THE ORIGIN OF FORMS and QUALITIES, (According to the Corpuscular
Philosophy,) Illustrated by Considerations and EXPERIMENTS, (Written formerly
by way of Notes upon an Essay about NITRE)

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

Audendum est, and Veritas investiganda; quam etiamsi non assequamur, omnino
tamen propius, quam nunc sumus, ad eam perveniemus.

Galen. OXFORD, Printed by H. HALL Printer to the University, for RIC: DAVIS.
An. Dom. MDCLXVI.

November. 2. 1665.
Imprimatur

ROBERTUS SAY, VICECANCELLARIUS OXON.

The Publisher to the Ingenious Reader.
IN this curious and inquisitive Age, when men, altogether dissatisfied and
wearied out with the wranglings and idle speculations of the Schools, are with
equal zeal and industry so earnest in their quest and pursuit of a more solid,
rational, and useful Philosophy, it may prove a work very obliging and
meritorious to help and guide them in their studies and researches, and to hang
out a Light to them, (as the Egyptians used to do from their highly celebrated
Pharos, for direction to the Mariners, that sailed in those dangerous Seas n^er
Alexandria*) whereby they may, with better success, steer their course through
the vast Ocean of Learning, and make more full and perfect Discoveries of
hitherto unknown Philosophical verities: which has been the chief Design of
this Gentleman of Honor, the most excellent and Incomparable Author in this
Treatise now presented to your view, wherein Principles are not (as was the
mode and guize of former times) obtruded on the World upon the account of a
Great Name, or involved in cloudy and mystical Notions, which put the
Understanding upon the Wrack, and yet when with all this labor and toil of
the Brain they are at last known, prove impertinent and useless to the making
out with satisfaction, or so much as tolerably, the ordinary Phenomenon, which
Nature every day presents the world with, but such as are built upon the firm
and immovable foundation of Reason, Sense, and Experience, plain and obvious
as well to the Eye as the Understanding, and no less accurate and certain in
their Application. And though the most noble Author has herein, for the main,
espoused the Atomical Philosophy (corrected and purged from the wild fancies
and extravagancies of the first Inventours of it, as to the Origin of the
Universe, and still ^mbraced with so much kindness and tenderness by some
Pretenders, against which He has so Learnedly disputed in his first part Of
the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, p. 74. etc.) in explicating the
Appearances; yet considering the several Alterations and Additions (the happy
product of his penetrating judgment) made therein, I may not scruple to call it
a New Hypothesis, peculiar to the Author, made out by daily Observations,
familiar Proofs and Experiments, and by exact and easily practicable Chemical
processes, whereby one of the most abstruse^ parts of Natural Philosophy, the
Origin of Forms and Qualities, which so much vexed and puzzled the Ancients,
and which, I would sp^ak with the leave of the Cartesians, their Ingenious
Master durst scarce venture upon, or at least was unwilling to handle at large,
is now fully cleared, and become manifest: so that from this very Essay we may
well take hope, and joyfully expect to see the noble Project of the famous
^ERULAM (hitherto reckond among the Desiderata) receive its full and perfect
Accomplishment, I mean, a real, useful, and experimental Physiology established
and bottomed upon easy, true, and generally received Principles. But I shall
not forestall thy judgment either about the Excel nay of the Author, or his
Subject, who has so freely communicated to the World those treasures of
Learning, wherewith his Mind is enriched, but shall soon refer you to the Work
it self, after I have given you these few Advertisements.

The following Discourse (as is easily perceivable by diverse Passages thereof)
being written, several years since, whole and entire, as now it is, I know not
whether it will be worth while to intimate, that the Author, casually turning
over of late a very recent Chemical Writer, found in one of his Treatises
(diverse of which he never to this day read over) a part of the Fifth Experiment
of the second Section; but, as He professes, (and sure is like to be believed,
she did not dream that That Chemist, or any other Author whatsoever had lighted
on that part of the Experiment till a good while after he had made and examined
That, among many others, concerning Salts, as may be easily guessed by the
peculiar uses and applications He made of it. And though He had met with so
unlikely an Experiment in a Writer, who, whether he deserve it or no, has the
ill fortune to be much accused of Insincerity, and some of whose more easy
processes our Author (who yet is willing to spare his Name, and seems to think
his works not useless) could not find to succeed, He should not have taken it
upon his Authority, no more then he is wont to take other Processes, diverse of
which He yet in the general supposes may be true upon the relation of other
Chemists; who by blemishing their Books by things untrue and justly suspicious,
are not to be relied on, nor much thanked by wary men. But twill probably
appear less pertinent to add any thing further on this subject, then to take
notice, that when the Author had once consented to the Publication of the
following Papers, He several times wishd for an Opportunity to make the
Experiments and Observations, He now presents to the Public, more full and
complete, then they were when addressed to a private Friend. But the Contagion,
that drove him from the Places, where his Accommodations for repeating
Experiments were, obliged Him to apply Himself to other Studies and Employments.

And upon the same account, though he afterward found many of his Notes upon
other parts of the Essay of Saltpeter, and have lying by him diverse Papers
concerning Sensible Qualities, and Sensation in general, and the Production of
Second Qualities, together with a collection of Notes about Occult Qualities,
and some other Subjects of kin to those of this Book; yet having, upon the
freshly intimated Occasion, diverted his Thoughts to other Subjects, He will
not engage himself to put together and communicate his Collections on these
Subjects by any Public promise.

Only thus much perchance I may undertake for, if a fair Opportunity offer it
self, that the Author may be induced to add ere long, for the completion of
this present Work, a Discourse of Subordinate ^orms, wherein He, not finding
that they have been by any one attempted to be explicated by the Corpuscularian
Hypothesis, has proposed an Account of them agreeable thereunto.

Furthermore, as the Author has in the following Disquisitions aimed not at the
raising or abetting a Faction in Philosophy, but at the Discovery of the Truth;
so he is not so sollicitous what every sort of Read^r will think of his
Attempts, (which it is easy to foresee are not like to be overwelcome to the
Votaries of the School Philosophy) as to refuse a Compliance with the desires
of his Friends, who have been long since very earnest with him not to spend
that time in Replies to particular Persons, which might be more usefully
employed in pursuing further Discoveries of Nature by Experiments. If he meet
with any cogent and material Objections against any of his chief Opinions, He
is enough a Lover of Truth, to be disposed to think himself obliged by those
that shall show him his Mistakes, and to take occasion to reform them. But if
nothing new or weighty be urg d, He considers, that he lives in an Age, wherein
he has observed (even in his Own case) that Truths, if recommended by real
Experiments, will in time make their own way, and wherein livestore of
Ingenious Men, who, for the main, approve the Opinions, and probably will not
dislike the Arguments he has proposed, and who being more at leisure then He to
write Polemical Books, will not silently suffer what they judge Truth, to be
triumphed over, or oppressd by those, who, employing usually but Scholastical
Arguments, may be confuted by Answers of the like nature. And therefore He
doubts not, but that some Learned Favorers of the Corpuscularian Philosophy
(of which he has endeavored to make out those parts, wherein they almost all
agree will be both able and willing to defend those Discoveries by rational
Di^putations, that they have not Opportunity to increase by New Experiments.

In the mean while I have no Temptation to doubt in the last, but that this
curious and excellent Piece will be entertained and received by all that have
any regard to the great concerns of Learning with that gust, delight, respect,
and aestimation which it so highly m^rits.

The following Treatise being printed in the absence of the Honorable Author,
th^re has happened (through the misplacing of the several Bundles w^t apart
fairly for the Press) ^ Dislocation at the 107. page, (as is there also
intimated) where the first Section of the Historical part is placed, which
should not have come in till p. 269. after the discourse of FORMS.

The Praeface.
THe Origin (Pyrophilus) and Nature of the Qualities of Bodies, is a Subject,
that I have long looked upon, as one of the most Important and Useful that the
Naturalist can pitch upon for his Contemplation. For the Knowledge we have of
the Bodies without Us, being for the Most part fetched from the Informations
the Mind receives by the Senses, we scarce know any thing else in Bodies, upon
whose account they can work upon our Senses save their Qualities: For as to
the Substantial Forms, which some Imagine to be in all Natural Bodies, it is
not half so Evident, that there are such, as it is, that the wisest of those
that do admit them, Confess, that they do not well Know them. Nego tibi ullam
esse formam robis notam ple^e and plane: nostramque scientiam esse umbram in
sole. Scal^ger: (^f whose confession to the same purpose, more are cited
hereafter.)
And as it is by their Qualities, that Bodies act Immediately upon our Senses, so
it is by virtue of those Attributes likewise, that they act upon Other bodies,
and by that action produce in Them, and oftentimes in Themselves those Changes,
that sometimes we call Alterations, and sometimes Generation, or Corruption.

And it is chiefly by the Knowledge, such as it is, that Experience, (not Art)
has taught Us, of these differing Qualities of Bodies, that we are enabled, by
a due application of Agents to Patients, to exercise the little Empire, that we
have either Acquired or Regained over the Creatures. But I think not the
contemplation of Qualities more Noble and Useful, then I find it Difficult; For
what is wont to be taught us of Qualities in the Schools, is so Slight and ill
grounded, that it may be doubted, whether they have not rather Obscured, then
Illustrated the things they should have explained. And I was quickly
discouraged from expecting to learn much from them, of the Nature ^ diverse
Particular Qualities, when I found that except some few, which they tell You i^
General may be deduced, (by ways they leave those to guess at that can,) from
those four Qualities, they are pleased to call the First; they confess, that
the rest spring from those Forms of Bodies, whose particular Natures, the
judiciousest of them acknowledge, they cannot comprehend. And Aristotle himself
not only does (as we shall see anon) give us of Quality in General, (which
yet seems far more easily defineable, then many a Particular Quality,) no other
then such a definition, as is as Obscure, as the thing to be declared by it;
but I Observe not without some wonder, that in his eight Books of Physics,
where he professedly treats of the General Affections of Natural things, he
leaves out the Doctrine of Qualities; as after him Magirus, and diverse other
Writers of the Peripatetick Physiologie have done: which (by the way) I cannot
but look upon as an Omission, since Qualities do as well seem to belong to
Natural Bodies Generally considered, as Place, Time, Motion, and those other
things, which upon that account are wont to be Treated of in the General part
of Natural Philosophy. The most Ingenious Des Carts has something concerning
some Qualities; but though for Reasons elsewhere express^d, I have purposely
Forborne to peruse his Systeme of Philosophy; yet I find by Turning over the
Leaves that he has Left most of the other Qualities Vntreated of, and of Those,
that are more properly called Sensible, he Speaks but very Briefly and
Generally; rather considering what they do upon the Organs of Sense, then what
Changes happen in the Objects themselves, to make them Cause in us a Perception
sometimes of one Quality, and sometimes of Another. Besides, that his
Explications, do many of them so depend upon His peculiar Notions, (of a
Materia Subtilis, Globuli Secundi Elementi, and the like) and These as it
became so Great a Person, he has so Interwoven with the rest of his Hypothesis,
that They can seldom be made Use of without Adopting his whole Philosophy
Epicurus indeed, and his Scholiast Lucretius, have Given some good Hints
concerning the Nature of some few Qualities. But beside, that even these
Explications are diverse of them either Doubtful or Imperfect, or both, there
are many other Qualities, which are left for Others to Treat of. And this is
the Second and Maine Difficulty, which I find in investigating the Nature of
Qualities, Namely, that Whatever be to be thought of the General Theoryes of
Aristotle, or other Philosophers, concerning Qualities; we evidently Want That,
upon which a Theory, to be Solid and Useful, must be Built; I mean an
Experimental History of them. And this we so Want, that except perhaps what
Mathematicians have done concerning Sounds, and the Observations (rather then
Experiments) that our Illustrious Verulam has (in some few Pages) said of
Heat, in his short Essay, De Forma Calidi; I know not Any one Quality, of which
any Author has yet Given us an any thing competent History. These things I
mention to You, Pyrophilus, not at all to derogate from those Great Men; whose
design seems rather to have been to deliver Principles and Summaries of
Philosophy, then to insist upon Particulars; but for this purpose, that since
the Nature of Qualities is so beneficial a speculation, my labors may not be
looked upon as wholly Useless, though I can contribute but a little to the
clearing of it: and that since it is so abstruse a subject, I may be pardoned,
if I sometimes miss the mark, and leave diverse things uncompleated; That
being but what such great Philosophers have done before me.

But, Pyrophylus, before I proceed to give You my Notes upon this part of our
Author's Essay, that you may rightly understand my Intention in them, it will
be requisite to give you three or four Advertisements.

And first, when ever I shall speak indefinitely of Substantial forms, I
would always be understood to except the Reasonable Soul, that is said to
inform the humane Body; which Declaration I here desire may be taken notice of,
once for all.

Secondly, Nor am I willing to treat of the Origin of Qualities in beasts;
partly because I would not be engaged to examine, of what Nature their Souls
are, and partly because it is difficult in most cases, (at least for one, that
is compassionate enough,) either to make experiments upon Living animals, or to
judge what influence their Life may have, upon the change of Qualities, produced
by such Experiments.

Thirdly, The occasion of the following Reflections, being only this; that our
Author in that part of his Essay concerning Saltpeter, whereto these Notes
refer, does briefly Intimate some Notions about the Nature and Origin of
Qualities; You must not exspect, that I, whose Method leads me but to Write
some Notes upon this, and some other parts of this Essay, should make Solemn
or Elaborate discourses concerning the Nature of particular Qualities, and that
I should fully deliver my own apprehensions concerning those Subjects. For as I
elsewhere sufficiently Intimate, that in these first Notes I Write as a
Corpuscularian, and set down those Things only, that seem to have a tendency
to Illustrate or Countenance the Notions or Fancies implied in our Author's
Essay: So I must here Tell you, that I neither have now the Leisure, nor
Pretend to the Skill, to deliver Fully the History or to Explicate Particularly
the Nature of Each several Quality.

Fourthly, But I consider, that the Schools have of late much Amused the World,
with a way they have got, of Referring all Natural Effects to certain
Entities, that they call Real Qualities, and accordingly Attribute to them a
Nature distinct from the Modification of the Matter they belong to, and in some
cases Separable from all Matter whatsoever, by which Means they have, as far
forth as their Doctrine is Acquiesc'd in, made it thought Needless or Hopeless
for men to Employ their Industry, in searching into the Nature of Particular
Qualities, and their Effects. As if, (for Instance) it be Demanded, how Snow
comes to dazzle the Eyes, they will answer, that it is by a Quality of Whiteness
that is in It; which makes all very white Bodies produce the same Effect; And
if You, ask what this Whiteness is, They will tell you no more in substance,
then that it is a real Entity, which denominates the Parcel of Matter, to which
it is Joined, White; and if You further Enquire, what this real Entity, which
They call a Quality, is, You will find, as We shall see anon, that They either
Speak of it much after the same rate, that They do of their Substantial Forms;
(as indeed some of the Modern'st teach, That a Quality affects the Matter it
belongs to, per modum formae secundariae, as they speak) or at least they will
not Explicate it more Intelligibly.

And accordingly if you further Ask them, how white Bodies in General do
rather Produce this effect of dazzling the Eyes, then Green or Blew ones,
instead of being told, that the former sort of Bodies reflect Outward, and so
to the Eye far more of the Incident Light, then the Latter; You shall
perchance be told, that it is their respective Natures so to act, by which way
of dispatching difficulties, they make it very easy to solve All the Phoenomena
of Nature in General, but make men think it impossible to explicate almost Any
of them in Particular.

And though the Unsatisfactorisness and Barrenness of the School. Philosophy
have persuaded a great many Learned Men, especially Physicians, to substitute
the Chemists Three principles, instead of those of the Schools; and though I
have a very good opinion of Chemistry it self, as it is a Practical Art; yet as
it is by Chemists pretended to contain a Systeme of Theoricall Principles of
Philosophy, I fear it will afford but very little satisfaction to a severe
enquirer, into the Nature of Qualities. For besides that, as we shall more
particularly see anon, there are Many Qualities, which cannot with any
probability be deduced from Any of the three Principles; those that are
ascribed to One, or other of them, cannot Intelligibly be explicated, without
recourse to the more Comprehensive Principles of the Corpuscularian Philosophy.
To tell us, for instance, that all Solidity proceeds from Salt, only informing
us, (where it can plausibly be pretended) in what material principle or
ingredient that Quality resides, not how it is produced; for this does not
teach us, (for example) how Water even in exactly closed vessels comes to be
frozen into Ice; that is, turned from a fluid to a Solid Body, without the
accession of a saline ingredient (which I have not yet found pretended,
especially Glass being held Impervious to Salts.) Wherefore, Pyrophilus, I
thought it might much conduce to the understanding the Nature of Qualities, To
show how they are Generated; and by the same way, I hoped it might remove in
some measure the obstacle, that these Dark and Narrow Theories of the
Peripateticks and Chemists may prove to the Advancement of solid and useful
Philosophy. That then, which I chiefly aim at, is to make it Probable to you
by Experiments, (which I Think has not yet been done:) That almost all sorts
of Qualities, most of which have been by the Schools either left Unexplicated,
or Generally referred, to I know not what Incomprehensible Substantial Forms;
may be produced Mechanically, I mean by such Corporeal Agents, as do not
appear, either to Work otherwise, then by virtue of the Motion, Size, Figure,
and Contrivance of their own Parts, (which Attributes I call the Mechanical
Affections of Matter, because to Them men willingly Refer the various
Operations of Mechanical Engines:) or to Produce the new Qualities exhibited by
those Bodies their Action changes, by any other way, then by changing the
Texture, or Motion, or some other Mechanical Affection of the Body wrought
upon. And this if I can in any Passable measure do, though but in a general
way, in some or other of each of these Three Sorts, into which the
Peripateticks are wont to Divide the Qualities of Bodies, I hope I shall have
done no useless Piece of Service to Natural Philosophy, Partly by exciting
You, and Your Learned Friends, to Enquire after more Intelligible and
Satisfactory ways of explicating Qualities, and Partly by Beginning such a
Collection of Materials toward the History of those Qualities, that I shall
the most largely Insist on, as Heat, Colors, Fluidity and Firmness, as may
invite You, and other Ingenious ^en, to contribute also their Experiments, and
Observations to so Useful a Work, and thereby lay a foundation, whereon You,
and perhaps I, may superstruct a more Distinct and Explicit Theory of
Qualities, then I shall at present adventure at. And though I Know, that some
of the things my Experiments tend to Manifest, may likewise be Confirmed by the
more obvious Phenomenon of Nature, yet I Praesume You will not dislike my
Chosing to entertain You with the Former, (though without at all Despising, or
so much as strictly forbearing to Employ the Latter,) because the Changes of
Qualities made by Our Experiments will for the most part be more Quick and
Conspicuous, and the agents made use of to produce them, being of our own
Applying, and oftentimes of our own Praeparation, we may be thereby assisted
the better to judge of what they Are, and to make an aestimate of what it is
they Do.

CONSIDERATIONS, AND EXPERIMENTS touching the Origin of Qualities, and Forms.
The Theoricall Part.
THat before I descend to Particulars, I may (Pyrophilus) furnish you with some
General Apprehension of the Doctrine (or rather the Hypothesis,) which is to be
Collated with, and to be either Confirmed, or Disproved by, the Historical
Truths, that will be delivered concerning Particular Qualities, (and Forms;) I
will assume the person of a Corpuscularian, and here, at the Entrance, give you
(in a general way) a brief Account of the Hypothesis it self, as it concerns
the Origin of Qualities (and Forms:) and for Distinctions sake, I shall
comprize it in the Eight following Particulars, which, that the whole Scheme
may be the better Comprehended, and as it were Surveyed under one Prospect, I
shall do little more then Barely propose Them, that either seem evident enough
by their own Light, or may without Praejudice have diverse of their Proofs
reserved for proper places in the following part of this Treatise: and though
there be some Other Particulars, to which the Importance of the Subjects, and
the Greatness of the (almost Universal) Prejudices, that lie against them,
will oblige me Immediately to annexe (for the seasonable Clearing, and
Justifying of them) some Annotations: yet that they may, as Little as I can,
Obscure the Cohaerence of the whole Discourse, as much of them as conveniently
may be, shall be included in [ ] Paratheses.

I. I agree with the generality of Philosophers so far, as to allow, that there
is one Catholic or Universal Matter common to all Bodies, by which I mean a
Substance extended, divisible and impenetrable.

II. But because this Matter being in its own Nature but one, the diversity we
see in Bodies must necessarily arise from somewhat else, then the Matter they
consist of. And since we see not, how there could be any change in Matter, if
all its (actual or designable) parts were perpetually at rest among themselves,
it will follow, that to discriminate the Catholic Matter into variety of
Natural Bodies, it must have Motion in some or all its designable Parts: and
that Motion must have various tendencies, that which is in this part of the
Matter tending one way, and that which is in that part tending another; as we
plainly see in the Universe or general Mass of Matter there is really a great
quantity of Motion, and that variously determined, and that yet diverse
portions of Matter are at rest.

That there is Local Motion in many parts of Matter is manifest to sense, but
how Matter came by this Motion was of Old, and is still hotly disputed of: for
the ancient Corpuscularian Philosophers, (whose doctrine in most other points,
though not in all, we are the most inclinable to,) not acknowledging an Author
of the Universe, were thereby reduced to make Motion congenite to Matter, and
consequently coeval with it; but since Local Motion, or an Endeavor at it, is
not included in the nature of Matter, which is as much Matter, when it rests,
as when it moves; and since we see, that the same portion of Matter may from
Motion be reduced to Rest, and after it has continued at Rest, as long as
other Bodies do not put it out of that state, may by external Agents be set a
moving again; I, who am not wont to think a man the worse Naturalist for not
being an Atheist, shall not scruple to say with an Eminent Philosopher of Old,
whom I find to have proposed among the Greeks that Opinion (for the main) that
the Excellent Des Carts has revived amongst Us, That the Origin of Motion in
Matter is from God; and not only so, but that thinking it very unfit to be
believed, that Matter barely put into Motion, and then left to it self, should
Casually constitute this beautiful and orderly World: I think also further,
that the wise Author of Things did by establishing the laws of Motion among
Bodies, and by guiding the first Motions of the small parts of Matter, bring
them to convene after the manner requisite to compose the World, and especially
did contrive those curious and elaborate Engines, the bodies of living
Creatures, endowing most of them with a power of propagating their Species. But
though these things are my Persuasions, yet because they are not necessary to
be supposed here, where I do not pretend to deliver any complete Discourse of
the Principles of Natural Philophy, but only to touch upon such Notions, as
are requisite to explicate the Origin of Qualities and Forms, I shall pass on
to what remains, as soon as I have taken notice, that Local Motion seems to be
indeed the Principl amongst Second Causes, and the Grand Agent of all that
happens in Nature: For though Bulk, Figure, Rest, Situation, and Texture do
concur to the Phenomenon of Nature, yet in comparison of Motion they seem to
be in many Cases, Effects, and in many others, little better then Conditions,
or Requisites, or Causes sine quibus non, which modifie the operation, that one
part of Matter by virtue of its Motion has upon another: as in a Watch, the
number, the figure, and coaptation of the Wheels and other parts is requisite
to the showing the hour, and doing the other things that may be performed by
the Watch; but till these parts be actually put into Motion, all their other
affections remain inefficacious: and so in a Key, though if it were too big,
or too little, or if its Shape were incongruous to that of the cavity of the
Lock, it would be unfit to be used as a Key, though it were put into Motion;
yet let its bigness and figure be never so fit, unless actual Motion intervene,
it will never lock or unlock any thing, as without the like actual Motion,
neither a Knife nor Rasor will actually cut, how much soever their shape and
other Qualities may ^it them to do so. And so Brimstone, what disposition of
Parts soever it have to be turned into Flame, would never be kindled, unless
some actual fire, or other parcel of vehemently and variously agitated Matter
should put the Sulphurous Corpuscles into a very brisk motion.

III. These two grand and most Catholic Principles of Bodies, Matter, and
Motion, being thus established, it will follow both, that Matter must be
actually divided into Parts, that being the genuine Effect of variously
determined Motion, and that each of the primitive Fragments, or other distinct
and entire Masses of Matter must have two Attributes, its own Magnitude, or
rather Size, and its own Figure or Shape. And since Experience shows us
(especially that which is afforded us by Chemical Operations, in many of which
Matter is divided into Parts, too small to be singly sensible,) that this
division of Matter is frequently made into insensible Corpuscles or Particles,
we may conclude, that the minutest fragments, as well as the biggest Masses of
the Universal Matter are likewise endowed each with its peculiar Bulk and
Shape. For being a finite Body, its Dimensions must be terminated and
measurable: and though it may change its Figure, yet for the same reason it
must necessarily have some Figure or other. So that now we have found out, and
must admit three Essential Properties of each entire or undivided, though
insensible part of Matter, namely, Magnitude, (by which I mean not quantity in
general, but a determined quantity, which we in English oftentimes call the
Size of a body,) Shape, and either Motion or Rest, (for betwixt them two there
is no mean:) the two first of which may be called inseparable Accidents of each
distinct part of Matter: inseparable, because being extended, and yet finite,
it is Physically impossible, that it should be devoid of some Bulk or other,
and some determinate Shape or other; and yet Accidents, because that whether or
no the Shape can by Physical Agents be altered or the Body subdivided, yet
mentally both the one and the other may be done, the whole essence of Matter
remaining undestroy'd.

Whether these Accidents may not conveniently enough be called the Moods or
primary affections of Bodies, to distinguish them from those less simple
Qualities, (as Colors, Tastes, and Odours,) that belong to Bodies upon their
account, or whether with the Epicureans they may not be called the Conjuncts of
the smallest parts of Matter, I shall not now stay to consider, but one thing
the Modern Schools are wont to teach concerning Accidents, which is too
repugnant to our present Doctrine, to be in this place quite omitted, namely
that there are in Natural Bodies store of real Qualities, and other real
Accidents, which not only are no Moods of Matter, but are real Entities
distinct from it, and according to the doctrine of many modern Schoolmen may
exist separate from all Matter whatsoever. To clear this point a little, we
must take notice, that Accident is among Logicians and Philosophers used in two
several senses, for sometimes it is opposed to the 4th Praedicable, (
Property,) and is then defined, "that which may be present or absent, without
the destruction of the subject; as a Man may be sick or well, and a Wall white
or not white, and yet the one be still a Man, the other a Wall; and this is
called in the Schools Accidens praedicabile, to distinguish it from what they
call Accidens praedicamentale, which is opposed to Substance: for when things
are divided by Logicians into 10 Praedicaments, or highest genus^es of things,
Substance making one of them, all the nine other are of Accidents. And as
Substance is commonly defined to be a thing that subsists of it self, and is
the subject of Accidents, (or more plainly, a real Entity or thing, that needs
not any ( created) Being, that it may exist:) so an Accident is said commonly
to be id cujus esse est inesse, and therefore Aristotle, who usually calls
Substances simply (...), Entities, most commonly calls Accidents (...),
Entities of Entities. These needing the existence of some substance or other,
in which they may be, as in their subject of Inhaesion. And because Logicians
make it the discriminating note of Substance, and Accident, that the former is
a thing that cannot be in another, as in its subject of Inhaesion, it is
requisite to know, that according to them, That is said to Be in a Subject,
which has these three conditions, That however it (1) be in another thing, (2)
is not in it as a part, and (3) cannot exist separately from the thing or
subject, wherein it is: as a white Wall is the subject of Inhaesion of the
Whiteness we see in it, which self-same whiteness though it be not in the wall
as a part of it, yet cannot the self-same whiteness according to our Logicians
exist any where out of the wall, though many other Bodies may have the like
degree of whiteness. This premised, twill not be hard to discover the falsity
of the lately mentioned Scholastic opinion touching real Qualities and
Accidents, their doctrine about which does, I confess, appear to me to be
either unintelligible, or manifestly contradictious: for speaking in a Physical
sense, if they will not allow these Accidents to be Modes of Matter, but
Entities really distinct from it, and in some cases separable from all Matter,
they make them indeed Accidents in name, but represent them under such a notion
as belongs only to Substances; the nature of a Substance consisting in this,
That it can subsist of it self, without being in any thing else, as in a
subject of Inhaesion: so that to tell us, that a Quality, or other Accident may
subsist without a subject, is indeed, whatever they please to call it, to allow
it the true Nature of Substance, nor will their Groundless Distinctions do any
more then keep them from seeming to contradict themselves in words, whilst
Unprepossess'd persons see that they do it in effect. Nor could I ever find it
intelligibly made out, what these real Qualities may be, that they deny to be
either Matter or modes of Matter, or immaterial Substances. When a Bowl runs
along or lies still, that Motion or Rest, or Globous figure of the Bowl, is not
Nothing, and yet it is not any part of the Bowl; whose whole Substance would
remain, though it wanted which you please of these Accidents: and to make them
real and physical Entities, (for we have not here to do either with Logical or
Metaphysical ones) is, as if, because we may consider the same Man sitting,
standing, running, thirsty, hungry, weary, etc. we should make each of these
a distinct Entitie, as we do give some of them (as hunger, weariness, etc.)
distinct names. Whereas the subject of all these Qualities is but the same Man
as he is considered with Circumstances, that make him appear different in one
case from what he appears in another: And it may be very useful to our present
Scope to observe, that not only diversity of Names, but even diversity of
Definitions, does not always infer a diversity of Physical Entities in the
Subject, whereunto they are attributed. For it happens in many of the Physical
Attributes of a Body, as in those Other cases, wherein a Man that is a Father,
a Husband, a Master, a Prince, etc. may have a Peculiar Definition (such as the
Nature of the thing will bear) belong unto him in each of these Capacities, and
yet the Man in himself considered is but the same Man, who in respect of
differing Capacities or Relations to other things is called by differing Names,
and described by various Definitions, which yet (as I was saying) conclude not
so many real and distinct Entities in the person so variously denominated.

An EXCVRSION about the Relative Nature of Physical Qualities.
BUt because I take this Notion to be of no Small Importance toward the
Avoiding of the Grand Mistake, that has hitherto obtained about the Nature of
Qualities, it will be worth while to Illustrate it a little farther. We may
consider then, that when Tubal-Cain, or whoever else were the Smith, that
Invented Locks and Keys, had made his first Lock, (for we may Reasonably
suppose him to have made that before the Key, though the Comparison may be made
use of without that Supposition,) That was only a Piece of Iron, contrived
into such a Shape; and when afterward he made a Key to that Lock, That also in
it self Considered, was nothing but a Piece of Iron of such a Determinate
Figure: but in Regard that these two Pieces of Iron might now be Applied to one
another after a Certain manner, and that there was a Congruitie betwixt the
Wards of the Lock and those of the Key, the Lock and the Key did each of them
now Obtain a new Capacity and it became a Main part of the Notion and
Description of a Lock, that it was capable of being made to Lock or Unlock by
that other Piece of Iron we call a Key, and it was Lookd upon as a Peculiar
Faculty and Power in the Key, that it was Fitted to Open and Shut the Lock, and
yet by these new Attributes there was not added any Real or Physical Entity,
either to the Lock, or to the Key, each of them remaining indeed nothing, but
the same Piece of Iron, just so Shaped as it was before. And when our Smith
made other Keys of differing Bignesses, or with Differing Wards, though the
first Lock was not to be opened by any of those Keys, yet that Indisposition,
however it might be Considered as a peculiar Power of Resisisting this or that
Key, and might serve to Discriminate it sufficiently from the Locks those Keys
belonged to, was nothing new in the Lock, or distinct from the Figure it had
before those Keys were made. To carry this Comparison a little Further, let
me add, that though one that would have Defined the First Lock, and the First
Key, would have Given them distinct Definitions with Reference to each other;
and yet (as I was saying) these Definitions being given but upon the Score o^
Certain Respects, which the Defined Bodies had One to Another, would no^ infer,
that these two Iron Instruments did Physically differ otherwise then in the
Figure, Size, or Contrivement of the Iron, whereof each of them consisted. And
proportionably hereunto I do not see, why we may not conceive, That as to those
Qualities (for Instance) which we call Sensible, though by virtue of a certain
Congruity or Incongruity in point of Figure or Texture, (or other Mechanical
Attributes,) to our Sensories, the Portions of Matter they Modifie are enabled
to produce various Effects, upon whose account we make Bodies to be Endowed
with Qualities; yet They are not in the Bodies that are Endowed with them any
Real or Distinct Entities, or differing from the Matter its self, furnished
with such a Determinate Bigness, Shape, or other Mechanical Modifications. Thus
though the modern Goldsmiths and Refiners reckon amongst the most
distinguishing Qualities of Gold, by which men may be certain of its being True
and not Sophisticated, that is easily dissoluble in Aqua Regis, and that Aqua
Fortis will not work upon it; yet these Attributes are not in the Gold any
thing distinct from its peculiar Texture, not is the Gold we have now of any
other Nature, then it was in Pliny's time, when Aqua Fortis and Aqua Regis had
not been Found out, (at least in these parts of the World,) and were utterly
unknown to the Roman Goldsmiths And this Example I have the rather pitched
upon, because it affords me an Opportunity to represent, that, unless we admit
the Doctrine I have been Proposing, we must Admit, that a Body may have an
almost Infinite Number o^ New Real Entities accruing to it, without the
Intervention of any Physic^ Change in the Body its self. As for Example, Gold
was the same Nature Body immediately before Aqua Regi^ and Aqua Fortis were
first made, as it was immediately after, and yet now it is reckoned amongst its
Principal Properties, that it is dissoluble by the Former of those two
Menstruums, and that it is not like other Metals Dissoluble or Corrodible by
the Latter. And if one should Invent another Menstruum, (as possibly I may
Think my self Master of such a one) that will but in part dissolve pure Gold,
and change some part of it into another Metalline Body, there will then arise
another new Property; whereby to distinguish That from other Metals; and yet
the Nature of Gold is not a whit other now, then it was before this last
Menstruum was first made. There are some Bodies not Cathartick, nor Sudorifick,
with some of which Gold being joined acquires a Purgative Virtue, and with
others a power to procure Sweat; and in a word, Nature her self does, sometimes
otherwise, and sometimes by Chance, produce so many things, that have new
Relations unto others: And Art, especially assisted by Chemistry, may, by
variously dissipating Natural Bodies, or Compounding either them, or their
Constituent Parts with one another, make such an Innumerable Company of new
Productions, that will each of Them have new operations, either immediately
upon our Sensories, or upon other Bodies, whose Changes we are able to
perceive, that no man can know, but that the most Familiar Bodies may have
Multitudes of Qualities, that he dreams not of, and a Considering man will
hardly imagine, that so numerous a Crowd of real Physical Entities can accrue
to a Body, whilst in the Judgment of all our Senses it remains Unchanged, and
the Same that 'twas before.

To clear this a little farther, we may add, that beaten Glass is commonly
reckoned among Poisons; and (to skip what is mentioned out of Sanctorius, of
the Dysentery procured by the Fragments of it) I remember Cardan: Contradict.
9. lib. 2. Tract. 5. a pud Schenckium.
Cardan has a story, That in a Cloister, where he had a Patient then like to
die of torments in the Stomach, two other Nuns had been already killed by a
distracted Woman, that having Casually got Free, had mixed beaten Glass with
Pease, that were eaten by these three, and diverse others of the Sisters (who
yet escaped unharm'd.) Now though the powers of Poisons be not only looked
upon as real Qualities, but are reckoned among the Abstrusest ones: yet this
Deleterious Faculty, which is supposed to be a Peculiar and Superadded Entitie
in the beaten Glass, is really nothing distinct from the Glass its self,
(which though a Concrete made up of those Innocent Ingredients, Salt and Ashes,
is yet a hard and stiff Body,) as it is furnished with that determinate
Bigness, and Figure of Parts, which have been acquired by Comminution. For
these Glassy Fragments being many, and Rigid, and somewhat Small, (without yet
being so small as Dust,) and endowed with sharp Points and cutting Edges, are
enabled by these Mechanical Affections to Pierce or Wound the tender Membranes
of the Stomach and Guts, and cut the slender Vessels that they meet with there,
whereby naturally ensue great Gripings and Contorsions of the injured Parts,
and oftentimes Bloody Fluxes occasioned by the perforation of the Capillary
Arteries, and the great irritation of the Expulsive Faculty, and sometimes also
not only horrid Convulsions by Consent of the Brain and Cerebellum, with some
of the Nervous or Membranous parts that happen to be hurt, but also Dropsies
occasioned by the great loss of Blood we were just now speaking of. And it
agrees very well with this Conjecture, that beaten Glass has diverse times
been observed to have done no Mischief to Animals that have swallowed it: For
there is no Reason it should, in case the Corpuscles of the Powder either
chance to be so small, as not to be fit to wound the Guts, which are usually
lined with a slimy substance, wherein very minute Powders may be as it were
sheathed, and by that means hindered from hurting the Guts, (insomuch that a
fragment of Glass with three very sharp corners, has been observed to have
for above eighteen Months lain This memorable Accident happened to a Senator of
B^rne, who was cured by the Experienced Fabricius Hildanus, that gives a long
Account of it to the Learned Horstius, among whose Observat^ons it is extant; (
Lib. 2. observe. 35.) who ascribes the Indolence of the Part, whilst
uncompress'd, to some slimy Juice, (familiar enough to those Tendinous parts,)
wherein the Glassy fragment was as it were Bedded.
inoffensive even in a nervous and very sensible part of the body,) out of
which they may with the grosser Excrements of the Lower Belly be harmelesly
Excluded, especially in some Individuals, whose Guts and Stomach too may be of
a much stronger Texture, and better Lined or Stuffed with Gross and Slimy
Matter, then those of others. And accordingly we see, that the Fragments of
Saphires, Christals, and even Rubies, which are much harder then Glass, are
innocently, though perhaps not very effectually used by Physicians, (and I have
several times taken That without Inconvenience) in Cordial Compositions,
because of their being by Grinding reduced to a Powder too Subtle to Excoriate,
or Grate upon the Stomach, or Guts; and probably 'twas upon some such Account,
that That happened which is related by Cardan in the same place, namely, That
though the three Nuns we have been speaking of were Poisoned by the Glass, yet
many others who eat of the other Portions of the same mingled Pease, received
no mischief thereby. (But of this subject more In those Notes about Occult
Qualitles, where the Deleterious Faculty attributed to Diamonds is considered.
elsewhere.)

And this puts me in mind to add, That the Multiplicity of Qualities, that are
sometimes to be met with in the same Natural Bodies, needs not make men reject
the Opinion we have been proposing, by persuading them, that so many Differing
Attributes, as may be sometimes found in one and the same Natural Body, cannot
proceed from the bare Texture, and other Mechanical Affections of its Matter.
For we must consider each Body, not barely as it is in it self an entire and
distinct portion of Matter, but as it is a Part of the Universe, and
consequently placed among a great Number and Variety of other Bodies, upon
which it may Act, and by which it may be acted on, in many ways, (or upon many
Accounts,) each of which Men are wont to Fancy, as a distinct Power or Quality
in the Body, by which those Actions, or in which those Passions are produced.
For if we thus consider Things, we shall not much wonder, that a Portion of
Matter, that is indeed endowed but with a very few Mechanical Affections, as
such a determinate Texture and Motion, but is placed among a multitude of other
Bodies, that differ in those Attributes from it, and one another, should be
capable of having a great Number and Variety of Relations to those other
Bodies, and consequently should be thought to have many Distinct Inhaerent
Qualities, by such as look upon those several Relations or Respects it may have
to Bodies without it, as Real and Distinct Entities implanted in the Body it
self. When a Curious Watch is going, though the Spring be that which puts all
the Parts into Motion, yet we do not Fancy (as an Indian o^ Chinois would
perchance do) in this Spring one Faculty to move the Index uniformely round the
Dial-plate, another to strike the Hour, and perhaps a Third to give an Alarm,
or show the Age of the Moon, or the Tides; all the action of the Spring, (which
is but a flexible piece of Steel, forcibly coil'd together,) being but an
Endeavor to dilate or unbind its self, and the rest being performed by the
various Respects it has to the several Bodies (that compose the Watch) among
which it is placed, and which they have One to another. We all know, that the
Sun has a power to Harden Clay, and Soften Wax, and Melt Butter, and Thaw Ice,
and turn Water into Vapors, and make Air expand it self in Weather-Glasses,
and contribute to Blanch Linen, and make the White skin of the Face Swarthy,
and Mowed Grass Yellow, and ripen Fruit, hatch the Eggs of Silkworms,
Caterpillars, and the like Insects, and perform I know not how many other
things, diverse of which seen contrary Effects, and yet these are not distinct
Powers or Faculties in the Sun but only the Productions of its Heat* (which it
self is but the brisk, and confused Local Motion of the Minute parts of a
Body,) diversified by the differing Textures of the Body that it chances to
work upon, and the Condition of the other Bodies that are concerned in the
Operation. And therefore whether the Sun in some cases have any Influence at
all distinct from its Light and Heat, we see, that all those Phaenomen^ we have
thought fit to name are producible by the heat of the common Culinary Fire duly
applied and regulated. And so, to give an Instance of another Kind, when some
years since, to Try some Experiments about the Propagation of Motion, with
Bodies less capable of being battered by one another, then those that have been
formerly employed; I caused some solid Bals of Iron skilfully hardened, and
exquisitely shaped and glazed, to be purposely made; each of these polished
Balls was a Sphaerical Looking-Glass, which placed in the midst of a Room,
would exhibit the Images of the Objects round about it, in a very regular and
pleasing Perspective. It would Contract the Image, and Reflect the Beams of the
Sun, after a manner differing from Flat and from Unequal Looking Glasses. It
would in a neat Perspective lessen the Image of him that looked upon it; and
bend it, and it would show that Image, as if it were behind the Surface, and
within the solid substance of the Sphaere, and in some it had all those
Distinct, and some of them wonderful Properties, which either Ancient or Modern
Writers of Catoptricks have demonstrated to belong to Sphaerical Specula, as
such: and yet the Globe furnished with all these Properties and Affections, was
but the Iron it self reduced by the Artificer to a Sphaerical Figure, (for the
Glass, that made it Specular, was not distinct from the Superficial parts of
the Iron, reduced all of them to a Physically equal distance from the Center.)
And of Specula, Sphaerical enough as to sense, you may make store in a trice,
by breaking a large Drop of Quicksilver into several little ones, each of
which will serve for Objects placed pretty near it, and the smaller of which
(being the least depressed in the middle by the^ own weight, and consequently
more perfectly Globous,) may with a goo^ Microscope placed in a Window affor^
you no unpleasant prospect of the neighboring Objects, and yet to reduce
parcel of Stagnant Quicksilver, which will much aemulate a Flat Looking Glass,
into many of these little Sphaerical Specula, whose Properties are so differing
from those of Plain ones, the^ intervenes nothing but a slight Loc^ Motion,
which in the twinkling of ^ Eye changes the Figure of the self same Matter.

I have said thus much (Pyrophilus) to remove the Mistake, That every thing men
are wont to call a Quality, must needs be a Real and Physical Entity, because
of the Importance of the Subject; and yet I have omitted some things that might
have been pertinently added, partly because I may hereafter have Opportunity to
take them in, and partly because I would not any farther lengthen this
Excursion, which yet I must not Conclude, till I have added this short
Advertisement.

That I have chosen to Declare what I mean by Qualities, rather by Examples,
then Definitions, partly because being immediately or reductively the Objects
of sense, Men generally understand pretty well what one another mean, when they
are spoken of: (As to say, that the Taste of such a thing is Saline or Sour, or
that such a Sound is Melodious, Shrill, or Jarring, (especially if when we
speak of Sensible Qualities, we add some Enumeration of particular Subjects,
wherein they do the most Eminently reside,) will make a Man as soon understood,
as if he should go about to give Logical Definitions of those Qualities:) and
partly because the Notions of things are not yet so well stated, and agreed on,
but that it is many times difficult to Assign their true Genus's: and Aristotle
himself does not only define Accidents without setting down their Genus, but
when he comes to define Qualities, he tells us, that Quality is that by which a
thing is said to be Qualis, where I would have you take notice both, that in
his Definition he omits the Genus, and that it is no such easy Thing to give a
very good Definition of Qualities, since he that is repute^ the great Master of
Logic, where he pretends to give us one, does but upon the matter define the
thing by the same thing; for it is supposed to be as little known what Qualis
is, as what Qualitas is, and me thinks he does just as if I should define
Whiteness to be that, for which a thing is called White, or Virtue, that for
which a Man is said to be Virtuous Since the writing of this, the Author found,
that some of the Eminentest of the modern Schoolmen themselves, have been, as
well as he, unsatisfied with the Aristotelian Definition of Quality: concerning
which (not to mention Revius, a Learned Protestant. Annotato^ upon Sua^ez.)
Ariaga says ( disp. 5. sect. 2. subs. 1.) Per haec n^hil explicatur; nam de
hoc quaerimus, quid sit esse qual, dices habere qualitatem; bonus Circulus:
qualitas est id quo quis sit qualis, and esse qualem est habere Qualitatem. And
even the famous Jesuit Suarez, though he endeavors to excuse it, yet
confesses, that it leaves the proper Notion of Quality as obscure to us as
before: ( Quae d^finitio, says he, licet ^a ration^ essent^alis videatur, quod
detur per habitudinem ad effectum formalem, quem omnis Fo^ma ess^^tialiter
respicit, tamen quod ad nos spectat, aque obscura nobis manet propria ratio
Qualitatis.) Suarez Disputat. Metaphysic. 42. But Hurtadus (^n his Metaphysical
Disputations) speaks mo^e boldly, telling us roundly, that it is Non tam
Definitio, quam inanis quaedam Nugatio, which makes me the mo^e wonder, that a
famous Cartesian (whom I forbear to name) should content himself to give us
such an Insignificant, or ^t least Superficial Definition of Quality.
. Besides that, I much doubt, whether his Definition be not Untrue as well as
Obscure, for to the Question, Qualis res est? Answer may be returned out of
some, if not all of the other Praedicaments of Accidents: which some of the
Modern Logicians being aware of, they have endeavored to salve the matter with
certain Cautions and Limitations, which however they may argue the Devisors to
be ingenious, do, for ought I can discern, leave us still to seek for a right
and intelligible Definition of Quality in general, though to give such a one be
probably a much easier Task, then to define many Qualities, that may be named
in particular, as Saltness, Sowrness, Green, Blew, and many others, which when
we hear named, every man knows what is meant by them, though no man (the I know
of) has been able to give accurate Definitions of them.

IV. And if we should conceive, the all the rest of the Universe were
annihilated, except any of these entire and undivided Corpuscles, (treated of
in the 3d Particular foregoing,) it is hard to say what could be attributed to
it, besides Matter, Motion (or Rest,) Bulk, and Shape, (whence by the way you
may take notice, that Bulk, though usually taken in a Comparative sense, is in
our sense an absolute Thing, since a Body would have it, though there were no
other in the World.) But now there being actually in the Universe great
Multitudes of Corpuscles mingled among themselves, there arise in any distinct
portion of Matter, which a number of them make up, two new Accidents or Events:
the one does more relate to each particular Corpuscle in reference to the
(really or supposedly) stable Bodies about it, namely its Posture; (whether
Erected, Inclined, or Horizontal:) And, when two or more of such Bodies are
placed one by anorher, the manner of their being so placed, as one besides
another, or one behind another, may be called their Order; as I remember,
Aristotle in his Metaphysics, lib. 1. cap. 4. recites this Example out of the
ancient Corpuscularians, That A and N differ in Figure, and A N and N A in
Order, Z and N in Situation: and indeed Posture and Order seem both of them
reducible to Situation. And when many Corpuscles do so convene together as to
compose any distinct Body, as a Stone, or a Metal, then from their other
Accidents (or Modes,) and from these two last mentioned, there does emerge a
certain Disposition or Contrivance of Parts in the whole, which we may call the
Texture of it.

V. And if we should conceive all the rest of the Universe to be annihilated,
save one such Body, suppose a Metal or a Stone, it were hard to show, tha^
there is Physically any thing more in it then Matter, and the Accidents we have
already named. But now we are to consider, that there are de facto in the world
certain sensible and rational Beings, that we call Men, and the body of Man
having several of its external parts, as the Eye, the Ear, etc. each of a
distinct and peculiar Texture, whereby it is capable to receive Impressions
from the Bodies about it, and upon that account it is called an Organ of Sense,
we must consider, I say, that these Sensories may be wrought upon by the
Figure, Shape, Motion, and Texture of Bodies without them, after several ways,
some of those External Bodies being fitted to affect the Eye, others the Ear,
others the Nostrils, etc. And to these Operations of the Objects on the
Sensories, the Mind of Man, which upon the account of its Union with the Body
perceives them, gives distinct Names, calling the one Light or Color, the
other Sound, the other Odor, etc. And because also each Organ of Sense, as the
Eye, or the Palate, may be it self differingly affected by External Objects, the
Mind likewise gives the Objects of the same Sense distinct Appellations,
calling one color Green, the other Blew, and one taste Sweet, and another
Bitter, etc. Whence Men have been induced to frame a long Catalogue of such
Things as, for their relating to our Senses, we call Sensible Qualities; and
because we have been conversant with them, before we had the use of Reason, and
the Mind of Man is prone to conceive almost every Thing (nay even Privations,
as Blindness, Death, etc.) under the notion of a true Entitie or Substance as
it self is, we have been from our Infancy apt to imagine, that these Sensible
Qualities are Real Beings, in the Objects they denominate, and have the faculty
or power to work such and such things; as Gravity has a power to stop the
motion of a Bullet shot upwards, and carry that solid Globe of Matter toward
the Center of the Earth, whereas indeed (according to what we have largely
shown above) there is in the Body, to which these Sensible Qualities are
attributed, nothing of Real and Physical, but the Size, Shape, and Motion, or
Rest of its component Particles, together with that Texture of the whole, which
results from their being so contrived as they are; nor is it necessary they
should have in them any thing more, like to the Ideas they occasion in us,
those Ideas being either the Effects of our Praejudices, or Inconsiderateness,
or else to be fetched from the Relation, that happens to be betwixt those
Primary Accidents of the Sensible Object, and the peculiar Texture of the Organ
it affects; as when a Pin, being run into my Finger, causes pain, there is no
distinct Quality in the Pin answerable to what I am apt to fancy Pain to be,
but the Pin in it self is only slender, stiff, and sharp, and by those
qualities happens to make a Solution of Continuity in my Organ of Touching,
upon which, by reason of the Fabric of the Body, and the intimate Union of the
Soul with it, there arises that troublesome kind of Perception which we call
Pain, and I shall anon more particularly show, how much that depends upon the
peculiar fabric of the Body.

VI. But here I foresee a Difficulty, which being perhaps the chiefest, that we
shall meet with against the Corpuscular Hypothesis, it will deserve to be,
before we proceed any farther, taken notice of. And it is this, that, whereas
we explicate Colors, Odours, and the like sensible Qualities by a relation to
our Senses, it seems evident, that they have an absolute Being irrelative to
Us; for, Snow (for instance) would be white, and a glowing Coal would be hot,
though there were no Man or any other Animal in the World: and it is plain, that
Bodies do not only by their Qualities work upon Our senses, but upon other,
and those, Inanimate Bodies; as the Coal will not only heat or burn a Man's
hand if he touch it, but would likewise heat Wax, (even so much as to melt it,
and make it slow,) and thaw Ice into Water, though all the Men, and sensitive
Beings in the World were annihilated. To clear this Difficulty, I have several
things to represent, and,

1. I say not, that there are no other Accidents in Bodies then Colors,
Odours, and the like; for I have already taught, that there are simpler and
more Primitive Affections of Matter, from which these Secondary Qualities, if I
may so call them, do depend: and that the Operations of Bodies upon one another
spring from the same, we shall see by and by.

2. Nor do I say, that all Qualities of Bodies are directly Sensible; but I
observe, that when one Body works upon another, the knowledge we have of their
Operation, proceeds, either from some sensible Quality, or some more Catholic
affection of Matter, as Motion, Rest, or Texture, generated or destroyed in one
of them; for else it is hard to conceive, how we should come to discover what
passes betwixt them.

3. We must not look upon every distinct Body, that works upon our Senses, as a
bare lump of Matter of that bigness and outward shape, that it appears of; many
of them having their parts curiously contrived, and most of them perhaps in
motion too. No^ must we look upon the Universe that surrounds us, as upon a
moveless and undistinguished Heap of Matter, but as upon a great Engine, which,
having either no Vacuity, or none that is considerable, betwixt its parts
(known to us,) the actions of particular Bodies upon one another must not be
barely aestimated, as if two Portions of Matter of their Bulk and Figure were
placed in some imaginary Space beyond the World, but as being situated in the
World, constituted as it now is, and consequently as having their action upon
each other liable to be promoted, or hindered, or modified by the Actions of
other Bodies besides them: as in a Clock, a small force applied to move the
Index to the Figure of 12, will make the Haromer strike often and forcibly
against the Bell, and will make a far greater Commotion among the Wheels and
Weights, then a far greater force would do, if the Texture and Contrivance of
the Clock did not abundantly contribute to the Production of so great an
Effect. And in agitating Water into Froth, the Whiteness would never be
produced by that Motion, were it not that the Sun, or other Lucid Body, shining
upon that Aggregate of small Bubbles, enables them to reflect confusedly great
store of little, and as it were contiguous lucid images to the Eye. And so the
giving to a large Metalline Speculum a Concave figure, would never enable it to
set Wood on fire, and even to melt down Metals readily, if the Sun beams, that
in Cloudless days do, as to sense, fill the Air, were not by the help of that
Concavity, thrown together to a Point. And to show You by an eminent Instance,
how various and how differing Effects the Same action of a Natural Agent may
produce, according to the several Dispositions of the Bodies it works upon, do
but consider, that in two Eggs, the one Prolifick, the other Barren, the sense
can perhaps distinguish before Incubation no difference at all* and yet these
Bodies, outwardly so like, do so differ in the internal disposition of their
parts, that if they be both exposed to the same degree of Heat, (whether of a
Hen, or an Artificial Oven,) that Heat will change the one into a putrid and
stinking Substance, and the other into a Chick, furnished with great variety of
Organical parts of very differing consistences, and curious as well as
differing Textures.

4. I do not deny, but that Bodies may be said, in a very favorable sense, to
have those Qualities we call Sensible, though there were no Animals in the
World: for a Body in that case may differ from those Bodies, which now are
quite devoid of Quality, in its having such a disposition of its Constituent
Corpuscles, that in case it were duly applied to the Sensory of an Animal, it
would produce such a sensible Quality, which a Body of another Texture would
not; as though if there were no Animals, there would be no such thing as Pain,
yet a Pin may upon the account of its Figure be fitted to cause pain, in case
it were moved against a Man's finger; whereas a Bullet, or other blunt Body
moved against it with no greater force, will not cause any such perception of
pain. And thus Snow, though if there were no Lucid Body nor Organ of Sight in
the World, it would exhibit no Color at all, (for I could not find it had any
in places exactly darkened,) yet it has a greater disposition then a Coal or
Soot to reflect store of Light outward, when the Sun shines upon them all
three. And so we say, that a Lute is in tune, whether it be actually played upon
or no, if the Strings be all so duly stretched, as that it would appear to be in
Tune, if it were played upon. But as if You should thrust a Pin into a man's
Finger, both a while before and after his Death, though the Pin be as sharp at
one time as at another, and makes in both cases alike a Solution of
Continuity; yet in the former case, the Action of the Pin will produce Pain,
and not in the latter, because in this the pricked Body wants the Soul, and
consequently the Perceptive Faculty: so if there were no Sensitive Beings,
those Bodies that are now the Objects of our Senses, would be but
dispositively, if I may so speak, endowed with Colors, Tastes, and the like;
and actually but only with those more Catholic Affections of Bodies, Figure,
Motion, Texture, etc.

To illustrate this yet a little farther, suppose a Man should beat a Drum at
some distance from the mouth of a Cave, conveniently situated to return the
Noise he makes; although Men will presently conclude, that That Cave has an
Echo, and will be apt to fancy upon that account some Real Property in the
place, to which the Echo is said to belong, and although indeed the same Noise
made in many other of the neighboring places, would not be reflected to the
Ear, and consequently would manifest those places to have no Echos; yet to
speak Physically of things, this Peculiar Quality or Property we fancy in the
Cave, is in It nothing else but the Hollowness of its Figure, whereby it is so
disposed, as when the Air beats against it, to reflect the Motion toward the
place whence that Motion began; and that which passes on this occasion is
indeed but this, That the Drum stick falling upon the Drum, makes a Percussion
of the Air, and puts that Fluid Body into an Undulating Motion, and the Aerie
Waves thrusting on one another, 'till they arrive at the hollow Superficies of
the Cave, have by reason of its resistance and figure, their Motion determined
the contrary way, namely backwards toward that part where the Drum was, when
it was struck; so that in That, which here happens, there intervenes nothing
but the Figure of one Body, and the Motion of another, though if a Man's Ear
chance to be in the way of these Motions of the Air forwards and backvvards, it
gives him a Perception of them, which he calls Sounds; and because these
Perceptions, which are supposed to proceed from the same percussion of the
Drum, and thereby of the Air, are made at distinct times one after another,
That hollow Body, from whence the Last Sound is conceived to come to the Air,
is imagined to have a peculiar Faculty, upon whose account Men are wont to say,
that such a place has an Echo.

5. And whereas one Body does often seem to produce in another diverse such
Qualities, as we call Sensible, which Qualities therefore seem not to need any
reference to our Senses, I consider, that when one Inanimate Body works upon
another, there is nothing really produced by the Agent in the Patient, save
some Local Motion of its Parts, or some Change of Texture consequent upon that
Motion; and so, if the Patient come to have any sensible Quality, that it had
not before, it acquires it upon the same account, upon which other Bodies have
it, and it is but a consequent to this Mechanical Change of Texture, that by
means of its Effects upon our Organs of Sense, we are induced to attribute this
or that sensible Quality to it. As in case a Pin should chance by some
inanimate Body to be driven against a Man's Finger, that which the Agent does,
is but to put a sharp and slende^ Body into such a kind of Motion, an^ that
which the Pin does, is to pierce into a Body that it meets with, not ha^^
enough to resist its Motion, and so tha^ upon this there should ensue such a
thing as Pain, is but a Consequent, tha^ superadds nothing of Real to the P^^
that occasions that Pain. So if a piece of Transparent Ice be, by the falling
o^ some heavy and hard Body upon it, broken into a Gross Powder that look
Whitish, the falling Body does nothing to the Ice but break it into very sma^
Fragments, lying confusedly upon on^ another; though by reason of the Fabric
of the World, and of our Eyes, there does in the day time upon this
Comminution, ensue such a kind of copious Reflection of the incident Light to
our Eyes, as we call Whiteness: and when the Sun, by thawing this broken Ice,
destroys the Whiteness of that portion of Matter, and makes it become
Diaphanous, which it was not before, it does no more then alter the Texture of
the Component parts, by putting them into Motion, and thereby into a new Order;
in which, by reason of the disposition of the Pores intercepted betwixt them,
they reflect but few of the incident beams of Light, and transmit most of them.
Thus when with a Burnisher You polish a rough piece of Silver, that which is
really done, is but the Depression of the little Protuberant parts into one
Level with the rest of the Superficies; though upon this Mechanical change of
the Texture of the Superficial parts, we Men say, that it has lost the Quality
of Roughness, and acquired that of Smoothness, because that whereas before, the
little Exstancies by their Figure resisted a little the Motion of our Finger,
and grated upon them a little, our Fingers now meet with no such offensive
Resistance. It Is true that the Fire does thaw Ice, and also both make Wax slow,
and enable it to burn a Man's hand, and yet this does not necessarily argue in
it any Inhaerent Quality of Heat, distinct from the Power it has of putting
the smal^ parts of the Wax into such a Motion as that their Agitation surmounts
their Cohaesion; which Motion, together with their Gravity, is enough to make
them pro tempore constitute a Fluid Body: and Aqua Fortis, without any
(sensible) Heat, will make Camphire, cas^ on it, assume the form of a Liquor
distinct from it; as I have tried, that ^ strong Fire will also make Camphi^
fluid: not to add, that I know a Liquor, into which certain Bodies being put,
when both it Self, (as well as They,) is actually cold, (and consequently when
You would not suspect it of an Actual Inhaerent Heat) will not only speedily
dissipate many of their parts into Smoke, but leave the rest Black, and burnt
almost like a Coal. So that though we suppose the Fire to do no more then
variously and briskly to agitate the Insensible parts of the Wax, That may
suffice to make us think the Wax endowed with a Quality of Heat: because if
such an Agitation be greater then that of the Spirit, and other parts of our
Organs of Touching, That is enough to produce in us that Sensation we call
Heat; which is so much a Relative to the Sensory which apprehends it, that we
see, that the same Lukevvarm Water, that is, whose Corpuscles are moderately
agitated by the Fire, will appear hot to one of a Man's hands, if That be very
cold; and cold to the other, in case it be very hot, though both of them be the
same Man's hands. To be short, if we fancy any two of the Bodies about us, as a
Stone, a Metal, etc. to have nothing at all to do with any other Body in the
Universe, it is not easy to conceive, either how one can act upon the other, but
by Local Motion (of the whole Body, or its Corporeal Effluvia;) or how by
Motion it can do any more, then put the Parts of the other Body into Motion
too, and thereby produce in them a Change of Situation and Texture, or of some
other of its Mechanical Affections: though this (Passive) Body being placed
among other Bodies in a World constituted as ours now is, and being brought to
act upon the most curiously contrived Sensories of Animals, may upon both these
accounts exhibit many differing sensible Phenomenon; which however we look upon
them as distinct Qualities, are consequently but the Effects of the often
mentioned Catholic affections of Matter, and deducible from the Size, Shape,
Motion (or Rest,) Posture, Order, and the resulting Texture of the Insensible
parts of Bodies. And therefore though, for shortness of speech, I shall not
scruple to make use of the word Qualities, since it is already so generally
received, yet I would be understood to mean them in a sense suitable to the
Doctrine above delivered. As if I should say, that Roughness is apt to grate
and offend the Skin, I should mean, that a File or other Body, by having upon
its Surface a multitude of little hard and exstant Parts, and of an Angular or
sharp Figure, is qualified to work the mentioned Effect: and so if I should
say, that Heat melts Metals, I should mean, that this Fusion is effected by
Fire, or some other Body, which by the various and vehement Motion of its
insensible parts, does to us appear Hot. And hence, (by the way,) I presume You
will easily guess at what I think of the Controversy so hotly disputed of late
betwixt two parties of Learned Men, whereof the One would have all Accidents to
work only in virtue of the Matter they reside in, and the Other would have
the Matter to act only in virtue of its Accidents: for considering, that on
the one side, the Qualities, we here speak of, do so depend upon Matter, that
they cannot so much as have a Being but in, and by it; and on the other side,
if all Matter were but quite devoid of Motion, (to name now no other
Accidents,) I do not readily conceive, how it could operate at all, I think it
is safest to conclude, That neither Matter, nor Qualities apart, but both or
them conjointly do perform, what we see done by Bodies to one another,
according to the Doctrine of Qualities just now delivered.

(Of the Nature of a Form.)
VII. WE may now advance somewhat farther, and consider, that Men having taken
notice, that certain conspicuous Accidents were to be found associated in some
Bodies, and other Conventions of Accidents in other Bodies, they did for
convenience, and for the more expeditious Expression of their Conceptions agree
to distinguish them into several Sorts, which they call Genders or Species,
according as they referred them either upwards to a more Comprehensive sort of
Bodies, or downward to a narrower Species, or to Individuals: As, observing
many Bodies to agree in being Fusible, Malleable, Heavy, and the like, they
gave to that sort of Body the name of Metal, which is a Genus in reference to
Gold, Silver, Lead, and but a Species in reference to that sort of mixed Bodies
they call Fossilia. This superior Genus comprehending both Metals, Stones, and
diverse other Concretions, though it self be but a Species in respect of Mixed
Bodies. Now when any Body is referred to any particular Species, (as of a
Metal, a Stone, or the like,) because Men have for their Convenience agreed to
signify all the Essentials requisite to constitute such a Body by one Name,
most of the Writers of Physics have been apt to think, that besides the common
Matter of all Bodies, there is but One thing that discriminates it from other
Kinds, and makes it what it is, and this for brevities sake they call a Form;
which, because all the Qualities and other Accidents of the Body must depend on
it, they also imagine to be a very Substance, and indeed a kind of Soul, which
united to the gross Matter composes with it a Natural Body, and acts in it by
the several Qualities to be found therein, which Men are wont to ascribe to the
Creature so composed. But as to this affair, I observe, that if (for Instance)
You ask a Man, what Gold is, if he cannot show you a piece of Gold, and tell
You, This is Gold, he will describe it to You as a Body, that is extremely
Ponderous, very Malleable and Ductile, Fusible and yet Fixed in the Fire, and of
a Yellowish color: and if You offer to put off to him a piece of Brass for a
piece of Gold, he will presently refuse it, and (if he understand Metals) tell
You, that though Your Brass be colored like it, it is not so heavy, nor so
malleable, neither will it like Gold resist the utmost brunt of the Fire, or
resist Aqua Fortis: and if You ask Men what they mean by a Ruby, or Niter, or a
Pearl, they will still make You such Answers, that You may clearly perceive,
that whatever Men talk in Theory of Substantial Forms, yet That, upon whose
account they really distinguish any one Body from others, and refer it to this
or the Species of Bodies, is nothing but a Aggregate or Convention of such
Accidents, as most men do by a kind of Agreement (for the Thing is more
A^bitrary then we are aware of) think necessary or sufficient to make a Portion
of the Universal Matter belong to the or that Determinate Genus or Specie^ of
Natural Bodies. And therefore no^ only the Generality of Chemists, be diverse
Philosophers, and, what is more some Schoolmen themselves, maintai^ it to be
possible to Transmute the ign^bler Metals into Gold; which argues that if a
Man could bring any Parcel o^ Matter to be Yellow, and Malleable and Ponderous,
and Fixed in the Fire, an^ upon the Test, and Indissoluble in Aqu^ Fortis, and
in some to have a concurrence of all those Accidents, by which Men try True
Gold from False, the^ would take it for True Gold without scruple. And in this
case the general^ty of Mankind would leave the School-Doctors to dispute,
whether being a Factitious Body, (as made by the Chemists art,) it have the
Substantial Form of Gold, and would upon the account of the Convention of the
freshly mentioned Accidents let it pass Current amongst them, notwithstanding
most Men's greater care, not to be deceived in a matter of this nature then in
any other. And indeed, since to every Determinate Species of Bodies, there does
belong more then One Quality, and for the most part a concurrence of Many is so
Essential to That sort of Bodies, that the want of any of them is sufficient to
exclude it from belonging to that Species: there needs no more to discriminate
sufficiently any One kind of Bodies from all the Bodies in the World, that are
not of that kind; as the Chemists Luna ^ixa, which they tell us wants not the
Weight, the Malleablenesse, nor the Fixtness, nor any other property of Gold,
except the Yellowness, (which makes them call it White Gold,) would by reason
of that want of Color be easily known from true Gold. And you will not wonder
at this, if you consider, that those Sphaeres and Parallelopipedons differ but
in Shape, yet this difference alone is the ground of so many others, that
Euclid and other Geometricians have demonstrated, I know not how many
Properties of the one, which do no way belong to the other, and Anst. Metaph.
lib. 7. cap. 8.
Aristotle himself somewhere tells us, That a Sphaere is composed of Brass and
Roundness. And I suppose it would be thought a Man's own fault, if he could not
distinguish a Needle from a File, or a Key from a pair of Scissors, though
these being all made of Iron, and differing but in Bigness and Shape, are less
remarkably diverse then Natural Bodies, the most part of which differ from each
other in far more Accidents then Two. Nor need we think that Qualities being
but Accidents, they cannot be essential to a Natural Body; for Accident, as I
formerly noted, is sometimes opposed to Substance, and sometimes to Essence:
and though an Accident can be but accidental to Matter, as it is a Substantial
thing, yet it may be essential to this or that particular Body; as in
Aristotle's newly mentioned Example, though Roundness is but Accidental to
Brass, yet it is Essential to a Brazen Sphaere; because, though the Brass were
devoid of Roundnesse, (as if it were Cubical, or of any other figure,) it would
still be a Corporeal Substance, yet without that Roundness it could not be a
Sphaere: wherefore since an Aggregate or Convention of Qualities is enough to
make the portion of Matter it is found in, what it is, and denominate it of this
or that Determinate sort of Bodies; and since those Qualities, as we have seen
already, do themselves proceed from those more Primary and Catholic affections
of Matter, Bulk, Shape, Motion or Rest, and the Texture thence resulting, why
may we not say, that the Form of a Body being made up of those Qualities united
in one Subject, does likewise consist in such a Convention of those newly named
Mechanical Affections of Matter, as is necessary to constitute a Body of that
Determinate kind. And so, though I shall for brevities sake retain the word
Form, yet I would be understood to mean by it, not a Real Substance distinct
from Matter, but only the Matter it self of a Natural Body, considered with
its peculiar manner of Existence, which I think may not inconveniently be
called either its Specifical or its Denominating State, or its Essential
Modification, or, if you would have me express it in one word, its Stamp: for
such a Convention of Accidents is sufficient to perform the Offices that are
necessarily required in what Men call a Form, since it makes the Body such as
it is, making it appertain to this or that Determinate Species of Bodies, and
discriminating it from all other Species of Bodies whatsoever: as for Instance,
Ponderousness, Ductility, Fixtnesse, Yellowness, and some other Qualities,
concurring in a portion of Matter, do with it constitute Gold, and making it
belong to that Species we call Metals, and to that sort of Metals we call
Gold, do both denominate and discriminate it from Stones, Salts, Marchasites,
and all other sorts of Bodies that are not Metals, and from Silver, Brass,
Copper, and all Metals except Gold. And whereas it is said by some, that the
Form also of a Body ought to be the Principle of its Operations, we shall
hereafter consider in what sense That is to be admitted or rejected, in the
mean time it may suffice us, that even in the Vulgar Philosophy it is
acknowledged, that Natural Things for the most part operate by their Qualities,
as Snow dazles the Eyes by its Whiteness, and Water scattered into drops of
Rain falls from the Clouds upon the account of its Gravity. To which I shall
add, that how great the power may be, which a Body may exercise by virtue of a
single Quality, may appear by the Various and oftentimes Prodigious Effects,
which Fire produces by its Heat, when thereby it melts Metals, calcines
Stones, destroys whole Woods and Cities etc. And if several Active Qualities
conven^ in one Body, (as that which in our Hypothesis is meant by Form,
usually comprises several of them,) what great things may be thereby performed,
may be somewhat guessed at by the strange things we see done by some Engines
which, being, as Engines, undoubtedly devoid of Substantial Forms, must d^ those
strange things they are admired for, by virtue of those Accidents, the Shape,
Size, Motion, and Contrivance, of their parts. Not to mention, that in our
Hypothesis, besides those Operations that proceed from the Essential
Modification of the Matter, as the Body (composed of Matter and necessary
Accidents) is considered per modum unius, as one Entire Corporeal Agent, it may
in diverse cases have other Operations, upon the account of those particular
Corpuscles, which though they concur to compose it, and are in reference to
the whole considered but as its parts, may yet retain their own particular
Nature, and diverse of the peculiar Qualities: as in a Watch, besides those
things which the Watch performs as such, the several parts whereof it consists,
as the Spring, the Wheels, the String, the Pins, etc. may have each of them its
peculiar Bulk, Shape, and other Attributes, upon the account of one or more of
which, the Wheel or Spring etc. may do other things then what it does, as
merely a Constituent part of the Watch. And so in the Milk of a Nurse, that
has some hours before taken a Potion, though the Corpuscles of the purging
Medicine appear not to sense distinct from the other parts of the Milk, which
in far greater numbers concur with them, to constitute that white Liquor, yet
these Purgative Particles, that seem but to be part of the Matter whereof the
Milk consists, do yet so retain their own Nature and Qualities, that being
sucked in with the rest by the Infant, they quickly discriminate and discover
themselves by purging him. But of this Subject more hereafter.

(Of Generation, Corruption, and Alteration.)
VIII. IT now remains that we declare, what, according to the Tenor of our
Hypothesis, is to be meant by Generation, Corruption, and Alteration; (Three
Names, that have very much puzzled and divided Philosophers.) In order hereunto
we may consider,

1. That there are in the World great store of Particles of Matter, each of
which is too small to be, whilst single, Sensible; and being Entire, or
Undivided, must needs both have its Determinate Shape, and be very Solid.
Insomuch, that though it be mentally, and by Divine Omnipotence divisible, yet
by reason of its Smalness and Solidity, Nature does scarce ever actually divide
it; and these may in this sense be called Minima or Prima Naturalia.

2. That there are also Multitudes of Corpuscles, which are made up of the
Coalition of several of the former Minima Naturalia; and whose Bulk is so
small, and their Adhaesion so close and strict, that each of these little
Primitive Concretions or Clusters (if I may so call them) of Particles is
singly below the discernment of Sense, and though not absolutely indivisible by
Nature into the Prima Naturalia that composed it, or perhaps into other little
Fragments, yet, for the reasons freshly intimated, they very rarely happen to
be actually dissolved or broken, but remain entire in great variety of sensible
Bodies, and under various forms or disguises. As, not to repeat, what we lately
mentioned of the undestroy'd purging Corpuscles of Milk; we see, that even
Grosser and more compounded Corpuscles may have such a permanent Texture: For
Quicksilver, for instance, may be turned into a red Powder for a Fusible and
Malleable Body, or a Fugitive Smoke, and disguised I know not how many other
ways, and yet remain true and recoverable Mercury. And these are as it were
the Seeds, or immediate Principles of many sorts of Natural Bodies, as Earth,
Water, Salt, etc. and those singly insensible, become capable, when united, to
affect the Sense: as I have tried, that if good Camphire be kept a while in
pure Spirit of Wine, it will thereby be reduced into such Little parts, as
totally to disappear in the Liquor, without making it look less clear then fair
Water, and yet, if into this Mixture you pour a competent quantity of Water, in
a moment the scattered Corpuscles of the Camphire will, by reuniting
themselves, become White, and consequently Visible, as before their Dispersion.

3. That as well each of the Minima Naturalia, as each of the Primary Clusters
above mentioned, having its own Determinate Bulk and Shape, when these come to
adhere to one another, it must always happen, that the Size, and often, that
the Figure of the Corpuscle composed by their Juxta-position and Cohaesion,
will be changed: and not seldom too, the Motion either of the one, or the
other, or both, will receive a new Tendency, or be altered as to its Velocity,
or otherwise. And the like will happen, when the Corpuscles, that compose a
Cluster of Particles, are disjoined, or any thing of the little Mass is broken
off. And whether any thing of Matter be added to a Corpuscle, or taken from it
in either case, (as we just now intimated,) the Size of it must necessarily be
altered, and for the most part the Figure will be so too, whereby it will both
acquire a Congruity to the Pores of some Bodies, (and perhaps some of our
Sensories,) and become Incongruous to those of others, and consequently be
qualified, as I shall more fully show you hereafter, to operate on diverse
occasions, much otherwise then it was fitted to do before.

4. That when many of these insensible Corpuscles come to be associated into
one visible Body, if many or most of them be put into Motion, from what cause
soever the Motion proceeds, That it self may produce great Changes, and new
Qualities in the Body they compose; for not only Motion may perform much, even
when it makes not any visible Alteration in it, as Air put into swift Motion,
(as when it is blown out of Bellows) acquires a new Name, and is called Wind,
and to the Touch appears far colder then the same Air not so formed into a
Stream; and Iron, by being briskly rubbed against Wood or other Iron, has its
small parts so agitated, as to appear hot to our Sense: but this Motion
oftentimes makes visible Alterations in the Texture of the Body into which it
is received, for always the Moved parts strive to communicate their Motion, or
somewhat of the degree of it, to some parts that were before either at Rest, or
otherwise moved, and oftentimes the same Moved parts do thereby either disjoyn,
or break some of the Corpuscles they hit against, and thereby change their
Bulk, or Shape, or both, and either drive some of them quite out of the Body,
and perhaps lodge themselves in their places, or else associate them anew with
others. Whence it usually follows, that the Texture, is for a while at least,
and, unless it be very stable and permanent, for good and all, very much
altered, and especially, in that the Pores or little Intervals intercepted
betwixt the component Particles, will be changed as to Bigness, or Figure, or
both, and so will cease to be commensurate to the Corpuscles that were fit for
them before, and become commensurate to such Corpuscles of other Sizes and
Shapes, as till then were incongruous to them Thus we see that Water, by
loosing the wonted agitation of its parts, may acquire the Firmness and
Brittlenesse we find in Ice, and loose much of the Transparency it had whilst
it was a Liquor. Thus also by very hard rubbing two pieces of Resinous Wood
against one another, we may make them throw out diverse of their looser parts
into Steams and visible Smoke, and may, if the Attrition be duly continued,
make that commotion of the parts so change the Texture of the whole, as
afterward to turn the superficial parts into a kind of Coal. And thus Milk,
especially in hot weather, will by the intestine, though languid, Motions of
its parts, be in a short time turned into a thinner sort of liquor then Milk,
and into Cream, and this (last named) will by being barely agitated in a Churn,
be turned in a shorter time into that Unctuous and consistent Body we call
Butter, and into thin, fluid, and sower Butter-milk. And thus (to dispatch) by
the bruising of Fruit, the Texture is commonly so changed, that as we see
particularly in Apples, that the Bruised part soon comes to be of another
nature then the Sound part, the one differing from the other both in Color,
Taste, Smell, and Consistence. So that (as we have already inculcated) Local
Motion has, of all other affections of Matter, the greatest Interest i^ the
Altering and Modifying of it, since it is not only the Grand Agent or
Efficient among Second Causes, but is also oftentimes one of the principal
things that constitutes the Form of Bodies: as when two Sticks are set on fire
by long and vehement Attrition, Local Motion is not only that which kindles
the Wood, and so as an Efficient produces the Fire, but is That which
principally concurrs to give the produced Stream of shining Matter, the name
and nature of Flame: and so it concurrs also to constitute all Fluid Bodies.

5. And that since we have formerly seen, that it is from the Size, Shape, and
Motion of the small parts of Matter, and the Texture that results from the
manner of their being disposed in any one Body, that the Color, Odor, Taste,
and other qualities of that Body are to be derived, it will be easy for us to
recollect, That such Changes cannot happen in a portion of Matter, without so
much varying the Nature of it, that we need not deride the ancient Atomists,
for attempting to deduce the Generation and Corruption of Bodies from the famed
(...), the Convention and Dissolution, and the Alterations of them, from the
transposition of their (supposed) Atoms: For though indeed Nature is wont in
the Changes she makes among things Corporeal, to employ all the three ways, as
well in Alterations, as Generations and Corruptions; yet if they only meant,
as probably enough they did, That of the three ways proposed, the First was
wont to be the Principal in the Generation of Bodies, the second in the
Corruption, and the third in their Alterations, I shall not much oppose this
Doctrine: though I take the Local Motion or Transposition of Parts, in the same
portion of Matter, to bear a great stroke as well in reference to Generation
and Corruption, as to Alteration: as we see when Milk, or Flesh or Fruit,
without any remarkable addition or loss of parts turns into Maggots, or other
Insects; and as we may more conspicuously observe in the Praecipitation of
Mercury without addition, in the Vitrification of Metals, and other Chemical
Experiments to be hereafter mentioned.

These things premised, it will not now be difficult to comprise in few words
such a Doctrine, touching the Generation, Corruption, and Alteration of Bodies,
as is suitable to our Hypothesis, and the former Discourse. For if in a parcel
of Matter there happen to be produced (it imports not much how) a Concurrence
of all those Accidents, (whether those only, or more) that Men by tacit
agreement have thought necessary and sufficient to constitute any one
Determinate Species of things corporeal, then we say, That a Body belonging to
that Species, as suppose a Stone, or a Metal, is Generated, or produced de
novo. Not that there is really any thing of Substantial produced, but that
those parts of Matter, that did indeed before praeexist, but were either
scattered and shared among other Bodies, or at least otherwise disposed of, are
now brought together, and disposed of after the manner requisite, to entitle
the Body that results from them to a new Denomination, and make it appertain to
such a Determinate Species of Natural Bodies, so that no new Substance is in
Generation produced, but only That, which was praeexistent, obteins a new
Modification, or manner of Existence. Thus when the Spring, and Wheels, and
String, and Balance, and Index etc. necessary to a Watch, which lay before
scattered, some in one part, some in another of the Artificer's Shop, are first
set together in the Order requisite to make such an Engine, to show how the
time passes, a watch is said to be made: not that any of the mentioned Material
parts is produced de novo, but that till then the divided Matter was not so
contrived and put together, as was requisite to constitute such a thing, as we
call a Watch. And so when Sand and Ashes are well melted together, and suffered
to cool, there is Generated by the Colliquation that sort of Concretion we call
Glass, though it be evident, that its Ingredients were both praeexistent, and
do but by their Association obtain a New manner of existing together. And so
when by the Churning of Cream, Butter and Butter-milk are generated, we find
not any thing Substantial Produced de novo in either of them, but only that
the Serum, and the fat Corpuscles, being put into Local Motion, do by their
frequent Occursions extricate themselves from each other, and associate
themselves in the new manner, requisite to constitute the Bodies, whose names
are given them.

And as a Body is said to be generated, when it first appears clothed with all
those Qualities, upon whose Account Men have been pleased to call some Bodies
Stones; others, Metals; others, Salts, etc. so when a Body comes to loose all
or any of those Accidents that are Essential, and necessary to the constituting
of such a Body, it is then said to be corrupted or destroyed, and is no more a
Body of that Kind, but looses its Title to its former Denomination. Not that
any thing Corporeal or Substantial perishes in this Change, but only that the
Essential Modification of the Matter is destroyed: and though the Body be still
a Body, (no Natural Agent being able to annihilate Matter,) yet it is no longer
such a Body, as 'twas before, but perishes in the capacity of a Body of that
Kind. Thus if a Stone, falling upon a Watch, break it to pieces; as, when the
Watch was made there was no new Substance produced, all the Material parts (as
the Steel, Brass, String, etc.) being praeexistent some where or other, (as in
Iron, and Copper Mines, in the Bellies of those Animals of whose Guts Men use
to make Strings;) so not the least part of the Substance of the Watch is lost,
be only displaced and scattered; and yea that Portion of Matter ceases to be a
VVatch as it was before. And so (^ resume our late Example) when Cream^ is by
Churning turned into But^er, and a Serous Liquor, the parts of the Mil^ remain
associated into those two Bodies but the White Liquor perishes in the capacity
of Milk. And so when Ice comes to be thawed in exactly close Vessels, though
the Corruption be produced only (for ought appears) by introducing a new
Motion and Disposition into the parts of the Frozen Water yet it thereupon
ceases to be Ice, however it be as much Water, and consequently as much a
Body, as before it was frozen or thawed. These and the like Examples may teach
us rightly to understand that common Axiom of Naturalists, Corruption unius est
generatio alterius; and e contra: for since it is acknowledged on all hands,
that Matter cannot be annihilated, and since it appears by what we have said
above, that there are some Properties, namely Size, Shape, Motion, (or in its
absence, Rest,) that are inseparable from the actual parts of Matter; and since
also the Coalition of any competent number of these parts is sufficient to
constitute a Natural Body, endowed with diverse sensible Qualities; it can
scarce be otherwise, but that the same Agents, that shatter the Frame, or
destroy the Texture of one Body, will by shuffling them together, and disposing
them after a New manner, bring them to constitute some new sort of Bodies: As
the same thing, that by burning destroys Wood, turns it into Flame, Soot, and
Ashes. Only I doubt whether the Axiom do generally hol^ true, if it be meant,
That every Corruption must end in the Generation of a Body belonging to some
particular Species ^ things, unless we take Powders an^ fluid Bodies
indefinitely for Species ^ Natural Bodies; since it is plain, the^ are
multitudes of Vegetables, and other Concretions, which, when they rot, d^ not,
as some others do, turn in^^ Worms, but either into some slimy o^ watery
Substance, or else (which is the most usual) they crumble into a kin^ of Dust
or Powder, which, thoug^ looked upon as being the Earth, in^ which rotten
Bodies are at length resolved, is very far from being of an Elementary nature,
but as yet a Compounded Body, retaining some, if not many Qualities, which
often makes the D^ of one sort of Plant or Animal diff^ much from that of
another. And The will supply me with this Argument Ad hominem, viz. That since
in those violent Corruptions of Bodies, that are made by Outward Agents,
shattering them into pieces, if the Axiom hold true, the New Bodies emergent
upon the Dissolution of the Former, must be really Natural Bodies, as (indeed
diverse of the Moderns hold them to be,) and Generated according to the course
of Nature; as when Wood is destroyed by Fire, and turned partly into Flame,
partly into Soot, partly into Coals, and partly into Ashes; I hope we may be
allowed to conclude, That those Chemical Productions, which so many would have
to be but Factitious Bodies, are Natural ones, and regularly Generated. For it
being the same Agent, the Fire, that operates upon Bodies, whether they be
exposed to it in close Glasses, or in Chimnies, I see no sufficient reason, why
the Chemical Oils, and Volatile Salts, and other things which Spagirites obtain
from mixed Bodies, should not be accounted Natural Bodies, as well as the Soot,
and Ashes, an^ Charcoal, that by the same fire are obtained from Kindled Wood.

But before we pass away from the mention of the Corruption of Bodies, must
take some notice of what is called their Putrefaction. This is but a Peculiar
kind of Corruption, wrought slowly (whereby it may be distinguished from
Destruction by Fire, and other nimble Agents) in Bodies: it happens to them for
the most part by means o^ the Air, or some other Ambient Fluid, which by
penetrating into the Pores o^ the Body, and by its agitation in them, does
usually call out some of the more Agile and less entangled parts of the Body,
and does almost ever loosen and dislocate the parts in general, and thereby so
change the Texture, and perhaps too the Figure, of the Corpuscles, that compose
it, that the Body, thus changed, acquires Qualities unsuitable to its Former
Nature, and for the most part offensive to Our Senses, especially of Smelling
and Tasting: which last clause I therefore add, not only because the Vulgar
look not upon the Change of an Egg into a Chick as a Corruption, but as a
Perfection of the Egg; but because also I think it not improbable, that if by
such slow Changes of Bodies, as make them loose their former Nature, and might
otherwise pass for Putrefaction, many Bodies should acquire better Sents or
Tastes then before; or if Nature, Custom, or any other cause should much alter
the Texture of our Organs of Tasting and Smelling, it would not perhaps be so
well agreed on what should be called Putrefaction, as that imports an impairing
Alteration, but Men would find some favourabler Notion for such Changes. For I
observe, that Medlars, though they acquire in length of time such a Color and
Softness as rotten Apples, and other putrified Fruits do, yet, because their
Taste is not then harsh as before, we call that Ripeness in them, which
otherwise we should call Rottenness. And though upon the Death of a fourfooted
Beast, we generally call that Change, which happens to the Flesh or Blood,
Putrefaction, yet we pass a more favorable judgment upon That, which happens
to the Flesh and other softer parts of that Animal, (whether it be a kind of
large Rabbets, or very small and hornlesse Deer,) of which in China, and in the
Levant they make Musk; because by the Change, that ensues the Animals death,
the Flesh acquires not an odious, but a grateful Smell. And we see, that some
Men, whose Appetites are gratified by Rotten Cheese, think it Then not to have
degenerated, but to have attained its best State, when having lost its former
Color, Smell, and Taste, and, which is more, being in great part turned into
those Insects called Mites, it is both in a Philosophical sense corrupted, and
in the aestimate of the generality of Men grown Putrid. But because it very
seldom happens, that a Body by Generation acquires no other Qualities, then
just those that are absolutely necessary, to make it belong to the Species that
Denominates it; therefore in most Bodies there are diverse other Qualities that
may be there, or may be missing, without Essentially changing the Subject: as
Water may be clear or muddy, odorous or stinking, and still remain Water; and
Butter may be white or yellow, sweet or rancid, consistent or melted, and still
be called Butter. Now therefore whenever a Parc^l of Matter does acquire or
loose a Quality, that is not Essential to it, That Acquisition or Loss is
distinctly called Alteration, (or by some, Mutation:) the Acquist only of the
Qualities that are absolutely necessary to constitute its Essential and
Specifical difference, or the Loss of any of those Qualities, being such a
Change as must not be called mere Alteration, but have the particular name of
Generation or Corruption; both which according to this Doctrine appear to be
but several Kinds of Alteration, taken in a large sense, though they are
distinguished from it in a more strict and Limited acception of that Term.

And here we have a fair Occasion to take notice of the Fruitfulness and
Extent of our Mechanical Hypothesis: For since according to our Doctrine, the
World we live in is not a Movelesse or Indigested Mass of Matter, but an (...),
or Self moving Engine, wherein the greatest part of the common Matter of all
Bodies is always (though not still the same parts of it) in Motion; and
wherein Bodies are so close set by one another, that (unless in some very few
and extraordinary, and as it were Praeternatural cases) they have either no
Vacuities betwixt them, or only here and there interposed, and very small
ones. And since, according to us, the various manner of the Coalition of
several Corpuscles into one visible Body is enough to give them a peculiar
Texture, and thereby fit them to exhibit diverse sensible Qualities, and to
become a Body, sometimes of one Denomination, and sometimes of another; it will
very naturally follow, that from the various Occursions of those innumerable
swarms of little Bodies, that are moved to and fro in the World, there will be
many fitted to stick to one another, and so compose Concretions; and many
(though not in the self same place) disjoined from one another, and agitated
apart; and multitudes also that will be driven to associate themselves, now
with one Body, and presently with another. And if we also consider on the one
side, that the Sizes of the small Particles of Matter may be very various,
their Figures almost innumerable, and that if a parcel of Matter do but happen
to stick to one Body, it may chance to give it a new Quality, and if it adhere
to another, or hit against some of its Parts, it may constitute a Body of
another Kind; or if a parcel of Matter be knocked off from another, it may
barely by That, leave It, and become it self of another Nature then before. If,
I say, we consider these things on the one side; and on the other side, that
(to use Lucretius his Comparison) all that innumerable multitude of Words, that
are contained in all the Languages of the World, are made of the various
Combinations of some of the 24 Letters of the Alphabet; 'twill not be hard to
conceive, that there may be an incomprehensible variety of Associations and
Textures of the Minute parts of Bodies, and consequently a vast Multitude of
Portions of Matter endowed with store enough of differing Qualities, to deserve
distinct Appellations; though for want of heedfulnesse and fit Words, Men have
not yet taken so much notice of their less obvious Varieties, as to sort them
as they deserve, and give them distinct and proper Names. So that though I
would not say, that Any thing can immediately be made of Every thing, as a Gold
Ring of a Wedge of Gold, or Oil, or Fire of Water; yet since Bodies, having
but one common Matter, can be differenced but by Accidents, which seem all of
them to be the Effects and Consequents of Local Motion, I see not, why it
should be absurd to think, that (at least among Inanimate Bodies) by the
Intervention of some very small Addition or Substraction of Matter, (which yet
in most cases will scarce be needed,) and of an orderly Series of Alterations,
disposing by degrees the Matter to be transmuted, almost of any thing, may at
length be made Any thing: as, though out of a wedge of Gold one cannot
immediately make a Ring, yet by either Wyre-drawing that Wedge by degrees, or
by melting it, and casting a little of it into a Mould, That thing may easily
be effected. And so though Water cannot immediately be transmuted into Oil, and
much less into Fire, yet if you nourish certain Plants with Water alone, (as I
have done,) 'till they have assimilated a great quantity of Water into their
own Nature, You may, by committing this Transmuted Water (which you may
distinguish and separate from that part of the Vegetable you first put in) to
Distillation in convenient Glasses, obtain, besides other things, a true Oil*
and a black combustible Coal, (and consequently Fire,) both of which may be so
copious, as to leave no just cause to suspect, that they could be any thing
near afforded by any little Spirituous parts, which may be praesum'd to have
been communicated by that part of the Vegetable, that is first put into the
water, to that far greater part of it, which was committed to Distillation.

But, Pyrophilus, I perceive the Difficulty and Fruitfulness of my Subject,
have made me so much more prolix then I intended, that it will not now be amiss
to Contract the Summary of our Hypothesis, and give you the Main Points of it
with little or no Illustration, and without particular Proofs in a few words.
We teach then (but without peremptorily asserting it,)

First, That the Matter of all Natural Bodies is the Same, namely a Substance
extended and impenetrable.

2. That all Bodies thus agreeing in the same common Matter, their Distinction
is to be taken from those Accidents that do diversity it.

3. That Motion, not belonging to the Essence of Matter, (which retains its
whole Nature, when it is at Rest,) and not being Originally producible by other
Accidents, as They are from It, may be looked upon as the First and chief Mood
or Affection of Matter.

4. That Motion, variously determined, does naturally divide the Matter it
belongs to, into actual Fragments or Parts; and this Division obvious
Experience, (and more eminently, Chemical Operations) manifest to have been
made into parts exceedingly minute, and very often, too minute to be singly
perceiveable by our Senses.

5. Whence it must necessarily follow, that each of these Minute Parts, or
minima Naturalia (as well as every particular Body, made up by the Coalition of
any number of them,) must have its Determinate Bigness or Size, and its own
Shape. And these three, namely Bulk, Figure, and either Motion or Rest, (there
being no Mean between these two) are the three Primary and most Catholic Moods
or Affections of the insensible parts of Matter, considered each of them apart.

6. That when diverse of them are considered together, there will necessarily
follow here Below both a certain Position or Posture in reference to the
Horizon (as Erected, Inclining, or Level) of each of them, and a certain Order,
or placing before, or behind, or besides one another; (as when in a company of
Soldiers, one stands upright, the other stoops, the other lies along upon the
Ground, they have various Postures; and their being placed besides one another
in Ranks, and behind one another in Files, are Varieties of their Order:) and
when many of these small parts are brought to Convene into one Body from their
primary Affections, and their Disposition, or Contrivance as to Posture and
Order, there results That, which by one Comprehensive Name we call the Texture
of that Body. And indeed these several Kinds of Location, to borrow a
Scholastical Term,) attributed (in this 6th number) to the Minute Particles of
Bodies, are so near of Kin, that they seem all of them referrable to (that
One Event of their Convening,) Situation, or Position. And these are the
Affections that belong to a Body, as it is considered in it self, without
relation to sensitive Beings, or to other Natural Bodies.

7. That yet, there being Men in the World, whose Organs of Sense are contrived
in such differing ways, that one Sensory is fitted to receive Impressions from
some, and another from other sorts of External Objects, or Bodies without them,
(whether these act as Entire Bodies, or by Emission of their Corpuscles, or by
propagating some Motion to the Sensory,) the Perceptions of these Impressions
are by me^ called by several Names, as Heat, Color, Sound, Odor; and are
commonly imagined to proceed from certain distinct and peculiar Qualities in
the External Object, which have some resemblance to the Ideas, their action
upon the Senses excites in the Mind; though indeed all these Sensible
Qualities, and the rest that are to be met with in the Bodies without us, are
but the Effects or Consequents of the above mentioned primary Affections of
Matter, whose Operations are diversified according to the nature of the
Sensories, or other Bodies they work upon.

8. That when a Portion of Matter, either by the accession or Recesse of
Corpuscles, or by the transposition of those it consisted of before, or by any
two or all of these ways, happens to obtain a concurrence of all those
Qualities, which Men commonly agree to be necessary and sufficient to
Denominate the Body, which has them, either a Metal, or a Stone, or the like,
and to rank it in any peculiar and determinate Species of Bodies, Then a Body
of that Denomination is said to be Generated.

9. This Convention of Essential Accidents being taken (not any of the^ Apart,
but all) together for the Specif^cal Difference that constitutes the Body and
discriminates it from all other sort of Bodies, is by one Name, because
conside^'d as one collective Thing called its Form, (as Beauty, which i^ made
up both of Symmetry of Parts and Agreeableness of Colors,) which is
consequently but a certain Character* (as I sometimes call it,) or a peculi^
state of Matter, or, if I may so name it an Essential Modification: a
Modification, because it is indeed but a Determinate manner of Existence of the
Matter and yet an Essential Modification, because that though the concurrent
Qualities be but Accidental to Matter (which with others in stead of Them would
be Matter still,) yet they are essentially necessary to the Particular Body
which without those Accidents would not be a Body of that Denomination, as a
Metal or a Stone, but of some other.

10. Now a Body being capable of many other Qualities, besides those, whose
Convention is necessary to make up its Form; the acquisition or less of any
such Quality is, by Naturalists in the more strict sense of that Term, named
Alteration: as when Oil comes to be frozen, or to change color, or to grow
rancid; but if all, or any of the Qualities, that are reputed essential to such
a Body, come to be lost or destroyed, that notable Change is called Corruption;
as when Oil being boiled takes fire, the Oil is not said to be altered in the
former sense, but corrupted or destroyed, and the emergent Fire generated; and
when it so happens, that the Body is slowly corrupted, and thereby also
acquires Qualities offensive to our Senses, especially of Smell and Taste, (as
when Flesh* or Fruit grows rotten,) that kind of Corruption is by a more
particular Name called Putrefaction. But neither in this, nor in any other kind
of Corruption is there any thing substantial destroyed, (no such thing having
been produced in Generation, and Matter it self being on all hands acknowledged
incorruptible,) but only that special connection of the Parts, or manner of
their Coexistence, upon whose account the Matter, whilst it was in its former
state, was, and was called a Stone, or a Metal, or did belong to any other
Determinate Species of Bodies.

CONSIDERATIONS and EXPERIMENTS, Touching the Origin of QUALITIES and FORMS.
THE HISTORICAL PART.
The I. SECTION. The I. SECTION, Containing the Observations.
IN the foregoing Notes I have endeavored with as much Clearness, as the
Difficulty of the Subject, and the Brevity I was confined to, permitted to give
a Scheme or Summary of the Principles of the Corpuscularian Philosophy, as I
apprehended them, by way of a short Introduction to it, at least as far as I
judged necessary for the better understanding of what is contained in our Notes
and Experiments concerning the Productions and Changes of particular Qualities.
But though, I hope, I have not so affected Brevity, as to fall into Obscurity;
yet since these Principles are built upon the Phenomenon of Nature, and devised
in order to the Explication of them, I know not what I can do more proper to
recommend them, then to subjoyn some such Natural Phenomenon, as either induce
me to take up such Notions, or which I was directed to find out by the Notions
I had embraced. And since I appeal to the Testimony of Nature to verify the
Doctrine I have been proposing, about the Origin and Production of Qualities,
(for that of Forms will require a distinct Discourse,) I think it very proper
to set down some Observations of what Nature does, without being overrul'd by
the Power and Skill of Man, as well as some Experiments wherein Nature is
guided, and as it were Mastered by Art, that so she may be made to attest the
Truth of our Doctrine, as well, when she discloses her Self freely, and, if I
may so speak, of her Own accord, as when she is as it were Cited to make her
Depositions by the Industry of Man. The Observations will be but the more
suitable to our Design for being Common and Familiar, as to the Phenomenon,
though perhaps New enough as to the Application to our Purpose. And as for the
Experiments, because those that belong more immediately to this or that
particular Quality, may be met with in the Notes that treat of It, I thought it
not amiss that the Experiments should be both Few in number, and yet so
Pregnant, that every one of them should afford such differing Phenomenon, as
may make it applicable to more then One Quality.

I.
The Observation I will begin with shall be fetched from what happens in the
Hatching of an Egg. For as familiar and obvious a thing as it is, (especially
after what the Learned Fabricius ab Aqua pendente, and a recenter Anatomist
have delivered about them,) that there is a great Change made in the substance
of the Egg, when it is by Incubation turned into a Chick: yet, as far as I
know, this Change has not been taken notice of, for the same purpose, to which
I am about to apply it.

I consider then, that in a Prolifick Egg, (for Instance that of a Hen,) as
well the Liquor of the Yolk, as that of the White, is a Substance, as to sense,
Similar. For upon the same account that Anatomists and Physicians call several
parts of the humane Body, as Bones, Membranes, etc. Similar, that is, such, as
that every Sensible part of it has the same Nature or Denomination with the
whole, as every Splinter of Bone is Bone, as every Shred of Skin is Skin.

And though I find by distilling the Yolks and Whites, they seem to be
Dissimilar Bodies, in regard that the White of an Egg (for Example) will
afford Substances of a very differing Nature, as Phlegm, Salt, Oil, and Earth,
yet (not now to examine whether, or how far these may be esteemed Productions
of the Fire, that are rather obtained from the White of the Egg, then were
praeexistent in it; not to mention this I say,) it does not appear by
Distillation, that the White of an Egg, is other then a Similar Body in the
sense above delivered. For it would be hard to prove, that one part of the
White of an Egg will not be made to yield the same differing Substances by
Distillation, that any other part does; and Bones themselves, and other hard
parts of a humane Body, that are confessedly Similar, may by Distillation be
made to afford Salt, and Phlegm, and Spirit, and Oil, and Earth, as well as
the White of an Egg.

This being thus settled in the First place, we may in the Next consider, that
by beating the White of an Egg well with a Whisk, you may reduce it from a
somewhat Tenacious into a Fluid Body, though this Production of a Liquor be, as
we elsewhere noted, effected by a Divulsion, Agitation etc. of the parts, that
is in a word, by a Mechanical change of the Texture of the Body.

In the Third place I consider, that according to the exactest Observations of
Modern Anatomists, which our own Observations do not contradict, the Rudiments
of the Chick, lodged in the Cicatricula, or white Speck upon the Coat of the
Yolk, is nourished, 'till it have obtained to be a great Chick, only by the
White of the Egg; the Yolk being by the Providence of Nature reserved as a more
strong and solid Aliment, till the Chick have absum'd the White, and be thereby
grown great and strong enough to digest the Yolk; and in effect you may see the
Chick furnished not only with all the necessary, but diverse other parts, as
Head, Wings, Legs, and Beak, and Claws, whilst the Yolk seems yet as it were
untouched. But whether this Observation about the Entireness of the Yolk be
precisely true, is not much material to our present purpose, nor would I be
thought to build much upon it; since the Yolk it self, especially at that time,
is wont to be fluid enough, and to be a Liquor perhaps no less so then the
White was, and That is enough for my present purpose.

For in the Last place I consider, that the Nutritive Liquor of an Egg, which
is in it self a Body so very soft, that by a little Agitation it may be made
Fluid, and is readily enough dissolvable in common cold water, this very
Substance, I say, being brooded on by the Hen, will within two or three weeks
be transmuted into a Chick, furnished with Organical parts, as Eyes, Ears,
Wings, Legs, etc. of a very differing Fabric, and with a good number of
Similar ones, as Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Tendons, Membranes, etc. which
differ very much in Texture from one another; besides the Liquors, as Blood,
Chyle, Gall, etc. contained in the solid parts: So that here we have out of the
White of an Egg, which is a Substance Similar, Insipid, Soft, (not to call it
Fluid,) Diaphanous, Colourlesse, and readily dissoluble in cold water, out of
this Substance I say, we have by the new and various Contrivement of the small
parts it consisted of, an Animal, some of whose parts are not Transparent but
Opacous; some of them Red, as the Blood; some Yellow or Greenish, as the Gall;
some White, as the Brain; some Fluid, as the Blood, and other Juices; some
Consistent, as the Bones, Flesh, and other stable parts of the Body; some Solid
and Frangible, as the Bones, others Tough and Flexible, as the Ligaments,
others Soft and loosly Cohaerent, as the Marrow; some without Springs, as many
of the parts* some with Springs, as the Feathers, some apt to mingle readily
with cold water, as the Blood, the Gall; some not to be so dissolved in it, as
the Bones, the Claws, and the Feathers; some well tasted, as the Flesh and
Blood; some very ill tasted, as the Gall, (for That I have purposely and
particularly observed.) In a word, we have here produced out of such an
uniforme Matter as the White of an Egg,

First, new kind of Qualities, as (besides Opacity) Colors, (whereof a single
Feather will sometimes afford us Variety,) Odours, Tastes, and Heat in the Heart
and Blood of the Chick; Hardness, Smoothness, Roughness, etc.

Secondly, diverse other Qualities, that are wont to be distinguished from
Sensible ones, as Fluidity (in the Blood and aqueous humor of the Eye,)
Consistency in the Grisles, Flesh, etc. Hardness, Flexibility, Springynesse,
Toughness, unfitness to be dissolved in cold water, and several others. To
which may probably be added

Thirdly, some Occult Properties as Physicians observe, that some Birds, as
young Swallows, young Magpies afford Specific, or at least Noble Medicines, in
the Falling sickness, Hysterical Fits, and diverse other Distempers.

Fourthly, I very well foresee it may be objected, that the Chick with all its
parts is not a Mechanically contrived Engine, but fashioned out of Matter by
the Soul of the Bird, lodged chiefly in the Cicatricula, which by its Plastic
power fashions the obsequious Matter, and becomes the Architect of its own
Mansion. But not here to examine, whether any Animal, except Man, be other then
a Curious Engine, I answer, that this Objection invalidates not what I intend
to prove from the alleged Example. For let the Plastic Principle be what it
will, yet still, being a Physical Agent, it must act after a Physical manner,
and having no other Matter to work upon but the White of the Egg, it can work
upon that Matter but as Physical Agents, and consequently can but divide the
Matter into minute parts of several Sizes and Shapes, and by Local Motion
variously context them, according to the Exigency of the Animal to be produced,
though from so many various Textures of the produced parts there must naturally
emerge such differences of Colors, Tastes, and Consistencies, and other
Qualities as we have been taking notice of. That which we are here to consider,
is not what is the Agent or Efficient in these Productions, but what is done to
the Matter to effect them. And though some Birds by an inbred Skill do very
Artificially build their Curious Nests, yet cannot Nature* that teaches them,
enable them to do any more then select the Materials of t^eir Nests, and by
Local Motion div^de, transport, and connect them after Certain manner. And when
Man himself, who is undoubtedly an Intelligent Agent, is to frame a Building o^
an Engine, he may indeed by the help of Reason and Art, contrive his Materials
curiously and skilfully, but still ^ he can do, is but to move, divide,
tranpose, and context the several parts, in^^ which he is able to reduce the
Matte^ assigned him.

Nor need we imagine, that the So^ of that Hen, which having first produced the
Egg, does after a while sit on it has any peculiar Efficiency in hatching of a
Chick: for the Egg will be we^ hatched by another Hen, though The which laid it
be dead; and, which is more, we are assured by the Testimony of very good
Authors, as well as of recent Travelers, that in some places especially in
Egypt, there needs ^ Bird at all to the Production of a Chick out of an Egg,
since they hatch multitudes of Eggs by the regulated heat o^ Ovens, or
Dunghils. And indeed, that there is a Motion or Agitation of the parts of the
Egg by the external heat, whereby it is hatched, is evident of its self, and
not (as far as I know) denied by any, and that also the white Substance is
absumed and contexted, or contrived into the Body of the Chick, and its several
parts, is manifest to sense; especially if one has the Curiosity to observe
the progress of the Chicks Formation and Increment. But as it is evident, that
as these two things, the Substance of the White, and the Local Motion, wherein
the External Heat necessary to Incubation puts its parts, do eminently concur
to the Production of the Chick; so that the Formative Power (whatever that be)
does any more then guide these Motions, and thereby associate the ^itted
Particles of Matter after the manner requisite to constitute a Chick, is that
which I think will not easily be evinced. And I might to what I said of the
Egg, add several things touching the Generation of Viviparous Animals, which
the Learned Fabricius ab Aqua pendente, as well as some of the Ancient
Philosophers would have to be generated from a^ Imperfect kind of Eggs: but I
take the Eggs of Birds to be much fitter to instance in, because they are
things tha^ we have more at command, and where with we can conveniently make
mo^ Trials and Observations; and especiall^ because in perfect Eggs the Matter
t^ be transmuted is more closely locked up, and being kept from any visib^e
supply of Matter, confined to be wrought upon by the External Heat and by its
own Vital Principle within.

II.
Water being generally esteemed ^ Elementary Body, and being at leas^ far more
Homogeneous then Both here below are wont to be; it may mk^ very much for our
present purpose (...) show, that Water it self, that is Flu^^, Tastless,
Inodorous, Diaphanous, Colorless, Volatile, etc. may, by a differing Texture
of its Parts, be brought to constitute Bodies of Attributes very distant from
these. This I thought might be done, by nourishing Vegetables with simple
water. For in case I could do so, all, or the greatest part of that which would
accrue to the Vegetable thus nourished, would appear to have been materially
but Water, with what Exotic Quality soever it may afterward, when transmuted,
be endowed.

The Ingenious Helmont indeed mentions an Experiment somewhat of this nature,
though not to the same purpose, which he made by planting a Branch of Willow
into a Pot full of Earth, and observing the increase of Weight he obtained
after diverse years, though he fed the Plant but with Rain water. And some
Learned Modern Naturalists have conjectured at the easy Transmutablenesse of
Water, by what happens in Gardens and Orchards, where the same Showers or Rain
after a long Drought makes a great number of differing Plants to flourish. But
though these things be worthy of their Authors, yet I thought they would not be
so fit for my purpose, because it may be speciously enough objected, That the
Rain water does not make these Plants thrive and flourish, by immediately
affording them the Aliments they assimilate into their own Substance, but by
proving a Vehicle, that dissolves the Saline, and other Alimental Substances of
the Earth, and dilutes both them and the nutritive Juice, which, in a part of
the Plant its self, it may find too much thickened by the Drought or Heat of the
ambient Air, and by this means it contributes to the nourishment of the Plant,
though it self be insensibly afterward exhaled into vapors. And indeed
Experience shows us, that several Plants, that thrive not well without Rain
water, are not yet nourished by it alone, since when Corn in the Field, and
Fruit Trees in Orchards have consumed the Saline and Sulphurous Juices of the
Earth, they will not prosper there, how much Rain soever falls upon the Land,
till the Ground by Dung or otherwise be supplied again with such assimilable
Juices. Wherefore I rather chose to attempt the making of Plants grow in Viols
filled with Water, not only to prevent the forementioned Objection, and also
to make the Experiment less tedious, but that I might have the pleasure of
seeing the progress of Nature in the Transmutation of Water; and my
Observations of this kind as Novelties, unmention'd by any other Writer, I
showed diverse Ingenious Friends, who having better Opportunities then I of
staying in one place, have attempted the like, and made succesful Trials,
which, I suppose, will not be concealed from the public. Of my Observations
about things of this kind, I can at present find but few among my Adversaria;
but in Them I find enough for my present turn. For They and my Memory inform
me, that Vinca per Vinca, Raphanus Aquaticus, Spearemint, and even Ranunculus
it self, did grow and prosper very well in Viols filld with fair water, by
whose Necks the Leaves were supported, and the Plant kept from sinking: some of
these were only Cuttings without Roots, diverse of them were left in the water
all the Autumn, and great part of the Winter, and at the latter end of January
were taken out verdant, and with fair Roots, which they had shot in the water.
And besides I find, that particularly a Branch or Sprig of Raphanus Aquaticus
was kept full nine Months, and during that time withered not the whole Winter,
and was taken out of the water with many fibrous Roots, and some green Buds,
and an increase of Weight, and that a Stump of Ranunculus did so prosper in the
water, that in a Months time it had attained to a pretty deal more then double
the weight it had, when it was put in. And the next Note, which I find
concerning these Plants, informs me, that the above mentioned Crowsfoot being
taken out again at six Months after it was put in, weighed a Dram and a half
wanting a Grain and a half, that is, somewhat above Thrice as much as it did at
first. This last Circumstance (of the increase of Weight) I therefore thought
fit particularly to make Trial of, and set down upon this account among others,
That having doubted the Roots and Leaves, that seemed produced out of the
Water, might really be so, by an Oblongation and an Expansion of the Plants,
(as I have purposely tried, that an Onion weighed and laid up in the Spring,
though after some weeks keeping in the Air it shot Blades, whereof one was five
Inches long, in stead of incorporating the Air or terrestrial Effluviums with
it self, and consequently thereby growing heavier, had lost nine Grains of its
former weight,) it might by this Circumstance appear, that there may be a real
Assimilation and Transmutation of Water into the Substance of the Vegetable, as
I elsewhere also show by other proofs. For this being made out, from thence I
infer, That the same Corpuscles, which, convening together after one manner,
compose that fluid, Inodorous, colorless, and insipid Body of Water being
contexted after other manners, may constitute differing Concretes, which may
have Firmeness, Opacity, Odours, Smells, Tastes, Colors, and several other
manifest Qualities, and that too very different from one another. And besides
all this, these distinct Portions of Transmuted Water may have many other
Qualities, without excepting those that are wont to be called Specific, or
Occult, witness the several Medicinal Virtues attributed by Authors to
Spearmint, and to Periwinckle, to Majorane, and to Raphanus Aquaticus. And as
for Ranunculus, that Plant being reckoned among Poisonous ones, and among those
that raise Blisters, 'twill be easily granted, that it has, as other Poisons,
an Occult Deleterial faculty; and indeed it somewhat deserves our wonder, that
so insipid and innocent a thing as fair Water, should be capable to be turned
into a Substance of such a piercing and caustic Nature, as by Contact to raise
Blisters on an humane Body. And yet perhaps that is no less strange, which we
elsewhere relate, That a Plant, consisting chiefly of Transmuted Water, did by
Distillation afford us a true Oil, that would not mingle with Water, and
consequently was easily convertible into Fire. But whether or no this
Experiment, or any such like, prove, that almost All things may be made of All
things, not immediately, but by intervention of successive Changes and
Dispositions, is a Question to which we elsewhere say something, but are not
willing in this place to say any thing. And if it be here objected, That the
solid Substance, that accrues to a Plant rooted in Water, procceds not at all
from the water it self, but from the Nitrous, fat, and earthy Substances, that
may be presumed to abound even in common Water, not here to repeat what I
elsewhere say about this Objection, I shall at present reply, That though as to
diverse Plants, that flourish after Rain, I am apt to think, as I intimated
above, that they may in part be nourished as well by the Saline and Earthy
Substances, to which the Rain usually prooves a Vehicle, as by the Rain it
self; yet as to what the Objection holds forth about the Plants, that grow not
in the Ground, but in Glasses filled with Water, it should not be barely said
but proved, which he will not perhaps think easy to be done, that considers
how vast a quantity of fair Water is requisite to be exhaled away, to obtain as
much as one Ounce of dry Residents, whether Saline or Earthy.

III.
That a Plant, growing in the Earth, does by the faculties of its Vegetative
Soul attract the Juices of the Earth, that are within its reach, and selecting
those parts that are congruous to its Nature, refuse the rest, is the general
Opinion of Philosophers, and Physicians: and therefore many Naturalists are not
wont much to marvail, when they see a Tree bear a Fruit that is sour or bitter,
because they presume, that Nature has in the Root of the Tree culled out such
parts of the Alimental Juice of the Earth, as being made to convene into one
Fruit, are fit to make it of such a Quality. But it is worth observing for our
present purpose what happens both in ordinary Graftings, and especially in that
kind of Insition (taking the word in a large sense) which is commonly called
Inoculation. For though we may presume, that the Root of a white Thorn (for
Instance) may electively attract its Aliment from the Earth, and choose that
which is fittest to produce the Ignoble fruit, that is proper for that Plant:
yet we cannot reasonably suppose, that it should in its attraction of Aliment
have any Design of providing an Appropriate Nutriment for a Pore, and yet the
known Experience of Gardiners, and our own Observations manifest, that the
Cyons of a Pear tree will take very well upon a White thornstock, and bring
forth a well tasted fruit, very differing in many qualities from that of the
White thorn. I have also learned from those that are expert, That though Apples
and Pears, being but Vulgar Fruit, are seldom propagated but by Grafting; yet
they may be propagated likewise by Inoculation, (which seems to be but a kind
of Grafting with a Bud.) Now in the Inoculations, that are made upon Fruit
trees, it is very observable, and may much countenance what we are endeavoring
to prove, that a little Vegetable Bud, (that is no Seed, properly so called,)
not so big oftentimes as a Pea, should be able so to transmute all the Sap that
arrives at it, that though this Sap be already in the Root, and in its passage
upwards determined by Natures Intention, as Men are wont to speak, to the
production of the Fruit that is natural to the Stock; yet this Sap should by so
small a Vegetable Substance as a Bud, (whether by the help of some peculiar
kind of Strainer, or by the Operation of some powerful Ferment lodged in it, or
by both these, or some other cause,) be so far changed and overrul'd, as to
constitute a Fruit quite otherwise qualified, then that which is the Genuine
production of the Tree, and which is actually produced by those other portions
of the like Sap, which happened to nourish the prolific'd Buds that are the
Genuine Offspring of the Stock; so that the same Sap, that in one part of a
Branch constitutes (for instance) a Cluster of Haws, in another part of the
same Branch may constitute a Pear. And that which is further remarkable to our
present purpose, is, That not only the Fruits made of the same Sap do often
differ from one another in Shape, Bigness, Color, Odor, Taste, and other
obvious Qualities, as well as Occult ones: but that though the Sap it self be
(oftentimes) a Waterish and almost Insipid Liquor, that appears to sense
Homogeneous enough, and even by Distillation affords very little besides
Phlegm; yet this Sap is not only convertible by Buds of several Natures into
differing Fruits, but in one and the same Fruit the transmuted Sap shall by
differing Textures be made to exhibit very differing, and sometimes contrary
Qualities. As when (for instance) a Peach bud does not only change the Sap
that comes to it into a Fruit, very differing from that which the Stock
naturally produces, but in the Skin of the Peach it must be red, in the Kernel
white, and in other parts of other Colors; the Flesh of it must be fragrant,
the Stone inodorous, the Flesh soft and yielding, the Stone very hard and
brittle, the Meat pleasantly tasted, the Kernel bitter; not to mention, that
Peach Blossoms, though produced also by the Bud, are of a Color and Texture
very differing from that of the Fruit, and are enobled with an Occult Quality,
which the Fruit has not, I mean a Purgative Virtue: So that from Inoculations
we may learn, That a stegmatick Liquor, that seems Homogeneous enough, and but
very slenderly provided with other manifest Qualities then common water, may,
by being variously contexted by the Buds of Trees, be transmuted into Bodies
endowed with new, and various, and considerable Sents, Colors, Tastes,
Solidity, Medicinal virtues, and diverse other Qualities manifest, and occult.

If it be here said, that these Qualities are the productions of the Plastic
Power residing in prolifick Buds, which indeed (to me) seem to be but very
minute Boughs; I shall return the same Answer that I did to the like Objection,
when 'twas proposed in the First Observation.

Hitherto I have only argued from vulgar Inoculations, but there may be
others, as well more considerable, as less ordinary; and I remember I have
seen a Tree, whereof, though the Stock was of one sort of good Fruit, there
were three more and differing kinds of Stone-fruit, that had been made to take
by Inoculation; and two of those inoculated Boughs had actually Fruit on them,
and the third, though it had as yet no Fruit, because the Season for that sort
of Plants to bear it was not yet come, yet the Shoot was so flourishing, that
we concluded, that the Blossoms would in due time be succeeded by fruit. And
since I have been speaking of the differing Qualities of the parts of the same
Fruit, I am content to add two things: the one that Garcias ab Horto, a
Classick Author, (and Physician to the Indian Viceroy) affirms Aromat. Hist.
lib. 1. cap. 29. de Cassia solutiva.
with some solemnity, (as wondering that a Learned man should write otherwise,)
that though the fruit we call Cassia fistula be very commonly used, both here
and in the Indies as a Purging Medicine, yet the Seeds of this Solutive Cassia
are Astringent. The other: That of late years there have been often brought
into England from the Carybbe Islands, certain Kernels of a fruit, which those
that have seen it grow, liken to a white Pear-plumme; these are so strongly
Purgative, and also Emetick, that the Ingenious Mr. Lygon Ligon's History of
Barbados. page 67.68.
tells us, the five of them wrought with him a Dozen times upwards, and above
Twenty downwards, and yet the same Author assures us, (which is likewise here a
received Tradition among them that are curious of this fruit,) That in the
Kernel, in the parting of it into halfes, (^ when our Hazle Nuts in England p^^
in the middle longwise) you shall find thin Filme, which looks of a faint
Ca^nation, (which color is easily enoug^ discerned, the rest of the Kernel
being perfectly white,) and that taking o^ the Filme you may eat the Nut safely
without feeling any Operation at all and it is as sweet as a Jordan Almon^ [A
Learned Man, that practiced Physic in America, being inquired of by m^
concerning the Truth of this Relation answered, That though he had diverse times
given those Nuts as Cathartick Remedies, yet he had not that Curiosity to take
out the Filmes, finding it the Universal belief, that the Purgative faculty
consisted therein.] And I remember, that the famous See Nicholaus Monardes,
under the Title, Fabae Purgatrices.
Monardes does somewhat countenance this Tradition, where speaking of another
Purging fruit, that also comes from America, (from Cartagena, and Nombre de
Dios,) he takes notice, that these purging Beans (which are like ours, but
smaller) have a thin Skin, that divides them through the middle, which must
(together with the external Rind) be cast away, else they will work so
violently both upwards and downwards, as to bring the Taker into hazard of his
Life: whereas he commends these Beans rightly prepared, not only as a pleasant
Medicine, that does without trouble purge both Choler, Phlegm, and gross
Humors, for which it is celebrated among the Indians.

To these stories of our Countrymen, and Monardes, I shall subjoin another,
which I find related by that great Rambler about the World, Vincent le Blanck,
who giving us an Account of a public Garden, which he visited in Africa, in
the Territories of the Lord of Casima, not far from the Borders of Nubia, which
he represents as the curiosest Garden he saw in all the East, he mentions this
among other Rarities, "There were (says he) other sorts of Fruit, which I
never saw but there, and one among the rest leaved like a Sycamore, with fruit
like the Golden Apple, but no Gall more bitter, and within five Kernels, as big
as Almonds, the Juice whereof is sweet as Sugar, betwixt the Shell and the Nut
there grows a thick Skin of a Carnation color, which Vincent le Blanck's
Survey of the World: Part. 2. p. 260.
taken before they be thoroughly ripe, they preserve with Date Vinegar, and make
an excellent Sweetmeat, which they present to the King as a great Curiosity.

IV.
The Fourth and last Observation I shall at present mention, is afforded me by
the consideration of Rotten Cheese. For if we take notice of the difference
betwixt two parts of the same Cheese, whereof the one continues sound by
preserving its Texture, and the other has suffered that Impairing Alteration
of Texture we call Rottenness, we may often see a manifest and notable Change
in the several portions of a Body, that was before Similar. For the Rotten part
will differ from the Sound in its Color, which will be sometimes Livid, but
most commonly betwixt Green and Blew; and its Odor, which will be both strong
and offensive; and its Taste, which will be very Picquant, and to some men much
more pleasant then before, but to most men odious; and in diverse other
Qualities, as particularly its Consistence, it will be much less Solid and
more Friable then before; and if with a good Microscope we look upon the
molded parts of many Cheeses, we shall quickly discover therein some Swarms of
little Animals, (the Mites,) furnished with variety of Parts of differing
Sizes, Shapes, Textures, etc. and discry a yet greater diversity, both as to
manifest Qualities (nor probably is it inferior as to Occult ones) betwixt the
Moldy part of the Cheese and the Untainted, then the unassisted Eye could
otherwise have discovered.

The following Discourse (Of the Origin of Form^) ought to have been placed
before this foregoing Sectio^ the Historical Part.
OF THE ORIGIN OF FORMS.
THe Origin of Forms, Pyrophilus, as it is thought the Noblest, so, if I
mistake not, it has been found one of the most perplexed Enquiries, that
belong to Natural Philosophy: and, I confess, it is one of the things that has
invited me to look about for some more satisfactory Account, then the Schools
usually give of this matter, that I have observed, that the wisest that have
busied themselves in explicating Forms according to the Peripatetick Notions of
them, have either knowingly Confessed themselves unable to explain them, or
unwittingly Proved themselves Formarum cognitio est rudis, con^usa, nec nisi
per (...); neque verum est, formae substantialis speciem recipi in intellectum,
non enim in sensu usquam fuit. J.C. Scalig.

Formae substantiales sunt incognitae nobis, quia insensiles: ideo per
qualitates, quae sunt principia immediatae Transmutationis, exprimuntur.
Aquinas ad 1. de generat. and corrupt.

In hac humanae mentis caligine aeque forma Ignis ac Magnetis nobis igno^a est.
Sennertus.


to be so, by giving but unsatisfactory Explications of them.

It will not (I presume) be expected, that I, who now write but Notes, should
enumerate, much less examine all the various Opinions touching the Origin and
Nature of Forms; it being enough for our purpose, if, having already intimated
in our Hypothesis, what, according to that, may be thought of this Subject; we
now briefly consider the general Opinion of our Modern Aristotelians and the
Schools concerning it. I say, the Modern Aristotelians, because diverse of the
Ancient, especially Greek Commentators of Aristotle, seem to have understood
their Masters Doctrine of Forms much otherwise, and less incongruously, then
his Latin followers, the Schoolmen and others, have since done. Nor do I
expressly mention Aristotle himself among the Champions of substantial Forms,
because though he seem in a place or two expressly enough to reckon Forms among
Substances, yet elsewhere the Examples he imploies to set forth the Forms of
Natural things by, being taken from the Figures of artificial things, (as of a
Statue, etc.) which are confessedly but Accidents, and making very little use,
if any, of Substantial Forms to explain the Phenomenon of Nature, He seems to
me upon the whole matter, either to have been irresolv'd, whether there were
any such Substances, or no, or to speak ambiguously and obscurely enough of
them, to make it questionable, what his Opinions of them were.

But the sum of the Controversy betwixt Us and the Schools is this, whether
or no the Forms of Natural things, (the Souls of Men always excepted) be in
Generation educed, as they speak, out of the power of the Matter, and whether
these Forms be true substantial Entities, distinct from the other substantial
Principle of Natural Bodies, namely Matter.

The Reasons that move me to embrace the Negative, are principally these three.
First, That I see no necessity of admitting in Natural things any such
substantial Forms, Matter and the Accidents of Matter being sufficient to
explicate as much of the Phenomenon of Nature, as we either do or are like to
understand. The next, That I see not what use this puzling Doctrine of
substantial Forms is of in Natural Philosophy; the Acute Scaliger, and those
that have most busied themselves in the Indagation of them, having freely
acknowledged, (as the more Candid of the Peripateticks generally do,) That the
true Knowledge of Forms is too difficult and abstruse to be attained by them.
And how like it is, that particular Phenomenon will be explained by a
Principal, whose Nature is confessedly ignor'd, I leave you to judge: but
because to these considerations I often have had, and shall have here and there
occasion to say something in the body of these Notes, I shall at present insist
upon the third, which is, That I cannot conceive, neither how Forms can be
generated, as the Peripateticks would have it, nor how the things, they ascribe
to them, are consistent with the Principles of true Philosophy, or even with
what themselves otherwise teach.

The Manner how Forms are educed out of the Power of the Matter, according to
that part of the Doctrine of Forms, wherein the Schools generally enough agree,
is a thing so Inexplicable, that I wonder not it has put Acute men upon
several Hypotheses to make it out. And indeed the number of These is of late
grown too great to be fit to be here recited, especially since I find them all
so very unsatisfactory, that I cannot but think, the acute Sticklers for any of
them are rather driven to embrace it by the palpable inconveniences of the
ways they reject, then by any thing they find to satisfy them, in that which
they make choice of: and for my part I confess, I find so much Reason in what
each Party says against the Explications of the rest, that I think they all
Confute well, and none does well Establish.

But my present way of Writing forbidding me to insist on many Arguments
against the Doctrine, where they most agree, I shall only urge* That which I
confess chiefly sticks with me, namely that I find it not Comprehensible.

I know the Modern Schoolmen fly here to their wonted Refuge of an Obscure
Distinction, and tell us, that the Power of Matter in reference to Forms is
partly Eductive, as the Agent ca^ make the Form out of it, and partly
Receptive, whereby it can receive the For^ so made; but since those that say
this, will not allow, that the Form of a generated Body was actually
praeexisten^ in its Matter, or indeed any where else, it is hard to conceive,
how a Substance can be educ'd out of another Substance totally distinct in
Nature from it, without being, before such Eduction, actually existent in it.
And as for the Receptive Power of the Matter, That but fitting it to receive or
lodge a Form, when brought to be United with it, how can it be intelligibly
made out to contribute to the Production of a new Substance, of a quite
differing Nature from that Matter, though it harbors it when produced? And
it is plain, that the Humane Body has a receptive Power in reference to the
Humane Soul, which yet themselves confess both to be a substantial Form, and
not to be educ'd out of the Power of Matter. Indeed if they would admit the
Form of a Natural Body to be but a more fine and subtle part of the Matter, as
Spirit of Wine is of Wine, which upon its recess remains no longer Wine, but
Phlegm or Vinegar, then the Eductive Power of Matter might signify something;
and so it might, if with us they would allow the Form to be but a Modification
of the Mattter; for then it would import b^ that the Matter may be so ordered
^^ disposed by fit Agents, as to constitut^ a Body of such a sort and
Denomination: and so (to resume that Example the Form of a Sphaere may be said
(...) lurk potentially in a piece of Brass, in a^ much as that Brass may by
casting, tu^ning, or otherwise, be so figured as ^ become a Sphaere. But this
they w^ not admit, least they should make Form to be but Accidents, though it
is ^o ought I know as little intelligible, ho^ what is educ'd out of any
Matter, without being either praeexistent, or being any part of the Matter, can
be a tr^ Substance, as how that Roundness, tha^ makes a piece of Brass become a
Sphere can be a new Substance in it. Nor ca^ they admit the other way of
educing (...) Form out of Matter, as Spirit is out o^ Wine, because then not
only Matter will be corruptible against their grounds, but Matter and Form
would not be two differing and substantial Principles, but one and the same,
though diversified by firmness, and grosseness, etc. which are but Accidental
differences. I know they speak much of the efficacy of the Agent upon the
Matter, in the Generation of Natural Bodies, and tell us strange things of his
manner of working. But not to spend time in examining those obscure niceties, I
answer in short; That since the Agent, be he what he will, is but a Physical
and finite Agent, and since what way soever he works, he can do nothing
repugnant to the nature of things, the difficulty, that sticks with me, will
still remain. For if the Form produced in Generation, be, as they would have
it, a Substance, that was not before to be found any where out of that portion
of Matter, wherewith it constitutes the Generated Body; I say that either it
must be produced, by refining or subtiliating some parts of the Matter into
Form, or else it must b^ produced out of nothing, that is, Cre^ted, (for I see
no Third way, how a Substance can be produced de novo.) If they allow the
First, then will the Form b^ indeed a Substance, but not, as they hol^ it is,
distinct from Matter; since Matter however subtiliated, is Matter still, ^ the
finest Spirit of Wine is as truly Body, as was the Wine it self, that ye^ded
it, or as is the Grosser Phlegm, from which it was extracted: besides that, the
Peripateticks teach, that the Form is no^ made of any thing of the Matter; n^^
indeed is it conceivable, how a Physica^ Agent can turn a Material into an
Immaterial Substance, especially Matte^ being, as they themselves confess, a^
well incorruptible as ingenerable. B^ if they will not allow, as indeed they do
not, that the substantial Form is made of any thing that is Material, they must
give me leave to believe, that it is produced out of Nothing, till they show me,
how a Substance can be produced otherwise, that existed no where before. And at
this rate every Natural Body of a special Denomination, as Gold, Marble, Nitre,
etc. must not be produced barely by Generation, but partly by Generation, and
partly by Creation. And since it is confessed on all sides, that no Natural Agent
can produce the least Atome of Matter, it is strange they should in Generation
allow every Physical Agent the power of producing a Form, which, according to
them, is not only a Substance, but a far nobler one then Matter, and thereby
attribute to the meanest Creatures that power of creating Substances, which the
Ancient Naturalists thought too great to be ascribed to God himself, and which
indeed is too great to be ascribed to any other then Him, and therefore some
Schoolmen and Philosophers have derived Forms immediately from God; but this is
not only to desert Aristotle and the Peripatetick Philosophy they would seem
to maintain, but to put Omnipotence upon working I know not how many thousand
Miracles every hour, to perform that (I mean the Generation of Bodies of new
Denominations) in a supernatural way, which seems the most familiar effect of
Nature in her ordinary course.

And as the Production of Forms out of the Power of Matter is for these Reasons
incomprehensible to me, so those things, which the Peripateticks ascribe to
their substantial Forms, are some of them such, as, I confess, I cannot
reconcile my Reason to: for they tell us positively, that these Forms are
Substances, and yet at the same time they teach, that they depend upon Matter,
both in fieri and in esse, as they speak, so that out of the Matter, that
supports them, they cannot so much as exist, (whence they are usually called
Material Forms,) which is to make them Substances in name, and but Accidents in
truth: for not to ask how (among Physical things) one Substance can be said to
depend upon another in fieri, that is not made of any part of it, that very
notion of a Substance is to be a self-subsisting Entity, or that which needs no
other Created Being to support it, or to make it exist. Besides that, there
being but two sorts of Substances, Material, and Immaterial, a substantial Form
must appertain to one of the two, and yet they ascribe things to it, that make
it very unfit to be referred to either. To all this I add, that these
imaginary Material Forms do almost as much trouble the Doctrine of Corruption,
as that of Generation: for if a Form be a true Substance really distinct from
Matter, it must, as I lately noted, be able to exist of it self, without any
other Substance to support it; as those I reason with confess, that the Soul of
Man survives the Body, it did before Death inform: whereas they will have it,
that in Corruption the Form is quite abolished, and utterly perishes, as not
being capable of existing, separated from the Matter, whereunto it was united:
so that here again, what they call a Substance they make indeed an Accident,
and besides contradict their own vulgar Doctrine, That Natural things are upon
their Corruption resolved into the first Matter, since at this rate they should
say, that such things are but partly resolved into the first Matter, and partly
either into Nothing, or into Forms, which being as well immaterial as the Souls
of Men, must, for ought appears, be also, like them, accounted immortal.

I should now examine those Arguments, that are wont to be employed by the
Schools to evince their substantial Forms, but, besides that the nature and
scope of my present Work injoynes me Brevity, I confess that, one or two
excepted, the Arguments I have found mentioned, as the chief, are rather
Metaphysical, or Logical, then grounded upon the Principles and Phenomenon of
Nature, and respect rather Words then Things, and therefore I, who have neither
inclination, nor leisure, to wrangle about Terms, shall content my self to
propose, and very briefly answer two or three of those that are thought the
plausiblest.

First then they thus argue. Omne Compositum substantiale (for it is hard to
English well such Uncouth Terms) requirit materiam and formam substantialem, ex
quibus componatur. Omne corpus natural est compositu^ substantiale. Ergo etc.
In this Syllogism some do plausibly enough deny the Consequence, but for
brevities sake, I shall rather choose to deny the Minor, and desire the
Proposers to prove it. For I know not any thing in Nature that is composed of
Matter, and a Substance distinct from Matter, except Man, who alone is made up
of an immaterial Form, and a humane Body; and if it be urged, that then other
Bodies cannot be properly said to be Composita substantialia: I shall, rather
then wrangle with them, give them leave to find out some other name for other
Natural things.

But then they argue in the next place, that, if there were no substantial
Forms, all Bodies would be but Entia per accidens, as they speak, which is
absurd. To which I answer, That in the Notion, that diverse Learned men have of
an Ens per Accidens, namely, that it is That which consists of those things, quae
non ordinantur ad unum, it may be said, That though we do not admit substantial
Forms, yet we need not admit Natural Bodies to be Entia per accidens; because
in them the several things that concur to constitute the Body, as Matter,
Shape, Situation, and Motion, ordinantur per se and intrinsece to constitute
one Natural Body. But, if this Answer satisfy not, I shall add, that for my
part, That which I am sollicitous about, is, what Nature has made things to be
in themselves, not what a Logician or Metaphysician will call them in the Terms
of his Art; it being much fitter in my judgment to alter Words, that they may
better fit the Nature of Things, then to affix a wrong Nature to Things, that
they may be accommodated to forms of Words, that were probably devised, when
the things themselves were not known or well understood, if at all thought on.

Wherefore I shall but add one Argument more of this sort, and That is, that,
if there were no substantial Forms, neither could there be any substantial
Definitions, but the Consequent is absurd, and therefore so is the Antecedent.
To which I reply, that since the Peripateticks themselves confess the Forms of
Bodies to be of themselves unknown, all that this Argument seems to me to
conclude, is but this, That if we do not admit somethings, that are not in
rerum natura, we cannot build our Definitions upon them: nor indeed could we,
if we should admit substantial Forms, give substantial Definitions of Natural
things, unless we could also define Natural Bodies by things that we know not;
for such Nego tibi uil^m esse formam nobis notam plene and plane, nostramque
scientiam esse umbram in Sole. Scalig.
the substantial Forms are (as we have seen already) confessed to be, by the
wisest Peripateticks, who pretend not to give the substantial Definition of any
Natural Compositum, except Man. But it may suffice Us to have, instead of
substantial, essential Definitions of things; I mean such as are taken from the
Essential Differences of things, which constitute them in such a sort of
Natural Bodies, and discriminate them from all those of any other sort.

These three Arguments, Pyrophilus, for substantial Forms, You may possibly, as
well as I, find variously proposed, and perhaps with some light alterations
multiplied in the writings of the Peripateticks and Schoolmen; but all the
Arguments of this kind that I have met with, may, if I mistake not, be
sufficiently solved by the Answers we have given to these* or at least by the
grounds upon which those Answers are built; those seemingly various Arguments
agreeing in this, That either they respect rather Words then Things, or that
they are grounded upon precarious Suppositions; or lastly that they urge That
as an Absurdity, which, whether it be one or not in those, that admit the
Peripatetick Philosophy, to me, that do as little acquiesce in many of their
other Principles, as I do in their substantial Forms, does not appear any
Absurdity at all. And it is perhaps for fear that Arguments of this sort should
not much prevail with Naturalists, that some of the Modern assertors of the
Forms we question, have thought it requisite to add some more Physical
Arguments, which (though I have not found them all in the same Writers, yet)
being in all but few, I shall here briefly consider them.

First then among the Physical Arguments, that are brought to prove substantial
Forms, I find That the most confidently insisted on, which is taken from the
spontaneous return of heated Water to Coldness, which Effects, say they, must
necessarily be ascribed to the Action of the substantial Form, whose office it
is to preserve the Body in its Natural state, and, when there is occasion, to
reduce it thereunto: and the Argument indeed might be plausible, if we were
sure, that heated Water would grow cold again (without the Avolation of any
Parts more agitated then the rest,) supposing it to be removed into some of the
imaginary spaces beyond the World; but as the case is, I see no necessity of
slying to a substantial Form, the Matter seeming to be easily explicable
otherwise. The Water we heat is surrounded with our Air, or with some Vessel,
or other Body contiguous to the Air, and both the Air and the Water in these
Climates are most commonly less agitated, then the Juices in our hands, or
other Organs of Touching, which makes us esteem and call those Fluids, cold.
Now when the Water is exposed to the fire, it is thereby put into a new
Agitation, more vehement then that of the parts of our Sensory, which you will
easily grant, if you consider, that when the Heat is intense, it makes the
Water boil and smoke, and oftentimes run over the Vessel; but when the Liquor
is removed from the fire, this acquired Agitation must needs by degrees be
lost, either by the avolation of such fiery Corpuscles as the Epicureans
imagine to be got into heated Water, or by the Water's communicating the
Agitation of its Parts to the contiguous Air, or to the Vesse^ that contains
it, till it have lost its surplusage of Motion, or by the ingress o^ those
frigorifick Atoms, wherewith (i^ any such be to be granted) the Air i^ these
Climates is wont to abound, and so be reduced into its former Temperature:
which may as well be done without a substantial Form, as if a Shi^ swimming
slowly down a River, should by a sudden gust of Wind, blowing the same way the
Stream runs, be driven o^ much faster then before, the Vessel upon the ceasing
of the Wind may, without any such internal principle, return after a while to
its former slowness of Motion. So that in this Phenomenon, we need not have
recourse to an internal principle, the Temperature of the extern^^ Air being
sufficient to give an acco^ of it. And if Water be kept, (as is usual in poor
men's houses that want Cellars,) in the upper Rooms of the house, in case the
Climate be hot, the Water will, in spite of the Form, continue far less cold,
then, according to the Peripateticks, its nature requires, all the Summer long.
And let me here represent to the Champions of Forms, that, according to their
Doctrine, the Fluidity of Water, must at least as much proceed from its Form as
the Coldness, and yet this does so much depend upon the Temperature of the
Air, that in Nova Zembla vast quantities of Water are kept in the hard and
solid Form of Ice all the year long, by the sharp Cold of the ambient Air,
notwithstanding all the pretended Office and Power of the substantial Form to
keep it fluid, which it will never be reduced to be, unless by such a thawing
Temperature of the Air, as would it self, for ought appears, make it flow
again, although there were no substantial Form in rerum natura.

There is another Argument much urged of late by some Learned Men, the
substance whereof is this; That Matte^ being indifferent to one sort of
Accidents as well as to another, it is necessary there should be a substantial
Form to keep those Accidents, which are said to constitute it, united to the
Matter they belong to, and preserve both then and the Body in their Natural
state; so since it is confessed, that Matter has o^ appetite to these Accidents,
more th^^ to any others, they demand, how without a substantial Form these
Acciden^ can be contained and preserved? T^ this I might represent, that I am
not ^ well satisfied with the Notion wont i^ be taken for granted, not only by
the vulgar, but by Philosophers, of the Natural state of Bodies; as if it were
undeniable, that every Natural Body, (for a to some, I shall not now question
it,) has a certain state, wherein Nature endeavors to preserve it, and out of
which it cannot be put, but by being put into a Praeternatural state. For the
World being once constituted by the great Author of Things, as it now is, I
look upon the Phenomenon of Nature to be caused by the Local Motion of one part
of Matter hitting against another, and am not so fully convinced, that there is
such a thing, as Natures designing to keep such a parcel of Matter in such a
state, that is clothed with just such Accidents, rather then with any other.
But I look upon many Bodies, especially fluid ones, as frequently changing
their state, according as they happen to be more or less agitated, or
otherwise wrought upon by the Sun, and other considerable Agents in Nature. As
the Air, Water, and other Fluids, if the temperature as to Cold or Heat, and
Rarefaction or Condensation, which they are in at the beginning of the Spring
here at London, be pitched upon as their Natural state, then not only in the
torrid and frozen Zones they must have other and very differing Natural states,
but here it self they will, almost all the Summer and all the Winter, as our
Weather Glasses inform us, be in a varying Praeternatural state, because they
will be in those seasons either more hot and rarified, or more cold and
condensed, then in the beginning of the Spring. And in more stable and constant
Bodies I take, in many cases, the Natural state to be but either the most usual
state, or That, wherein that, which produces a notable Change in them, finds
them. As when a slender piece of Silver, that is most commonly flexible, and
will stand bent every way, comes to be well hammered, I count that Flexibility
to be the Natural state of that Metal, because most commonly Silver is found
to be flexible, and because it was so before it was hammered; but the
Springinesse it acquires by hammering is a state, which is properly no more
unnatural to the Silver then the other, and would continue with the Metal as
long as It, if both pieces of Silver, the one flexible, the other springy, were
let alone, and kept from outward violence: And as the Silver, to be deprived of
its flexibleness, needed the violent Motion of the Hammer, so to deprive it of
its Spring, it needs the violent Agitation of a nealing fire. These things, and
much more, I might here represent, but to come close to the Objection, I
Answer, That the Accidents spoken of are introduced into the Matter by the
Agents or Efficient Causes, whatever they be, that produce in it what, in the
sense formerly explained, we call an essential (though not a substantial) Form.
And these Accidents being once thus introduced into the Matter, we need not
seek for a new substantial Principle to preserve them there, since by the
general law, or common course of Nature, the Matter qualified by them, must
continue in the state such Accidents have put it into, till, by some Agent or
other, it be forcibly put out of it, and so divested of those Accidents; as in
the formerly mentioned Example, borrowed from Aristotle, of a Brazen Sphaere,
when once the Motion of Tools, impelled and guided by the Artificer, have
turned a piece of Brass into a Sphaere, there needs no new Substance to
preserve that round figure, since the Brass must retain it, till it be
destroyed by the Artificer himself, or some other Agent able to overcome the
resistance of the Matter, to be put into another figure. And on this occasion
let me confirm this ad hominem, by representing, That there is not an
inconsiderable Party among the Peripateticks themselves, who maintain, That in
the Elements the First Qualities (as they call them) are instead of Forms, and
that the Fire (for instance) has no other Form then Heat and Dryness, and the
Water then Coldness and Moisture. Now if these Bodies, that are the vastest
and the most important of the Sublunary World, consist but of the Universal
Matter, and the few Accidents; and if in these there needs no substantial Form
to keep the Qualities of the Matter united to it, and conjoined among
themselves, and preserve them in that state, as long as the Law of Nature
requires, though besides the four Qualities that are called First, the Elements
have diverse others, as Gravity and Levity, Firmness and Fluidity, Opacousnesse
and Transparency, etc. why should the favorers of this Opinion deny, That, in
other Bodies besides the Elements, Qualities may be preserved and kept united
to the Matter they belong to, without the Band or Support of a substantial
Form? And as, when there is no competent destructive Cause, the Accidents of a
Body will by the Law of Nature remain such as they were, so if there be, it
cannot with reason be pretended, that the substantial Form is able to preserve
all those Accidents of a Body, that are said to slow from it, and to be as it
were under its care and tuition; for if, for instance, you expose a Sphaere or
Bullet of Lead to a strong fire, it will quickly loose (not to mention its
Figure) both its Coldness, its Consistence, its Malleableness, its Color, (for
'twill appear of the color of fire,) its Flexibility, and some other
Qualities, and all this in spite of the imaginary substantial Form, which,
according to the Peripatetical Principles, in this case must still remain in it
without being able to help it. And though upon the taking the Lead from off the
fire, it is wont to be reduced to most of its former Qualities, (for it will
not of it self recover its Sphaericity,) yet That may well be ascribed partly
to its peculiar Texture, and partly to the Coldness of the ambient Air,
according to what we lately discoursed touching heated and refrigerated Water,
which Temperature of the Air is an extrinsecal thing to the Lead, and indeed it
is but Accidental, that the Lead upon refrigeration regains its former
Qualities; for in case the Lead have been exposed long enough to a sufficiently
intense fire, it will (as we have purposely tried) be turned into Glass, and
loose its color, its opacity, its malleableness, and (former degree of)
flexiblenesse, and acquire a Reddishness, a degree of Transparency, a
Brittlenesse, and some other Qualities, that it had not before: and let the
supposed substantial Form do what it can, even when the Vessel is removed from
the fire, to reduce or restore the Body to its Natural state and Accidents, yet
the former Qualities will remain lost, as long as these Praeternatural ones,
introduced by the fire, continue in the Matter; and neither the one will be
restored, nor the other destroyed, till some sufficiently powerful extrinsick
Agent effect the Change. And on the other side I consider, that the Fruit, when
severed from the Tree it grew on, is confessed to be no longer animated (at
least the Kernels or Seeds excepted) by the Vegetative Soul, or substantial
Form of the Plant; yet in an Orange or Lemmon (for instance) plucked from the
Tree, we see, that the same Color, the same Odor, the same Taste, the same
Figure, the same Consistence, and, for ought we know, the same other Qualities,
whether sensible, or even occult, as are its Antidotal and Antiscorbutical
virtues, that must before be said to have flowed from the Soul of the Tree,
will continue, many months, perhaps some years, after the fruit has ceased to
have any commerce with the Tree, (nay though the Tree, whereon it grew, be
perhaps in the mean time hewn down or burnt, and though consequently its
Vegetative Soul or Form be destroyed,) as when it grew thereon, and made up one
Plant with it. And we find, that Tamarinds, Rhubarb, Senna, and many other
Simples will for diverse years, after they have been deprived of their former
Vegetative Soul, retain their Purgative and other Specific properties.

I find it likewise urged, that there can be no Reason, why Whiteness should be
separable from a Wall, and not from Snow or Milk; unless we have recourse to
substantial Forms. But in case men have agreed to call a thing by such a name,
because it has such a particular Quality, that differences it from others, we
need go no farther to find a Reason, why one Quality is essential to one thing,
and not to another. As in our former example of a Brass Sphaere, the Figure is
that, for which we give it that Name, and therefore, though you may alter the
figure of the Matter, yet by that very alteration the Body perishes in the
capacity of a Sphaere, whereas its Coldness may be exchanged for Heat, without
the making it the less a Sphaere, because it is not for any such Quality, but for
Roundness, that a Body is said to be a Sphaere. And so Firmness is an
inseparable Quality of Ice, though this or that particular Figure be not,
because that it is for want of fluidity, that any thing, that was immediately
before a Liquor, is called Ice, and congruously hereunto, though Whiteness were
inseparable from Snow and Milk, yet that would not necessarily infer, that
there must be a substantial Form to make it so: for the Firmness of the
Corpuscles, that compose Snow, is as inseparable from it, as the Whiteness;
and yet is not pretended to be the effect of the substantial Form of the Water,
but of the excess of the Coldness of the Air, which (to use vulgar, though
perhaps unaccurate, expressions,) puts the Water out of its Natural state of
Fluidity, and into a Praeternatural one Firmness and Brittleness. And the
reason, why Snow seldom looses its whiteness but with its nature, seems to be,
that its component Particles are so disposed, that the same heat of the ambient
Air, that is sit to turn it into a transparent Body, is also fit to make it a
fluid one, which when it is become, we no longer call it Snow, but Water; so
that the Water looses its whiteness, though the Snow do not. But if there be a
cause proper to make a convenient alteration of Texture in the Snow, without
melting or resolving it into water, it may then exchange its Whiteness for
Yellowness, without loosing its right to be called Snow; as, I remember, I
have read in an eminent Writer, that de facto in the Northern Regions toward
the Pole, those parcels of Snow, that have lain very long on the ground,
degenerate in time into a Yellowish color, very differing from that pure
Whiteness to be observed in the neighboring Snow lately fallen.

But there yet remains an Argument for substantial Forms, which though (perhaps
because Physical) wont to be overlooked, or slightly answered by their
Opposers, will for the same reason deserve to be taken notice of here; and it
is, That there seems to be a necessity of admitting substantial Forms in
Bodies, that from thence we may derive all the various changes, to which they
are subject, and the differing Effects they produce, [the Preservation and
Restitution of the State requisite to each particular Body,] as also the
keeping of its several parts united into one Totum. To the answering of this
Argument, so many things will be found applicable, both in the past and
subsequent parts of these Notes, that I shall at present but point the chief
particulars, on which the Solution is grounded.

I consider then first, that many and great Alterations may happen to Bodies,
which seem manifestly to proceed from their peculiar Texture, and the Action of
outward Agents upon them, and of which it cannot be shown, that they would
happen otherwise, though there were no substantial Forms in rerum natura: as we
see that Tallow (for instance) being melted by the fire looses its Coldness,
Firmness, and its Whiteness, and acquires Heat, Fluidity, and some
Transparency, all which, being suffered to cool, it presently exchanges for the
three first named Qualities. And yet diverse of these Changes are plainly enough
the effects partly of the Fire, partly of the ambient Air, and not of I know
not what substantial Form: and it is both evident and remarkable, what great
variety of changes in Qualities, and Productions of new ones, the Fire (that
is, a Body consisting of insensible parts, that are variously and vehemently
moved) does effect by its Heat, that is, by a modified Local Motion. I consider
further, that various Operations of a Body may be derived from the peculiar
Texture of the Whole, and the Mechanical Affections of the particular
Corpuscles or other parts that compose it, as we have often occasion to declare
here and there in this Treatise; and particularly by an Instance, ere long to
be further insisted on, namely, that though Vitriol, made of Iron with a
Corrosive liquor, be but a factitious Body, made by a convenient apposition of
the small parts of the saline Menstruum to those of the Metal, yet this
Vitriol will do most, if not all, of the same things, that Vitriol, made by
Nature in the bowels of the Earth, and dug out thence, will perform; and
each of these Bodies may be endowed with variety of differing Qualities, which
I see not, why they must flow, in the native Vitriol, from a substantial Form,
since in the factitious Vitriol, the same Qualities belong to a Form, that does
plainly emerge from the coalition of Metalline and Saline Corpuscles,
associated together and disposed of after a certain manner.

And lastly, as to what is very confidently, as well as plausibly, pretended,
That a substantial Form is requisite to keep the parts of a Body united,
without which it would not be one Body. I answer, That the contrivance of
conveniently figured parts, and in some cases their juxta-position, may without
the assistance of a substantial Form be sufficient for this matter; for not to
repeat what I just now mentioned concerning Vitriol made by Art, whose Parts
are as well united and kept together, as those of the Native Vitriol, I
observe* that a Pear grafted upon a Thorn, or a Plum inoculated upon an
Apricock, will bear good fruit, and grow up with the Stock, as though they both
made but one Tree, and were animated but by the same common Form; whereas
indeed both the Stock and the inoculated or grafted Plant have each of them its
o^ Form, as may appear by the differing leaves, and fruits, and seeds they be^*
And that which makes to our present purpose is, that even Vegetation and the
Distribution of Aliments are in such cases well made, though the nourished
parts of the Total Plant, if I may so ca^ it, have not one common Soul or Form
which is yet more remarkable in the Misletoes, that I have seen growing upon
old Hazletrees, Crab-trees, Apple Trees, and other plants, in which the
Misletoe often differs very widely from that kind of Plant on which it grow and
prospers. And for the durableness^ of the Union betwixt Bodies that a
substantial Form is not requisite to procure it, I have been induced to think
by considering, that Silver and Gold, being barely mingled by Infusion, will
ha^ their minute parts more closely united then those of any Plant or Animal
tha^ we know of. And there is scarce any Natural Body, wherein the Form makes
so strict, durable, and indissoluble an Union of the parts it consists of, as
that, which, in that Factitious Concrete we call Glass, arises from the bare
commistion of the Corpuscles of Sand with those Saline ones, wherewith they are
colliquated by the violence of the fire: and the like may be said of the Union
of the proper Accidents of Glass with the Matter of it, and betwixt one
another.

To draw toward a Conclusion, I know it is alleged as a main Consideration on
the behalf of substantial Forms, that these being in Natural Bodies the true
principles of their Properties, and consequently of their Operations, their
Natural Philosophy must needs be very imperfect and defective, who will not
take in such Forms: but for my part I confess, that this very consideration
does rather indispose then incline me to admit them. For if indeed there were
in every Natural Body such a thing as a substantial Form, from which all its
Properties and Qualities immediately flow, since we see that the Actions o^
Bodies upon one another are for the most part (if not all) immediately
performed by their Qualities or Accidents, it would scarce be possible to
explicate very many of the explicable Phaenomen^ of Nature, without having
recourse to Them; and it would be strange, if many of the abstruser Phenomenon
were not explicable by them only. Whereas indee^ almost all the rational
Accounts to be met with of difficult Phenomenon, are given by such as either do
not acknowledge, or at least do not take notice of substantial Forms. And it is
evident by the clear Solutions (untouched by many vulgar Philosophers,) we meet
with of many Phenomenon in the Staticks, and other parts of the Mechanics, and
especially in the Hydrostaticks, and Pneumaticks, how clearly many Phenomenon
may be solved, without employing a substantial Form. And on the other side, I
do not remember, that either Aristotle himself, (who perhaps scarce ever
attempted it,) or any of his Followers, has given a solid and intelligible
solution of any one Phenomenon of Nature by the help of substantial Forms;
which you need not think it strange I should say, since the greatest Patrons of
Forms acknowledge their Nature to be Nomina tu lapidis, q^i quo^idie tuis oculis
observatur, formam, and Phyllida solus habeto. Seal. contra Card.
unknown to Us, to explain any Effect by a substantial Form, must be to declare
(as they speak) ignotum per ignotius, or at least per aque ignotum. And indeed
to explicate a Phenomenon, being to deduce it from something else in Nature
more known to Us, then the thing to be explained by It, how can the employing
of Incomprehensible (or at least Uncomprehended) substantial Forms help Us to
explain intelligibly This or That particular Phenomenon? For to say, that such
an Effect proceeds not from this or that Quality of the Agent, but from its
substantial Form, is to take an easy way to resolve all difficulties in
general, without rightly resolving any one in particular; and would make a rare
Philosophy, if it were not far more easy then satisfactory: for if it be
demanded, why Jet attracts Straws, Rhubarb purges Choler, Snow dazles the Eyes
rather then Grass, etc. to say, that these and the like Effects are performed
by the substantial Forms of the respective Bodies, is at best but to tell me,
what is the Agent, not how the Effect is wrought; and seems to be but such a
kind of general way of answering, as leaves the curious Enquirer as much to
seek for the causes and manner of particular Things, as Men commonly are for
the particular causes of the several strange Things performed by Witchcraft,
though they be told, that it is some Devil that does them all. Wherefore I do not
think, but that Natural Philosophy, without being for That the more Defective,
may well enough spare the Doctrine of Substantial Forms as an useless Theory;
not that Men are yet arrived to be able to explicate all the Phenomenon of
Nature without them, but because, whatever we cannot explicate without them, we
cannot neither intelligibly explicate by them.

And thus, Pyrophilus, I have offered You some of those many things, that
indisposed me to acquiesce in the received Doctrine of Substantial Forms; but
in case any more piercing Enquirer shall persuade himself, that he understands
it thoroughly, and can explicate it clearly, I shall congratulate him for such
happy Intellectuals, and be very ready to be informed by him. But since what
the Schools are wont to teach of the Origin and Attributes of substantial
Forms, is that, which, I confess, I cannot yet comprehend; and since I have
some of the eminentest Persons among the Modern Philosophers to join with me,
though perhaps not for the same Considerations, in the like confession, that
it is not necessary the Reason of my not finding this Doctrine conceivable, must
be rather a Defectiveness in my Understanding, then the unconceivable nature of
the thing it self: I, who love not (in matters purely Philosophical) to
acquiesce in what I do not understand, nor to go about to explicate things to
others, by what appears to me it self inexplicable, shall, I hope, be excused,
if, leaving those that contend for them, the liberty of making what use they
can of substantial Forms, I do, till I be better satisfied, decline employing
them my self, and endeavor to solve those Phenomenon, I attempt to give an
account of, without them, as not scrupling to confess, that those that I cannot
explicate, at least in a general way, by intelligible principles, I am not yet
arrived to the distinct and particular knowledge of.

Now for our Doctrine touching the Origin of Forms, it will not be difficult
to collect it from what we formerly discoursed about Qualities and Forms
together: for the Form of a Natural Body, being according to us, but an
Essential Modification, and, as it were, the Stamp of its Matter, or such a
convention of the Bigness, Shape, Motion (or Rest,) Situation and Contexture,
(together with the thence resulting Qualities) of the small parts that compose
the Body, as is necessary to constitute and denominate such a particular Body;
and all these Accidents being producible in Matter by Local Motion, it is
agreeable to our Hypothesis to say, That the first and Universal, though not
immediate cause of Forms is none other but God, who put Matter into Motion,
(which belongs not to its Essence,) and Established the Laws of Motion amongst
Bodies, and also, according to my Opinion, guided it in diverse cases at the
beginning of Things; and that, among Second Causes, the Grand Efficient of
Forms is Local Motion, which by variously dividing, sequestring, transposing,
and so connecting the parts of Matter, produces in them those Accidents and
Qualities, upon whose account the portion of Matter they diversifie comes to
belong to this or that determinate species of Natural Bodies, which yet is not
so to be understood, as if Motion were only an Efficient cause in the
Generation of Bodies, but very often (as in, water, fire, etc.) it is also one of
the chief Accidents, that concur to make up the Form.

But in this last Summary Account of the Origin of Forms, I think my self
obliged to declare to you a little more distinctly, what I just now intimated
to be my own Opinion. And this I shall do, by advertising you, that though I
agree with our Epicureans, in thinking it probable, that the World is made up
of an innumerable multitude of singly insensible Corpuscles, endowed with their
own Sizes, Shapes, and Motions; and though I agree with the Cartesians, in
believing (as I find that Aristotle speaking of Anaxagoras in the first Chapter of
the last Book of his Physics, has this passage: Dicit (Anaxagoras) cum omnia
simul essent, atque qu^escere^t tempore infinito, Mentem movisse, a^ segregasse.
Anaxagoras did of Old,) that Matter has not its Motion from its self, but
Originally from God; yet in This I differ both from Epicurus and Des Carts,
that, whereas the former of them plainly denies, that the World was made by any
Deity, (for Deities he owned,) and the Latter of them, for ought I can find in
his Writings, or those of some of his Eminentest Disciples, thought, that God,
having once put Matter into Motion, and established the Laws of that Motion,
needed not more particularly interpose for the Production of Things Corporeal,
nor even of Plants or Animals, which according to him are but Engines: I do not
at all believe, that either these Cartesian Laws of Motion, or the Epicurean
casual Concourse of Atoms, could bring mere Matter into so orderly and well
contrived a Fabric as This World; and therefore I think, that the wise Author
of Nature did not only put Matter into Motion, but when he resolved to make
the World, did so regulate and guide the Motions of the small parts of the
Universal Matter, as to reduce the greater Systems of them into the Order they
were to continue in; and did more particularly contrive some portions of that
Matter into Seminal Rudiments or Principles, lodged in convenient Receptacles,
(and as it were Wombs,) and others into the Bodies of Plants and Animals: one
main part of whose Contrivance, did, as I apprehend, consist in this, That some
of their Organs were so framed, that, supposing the Fabric of the greater
Bodies of the Universe, and the Laws he had established in Nature, some Juicy
and Spirituous parts of these living Creatures must be fit to be turned into
Prolifick Seeds, whereby they may have a power, by generating their like, to
propagate their Species. So that according to my apprehension, it was at the
beginning necessary, that an Intelligent and Wise Agent should contrive the
Universal Matter into the World, (and especially some Portions of it into
Seminal Organs and Principles,) and settle the Laws, according to which the
Motions and Actions of its parts upon one another should be regulated: without
which interposition of the Worlds Architect, however moving Matter may with
some probability (for I see not in the Notion any Certainty) be conceived to be
able, after numberless Occursions of its insensible parts, to cast it self into
such grand Conventions and Convolutions, as the Cartesians call Vortices, and
as, I remember; Epicurus in his Epistle to Pythocles.
Epicurus speaks of under the name of (...); yet I think it utterly improbable,
that brute and unguided, though moving, Matter, should ever convene into such
admirable Structures, as the Bodies of perfect Animals. But the World being
once framed, and the course of Nature established, the Naturalist, (except in
some few cases, where God, or Incorporeal Agents interpose,) has recourse to
the first Cause but for its general and ordinary Support and Influence, whereby
it preserves Matter and Motion from Annihilation or Desition; and in
explicating particular Phenomenon, considers only the Size, Shape, Motion, (or
want of it) Texture, and the resulting Qualities and Attributes of the small
particles of Matter. And thus in this great Automaton the World, (as in a Watch
or Clock,) the Materials it consists of, being left to themselves, could never
at the first convene into so curious an Engine: and yet, when the skilful
Artist has once made and set it a going, the Phenomenon it exhibits are to be
accounted for by the number, bigness, proportion, shape, motion, (or
endeavor,) rest, coapration, and other Mechanical Affections of the Spring,
Wheels, Pillars, and other parts it is made up of: and those effects of such a
Watch, that cannot this way be explicated, must, for ought I yet know, be
confessed, not to be sufficiently understood.

But to return thither, whence my Duty to the Author of Nature obliged me, to
make this short Digression.

The hitherto proposed Hypothesis, touching the Origination of Forms, has, I
hope, been rendered probable by diverse particulars in the past Discourses, and
will be both exemplified and confirmed by some of the Experiments, that make
the Latter part of this present Treatise, (especially the Fifth and 7th of
them,) which, containing Experiments of the Changing the Form of a Salt and a
Metal, do chiefly belong to the Historical or Experimental part of what we
deliver touching the Origin of Forms. And indeed, besides the two kinds of
Experiments presently to be mentioned, we might here present you a Third sort,
consisting partly of diverse Relations of Metalline Transmutations, delivered
upon their own Credit by Credible men, that are not Alchymists; and partly of
some Experiments (some made, some directed by us) of Changing both Bodies,
totally inflammable, almost totally into Water, and a good part even of
distilled Rain water without Additament into Earth; and distilled Liquors,
readily and totally mingleable with Water, pro part into a true Oil, that
will not mix with it, This sort of Experiments, I say, I might here annex, if I
thought fit, in this place, either to lay any stresse upon those, that I cannot
my self make out, or to transfer hither those Experiments of Changes amongst
Bodies not Metalline, that belong to another The Skeptical Chemist.
Treatise. But over and above, what the past Notes and the Experiments, that
are to follow them, contain toward the making of what we teach concerning
Forms, we will here, for further Confirmation, proceed to add two sorts of
Experiments, (besides the Third already mentioned.) The one, wherein it
appears, that Bodies of very differing Natures, being put together, like the
Wheels, and other pieces of a Watch, and by their connection acquiring a new
Texture, and so new Qualities, may, without having recourse to a substantial
Form, compose such a new Concrete, as may as well deserve to have a substantial
Form attributed to it, by virtue of that new Disposition of its parts, as other
Bodies that are said to be endowed therewith. And the other, that a Natural
Body being dissipated, and as it were taken in pieces, like a Watch, may have
its parts so associated, as to constitute New Bodies, of Natures very differing
from its own, and from each other; and yet these dissipated and scattered
parts, by being recollected and put together again, like the pieces of a Watch,
in the like order as before, may recompose (almost, if not more then almost)
such another Body, as that they made up, before they were taken asunder.

I. EXPERIMENTS, and THOUGHTS, about the Production and Reproduction of FORMS.
IT was not at random, that I spoke, when, in the foregoing Notes about the
Origin of Qualities, I intimated, That 'twas very much by a kind of tacit
agreement, that Men had distinguished the Species of Bodies, and that those
Distinctions were more Arbitrary then we are wont to be aware of. For I
confess, that I have not yet, either in Aristotle, or any other Writer, met
with any genuine and sufficient Diagnostick and Boundary, for the
Discriminating and limiting the Species of Things, or to speak more plainly, I
have not found, that any Naturalist has laid down a determinate Number and sort
of Qualities, or other Attributes, which is sufficient and necessary to
constitute all portions of Matter, endowed with them, distinct Kinds of Natural
Bodies. And therefore I observe, that most commonly Men look upon these as
Distinct Species of Bodies, that have had the luck to have distinct Names found
out for them; though perhaps diverse of them differ much less from one
another, then other Bodies, which (because they have been hudled up under one
Name,) have been looked upon, as but one sort of Bodies. But not to lay any
weight on this Intimation about Names, I found, that for want of a true
Characteristick, or discriminating notes, it has been, and is still, both very
uncertain as to diverse Bodies, whether they are of different Species or of the
same, and very difficult to give a sufficient reason, why diverse Bodies,
wherein Nature is assisted by Art, should not as well pass for distinct kinds
of Bodies, as others, that are generally reckoned to be so.

Whether (for instance) Water and Ice be not to be esteemed distinct kinds of
Bodies, is so little evident, that some, that pretend to be very well versed in
Aristotle's Writings and Opinions, affirm him to teach, that Water looses not
its own nature by being turned into Ice; and indeed I remember I have read a
See Lib. 1. de Genesis and Cor. t. 80. Idem Corpus (says he there) qua^quam
continuum, alias liquidum, alias concretum videmus, non divisione aut
compositione hoc passum, aut conversione, aut attactu, sicuti Democritus
asserit: nam neque transpositione, neque Naturae demutatione ((...)) ex liquido
concretum evadere solet.
Text of his, that seems express enough to this purpose, and the thing it self
is made plausible by the reduciblenesse of ice back again into Water. And yet I
remember, Galen is affirmed to make these two, distinct Species of Bodies;
which Doctrine is favored by the differing Qualities of Ice and Water, for not
only the one is fluid, and the other solid, and even brittle, but Ice is also
commonly more or less opacous in comparison of Water, being also lighter then
it in specie, since it swims upon it. To which may be added, that Ice, beaten
with common Salt, will freez other Bodies, when Water mingled with Salt will
not. And on this occasion, I would propose to be resolved, whether Must, Wine,
Spirit of Wine, Vinegar, Tartar, and Vappa, be Specifically distinct Bodies?
and the like question I would ask concerning a Hens Egg, and the Chick that is
afterward hatched out of it: As also concerning Wood, Ashes, Soot, and
likewise the Eggs of Silkworms, which are first small Caterpillars, or (as some
think them) but Worms, when they are newly hatched, and then Aurelia's, (or
husked Maggots,) and then Butterflies, which I have observed with pleasure to
be the successive Production of the Prolifick Seed of Silkworms. And whether
the Answer to these Quaeries be Affirmative or Negative, I doubt the reason,
that will be given for either of the two, will not hold in diverse cases,
whereto I might apply it. And a more puzling Question it may be to some,
whether a Charcoal, being thoroughly kindled, do specifically differ from
another Charcoal? for, according to those I argue with, the fire has penetrated
it quite through; and therefore some of the recent Aristotelians are so
convinced of its being transmuted, that all the satisfaction I could find from
a very subtle modern Schoolman to the Objection, That if the glowing Coal were
plunged into Water, it would be a black Coal again, was, That notwithstanding
That reduction, the Form of a Charcoal had been once abolished by the fire, and
was reproduc'd by God, upon the regained Disposition of the Matter to receive
it.

Nor is it very easy to determine, whether Clouds, and Rain, and Ha^l, and
Snow, be bodies specifically distinc^ from Water, and from each other, and the
writers of Meteors are wont to handle them as distinct. And since if such
slight differences as those, that discriminate these Bodies, or that which
distinguishes Wind from Exhalations, whose Course makes it, be sufficient to
constitute differing kinds of Bodies, 'twill be hard to give a satisfactory
Reason, why other Bodies, that differ in more or more considerable particulars,
should not enjoy the same Privilege. And I presume, that Snow differs less
from Rain, then Paper does from Rags, or Glass made of Wood-ashes does from
Wood. And indeed, Men having, by tacit consent, agreed to look upon Paper, and
Glass, and Soape, and Sugar, and Brass, and Ink, and Pewter, and Gunpowder, and
I know not how many others, to be distinct sorts of Bodies, I see not, why they
may not be thought to have done it, on as good grounds, as those, upon which
diverse other d^ffering Species of Bodies have been constituted. Nor will it
suffice to object, that these Bodies are factitious; for it is the present
nature of Bodies, that ought to be considered in referring them to Species,
which way soever they came by that Nature: for Salt, that is, in many
Countries, made by boiling Sea water in Cauldrons, and other vessels, is as
well true Sea Salt, as that which is made in the Isle of Man, (as Navigators
call it,) without any cooperation of Man, by the bare action of the Sun upon
those parts of the Sea water, which chance to be left behind in hollow places,
after a high Springtide. And Silk worms, which will hatch by the heat of
humane Bodies, and Chickens, that are hatched in Egypt by the heat of Ovens or
Dunghils, are no less true Silkworms or Chickens, then those that are hatched
by the Sun, or by Hens.

As for what may be objected, that we must distinguish betwixt Factitious
Bodies and Natural, I will not now stay to examine, how far that Distinction
may be allowed: for it may suffice for our present purpose to represent, that
whatever may be said of Factitious Bodies, where Man does, by Instruments of
his own providing, only give Figure, or also Contexture to the sensible (not
insensible) parts of the Matter he works upon; as when a Joyner makes a Stool,
or a Statuary makes an Image, or a Turner a Bowl: yet the case may be very
differing in those other factitious Productions, wherein the insensible parts
of Matter are altered by Natural Agents, who perform the greatest part of the
work among themselves, though the Artificer be an Assistant, by putting Them
together after a due manner. And therefore I know not, why all the Productions
of the Fire made by Chemists should be looked upon, as not Natural, but
Artificial Bodies: since the Fire, which is the grand Agent in these Changes,
does not, by being employed by the Chemist, cease to be, and to work as, a
Natural Agent. And since Nature her self does, by the help of the fire,
sometimes afford us the like Productions that the Alchymists art presents us:
as in Aetna, Vesuvius, and other burning Mountains, (some of whose Productions
I can show you,) Stones are sometimes turned into Lime, (and so an Alcalizate
Salt is produced,) and sometimes, if they be more disposed to be flux'd, then
calcined, brought to vitrification; Metalline and Mineral Bodies are by the
violence of the fire colliquated into Masses of very strange and compounded
Natures. Ashes and Metalline flowers of diverse kinds are scattered about the
neighboring places, and copious flowers of Sulphur, sublimed by the internal
fire, have been several times found about the Vents, at which the Fumes are
discharged into the Air: (As I have been assured by Ingenious Visiters of such
Places, whom I purposely inquired of, touching these stores; for of these
Travelers more then one answered me, they had themselves gathered, and had
brought some very good.) Not to add, that I have sometimes suspected, upon no
absurd grounds, that diverse of the Minerals and other Bodies, we meet with in
the lower parts of the Earth, and think to have been formed and lodged there
ever since the beginning of Things, have been since produced there by the help
of subterraneal fires, or other heats, which may either by their immediate
action, and exceedingly long application, very much alter some Bodies by
changing their Texture; as when Lead is turned into Minium, and Tin into Putty
by the operation of the fire in a few hours, or by elevating, in the form of
Exhalations or Vapors, diverse Saline and Sulphurous Corpuscles or Particles
of unripe (or to use a Chemical Term of Art) Embrionated Minerals, and perhaps
Metals, which may very much alter the Nature, and thereby vary the Kind of
other subterraneal Bodies, which they pervade, and in which they often come to
be incorporated; or else may, by convening among themselves, constitute
particular Concretions, as we see that the fumes of Sulphur and those of
Mercury unite into that Lovely red Mass, which in the Shops they call
Vermilion, and which is so like to the Mineral, whence we usually obtain
Mercury, that the Latins give them both the same Name Cinnabaris, and in that
are imitated by the French and Italians; in whose favor I shall add, That if
we suppose this Mineral to consist of a stony Concretion, penetrated by such
Mineral fumes as I have been speaking of, the Appellation may be better excused
then perhaps you imagine, since from Cinnabaris nativa not only I obtained a
considerable quantity of good running Mercury, (which is That, Men are wont to
seek for from it,) but to gratify my Curiosity somewhat further, I tried an
easy way, that came into my mind, whereby the Caput mortuum afforded me no
despicable Quantity of good combustible Sulphur. But this upon the By, being
not obliged to set down here the grounds of my Paradoxical Conjecture about the
Effects of subterraneal Fires and Heats, since I here lay no stress upon it,
but return to what I was saying about Aetna, and other Volcans. Since then
these Productions of the Fire, being of Nature's own making, cannot be denied
to be Natural Bodies, I see not why the like Productions of the Fire should be
thought unworthy that Name, only because the Fire, that made the former, was
kindled by chance in a Hill, and that which produced the latter was kindled by
a Man in a Furnace. And if flower of Sulphur, Lime, Glass, and colliquated
mixtures of Metals and Minerals are to be reckoned among Natural Bodies, it
seems to be but reasonable, that, upon the same grounds, we should admit flower
of Antimony, Lime, and Glass, and Pewter, and Brass, and many other Chemical
Concretes, (if I may so call them) to be taken into the same number; and then
'twill be evident, that to distinguish the species of Natural Bodies, a
Concourse of Accidents will, without considering any Substantial Form, be
sufficient.

But because I need not, on this occasion, have recourse to instances of a
disputable nature, I will pitch, for the illustration of the Mechanical
Production of Forms, upon Vitriol. For since Nature her self, without the help
of Art, does oftentimes produce that Concrete, (as I have elsewhere shown by
Experience,) there is no reason why Vitriol, produced by easy Chemical
Operations, should not be looked upon as a Body of the same Nature and Kind.
And in Factitious Vitriol, our knowing what Ingredients we make use of, and how
we put them together, inables us to judge very well, how Vitriol is produced.
But because it is wont to be reckoned with Saltpeter, Sea Salt, and Sal Gem
among true Salts, I think it requisite to take notice in the first place, that
Vitriol is not a mere Salt, but That, which Paracelsus somewhere, and after him
diverse other Spagyrists, call a Magistery, which in their sense (for there are
that use it in another,) commonly signifies a Preparation, wherein the Body to
be prepared has no^ its Principles separated, as in Distillation, Incineration,
etc. but wherein the whole Body is brought into another form, by the addition
of some Salt or Menstruum, that is united per minima with it. And agreeably to
this Notion we find, that from common Vitriol, whether native or factitious,
may be obtained (by Distillation and Reduction) an acid Saline Spirit, and a
Metalline Substance, as I elsewhere mention, that from blew Vitriol, Copper may
be (by more then one way) separated. And I the rather give this Advertisement,
because that as there is a Vitriol of Iron, which is usually green; and another
of Copper, which is wont to be blew; and also a white Vitriol, about which it
is disputed what it holds, (though that it holds some Copper I have found;) and
yet all of these are without scruple reputed true Vitriols, notwithstanding
that they differ so much in Color, and (as I have discovered) in several other
Qualities; so I see no reason, why the other Minerals, being reduced by their
proper Menstruums into Salt like Magisteries, may not pass for the Vitriols of
those Metals, and consequently for Natural Bodies* which, if granted, will add
some confirmation to our Doctrine, though its being granted is not necessary to
make it out. For, to confine our selves to Vitriol, it is known among Chemists,
that if upon the filings of Mars one put a convenient quantity of that acid
distilled Liquor, which is (abusively) wont to be called Oil of Vitriol,
diluting the mixture with Rain, or with common Water, it is easy by Filtrating
the Solution, by Evaporating the Aqueous superfluity of it, and by leaving the
rest for a competent while in a Cellar, (or other cold place) to Christallize,
it is easy, I say, by this means to obtain a Vitriol of Iron; which agrees with
the other Vitriol of Vitriol-stones or Marchasites, presented us, by Nature,
without the help of any other Menstruum, then the Rain that falls upon them
from the Clouds, in I know not how many Qualities, part Obvious, and part of
them Occult: As, (of the first sort) in Color, Transparency, Brittlenesse,
easiness of Fusion, Styptical Taste, reducibleness to a Red Powder by
Calcination, and other Qualities more obvious to be taken notice of; to which
may be annexed diverse Qualities of the second sort, (I mean the more abstruse
ones,) as the power to turn in a trice an Infusion of Galls, made in ordinary
water, (as also to turn a certain clear Mineral Solution, elsewhere mentioned,)
into an Inckly color, to which, in all probability, we may add a faculty of
causing Vomits even in a small Dose, when taken into the Stomach of a Man, and
that remarkable property of being endowed with as exact and curious a shape or
figure, as Those, for which Salts have been, by modern Philosophers especially,
so much admired. But, that no scruple might arise from hence, that in the
Vitriolum Martis, wont to be made by Chemists, the Menstruum, that is employed,
is the Oil of common Vitriol, which may be suspected to have retained the
nature of the Concrete whence it proceeded, and so this Factitious Vitriol may
not be barely a new Production, but partly a Recorporification, as they speak,
of the Vitriolate Corpuscles contained in the Menstruum: To prevent this
Scruple I say, (which yet perhaps would not much trouble a Considering
Chemist,) I thought fit to employ a quite other Menstruum, that would not be
suspected to have any thing of Vitriol in it. And though Aqua fortis, and
Spirit of Nitre, however they corrode Mars, are unfit for such a work, yet
having pitched upon Spirit of Salt instead of Oil of Vitriol, and proceeding
the same way that has been already set down, it answered our Expectation, and
afforded us a good green Vitriol. Nor will the great disposition, I have
observed in this our Vitriol, to resolve, by the moisture of the Air, into a
Liquor, make it essentially differing from other Vitriols, since it has been
observed, and particularly by Guntherus Belichius more then once, that even the
common Vitriol he used in Germany, will also, though not so easily as other
Salts, run (as the Chemists phrase it) per deliquium. And to make the
Experiment more complete, though we did not find either Oil of Vitriol, or
Spirit of Salt, good Menstruums to make a blew Venereal Vitriol out of Copper,
(however filled, or thinly laminated,) and though upon more Trials then one, it
appeared, that Aqua fortis, and Spirit of Nitre, which we thought fit to
substitute to the above mentioned Liquors, did indeed make a Solution of
Copper, but so unctuous a one, that it was very hard to bring any part of it to
dryness, without spoiling the Color and Shape of the desired Body: yet
repeating the Experiment with care and watchfulness, we, this way, obtained one
of the loveliest Vitriols that has perhaps been seen, and of which you your
self may be the judge by a parcel of it I keep by me for a Rarity.

To apply now these Experiments, especially That, wherein Spirit of Salt is
employed, to the purpose, for which I have mentioned them, let us briefly
consider these two things; the one, that our Factitious Vitriol is a Body,
that, as well as the Natural, is endowed with many Qualities, (manifest, and
occult,) not only such as are common to it with other Salts, as Transparency,
Brittleness, Solublenesse in Water, etc. but such as are Properties peculiar to
it, as Greenness, easiness of Fusion, Stypticity of Taste, a peculiar Shape, a
power to strike a Black with infusion of Galls, an Emetick faculty, etc.

The other thing we are to consider is, that though these Qualities are in
common Vitriol believed to flow from the substantial Form of the Concrete, and
may, as justly as the Qualities, whether manifest or occult, of other Inanimate
Bodies, be employed as Arguments to evince such a Form: yet in our Vitriol,
made with Spirit of Salt, the same Qualities and Properties were produced by
the associating and juxtaposition of the two Ingredients, of which the Vitriol
was compounded, the Mystery being no more but this, That the Steel being
dissolved in the Spirit, the Saline Particles of the former, and the Metalline
ones of the latter, having each their Determinate Shapes, did by their
Association compose diverse Corpuscles of a mixed or compounded Nature, from the
Convention of many whereof, there resulted a new Body, of such a Texture, as
qualified it to affect our Sensories, and work upon other Bodies, after such a
manner as common Vitriol is wont to do. And indeed in our case, not only it
cannot be made appear, that there is any substantial Form generated anew, but
that there is not so much as an exquisite mixture, according to the common
Notion the Schools have of such a Mixture. For Both the Ingredients retain
their Nature, (though perhaps somewhat altered,) so that there is, as we were
saying, but a Juxta-position of the Metalline and Saline Corpuscles; only they
are associated so, as by the mannner of their Coalition to acquire that new
Texture, which Denominates the Magistery they compose, Vitriol. For it is
evident, that the Saline Ingredient may either totally, or for much the
greatest part be separated by Distillation, the Metalline remaining behind. Nay
some of the Qualities, we have been ascribing to our Vitriol, do so much depend
upon Texture, that the very Beams of the Sun (converg'd) will, as I have
purposely tried, very easily alter its Color, as well as spoil its
Transparency, turning it at first from Green to White, and, if they be
concentered by a good Burning glass, making it change that Livery for a deep
Red.

Doubts and Experiments, touching the Curious Figures of SALTS.
ANd here let me take notice, that though the exact and curious Figures, in
which Vitriol and other Salts are wont to shoot, be made Arguments of the
Presence, and great Instances of the Plastic skill of substantial Forms and
Seminal Powers, yet, I confess, I am not so fully satisfied in this matter, as
even the Modern Philosophers appear to be. It Is not that I deny, that Plato's
excellent Saying, (...), may be applied to these exquisite Productions of
Nature. For though God has thought fit to make things Corporeal after a much
more facile and intelligible way, then by the intervention of substantial
Forms; and though the Plastic power of Seeds, which in Plants and Animals I
willingly admit, seem not in our case to be needful; yet is the Divine
Architect's Geometry (if I may so call it) nevertheless to be acknowledged and
admired; for having been pleased to make the primary and insensible Corpuscles
of Salts and Metals of such determinate, curious, and exact Shapes that, as
they happen to be associated together, they should naturally produce
Concretions, which, though differingly figured according to the respective
Natures of their Ingredients, and the various manners of their Convening should
yet be all of them very curious and seem elaborate in their Kinds. How little I
think it fit to be allowed, that the Bodies of Animals, which consist of so
many curiously framed and wonderfully adapted Organical parts, (and whose
Structure is a thousand times more Artificial then that of Salts, and Stones,
and other Minerals,) can be reasonably supposed to have been produced by
Chance, or without the Guidance of an Intelligent Author of Things, I have
elsewhere largely declared. But I confess, I look upon these Figures we admire
in Salts, and in some kinds of Stones, (which I have not been Incurious to
collect,) as Textures so simple and slight in comparison of the Bodies of
Animals, and oftentimes in comparison of some one Organical part, that I think
it cannot be in the least inferred, that because such slight Figurations need
not be ascribed to the Plastic power of Seeds, it is not necessary, that the
stupendous and incomparably more elaborate Fabric and structure of Animals
themselves should be so. And this premised, I shall add, that I have been
inclined to the Conjecture about the shapes of Salts, that I lately proposed,
by these Considerations.

First, That by a bare Association of Metalline and Saline Corpuscles, a
Concrete, as finely figured as other Vitriols, may be produced, as we have
lately seen

Secondly, because that the Figures of these Salts are not constantly in all
respects the same, but may in diverse manners be somewhat varied, as they
happen to be made to shoot more hastily, or more leisurely, and as they shoot
in a scanter, or in a fuller proportion of Liquor. This may be easily observed
by any, that will but with a little Attention consider the difference that may
be found in Vitriolate Christals or Grains, when quantities of them were taken
out of the great Coolers, as they call them, wherein that Salt, at the Works
where it is boiled, is wont to be set to shoot. And accordingly, where the
Experienced Mineralist Agricola, describes the several ways of making Vitriol
in great Quantities, he does not only more then once call the great Grains or
Christals, into which it coagulates, Cubes; but speaking of the manner of their
Concretion about the Cords or Ropes, that are wont (in Germany) to be hanged
from certain cross Bars into the Vitriolate Water or Solution for the Vitriol
to fasten its self to; he compares the Concretions indifferently to Cubes or
Clusters of Grapes: Ex his (says he, speaking of the cross Bars,) pendent
restes lapillis extentae, ad quos humor spissus adhaerescens densatur in
translucentes atramenti sutorii vel Cubos, vel Acinos, qui uvae speciem gerunt.
I remember also, that having many years since a suspicion, that the Reason why
Alkalys, such as Salt of Tartar and Potashes are wont to be obtained in the
form of white Powders or Calces, might be the way, wherein the Water, or the
Lixiviums, that contain them, is wont to be drawn off, I fancied, that by
leaving the Saline Corpuscles a competent quanti- of Water to swim in, and
allowing them leisure for such a multitude of Georg: Agricola de re metal.
lib. 12. p. 462.
Occursions, as might suffice to make them hit upon more congruous Coalitions
then is usual, I might obtain Christals of Them, as well as of other Salts:
conjecturing this, I say, I caused some well purified Alkalys, dissolved in
clear water, to be slowly evaporated, till the Top was covered with a thin
Ice-like Crust, then taking care not to break That, least they should (as in
the ordinary way, where the Water is all forced off,) want a sufficient stock
of Liquor, I kept them in a very gentle heat for a good while; and then
breaking the above mentioned Ice like Cake, I had, as I wished, diverse figured
Lumps of Christalline Salt shot in the Water, and transparent almost like white
Sugar Candy.

I likewise remember, that having, on several occasions, distilled a certain
quantity of Oil of Vitriol, with a strong Solution of Sea Salt, till the
remaining Matter was left dry, that Saline Residue being dissolved in fair
water, filtered, and gently evaporated, would shoot into Christals, sometimes
of one figure, sometimes of another, according as the quantity or strength of
the Oil of Vitriol and other Substances determined. And yet these Christals,
though sometimes they would shoot into Prisme-like Figures, as Roch'd Petre;
and sometimes into shapes more like to Allome or Vitriol; nay though oftentimes
the same Caput mortuum dissolved, would in the same Glass shoot into Christals,
whereof some would be of one shape, some of another, yet would these differing
Grains or Christals appear for the most part more exquisitely figured, then
oftentimes Vitriol does. From Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Nitre, when I have
suffered them to remain long together before Coagulation, and freed the
mixture from the superfluous moisture very slowly, I have sometimes obtained
fine long Christals, (some of which I can show you) so shaped, that most
Beholders would take them for Christals of Saltpeter. And I have likewise
tried, that whereas Silver is wont to shoot into Plates exceeding thin, almost
like those of Moscovis glass, when I have dissolved a pretty quantity of it in
Aqua fortis, or spirit of Nitre, and suffered it to shoot very leisurely, I
have obtained Lunar Christals, (several of which I have yet by me,) whose
Figure, though so pretty as to have given some wonder even to an Excellent
Geometrician, is differing enough from that o^ ^^e thin Plates formerly
mentioned; each Crystal being composed of many small and finely shaped Solids,
that stick so congruously to one another, as to have one surface, that appeared
Plain enough, common to the^ all.

Thirdly, that insensible Corpuscles of different, but all of them exquisite,
shapes, and endowed with plain as well as smooth sides, will constitute Bodies
variously, but all very finely figured, I have made use of several ways to
manifest. And first, though Hartshorn, Blood, and Urine, being resolved, and
(as the Chemists speak) Analiz'd by Distillation, may well be supposed to have
their substantial Forms (if they had any) destroyed by the action of the Fire:
yet in regard the Saline Particles, they contain, are endowed with such figures
as we have been speaking of, when in the Liquor, that abounds with either of
these volatile Salts, the dissolved Particles do leisurely shoot into
Christals, I have diverse times observed, in these, many Masses, (some bigger,
and some less,) whose surfaces had Plains, some of Figures, as to sense exactly
Geometrical, and others very curious and pleasant. And of these finely shaped
Christals of various sizes, I have pretty store by me. And because (as it may
be probably gathered from the Event) the Saline Corpuscles of Stillatitio^s
acid liquors, and those of many of the Bodies, they are fitted to dissolve,
have such kind of Figures as we have been speaking of, when the solutions of
these Bodies, upon the recess of the superfluous moisture, shoot into
Christals; these, though they will sometimes be differing enough, according to
the particular natures of the dissolved Bodies and the Menstruum, yet either
the Christals themselves, or their Surfaces, or both, will oftentimes have fine
and exquisite Figures; as I have tried by a Menstruum, wherewith I was able to
dissolve some Gems; as also with a solution of Coral, made with Spirit of
Verdigreese, to omit other Examples. And for the same reason, when I tried
whether the Particles of Silver, dissolved in Aqu^ fortis, would not, without
Concoagulating with the Salts, convene, upon the Account of their own shapes,
into little Concretions of smooth and flat surfaces, I found, that having (to
afford the Metalline Corpuscles scope to move in) diluted one part of the
Solution with a great many parts of distilled Rain water, (for common water
will oftentimes make such Solutions become white or turbid,) a Plate of Copper
being suspended in the Liquor, and suffered to lie quiet there a while, (for it
need not be long) there would settle, all about it, swarms of little Metalline
and Undiaphanbus Bodies, shining in the water like the scales of small Fishes,
but formed into little Plates extremely thin, with surfaces not only flat, but
exceeding glossy: and among those, diverse of the larger were prettily figured
at the Edges. And as for Gold, its Corpuscles are sufficiently disposed to
convene with those of fit or congruous Salts into Concretions of determinate
Shapes, as I have found in the Christals I obtained from Gold dissolved in Aqua
Regis, and after having been suffered to loose its superfluous moisture, kept
in a cold place: and not only so, but also when by a more powerful Menstruu^ I
had subdivided the Body of Gold into such minute Particles, that they were
sublimable, (for That, I can assure you, is possible,) these volatile Particles
of Gold, with the Salts, wherewith they were elevated, afforded me (sometimes)
store of Christals, which, though not all of the^ near of the same Bigness,
resembled one another in their shape, which wa^ regular enough, and a very
pretty one. But of this more elsewhere.. I remember I have also long since
taken pleasure to dissolve two or more of those saline Bodies, whose shapes we
know already, in fair Water, that by a very gent^^ Evaporation I might obtain
Concretions, whose Shapes should be, thoug^ curious, yet differing from the
Figu^^ of either of the Ingredients. But we must not expect, that, in all
cases, the Salts dissolved together should be totaly compounded: for oftentimes
they are of such different Natures, that one will shoot much sooner then
another, and then it frequently happens, that a good Proportion of that will be
first Christalliz'd in its own shape: as is conspicuously to be observed in the
refining of that impure Pet^e, (which, from the Country that affords it, the
Purifiers call Barbary Nitre,) from the common Salt it abounds with: and (also)
as Agricola observes, G. Agricola de re Metallica. lib. 12.
that in some cases, where a Vitriolate Matter is mingled with that, which
yields Allom, those two kinds of Salts will shoot separately in the same large
vessel, (which the Trials, I have made with the compounded Solutions of those
two Salts, do not discountenance.) Now in such cases, all that can be expected,
or needs be desired, is, that the remaining part of the mixture, or some
portion of it, afford Christals, or Grains of compounded solid figures. Though
the Venetian Borax, wont to be sold in shops, be known to be a factitious Body,
compounded of several Salts, that I shall not now stay to enumerate; and
though, when we buy it, we usually find it to consist of Lumps and Grains
misshapen enough, yet when I dissolved some of it in a good quantity of fair
water, and made it coagulate very leisurely, I had Chrystals* upon whose
surfaces I could perceive very exquisite and, as to sense, regular Geometrical
figures. And one thing I must not here by any means praetermit, which is, that
though the Caput mortuum of common Aqua fortis consists of Bodies of very
differing Natures, (for such are Nitre and Vitriol,) and has been exposed to a
great violence of the Fire, yet I have sometimes admired the curiousness of
those figures, that might be obtained barely by frequent Solutions and
Coagulations of the Saline Particles of this Caput mortuum in fair water. But
because the Glasses, wherein my Concretions were made, were too little to
afford great Christals, and they ought to shoot very slowly; I choose rather to
show the Curious some large Christals, which I took out of the Laboratory of an
Ingenious Person, who, without minding the Figures, had upon my Recommendation
made great quantity of that Salt, in large vessels, for a Medicine: (it being
the Panacea duplicata, so famous in Holstein.) For diverse of these Christals
have not only Triangles, Hexagons, and Rhomboids, and other Figures
exquisitely Cut on their smooth and specular surfaces; and others, Bodies of
Prismatical shapes: But some of them are no less accurately figured then the
finest Nitre or Vitriol I remember my self to have observed, and some also
terminate in Bodies almost like Pyramids, consisting of diverse Triangles, that
meet in one Vertical point, and are no less admirably shaped then the fairer
sort of Cornish Diamonds, that have been brought me for Rarities. Besides, the
producing of Salts of new shapes, by compounding of Saline Bodies, I have found
it to be practicable not only i^ some Gross, or, as they speak, Corporal
Salts, such as Sea Salt, Saltpeter, but also in some. Natural and some
Chemical Salts dissolved together; and, which perhaps you will think more
considerable in saline Spirits, made by distillation: Not that all of them are
fit for this purpose, but that I have found diverse of those, that work upon one
another with Ebullition, to be so. For i^ that Conflict the Saline Corpuscles
come to be associated to one another, and thereby, or by their newly acquired
figure, whilst their Coalition lasts, to loose much of their former Volatility:
so that, upon Evaporation of the superfluous Liquor, they will not fly, as
otherwise they might; but concoagulate into finely shaped Christals, as I have
tried among other Saline Liquors, with Spirit of Urine, and Spirit of Nitre,
and with Oil of Vitriol, and Spirit of fermented Urine with Spirit of Sheeps
blood, and spirit of Salt, and also with the Spirits of Salt and of Urine;
which Last Experiment I the rather mention, because it shows, by the difference
of the Christals, afforded by those two Liquors, from the Christals resulting
from one of them, namely the spirit of Urine, (or if you please, the Volatile
Salt, wherewith it abounds,) concoagulated with a fit Dose of Oil of Vitriol,
how much those compounded emergent figures depend upon the more simple figures
of the saline Corpuscles, that happen to convene into those new Concretes. For
the spirit of Urine, satiated with spirit of Salt, and both very gently, and
not too far, Evaporated, often afforded me Christals, that differed exceedingly
in shape from those, which I obtained from the same spirit of Urine, satiated,
either with Oil of Vitriol, or with spirit of Nitre. For, (to add That upon
the By,) that Salt, compounded of the two Spirits of Urine* and of common Salt,
is wont to be very prettily figured, consisting of one long Beam as it were,
whence on both sides issue out far shorter Christals, sometimes perpendicular
to that, and parallel to one another like the Teeth in a Comb, and sometimes
so inclining, as to make the Whole appear almost like a Feather; which is the
more remarkable, because I have (many years ago) observed, that common Sal
Armoniack, that is made of Urine and common Salt, both crude, with a Proportion
of Soot, will, if warily dissolved, and coagulated, shoot into Christals of the
like shape. How far the unknown Figure of a Salt may Possibly (for I fear it
will not Easily) be ghess'd at, by that of the Figure, which it makes with some
other Salt, whose Figure is already known, I leave to Geometricians to
consider; having, I fear, insisted too long on this subject already. But yet I
must add one particular more, which will, as well illustrate and confirm much
of what has been said above touching the Origination of Vitriol, as show, that
the Shape of Vitriol depends upon the Textures of the Bodies, whereof it is
composed.

Fourthly then, when I considered, that (as I formerly noted) Vitriol being but
a Magistery, made by the concoagulation of the Corpuscles of a dissolved Metal,
with those of the Menstruum, the Magisteries of other Metals might, without
inconvenience, be added, as other Vitriolate Concretes to the green, the blew,
and white Vitriol, that are without scruple referred to the same species: and
when I considered, that Oil of Vitriol was not a fit Menstruum to dissolve
diverse of the Metals, nor even all those, that it will corrode; and that the
like unfitness also is to be found in common spirit of Salt, I pitched upon
Aqua fortis or spirit of Nitre, as that Menstruum, which was likeliest to
afford variety of Vitriols: and accordingly I found, that besides the Lovely
Vitriol of Copper formerly mentioned, that Liquor would with Quicksilver afford
one sort of Christals, with Silver another, and with Lead a third; all which
Christals of Vitriol, as they differed from each other in other Qualities,
(upon which score you will find this Experiment elsewhere mentioned,) so they
did very manifestly and considerably differ in Shape: the Christals of Silver
shooting in exceeding thin Plates, and those of Lead and Quicksilver obtaining
figures, though differing enough from each other, yet of a far greater depth
and thickness, and less remote from the figure of common Vitriol or Sea salt:
and yet all these Vitriols, especially That of crude Lead, when it was happily
made, had Shapes curious and elaborate, as well as those, we admire in common
Vitriol or Sea Salt.

IF then these Curious shapes, which are believed to be of the admirablest
Effects, and of the strongest Proofs of substantial Forms, may be the Results
of Texture; and if Art can produce Vitriol its self, as well as Nature; why may
we not think, that in ordinary Phenomenon, that have much less of wonder,
recourse is wont to be had to substantial Forms without any Necessity? (Matter,
and a Convention of Accidents being able to serve the turn without them;) and
why should we wilfully exclude those Productions of the Fire, wherein the
Chemist is but a Servant to Nature, from the number of Natural Bodies? And
indeed, since there is no certain Diagnostick agreed on, whereby to
discriminate Natural and Factitious Bodies, and constitute the species of both;
I see not, why we may not draw Arguments from the Qualities and Operations of
several of those, that are called Factitious, to show how much may be ascribed
to, and performed by, the Mechanical Characterization or Stamp of Matter: Of
which we have a noble Instance in Gunpowder, wherein by a bare comminution and
blending the Ingredients, Nitre, Charcoal, and Brimstone, which have only a
new, and That an exceeding slight Contexture, each retaining its own Nature in
the Mixture; so that there is no color afforded to the pretense of a
substantial Form, there is produced a new Body, whose Operations are more
powerful and prodigious, then those of almost any Body of Natures own
compounding. And though Glass be but an Artificial Concrete, yet, besides that
it is a very noble and useful one, Nature her self has produced very few, if
enough, to make up a Number more lasting and more unalterable. And indeed
diverse of those factitious Bodies that Chemistry is able to afford us, are
endowed with more various and more noble Qualities, then many of those, that
are unquestionably Natural. And if we admit these Productions into the number
of Natural Bodies, they will afford us a multitude of Instances, to show, that
Bodies may acquire many and Noble Qualities, barely by having Mechanical
Affections, introduced by outward Agents into the Matter, or destroyed there.
As though Glass be such a Noble Body, as we have lately taken notice of, yet
since it is Fusibility, Transparency, and Brittleness, that are its only
Constituent Attributes, we can in less then an hour, (or, perhaps half that
time,) turn an Opacous Body into Transparent Glass, without the Addition of any
other Visible Body, by a change of Texture, made in the same Matter, and by
another change of Texture, made without Addition, as formerly, we can, in a
trice, reduce Glass into, or obtain from it a Body, not Glassy, but Opacous,
and otherwise of a very differing Nature, as it had been before. And here let
me add what may not a little conduce to our present Design, That even those,
that embrace Aristotle's principles, do unawares confess, that a slight change
of Texture, without the introduction of a substantial Form, may not only make
a Specifical difference betwixt Bodies, but so vast a one, that they shall have
differing Genus'es, and may (as the Chemists speak) belong to differing
Kingdoms. For Coral, to pass by all other Plants of that kind, that may be
mentioned to the same purpose, whilst it grows in the Bottom of the Sea, is a
real Plant, and several times (which suffices for my present scope) has been
there found by an Acquaintance of mine, as well as by other Inquirers, soft and
tender like another Plant. Nay, I elsewhere In the Essays about things supposed
to be spontaneously generated.
bring very good and recent Authority to prove, that it is oftentimes found
very succu^ent, and does propagate its species, as well as other Shrubs; and
yet Coral, being gathered and removed into the Air, by the recess of its Soul,
no new Lapidifick Form being so much as pre^ended to, turns into a Concretion,
that ^s, by many Eminent Writers and others, ^eckon'd among Lapideous ones: as
in^eed Coral does not burn like Wood, ^or obey Distillation like it; and not
only its Calx is very differing from the Ashes of Vegetables, and is totally
so^^ble in diverse acid Liquors, and even spirit of Vinegar, but the uncalcin'd
Coral its self will be easily corroded ^y good Vinegar, after the same man^er
as I have seen Lapis stellaris, and o^^er unquestionably Mineral stones
dis^olv'd, some by that Liquor, and some ^y the Spirit of it. A much stranger
^ing may be seen in the East India ^sland of Sombrero, not very far from
Sumatra, if we may believe our Countryman Sr James Lancester, who relates it as
an Eye witness, for which reason, and for the strangeness of the thing, I
shall add the story in his own word Here ( Parchas. Pilgr. part. the first. p.
152.
says he, speaking of the Co^ of Sombrero) we found upon the sand (...) the Sea
side, a small Twigge growing (...) to a young Tree, and offering to pluck^ the
same, it shrunk down into the gro^^ and sinketh, unless you hold very hard. A^
being plucked up, a great Worm is the (...) of it: and look how the Tree
grows ^ greatness, the Worm diminishes N^^ soon as the Worm is wholly
turned i^ the Tree, it rooteth in the ground, (...) so grows to be great.
This Transfo^mation was one of the greatest wo^^ I saw in all my Travels. This
(...) being plucked up a little, the Leaves straped off and the Pill, by that
time it i^ dry turned into a hard Stone, much (...) to white Coral. So that
(concludes (...) this worm was twice transformed into different natures: of
these we gathered and brought home many. The Industrious Pis^, in his Excellent
History of Brasil, vouches a multitude of Witnesses (not having Opportunity to
be one himself) for the ordinary Transformation of a sort of Animals not much
unlike Grasshoppers) into Vegetables, at a certain season of the The passage,
which is long, I do not here transcribe, having had occasion to do it
elsewhere. It is extant Lib. 5. C^p. 21. and at the close of his Narrative he
subjoynes, Non est, quod quisquam de veritate dubitet, cum infinitos ^estes
habeat Brasilta, etc.
year.

But since I sat down this Relation of Sr John Lancester, I have met with
another, whose strangeness may much countenance it, in a small Tract newly
published by a Jesuit, F. Michael Boym, whom a good Critic much commended to
me. For this Author does, as an Eyewitness, affirm that, which is little
less to my present Purpose. Flo^a Sinensis o^ Traite des Flerus etc. under the
title Lozmeoques.
Ie vis, i.e. I saw in a small fresh water, and shallow Lake of the Island
Hainan, (which belongs to China) Crabs, or Crawfishes, which, as soon as they
were drawn out of the water, did in a moment loose both Life and Motion, and
became petrified, though nothing appeared to be changed either to the External
or Internal figure of ther^ Bodies. What he further adds of these Fishes, is
but of their Virtues in Physic, which, not concerning our subject* I shall (
Pyrophilus) willingly praeterm^ it; and even, as to our Country-man'^ relation,
hoping, by means of an Ingenious Correspondent in the East Indies, to receive a
further Information about the strange Plant he mentions, (...) shall, at
present, urge only what ha^ been taken notice of concerning Coral, to
countenance the Observation for whose sake these Narratives have been
alleged. And so likewise, as to what I was saying of Glass, and Gu^-powder,
our receiving of those and the generality of Factitious Bodies into the
Catalogue of Natural Bodies, is not (which I formerly also intimated) necessary
to my present Argument: whereto it is sufficient, that Vitriol is granted on
all hands to be a Natural Body, though it be also producible by Art. And also
to the Argument it affords us, we might add that memorable Experiment
delivered by Helmont, of turning Oil of Vitriol into Allom, by the Odor (as he
calls it) of Mercury, if, however it be not despicable, we had found it fit to
be relied on. But reserving an Account of that for another place, we shall
substitute the Instance, presented us by our Author, about the Production of
Saltpetre: for if, having dissolved Potashes in fair water, you coagulate the
filtrated Solution into a white Salt, and on that pour Spirit of Nitre, till
they will not hiss any longer together, there will shoot, when the superfluous
water is Evaporated, Christals, that proclaim their Nitrous Nature by their
Prismatical, (or at least Prisme-like) Shape, their easy Fusion, their
Accension, and Deflagration, and other Qualities, partly mentioned by our
Author, and partly discoverable by a little Curiosity in making Trials.

II. Experimental Attempts about the Redintegration of Bodies.
THe former of those two Arguments, ( Pyrophilus) by which I proposed to
confirm the Origin o^ Forms, was, as you may remember, grounded upon the
Manner, by which such a Convention of Accidents, as deserves to pass for a
Form, may be produced: and That having been hitherto prosecuted, it now
remains, that we proceed to the Second Argument, drawn, not (as the former)
from the first Production, but from the Reproduction of a Physical Body. And
though both these Arguments are valid; yet if this Latter could, in spite of
the Difficulties intervening in making of the Experiments that belong to it, be
as clearly made out as the former, you would, I suppose, like it much the
better of the two. For if we could Reproduce a Body, which has been deprived of
its substantial Form, you would, I presume, think it highly probable, if not
more then probable, that (to borrow our Author's Expression) That which is
commonly called the Form of a Concrete, which gives it its Being and
Denomination, and from whence all its Qualities are in the Vulgar Philosophy,
by I know not what inexplicable ways, supposed to flow; may be in some Bodies
but a Characterization or Modification of the Matter they consist of; whose
parts, by being so and so disposed in relation to each other, constitute such a
determinate kind of Body, endowed with such and such Properties; whereas, if
the same parts were otherwise disposd, they would constitute other Bodies, of
very differing Natures from that of the Concrete, whose parts they formerly
were, and which may again result or be produced, after its dissipation, and
seeming destruction, by the Reunion of the same component Particles, associated
according to their former Disposition.

But though it were not Impossible to make an adaequate Redintegration of a
Chymically Analiz'd Body, because some of the dissipated parts will either
escape through the Junctures of the Vessels, (though diligently closed,) or, if
they be very subtle, will fly away upon the disjoyning of the Vessels; or, will
irrecoverably stick to the inside of them: yet I see not, why such a
Reproduction, as is very possible to be effected, may not suffice to manifest
what we intend to make out by it. For, even in such Experiments, it appears,
that when the Form of a Natural Body is abolished, and its parts violently
scattered; by the bare Reunion of some parts after the former manner, the very
same Matter, the destroyed Body was before made of, may, without Addition of
other Bodies, be brought again to constitute a Body of the like Nature with the
former, though not of equal Bulk. And indeed, the Experiment, recorded by our
Author, about the Reproduction of Salt Petre, as it is the best and
successesfullest I have ever been able to make upon Bodies, that require a
strong Heat to dissipate them; so I hope it will suffice to give you those
thoughts about this matter, that the Author designed in alleging it; and
therefore, though having premised thus much, I shall proceed to acquaint you
with the success of some Attempts he intimates (in that Essay) his Intention of
making, for the Redintegration of some Bodies; yet doing it only out of some
Historical Notes I find among my loose Papers, That, which I at present pretend
to, is, but partly to show you the difficulty of such Attempts, which, since
our Author's Essay was communicated, have been represented (I fear by
Conjecture only) as very easy to be accurately enough done; and partly,
because our Author does not, without reason, intimate the usefulness of
Redintegrations, in case they can be effected; and does, not causelessly,
intimate, that such Attempts, though they should not Perfectly succeed, may
increase the Number of Noble and Active Bodies, and consequently, the Inventory
of Mankind's Goods.

Upon such Considerations we attempted the Dissipation and Reunion of the parts
of common Amber; and though Chemists, for fear of breaking their Vessels, are
wont, when they commit it to distillation, to add to it a caput mortuum (as
they speak) of Sand, Brick, etc. (in whose room we sometimes choose to
substitute beaten Glass;) which hinders them to judge of and employ the
Remanence of the Amber, after the Distillation is finished: yet we supposed,
and found, that if the Retort were not too much filled, and if the Fire were
slowly and warily enough administered, the Addition of any other Body would be
needless. Wherefore having put into a Glass Retort four or five Ounces of
Amber, and administered a gentle and gradual heat, we observed the Amber to melt
and bubble, (which we therefore mention, because ingenious men have lately
questioned, whether it can be melted,) and having ended the Operation, and
severed the vessels, we found, that there was come over in the form, partly of
Oil, partly of Spirit and Phlegm, and partly of volatile Salt, near half the
weight of the Concrete: and having broken the Retort, we found, in the bottom
of it, a Cake of coal-black Matter, then whose upper surface I scarce remember
to have seen in my whole life any thing more exquisitely polished; in so much,
that, notwithstanding the Color, as long as I kept it, it was fit to serve for
a Looking Glass: and this smooth Mass being broken, (for it was exceeding
brittle,) the larger fragments of it appeared adorned with an excellent luster.
All those parts of the Amber, being put together into a Glass Body, with a
blind head luted to it, were placed in Sand, to be incorporated by a gentle
heat: but whilst I stepped aside to receive a Visit, the Fire having been
increased without my knowledge, the Fumes ascended so copiously, that they
lifted up the Vessel out of the Sand, whereupon falling against the side of the
Furnace, it broke at the top, but, being seasonably called, we saved all but
the Fumes; and the remaining Matter looks not unlike Tar, and with the least
heat may be powered out like a Liquor, sticking even when it is cold to the
fingers. Yet this opened Body does not easily communicate so much as a Tincture
to spirit of Wine, (which therefore seems somewhat strange, because another
time presumeing, that this would be a good way to obtain a Solution of some of
the resinous parts of Amber, we did, by pouring spirit of Wine, that (though
rectified) was not of the very best, upon the reunited parts of Amber, lightly
digested into a Mass, easily obtain a clear Yellow Solution, very differing
from the Tincture of Amber, and abounding (as I found by Trial) in the
dissolved substance of the Amber:) but in Oil of Turpentine we have, in a short
time, dissolved it into a blood red Balsome, which may be of good use (at
least) to Chirurgions. And having again made the former Experiment with more
wariness then before, we had the like success in our Distillation, but, the
reunited parts of the Amber being set to digest in a large Bolt head, the
Liquor that was drawn off, did, in a few hours, from its own Caput mortuum
extract a blood red Tincture, or else made a Solution of some part of it,
whereby it obtained a very deep Red; but having been, by intervening Accidents,
hindered from finishing the Experiment, we mist the Satisfaction of knowing to
what it may be brought at last.

And as for what our Author tells us of this design to attempt the
Redintegration of Vitriol, Turpentine, and some other Concretes, wherein it
seemed not unpracticable, he found in it more difficulty then every one would
expect. For the Bodies, on which such Experiments are likeliest to succeed,
seem to be Allom, Sea salt, and Vitriol. And as for Allom, he found it a
troublesome work to take (as a Spagirist would speak) the Principles of it
asunder, in regard, that it is inconvenient to distill it with a Caput mortuum,
(as Chemists call any fixed Additament,) least that should hinder the desired
Redintegration of the dissipated parts: And when he distilled it by its self,
without any such Additament, he found, that, with a moderate heat, the Allom
would scarce part with any thing but its Phlegm, and if he urged it with a
strong fire, he found, it would so swell, as to endanger the breaking of the
Retort, or threaten the boiling over into the Receiver. (Yet having once been
able very warily to abstract as much Phlegm and Spirit, as I conveniently could,
from a parcel of Roch Allom, and having powered it back upon that pulverized
caput mortuum, and left the vessel long in a quiet place, I found, that the
Corpuscles of the Liquor, having had time, after a multitude of Occursions, to
accommodate and reunite themselves to the more fixed parts of the Concrete, did
by that Association (or Dissolution) recompose, at the top of the Powder, many
Christalline Grains of finely figured Salt, which increasing with time, made me
hope, that, at the length, the whole or the greatest part would be reduced into
Allom, which yet a Mischance, that robbed me of the Glass, hindered me to see.)
So likewise of Sea salt, if it be distilled, as it is usual, with thrice its
weight of burned Clay, or beaten Brick, twill prove inconvenient in reference
to its Redintegration; and if it be distilled alone, it is apt to be fluxt by
the heat of the fire, and, whilst it remains in Fusion, will scarce yield any
Spirit at all. And as for Vitriol, though the Redintegration of it might seem
to be less hopeful, then that of the other Salts, in regard that it consists
not only of a Saline, but of a Metalline Body, whence it may be supposed to be
of a more intricate and elaborate Texture yet because there needs no caput
mortuum in the Distillation of it, we did, to pursue our Author's intimated
designs, make two or three Attempts upon it, and seemed to miss of our Aim,
rather upon the Account of accidental hindrances, then of any insuperable
difficulty in the thing it self. For once, we with a strong fire, drew off from
a parcel of common blew Vitriol, the Phlegm and Spirit, and some quantity of
the heavy Oil, (as Chemists abusively call it:) These Liquors, as they came
over without Separation, we divided into several parts, and the remaining very
red Caput mortuum into as many. One of these parcels of Liquor we poured over
night upon its correspondent portion of the newly mentioned red Powder. But
having left it in a Window, and the Night proving very bitter, in the morning I
found the Glass cracked in many places by the violence of the Frost, and the
Liquor seemed to have been soaked up by the Powder, and to have very much
swelled it. This mixture then I took out, and placing it in an open mouthed
Glass in a Window, I found, after a while, diverse Grains of pure Vitriol upon
the other Matter, and some little Swellings, not unlike those we shall
presently have Occasion to speak of. I took likewise a much larger parcel of
the forementioned Liquor, and its correspondent proportion of Caput mortuum;
and having leisurely mixed them in a large Glass Basin, I obtained diverse
Phenomenon, that belong not to this place, but may be met with, where they will
more properly fall in. In this Basin (which I laid in the Window, and kept
from Agitation,) I perceived, after a while, the Liquor to acquire a bluish
Tincture, and after ten or twelve weeks, I found the mixture dry, (for, it
seems, it was too much exposed to the Air:) but the Surface of it adorned in
diverse places with Grains of Vitriol very curiously figured. And besides these,
there were store of Protuberances, which consisted of abundance of small
vitriolate particles, which seemed in the way to a Coalition; for having let
the Basin alone for four or five months longer, the Matter appeared crusted
over, partly with very elevated Saline protuberances, partly with lesser
parcels, and partly also with considerably broad Cakes of Vitriol, some of
above half an Inch in breadth, and proportionably long; and indeed the whole
surface was so odly diversifi'd, that I cannot count the trouble, these Trials
have put me to, misspent. Another time in a more slender and narrow mouthed
Glass I poured back upon the Caput mortuum of Vitriol the Liquors, I had by
violence of the fire forced from it; so that the Liquid part did swim a pretty
height above the red Calx, and remained a while limpid and colorless: but the
vessel having stood, for some time, unstop'd in a Window, the Liquor after a
while, acquired by degrees a very deep vitriolate color, and not long after,
there appeared, at the bottom and on the top of the Calx, many fair and
exquisitely figured Grains of Vitriol, which covered the surface of the Calx;
and the longer the ves^el continued in the Window, the deeper did this Change,
made upon the upper part of the Powder, seem to penetrate: so that I began to
hope, that, in process of time, almost (if not more then almost) the whole
mixture would be reduced to perfect Vitriol. But an Accident robbed me of my
Glass, before I could see the utmost of the Event.

And, on this Occasion, I must not praetermit an odd Experiment I lately made,
though I dare not undertake to make it again. I elsewhere relate, how I
digested, for diverse weeks, a Quantity of powdered Antimony, with a greater
weight by half of Oil of Vitriol, and how having at length committed this
mixture to Distillation, and thereby obtained, besides a little Liquor, a
pretty quantity of combustible Antimonial or Antimonio Virriolate Sulphur;
there remained, in the bottom of the Retort, a somewhat light and very friable
Caput mortuum, all the upper part of which was at least as white as common
Wood-ashes, and the rest looked like a Cinder. And now I must tell you what
became of this Caput mortuum, whereof I there make no further mention. We could
not well foresee what could be made of it, but very probable it was, that it
would afford us some new Discovery, by being exposed to the fire, in regard of
the copious Sulphur, whereof it seemed to have been deprived: provided it were
urged in close Vessels, where nothing could be lost. Whereupon committing it to
a naked fire in a small glass Retort, well Coated, and accommodated with a
Receiver, we kept it there many hours, and at length severing the Vessels, we
found (which need not be wondered at) no Antimonial Quicksilver, and much less
of Sulphur sublimed then we expected: wherefore greedily hastening to the Caput
mortuum, we found it flux'd into a Mass, covered with a thin Cake of Glass,
whose fragments being held against the light, were not at all colored, as
Antimonial Glass is wont to be, but were as colourlesse as common white Glass.
The Lump above mentioned being broken, was found, somewhat to our wonder, to be
perfect black Antimony, adorned with long shining streaks, as common Antimony
is wont to be: only this Antimony seemed to have been a little refined by the
sequestration of its unnecessary Sulphur; which Ingredient seems by this
Experiment, as well as by some other Observations of ours, to be more copious
in some particular Parcels of that Mineral, then is absolutely requisite to the
constitution of Antimony. Though in our case it may be suspected, that the
reduction of part of the Mass to a colorless Glass, was an effect of the
Absence of so much of the Sulphur, and might in part make the remaining Mass
some amends for it. What we further did with this new or reproduced Concrete,
is not proper to be here told you: only, for your satisfaction, we have kept a
Lump of it, that you may, with us, take notice of what some Philosophers would
call the Mindfulness of Nature, which, when a Body was deprived of a not
inconsiderable portion of its chief Ingredient, and had all its other parts
dissipated, and shuffled, and discolored, so as not to be knowable, was able
to rally those scattered and disguised parts, and Marshal or dispose them into
a Body of the former Consistence, Color, etc. though (which is not here to be
overlooked) the Contexture of Antimony, by reason of the copious shining
Styriae, that enoble the darker Body, be much more elaborate, and therefore
more uneasy to be restored, then that of many other Concretes.

But among all my Trials about the Redintegration of Bodies, That which seemed
to succeed best, was made upon Turpentine: for having taken some Ounces of
this, very pure, and good, and put it into a Glass Retort, I distilled so long
with a very gentle fire, till I had separated it into a good quantity of very
clear Liquor, and a Caput mortuum very dry and brittle: then breaking the
Retort, I powdered the Caput mortuum, which, when it was taken out, was
exceeding sleek, and transparent enough, and very Red; but being powdered,
appeared of a pure Yellow color. This Powder I carefully mixed with the
Liquor, that had been distilled from it, which immediately dissolved part of
it into a deep red Balsam; but by further Digestion in a large Glass
exquisitely stopped, that Color began to grow fainter, though the remaining
part of the Powder, (except a very little proportionable to so much of the
Liquor, as may be supposed to have been waste by Evaporation, and Transfusion
out of one Vessel into another,) be perfectly dissolved, and so well reunited
to the more fugitive parts of the Concrete, that there is scarce any, that by
the smell, or taste, or consistence would take it for other then good and
laudable Turpentine.

The I. Section of the Historical Part (containing the Observations, and
beginning at page, 107.) is misplaced, and ought to have come in here, and have
immediately preceded this II. Section containing the Experiments.

ADVERTISEMENTS about the ensuing II. SECTION.
THe Author would not have the Reader think, that the following Experiments,
are the sole ones that he could have set down to the same purpose with them.
For they are not the only that he had actually laid aside for this occasion,
till judging the ensuing ones sufficient for his present scope, he thought it
fitter to reserve Others for those Notes about the Production of particular
Qualities, to which they seemed properly to belong. Perhaps also it will be
requisite for me (because some Readers may think the Omission a little strange)
to excuse my having left diverse particulars unmentioned in more then One of the
ensuing Experiments. And I confess that I might easily enough both have taken
notice of more Circumstances in them, and made far more Reflections on them, if
I would have expatiated on the several Experiments according to the Directions
delivered in other Containing some Advices and Directions for the writing of an
Experimental Natural History.
Papers. But though there, where it was my Design to give employment to the
Curiosity and Diligence of as many Votaries to Nature, as (for want of letter
instructions) had a mind to be so set on work, it was fit the proposed Method
should be suitable; yet here, where I deliver Experiments, not so much as parts
of Natural History, as instances to confirm the Hypotheses, and Discourses they
are annexed to; it seemed needless, and improper, (if not impertinent,) to set
down Circumstances, Cautions, Inferences, Hints, Applications, and other
Particulars, that had no tendency to the scope, for which the Experiments were
alleged.

These two Leaves are to be placed immediately before the 271 page.
And as for the kind of Experiments, here made choice of, I have the less
scrupled to pitch upon Chemical Experiments, rather then Others on this
occasion; not only because of those Advantages which I have ascribed to such
Experiments in the latter part of the Preface The Preface, here mentioned, is
that premissed to the Tract entitled -- Some Specimens of an Attempt to make
^^mical Experiments useful to illustrate the Notions of the Corposcula^
Philosophy.
to my Specimens, but because I have been Encouraged by the success of the
Attempt made in those Discourses. For as new as it was when I made it four or
five years ago, and as unsual: Thing as it could seem to diverse Atomists and
Cartesians, That I should take upon me to Confirm and Illustrate the Notions of
the Particularian Philosophy (if I may so call it) by the help of an Art, which
many were pleased to th^ck cultivated but by Illiterate O^erators, or it
h^msical Ph^naticks in Philosophy, and useful only to ma^e Medicines, or
Disguize Metals: yet these Endeavors of ours met with much less opposition,
then new Attempts are most commonly fain to struggle with. And in so short a
time I have had the happiness to engage both diverse Chymist^^ learn and relish
the Notions of the Corpuscular Philoso^hy, and diverse eminent Embracers of
That, to endeavor to illustrate and promote the New Philosophy, by addicting
themselves to the Experiments, and perusing the Books: Chemists. And I
acknowledge, it is not unwelcome to ^^ to have been (in some ^^ttle measure)
instrumental to m^^^ the Corpuscularian Philosophy, assisted by Chemistry,
preferred to that which has so long obtained in the Sch^^^. For (not here to
consider, which ^ elsewhere do, how gi^^ an Advantage. That Philosophy by has
of This, by having a^ advantage of it in point of clearness,) though diverse
l^^^ned and worthy m^n, that knew no better Principles, h^^ in cultivating the
Peri^ate^ick Ones, abundantly exercised and displaid their own Wit: yet I fear
they have very (...), if at all, improved their Readers Intellect, or enricht
it with any true or useful Knowledge of Nature; but have rather taught him to
Admire Their Subtlety, then Understand Hers. For to ascribe all particular
Phenomenon, that seem any thing Difficult, (for abundance are not thought so,
that are so,) to substantial Forms, and, but nominally understood, Qualities,
is so general and easy a way of resolving Difficulties, that it allows
Naturalists, without Disparagement, to be very Careless and Lazy, if it do not
make them so: as in effect we may s^e, that in about 2000 years since
Aristotle's time, the Adorers of his Physics, at least by virtue of H^s
peculiar Principles, seem to have done little more more then Wrangle, without
clearing up (that I know of) any mystery of Nature, or producing any useful or
noble Experiments: whereas the Cultivators of the Particularian Ph^losophy,
being obliged by the nature of their Hypothesis, and their way of Reasoning, to
give the particular Accounts and Explications of particular Phenomenon of
Nature, are also obliged, not only to know the general Laws and Course of
Nature, but to enquire into the particular Structure of the Bodies they are
conversant with, as that wher^in, for the most part, their Power of acting, and
Disposition to be acted on, does depend. And in order to this, such Enquiries
must take notice of Abundance of Minute Circumstances; and to avoid mistaking
the Causes of some of them, must often Make and Vary Experiments; by which
means Nature comes to be much more diligently and in ^ustriously Studied, and
innumerable Particulars are discovered and observed, which in the Lazy
Aristorelian way of Philosophizing would not be Heeded. But to return to that
Decad of Instances, to which these Advertisements are premised; I hope I need
not make an Apology for making choice rather of Chemical Experiments, then
others, in the second and concluding Section of the Historical Part of the
present Treatise. (...) though I prefer that Kind of Instances, yet I would not
be thought to overvalue Them in their kind, or to deny, the some Artists may
(for ought I know) be found, to whose Chemical Arcana, these Experiments may be
little better the^ Trifles. Nor perhaps are these the considerablest, that I my
self could easily have communicated; (though these themselves would not be now
Divulged, if I would have been ruled by the Disswasions of such as would have
nothing of Chemical made Common, which they think Considerable.) But things of
greater Value in themselves, and of Noble Use in Physic, may be less Fit for
our present purpose, (which is not to impart Medicinal, or Alchymistical
Processes, but illustrate Philosophical Notions,) then such Experiments as
these; which, besides that they contain Variety of Phenomenon, do not (for the
most part) require either much Time, or much Charge, or much Skill.

The II. SECTION, containing the EXPERIMENTS.
Experiment I.
TAke good and clear Oil of Vitriol, and cast into it a convenient quantity of
good Camphire grossly beaten; let it float there a while, and, without the help
of external hear, it will insenslibly be resolved into a Liquor, which, from
time to time, as it comes to be produced, you may, by shaking the Glass, mingle
with the Oil of Vitriol, whereunto you may, by this means, impart first a fine
Yellow, and then a color, which though it be not a true Red, will be of kin to
it, and so very deep, as to make the mixture almost quite Opacous. When all the
Camphire is perfectly dissolved by incorporating with the Menstruum, if you hit
upon good Ingredients, and upon a right Proportion, (for a slight Mistake in
either of them, may make this part of the Experiment miscarry,) you may
probably obtain such a mixture, as I have more then once had, namely, such a
one, as not only to me, whose sense of Smelling is none of the Dullest, but
also to others, that knew not of the Experiment, seemed not at all to have an
Odor of the Camphire. But if into this Liquor you pour a due quantity of fair
Water, you will see (perhaps not without delight) that, in a trice, the Liquor
will become pale, almost as at the first, and the Camphire, that lay concealed
in the pores of the Menstruum, will immediately disclose it self, and emerge,
in its own nature and pristine form of white floating and combustible Camphire,
which will fill not the Viol only, but the neighboring part of the Air with
its strong and Diffusive Odor.

Now the Phenomenon of this Experiment may, besides the uses we elsewhere make
of it, afford us several particulars pertinent to our present purpose.

I. For (first) we see a lighter and consistent Body brought, by a Comminution,
into Particles of a certain figure, to be kept swimming, and mixed with a
Liquor, on which it floated before, and which is, by great odds, heavier then
it self: so that as by the Solution of Gold in Aqua regis, it appears, that the
ponperousest of Bodies, if it be reduced to parts minute enough, may be kept
from sinking in a Liquor much lighter then it self: So this Experiment of Ours
manifests what I know not whether hitherto Men have proved, That the Corpuscles
of Lighter Bodies may be kept from emerging to the Top of a much heavier
Liquor: which Instance being added to that of the Gold, may teach us, that,
when Bodies are reduced to very minute parts, we must as well consider their
particular Texture, as the received Rules of the Hydrostaticks, in determining
whether they will sink, or float* or swim.

II. This Experiment also shows, that several Colors, and even a very deep
one, may soon be produced by a White Body, and a clear Liquor, and that without
the intervention of fire, or any external heat.

III. And that yet this Color may, almost in the twinkling of an Eye, be
destroyed, and as it were annihilated, and the Latitant Whiteness, as many
would call it, may be as suddenly restored by the Addition of nothing but fair
Water, which has no Color of its own, upon whose account it might be
surmis'd to be contrary to the perishing color, or to heighten the other into
a Praedominancy: nor does the Water take into its self, either the Color it
destroyed, or That it restores. For

IV. The more then semi-opacity of the Solution of Camphire and Oil of Vitriol
does presently vanish; and that Menstruum, with the Water, make up (as soon as
the Camphorate Corpuscles come to be a float) one transparent and colorless
Liquor.

V. And it is worth noting, that upon the mixture of a Liquor, which makes the
Fluid much Lighter, (for so Water is in respect of Vitriol,) a Body is made to
emerge, that did not so, when the Fluid was much heavier. This Experiment may
serve to countenance what we elsewhere argue against the Schools, touching the
Controversy about Mistion. For whereas though some of them dissent, yet most
of them maintain, that the Elements always loose their Forms in the mixed
Bodies they constitute; and though if they had dexterously proposed their
Opinion, and limited their Assertions to some cases, perhaps the Doctrine might
be tolerated: yet since they are wont to propose it crudely and universally, I
cannot but take notice, how little it is favored by this Experiment; wherein
even a mixed Body (for such is Camphire) does, in a further mistion, retain its
Form and Nature, and may be immediately so divorced from the Body, to which it
was united, as to turn, in a trice, to the manifest Exercise of its former
Qualities. And this Experiment being the easiest Instance, I have devised, of
the preservation of a Body, when it seems to be destroyed, and of the Recovery
of a Body to its former Conditions; I desire it may be taken notice of, as an
instance I shall after have Occasion to have recourse to, and make use of.

VI. But the notablest thing in the Experiment is, that Odours should depend so
much upon Texture; that one of the subtlest and strongest sented Drugs, that
the East it self or indeed the World affords us, should so soon quite loose its
Odor, by being mixed with a Body that has scarce, if at all, any sensible
Odor of its own, and This, while the Camphorate Corpuscles survive
undestroy'd, in a Liquor, from whence one would think, that less subtle and
fugitive Bodies, then they, should easily exhale.

VII. Nor is it much less considerable, that so strong and piercing a Sent as
that of Camphire, should be, in a moment, produced in a Mixture, wherein none
of it could be perceived before, by such a Liquor as Water, that is quite
devoid of any Odor of its own: which so easy and sudden restoration of the
Camphire to its Native Sent, as well as other Qualities, by so languid a Liquor
as common Water, does likewise argue, that the Union or Texture of the two
Ingredients, the Camphire and the Oil of Vitriol, was but very slight, upon
which nevertheless a great alteration in point of Qualities depended. And to
confirm, that diverse of the praeceding Phenomenon depend upon the particular
Texture of the Liquors, employed to exhibit them, I shall add, that if, instead
of oil of Vitriol, you cast the Concrete into well deflegm'd Spirit of Nitre,
you will obtain no red, nor dark, but a Transparent and Colorless Solution.
And when to the above mentioned red Mixture I put, instead of fair Water, about
2 or 3 parts of duly rectified Spirit of Wine, there would ensue no such
changes, as those formerly recited; but the Spirit of Wine, that dissolved the
Concrete, when it was by it self, without loosing its Diaphaneity, or acquiring
any Color, did, when it dissolved the Mixture, dissolve it with its new
adventitious Color, looking like a gross red Wine, somewhat turbid, or not yet
well freed from its Lees: so that this Color appeared to reside in the Mixture
as such, since neither of the two Ingredients dissolved in, or mingled with
the Spirit of Wine, would have afforded that Color, or indeed any other. But
if to this Liquor, that looked like troubled Wine, we poured a large Proportion
of fair Water, the Redness would immediately vanish, and the Whole would, as to
sense, become White throughout; I say, as to sense, because the Whiteness did
not indeed appertain properly to the whole Mixture, but to a huge multitude of
little Corpuscles of the revived Concrete, whereof some or other, which at
first swamme confusedly to and fro, left no sensible Portion of the Liquor
unfurnished with some of them; whereas when the Camphorate Corpuscles had
leisure to emerge, as they soon did, they floated in the form of a White
Powder or Froth at the top of the Liquor, leaving all the rest as clear and
colourlesse as the common Water.

But we have not yet mentioned all the use, we designed to make of our Mixture,
for by prosecuting the Experiment a little further, we made it afford us some
new Phenomenon.

VIII. For having kept the Mixture in a moderately warm place, (which
circumstance had perhaps no influence on the Success,) and having distilled it
out of a Glass Retort, the Event answered our Expectation, and the Liquor, that
came over, had a Sent; which, though very strong, was quite differing both from
that of the Mixture, and that of the Camphire; and in the remaining Body,
though the Liquor and the Camphire it consisted of, were either both
transparent, or the one transparent as a Liquor, and the other white, as
transparent and colourlesse Bodies are wont to be made by Contusion: yet the
remaining Mass, which amounted to a good part of the Mixture, was not only
Opacous, but as black as Coal, is some places looking just like polished Jet;
which is the more considerable, because that though Vegetable Substances, that
are not fluid, are wont to acquire a Blackness from the fire, yet neither do
Liquors, that have already been distilled, obtain that Color upon
Redistillation, neither have we, upon Trial purposely made, found, that
Camphire, exposed to fire in a Retort, fitted with a Receiver, (which was the
case of the present Experiment,) would at all acquire a Jetty Color, but would
either totally ascend White, or afford Flores, and a Caput mortuum (as a vulgar
Chemist would call the Remains) of the same Color, both in respect of one
another, and in respect of the Camphire.

IX. And our Experiment afforded this notable Phenomenon, That though Oil of
Vitriol be a distilled Liquor, and though Camphire be so very fugitive a
Substance, that being left in the Air, it will, of it self, fly all away; and
therefore Physicians and Druggists prescribe the keeping it in Linseeds or
Millium, or other convenient Bodies, to hinder its Avolation; yet, by our
Experiment, its Fugacity is so restrained, that not only the Caput mortuum
newly mentioned, endured a good fire in the Retort, before it was reduced to
that pitchy Substance we were lately mentioning, but having taken some of
that substance out of the Retort, and ordered it, by a careful Workman, to be
kept in a closely covered Crucible during some time in the fire; when it was
brought me back, after the Pot had been kept red hot above half an hour, there
remained a good quantity of the Matter, brittle, without any smell of
Camphire, and as black as ordinary Charcoal; so much do the Fixity and
Volatility of Bodies depend upon Texture.

Experiment II.
AMong those other Experiments of mine, (Pyrophilus) which tend to manifest,
that new Qualities may be produced in Bodies, as the Effects of new Textures; I
remember, some years ago, I writ for a Friend a whole Set of Trials, that I had
made about the Changes I could produce in Metals and Minerals, by the
Intervention of Sublimate. But though the whole Tract, wherein they are
recited, might be pertinent enough to our present Subject; yet reserving other
passages of it for other places, (especially for our Notes upon those
particular Qualities, which they are most proper to illustrate,) it may at this
time suffice me to send you a Transcript of what that Account contains,
relating to Copper and Silver, the one a mean and fugitive, and the other a
noble and fixed Metal. For those changes Color, Consistence, Fusiblenesse, and
other Qualities, which you will meet with in these Experiments, will afford us
diverse Phenomenon, to show what great Changes may be made, even in Bodies
scarce corruptible, by one or more of those three Catholic ways of Natures
working according to the Corpuscular Principles, namely, the Access, the
Recess, and the Transposition of the minute Particles of Matter.

As for my Method of changing the Texture of Copper, I confess it has
oftentimes seemed strange to me, that Chemists, plainly seeing the notable
Effect, that Sublimate, distilled from Antimony, has upon that Mineral, by
opening it, and volatilizing it, (as we see it do in the making of what they
are pleased to call Mercurius vitae,) should not have the Curiosity to try,
whether or no Sublimate might not likewise produce, if nor the same, yet a
considerable Change in other Mineral Bodies, there appearing no reason, or at
least there having been none given, that I know of, why the Reserating
Operation (if I may so speak) of Sublimate, should be confined to Antimony.
Upon these Considerations, we were invited to endeavor to supply the Neglect
we had observed in Chemists, of improving the Experiment of Butyrum Antimonii:
and though an Indisposition in point of Health, which befell us before we had
made any great progress in our Enquiries, made us so shy of the Fumes of
Sublimate and Minerals, that we neither did make all our Trials so accurately,
nor prosecute them so far as we would have done, had we been to deal with more
innocent Materials: Yet we suppose, it will not be unwelcome to You, to receive
from us a naked, but faithful, Narrative of our Proceedings; being apt to
think, that you will therein find Inducements to carry on this Experiment
further then we have done, and to complete what we have but begun.

First then, we took half a pound of Copper plates, of about an Inch broad, and
the thickness of a Grain of Wheat, (which we after found was too great,) and of
an arbitrary length; then casting a Pound of grossly beaten Venetian Sublimate
into the bottom of a somewhat deep Glass Retort, we cast in the Copper plates
upon it, that the Fumes of the Sublimate might, in their Ascension, be
compelled to act upon the incumbent Metal, and then placing this Retort, as
deep as we well could, in a Sand Furnace, and adapting to it a small Receiver,
we administered a Gradual fire seven or eight hours, and at length for a while
increased the heat, as much as we well could do in such a Furnace. The success
of this Operation was as follows.

1. There came little or no Liquor at all over into the Receiver, but the Neck
and upper part of the Retort were Candied on the inside, by reason of the
copious Sublimate adhaering to them, which Sublimate weighed above Ten Ounces;
in the Retort we found about two Ounces and a quarter of running Mercury, which
had been suffered to revive by the acid Salts, which corroding the Copper,
forsook the Quicksilver, whereto they had been in the Sublimate united.

2. Upon the increase of the fire, there was plainly heard a Noise, made by the
melting Matter in the Retort, not unlike that of a boiling Pot, or of Vitriol,
when being committed to a Calcining fire, it is first brought to flow. And this
Noise we found to be a more constant Circumstance of this Experiment, then the
revification of part of the Mercury contained in the Sublimate; for upon
another Trial, made with the former proportion of Copper plates and Sublimate,
we observed, during a very long while, such a Noise as has been already
mentioned, but the Operation being finished, we scarce found so much as a few
Grains of running Mercury, either in the Retort or Receiver.

3. We found the Metalline Lump, in the bottom of the Retort, to have been
increased in weight somewhat more then (though not half an Ounce above) two
Ounces; some of the Copper plates, lying at the bottom of the Mass, retained
yet their Figure and Malleablenesse, which we ascribed to their not having been
thin enough to be sufficiently wrought upon by the Sublimate: the Others, which
were much the greater number, had wholly lost their Metalline form, and were
melted into a very brittle Lump, which I can compare to nothing more fitly,
then a lump of good Benjamin; for this Mass, though ponderous, was no less
brittle, and being broken, appeared of diverse Colors, which seemed to be
almost transparent, in some places it was red, in others of a high and pleasant
Amber Color, and in other parts of it, Colors more darkish and mixed might be
discerned.

4. But this strange Mass being broken into smaller Lumps, and laid upon a
Sheet of White Paper in a Window, was, by the next morning, where ever the Air
came at it, all covered with a lovely greenish Blew, or rather, bluish Green,
almost like that of the best Verdegreese, and the longer it lay in the air, the
more of the internal parts of the Fragments did pass into the same Color: but
the white Paper, which in some places they stained, seem Died of a Green
color inclining unto Yellow. And here we had Occasion to take notice of the
insinuating subtlety of the Air; for having put some pieces of this Cupreous
Gum (if I may so call it) into a little Box, to shut out the Air, which we
have found it possible to exclude by other means, we found, that
notwithstanding our care, those included Fragments were, as well as the rest
already mentioned, covered with the powder, as it were of viride Aeris.

5. We must not, on this Occasion, omit to tell you, that, having, the last
year, made some Trials in reference to this Experiment, we observed in one of
them, that some little Copper plates, from which Sublimate had been drawn off,
retained their pristine shape, and Metalline nature, but were Whitened over
like Silver, and continued so for diverse Months, (though we cannot precisely
tell you how long, having at length accidentally lost them.) And to try
whether this Whiteness were only superficial, we purposely broke some of
these flexible Plates, and found, that this Silver color had penetrated them
throughout, and was more glorious in the very Body of the Metal, then on its
Surface, which made us suspect, that the Sublimate, by us employed, had been
adulterated with Arsenick, (wherewith the Sophisticators of Metals are wont
to make Blanchers for Copper, but not to mention, that the Malleablenesse
continued, which Arsenick is wont to destroy,) we discovered not by Trial, that
the Sublimate was other then sincere.

6. In this Metalline Gum the Body of the Copper appeared so changed and
opened, that we were invited to look upon such a Change as no ignoble
Experiment, considering the Difficulty, which the best Artists tell us there
is, and which those, that have attempted it, have found, I say not, to unlock
the Sulphur of Venus, but to effect less Changes in its Texture, then was
hereby made. For this Gum, cast upon a quick Coal, and a little blown, will
partly melt and flow like Rosin, and partly flame, and burn like a Sulphur, and
with a flame so lasting, if it be rekindled as often as it leaves off burning,
that we observed it, not without some Wonder; and so inflammable is this opened
Copper, that, being held to the flame of a Candle, or a piece of lighted Paper,
it would almost in a moment take fire, and send forth a flame like common
Sulphur, but only that it seemed to us to incline much more to a greenish
color, then the blewer flame of Brimstone is wont to do.

To these Phenomenon of our Experiment, as it was made with Copper, my Notes
enable me to subjoyn some others, exhibited when we made it with Sublimate and
Silver.

There were taken of the purest sort of Coined Silver we could get, half a
scort thin Plates, on which was cast double the weight of Sublimate in a
small and strongly coated Retort. This Matter being sublimed in a naked fire,
we found, (having broken the Vessel,) that the Sublimate was almost totally
ascended to the top and neck of the Retort, in the latter of which appeared in
many places some revived Mercury, in the bottom of the Retort we found a little
fluxed Lump of Matter, which 'twas scarce possible to separate from the Glass,
but having, with much ado ^ivorc'd them, we found this Mass to be brittle, of
a pale yellowish color, of ^eer about the weight of the Metal, on which the
Sublimate had been cast. And in the thicker part of this Lump there appeared,
when it was broken, some part of the Silver plates, which, though brittle,
seemed not to have been perfectly dissolved. This Resin of Silver did, like
that of Copper, but more slowly, im^ibe the Moisture of the Air, and vvith^n
about 24. hours, was covered with a somevvhat greenish Dust, concerning
which we durst not determine, whether it proceeded from that mixture of
Copper, which is generally to be me^ with in coined Silver, or from the
compounded Metal. For the more curious sort of Painters do, as they inform us,
by corroding coined Silve^ with the fretting steams of saline Bodies, or with
corrosive Bodies themselves, turn it into a fine kind of Azu^^ as we may
elsewhere have opportuni^^ more particularly to declare. I sh^^ now only
add, that some small fragments of our Resin, being cast upon r^^ hot Coals,
did there vvast themselv^ in a flame not very differing in colo^ from that of
the former mentioned R^sin of Copper, but much more durab^^ then would have
easily been expect^ from so small a^ quantity of Matter.

This is all the Account I can give yo^ of our first Trial, but suspecting, the
the Copper, wont to be mixed as a^ Alloy-vvith our coined Silver, might have
too much Influence on the reci^ Event; coming afterward into a pla^^ where
we could procure Refined S^^ver, we took an Ounce of That, a^ having
Laminated it, we cast it up^ twice its Weight of beaten Sublim^^ which being
driven away from it with a somewhat strong fire, we took, out of ^he bottom of
the Glass Retort, a Lump of Matter, which in some places, where it lay next the
Glass, was as it were silvered over very finely, but so very ^hinly, that the
Thickness of the Silver ^carce equaled that of fine white Paper; the rest of
the Metal (except a little that lay undissolv'd almost in the middle of the
Mass, because, as we supposed, the Plates had not been beaten, till they were
sufficiently and equally thin,) having been, by the saline part of the
Sublimate, that stuck to it, colliqua^ed into a Mass, that looked not at all
like Silver, or so much as any other Metal or Mineral.

And it is remarkable, that though Silver be a fixed Metal, and accounted
indestructible; yet it should by so slight an Operation, and by but about a
quarter of its weight of Additament, (as appeared by weighing the whole Lump,)
be so strangely disguized, and have its Qualities so altered.

For (first) though an eminent Whiteness be accounted the color, which
belongs to pure Silver, and though beaten Sublimate be also eminently White yet
the Mass, we are speaking of, w^^ partly of a Lemmon or Amber color or a deep
Amethystinine color, a^ partly of so dark a one, as it seemed black: and it
was pretty, that sometime in a fragment, that seemed to be one continued and
entire piece, the upper part would be of a light Yellow, which abruptly
ending, the lower was of a color so obscure, as scarce to challenge any name
distinct from Black.

Next whereas Silver is one of the most Opacous Bodies in Nature, and Sublimate
a White one, the produced Mass was in great part Transparent, though not like
Glass, yet like good Amber.

Thirdly, the Texture of the Silver was exceedingly altered: for our Mass,
instead of being Malleable and Flexible, as that Metal is very much, appeared,
if you went about to cut it with a Knife, like Horn, yet otherwise easily apt
to crack and break, though not at all to bend.

Fourthly, whereas Silver will endure Ignition for a good while before it be
brought to Fusion, our Mixture will easily melt, not only upon quick coals,
but in the flame of a Candle; but this Resin, or Gum (if I may so call it) of
our fixed Metal did not, like that, we formerly described, of Copper, tinge the
flame of a Candle, or produce with the glowing coals, on which it is laid, either
a green or bluish color.

And ( Pyrophilus) to discover how much these Operations of the Sublimate upon
Copper and Silver depend upon the particular Textures of these Bodies, I took
two parcels of Gold, the one common Gold thinly laminated, and the other very
well refined, and having cast each of these in a distinct Urinal, upon no less
then thrice its weight of grossly beaten Sublimate, I caused this last named
substance to be, in a Sand furnace, elevated from the Gold, b^^ found not, that
either of the two Parcels of that Metal was manifestly altered thereby: whether
in case the Gold had been reduced to very minute particles, some kind of change
(perhaps, if any differing enough from those lately recited to have been made
in the Copper and the Silver) might have been made in it, I am not so
absolutely certain; but I am confident, that by what I reserve to tell you
hereafter of Sublimates Operation upon some other Minerals, especially Tin, it
will appear, that That Operation depends very much upon the particular Texture
of the Body, from whence that Sublimate is Elevated.

Before I dismiss this subject, Pyrophilus, I must not conceal from you, that
in the Papers, whence these Experiments made with Sublimate have been
transcribed, I annexed to the whole Discourse a few Advertisements, whereof the
first was, That I was reduced, in those Experiments, to employ, for want of a
better, a Sand Furnace, wherein I could not give so strong a fire as I desired,
which circumstance may have had some Influence upon the recited Phenomenon; and
among other Advertisements there being one, that will not be impertinent to my
present Design, and may possibly afford a not unsuccesful Hint, I shall subjoin
it in the words, wherein I find it delivered.

The next thing, of which I am to advertise you, is this, That this Experiment
may probably be further improved, by employing about it various and new kinds
of Sublimate, and that several other things may be sublimed up together either
with crude Mercury, or with common Sublimate, he that considers the way of
making vulgar Sublimate, will not, I suppose, deny. To give you only one
Instance, I shall inform you, that, having caused about equal parts of common
Sublimate and Sal Armoniack to be well powdered and incorporated, by subliming
the Mixture in strong and large Urinals placed in a Sand Furnace, we obtained a
new kind of Sublimate, differing from the former, which we manifested ad
Oculum, by dissolving a little of it and a little of common Sublimate severally
in fair water; for dropping a little resolved salt of Tartar upon the solution
of common Sublimate, it immediately turned of an Orange tawny color, but
dropping the same Liquor upon the solution of the Ammoniack Sublimate, if I may
so call it, it presently turned into a Liquor in Whiteness resembling Milk:
And having from 4 ounces of Copper plates drawn 6 ounces of this new Sublimate
after the already often recited manner, we had indeed in the bottom of the
Retort a Cupreous Resin, not much unlike That, made by Copper and common
Sublimate; and this Resin did, like the other, in the moist Air, soon begin to
degenerate into a kind of Verdigreese. But that which was singular in this
Operation was, that not only some of the Sublimate had carried up, to a good
height, enough of the Copper to be manifestly colored by it of a fine bluish
Green, but into the Receiver there was passed near an Ounce of Liquor, that
smelt almost like spirit of Sal Armoniack, and was tincted like the Sublimate,
so that we supposed the Body of the Venus to have been better wrought upon by
this, then by the former Sublimate. And yet I judged not this way to be the
most effectual way of improving common Sublimate, being apt to think, upon
grounds not now to be mentioned, that it may, by convenient Liquors, be so far
enriched and advanced, as to be made capable of opening the Compact Body of
Gold it self, and of producing in it such Changes, (which yet perhaps will
enrich but men's Understandings,) as Chemists are wont very fruitlesly to
attempt to make in that almost Indestructible Metal. But of This, having now
given you a Hint, I dare here say no more.

Experiment III.
THere is ( Pyrophilus) another Experiment, which many will find more easy to
be put in practice, and which yet may, as to Silver, be made a kind of
Succedaneum to the former, and consequently may serve to show, how the like
Qualities in Bodies may be effected by differing Ways, provided a like Change
of Texture be produced by them. Of This I shall give you an Example in that
Preparation of Silver, that some Chemists have called Luna Cornea, which I
shall not scruple to mention particularly, and apply to my present purpose;
because though the name of Luna Cornea be already to be met with in the
Writings of some Alchymists, yet the thing it self, being not used in Physic,
is not wont to be known by those that learn Chemistry in order to Physic; and
the way that I use in making it is differing from that of Alchymists, being
purposely designed to show some notable Phenomenon, not to be met with in their
way of proceeding.

We take then refined Silver, and having beaten it into thin Plates, and
dissolved it in about twice its Weight of good Aqua fortis, we Filtrate it
carefully to obtain a clear solution, (which sometimes we Evaporate further,
till it shoot into Chrystals, which we afterward dry upon brown Paper with a
moderate heat.)

Upon the abovementioned solution we drop good spirit of Salt, till we find,
that it will no more curdle the Liquor it falls into, (which will not happen so
soon, as you will be apt at first to imagine,) then we put the whole Mixture in
a Glass Funnel lined with Cap-paper, and letting the moisture drain through, we
dry, with a gentle heat, the substance, that remains in the Filtre, first
washing it (if need be) from the loosly adhaering Salts, by letting fair Water
run through it several times, whilst it yet continues in the Filtre. This
substance being well dried, we put it into a Glass Viol, which being put upon
quick coals, first covered with Ashes, and then freed from them, we melt the
contained substance into a Mass, which, being kept a while in Fusion, gives us
the Luna Cornea we are now to consider.

If to make this Factitious Concrete, we first reduce the Silver into
Chrystals, and afterward proceed with spirit of Salt, as we have just now
taught you to do with the solution; we have the exceedingly Opacous, Malleable,
and hardly Fusible Body of Silver, by the convenient interposition of some
saline Particles, not amounting to the third part of the Weight of the Metal,
reduced into Chrystals, that both shoot in a peculiar and determinate figure,
differing from those of other Metals, and also are diaphanous and brittle, and
by great odds more easily fusible then Silver it self; besides other Qualities,
wherein having elsewhere taken notice, that these Chrystals differ both from
Silver and from Aqua fortis, we shall not now insist on them, but pass to the
Qualities, that do more properly belong to the change of the Solution of Silver
into Luna Cornea.

First then we may observe, that though spirit of Salt be an highly acid
Liquor, and though acid Liquors and Alkalys are wont to have quite contrary
Operations, the one praecipitating what the other would dissolve, and
dissolving what the other would praecipitate: yet in our case, as neither Oil
of Tartar per deliquium, nor spirit of Salt will dissolve Silver, so both the
one and the other will praecipitate it; which I desire may be taken notice of
against the Doctrine of the Vulgar Chemists, and as a Proof, that the
Praecipitation of Bodies depends not upon acid or Alkalizate Liquors as such,
but upon the Texture of the Bodies, that happen to be confounded.

2. We may here observe, that Whiteness and Opacity may be immediately produced
by Liquors, both of them Diaphanous and colorless.

3. That on the other side, a White Powder, though its minute parts appear not
transparent, like those of beaten Glass, Rosin, etc. which, by comminution, are
made to seem White, may yet, by a gentle heat, be presently reduced into a Mass
indifferently Transparent, and not at all White, but of a fair Yellow.

4. We may observe too, that though Silver require so strong a fire to melt it,
and may be long kept red hot, without being brought to Fusion; yet by the
association of some saline particles, conveniently mingled with it, it may be
made so fusible, as to be easily and quickly melted, either in a thin Viol, or
at the flame of a Candle, where it will flow almost like Wax.

5. It may also be noted, that though the Lunar solution and the spirit of Salt
would, either of them apart, have readily dissolved in Water; yet when they are
mingled, they do, for the most part, concoagulate into a substance, that will
lie undissolv'd in Water, and is scarce, if at all, soluble either in Aqua
fortis, or in spirit of Salt.

6. And remarkable it is, that the Body of Silver being very flexible and
malleable, (especially if the Metal be, as ours was, refined) it should yet, by
the Addition of so small a proportion of Salt, (a Body rigid and brittle,) as
is associated to it in our Experiment, be made of a Texture so differing from
what either of its Ingredients was before, being wholly unlike either a Salt or
a Metal, and very like in Texture to a piece of Horn. And to satisfy my self,
how much the Toughness of this Metalline Horn depended upon the Texture of the
Compositum, resulting from the respective Textures of the several Ingredients,
I praecipitated a solution of Silver with the distilled saline Liquor commonly
called Oil of Vitriol, instead of spirit of salt, and having washed the
Praecipitate with common Water, I found agreeably to my conjecture, that this
Praecipitate, being flux'd in a moderate heat, afforded a Mass, that looked
like enough to the Concrete we have been discoursing of, but had not its
Toughness, being brittle enough to be easily broken in pieces. But the tw^
considerablest Phenomenon of our ExExperiment do yet remain unmentiond.

For 7thly. It Is odd, that whereas a solution of Silver is, as we have often
occasion to note, the bitterest Liquor we have ever met with, and the spirit of
Salt far sowrer then either the sharpest Vinegar, or even the spirit of it,
these two so strongly and offensively tasted Liquors should be so easily and
speedily, without any other thing to correct them, be reduced into an insipid
substance, (at least so far insipid, that I have licked it several times with
my Tongue, without finding it otherwise, though perhaps, with much rolling it
to and fro in the mouth, it may at length afford some unpleasant Taste, but
exceedingly different from that of either of the Liquors that composed it:) and
This, though the Salts, that made both the Silver, and the praecipitating
spirit so strongly tasted, remain associated with the Silver.

8. And Lastly, it is very strange, that though the saline Corpuscles, that
give the efficacy both to good Aqua fortis, and the like spirit of Salt, be not
only so volatile, that they will easily be distilled with a moderate fire, but
so fugitive, that they will in part fly away of themselves in the cold Air, (as
our Noses can witness to our trouble, when the Viols, that contain such
Liquors, are unstopt;) yet by virtue of the new Texture they acquire, by
associating themselves with the Corpuscles of the Silver and with one another,
these minute particles of salt loose so much of their former Lightness, and
acquire such a degree of Fixednesse, that they will endure melting with the
Metal they adhere to, rather then suffer themselves to be driven away from it.
Nor do I remember, that when I melted this Mass in a thin Viol, I could
perceive any sensible Evaporation of the Matter: nay having afterward put a
parcel of it upon a quick Coal, though that were blows to intend the heat; yet
it suffered Fusion, and so ran off from the Coal, without appearing, when it
was taken up again, to be other then Luna Cornea, as it was before.

Experiment IV.
I Am now ( Pyrophilus) about to do a Thing, contrary enough both to my Custom
and Inclination, that is, To discourse upon the Phenomenon of an Experiment,
which I do not teach you to make. But since I cannot as yet, without some
breach of promise, plainly disclose to you what I must now conceal your Equity
assures me of your Pardon. And as, because the Qualities of the Salt, I am to
speak of, are very remarkable, and pertinent to my present design, I am
unwilling to pass them by unmention'd; so I hope, that notwithstanding their
being strange, I may be allowed to discourse upon them to you, who, I presume,
know me too well to suspect I would impose upon you in matters of fact, and to
whom I am willing (if you desire it) to show the Anomalous Salt it self, and
Ocular proofs of the chief properties I ascribe to it.

I shall not then scruple to tell you, that Discoursing one day with a very
Ingenious Traveller and Chemist, who had had extraordinary Opportunities to
acquire Secrets, of a certain odd Salt I had thought upon and made, which was
of so differing a kind from other Salts, that though I did not yet know what
Feats I should be able to do with it, yet I was confident, it must have Noble
and unusual Operations. This Gentleman, to requi^e my Franckness, told me, that
I had lighted on a greater Jewel, then perhaps I was aware of; and that if I
would follow his Advice, by adding something that he named to me, and
prosecuting the Preparation a little further, I should obtain a Salt
exceedingly noble. I thanked him, as I had cause, for his Advice, and, when I
had Opportunity, followed it. And though I found the way of making this Salt
so nice and intricate a thing, that if I would, I could scarce easily describe
it, so as to enable most men to practice it; yet having once made it, I found,
that, besides some of the things I had been told it would perform, I could do
diverse other things with it, which I had good cause to believe the Gentleman,
of whom I was speaking, did not think of; and I doubt not, but I should have
done much more with it, if I had not unfortunately lost it soon after I had
prepared it.

Several of the Phenomenon, I tried to produce with it, which are not so proper
for this place, are reserved for another, but here I shall mention a few, that
best fit my present purpose.

First then, though the several ingredients, that composed this Salt, were all
of them such, as Vulgar Chemists must according to their Principles, look upon
as purely Saline, and were each of them far more salt then Brine, or more sour
then the strongest Vinegar, or more strongly tasted then either of those two
Liquors; yet the Compound, made up of only such Bodies, is so far from being
eminently salt, or sour, or insipid, that a Stranger being asked, what Taste it
had, would not scruple to judge it rather sweet, then of any other Taste*
though its Sweetness be of a peculiar kind, as there is a difference even among
Bodies sweet by Nature; the sweetness of Sugar being diverse from that of Honey,
and both of them differing from that of the sweet Vitriol of Lead. And this is
the only instance, I remember, I have hitherto met with of Salts, that,
without the mixture of insipid Bodies, compose a substance really sweet. I say
really sweet, because Chemists oftentimes term the Calces of Metals and other
Bodies dulcifi'd, if they be freed from all corrosive salts and sharpness of
Taste, sweet, though they have nothing at all of positive sweetness in them; and
by that license of speaking do often enough impose upon the Unskilful.

Another thing considerable in our Anomalous Salt is, That though its Odor be
not either strong or offensive, (both which that of Volatile Salts is wont to
be,) yet if it be a little urged with heat, so as to be forced to evaporate
hastily and copiously, I have known some, that have been used to the powerful
stink of Aqua fortis, distilled Urine, and even spirit of Sal Armoniack its
self, that have complained of this smell, as more strong, and upon that account
more unsupportable then these themselves: and yet when these Fumes settle again
into a Salt, their Odor will again prove mild and inoffensive, if not pleasant.

Thirdly, whereas all the Volatile, and Acid, and Lixiviate Salts, that we know
of, are of so determinate and specificated a Nature, (if I may so speak,) that
there is no one sort of the three, but may be destroyed by some one or other of
the other two Salts, if not by both, as spirit of Urine, which is a volatile
Salt, being mingled with spirit of Salt, or Aqua fortis, or almost any other
strong and acid spirit, will make a great Ebullition, and loose its peculiar
Taste, and several of its other Qualities; and on the otherside, Salt of Tartar,
and other Alkalys, (that is, Salts produced by Incineration of mixed Bodies,)
will be destroyed with Ebullition by Aqua fortis, spirit of Salt, or almost any
other strong spirit of that Family. And spirit of Salt, Aqua fortis, etc. will
be (as they speak) destroyed both by Animal volatile Salts, and by the fixed
Salts of Vegetables; that is, will make an Effervescence with either sort of
Salts, and compose with them a new Liquor or Salt, differing from either of the
ingredients, and, as to taste, smell, odor, and diverse other Qualities, more
languid and degenerous: whereas, I say, each of these three Families of Salts
may be easily destroyed by the other two, our Anomalous Salt seems to be above
the being thus wrought upon by any of all the three, and i^ the only Body I
know: (which is no small privilege, or rather prerogative,) for I did not
find, that a Solution of it, made with as little Water as I could, which is the
way whereby we usually make it fluid, would make any Ebullition, either with
Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, or spirit of Sal Armoniack, or strong spirit of
Salt, or even Oil of Vitriol, but would calmely and silently mix with these
differing Liquors, and continue as long as I had patience to look upon them,
without being praecipitated by them. But this is not the only way I employed
to examine, whether our Salt belonged to any of the three above mentioned
comprehensive families of Salts. For I found not, that the strongest solution
of it would turn Syrup of Violets either red, as acid spirits do, or green, as
both fixed and volatile Salts will do. Nor would our Solution turn a clear one
of Sublimate made in common Water, either white, as spirit of Urine, Sal
Armoniack, or others of the same family, or into an Orange Tawny, like salt of
Tartar, and other Alkalys: but left the solution of Sublimate transparent,
without giving it any of these colors, mingling it self very kindly with it,
as it had done with the four lately mentioned Liquors. And to satisfy my self a
little further, I not only tried, that an undiscolour'd mixture of syrup of
Violets and our solution, would immediately be turned red by 2 or 3 drops of
spirit of Salt, or green by as much Oil of Tartar: but, to prosecute the
Experiment, I let fall a drop or two of a mixture made of our Anomalous
solution, and spirit of Salt well shaken together, upon some syrup of Violets,
which was thereby immediately turned red, and a little of the same Anomalous
solution, being shaken together with Oil of Tartar per Deliquium, turned
another parcel of the same syrup of Violets into a delightful green; which,
happening as I expected, seemed to argue, that our Solution, though as to sense
it were exquisitely mingled in the several mixtures, to which I had put it,
did, as it left them their undestroy'd respective Natures, retain its own; and
yet this Salt is so far from being a languid or an insignificant thing, that
Aqua fortis, and Oil of Vitriol themselves, as operative and as furious Liquors
as they are, are unable in diverse cases to make such Solutions, and perform
such other things, as our calm, but powerful, Menstruum can, though but
slowly, effect.

Fourthly: Though this Salt be a volatile one, and requires no strong heat to
make it sublime into finely figured Chrystals without a remanence at the
Bottom; yet being dissolved in Liquors, you may make the Solution, if need be,
to boil, without making any of the Salt sublime up, before the Liquor be
totally or almost totally drawn off, whereas the volatile salt of Urine, Blood,
Hartshorn, etc. are wont to ascend before almost any part of the Liquor, they
are dissolved in, which is in many cases very inconvenient.

And though this be a Volatile salt, yet I remember not, that I have observed
any fixed salt, (without excepting salt of Tartar it self,) that runs near so
soon per Deliquium, as this will do; but by abstraction of the adventitious
moisture it is easily restored to its former saline form: and yet differs from
salt of Tartar, not only in Fixednesse and Taste, and diverse other qualities,
but also in this, That, whereas salt of Tartar requires a vehement fire to flux
it, a gentlier heat, then one would easily imagine, will melt our Salt into a
Limpid Liquor.

And whereas spirit of Wine will dissolve some Bodies, as Sanderick, Mastick,
Gum-Lac, etc. and Water, on the other side, dissolves many that spirit of Wine
cannot, and Oils will dissolve some, for which neither of the other Liquors are
good solvents; our salt will readily dissolve both in fair Water, in the
highest rectified spirit of Wine, (and That so little, as not to weigh more
then the salt,) and in Chemical Oils themselves, with which it will as^ociate
its self very strictly, and perhaps more too, then I have yet found any other
consistent salt to do.

Experiment V.
THe Experiment I am ( Pyrophilus) now about to deliver, though I have not yet
had Opportunity to perfect what I designed, when some Notions, that I have
about Fire and Salt, suggested it to me, is yet such as may far more clearly,
then almost any of the Experiments commonly known to Chemists, serve to show
us, how near to a real Transmutation those Changes may prove, that may be
effected even in inanimate, and, which is more, scarce corruptible Bodies, by
the recess of some Particles, and the access of some others, and the new
Texture of the residue. The Experiment I have made several ways, but one of
the latest and best I have used is this: Take one part of good Sea Salt well
dried and powdered, and put to it double its weight of good Aqua fortis, or
spirit of Nitre, then having kept it (if you have time) for some while in a
previous digestion, distill it over with a slow fire in a Retort or a low Body,
till the the remaining Matter be quite dry, and no more; for this substance,
that will remain in the bottom of the Glass, is the thing that is sought for.

This Operation being performable in a moderate fire, and the Bodies themselves
being almost of an incorruptible nature, one would scarce think, that so slight
a matter should produce any Change in them; but yet I found, as I expected,
these notable Mutations of Qualities effected by so unpromising a way.

For in the first place, we may take notice, that the Liquor, that came over,
was no longer an Aqua fortis, or spirit of Nitre, but an Aqua Regis, that was
able to dissolve Gold, which Aqua fortis will not meddle with, and will not
dissolve Silver, as it would have done before, but will rather, as I have
purposely tried, praecipitate it out of Aqua fortis, if that Menstruum have
already dissolved it: But this Change belonging not so properly to the
substance it self I was about to consider, I shall not here insist on it.

2. Then, the Taste of this Substance comes by this Operation to be very much
altered. For it has not that strong saltness that it had before, but tastes far
milder, and, though it relish of both, affects the Palate much more like
Saltpeter, then like common salt.

3. Next, whereas this last named Body is of very difficult Fusion, our
factitious salt imitates saltpeter in being very fusible, and it will, like
Nitre, soon melt, by being held in the flame of a Candle.

4. But to proceed to a more considerable Phenomenon, it is known, that Sea Salt
is a Body, that does very much resist the fire, when once by being brought to
Fusion, it has been forced to let go that windy substance, that makes unbeaten
salt crackle in the fire, and so by blowing it accidentally increase it. It Is
also known, that acid spirits, as those of Salt, Vitriol, Nitre, Vinegar, etc.
are not only not inflammable themselves, but hinderers of inflammation in
other Bodies; and yet my Conjecture leading me to expect, that, by this
Operation, I should be able to produce, out of two inflammable Bodies, a third,
that would be easily inflammable. I found, upon Trial, not only that small
Lumps of this substance, cast upon quick and well blown coals, though they did
not give so blew a flame as Nitre, did yet, like it, burn away with a copious
and vehement flame. And, for further Trial, having melted a pretty quantity of
this transmuted Sea salt in a Crucible, by casting upon it little fragments of
well kindled Charcoal, it would, like Nitre, presently be kindled, and afford a
flame so vehement and so dazzling, that one that had better Eyes then I, and
knew not what it was, complained, that he was not able to support the splendour
of it. Nor were all its inflammable parts consumed at one deflagration: for by
casting in more fragments of well kindled Coal, the Matter would fall a
puffing, and flame afresh for several times consecutively, according to the
quantity that had been put into the Crucible.

5. But this it self was not the chief discovery I designed by this Experiment.
For I pretended hereby to devise a way of turning an acid salt into an Alkaly,
which seems to be one of the greatest and difficultest Changes, that is
rationally to be attempted among durable and inanimate Bodies. For it is not
unknown to such Chemists as are any thing inquisitive and heedful, how vast a
difference there is between acid Salts, and those, that are made by the
combustion of Bodies, and are sometimes called Fixed, sometimes Alkalizate. For
whereas strong Lixiviums (which are but strong solutions of Alkalys) will
readily enough dissolve common Sulphur, and diverse other Bodies abounding with
Sulphur; even those highly acid Liquors, Aqua fortis, and Aqua Regis, though so
corrosive, that one will dissolve Silver, and the other Gold it self, will let
Brimstone lie in them undissolv'd I know not how long; though some say, that in
process of time, there may be some Tincture drawn by the Menstruum from it,
which yet I have not seen tried; and though it were true, would yet
sufficiently argue a great disparity betwixt those acid spirits, and strong
Alkalizate solutions, which will speedily dissolve the very mass of common
Sulphur. Besides, it is observed by the inquisitive Chemists, nor does my
Experience contradict it, that the Bodies, that are dissolved by an acid
Menstruum, may be praecipitated by an Alkalizate; and on the contrary,
solutions, made by the latter, may be praecipitated by the former. Moreover, as
Litharge, dissolved in spirit of Vinegar, will be praecipitated by the Oil of
Tartar per Deliquium, or the solution of its Salt; and, on the contrary,
Sulphur or Antimony, dissolved in such a solution, will be praecipitated out of
it by the spirit of Vinegar, or even common Vinegar. Moreover, Acids and
Alkalizates do also differ exceedingly in taste, and in this greater disparity,
that the one is volatile, and the other fixed, besides other particulars not
necessary here to be insisted on. And indeed, if that were true, which is
taught in the Schools, that there is a natural enmity, as well as disparity
betwixt some Bodies, as between Oily and waterish ones, the Chemists may very
speciously teach, (as some of them do) That there is a strange contrariety
betwixt Acid and Alkalizate Salts; as when there is made an Affusion of oil of
Tartar upon Aqua Regis, or Aqua fortis, to praecipitate Gold out of the one,
and Silver out of the other, their mutual Hostility seems manifestly to show it
self, not only by the noise, and hear, and fume, that are immediately excited
by their conflict, but by this most of all, that afterward the two contending
Bodies will appear to have mutually destroyed one another, both the sour Spirit
and the fixed Salt having each lost its former Nature in the scuffle, and
degenerated with its Adversary into a certain Third substance, that wants
several of the Properties both of the sour Spirit and the Alkaly. Now to apply
all this to the Occasion, on which I mentioned it, how distant and contrary
soever the more inquisitive of the latter Chemists take Acid and Fixed Salts to
be; yet I scarce doubted, but that, by our Experiment, I should, from acid
salts, obtain an Alkaly, and accordingly having, by casting in several bits of
well kindled coal, excited, in the melted Mass of our transmuted Salt, as many
Deflagrations as I could, and then giving it a pretty strong fire to drive away
the rest of the more fugitive parts, I judged, that the remaining Mass would
be (like the fixed Nitre I have elsewhere mentioned) of an Alkalizate nature,
and accordingly having taken it out, I found it to taste, not like Sea Salt, but
fiery enough upon the Tongue, and to have a Lixiviate relish. I found too, that
it would turn Syrup of Violets into a greenish color, that it would
praecipitate a Limpid solution of Sublimate, made in fair water, into an Orange
tawny Powder. I found, that it would, like other fixed salts, produce an
Ebullition with acid spirits, and even with spirit of salt it self, and
concoagulate with them. Nor are these themselves all the ways I took to
manifest the Alkalizate Nature of our transmuted Sea salt.

I did indeed consider at first, that it might be suspected, that this new
Alkalizatenesse might proceed from the Ashes of the injected Coals, the Ashes
of Vegetables generally containing in them more or less of a fixed Salt. But
when I considered too, that a pound of Charcoal, burned to Ashes, is wont to
yield so very little Salt, that the injected fragments of Coal, (though they
had been, which they were not) quite burned out in this Operation, would scarce
have afforded two or three grains of salt, (perhaps not half so much,) I saw no
reason at all to believe, that in the whole Mass I had obtained (and which was
all, that was left me of the Sea Salt, I had at first employed,) it was nothing
but so inconsiderable a proportion of Ashes, that exhibited all the Phenomenon
of an Alkaly.

And for further confirmation both of This, and what I said a little before, I
shall add, that to satisfy my self yet more, I poured, upon a pretty quantity
of this Lixiviate salt, a due proportion of Aqua fortis, till the hissing and
ebullition ceased, and then leaving the fluid Mixture for a good while to
coagulate, (which it did very slowly,) I found it at length to shoot into
saline Chrystals, which though they were not of the figure of Nitre, did yet,
by their inflammability and their bigness, sufficiently argue, that there had
been a Conjunction made betwixt the Nitrous spirit, and a considerable
proportion of Alkaly.

I considered also, that it might be suspected, that in our Experiment it was the
Nitrous Corpuscles of the Aqua fortis, that, lodging themselves in the little
rooms deserted by the saline Corpuscles of the Sea Salt, that passed over into
the Receiver, had afforded this Alkaly; as common Saltpeter, being handled
after such a manner, would leave in the Crucible a fixed or Alkalizate Salt.
But to this I answer, that as the Sea Salt, which was not driven over by so
mild a Distillation, and seemed much a greater part then that which had passed
over, was far from being of an Alkalizate nature: so the Nitrous Corpuscles,
that are presumed to have stayed behind, were whilst they composed the spirit
of Nitre, of an highly volatile and acid Nature, and consequently of a nature
directly opposite to that of Alkalys; and if by the addition of any other
substance, that were no more Alkalizate then Sea Salt, an Alkaly could be
obtained out of spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis, the Producibleness of an Alkaly
out of Bodies of another nature might be rightly thence inferred: so that
however, it appears, that by the intervention of our Experiment, two
Substances, that were formerly acid, are turned into one, that is manifestly of
an Alkalizate Nature, which is That we would here evince.

Perhaps it may ( Pyrophilus) be worth while to subjoyn; That to prosecute the
Experiment by inverting it, we drew two parts of strong spirit of Salt from one
of purified Nitre; but did not observ^ the remaining Body to be any thing near
so considerably changed as the Sea Salt, from which we had drawn the spirit of
Nitre; since though the spirit of Salt, that came over, did (as we expected)
bring over so many of the Corpuscles of the Nitre, that, being heated, it would
readily enough dissolve foliated Gold; yet the Salt, that remained in the
Retort, being put upon quick Coals, did flash away with a vehement and
halituous flame, very like that of common Nitre.

Experiment VI.
I Come now ( Pyrophilus) to an Experiment, which, though in some things it be
of kin to that which I have already taught you, concerning the changing of
Sea Salt by Aqua fortis, will yet afford us diverse other instances, to show,
how upon the change of Texture in Bodies, there may arise diverse new Qualities,
especially of that sort, which, because they are chiefly produced by Chemistry,
and are wont to be considered by Chemists, if not by Them only, may in some
sense be called Chemical.

The Body, which, partly whilst we were preparing it, and partly when we had
prepared it, afforded us these various Phenomenon, either is the same that
Glauberus means by his Sal Mirabilis, or at least seems to be very like it: and
whether it be the same or no, its various and uncommon Properties make it very
fit to have a place allowed it in this Treatise. Though of the many Trials I
made with it, I can at present find no more among my loose Papers, then that
following part of it, that I wrote some years ago to an Ingenious Friend, who I
know will not be displeased, if, to save my self some time, and the trouble of
Examining my Memory, I annex the following Transcript of it.

[To give you a more particular account of what I writ to you from Oxford of my
Trials about Glauber's Salt, though I dare not say, that I have made the self
same Thing, which he calls his Sal Mirabilis, because he has described it so
darkly and ambiguously, that it is not easy to know with any certainty what he
means; yet whether or no I have not made Salt, that, as far as I have yet tried
it, agrees well enough with what he delivers of His, and therefore is like to
prove either his Sal mirabilis, or almost as good a one, I shall leave you to
judge by this short Narrative.

The strange things that the Industrious Glauber's Writings have invited Men to
expect from his Sal mirabilis, in case he be indeed possessed of such a thing,
and the Enquiries of diverse Eminent Men, who would fain learn of me, what I
thought of its Reality and Nature, invited me, the next Opportunity I got, to
take into my hands his Pars altera Miraculi Mundi, whose Title you know
promises a Description of this Sal Artis mirificum, as he is pleased to call
it. But, I confess, I did not read it near all over, because a great part of it
is but a Transcription of several entire Chapters out of Paracelsus, and I
perceived, that much of the rest did, according to the custom or Chemical
Writings, more concern the Author, then the subject; wherefore looking upon his
process of making his sal mirabilis, I soon perceived he had no mind to make it
common, since he only bids us upon two parts of common Salt dissolved in
common Water, to pour A, without telling us what that A is, wherefore reading
on in the same process, and finding that he tells us, that with B (which he
likewise explaines not at all, nor determines the quantity of it) one may make
an Aqua fortis, it presently called into my mind, That some Years before,
having had Occasion to make many Trials, mentioned in other Tracts of mine,
with Oil of Vitriol and Salt petre, I did, among other things, make a red
spirit of Nitre, by the help only of Oil of Vitriol; remembering This (I say) I
resorted to one of my Carneades's Dialogues, See the Skeptical Chemist.
and reviewing that Experiment, as I have set it down, I concluded, That though
I had not dissolved the Salt petre in Water, as Glauber does his common Salt;
yet since, on the other side, I made use of external fire, 'twas probable I
might this way also get a Nitrous spirit, though not so strong. And though by
calling the Liquor, that must make an Aqua fortis B, whereas he had called
that, which is to make his spirit of Salt and sal mirabilis, A, he seemed
plainly to make them differing things, yet relying on the Experiment I had
made, and putting to a solution of Nitre as much of the Oil of Vitriol as I had
taken last, though That be double the quantity he prescribes for the making of
his Sal mirabilis, I obtained, out of a low glass Body and Head placed in
Sand, an indifferent good Spiritus Nitri, that even before Rectification would
readily enough dissolve Silver, though it were diluted with as much of the
common Water, wherein Saltpeter had been dissolved, as amounted at least to
double or treble the weight of the Nitrous parts; the remaining Matter, being
kept in the fire till it was dry, afforded us a Salt easily reducible (by
Solution in fair Water and Coagulation) into Chrystalline Grains, of a nature
very differing both from crude Nitre, and from fixed Nitre, and from Oil of
Vitriol. For it coagulated into pretty big and well shaped Grains, which, you
know, fixed Nitre and other Alkalizate Salts are not wont to do; and these
Grains were not like the Chrystals of Saltpeter it self, long and
Hexaedrical, but of another figure, not easy nor necessary to be here
described.

Besides, this Vitriolate Nitre (if I may so call it) would not easily, if at
all, flow in the Air, as fixed Nitre is wont to do. Moreover, it was easily
enough fusible by heat, whereas fixed Nitre does usually exact a vehement Fire
for its Fusion; and though crude Saltpeter also melts easily, yet to satisfy
you how differing a substance this of ours was from That, we cast quick Coals
into the Crucible, without being at all able to kindle it. Nay, and when, for
further Trial, we threw in some Sulphur also, though it did flame away it
self, yet did it not seem to kindle the Salt, that was hot enough to kindle It;
much less did it flash, as Sulphur is wont on such occasions to make Saltpeter
do. Add to all this, That a parcel of this white substance, being, without
Brimstone, made to flow for a while in a Crucible, with a bit of Charcoal for
it to work upon, grew manifestly and strongly sented of Sulphur, and acquired
an Alkalizate Taste, so that it seemed almost a Coal of fire upon the Tongue, if
it were licked before it imbibed any of the Aires moisture, and (which many
perhaps will, though I do not, think stranger) obtained also a very red color;
which recalled to my mind, that Glauber mentions such a Change observable in
his Salt, made of common Salt, upon whose Account he is pleased to call such a
substance his Carbunculus.

Being invited by this success to try, whether I could make his Sal mirabilis,
notwithstanding his intimating, as I lately told you, that it is done with a
differing Menstruum from that, wherewith the Saltpeter is to be wrought upon;
I observed, that where he points at a way of making his Salt in quantity
without breaking the Vessels, he prescribes, that the Materials be distilled in
Vessels of pure Silver; whence I conjectured, that 'twas not Aqua fortis, or
spirit of Nitre, that he employed to open his Sea Salt: and that consequently,
since common spirit of Salt was too weak to effect so great a Change, as the
Experiment requires, 'twas very probable, that he employed Oil of Sulphur, or
of Vitriol, which will scarce at all fret unalloy'd Silver. And however I
concluded, that whatsoever the Event should prove, it could not but be worth
the While to try, what Operation such a Menstruum would have upon Sea Salt,
as I was sure had such a notable one upon saltpeter. And I remember, that
formerly making some Experiments about the differing manners of Dissolution of
the same Concrete by several Liquors, I found, that Oil of Vitriol dissolves
Sea Salt in a very odd way, (which you will find mentioned among my
promiscuous Experiments,) wherefore pouring, upon a solution of Bay Salt, made
in but a moderate proportion of Water, Oil of Vitriol to the full Weight of the
dry Salt, and abstracting the Liquor in a Glass Cucurbite placed in Sand, I
obtained, without stress of fire, besides phlegm, good store of a Liquor,
which, by the Smell and Taste, seemed to be spirit of Salt. And to satisfy my
self the better, mingling a little of it with some of the spirit of Nitre
lately mentioned, I found the mixture, even without the Assistance of Heat, to
dissolve crude Gold. And having, for further Trials sake, poured some of it
upon spirit of fermented Urine, till the Affusion ceased to produce any
Conflict, and having afterward gently evaporated away the superfluous
moisture, there did, as I expected, shoot, in the remaining Liquor, a Salt
figured like Combs and Feathers, thereby disclosing it self to be much of the
nature of Sal Armoniack, such as I elsewhere relate my having made, by mingling
spirit of Urine with spirit of common Salt, made the ordinary way.]

This (Pyrophilus) is all I can find at present of that Account, of which I
hoped to have found much more; but you will be the more unconcerned, for my not
adding diverse other things, that, I remember, I tried, as well before and
after the vvriting the above transscrib'd Paper, (as particularly, that I found
the Experiment sometimes to succeed not ill, when I distilled the Oil of
Vitriol and Sea Salt together, without the intervention of Water, (whereby much
time was saved,) and also when I employed Oil of Sulphur, made with a Glass
Bell, in stead of Oil of Vitriol,) if I inform You, that afterward I found,
that Glauber himself, in some of his subsequent pieces, had delivered more
intelligibly the Way of making what he, without altogether so great a Brag, as
most think, calls his Sal mirabilis, (which yet some very ingenious Readers of
his Writings have come to Us to teach them,) and that those Experiments of his
about it, which I was able to make succeed, (for some I was not, and some I
did not think fit to try) you will find, together with those of my Own, in more
proper places of other Papers. Only, to apply what has been above related to
my present purpose, I must not here pretermit a couple of Observations.

And first we may take notice of the power, that Mixtures, though they seem but
very slight, and consist of the smallest number of ingredients, may, if they
make great changes of Texture, have, in altering the Nature and Qualities of
the compounding Bodies. For in our (above recited) case, though Sea Salt be a
Body considerably fixed, requires a naked Fire to be elevated even by the help
of copious additaments of beaten Bricks, or Clay, etc. to keep it from Fusion,
yet the saline Corpuscles are distilled over in a moderate Fire of Sand, whilst
the Oil of Vitriol, by whose intervention they acquire this volatility, though
it be not (like the other) a Gross or (as the same Chemist speaks) corporeal
salt, but a Liquor, that has been already distilled, is yet, by the same
operation, so fixed, as to stay behind, not only in the Retort, but, as I have
sometimes purposely tried, in much considerabler heats then That needs in this
Experiment be exposed to. Nor only is the oil of Vitriol made thus far fixed,
but it is otherwise also no less changed. For when the remaining Salt has been
exposed to a competent heat, that it may be very dry and white, to be sure of
which, I several times do, when the Distillation is ended, keep the remaining
Mass (taken out of the Retort and beaten) in a Crucible among quick coals, you
shall have a considerable quantity (perhaps near as much as the Sea Salt You
first employed) of a Substance, which, though not insipid, has not at all the
taste of Sea Salt, or any other pungent one, and much less the highly corrosive
acidity of Oil of Vitriol.

And the mention of this substance leads me to the second particular I intended
to take notice of, which is a Phenomenon to confirm what I formerly
intimated, That notwithstanding the regular and exquisite figures of some
Salts, they may, by the addition of other Bodies, be brought to constitute
Chrystals of very differing, and yet of curious, shapes. For if You dissolve
the hitherto mentioned Caput mortuum of Sea salt (after You have made it very
dry, and freed it from all pungency of Taste) in a sufficient quantity of fair
water, and, having filtrated the solution, suffer the dissolved Body leisurely
to coagulate, You will probably obtain, as I have often done, Chrystals of a
far greater Transparency, then the Cubes wherein Sea salt is wont to shoot, and
of a shape far differing from theirs, though oftentimes no less Curious then
that of those Cubes; and, which makes mainely for my present purpose, I have
often observed those finely figured Chrystals to differ as much in shape from
one another, as from the Grains of common Salt. And indeed I must not, on this
occasion, conceal from You, that whether it be to be imputed to the peculiar
Nature of Sea salt, or (which I judge much more probable) to the great
disparities to be met with in Liquors, that do all of them pass for Oil of
Vitriol, whether (I say) it be to this, or to some other cause, that the Effect
is to be imputed, I have found my Attempts, to make the best sort of Sal
mirabilis, subject to so much incertainty, that though I have diverse times
succeeded in them, I have found so little Uniformity in the success, as made me
reckon this Experiment amongst Contingent ones, and almost weary of meddling
with it.

Experiment VII. Though this VII. Experiment, being considerable and very
pertinent, the Author thought fit to mention it, such as it is here delivered,
when he writ but to a private friend; yet, after he was induced to publish
these Papers, it was the (now raging) Plague, which drove him from the
Accommodations requisite to his purpose, that frustrated the Design he had of
first repeating that part of the Experiment, which treats of the Destruction of
Gold: for as for that part, which teaches the Volatilization of it, he had
tried That often enough before.

I Remember ( Pyrophilus) I once made an Experiment, which, if I had had the
Opportunity to repeat, and had done so with the like success, I should be
tempted to look upon it, though not as a Lucriferous Experiment, (for it is the
quite contrary,) yet as so Luciferous a one, as, how much soever it may serve
to recommend Chemistry it self, may no less displease Envious Chemists, who
will be troubled, both that one, who admits not their Principles, should devise
such a thing, and that having found it, he should not (Chemist like) keep it
secret.

But to give you a plain and naked Account of this matter, that you may be able
the better to judge of it, and, if You please, to repeat it, I will freely tell
You, That supposing all Metals, as well as other Bodies, to be made of one
Catholic Matter common to them all, and to differ but in the shape, size,
motion or rest, and texture of the small parts they consist of, from which
Affections of Matter, the Qualities, that difference particular Bodies, result,
I could not see any impossibility in the Nature of the Thing, that one kind of
Metal should be transmuted into another; (that being in effect no more, then
that one Parcel of the Universal Matter, wherein all Bodies agree, may have a
Texture produced in it, like the Texture of some other Parcel of the Matter
common to them both.)

And having first supposed this, I further considered, That in a certain
Menstruum, which, according to the vulgar Chemists doctrine, must be a
worthless Liquor, according to my apprehension there must be an extraordinary
efficacy in reference to Gold, not only to dissolve, and otherwise alter it,
but to injure the very Texture of that supposedly immutable Metal.

The Menstruum then I chose to try whether I could not dissolve Gold with, is
made by pouring on the rectified oil of the Butter of Antimony as much strong
spirit of Nitre, as would serve to praecipitate out of it all the Bezoarticum
Minerale, and then with a good smart Fire distilling off all the Liquor, that
would come over, and (if need be) Cohobating it upon the Antimonial powder. For
though diverse Chemists, that make this Liquor, throw it away, upon Presumption,
that, because of the Ebullition, that is made by the Affusion of the spirit to
the Oil, and the consequent precipitation of a copious Powder, the Liquors have
mutually destroyed or disarmed each other; yet my Notions and Experience of the
Nature of some such Mixtures invites me to prize this, and give it the name of
Menstruum per acutum.

Having then provided a sufficient quantity of this Liquor, (for I have
observed that Gold ordinarily requires a far more copious Solvent then Silver,)
we took a quantity of the best Gold we could get, and melted it with 3 or 4
times its weight of Copper, which Metal we choose rather then that which is
more usual among the Refiners, Silver, that there may be the less suspicion,
that there remained any Silver with the Gold, after their separation; this
Mixture we put into good Aqua fortis, or spirit of Nitre, that all the Copper
being dissolved, the Gold might be left pure and finely powdered at the bottom;
this Operation with Aqua fortis being accounted the best way of refining Gold
that is yet known, and not subject, like Lead, to leave any Silver with it,
since the Aqua fortis takes up that Metal. And for greater security, we gave
the Powder to an Ancient Chemist, to boil some more of the Menstruum upon it,
without communicating to him our Design. This highly refined Gold being, by a
competent degree of heat, brought, as is usual, to its Native Color and
Luster, we put to it a large Proportion of the Menstruum peracutum, (to which
we have sometimes found cause to add a little spirit of Salt, to promote the
Solution,) wherein it dissolves slowly and quietly enough; and there remained
at the bottom of the Glass a pretty quantity (in show, though not in weight)
of white Powder, that the Menstruum would not touch, and, if I much misremember
not, we found it as indissoluble in Aqua Regis too. The Solution of Gold being
abstracted, and the Gold again reduced into a Body, did, upon a second
Solution, yield more of the white Powder, but not (if I remember aright) so
much as at the first; now having some little quantity of this Powder, it was
easy with Borax or some other convenient Flux, to melt it down into a Metal,
which Metal we found to be white like Silver, and yielding to the Hammer, if
not to a less pressure, and some of it, being dissolved in Aqua fortis or
spirit of Nitre, did, by the odious Bitterness it produced, sufficiently
confirm us in our Expectation, to find it true Silver.

I doubt not, but you will demand ( Pyrophilus) why I did not make other Trials
with this Factitious Metal, to see in how many other Qualities I could verify
it to be Silver, but the quantity I recovered after Fusion was so small, some
of it perhaps being left either in the Flux, or in the Crucible, that I had not
wherewithal to make many Trials, and being well enough satisfied by the
visible Properties, and the Taste peculiar to Silver, both that it was a Metal,
and rather Silver then any other, I was willing to keep the rest of it for a
while, as a Rarity, before I made further Trials with it; but was so
unfortunate, as with it to loose it in a little Silver Box, where I had
something of more Value, and possibly of more Curiosity.

You will also ask, why I repeated not the Experiment? to which I shall answer,
that, besides that one may easily enough fail in making the Menstruum fit for
my purpose, I did, when I had another Opportunity, (for I was long without it,)
make a Second Attempt; and having, according to the above mentioned Method,
brought it so far, that there remained nothing but the melting of the White
Powder into Silver, when having washed it, I had laid it upon a piece of white
Paper by the fires side to dry, being suddenly called out of my Chamber, an
ignorant Maid, that in the mean time came to dress it up, unluckily swept this
Paper, as a foul one, into the fire: which Discouragement, together with
multiplicity of Occasions, have made me suspend the Pursuit of this Experiment,
till another Opportunity. But in the mean time I was confirmed in some part of
my Conjecture by these Things.

The first, by finding, that with some other Menstruums which I tried, and even
with good Aqua Regis it self, I could obtain from the very best Gold, I
dissolved in them, some little quantity of such a White Powder, as I was
speaking of; but in so very small a proportion to the dissolved Gold, that I
had never enough of it at once, to think it worth prosecuting Trials with.

The other was this. That a very Experienced Mineralist, whom I had acquainted
with part of what I had done, assured me, that an eminently Learned and
Judicious person, that he named to me, had, by dissolving Gold in a certain
kind of Aqua Regis, and after by reduction of it into a Body, redissolving it
again, and repeating this Operation very often, reduced a very great, if not
much the greater, part of an Ounce of Gold into such a White Powder.

And the Third thing, that confirmed me, was, the Proof given me by some Trials
that I purposely made; That the Menstruum peracutum I employed, had a notable
Operation upon Gold, and would perform some things (one of which we shall by
and by mention,) which Judicious Men, that play the great Critics in
Chemistry, do not think feasible: so that there seems no greater cause to
doubt, that the above mentioned Silver was really obtained out of the pure
Gold, then only this, That Men have hitherto so often in vain attempted to
make a real Transmutation of Metals, (for the better or for the worse,) and to
destroy the most fixed and compacted Body of Gold, that the one is looked upon
as an Unpracticable Thing, and the other as an Indestructible Metal.

To reflect then a little upon what we have been relating, if we did not
mistake nor impose upon our selves, (I say, upon our Selves, the Project being
our own, and pursued without acquainting any body with our Aim,) it may afford
us very considerable Consequences of great moment

And in the First place, it seems probably reducible from hence, that however
the Chemists are wont to talk irrationally enough of what they call Tinctura
Auri, and Anima Auri; yet, in a sober sense, some such thing may be admitted, I
say, some such thing, because as on the one hand, I would not countenance their
wild Fancies about their matters, some of them being as unintelligible, as the
Peripateticks substantial Forms, so, on the other hand, I would not readily
deny, but that there may be some more noble and subtle Corpuscles, being duly
conjoined with the rest of the Matter, whereof Gold consists, may qualify that
Matter to look Yellow, to resist Aqua fortis, and to exhibit those other
peculiar Phenomenon, that discriminate Gold from Silver, and yet these Noble
parts may either have their Texture destroyed by a very piercing Menstruum, or
by a greater congruity with its Corpuscles, then with those of the remaining
part of the Gold, may stick more closer to the former, and by their means be
extricated and drawn away from the latter. As when (to explain my meaning by a
gross Example) the Corpuscles of Sulphur and Mercury do, by a strict Coalition,
associate themselves into the Body we call Vermilion, though these will rise
together in Sublimatory Vessels, without being divorced by the fire, and will
act, in many cases, as one Physical Body: yet it is known enough among Chemists,
That if You exquisitely mix with it a due proportion of Salt of Tartar, the
parts of the Alkaly will associate themselves more strictly with those of the
Sulphur, then these were before associated with those of the Mercury, whereby
You shall obtain out of the Cinnabar, which seemed intensely red, a real
Mercury, that will look like fluid Silver. And this Example prompts me to mind
You, ( Pyrophilus) That, at the beginning of this Paragraph, I said no more,
then that the Consequence, I have been deducing, might probably be inferred
from the Premises. For as it is not absurd to think, that our Menstruum may have
a particular Operation upon some Noble, and (if I may so call them) some
Tinging parts of the Gold, so it is not impossible, but that the Yellowishness
of that rich Metal may proceed not from any particular Corpuscles of that
Color, but from the Texture of the Metal; as in our lately mentioned Example,
the Cinnabar was highly Red, though the Mercury, it consisted of, were
Silver-coloured, and the Sulphur but a pale Yellow; and consequently, the
Whiteness, and other Changes, produced in the new Metal we obtained, may be
attributed not to the Extraction of any tinging Particles, but to a Change of
Texture, whereon the Color, as well as other Properties of the Gold did
depend. But That, which made me unwilling to reject the way, I first proposed,
of explicating this Change of Color, was, That a Mineralist of great Veracity
has several times assured me, that a known Person in the Relators Country, the
Netherlands, got a great deal of Money by the way of Extracting a Blew Tincture
out of Copper, so as to leave the Body White; adding, that he himself, having
procured from a friend (to satisfy his Curiosity) a little of the Menstruum,
(whose chief Ingredients his friend communicated to him, and he to me,) he
did, as he was directed, dissolve Copper in common Aqua fortis, to reduce it
into small parts, and then having kept the Calx of the Powder of this Copper
for some hours in this Menstruum, he perceived, that the clear Liquor, which
was weak in Taste, did not dissolve the Body of the Metal, but only extract a
blew Tincture, leaving behind a very White Powder, which he quickly reduced by
Fusion into a Metal of the same Color, which he found as Malleable as before.
Which I the less wonder at, because the Experienced Chemist Johannes Agricola,
in his Dutch Annotations upon Poppius, mentions the making of a White and
Malleable Copper in good quantities upon his own knowledge; and that of such a
kind of Copper, I have with pleasure made Trial, I elsewhere relate. But of
these matters we may possibly say more in a convenient place.

The Second thing, that seems deducible from our former Narrative, is, That
however most (for I say not all) of the Judiciousest among the Chemists
themselves, as well as among their Adversaries, believe Gold too fixed and
permanent a Body to be changeable by Art, insomuch that it is a received Axiom
amongst many Eminent Spagyrists, that facilius est aurum construere, quam
destruere; yet Gold it self is not absolutely indestructible by Art, since Gold
being acknowledged to be an Homogeneous Metal, a part of it was, by our
Experiment, really changed into a Body, that was either true Silver, or at
least a new kind of Metal very differing from Gold. And since it is generally
confessed, that among all the Bodies we are allowed to observe near enough, and
to try our skill upon, there is not any, whose Form is more strictly united to
its Matter then that of Gold, and since also the Operation, by which the White
Powder was produced, was made only by a corrosive Liquor, without violence of
Fire, it seems at least a very probable Inference, That there is not any Body
of so constant and durable a Nature, but that, notwithstanding its persisting
inviolated in the midst of diverse sensible Disguises, its Texture, and
consequently its Nature may be really destroyed, in case this more powerful and
appropriated Agent be brought by a due manner of Application to work upon the
Body, whose Texture is to be destroyed.

But this Matter we elsewhere handle, and therefore shall now proceed to the
Last and chief Consectaries of our Experiment.

Thirdly then, it seems deducible from what we have delivered, that there may
be a real Transmutation of one Metal into another, even among the perfectest
and noblest Metals, and that effected by Factitious Agents in a short time,
and, if I may so speak, after a Mechanical manner. I speak not here of
Projection, whereby one part of an Aurisick Powder is said to turn I know not
how many 100 or 1000 parts of an ignobler Metal into Silver or Gold, not only
because, though Projection includes Transmutation, yet Transmutation is not all
one with Projection, but far easier then it: but chiefly because it is not in
this Discourse you are to expect what I can say, and do think, concerning what
Men call the Philosophers Stone. To restrain my self then to the Experiment we
are considering, that seems to teach us, that, at least among inanimate Bodies,
the noblest and constantest sort of Forms are but peculiar Contrivances of the
Matter, and may, by Agents, that work but Mechanically, that is, by locally
moving the parts, and changing their Sizes, Shape, or Texture, be generated and
destroyed; since we see, that in the same parcel of Metalline Matter, which a
little before was true and pure Gold, by having some few of its parts
withdrawn, and the rest transposed, or otherwise altered in their structure,
(for there appears no token, that the Menstruum added any thing to the Matter
of the produced Silver,) or by both these ways together, the Form of Gold, or
that peculiar Modification which made it Yellow, indissoluble in Aqua fortis,
etc. is abolished, and from the new Texture of the same Matter, there arises
that new Form, or Convention of Accidents, from which we call a Metal Silver;
and since Ours was not only dissoluble in Aqua fortis, but exhibited that
excessively bitter Taste, which is peculiar to Silver, there seems no necessity
to think, that there needs a distinct Agent, or a particular Action of a
Substantial Form, to produce in a Natural Body the most peculiar and
discriminating Properties. For it was but the same Menstruum, devoid of
Bitterness, that, by destroying the Texture of Gold, changed it into another,
upon whose account it acquired at once both Whiteness in color,
Dissolublenesse in Aqua fortis, and aptness to compose a bitter Body with it,
and I know not how many other new Qualities are attributed.

I know it is obvious to object, that it is no very thrifty way of Transmutation,
instead of Exalting Silver to the condition of Gold, to degrade Gold to the
condition of Silver. But a Transmutation is nevertheless more or less real,
for being or not being Lucriferous, and since That may enrich a Brain, that may
impoverish a Purse, I must look upon your humor as that of an Alchymist,
rather then of a Philosopher, if I durst not expect that the Instructiveness in
such an Experiment will suffice to recommend it to You. And if I could have
satisfied my self, that good Authors are not mistaken about what they affirm of
the Transmutation of Iron into Copper, though, the Charge and Pains considered,
it be a matter of no Gain, yet I should have thought it an Experiment of great
Worth, as well as the Transmutation of Silver into Gold. For it is no small
matter to remove the Bounds, that Nature seems very industriously to have set
to the Alterations of Bodies; especially among those Durable and almost
Immortal Kinds, in whose Constancy to their first Forms, Nature seems to have
designed the showing her self invincible by Art.

I should here ( Pyrophilus) conclude what I have to say of the Experiment,
that has already so long entertained us, by recommending to You the repetition
of what I had not the Opportunity to try above once from end to end, were it
not, that I remember something I said about the Menstruum peracutum, may seem
to import a Promise of communicating to You something of the Efficacy of that
Liquor upon Gold. And therefore partly for that reason, and partly to make
sure, that the present Discourse shall not be uninstructive to You, I would
add, That though not only the generality of Refiners and Mineralists, but
diverse of the most Judicious Cultivators of Chemistry it self, hold Gold to be
so fixed a Body, that it can as little be Volatiliz'd as Destroyed, and that
upon This ground, that the processes of subliming or distilling Gold to be met
with in diverse Chemical Books, are either mystical, or unpracticable, or
fallacious, (in which Opinion I think them not much mistaken;) though This, I
say, be the persuasion even of some critical Chemists, yet, upon the just
Expectation I had to find my Menstruum very operative upon Gold, I attempted
and found a way to Elevate it to a considerable height, but far less proportion
of Additament, then one that were not fully persuaded of the possibility of
Elevating Gold; and though I have indeed found, by two or three several
Liquors, (especially the Aqua pugilum, aenigmatically described by Basilius,)
that the Fixedness of Gold is not altogether invincible, yet I found the Effect
of these much inferior to that of our Mixture, touching which I shall relate to
You the easiest and shortest, though not perhaps the very best, manner of
employing it.

We take then the finest Gold we can procure, and having either Granulated it,
or Laminated it, we dissolve it in a moderate heat, with a sufficient quantity
of the Menstruum peracutum, and having carefully decanted the Solution into a
conveniently sized Retort, we very gently in a Sand-Furnace distill off the
Menstruum, and if we have a mind to elevate the more Gold, we either pour back
upon the remaining substance the same Menstruum, or, which is better,
redissolve it with fresh; the Liquor being abstracted, we urge the remaining
Matter by degrees of Fire, and in no stronger a one, then what may easily be
given in a Sand Furnace, a considerable quantity of the Gold will be Elevated
to the upper part of the Retort, and either fall down in a Golden colored
Liquor into the Receiver, or, which is more usual, fasten it self to the Top
and Neck in the form of a Yellow or Reddish Sublimate, and sometimes we have
had the Neck of the Retort enriched with good store of large thin Chrystals,
not Yellow but Red, and most like Rubies, very glorious to behold; (though even
these being taken out, and suffered to lie a due time in the open Air would
loose their saline Form, and run per Deliquium into a Liquor.) Nor see I any
cause to doubt, but that by the Reaffusions of fresh Menstruum upon the dry
Calx of Gold, that stays behind, the whole Body of the Metal may be easily
enough made to pass through the Retort, though, for a certain reason, I forbore
to prosecute the Experiment so far.

But here (Pyrophilus) I think my self obliged to interpose a Caution, as well
as to give you a further Information about our present Experiment. For first I
must tell You, that though even Learned Chemists think it a sufficient proof of
a true Tincture, that not only the color of the Concrete will not be
separated by Distillation, but the extracting Liquor will pass over tincted
into the Receiver; yet this supposition, though it be not unworthy of able men,
may, in some cases, deceive them. And next I must tell You, that whereas I
scruple not, in several Writings of mine, to teach, That the Particles of solid
and consistent Bodies are not always unfit to help to make up Fluid ones, I
shall now venture to say further, That even a Liquor, made by Distillation, how
volatile soever such Liquors may be thought, may in part consist of Corpuscles
of the most compact and ponderous Bodies in the World.

Now to manifest Both these things, and to show You withal the Truth of what I
elsewhere teach, That some Bodies are of so durable a Texture, that their
Minute parts will retain their own Nature, notwithstanding variety of
Disguizes, which may impose, not only upon other men, but upon Chemists
themselves; I will add, that to prosecute the Experiment, I dropped into the
Yellow Liquor afforded me by the Elevated Gold, a convenient quantity of clean
running Mercury, which was immediately colored with a Golden colored Filme,
and shaking it to and fro, till the Menstruum would guild no more, when I
supposed the Gold to be all praecipitated upon the Mercury, I decanted the
clarifi'd Liquor, and mixing the remaining Amalgam (if I may so call it) of
Gold and Mercury, with several times its Weight of Borax, I did, as I expected,
by melting them in a small Crucible, easily recover the scattered Particles of
the Elevated Metal, reduced into one little Mass or Bead of Corporal or Yellow
(though perhaps somewhat palish) Gold. But yet whether the Gold, that tinged
the Menstruum, might not, before the Metal was reduced or praecipitated out of
it, have been more succesfully applied to some considerable purposes, then a
bare Solution of Gold, that has never been Elevated, may be a Question, which
I must not in this place determine, and some other things that I have tried
about our Elevated Gold, I have elsewhere taken notice of; Only this further
Use I shall here make of this Experiment, that, whereas I speak in other
Papers, as if there may be a volatile Gold in some Oars, and other Minerals,
where the Mine-men do not find any thing of that Metal, I mention such a thing
upon the Account of the past Experiment and some Analogies. And therefore as I
would not be understood to adopt what every Chemical Writer is pleased to
fancy concerning Volatile Gold; so I think Judicious men, that are not so well
acquainted with Chemical Operations, are sometimes too forward to condemn the
Chemists Observations; not because their Opinions have nothing of Truth, but
because they have had the ill Luck not to be warily enough proposed. And to
give an instance in the Opinion, that some Minerals have a Volatile Gold, (and
the like may be said of Silver,) I think I may give an Account, rational
enough, of my admitting such a thing, by explicating it thus: That as in our
Experiment, though after the almost total abstraction of the Menstruum, the
remaining Body being true Gold, and consequently, in its own Nature, fixed, yet
it is so strictly associated with some volatile saline Particles, that these,
being pressed by the fire, carry up along with them the Corpuscles of the Gold,
which may be reduced into a Mass by the admistion of Borax, or some other Body
fitted to divorce the Corpuscles of the Metal from those, that would Elevate
them, and to unite them into Grains, too big and ponderous to be sublimed; so
in some Mineral Bodies there may be pretty store of Corpuscles of Gold, so
minute, and so blended with the unfix'd Particles, that they will be carried up
together with them by so vehement a heat, as is wont to be employed to bring
Oars, and even Metalline masses to Fusion. And yet it is not impossible, but that
these Corpuscles of Gold, that in ordinary Fusions fly away, may be detained
and recovered by some such proper additament, as may either work upon, and (to
use a Chemical Term) mortify the other parts of the Mass, without doing so
upon the Gold; or by associating with the Volatile and ignobler Minerals, some
way or other disable them to carry away the Gold with them, as they otherwise
may do; or by its Fixedness and Cognation of Nature make the dispersed Gold
imbody with it. On which Occasion I remember, that a very Ingenious Man,
desiring my Thoughts upon an Experiment, which he and some others, that were
present at it, looked upon as very strange, namely, that some good Gold,
having, for a certain Trial, been cuppell'd with a great deal of Lead, instead
of being advanced in Color, as in Goodness, was grown manifestly paler then
before; my Conjecture being, That so great a Proportion of Lead might contain
diverse particles of volatile Silver, which, meeting with the fixed Body of the
Gold, by incorporating therewith, was detained, was much confirmed by finding,
upon Enquiry, that the Gold, instead of loosing its Weight, had it considerably
increased; which did much better answer my Ghess, then it did their
Expectation, that made the Experiment, and were much surpised at the Event.
But this is no fit place to prosecute the consideration of the Additaments,
that may be used to unite and fix the Particles of the nobler Metals, blended
with volatile Bodies; though perhaps what has been said may afford some Hint
about the matter, as well as some Apology for the Chemical Term, Volatile Gold:
the possibility of which, I presume, we have evinced by the latter part of this
Experiment, (in which I am sorry I cannot remember the proportion of the
remaining Salts, that were able to Elevate the Gold;) for That I have several
times made, and therefore dare much more confidently rely on it, then I can
press You to do on the former part, (about the Transmutation, or at least
Destruction of Gold,) till You or I shall have Opportunity to repeat that Trial.

Experiment VIII.
THough ( Pyrophilus) the Experiment, I am about to subjoin, may, at the first
glance, seem only to concern the production of Tastes, and be indeed one of the
principal, that I devised concerning that subject, and that belongs to the
Notes I have made about those Qualities: yet if You do not of your self take
notice of it, I may hereafter have Occasion to show You, that there are some
particulars in this Experiment, that are applicable to more then Tastes. And
since I had once thoughts (however since discouraged by the difficulties of the
Attempt) to make my Notes extend even to diverse Qualities, which the operations
of Chemists, and the practice of Physicians have made men take notice of; (such
as the powers of corroding, praecipitating, fixing, purging, blistering,
stupifying, etc-) I presume You will not dislike, that one, who had thoughts to
say something even of Chemical and of Medical Qualities, if I may so call them,
should give You here an Experiment or two about more obvious, though
particular, Affections of Bodies, when there are several things in the
Experiment, that may be of a general import to the Doctrine of the Origin of
Qualities and Forms.

We took then an Ounce of refined Silver, and having dissolved it in Aqua
fortis, we suffered it to shoot into Chrystals, which being dried, we found to
exceed the weight of the Silver by several Drachms, which accrued upon the
concoagulation of the acid Salts, that had dissolved, and were united to the
Metal. These Chrystals we put into a Retort, and distilled them in Sand, with
almost as great a heat as we could give in a hammered Iron Furnace, wherein the
Operation was made; but there came over only a very little sowrish Phlegm with
an ill sent, wherefore the same Retort being suffered to cool, and then coated,
it was removed to another Furnace, capable of giving a far higher degree of
Heat, namely, that of a naked fire, and in this Furnace the Distillation was
pursued by the several degrees of heat, till at length the Retort came to be
red hot, and kept so for a good while; but though even by this Operation there
was very little driven over, yet That sufficiently manifested what we aimed at,
showing (namely) that a Body extremely Bitter might afford, as well as it
consisted of, good store of parts that are not at all bitter, but (which is a
very differing taste) eminently Sour. For our Receiver being taken off even when
it was cold, the contained spirit smoked out like rectified Aqua fortis, and
not only smelt and tasted like Aqua fortis, to the Annoyance of the Nose and
Tongue, but being poured upon Filings of crude Copper, it fell immediately to
corrode them with violence, making much hissing, and sending up thick fumes,
and in a trice produced, with the corroded Copper, a bluish color, like That,
which that Metal is wont to give in good Aqua fortis.

Afterward we took Minium and Aqua fortis, and made a Solution, which being
filtred and evaporated, left us a Saccharum Saturni, much like the common made
with spirit of Vinegar, then taking this sweet Vitriol of Lead, (as we
elsewhere call it) we endeavored in the formerly mentioned Sand Furnace to
drive it over in a Retort; but finding That degree of fire incompetent to force
over any thing save a little phlegmatic Liquor, we caused the Retort to be
coated, and transferred to the other Furnace, where being urged with a naked
Fire, it afforded at length a spirit somewhat more copious then the Silver had
done. This Spirit smoked in the cold Receiver as the other had, and did, like
it, rankly smell of Aqua fortis, and was so far from retaining any of the
sweetness of the Concrete that had yielded it, that it was offensively acid,
and being poured upon Minium, it did with noise and Bubbles fall upon it, and
quickly afforded us a Liquor, which being filtred, did, by its Sweetness as
well as other proofs, assure us, that there would have needed but a gentle
Evaporation (if We had leisure to make it) to obtain from it a true Sugar of
Lead; and it is remarkable, that the Concrete, which appeared White before
Distillation, remained, for the most part, behind in the Retort in the form of
a black Caput mortuum, (sometimes We have had it in a Yellowish Lump,) which
was neither at all sweet, as the Vitriol of Lead it self had eminently been,
nor at all sour, as the Liquor, distilled from it, was in a high degree, but
seemed rather insipid, and was indeed but a Calx of Lead, which the heat of the
fire had in part reduced into true and manifest Lead in the Retort it self, as
appeared by many Grains of several Sizes, that We met with in the Caput
mortuum, (the rest of which is easily enough reducible by fusion with a
convenient flux into malleable Lead it self.)

There are some Phenomenon of this Experiment, that We may elsewhere have
Occasion to take notice of; as particularly, That, notwithstanding Silver be a
Body so fixed in the fire, that it will (as it is generally known) endure the
Cuppel it self, and though in the dried Chrystals of Silver, the Salt, that
adheres to the Silver, increases the weight of the Metal but about a 4h or a 3d
part; yet this small proportion of saline Corpuscles was able to carry up so
much of that almost fixedst of Bodies, that, more then once, We have had the
inside of the Retort, to a great height, so covered over with the Metalline
Corpuscles, that the Glass seemed to be Silvered over, and could hardly, by
long scraping, be freed from the copious and closely adhering Sublimate.

But the Phenomenon, that I chiefly desire to take notice of at present, is
this, That not only Aqua fortis, being concoagulated with differing Bodies,
may produce very differing Concretes, but the same numerical Saline Corpuscles,
that, being associated with those of one Metal, had already produced a Body
eminent in one. Taste, may afterward, being freed from that Body, compose a
Liquor eminent for a very differing Taste; and after That too, being combined
with the particles of another Metal, would with them constitute a Body of a
very eminent Taste, as opposite as any one can be to both the other Tastes; and
yet these Saline Corpuscles, if, instead of this second Metal, they should be
associated with such a one as That, they are driven from, would therewith
exhibit again the first of the three mentioned Tastes. To prove all this, We took
Chrystals of refined Silver made with Aqua fortis, and though these Chrystals
be, as We often note, superlatively bitter; yet having, by a naked fire,
extorted from them what Spirit we could, and found That, as we expected,
extremely Acid, we put one part of it upon a few Filings of Silver, of which it
readily made a Solution more bitter then Gall, and the other part of the
distilled Liquor We poured upon Minium: and though, whilst it had been an
Ingredient of the Chrystals of Silver committed to Distillation, it did with
that Metal compose an excessively bitter substance, yet the same Particles,
being loosned from that Metal, and associated with those of the Lead, did with
them constitute a Solution, which by Evaporation afforded us a Saccharum
Saturni, or a Vitriol sweet as Sugar. And for further confirmation, We varied
the Experiment, having, in a naked Fire, distilled some dried Saccharum Saturni
made with Aqua fortis, the little Liquor that came over, in proportion to the
Body, that afforded it, was so strong a spirit of Nitre, that for several hours
the Receiver was filled with red Fumes; and though the smoking Liquor were
hugely sharp, yet part of it, being poured upon a piece of its own Caput
mortuum, (in which We perceived not any Taste) did at length (for it wrought
but very slowly) exhibit some little Grains of a Saccharine Vitriol, but the
other part, being put upon Filings of Silver, fell upon it immediately with
noise and store of smoke, and a while after concoagulated with part of it
(which it had dissolved) into a Salt excessively bitter.

Experiment IX.
THe Artificial Transmutation of Bodies, being as the rarest and difficultest
Production, so one of the noblest and usefullest Effects of Humane skill and
power, not only the clear Instances of it are to be diligently sought for and
prized, but even the Probabilities of effecting such an extraordinary Change of
Bodies are not to be neglected; especially, if the Version, hoped for, be to be
made betwixt Bodies of Primordial Textures, (if I may so call them,) and such
Bodies, as by the greatness of their Bulk, and by their being to be found in
most of the mixed Bodies here below, make a considerable part of those, that we
Men have the most immediately to do with. Invited by these considerations,
Pyrophilus, I shall venture to give you the Account of some Observations, and
Trials, about the Transmuting of Water into Earth, though it be not so perfect
as I Wish, and as I Hope, by Gods blessing, to make it.

The first Occasion, afforded me to do any thing about this matter, was my
being consulted by a Gentleman, (an ancient Chemist, but not at all a
Philosopher,) who relating to me how much he had (with the wonted success of
such Attempts) labored after the Grand Arcana, complained to me among other
things, that, having Occasion to employ great quantity of purified Rainwater,
he obtained from it much less then he wished of the substance that he looked
for, but a great deal of a certain whitish excrementitious Matter, which he
knew not what to make of. This gave me the Curiosity first to desire a sight of
it, in case he had not thrown it away, (which by good fortune he had not,) and
then, taking notice of the unexpected plenty, and some of the Qualities of it,
to ask him some Questions which were requisite and sufficient to persuade me,
that this Residenee came not from accidental foulness of the Water, nor of the
Vessels it was received in. This I afterward often thought of, and indeed it
might justly enough awaken some suspicions, that the little Motes, that have
been sometimes observed to appear numerous enough, in pure Rain water whilst it
is distilling, might not be merely accidental, but really produced, as well as
exhibited by the action of the Fire. I thought it then worth while to prosecute
this matter a little farther: And having put a pretty quantity of distilled
Rainwater in a clean Glass Body, and fitted it with a Head and a Receiver, I
suffered it to stand in a Digestive Furnace, till, by the gentle heat thereof,
the Water was totally abstracted, and the Vessel left dry: which being taken
out of the Sand, I found the bottom of the Glass all covered over with a white
(but not so very white) substance; which, being scraped off with a Knife,
appeared to be a fine Earth, in which I perceived no manifest Taste, and
which, in a word, by several Qualities seemed to be Earth.

This encouraged me to redistill the Rainwater in the same Glass Body, whose
Bottom, when the Water was all drawn off, afforded me more of the like Earth:
but though the Repetition of the Experiment, and my having, for greater
caution, tried it all the while in a new Glass, that had not been employed
before to other uses, confirmed me much in my conjecture, That unless it could
be proved, which I think will scarce be pretended, that so insipid a Liquor as
Rainwater should, in so gentle a heat, dissolve the most close and almost
Indestructible Body of Glass it self, (which such corrosive Menstruums as Aqua
fortis, and Aqua Regis are wont to leave unharm'd,) the Earthy powder, I
obtained from already distilled Rain water, might be a Transmutation of some
parts of the Water into that substance, yet having unhappily lost part of my
Powder, and consumed almost all the rest, (for I kept a little by me, which you
may yet see,) I should, till I had more frequently reiterated my Experiments,
(which then I had not Opportunity to do, though I had thoughts of doing it also
with Snow-water, that I had put into Chemical Glasses for that purpose, and
with liquor of melted Hail, which I had likewise provided,) and thereby also
obtained some more of this Virgin Earth (as diverse Chemists would call it) to
make farther Trials with, have retained greater suspicions, if I had not
afterward accidentally fallen into discourse of this matter with a learned
Physician, who had dealt much in Rain-vvater, but he much confirmed me in my
conjecture, by assuring me, that he had frequently found such a White Earth, as
I mentioned, in distilled Rain Water, after he had distilled the same Numerical
Liquor (carefully gathered at first) I know not how many times one after
another, adding, that he did not find (any more then I had done) any cause to
suspect, that if he had continued to redistill the same portion of Water, it
would have yielded him more Earth.

But the Odness of the Experiment still keeping me in suspense, it was not
without much delight, that afterward mentioning it to a very Ingenious Person,
whom, without his leave, I think not fit to name, well versed in Chemical
matters, and whom I suspected to have, in order to some Medicines, long wrought
upon Rain water, he readily gave me such an Account of his proceedings, as
seemed to leave little scruple about the Transmutation we have been mentioning:
for he solemnly affirmed to me, that having observed, as I had done, that
Rain-vvater would, even after a Distillation or two, afford a Terrestrial
substance, which may sometimes be seen swimming up and down in the Limpid
Liquor, he had the Curiosity, being settled and at leisure, to try how long he
could obtain this substance from the Water. And accordingly having freed Rain
Water, carefully collected, from its accidental, and as it were faeculent
Earthiness, which it will deposite at the first slow Distillation, (and
which is oftentimes colored, whereby it may be distinguished from the White
Earth made by Transmutation,) he redistill'd it in very clean Glasses, not
only 8 or 10 times, but near 200, without finding that his Liquor grevv weary
of affording him the White Earth, but rather that the Corpuscles of it did
appear far more numerous, or at least more conspicuous in the latter
Distillation, then in the former. And when I expressed my Curiosity to see
this Earth, he readily shevv'd me a pretty quantity of it, and presented me
with some, which comparing with what I had remaining of mine, I found to be
exceeding like it, save that it was more purely White, as having been, for the
main, afforded by Rain Water, that had been more frequently rectified. And to
compare this welcome Powder with That I made my self, I tried with This diverse
things, which I had before tried with my own, and (because the quantity
presented me was less inconsiderable) some others too. For I observed in this
new Powder, as I had done with my Own, that being put into an excellent
Microscope, and placed where the Sun beams might fall upon it, it appeared a
White Meal, or heap of Corpuscles so exceeding, not to say unimaginably, small,
that, in two or three choice Microscopes, both I and others had occasion to
admire it; and their extreme Littleness was much more sensibly discerned, by
mingling some few Grains of Sand amongst them, which made a Mixture that looked
like that of Pibble stones, and of the finest Flower. For our Earth, even in
the Microscope, appeared to consist of as small Particles, as the finest
Hair-powder to the naked Eye. Nor could We discern this Dust to be transparent,
though, when the Sun shined upon it, it appeared in the Microscope to have some
Particles a little glistering, which yet, appearing but in a glaring light, we
were not sure to be no deceptio visus. 2. I found, that our White Powder, being
cast into Water, would indeed for a while discolor it by somewhat Whitening
it, which is no more then Spaud will do, and the fine dust of white Marble, and
other stones, whose Corpuscles, by reason of their Minuteness, swim easily
for a while in the Water, but when it was once settled at the bottom, it
continued there undissolv'd (for ought I could perceive) for some days and
nights, as Earth would have done. 3. Having weighed a quantity of it, and put
it into a new clean Crucible, with another inverted over it for a Cover, I
placed it among quick Coals, and there kept the Crucible red hot for a pretty
while, causing the Fire afterward to be acuated with a blast of a Bellows, but
taking out the Powder, I neither found it melted, nor clotted into lumps, nor,
when I weighed it again, did I see cause to conclude that there was much of it
wasted, besides what stuck to the sides of the Crucible, and to a little Clay,
wherewith I had luted on the Cover, and which (to show you, that the Heat had
not been inconsiderable) was in several places burnt red by the vehemence of
the fire; and when I afterward kept this Powder in an open Crucible among
glowing coals, neither I, nor one that I employed to assist me, perceived it
all to smoke; and having put a little upon a quick Coal, and blown That too, I
found that which I had not blown away, to remain fixed (which some Bodies will
not do) upon quick Coals, that will endure the fire in a red hot Crucible. 4. I
found this powder to be much heavier in specie then Water. For employing a
nice pair of Gold Scales, and a Method that would be too long here to describe,
I found that this Powder weighed somevvhat (though not much) more then twice so
much common Water, as was equal to it in Bulk. And least some Corollaries,
that seem obviously contained in the common, but groundless, conceits of the
Peripateticks, about the Proportions of the Elements in Density etc. should
make you expect, that this powder ought to have been much more ponderous, I
shall add, that having had the Curiosity, which I wonder no body should have
before me, to examine the Gravity of the Earth, which seems the most Elementary
of any we have, I took some sifted Wood-ashes, which I had caused to be three
or four times boiled in a plentiful proportion of Water, to free them from
Salt, and having put them very dry into common Water, I found them but little
heavier then our newly mentioned Powder, surpassing in weight Water of the same
Bulk but twice, and a little more then a 6th part, (Water and It being very
little more then as 1 to 2 1/6.) And that you may the less doubt of this, I
will yet subjoyn, that, examining the Specific Gravity of (white) Glass it
self, I found that compact Body to be very little, if at all more then 2 times
and a half as heavy as Water of equal Bigness to it. So that the Gravity of
that Powder, which, borrowing a Chemical term, we have been calling
Virgin-Earth, being added to its Fixtness, and other Qualities, it may seem no
great impropriety of Speech to name it Earth, at least, if by Earth we mean not
the pure Elementary Earth of the Schools, which many of themselves confess not
to be found actually separate, but a Body dry, cold, ponderous, enduring the
fire, and, which is the main, irresoluble by Water and Fire into other Bodies
specifically different.

[But to return to the Guise of the Powder, when I asked this Learned man,
whether he observed the Glass he distilled in to have been fretted by the
Liquor, and whether This lost of its Substance, according as it deposited more
Powder, He answered me, (and he is a Person of unsuspected Credit,) that he
found not his Glass to have been injured by the Liquor, and that the Water
wasted (though he were careful it should not do so by Evaporation and
Transfusions) by degrees so much, that there remained, by his aestimate, but
about an 8th part of the first quantity: and though, for certain reasons, he
kept by him the Liquor last distilled, yet he doubted not, but that it might be
very nigh totally brought into Earth, since out of an Ounce of distilled
Rainwater he had already obtained near 3 quarters of an Ounce, if not more, of
the often mentioned Earth.]

These several Relations will, I suppose, persuade You, Pyrophilus, that this
Experiment is hopeful enough to be well worth your pursuing, if not that
perhaps none but such a scrupulous Person as I, would think the prosecution of
it other then superfluous. And if You do acquiesce in what has been already
done, you will, I presume, think it no mean confirmation of the Corpuscularian
Principles, and Hypotheses. For if, contrary to the Opinion that is so much in
request among the generality of modern Physicians and other Learned Men, that
the Elements themselves are transmuted into one another, and those simple and
Primitive Bodies, which Nature is presumed to have intended to be the stable
and permanent ingredients of the Bodies she compounds here below, may be
artificially destroyed, and (without the intervention of a Seminal and Plastic
power) generated or produced: if, I say, this may be done, and that by such
slight means, why may We not think, that the Changes and Metamorphoses, that
happen in other Bodies, which are acknowledged by the Moderns to be far more
liable to Alterations, may proceed from the Local Motion of the minute or
insensible parts of Matter, and the Changes of Texture that may be consequent
thereunto? Some bold Atomists would here be determining, by what particular
Ways this strange Transmutation of Water into Earth may be performed, and
would perchance particularly tell you, how the continually, but slowly,
agitated parts of the Water, by their innumerable occursions, may by degrees
rub, and as it were grind themselves into such Surfaces, as either to stick
very close to one another by immediate contact, (as I elsewhere observe
polished pieces of Glass to do,) or implicate, and entangle themselves together
so, as to make, as it were, little knots; which knots (he would add,) or the
newly mentioned clusters of coherent Particles, being then grown too great and
heavy to be supported by the Water, must subside to the bottom in the form of a
Powder, which, by reason of the same Gravity of these Moleculae, and the strict
Union of the les^er particles that compose them, obtain an indisposition to
dissolve in water, and to be elevated or dissipated by the fire; as their
Insipidness may be accounted for by its being but the same with that of the
Liquor, whence they were made, and their Transparency by that of the Water they
were made of, and by the multitude of the little Surfaces that belong to so
fine a Powder. But though in favor of such conjectures, I could somewhat
illustrate them, partly by applying to this Occasion what I elsewhere observe
of the reducing of the fluid Body of Quicksilver by a bare Circulation, (which
is but a repeated Distillation) with a proportionable heat, into a real Powder,
which also will not so easily be raised by the fire, as the fluid Body,
whence by change of Texture it was made; and partly by subjoining, among other
things, how by the conjunction of two distilled Liquors digested together, I
have obtained good store of an insipid Substance, that would not dissolve in
Water, and that would long enough endure no inconsiderable degree of Fire;
though, I say, by these and other such particulars, I could make our Atomists
conjectures less improbable, yet the full disquisition of so difficult a
Subject is too long and intricate to be proper for this place. What is here
delivered may be, for the main, verified by what the Reader will meet with in
the (following) Xth. Experiment, though That be not It which the Author meant.


And therefore, without here examining our Atomists explication of this
Metamorphosis, we will give him leave for a while to suppose the Transmutation
it self to be real, and thereupon to consider, whether the Historical part of
it do not much disfavour some of the chief Doctrines of the Chemists, and a
fundamental one of Helmonts. For if the purest Water may be turned into Earth,
it will not be easy to make it improbable, that the other Ingredients of mixed
Bodies, which the Chemists call their Hypostatical Principles, are capable of
being transmuted into one another, which would overthrow one of the main
Foundations of their whole Philosophy; and besides, if out of the simplest
Water it self, a moderate fire can produce a large proportion of Earth, that
was not formally praeexistent in it, how shall We be sure, that in all the
Analyzes, which the Fire makes of mixed Bodies, the Substances thereby exhibited
are obtained by Separation only, without any Transmutation? As for Helmont,
it is well enough known, that he makes Water to be the Material Principle of all
Bodies here below, which he would have to be either Water it self, or but
Water disguised by those Forms, which the Seeds of things have given it. I
will not here examine, whether this Opinion, if he had restrained it to Animals
and Vegetables, might not, with some restriction and explanations, be kept from
appearing absurd, since my Eleutherius has (though without absolutely adopting
it) elsewhere pleaded for its not being so extravagant, as it has been
thought.

But whereas Helmont's Grand Argument from Experience is grounded on this, That
the Alkahest does, as he affirms, by being digested with, and distilled from
other tangible Bodies, reduce them all at last into a Liquor, no way differing
from Rain Water, though we should grant the matter of fact, yet the Experiment
of our Powder will warrant me to question their Ratiocination. For if all mixed
Bodies be therefore concluded to be materially from Water, because they are, by
the Operation of the Fire, and a Menstruum, after having passed through diverse
praevious Changes, reduced at length into insipid Water; by the same way of
arguing (and with greater cogency) I might conclude, that all those Bodies are
materially but disguised Earth, since without intervention of a Seminal
Principle, (for Helmont will not allow that Title to Fire, which he styles the
Artificial Death of Things) Water it self may be turned into Earth. Indeed if
that acute Chemist were now alive, and had such an immortal Liquor, as he
describes his Alkahest to be, I would gladly put him upon trying whether that
Menstruum would reduce our White Earth into Water. But there being no more
probability of that, then that such reproduc'd Water, being just what it was
before, might be turned into Earth again; it may be probably said, that since
these Bodies are mutually convertible into one another, (and, as to the version
of Water into Earth, by a seemingly slight Operation,) they are not either of
them ingenerable and incorruptible Elements, much less the sole matter of all
tangible Bodies, but only two of the Primordial, and of the most obvious
Schematisms of that, which is indeed the universal Matter, which, as it comes
to have its minute Particles associated after this or that manner may, by a
change of their Texture and Motion, constitute, with the same Corpuscles,
sometimes Water, and sometimes Earth.

But ( Pyrophilus) to leave these Reflections, to return to the bold Conjectures
that they are grounded on; though if I had leisure and indulgence enough, I
could, I confess add many things in favor of some of those Thoughts: Of the
possible ways of turning Liquors into consistent Bodies, by bending, breaking,
twisting, and by otherwise changing the Texture of the Liquor, see more
particularly the History of Fluidity and Firmness, publishd by the Author.
yet I would not have you wonder, that, whilst I was mentioning the many
particulars, that seem to evince the change of Water into Earth, I should let
fall some Words, that intimate a Diffidence about it. For, to disguize nothing
unto You, I must confess, that having, in spite of an unusual care, unluckily
lost a whole paper of the Powder I had made my self, and having unexpectedly
been obliged to remove from my Furnaces, before I had made half the Trials I
judged requisite in so nice a case, I have not yet laid aside all my Scruples.

For 1. I would gladly know, whether the untransmuted Rain water, by the
deposition of so much Terrestrial Matter, were grown lighter in specie then
before, or sharp in taste. Next, I would be thoroughly satisfied, (which I
confess I am not yet, notwithstanding all that the followers of Angelus Sala
have confidently enough written,) whether and how far insipid Liquors (as Rain
Water is) may, or may not work as Menstruums upon Stones or Earthy Bodies: not
to question, whether the Particles of Rain Water may not, by their mutual
Attrition, or some other action upon one another, be reduced into Shapes and
Sizes fit to compose such a Menstruum, as the Liquor was not before; as in
diverse Plants, that seem to be nourished only with Water, the Sap is endowed
with a sharp Taste, and great penetrancy, and activity of parts.

2. It were also fit to know, whether the Glass Body, wherein all the
Distillations are made, do loose of its Weight any thing near so much, as the
obtained Powder amounts to, over and above the Decrement of Weight, which may
be imputed to the action of the Heat upon the substance of the Glass, in case
it appear by another Glass, kept empty in an equal heat, and for the same time
that the Glass looses by such Operations any thing worth reckoning. And it
were also not impertinent to try, whether the Gravity of the obtained a Powder
be the same in specie with that of the Glass, wherein the Distillations were
made: (for that is differed but about a 5th part from the weight of
Chrystalline Glass I lately mentioned.) Which Scrup^e, and some of the former,
I might have prevented, if I had had convenient Metalline Vessels, wherein to
make the Distillations instead of Glass ones.

3. I could wish likewise that it were more demonstrably determined, what is on
all hands taken for granted, (as it appears indeed highly probable,) that
distilled Rain Water is a perfectly Homogeneous Body, which if it be not,
diverse suspicions might be suggested about its Transmutation into Earth, and if
it be, 'twill be as a very strange thing, so a matter of very great difficulty
to conceive, how a perfectly and exquisitely Homogeneous Matter should,
without any Addition, or any Seminal and Plastic Principle, be brought to
afford great store of a Matter of much more Specific Gravity then it self,
since we see, that no Aggregate we can make of Bodies but aequiponderant in
specie with water, does, by virtue of their Convention, grow specifically
heavier then it.

4. Having had the Curiosity to try, whether Corrosive Liquors would work upon
our white Powder, I found, that not only good Oil of Vitriol would corrode it,
but strong and deflegm'd Spirit of Salt did readily work upon part of it, and
that without the assistance of heat, though not without hissing, and exciting
great store of bubbles, as I have known such Menstruums do, when put upon Lapis
Stellaris, or Ossifragus, or some such soft Stone; as if that so much
defaecated Rain water, actuated by heat, had resolved some of the looser
Corpuscles of the Sand or Stone, that, together with some Salts, compose common
Glass, as I have observed in some Petrifying Water, that some of the Bodies I
took up, and which were presumed to be petrified, were but crusted over with
Stone, that seemed generated but by the successive apposition of Stony
Particles, that, lying invisibly mingled with the running Water, stuck in
their passage to the conveniently disposed Bodies that lay in the Streams way.
But yet I must not omit, that, when I suffered this Mixture to settle, as much
of the Powder, as seemed to be a very great part of it, remained in the lower
part of the Liquor, as if that had rather fretted then dissolved i^, and that
not because the Menstruum was overcharged or glutted, as I found by putting in
afterward several fresh parcels of Powder, which it readily fell upon, not
without noise and froth. Nor must I forget, that sometimes I have excited such
an Ebullition, by pouring the same Liquors upon the Earthy part of Wood-ashes,
several times washed in boiling water, (though, I confess, I afterward
somewhat suspected there might remain some little adhering Alkaly, which might
occasion those Bubbles, notwithstanding that both I and another, whom I also
invited to taste it, took the Earth to be quite Saltlesse.) I might (
Pyrophilus) add, that sometimes also me thought I found this Powder (which yet
likewise sometimes happened to me with the lately mentioned Earth of Wood-ashes)
somewhat gritty between my Teeth, and subjoin diverse other particulars, if it
were not too tedious to mention to You all the doubts and considerations that
have occurred to me about the recited Change of Water into Earth: which yet are
not such as ought to hinder me from giving You the Historical account I have
set down, since to some of my Scruples I could here give plausible Answers, but
that I cannot do it in few words. And if any part of our white Powder prove to
be true Earth, no body perhaps yet knows to what the Experiment may lead
sagacious Men: and whether in a strict sense it be true Earth or no, yet the
Phenomenon, that are exhibited in the production of it, are sufficient to give
this 9th Experiment a place among the others (of the same Decad) with which it is
associated. For since out of a substance that is universally acknowledged to be
Elementary and Homogeneous, and which manifestly is fluid, transparent, much
lighter in specie then Earth, moist and fugitive, there is artificially
generated or obtained a Substance consistent, white, and consequently opacous,
comparatively ponderous, dry, and not at all fugitive; the Alteration is so
great, and effected in so simple a way, that it cannot but afford us a
considerable Instance of what the varied Texture of the minute parts may
perform in a Matter confessedly similar. And if frequently distilled Rain Water
should not be allowed Homogeneous, our Experiment will at least show as, better
then perhaps any has yet done, how little we are bound to believe what the
Chemists, and others tell us, when they pretend manifestly to exhibit to us
Homogeneous Principles, and Elementary Bodies, and how difficult it is to be
certain when a Body is absolutely iiresoluble into specifically differing
substances, and consequently what is the determinate number of the perfectly
simple Ingredients of Bodies: (supposing that such there are.) Though I must
confess, that my only aim is not to Relate what has been done, but to
Procure the prosecution of it. For if the obtained Substance be, by the Rain
Water, dissolved out of the Glass, this will both prove a noble and surprising
Instance of what may be one by insipid Menstruums, even upon Bodies that are
justly reckoned among the compactest and most indissoluble that we know of, and
may afford us many other considerable hints, that have been partly intimated
already: and if on the other side, this Powder, whether it be true Elementary
Earth or not, be found to be really produced out of the Water it self, it may
prove a Magnale in Nature, and of greater consequence then will be presently
foreseen, and may make the Alchymists hopes of turning other Metals into Gold,
appear less wild, since that by Experimentally evincing, that two such
difficult Qualities to be introduced into a Body, is considerable degrees of
Fixity and Weight, (whose requisitenesse to the making of Gold are two of the
Principal things, that have kept me from easily expecting to find the Attempts
of Alchymists successeful,) may, without the mixture of a Homogeneous Matter,
be generated in it, by varying the Texture of its parts.

I will not now adventure to add any thing of what I have been attempting
about the transmuting (without additaments) of pure Alkalizate Salts into
Earth, because I do not yet know, whether the Trials will answer my Hopes: (for
I do not yet call them my Expectations.) But upon this subject of
Transmutations, I could, if it did not properly belong to another Treatise,
tell you something about the Changes, that may be wrought upon highly rectified
Spirit of Wine, which would perchance make You think of other things of the
like kind less infeasible. For whereas it is a known thing, that That
spirituous Liquor being kindled, (and that, if you please, by other Spirit of
Wine actually fired) will, for ought appears, burn all away, that is, be
totally turned into flame; if I durst rely, in so important a case, on a couple
of Trials, whilst I hope for an Opportunity of making farther ones, I would
tell You, that by a way unthought on (that I know of) by any Body, I have,
without any addition, obtained, from such Spirit of Wine, as, being kindled in
a Spoon, would flame all away, without leaving the least drop behind it, a
considerable quantity of downright incombustible Phlegm. And by another way
(mentioned indeed by Helmont, but not taught to almost any of his Readers) some
Ingenious Persons, that you know and esteem, vvorking by my directions, (but
without knowing what each other was doing) did both of them reduce
considerable quantities of high rectified Spirit of Wine (that would before
have burnt all away) into a Liquor, that was for the most part phlegm, as I was
informed as well by my own taste, as by the Trials I ordered to be made: (being
forced my self to be most commonly absent.) From which change of the greatest
part of that at first liquid Splrit into Phlegm, it seems deducible, that the
same portion of Matter, which, by being kindled, may be turned all into Fire,
may be, by another way of handling, turned into Phlegm or Water, and this
without the addition of any thing, and without being wrought upon by any
visible Body, but one so extremely dry as duly prepared Salt of Tartar; and
that it self is not so indispensably necessary to the obtaining of phlegm out of
totally inflammable Spirit of Wine, but that, as I was saying, I did, by
another way, obtain that dull Liquor without employing the Salt, or any other
visible Body whatsoever. But I make a scruple to entertain you any longer with
Extravagances of this Nature, and yet, if I were sure You would contain your
smiles, I would add for conclusion, That, if I had had time and Opportunity to
furnish my self with any quantity of that Water, I had it in my thoughts to
try, whether that would have afforded me such a Terrestrial substance, as
Rain Water had done, and thereby have undergone a new and further Metamorphosis.

The X. Experiment.
THere is one Experiment more, two of the chief Phenomenon of which belong to
another Discourse; (where I particularly mention Them,) and yet I shall
conclude this little Treatise with the recitation of the Experiment it self,
not only because diverse of the Phenomenon do eminently belong to our present
subject, but because I have scarce met with any Experiments more suitable to
the Design I have of shevving, before I conclude this Discourse, what great
and sudden Productions and Destructions of Qualities may be effected by the
composition of the smallest Number of Ingredients, even among Liquors
themselves, and such too as are believed to be both of Them simple and
Homogeneous, and incapable of Putrefaction, that so it may appear, what notable
Alterations of Qualities even seemingly slight and easy mixtures can perform
among Bodies, both of them fluid, as well as among those that were either both
of them stable, or one of them stable, and the other consistent.

Take then of good Oil of Vitriol, and of Spirit of Wine, that will burn all
away, equal parts, not in quantity, but in Weight; put them together by little
and little, and having placed the Mixture in a Bolt-head, or Glass Egg with a
long neck, and carefully stopped it with a Cork and hard Wax, set the Vessel in
a moderate heat to digest for a competent while; (two or three weeks may do
well,) then pour out the Mixture into a tall Glass Cucurbite, to which lute on
a Head and a Receiver with extraordinary care, to prevent the Avolation of the
Spirits, which will be very subtle: then with a very gentle fire abstract the
spirit of Wine, that will first ascend, and when the Drops begin to come over
sowrish, shift the Receiver, and continue the Distillation with great care,
that the Matter boil not over, and when you judge that about half the acid
Liquor is come over, it will not be amiss, though it be not necessary, to
change the Receiver once more; but whether you do this or no, your Distillation
must be continued, increasing the fire toward the latter end, till you have
brought over all you can, and what remains in the bottom of the Cucurbite must
be put into a Glass well stopped, to keep it from the Air.

N B. 1. That to the Production of most, if not of all the Phenomenon of this
Experiment, it is not absolutely necessary, that so long a Digestion, (not to
say, not any,) be premised; though if the time above prescribed be allowed, the
Experiment will succeed the better.

2. That, I remember, I have sometimes made use of Oil of Sulphur per Campanam
(as they call it) instead of Oil of Vitriol, to produce the recited Phenomenon;
and though the Attempt succeeded not ill, as to diverse particulars, yet I
afterward chose rather to employ oil of Vitriol, both because it did, in some
points, better answer my Expectation then the other Liquor, and because I would
not give occasion to suspect, that the Odours, hereafter to be mentioned as
Phenomenon of our Experiment, were due to the common Sulphur, whence the
unctuous Liquor, made per Campanam, was obtained, as such, and did no way
proceed from the acid Vitriolate Salt, which that Oil (as it is improperly
called) does abound with.

3. That I had likewise the Curiosity to digest Oil of Vitriol with Spanish
Wine, instead of Spirit of Wine, by which means I obtained an odd Spirit, and
residence, and some other Phenomenon, which I content my self to have in this
place given hint of, in regard that Wine being a Liquor of a much less simple
nature then its Spirit, the Phenomenon, afforded me by This, are much fitter
for my present purpose.

4. That great care must be had in regulating the fire, when once a good part
of the Acid spirit, mentioned in the process, is come over. For if the Fire be
not increased, the rest will scarce ascend, and if it be increased but a little
too much, the Matter will be more apt, then one would suspect, to swell
exceedingly in the Cucurbite, and perhaps run over into the Receiver, and spoil
what it finds there, as it has more then once happened to me, when I was fain to
commit the management of the Fire to others.

Now the oil of Vitriol, and the spirit of Wine, being both of them distilled
Liquors, and the Latter of them several times redistill'd, and one of them
being drawn from so simple and familiar a substance as Wine, and the other from
a Concrete not more compounded, then what Nature her self (which, as I elsewere
show, can, without the help of Art, produce Vitriol) does diverse times present
us with; these Liquors, I say, being both or them distilled, and consequently
volatile, one would expect, that by distilling them, they should be brought
over united, as I have tried, that the spirit of Wine, and of Nitre, or also of
common Salt may be; and as the spirits of differing Vegetables are wont to be;
or that, at least, the Distillation should not much alter them, from what it
found them, after they had been well mingled together. But this
notwithstanding, these two Liquors being of very odd Textures in reference to
each other, their conjunction and distillation will make them exhibit diverse
considerable and perhaps surprising Phenomenon.

For First, whereas spirit of Wine has no great Sent, nor no good one, and
moderately deflegm'd Oil of Vitriol is wont to be inodorous; the Spirit, that
first comes over from our mixture, has a Sent not only very differing from
spirit of Wine but from all things else, that. I remember, I ever smelt. And as
this new Odor does to almost all those, whose Opinions I have asked about it,
seem very fragrant and pleasant, so I have sometimes had it so exceeding
subtle, that, in spite of the care that was taken to lute the Glasses exactly
together, it would perfume the neighboring parts of the Laboratory, and would
not afterward be kept in by a close Cork, covered with two or three several
Bladders, but smell strongly at some distance from the Viol wherein it was put,
I did not think it unlikely, that so noble and piercing a Liquor might be of no
mean efficacy in Physic; and though I missed of receiving an account of its
Effects from some ingenious Physicians, into whose Hands I put it to have
Trials made of it, yet I cannot despair of finding it a considerable Medicine,
when I remember, partly what has been done by some acquaintances of mine with
bare phlegm of Vitriol, upon the account (as is supposed) of that little
Sulphur of Vitriol, that, though but sparingly, does enrich that Liquor; and
partly, what the Masters of Chemical Arcana tell us of the wonderful virtues of
the Volatile Sulphur of Vitriol, and what I have observed my self, that may
invite me to have a good Opinion of Remedies of that nature.

2. But to show how much the Odours of Bodies depend upon their Texture, I
shall now add, That after this volatile and odoriferous Spirit is come over,
and has been followed by an Acid Spirit, it will usually, toward the latter
end of the Distillation, be succeeded by a Liquor, that is not only not
fragrant, but stinks so strongly of Brimstone, that I have sometimes known it
almost take away the Breath (as they speak) of those, who, when I had the
Receiver, newly taken off, in my hand, did (either because to make sport I gave
them no warning, or because they would not take it, as thinking what I told
them impossible,) too boldly adventure their Noses in the Trial.

3. There is in this Operation produced a Liquor, that will not mingle either
with the fragrant, or with the foetid Spirit hitherto described, but is very
differing from both of them, and is so very pleasant, subtle, and Aromatical,
that it is no less differing as well from Spirit of Wine, as Oil of Vitriol.
But of this Liquor I give a further Account in a more convenient place.

4. When the Distillation is carried on far enough, You will find at the
bottom, that the two above mentioned Diaphanous Spirits (for Oil of Vitriol is
indeed rather a Saline Spirit, then an Oil) have produced a pretty Quantity of
a Substance, not only very opacous, but black almost like Pitch or Jet.

5. And this Substance, though produced by two Bodies, that were not only
fluid, but distilled, will not alone be consistent, but (if the Distillation
have been urged far enough) brittle.

6. And though Spirit of Wine be reputed the most inflammable, and Oil of
Vitriol the most corrosive Liquor that is known, yet I could not find, that
this black Substance would easily, if at all, be brought, I say not to flame,
but to burn; nor that it had any discernible Taste, though both the Liquors,
from whose mixture it was obtained, have exceeeding strong and pungent Tastes.

7. And whereas both Oil of Vitriol and Spirit of Wine will each of them more
readily, then most Liquors that are yet known, mingle with common Water, and
diffuse it self therein, I observed, that this pitchy Mass, if the Distillation
had been continued till it was perfectly dry, would not, that I could perceive,
dissolve in common water for very many hours, and, if I much misremember not,
for some days.

8. And Lastly, whereas the Oil of Vitriol, and the Spirit of Wine, were both
of them distilled Liquors, and one of them exceeding volatile and fugitive; yet
the black Mass, produced by them, was so far fixed, that I could not make it
rise by a considerably strong and lasting fire, that would have raised a much
more sluggish Body, then the heaviest of those that concurred to produce it.

The remaining particulars, that I have observed in this Experiment, belong to
another Treatise, and therefore I shall forbear to mention them in this: nor
shall I at present add any new Phenomenon to those I have already recited;
those freshly mentioned Experiments, and those that preceded it, being, even
without the assistance of the four Observations I have delivered before them,
sufficient to manifest the Truth I have been endeavoring to make out, For in
the Experiments we are speaking of, it cannot well be pretended, or at least
not well proved, that any Substantial Forms are the Causes of the Effects I
have recited. For in most of the (above mentioned) cases, besides that, in the
Bodies we employed, the Seminal Virtues, if they had any before, may be
supposed to have been destroyed by the fire, they were such, as those I argue
with would account to be Factitious Bodies, artificially produced by Chemical
Operations. And it is not more manifest, that, in the production of these
Effects, there intervenes a Local Motion, and change of Texture by these
Operations, then it is inevident and precarious, that they are the Effects of
such things, as the Schools fancy Substantial Forms to be: since it is, in these
new Experiments, by the Addition of some new particles of Matter, or the
Recess, or Expulsion of some praeexistent ones, or, which is the most frequent
way, by the Transposition of Minute parts, yet without quite excluding the
other two, that no more skilful a Chemist then I have been able to produce by
Art a not inconsiderable number of such changes of Qualities; that more notable
ones are not ordinarily presented us by Nature, where she is presumed to work
by the help of Substantial Forms; I see not, why it may not be thought
probable, that the same Catholic and fertile Principles, Motion, Bulk, Shape,
and Texture of the Minute parts of Matter, may, under the Guidance of Nature,
(whose Laws the modern Peripateticks acknowledge to be established by the
all-wise God,) suffice likewise to produce those other Qualities of Natural
Bodies, of which we have not given particular Instances.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Praef. p. 11. l. ult. read aim. praef. p. 13. l. 13. r. perhaps. p. 68. l.
13. r. destroys. p. 130 l. 14. r. Pear. p. 146. l. 20. r. Principle. p. 247.
l. 25. r. Fleurs. p. 231. l. 15. r. it. p. 325. l. 6. a Comma at inflammable.
p. 337. l. 7. r. of. p. 411. l. 7. r. former.


