SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The Reconcileableness OF REASON AND RELIGION.

By T.E. A LAYMAN.

To which is annexed by the Publisher, A Discourse of Mr. Boil, ABOUT THE
POSSIBILITY OF THE RESURRECTION.

Homines absque rerum discrimine incredulos esse, summae est imperitiae.
Verulam. in Novo Organo. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H. Herringman, at the
Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1675.

THE Publisher TO THE READER.
THese Considerations about Religion and Reason, delivered by a Person of an
excellent Genius and Ability to consider the Nature of the things he is wont to
discourse upon, being fallen into my hands, nor being forbidden to publish
them; I thought the Subject so weighty, and the way of handling it both so
discreet and solid, that I could not forbear recommending it to the Press,
being fully persuaded, the Public in general, as well as all Persons in
particular that are concerned for the safety both of Reason and Religion, and
consequently for their Dignity as they are Men, and their Nobleness as they are
Christians, will find sufficient cause to be pleased with the publication of
it. To which I have nothing to add but that, whereas at the beginning of the
following Discourse there is mention made of its being to consist of Two Parts;
one, to show, that a Christian need not lay aside his Reason; and the other,
that he is not commanded to do so: The Author thought fit to keep that Paper,
which concerned the latter, from now accompanying the former, which seems the
most seasonable, and likeliest to make impressions on that sort of Persons,
whom he chiefly designs to persuade.

THE Preface.
It Is the just Grief, and frequent Complaint of those that take to heart the
Concerns of Religion, that they see it now more furiously assaulted and
studiously undermined than ever, not only by the vicious Lives of Men, but by
their licentious Discourses. I know, there have been Vices in the World, as
long as there have been Men: And it is an observation as old as Solomon, Eccles.
7.10. That Men are apt to look upon their own Times as worse than those that
preceded them. And because I remember too, that in reciting this Complaint he
disapproves it; I shall not dispute, whether other Ages have been less faulty
than this we live in: But this I think I may say with as much Truth as Grief,
that, among us here in England, the Times, to which our memory can reach, have
been less guilty, than the present Time is, of a spreading and bold
Profaneness. For, though many allowed themselves to court Gold, and Cups, and
Mistresses, little less than now they do; yet these were still acknowledged to
be Faults even by those that committed them, and the Precepts and the Counsels
of Religion were neglected or disobeyed, but not their Authority thrown off or
affronted; Men retaining yet such a kind of respect for Her, as the elder Son
in the Parable did for his Father, when, receiving a command from him to go and
work in his Vineyard, he answered, I go Sir, though he went not, Mat. 21.30.
But now too many of the Vicious do not only scandalously violate the Laws of
Religion, but question the Truth, and despise the very Name of it. They rather
choose to imitate the Rebels in the other Parable, and say of Religion what
they did of their lawful King, when they insolently declared, that they would
not have him to reign over them, Luke 19.14. They seek not to hide their sins
like Adam, but think either to cover or protect all others by that greatest of
all, Impiety; and, instead of cheating Conscience into silence, (as sinners,
not impudent, are wont to do,) by deceitful promises of repenting hereafter of
their sins, they endeavor to stifle or depose it, by maintaining, that
Repentance is a weakness of mind, and Conscience ought not to be looked on as
the Vicegerent of a Deity, whose very Existence or Providence they dispute.

And that which more troubled me, and made me most apprehend the spreading of
this Impiety, was, that it was propagated in a new way, that made me fear, the
Arguments not only of vulgar Preachers, but even of learned Divines themselves,
would be much less fit than formerly to give a check to its progress. For, till
of late, the generality of our Infidels did, either as Philologers, question
the Historical part of the Scriptures, and perhaps cavil at some of the
Doctrines; or, if they employed Philosophical Arguments, as Pomponatius and
Vaninus did, they borrowed them from Aristotle, or the Peripatetick School. And
against both these sorts of Adversaries, the learneder Champions of the
Christian Religion, such as Vives, Mornay, and Grotius, had furnished Divines
with good and proper Weapons. For, the Historical part of the Scriptures, and
especially the Miracles, were strongly confirmable by competent Testimonies,
and other Moral Proofs, sufficient in their kind. And Aristotle being himself a
dark and dubious Writer, and his Followers being on that account divided into
Sects and Parties, which for the most part had nothing to allege but his
single Authority, 'twas not difficult to answer the Arguments drawn from the
Peripatetick Philosophy; and, if that could not have been done, it had not been
difficult to reject the Doctrines themselves as false or precarious. But our
new Libertines take another and shorter way, (though I hope it will not be a
more prosperous one,) to undermine Religion. For, not troubling themselves to
examine the Historical or Doctrinal parts of Christian Theology, in such a way
as Jews, Pagans, Mahometans, would do; These deny those very Principles of
Natural Theology, wherein the Christian, and those other differing, Religions
agree, and which are supposed in almost all Religions, that pretend to
Revelation, namely, the Existence and Providence of a Deity, and a Future State
(after this life is ended.) For, these Libertines own themselves to be so upon
the account of the Epicurean, or other Mechanical, Principles of Philosophy,
and therefore to press them with the Authorities wont to be employed by
Preachers, is improper, since they are so far from paying any respect to the
venerable Fathers of the Church, that they slight the generality of the Heathen
Philosophers themselves, judging no Writers worthy of that name, but those
that, like Leucippus, Democritus, Epicurus, etc. explicate things by Matter and
Local Motion; and therefore it is not to be expected, that they should reverence
any more the Peripatetick Arguments of Scotus or Aquinas, than the Homilies of
St. Augustine, or St. Chrysostom; and to give Aristotle himself the Title of
The Philosopher, were enough to make some of them conclude the Ascriber were no
Philosopher. And this, by the way, may excuse me for not having brought into
the following Papers the Sentences of the Fathers or the Moralists, or the
Authority of Aristotle, or any of the School-Philosophers, which I should have
declined to employ, though my frequent removes from place to place, when I was
writing these Papers, had not denied me the convenience of a Library.

Things being at this pass, though the Title of this Discourse acknowledges the
Author of it to be a Layman; yet I shall not beg pardon for the ensuing Papers
as for an intrenchment upon the Ecclesiastics. For besides that, though I know
some Functions, yet I know no Truths, of Religion, that have the peculiarity of
the Shewbread under the Law, Mat. 12.4. with which it was lawful only for the
Priests to meddle; I will not so far mistrust the Charity of Churchmen, as not
to suppose, that they will rather thank than blame any man, that being not
altogether a stranger to this warfare, offers them his assistance against the
common Enemy in so important a quarrel, and so great a danger. The Fathers, and
other Divines, being wont to compare the Church Militant to a ship, 'twill not
be an improper extension of the Comparison, to say, that, when the Vessel is
threatened with shipwreck, or boarded by Pirates, it may be the Duty not only of
professed Seamen, but any private Passenger, to lend his helping hand in that
common danger. And I wish, I were as sure, that my endeavors will prove
successful, as I am, that such Churchmen as I most esteem will think them
neither needless nor unseasonable. Nay, perhaps my being a Secular person, may
the better qualify me to work on those I am to deal with, and may make my
Arguments, though not more solid in themselves, yet more prevalent with men
that usually (though how justly, let them consider,) have a particular pique at
the Clergy, and look with prejudice upon whatever is taught by men, whose
interest is advantaged by having what they teach believed. And I was the more
invited not to be a mere Spectator, or a lazy Deplorer of the danger I saw
Religion in, because it seemed not unlikely, that Philosophical Infidels, as
they would be thought, would be less tractable to Divines, though never so good
Humanists and Antiquaries, than to a person that reasons with them upon their
own grounds, and discourses with them in their own way, having had a somewhat
more than ordinary curiosity to acquaint himself with the Epicurean and
Cartesian Principles, and exercise himself in that Philosophy, which is very
conversant with things Corporeal, and strives to explain them by Matter and
Motion, and shakes off all Authority (at least that is not infallible.) Upon
such Considerations as these, I complied with an occasion I had of solemnly
asking Reason the Question, that Joshua once asked the Angel that appeared to
him in the Plains of Jericho, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? Josh.
5.14; and of committing to Paper those thoughts that should occur to me on that
Subject. And this I the rather did, that I might thereby as well contribute to
my own satisfaction as to that of my Friends. For, as I think, that there is
nothing that belongs to this life, that so much deserves our serious care as
what will become of us when we are past it; so I think, that he who takes a
resolution either to embrace or reject so important a thing as Religion,
without seriously examining why he does it, may happen to make a good Choice,
but can be but a bad Chooser. And that I might not exclude, by too early a
method, those things, that, for ought I knew, might hereafter be pertinent and
useful, I threw my Reflections into one Book, as into a Repository, to be kept
there only as a heap of differing materials, that, if they appeared worth it,
they might be afterward reviewed, and sorted, and drawn into an orderly
Discourse. But, before I began to do what I intended, a succession of
accidents, (wherewith 'twould not be proper to trouble the Reader,) quite
diverted me to employments of a very distant nature; so that these Papers,
being thrown by, did for diverse years lie neglected, with many others, till at
length the person, for whose perusal I in the first place designed them, joined
with some other intelligent Friends to urge me to send them abroad, though I
was not in a condition to give them the finishing strokes, or so much as to
fill up several of the Blanks, my haste had made me leave to be supplied when I
should be at leisure. And indeed, notwithstanding the just aversness I had from
letting a piece so incomplete and uncorrected appear in this Critical Age; yet
the hopes, they confidently gave me, that this piece, such as it is, might not
be unacceptable nor useless, were not, I confess, altogether groundless.

Novelty being a thing very acceptable in this age, and particularly to the
persons I am to deal with, to whom perhaps it is none of the least endearments
of their Errors, I despair not, that 'twill somewhat recommend these Papers, to
which I designed to commit not Transcripts of what I thought they may have
already met with in Authors, but such considerations, as a serious attention,
and the nature of the things I treated of, suggested to me; so that most of the
things will perhaps be thought new; and some few things coincident with what
they may have elsewhere met with, may possibly appear rather to have been
suggested by considering the same subjects, to other Authors and to me, than to
have been borrowed by me of them. But some few things, I confess, I employ,
that were commonly enough employed before, and I hope, I may in that have done
Religion no disservice; For having taken notice, that some of the more familiar
Arguments had a real force in them, but had been so unwarily proposed as to be
liable to exceptions that had discredited them; I made it my care, by proposing
them more cautiously, to prevent such objections, which alone kept their force
from being apparent.

I was not unmindful of the great Disadvantage this Tract was likely to
undergo, partly for want of a more curious method, and partly because my other
occasions required, that if I Published it at all, it must be left to come
abroad uupolish'd and unfinished. But though this Inconvenience had like to
have suppressed this Discourse; yet the force of it was much weakened by this
consideration, that this immethodical way of Writing would best comply with
what was designed and pretended in this Paper, which was, not to write a
complete Treatise of the Subject of it; but only to suggest about it some of
those many considerations, that (questionless) might have occurred to (what I
do not pretend to) an Enlightened and Penetrating Intellect. And the Loadstone,
diverse of whose Phenomena are mentioned in the body of this little Tract,
suggested somewhat to me in reference to the Publication of it, by exciting in
me a hope, that, if this Discourse have any thing near as much Truth as I
endeavored to furnish it with, that Truth will have its operation upon sincere
Lovers of it, notwithstanding the want of regularity in the method: As a good
Loadstone will not, by being rough and rudely shaped, be hindered from
exercising its Attractive and Directive powers upon Steel and Iron.

As for the Style, I was rather shy than ambitious of bringing in the Thorns of
the Schoolmen or the Flowers of Rhetoric: For, the latter, though they had of
their own accord sprung up under my Pen, I should have thought improper to be
employed in so serious and Philosophical a Subject: And as to the former, I
declined them, in complaisance to the humor of my Infidels, who are generally
so prejudiced against the Schoolmen, that scarce any thing can be presented
them with more disadvantage than in a Scholastic dress; and a Demonstration
will scarce pass for a good Argument with some of them, if it be formed into a
Syllogism in mode and figure. That therefore, which I chiefly aimed at in my
expressions, was significancy and clearness, that my Reader might see, that I
was willing to make him judge of the strength of my Arguments, and would not
put him to the trouble of divining in what it lay, nor inveigle him by
ornaments of speech, to think it greater than it was. I was also led by my
Reason, as well as by my Inclination, to be careful not to rail at my Infidels:
And though I have some cause to think, that many of them had their
understandings debauched by their lives, and were seduced from the Church not
by Diagoras or Pyrrho, but by Bacchus and Venus; yet I treat them as supposing
them to be what they would be thought, Friends to Philosophy: And being but a
Layman, I did not think my self obliged to talk to them as out of a Pulpit, and
threaten them with Damnation unless they believed me, but chose to discourse to
them rather as to erring Virtuosi, than Wicked wretches.

This moderation that I have used toward them, will, I hope, induce them to
grant me two or three reasonable requests; whereof the first shall be, that
they would not make a final judgment of these Papers till they have perused
them quite through; especially having in their Eye what is declared in the
Preamble, where both the design and scope of the whole discourse, and what it
does not pretend to, is expressed. The next thing I am to request of them, and my
Readers, is, that they would not have the meaner thoughts of my Arguments for
not being proposed with the confidence, wherewith many Writers are wont to
recommend weaker proofs. For I wrote to intelligent Men, and, in the judgment
of such, I never observed that a Demonstration ceased to be thought one for
being modestly proposed; but I have often known a good Argument lose of its
credit by the invidious Title of a Demonstration. And I must further beg my
Readers, to estimate my Design in these Papers by the Title of them, in which I
do not pretend to make Religion trample upon Reason, but only to show the
Reconcileableness of the one to the other, and the friendly agreement between
them. I am a person, who looking upon it as my Honor and Happiness to be both
a Man, and a Christian, would neither write nor believe any thing, that might
misbecome me in either of those two capacities. I am not a Christian, because
it is the Religion of my Country, and my Friends; nor, because I am a stranger
to the Principles either of the Atomical, or the Mechanical Philosophy. I admit
no man's Opinions in the whole lump, and have not scrupled, on occasion, to own
dissents from the generality of learned men, whether Philosophers or Divines:
And when I choose to travel in the beaten Road, it is not because I find it is
the Road, but because I judge it is the Way. Possibly I should have much fewer
Adversaries, if all those that yet are so, had as attentively and impartially
considered the Points in Controversy as I have endeavored to do. They would
then, it is like, have seen, that the Question I handle, is not whether Rational
Beings ought to avoid Unreasonable Assents, but whether, when the Historical
and other Moral Proofs clearly sway the Scales in favor of Christianity, we
ought to fly from the Difficulties that attend the granting of a Deity and
Providence, to Hypotheses, whether Epicurean or others, that are themselves
encumbered with confounding Difficulties: On which account I conceive, that the
Question between them and me is not, whether They, or I, ought to submit to
Reason (for we both agree in thinking our selves bound to that;) but whether
They or I submit to Reason the fulliest informed, and least biased by
Sensuality, Vanity, or Secular Interest.

I reverence and cherish Reason as much, I hope, as any of them; but I would
have Reason practice Ingenuity as well as Curiosity, and both industriously pry
into things within her sphere, and frankly acknowledge (what no Philosopher
that considers will deny) that there are some things beyond it. And in these it
is, that I think it as well her Duty to admit Revelation, as her Happiness to
have it proposed to her: And, even as to Revelations themselves, I allow Reason
to judge of them, before she judges by them. The following Papers will, I hope,
manifest, that the main difference betwixt my Adversaries and me is, that they
judge upon particular Difficulties and Objections, and I, upon the whole
matter. And to conclude; as I make use of my Watch to estimate Time, when ever
the Sun is absent or clouded, but when he shines clearly forth, I scruple not
to correct and adjust my Watch by his Beams cast on a Dial; so, wherever no
better Light is to be had, I estimate Truth by my own Reason; but where Divine
Revelation can be consulted, I willingly submit my fallible Reason to the sure
Informations afforded by Celestial Light.

I should here put an end to this long Preface, but that to the things, which
have been said concerning what I have written of my own, I see it is requisite
that I add a few words about what I quote from other Writers; especially
because in this very Preface I mention my having intended to entertain my
Friend with my own Thoughts. Of the Citations therefore that my Reader will
meet with in the following Papers, I have this Account to give him: (1.) That I
had written the Considerations and Distinctions to which they are annexed,
before I met with these cited Passages, which I afterward inserted in the
Margent, and other vacant places of my Epistle. (2.) That these Passages are
not borrowed from Books that treat of the Truth of the Christian Religion, or
of Christian Theology at all, but are taken from Authors that write of
Philosophical Subjects, and are by me applied to Mine, which are usually very
distant from Theirs. (3.) If you then ask me, why I make use of their
Authority, and did not content my self with my own Ratiocinations? I have this
to Answer; that my design being to convince another who had no reason to look
upon my Authority, and whom I had cause to suspect to have entertained some
prejudices against any Reasons that should come from one that confessedly aimed
at the defending of the Christian Religion, I thought it very proper and
expedient to let him see, that diverse of the same things (for substance,) that
I delivered in favor of that Religion, had been taught as Philosophical Truths
by Men that were not professed Divines, and were Philosophers, and such strict
Naturalists too, as to be extraordinarily careful not to take any thing into
their Philosophy upon the account of Revelation. And on this occasion let me
observe to you, that there are some Arguments, which being clearly built upon
Sense or evident Experiments, need borrow no Assistance from the Refutation of
any of the Proposers or Approvers, and may, I think, be fitly enough compared
to Arrows shot out of a Cross-Bow, or Bullets shot out of a Gun, which have the
same strength, and pierce equally, whether they be discharged by a Child, or a
strong Man. But then, there are other Ratiocinations, which either do, or are
supposed to depend, in some measure, upon the judgment and skill of those that
make the Observations whereon they are grounded, and their Ability to discern
Truth from Counterfeits, and Solid things from those that are but Superficial
ones: And these may be compared to Arrows shot out of a Long-Bow, which make
much the greater impression, by being shot by a strong and skilful Archer. And
therefore when we question, what Doctrines ought or ought not to be thought
Reasonable, it does not a little facilitate a Propositions appearing (not
Contrary, but) Consonant to Reason, that it is looked upon as such by those that
are acknowledged the Masters of that Faculty.

ERRATA.
Page 38. line 6. read of for or. ib. l. 9. dele all that is contained in that
whole parenthesis. ib. l. 19. The discourse, beginning in that line with the
words, if no body, and ending p. 43. l. 7. with the words, contiguous and
moved, is to be included between two signs of a Parathesis, []. P. 43. l. 18.
del. Parenthesis before the words, as were, and put it l. 20. before the word,
and.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The Reconcileableness OF REASON and RELIGION.
The First Part.
AS to what you write in your Friends name, near the bottom of the first page
of your Letter, perhaps I shall not mistake, if I guess, that, when He seems
but to propose a Question, he means an Objection; and covertly intimates, that
I, among many others, am reduced to that pass, that to embrace our Religion, we
must renounce our Reason; and consequently, that to be a Christian, one must
cease to be a Man, and much more, leave off being a Philosopher.

What liberal Concessions soever some others have been pleased to make on such
an Occasion as this, they do not concern me; who, being asked but my own
Opinion, do not think my self responsible for that of others. And therefore,
that I may frame my Answer so, as to meet both with the obvious sense of the
Question, and the intimated meaning of Him that proposes it, I shall roundly
make a Negative Reply, and say, That I do not think, that a Christian, to be
truly so, is obliged to forego his Reason; either by denying the Dictates of
right Reason, or by laying aside the Use of it.

I doubt not but this Answer is differing enough from what your Friend expects;
and perhaps those Grants, that have been made by the Indulgence or Inadvertency
of many persons, eminent for being Pious or Learned, may make you your self
startle at this Declaration: And therefore, though you will not, I know, expect
an Answer to what Objections your Friend may make, since he has expressed but
what He thinks ought to be a Christian's Opinion, not what he has to object
against what is so; yet, to satisfy those Scruples that you your self may
retain, I shall endeavor (but with the Brevity that becomes a Letter) to
acquaint you by themselves, with some of the Positive Inducements, that have
led me to this Opinion, and interweave some others, in answering the chief
Objections that I think likely to be made against it.

And this Preamble, short as it is, will, I hope, serve to keep you from
mistaking my design; which, as you may gather from what I have intimated, is
not to give you the positive proofs of the Christian Religion (which is not
here to be expected from a bare Defendant,) but to give you some Specimens of
such general Considerations, as may probably show, that the Matter (or
Essential Doctrines) peculiar to the Christian Religion, is not so repugnant to
the Principles of true Natural Philosophy, as that to believe them, a Man must
cease to act like a Rational Man, any more than he would be obliged to do by
embracing other Religions, or even the Tenants that have been held without
disparagement to their Intellectuals, by the mere Philosophers themselves;
which last Clause I add, because I presume, you do not expect, that I should be
sollicitous to vindicate the Christians belief of a Deity from being
Irrational; since, besides that perhaps your Friend would think himself
affronted to be dealt with as an Atheist, without having professed himself one,
the Acknowledgment of a Deity blemishes the Christian's Reason no more, than it
does that of Men of all Religions, not to say of all Mankind; and imports no
other contradiction to Reason, than what has been judged to be none at all by
the Greatest, if not by all, of the Philosophers that were famed for being
guided by Reason (without Revelation.) And I shall venture to add (upon the by)
that, as I do not for my own part think the Atheists Philosophical Objections
(if your Friend had produced them) to be near so considerable for weight or
number, as not only those few that deny a God, but many of those that believe
one, are wont to think; so the Christian is not reduced, as is imagined, to
make the Being of a Deity a mere Postulatum; since, besides the Philosophical
Arguments he can allege in common with the best Champions for a Deity, he has
a peculiar Historical Proof that may suffice; the Miracles performed by Christ
and his followers being such, that if the matter of Fact can be (as it may be)
well evinced, they will not only prove the rest of the Christian Religion, but
in the first place, That there must be a God to be the Author of them.

But though of the two things which my design obliges me to Endeavor the making
good of, the most Natural order seems to be, that I should first show, That no
Precepts of Christianity do command a Man to lay aside his Reason in matters of
Religion; and then, That there is nothing in the Nature of the Christian
Doctrine it self that makes a Man need to do so; Yet I think it not amiss in
treating of these two Subjects to invert the Order, and first consider that
difficulty which is the Principal, and which your Friend and You jointly desire
to have my thoughts of; namely, Whether there be a necessity for a Christian to
deny his Reason? And then we shall proceed to examine, Whether, though he need
not disclaim his Reason, it be nevertheless his Duty so to do?

SECT. I.
To proceed then to the Considerations that make up the former Part of this
Epistle; I shall in the first place distinguish betwixt that which the
Christian Religion it self teaches, and that which is taught by this or that
Church or Sect of Christians, and much more by this or that particular Divine
or Schoolman.

I Need not persuade you, who cannot but know it so well already, that there
are many things taught about the Attributes and Decrees of God, the Mysteries
of the Trinity, and Incarnation, and diverse other Theological Subjects, about
which not only private Christians, but Churches of Christians do not at all
agree. There are too many Men, whose Ambition, or Boldness, or Self-conceit, or
Interest, leads them to obtrude upon others, as parts of Religion, Things that
are not only Strangers, but oftentimes Enemies to it. And there are others, who
out of an indiscreet Devotion are so sollicitous to increase the Number and the
Wonderfulness of Mysteries, that, to hear them propose and Discourse of things,
one would judge, that they think it is the office of Faith, not to elevate, but
to trample upon Reason; and that things are then fittest to be believed, when
they are not clearly to be proved or understood. And indeed, when on the one
side I consider the charitable design of the Gospel, and the candid simplicity
that shines in what it proposes, or commands; and on the other side, what
strange and wild Speculations and Inferences have been fathered upon it, not
only in the Metaphysical Writings of some Schoolmen, but in the Articles of
Faith of some Churches; I cannot but think, that if all these Doctrines are
parts of the Christian Religion, the Apostles, if they were now alive, would be
at best but Catechumini; and I doubt not but many of the nice Points that are
now much valued and urged by some, would be as well disapproved by St. Paul, as
by Aristotle; and should be as little entertained by an Orthodox Divine, as a
Rigid Philosopher. I do not therefore allow all that for Gospel, which is
taught for such in a Preachers Pulpit, or even a Professors Chair. And
therefore, if Scholastic Writers, of what Church soever, take the liberty of
imposing upon the Christian Religion their Metaphysical Speculations, or any
other merely humane Doctrines, as matters of Faith, I who, not without some
Examination, think Metaphysics themselves not to have been for the most part
over-well understood, and applied, shall make bold to leave all such private
Doctrines to be defended by their own Broachers or Abettors; and shall deny,
that it will follow, That in case of this multitude of Placets, which some bold
Men have been pleased to adopt into the Catalogue of Christian Verities, any or
all should be found inconsistent with right Reason, the Christian Religion must
be so too. For by that name I understand only that System of Revealed Truths
that are clearly delivered in the Scriptures; or by legitimate and manifest
consequences deduced thence. And by this one Declaration so many unnecessary
and perhaps hurtful Retainers to Christianity will be at once thrown off, that
I doubt not, but if you consider the Matter aright, you will easily discern,
that by this first Distinction I have much lessened the work that is to be done
by those that are to follow it.

SECT. II.
In the next place, among the things that seem not rational in Religion, I make
a great difference between those, in which unenlightned Reason is manifestly a
competent Judge, and those which Natural Reason it self may discern to be out
of its Sphere.

You will allow me, That Natural Theology is sufficient to evince the Existence
of the Deity; and we know that many of the old Philosophers, that were
unassisted by Revelation, were, by the force of Reason, led to discover and
confess a God, that is, a Being supremely perfect; under which Notion diverse of
them expressly represent him. Now, if there be such a Being, it is but reasonable
to conceive, that there may be many things relating to his Nature, his Will,
and his management of things, that are without the Sphere of mere or unassisted
Reason. For, if his Attributes and Perfections be not fully comprehensible to
our Reason, we can have but inadequate Conceptions of them; and since God is a
Being, toto Caelo, as they speak, differing from all other Beings, there may be
some things in his Nature, and in the manner of his Existence, which is without
all Example or perfect Analogy in inferior Beings. For we see, that even in Man
himself the Coexistence and intimate Union of the Soul and Body, that is, an
Immaterial and a Corporeal substance, is without all President or Parallel in
Nature. And though the truth of this Union may be proved; yet the manner of it
was never yet, nor perhaps ever will be, in this Life clearly understood, (to
which purpose I shall elsewhere say more.) Moreover, if we suppose God to be
Omnipotent, (that is, to be able to do whatever involves no Contradiction that
it should be done,) we must allow him to be able to do many things that no
other Agent can afford us any Examples of, and some of them perhaps such, as
we, who are but finite, and are wont to judge of things by Analogy, cannot
conceive how they can be performed. Of the last sort of things may be the
recollecting a sufficient quantity of the scattered matter of a Dead humane
Body, and the contriving of it so, that (whether alone or with some addition of
other Particles) upon a reconjunction with the Soul, it may again constitute a
living Man, and so effect that Wonder we call the Resurrection. Of the latter
sort is the Creation of Matter out of nothing, and much more the like
Production of those Rational and Intelligent Beings, Humane Souls. For as for
Angels (good or bad,) I doubt, whether mere Philosophy can evince their
Existence, though I think it may the possibility thereof. And since we allow
the Deity a Wisdom equal to this boundless Power, it is but reasonable to
conceive, that these unlimited Attributes conspiring may produce Contrivances
and frame Designs, which we Men must be unable (at least of our selves)
sufficiently to understand, and to reach to the bottom of. And by this way of
arguing it may be made to appear, That there may be many things relating to the
Deity above the reach of unenlightned humane Reason. Not that I affirm all
these things to be in their own Nature incomprehensible to us (though some of
them may be so,) when they are once proposed; but that Reason by its own light
could not discover them particularly, and therefore it must owe its knowledge
of them to Divine Revelation. And if God vouchsafes to disclose those things to
us, since not only he must needs know about his own Nature, Attributes, etc.
what we cannot possibly know unless he tells us, and since we know, that
whatever he tells us is infallibly true, we have abundant Reason to believe
rather what he declares to us concerning Himself and Divine things, than what
we should conclude or guess about them by Analogy to things of a nature
infinitely distant from his, or by Maxims framed according to the nature of
inferior Beings. If therefore he clearly reveal to us, That there is in the
Godhead, Three distinct Persons, and yet that God is One, we, that think our
selves bound to believe God's Testimony in all other Cases, ought sure not to
disbelieve it concerning himself, but to acknowledge, that in an unparalled
and incomprehensible Being, there may be a manner of Existence not to be
paralleled in any other Being, though it should never be understood by us Men,
who cannot clearly comprehend, how in our selves two such distant Natures as
that of a gross Body and an immaterial Spirit, should be united so as to make
up one Man. In such cases therefore as we are now speaking of, there must
indeed be something that looks like captivating ones Reason, but it is a
submission that Reason it self obliges us to make; and he that in such points
as these believes rather what the Divine Writings teach him, than what he would
think if they had never informed him, does not renounce or inslave his Reason,
but suffers it to be Pupil to an Omniscient and Infallible Instructor, who can
teach him such things, as neither his own mere Reason, nor any others could
ever have discovered to him.

I thought to have here dismissed this Proposition, but I must not omit to give
it a confirmation afforded me by chance (or rather Providence:) For, since I
writ the last Paragraph, resuming a Philosophical Enquiry, I met in prosecuting
it with a couple of Testimonies of the truth of what I was lately telling you,
which are given not by Divines or Schoolmen, but by a couple of famous
Mathematicians, that have both led the way to many of the Modern Philosophers
to shake off the reverence wont to be born to the Authority of great Names, and
have advanced Reason in a few years more than such as Vaninus and Pomponatius
would do in many Ages; and have always boldly, and sometimes successfully
attempted to explain intelligibly those things, which others scrupled not
either openly or tacitly to confess inexplicable.

The first of these Testimonies I met with in a little French Treatise put out
by some Mathematician, who, though he conceals his Name, appears by his way of
writing to be a great Virtuoso, and takes upon him to give his Readers in
French the new thoughts of Galilaeo, by making that the Title of his Book. This
Writer then speaking of a Paradox (which I but recite) of Galilaeo's, that
makes a point equal to a Circle, adds, Et per consequent l'on peut dire, Page
22, 23.
i. e. and consequently one may say, that all Circles are equal between
themselves, since each of them is equal to a point. For though the imagination
be overpowered by this Idea or Notion; yet Reason will suffer it self to be
persuaded of it. I know (continues he) diverse other excellent Persons (besides
Galilaeo) who conclude the same thing by other ways, but all are constrained to
acknowledge, that indivisible and infinite are things that do so swallow up the
mind of Man, that he scarce knows what to pitch on, when he contemplates them.
For it will follow from Galilaeo's Speculation, etc. which passage I have
cited, to show you, that Galilaeo is not the only Philosopher and Mathematician
who has confessed his Reason quite passed about the Attributes of what is
Infinite.

The other Testimony I mentioned to you, is that of the excellent Descartes in
the second Part of his Principles of Philosophy, Numb. 34.
where speaking of the Circle to be made by Matter moving through places still
lesser and lesser, he has this ingenious acknowledgment; Fatendum tamen est
(says he) in motu isto aliquid reperiri, quod men's quidem nostra pereipit esse
verum, sed tamen quo pacto fiat non comprehendit, nempe Divisionem quarundam
particularum Materiae in infinitum, sive indefinitam, atque in tot parts ut
nulla cogitatione determinare possimus tam exiguam, quin intelligamus ipsam in
alias adhuc minores reipsa esse divisam. And in the Close of the next
Paragraph, he gives this for a Reason, why, though we cannot comprehend this
indefinite division, yet we ought not to doubt of the truth of it, That we
discern it to be of that kind of things that cannot be comprised by our minds
as being but finite.

If then such bold and piercing Wits, and such excellent Mathematicians are
forced to confess, that not only their own Reason, but that of Mankind may be
passed and non-plus'd about Quantity, which is an Object of contemplation
Natural, nay, Mathematical, and which is the Subject of the rigid
Demonstrations of pure Mathematics; why should we think it unfit to be
believed, and to be acknowledged, that in the Attributes of God, who is
essentially an Infinite Being, and an Ens singularissimum, and in diverse other
Divine things, of which we can have no knowledge without Revelation, there
should be some things, that our Finite understandings cannot, especially in
this life, clearly comprehend.

SECT. III.
To this Consideration, I shall for Affinities sake subjoin another, which I
leave to your Liberty to look upon as a distinct one, or as an Enlargement and
Application of the former.

I consider then, that there is a great difference between a Doctrines being
repugnant to the general and well-weigh'd Rules or Dictates of Reason, in the
forming of which Rules it may be supposed to have been duly considered; and its
disagreeing with Axioms, at the Establishment whereof the Doctrine in Question
was probably never thought on. There are several Rules that pass current even
among the most Learned Men, and which are indeed of very great use when
restrained to those things whence they took their Rise, and others of the like
nature; which yet ought not to overthrow those Divine Doctrines that seem not
consonant to them. For the Framers of these Rules having generally built them
upon the Observations they had made of Natural and Moral things, since (as we
lately argued) Reason it self cannot but acknowledge, there are some things out
of its Sphere, we must not think it impossible, that there may be Rules, which
will hold in all inferior Beings for which they were made; and yet not reach to
that infinite and most singular Being called God, and to some Divine matters
which were not taken into Consideration when those Rules were framed. And
indeed, if we consider God as the Author of the Universe, and the free
Establisher of the Laws of Motion, whose general Concourse is necessary to the
Conservation and Efficacy of every particular Physical Agent, we cannot but
acknowledge, that by withholding his Concourse or changing these Laws of
Motion, which depend perfectly upon his Will, he may invalidate most, if not
all, the Axioms and Theorems of Natural Philosophy: These supposing the Course
of Nature, and especially the Established Laws of Motion among the parts of the
Universal Matter, as those upon which all the Phenomenon of Nature depend. It Is
a Rule in Natural Philosophy, that Causae necessariae semper agunt quantum
possunt; But it will not follow from thence, that the Fire must necessarily
burn Daniel's three Companions or their Clothes, that were cast by the
Babylonian King's Command into the midst of a Burning fiery Furnace, when the
Author of Nature was pleased to withdraw his Concourse to the Operation of the
flames, or supernaturally to defend against them the Bodies that were exposed
to them. That Men once truly dead cannot be brought to life again, has been in
all Ages the Doctrine of mere Philosophers; but though this be true according
to the Course of Nature, yet it will not follow but that the contrary may be
true, if God interpose either to recall the departed Soul and reconjoin it to
the Body, if the Organization of this be not too much vitiated, or by so
altering the Fabric of the matter whereof the Carcass consists, as to restore
it to a fitness for the Exercise of the Functions of Life. Agreably to this let
me observe to you, that, though it be unreasonable to believe a Miraculous
Effect when attributed only to a mere Physical Agent; yet the same thing may
reasonably be believed, when ascribed to God, or to Agents assisted with his
absolute or supernatural Power. That a Man born blind should in a trice recover
his sight upon the Application of Clay and Spittle, would justly appear
incredible, if the Cure were ascribed to one that acted as a mere Man; but it
will not follow, that it ought to be incredible, that the Son of God should
work it. And the like may be said of all the Miracles performed by Christ, and
those Apostles and other Disciples of his, that acted by virtue of a Divine
Power and Commission. For in all these and the like Cases it suffices not to
make ones Belief irrational, that the things believed are impossible to be true
according to the course of Nature; but it must be shown, either that they are
impossible even to the Power of God to which they are ascribed, or that the
Records, we have of them, are not sufficient to beget Belief in the nature of a
Testimony; which latter Objection against these Relations is Foreign to our
present Discourse. And as the Rules about the power of Agents will not all of
them hold in God; so I might show the like, if I had time, concerning some of
his other Attributes: Insomuch that even in point of Justice, wherein we think
we may freeliest make Estimates of what may or may not be done, there may be
some cases, wherein God's supreme Dominion, as Maker and Governor of the World,
places him above some of those Rules; I say, some, for I say not above all
those Rules of Justice which oblige all inferior Beings, without excepting the
greatest and most absolute Monarchs themselves. I will not give Examples of his
Power of Pardoning or Remitting Penalties, which is but a relaxing of his own
Right; but will rather give an instance in his Power of afflicting and
exterminating Men, without any Provocation given him by them. I will not here
enter upon the Controversy de Jure Dei in Creaturas, upon what it is founded,
and how far it reaches. For, without making my self a party in that Quarrel, I
think, I may safely say, that God by his right of Dominion, might, without any
violation of the Laws of Justice, have destroyed and even annihilated Adam and
Eve before they had eaten of the forbidden Fruit, or had been commanded to
abstain from it. For Man being as much and as entirely God's Workmanship as any
of the other Creatures; unless God had obliged himself by some promise or pact
to limit the Exercise of his absolute dominion over him, God was no more bound
to preserve Adam and Eve long alive, than he was to preserve a Lamb, or a
Pigeon; and therefore, as we allow, that he might justly recall the Lives he
had given those innocent Creatures when he pleased, (as actually he often
ordered them to be killed and burned in Sacrifice to him:) so he might, for the
declaration of his Power to the Angels, or for other Reasons, have suddenly
taken away the Lives of Adam and Eve, though they had never offended him. And
upon the same grounds he might without Injustice have annihilated, I say not,
damned their Souls; he being no more bound to continue Existence to a Nobler,
than a less noble Creature: As he is no more bound to keep an Eagle than an
Oyster always alive. I know, there is a difference betwixt Gods resuming a
Being he lent Adam, and his doing the same to inferior Creatures: But that
disparity if it concern any of his Attributes, will concern some other than his
Justice; which allowed him to resume at pleasure the Being he had only lent
them, or lay any Affliction on them that were lesser than that Good could
countervail. But mentioning this instance only occasionally, I shall not
prosecute it any further, but rather mind you of the Result of this and the
foregoing Consideration; which is, That Divinely revealed Truths may seem to be
repugnant to the dictates of Reason, when they do but seem to be so: Nor does
Christianity oblige us to question such Rules as to the cases they were framed
for, but the application of them to the Nature of God, who has already been
truly said to be Ens singularissimum, and to his absolute Power and Will; so
that we do not reject the Rules we speak of, but rather limit them; and when we
have restrained them to their due bounds, we may safely admit them.

From Men's not taking notice of, or not pondering this necessary limitation of
many Axioms delivered in general terms, seems to have proceeded a great Error,
which has made so many Learned Men presume to say, That this or that thing is
true in Philosophy, but false in Divinity, or on the contrary: As for instance,
that a Virgin, continuing such, may have a Child, is looked upon as an Article
which Theology asserts to be true, and Philosophy pronounces impossible. But
the Objection is grounded upon a mistake, which might have been prevented by
wording the Propositions more warily and fully. For though we grant, that,
Physically speaking, it is false, that a Virgin can bring forth a Child; yet
that signifies no more, than that, according to the course of Nature, such a
thing cannot come to pass; but speaking absolutely and indefinitely, without
confining the Effect to mere Physical Agents, it may safely be denied that
Philosophy pronounces it impossible that a Virgin should be a Mother. For why
should the Author of Nature be confined to the ways of working of dependent and
finite Agents? And to apply the Answer to the Divines that hold the Opinion I
oppose; I shall demand, why God may not out of the substance of a Woman form a
Man, without the help of a Man, as well as at the beginning of the substance of
a Man he formed a Woman without the concurrence of a Woman? And so, that Iron
being a Body far heavier, ( in specie, as they speak,) will, if upheld by no
other Body, sink in water, is a Truth in Natural Philosophy; but since Physics
themselves lead Men to the acknowledgment of a God, it is not repugnant to
Reason, that, if God please to interpose his Power, he may (as in Elisha's
case) make Iron swim, either by withholding his concourse to the Agents,
whatever they be that cause Gravity in Bodies, or perhaps by other ways unknown
to us; since a vigorous Loadstone may, as I have more than once tried, keep a
piece of Iron, which it touches not, swimming in the Air, though this thin Body
must contribute far less, than water would, to the sustaining it aloft.

That strict Philosopher Des Carts, who has with great Wit and no less
Applause attempted to carry the Mechanical Powers of matters higher than any of
the Modern Philosophers; this Naturalist, I say, that ascribes so great a power
to Matter and Motion, was so far from thinking, that what was impossible to
them, must be so to God too, that, though he were urged by a learned Adversary
with an Argument as likely as any to give him a strong Temptation to limit the
Omnipotence of God; yet even on this occasion he scruples not to make this
ingenious and wary Acknowledgment, and that in a private Letter; For my part,
says he, I think we ought never to say of any thing that it is impossible to
God. For all that is true and good being dependent on his Almightiness, I dare
not so much as say, that God cannot make a Mountain without a Valley, or cannot
make it true, Volum. second Lettre vi.
that one and two shall not make three; but I say only, that he has given me a
Soul of such a nature, that I cannot conceive a Mountain without a Valley, nor
that the Aggregate of one and of two shall not make three, etc. and I say only,
that such things imply a Contradiction in my Conception. And consonantly to
this in his Principles of Philosophy he gives on a certain occasion this useful
Caution, -- Quod ut satis tuto and sine errandi periculo aggrediamur, Part
prima. Artic. 24.
ea nobis cautela est utendum, ut semper quam maxim recordemur, and Deum
Autorem rerum esse infinitum, and Nos omnina finitos.

SECT. IV.
In the next place, I think we ought to distinguish between Reason considered
in it self, and Reason considered in the Exercise of it, by this or that
Philosopher, or by this or that Man, or by this or that Company or Society of
Men, whether all of one Sect, or of more.

If you will allow me to borrow a School-phrase, I shall express this more
shortly by saying, I distinguish between Reason in Abstracto, and in Concreto.
To clear this matter, we may consider, That whatever you make the Faculty of
Reason to be in it self, yet the Ratiocinations it produces are made by Men,
either singly reasoning, or concurring in the same Ratiocinations and Opinions;
and consequently, if these Men do not make the best use of their Reasoning
Faculty, it will not be necessary, that what thwarts their Ratiocinations, must
likewise thwart the Principles or the Dictates of right Reason. For, Man having
a Will and Affections as well as an Intellect, though our Dijudications and
Tenants ought indeed (in matters speculative) to be made and pitched upon by
our unbiased Understandings; yet really our Intellectual Weaknesses, or our
Prejudices, or Prepossession by Custom, Education, etc. our Interest, Passions,
Vices, and I know not how many other things, have so great and swaying an
Influence on them, that there are very few Conclusions that we make, or
Opinions that we espouse, that are so much the pure Results of our Reason, that
no personal Disability, Prejudice, or Fault, has any Interest in them.

This I have elsewhere more amply discoursed of on another occasion; About the
Diversity of Religions.
wherefore I shall now add but this, That the distinction, I have been
proposing, does (if I mistake not) reach a great deal further than you may be
aware of. For not only whole Sects, whether in Religion or Philosophy, are in
many cases subject to Prepossessions, Envy, Ambition, Interest, and other
misleading things, as well as single Persons; but, which is more considerable
to our present purpose, the very Body of Mankind may be embued with Prejudices,
and Errors, and that from their Childhood, and some also even from their Birth,
by which means they continue undiscerned and consequently unreform'd.

This you will think an Accusation as bold as high; but to let you see, that
the Philosophers, you most respect, have made the same Observation, though not
applied to the same case, I must put you in mind, that Monsieur Des Carts
begins his Principles of Philosophy with taking notice, That, because we are
born Children, we make diverse unright Judgments of things, which afterward are
wont to continue with us all our Lives, and prove radicated Prejudices, that
mislead our Judgments on so many occasions, that he elsewhere tells us, he
found no other way to secure himself from their Influence, but once in his Life
solemnly to doubt of the Truth of all that he had till then believed, in order
to the re-examining of his former Dijudications. But I remember, our
illustrious Verulam warrants a yet further Prejudice against many things that
are wont to be looked on as the suggestions of Reason. For having told us, That
the Mind of Man is besieged with four differing kinds of Idols or Phantasms,
when he comes to enumerate them, he teaches, that there are not only such as
Men get by Conversation and Discourse one with another, and such as proceed
from the diverse Hypotheses or Theories and Opinions of Philosophers, and from
the perverse ways of Demonstration, and likewise such as are personal to this
or that Man, proceeding from his Education, Temperament, Studies, etc. but such
as he calls Idola tribus, because they are founded in humane Nature it self,
and in the very Tribe or Nation of Mankind; and of these he particularly
discourses of seven or eight; As that the Intellect of Man has an innate
Propensity to suppose in things a greater order and equality than it finds, and
that being unable to rest or acquiesce, it does always tend further and
further; to which he adds diverse other innate prejudices of Mankind, which he
sollicitously as well as judiciously endeavors to remove.

Now, if not only single Philosophers, and particular Sects, but the whole body
of Mankind be subject to be swayed by innate and unheeded Prejudices and
Proclivities to Errors about matters that are neither Divine, nor Moral, nor
Political, but Physical, where the attainment of Truth is exceeding pleasant to
humane Nature, and is not attended with consequences distasteful to it: Why may
not we justly suspect not only this or that Philosopher or particular Sect; but
the generality of Men, of having some secret propensities to err about Divine
things, and indispositions to admit Truths, which not only detect the
weaknesses of our Nature, and our personal disabilities, and thereby offend or
mortify our Pride and our Ambition, but shine into the Mind with so clear as
well as pure and chaste a light, as is proper both to discover to our selves
and others our Vices and Faults, and oftentimes to cross our Designs and
Interests?

And to this purpose we may take notice, that diverse of those very Idols, which
my Lord Bacon observes to besiege or pervert Men's Judgments in reference to
things Natural, may probably have the same kind of influence (and that much
stronger) on the minds of Men in reference to Supernatural things. Thus he
takes notice, that, if some things have once pleased the Understanding, it is
apt to draw all others to comport with, and give Suffrage, to them, though
perhaps the Inducements to the contrary belief be either more numerous or more
weighty. He observes also, that Man is apt to look upon his senses and other
perceptions as the measures of things, and also, that the understanding of Man
is not sincerely disposed to receive the light of Truth, but receives an
infusion as it were of adventitious Colors (that disguise the light) from the
Will and Affections, which makes him sooner believe those things that he is
desirous should be true, and reject many others upon Accounts that do no way
infer their being false. Now if we apply these things to Divine Truths (to
which 'twere well they were less justly applicable) and consider, that in our
Youth we generally converse but with things Corporeal, and are swayed by
Affections that have them for their Objects, we shall not much wonder, that Men
should be very prone, either to frame such Notions of Divine things as they
were wont to have about others of a far different and meaner nature; or else to
reject them for not being Analogous to those things which they have been used
to employ for the measures of truth and falsity. And if we consider the inbred
pride of man, which is such, that if we will believe the Sacred story, even
Adam in Paradise affected to be like God knowing good and evil, we shall not so
much marvel, that almost every man in particular makes the Notions he has
entertained already, and his Senses, his Inclinations and his Interests, the
Standards by which he estimates and judges of all other things, whether natural
or revealed. And as Heraclitus justly complained, that every man sought the
knowledge of natural things in the Microcosm, that is, himself, and not in the
Macrocosm, the World; so we may justly complain, that men seek all the
knowledge, they care to find, or will admit, either in these little worlds
themselves, or from that great World, the Universe; but not from the Omniscient
Author of them both. And lastly, if even in purely Physical things, where one
would not think it likely, that rational Beings should seek Truth with any
other designs than of finding and enjoying it, our Understandings are so
universally biased, and imposed upon by our Wills and Affections; how can we
admire, especially if we admit the fall of our first Parents, that our Passions
and Interests, and oftentimes our Vices should pervert our Intellects about
those revealed Truths; diverse of which we discern to be above our
comprehensions, and more of which we find to be directly contrary to our
Inclinations,

SECT. V.
And now 'twill be seasonable for me to tell you, That I think, there may be a
great difference betwixt a things being contrary to right Reason, or so much as
to any true Philosophy, and its being contrary to the received Opinions of
Philosophers, or to the Principles or Conclusions of this or that Sect of them.

For here I may justly apply to my present purpose, what Clemens Alexandrinus
judiciously said on another Occasion, that Philosophy was neither
Peripatetical, nor Stoical, nor Epicurean, but whatsoever among all those
several parties was fit to be approved.

And indeed if we survey the Hypotheses and Opinions of the several Sects of
Philosophers, especially in those points wherein they hold things repugnant to
Theological Truths, we shall find many of them so slightly grounded, and so
disagreeing among themselves, that a severe and inquisitive Examiner would see
little cause to admit them upon the bare Account of his being a Philosopher,
though he did not see any to reject them upon the Account of his being a
Christian. And in particular, as to the Peripateticks, who by invading all the
Schools of Europe (and some in Asia and Africa) have made their Sect almost
Catholic, and have produced diverse of the famous Questioners of Christianity
in the last Age, and the first part of this; the World begins to be apace
undeceived as to many of their Doctrines, which were as confidently taught and
believed for many Ages, as those that are repugnant to our Religion; and there
is now scarce any of the modern Philosophers that allow themselves the free use
of their Reason, who believes any longer, that there is an Element of Fire
lodged under the supposed Sphere of the Moon; that Heaven consists of solid
Orbs; that all Celestial Bodies are ingenerable and incorruptible; that the
Heart, rather than the Brain, is the Origin of Nerves; that the torrid Zone is
uninhabitable; and I know not how many other Doctrines of the Aristotelians,
which our Corpuscularian Philosophers think so little worth being believed,
that they would censure him, that should now think them worthy to be
sollicitously confuted; upon which score, I presume you will allow me to leave
those and diverse others as weak Peripatetick conceits, to fall by their own
groundlesness.

But you will tell me, that the Epicureans, and the Somatici, that will allow
nothing but Body in the World, nor no Author of it but Chance, are more
formidable Enemies to Religion than the Aristotelians. And indeed I am apt to
think they are so, but they may well be so without deserving to have any of
their Sects looked upon as Philosophy it self, there being none of them that I
know of, that maintain any Opinion inconsistent with Christianity, that I think
may not be made appear to be also repugnant to Reason, or at least not
demonstrable by it. You will not expect I should descend to particulars,
especially having expressly discoursed against the Epicurean Hypothesis of the
Origin of the World in another Paper; and therefore I shall observe to you in
general, that the Cartesian Philosophers, who lay aside all Supernatural
Revelation in their Inquiries into Natural things, do yet both think, and, as
to the two first of them, very plausibly prove, the three grand Principles of
Epicurus, That the little Bodies he calls Atoms are indivisible, That they all
have their motion from themselves, and That there is a vacuum in rerum natura,
to be as repugnant to mere Reason, as the Epicureans think the Notion of an
Incorporeal Substance, or the Creation of the World, or the Immortality of the
Soul. And as for the new Somatici, such as Mr. Hobbs (and some few others) by
what I have yet seen of his, I am not much tempted to forsake any thing that I
looked upon as a Truth before, even in Natural Philosophy it self, upon the
score of what he (though never so confidently) delivers, by which hitherto I
see not, that he has made any great discovery either of new Truths, or old
Errors. An Honorable Member of the Royal Society, has elsewhere purposely
shown, how ill he has proved his own Opinions about the Air, and some other
Physical Subjects, and how ill he has understood and opposed those of his
Adversary. But to give you in this place a Specimen how little their repugnancy
to his Principles or Natural Philosophy, ought to affright us from those
Theological Doctrines they contradict, I shall here (but not in the Body of
this Discourse, for fear of too much interrupting it) examine the fundamental
Maxim of his whole Physics, That nothing is removed but by a Body contiguous
and moved; it having been already shown (by the Gentleman newly mentioned)
that, as to the next to it, which is, that there is no vacuum, whether it be
true or no, he has not proved it.

If no Body can possibly be moved but by a Body contiguous and moved, as Mr.
Hobbs teaches; I demand, How there comes to be Local motion in the World? For,
either all the portions of matter that composed the Universe, have motion
belonging to their Nature, which the Epicureans affirmed for their Atoms; or
some parts of Matter have this motive power, and some have not; or else none of
them have it, but all of them are naturally devoid of Motion. If it be granted,
that Motion does naturally belong to all parts of Matter, the dispute is at an
end, the concession quite overthrowing the Hypothesis. If it be said, that
naturally some portions of Matter have Motion, and others not, then the
Assertion will not be Universally true: For though it may hold in the parts
that are naturally moveless or quiescent, yet it will not do so in the others,
there being nothing that may show a necessity, why a Body, to which Motion is
natural, should not be capable of moving without being put into motion by
another contiguous and moved. And if there be no Body to which Motion is
natural, but every Body needs an outward movent, it may well be demanded, How
there comes to be any thing Locally moved in the World; which yet constant and
obvious experience demonstrates, and Mr. Hobbs himself cannot deny. For if no
part of Matter have any Motion but what it must owe to another that is
contiguous to it, and being it self in Motion impels it; and if there be
nothing but Matter in the World, how can there come to be any Motion amongst
Bodies, since they neither have it upon the score of their own nature, nor can
receive it from external Agents. If Mr. Hobbs should reply, that the Motion is
impressed upon any of the parts of the Matter by God, he will say that which I
most readily grant to be true, but will not serve his turn, if he would speak
congruously to his own Hypothesis. For I demand, Whether this Supreme Being,
that the Assertion has recourse to, be a Corporeal or an Incorporeal Substance?
If it be the latter, and yet be the efficient Cause of Motion in Bodies, then
it will not be Universally true, that whatsoever Body is moved, is so by a Body
contiguous and moved. For, in our supposition, the Bodies that God moves either
immediately, or by the intervention of any other Immaterial Being, are not
moved by a Body contiguous, but by an Incorporeal Spirit. But because Mr.
Hobbs, in some Writings of his, is believed to think the very Notion of an
Immaterial Substance to be absurd, and to involve a Contradiction, and because
it may be subsum'd, that if God be not an Immaterial Substance, he must by
Consequence be a Material and Corporeal one, there being no Medium Negationis,
or third Substance that is none of those two: I answer, That, if this be said,
and so that Mr. Hobbs's Deity be a Corporeal one, the same difficulty will
recurr, that I urged before. For this Body will not, by Mr. Hobbs's calling or
thinking it divine, cease to be a true Body, and consequently a portion of
Divine Matter will not be able to move a portion of our Mundane Matter without
it be it self contiguous and moved; which it cannot be but by another portion
of Divine Matter so qualified to impress a Motion, nor this again but by
another portion.

And besides, that it will breed a strange confusion in rendering the Physical
Causes of things, unless an expedient be found to teach us how to distinguish
accurately the Mundane Bodies from the Divine (which will perhaps prove no
easy task;) I see not yet, how this Corporeal Deity will make good the
Hypothesis I examine. For I demand, How this Divine Matter comes to have this
Local Motion that is ascribed to it? If it be answered, That it has it from
its own Nature, without any other Cause; since the Epicureans affirm the same
of their Atoms, or merely Mundane Matter, I demand, How the Truth of Mr.
Hobbs's Opinion will appear to me, to whom it seems as likely by the Phenomenon
of Nature that occur, that Mundane Matter should have a congenit Motion, as
that any thing that is Corporeal can be God, and capable of moving it; which to
be, it must, for ought we know, have its Subsistence divided into as many
minute parts, as there are Corpuscles and Particles in the World that move
separately from their neighboring ones. And, to draw toward a Conclusion, I
say, that these minute Divine Bodies, that thus moved those portions of Mundane
Matter, concerning which Mr. Hobbs denies that they can be moved but by Bodies
contiguous and moved, these Divine Substances, I say, are, according to the
late supposition, true Bodies, and yet are moved themselves not by Bodies
contiguous and moved, but by a Motion which must be Innate, derived or flowing
from their very essence or nature, since no such Body is pretended to have a
Being as cannot be referred as a portion, either to the Mundane, or the Divine
Matter. In short, since Local Motion is to be found in one, if not in both, of
these two Matters, it must be natural to (at least some parts of) one of them
in Mr. Hobbs's Hypothesis; for, though he should grant an Immaterial Being, yet
it could not produce a Motion in any Body, since, according to him, no Body can
be moved but by another Body contiguous and moved.

As then to this grand Position of Mr. Hobbs, though, if it were cautiously
proposed as it is by Des Carts, it may perhaps be safely admitted, because
Cartesius acknowledges, the first Impulse that set Matter a moving, and the
Conservation of Motion once begun, to come from God; yet, as it is crudely
proposed by the favorers of Mr. Hobbs, I am so far from seeing any such cogent
Proof for it, (as were to be wished for a Principle on which he builds so much,
and which yet is not at all evident by its own light,) that I see no competent
Reason to admit it.

I expect your Friend should here oppose to what I have been saying, that
formerly recited Sentence, that is so commonly employed in the Schools as well
of Divines as of Philosophers: That such or such an Opinion is true in
Divinity, but false in Philosophy; or on the contrary, Philosophically true,
but Theologically false.

Upon what Warrant those, that are wont to employ such Expressions, ground
their Practice, I leave to them to make out; but as to the Objection it self,
as it supposes these ways of speaking to be well grounded, give me leave to
consider, That Philosophy may signify two things, which I take to be very
differing.

For first it is most commonly employed to signify a System or Body of the
Opinions and other Doctrines of the particular Sect of those Philosophers that
make use of the Word. As when an Aristotelian talks of Philosophy, he usually
means the Peripatetick, as an Epicurean does the Atomical, or a Platonist the
Platonic.

But we may also in a more general and no less just Acception of the term,
understand by Philosophy, a Comprehension of all those Truths or Doctrines,
which the natural Reason of man, freed from Prejudices and Partiality, and
assisted by Learning, Attention, Exercise, Experiments, etc. can manifestly
make out, or by necessary consequence deduce from clear and certain Principles.

This being briefly premised, I must in the next place put you in mind of what
I formerly observed to you, that many Opinions are maintained by this or that
Sect of Christians, or perhaps by the Divinity-Schools of more than one or two
Sects, which either do not at all belong to the Christian Religion, or at least
ought not to be looked upon as parts of it, but upon supposition, that the
Philosophical Principles and Ratiocinations, upon which, and not upon express
or mere Revelation, they are presumed to be founded, are agreeable to right
Reason.

And having premised these two things, I now answer more directly to the
Objection; that, if Philosophy be taken in the first sense abovementioned, its
teaching things repugnant to Theology, especially taking this word in the more
large and vulgar sense of it, will not cogently conclude any thing against the
Christian Religion. But, if Philosophy be taken in the latter sense for true
Philosophy, and Divinity only for a System of those Articles that are clearly
revealed as Truths in the Scriptures; I shall not allow any thing to be false
in Philosophy so understood that is true in Divinity so explained, till I see
some clearer Proof of it than I have yet met with. I have had occasion in the
foregoing Discourse, to say something, that may be applied to the Point under
debate; and in the following part of this Letter I shall have Occasion to touch
upon it again: And therefore I shall now say but this in short, That it is not
likely, that God, being the Author of Reason as well as Revelation, should make
it men's Duty to believe as true that which there is just Reason to reject as
false.

There is indeed a Sense, wherein the Phrases, I disapprove, may be tolerated.
For if by saying, that such a thing is true in Divinity, but false in
Philosophy, it were meant, that if the Doctrine were proposed to a mere
Philosopher, to be judged of according to the Principles of his Sect, or at
most according to what he, being supposed not to have heard of the Christian
Religion, or had it duly proposed to him, would reject it, the Phrase might be
allowed, or at least indulged. But then we must consider, that the Reason why
such a Philosopher would reject the Articles of Christian Faith, would not be,
because they could by no Mediums be possibly proved, but because these
Doctrines being founded upon a Revelation, which he is presumed either not to
have heard of, or not to have had sufficiently proposed to him, he must, as a
Rational man, refuse to believe them upon the score of their Prooflesness. And
the same Philosopher, supposing him to be a true one, though he will be very
wary, how he admits any thing as true that is not proved, if it fall properly
under the cognizance of Philosophy; yet he will be as wary, how he pronounces
things to be false or impossible in matters which he discerns to be beyond the
reach of mere natural Reason, especially if Sober and Learned men do very
confidently pretend to know something of those matters by Divine Revelation,
which though he will not easily believe to be a true one, yet he will admit, in
case it should be proved true, to be a fit Medium to evince Truths, which, upon
the Account of mere natural Light, he could not discover or embrace. To be
short, such a Philosopher would indeed reject some of the Articles of our Faith
hypothetically; i. e. upon supposition that he need employ no other Touchstone
to examine them by, than the Principles and Dictates of Natural Philosophy,
that he is acquainted with (upon which score I shall hereafter show, that
diverse strange Chemical Experiments, and other Discoveries would also be
rejected;) but yet he would nor pronounce them false, but upon supposition that
the Arguments, by which they lay claim to Divine Revelation, are incompetent in
their kind. For as he will not easily believe any thing within the Sphere of
Nature that agrees not with the Established Laws of it; so he will not easily
adventure to pronounce one way or other in matters that are beyond the Sphere
of Nature: He will indeed (as he justly may,) expect as full a Proof of the
Divine Testimony that is pretended, as the Nature of the thing requires and
allows; but he will not be backward to acknowledge, that God to whom that
Testimony is ascribed, is able to know and to do many more things than we can
explicate How He can discover, or imagine How any Physical Agent can perform.

[Since I proposed to you this fifth Consideration, I happened to light on a
passage in Des Cartes's Principles, which affords of what I have been
discovering the Suffrage of a Philosopher, Princip. Philes. part. prima. Artic.
25.
that is wont to be accused of excluding Theology too scrupulously out of his
Philosophy. His words are so full to my present Purpose, that I need not, to
accommodate them to it, alter one of them, and therefore shall transcribe them
just as they lie: Si forte nobis Deus de seipso, vel aliis, aliquid revelet,
quod naturales Ingenii nostri vires excedat, qualia sunt mysteria Incarnationis
and Trinitatis, non recusabimus illa credere, quamvis non clare intelligamus,
nec ullo modo mirabimur, multa esse tum in immensa ejus natura, tum etiam in
rebus ab eo creatis, quae captum nostrum excedant.]

And let me add on this occasion, that whereas the main Scruples that are said
to be suggested by Philosophy against some mysterious Articles of Religion, are
grounded upon this, that the Modus, as they speak, of those things is not
clearly conceivable, or at least is very hardly explicable; these objections
are not always so weighty as perhaps by the confidence wherewith they are urged
you may think them. For whereas I observed to you already, that there are
diverse things maintained by School Divines, which are not contained in the
Scripture, that observation is chiefly applicable to the things we are
considering; since in several of these nice Points, the Scripture affirms only
the thing, and the Schoolmen are pleased to add the Modus: And as by their
unwarrantable boldness the School Divines determine many things without Book;
so the scruples and objections that are made against what the Scripture really
delivers, are usually grounded upon the Erroneous or Precarious Assertions of
the School Philosophers, who often give the Title of Metaphysical Truths to
Conceits that do very little deserve that name, and to which a rigid
Philosopher would perhaps think that of Sublime Nonsense more proper. But of
this I elsewhere say enough, and therefore shall now proceed to the
consideration I chiefly intended, viz. That from hence, That the Modus of a
revealed Truth is either very hard, or not at all explicable, it will not
necessarily follow, that the thing it self is irrational, provided the positive
Proofs of its Truth be sufficient in their kind. For even in Natural things
Philosophers themselves do and must admit several things, whereof they cannot
clearly explicate or perhaps conceive the Modus. I will not here mention the
Origin of Substantial Forms as an instance in this kind, because though it may
be a fit one as to the Peripatetick Philosophy; yet not admitting that there
are any such Beings, I will take no further notice of them; especially because
for a clear Instance to our present purpose, we need go no further than our
selves, and consider the Union of the Soul and Body in man. For who can
Physically explain, both how an immaterial Substance should be able to guide or
determine, and excite the motions of a Body, and yet not be able to produce
motion in it (as by dead Palsies, great Faintnesses, etc. it appears the Soul
cannot,) and, which is far more difficult, how an incorporeal Substance should
receive such Impressions from the motions of a Body, as to be thereby affected
with real pain and pleasure; to which I elsewhere add some other properties of
this Union, which, though not taken notice of, are perhaps no less difficult to
be conceived and accounted for. For how can we comprehend that there should be
naturally such an intimate Union betwixt two such distant Substances as an
(Incorporeal) Spirit and a Body, as that the former may not, when it pleases,
quit the latter, which cannot possibly have any strings or chains that can tie
or fasten to it that which has no Body on which they may take hold. And I there
show, that it is full as difficult, Physically to explicate how these so
differing Beings come to be united, as how they are kept from parting at
pleasure, both the one and the other being to be resolved into the mere
appointment of God. And if to avoid the abstruseness of the Modus of this
Conjunction betwixt the Rational Soul and the Humane Body, it be said, as it is
by the Epicureans, that the former is but a certain Contexture of the finer and
most subtle parts of the latter, the formerly proposed abstruseness of the
Union betwixt the Soul and the Body will indeed be shifted off; but 'twill be
by a Doctrine that will not much relieve us. For those that will allow no Soul
in Man but what is Corporeal, have a Modus to explain, plain that I doubt they
will always leave a Riddle. For of such I desire, that they would explain to
me, (who know no effects that Matter can produce but by Local Motion and Rest,
and the consequences of it,) how mere Matter, (let them suppose it as fine as
they please, and contrive it as well as they can) can make Syllogisms, and have
Conceptions of Universals, and invent speculative Sciences and Demonstrations,
and in a word do all those things which are done by Man, and by no other
Animal; and he that shall intelligibly explicate to me the Modus of matters,
framing Theories and Ratiocinations, will, I confess, not only instruct me, but
surprise me too.

And now give me leave to make this short Reflection on what has been said in
this Section, compared with what formerly I said in the first Section: That if
on the one hand we lay aside all the Irrational Opinions that the Schoolmen and
other bold Writers have unwarrantably fathered on Christian Religion, and on
the other hand all the Erroneous Conceits repugnant to Christianity, which the
Schoolmen and others have prooflesly fathered upon Philosophy, the seeming
Contradictions betwixt solid Divinity and true Philosophy will appear to be but
few, as I think the Real ones will be found to be none at all.

SECT. VI.
The next Consideration I shall propose, is, That a thing may, if singly or
precisely considered, appear Unreasonable, which yet may be very Credible, if
considered as a Part of, or a manifest Consequence from, a Doctrine that is
highly so.

Of this I could give you more Instances in several Arts and Sciences, than I
think fit to be here specified; and therefore I shall content my self to
mention three or four.

When Astronomers tell us that the Sun, which seems not to us a foot broad, nor
considerably bigger than the Moon, is above a hundred and threescore times
bigger than the whole Globe of the Earth, which yet is forty times greater than
the Moon; the thing thus nakedly proposed, seems very Incredible. But yet,
because Astronomers very skilful in their Art, have, by finding the
Semidiameter of the Earth, and observing the Parallaxes of the Planets,
concluded the proportion of these three Bodies to be such as has been
mentioned, or thereabout, even Learned and Judicious Men of all sorts,
(Philosophers, Divines, and others,) think it not Credulity to admit what they
affirm.

So the relations of Earthquakes that have reached diverse hundreds of miles; of
Eruptions of fire, that have at once overflown and burned vast Scopes of Land;
of the blowing up of Mountains by their own fires; of the Casting up of new
Islands in the Sea it self, and other Prodigies of too unquestionable. Truth;
(for I know what work Ignorance and Superstition have made about other
Prodigies:) If they were attested but by slight and ordinary Witness, they
would be judged Incredible, but we scruple not to believe them, when the
Relations are attested with such Circumstances, as make the Testimony as strong
as the things attested are strange.

If ever you have considered, what Clavius, and diverse other Geometricians
teach upon the sixteenth Proposition of the third Book of Euclide, (which
contains a Theorem about the Tangent and the Circumference of a Circle,) you
cannot but have taken notice, that there are scarce greater Paradoxes delivered
by Philosophers or Divines, than you will find asserted by Geometricians
themselves. And though of late the Learned Jesuit Tacquet, and some rigid
Mathematicians, have questioned diverse of those things, yet even what some of
these severe Examiners confess to be Geometrically demonstrable from that
Proposition, contains things so strange, that Philosophers themselves, that are
not well acquainted with that Proposition and its Corollaries, can scarce look
upon them as other than Incomprehensible, or at least Incredible, things; which
yet, as improbable as they are considered in themselves, even rigid
Demonstrators refuse not to admit, because the^ are legitimately deducible from
an Acknowledged truth.

And so also among the Magnetical Phenomenon there are diverse things, which
being nakedly proposed must seem altogether unfit to be believed, as indeed
having nothing like them in all nature; whereas those that are versed in
Magnetic Philosophy, even before they have made particular Trials of them,
will look upon them as credible, because, how great Paradoxes soever they may
seem to others, they are consonant and consequent to the Doctrine of Magnetism,
whose grand Axioms (from what cause soever Magnetisms are to be derived) are
sufficiently manifest; and therefore a Magnetical Philosopher would not, though
an ordinary Philosopher would, think it unreasonable to believe, that one part
of the same Loadstone should draw a Needle to it, and the other part drive the
same Needle from it; and that the Needle in a Seamans Compass, after having
been carried perhaps many hundred Leagues (through differing Climates, and in
stormy weather) without varying its Declination, may upon a sudden, without any
manifest cause, point at some part of the Horizons several whole degrees
distant from that which it pointed to before. To which might here be added
diverse other scarce credible things, which either others or I have tried about
Magnetical Bodies; but I shall hereafter have occasion to take notice of some
of them in a fitter place.

Wherefore, when something delivered in or clearly deduced from Scripture is
objected against, as a thing which it is not reasonable to believe, we must not
only consider, whether, if it were not delivered in that Book, we should upon
its own single Account think it fit or unworthy to be believed; but whether or
no it is so improbable, that it is more fit to be believed, that all the proofs
that can be brought for the Authority of the Scripture are to be Rejected, than
that this thing which comes manifestly recommended to our belief by that
Authority, is worthy to be Admitted: I say, manifestly recommended by that
Authority, because that, if the thing be not clearly delivered in Scripture, or
be not clearly and cogently deduced thence, so far as that clearness is
wanting, so far the thing it self wants of the full Authority of the Scripture,
to impose it on our assent.

[Perhaps it will procure what I have said the better Reception, if I add a
couple of Testimonies not of any modern Bigots, no nor of any devout Fathers of
the Church; but of two modern Authors of Sects, and who in their kinds have
been thought extremely subtle Reasoners, and no less rigid Exacters of Reason
in whatever they admitted.

The first passage I shall allege, is the Confession of Socinus, who in his
second Epistle to Andreas Dudithius, speaks thus: Jam vero ut rem in pauca
conferam, quod ad meas aliorumve opiniones, quae novitatis praese ferunt
speciem, attinet, mihi ita videtur; si detur, Scriptur am sacram ejus esse
Authoritatis, ut nullo modo ei contradici possit, ao de interpretatione illius
omnis duntaxat sit scrupulus, (which he allows) nihil, utut verisimile aut
ratione conclusum videatur, afferri contra eas possit quod ullarum sit virium,
quotiescunque illae sententiis atque verbis illius Libri aut rationibus liquido
inde deduct is probatae atque assertae fuerint. Which confession of Socinus is
surpassed by that of his Champion Smalcius, to be produced elsewhere in this
Paper. The other passage I met with in the Excellent Monsieur Des Cartes's
Principles of Philosophy, Part. 2. Artic. 34, 35.
where discoursing of the either Infinite or Indefinite Division of the
Particles of Matter, which is necessary to make them fill exactly all the
differingly figured spaces, through which various motions do sometimes make
them pass; he confesses (as he well may,) that the point is exceedingly
abstruse, and yet concludes: Et quamvis quomodo fiat indefinita ista Divisio
cogitatione comprehendere nequeamus, non ideo tamen debemus dubitare quin fiat,
quia clare percipimus ill am necessario sequi ex natura materiae nobis
evidentissime cognita, etc.]

And in this place it may be seasonable as well as pertinent, to take notice of
three or four particulars, which, though they be in some measure implied in the
former general Consideration, yet deserve to be distinctly inculcated here,
both for their importance, and because they may as well be deduced as
Corollaries from the foregoing Discourse, as be confirmed by the proofs I shall
add to each of them. Of these the first shall be this, that we must not
presently conclude a thing to be contrary to Reason, because Learned Men
profess or even complain, that they are not able clearly to comprehend it,
provided there be competent proof that it is true, and the thing be Primary or
Heteroclite.

For it is not always necessary to the making the belief of a thing Rational,
that we have such a Comprehension of the thing believed as may be had and
justly required in ordinary Cases; since we may be sure of the Truth of a
thing, not only by Arguments suggested by the Nature of the thing it self
clearly understood by us; but by the external Testimony of such a Witness, as
we know will not deceive us, and cannot (at least in our Case) be reasonably
suspected to be himself deceived. And therefore it may in some Cases suffice to
make our belief Rational, that we clearly discern sufficient Reason to believe
that a thing is true, whether that Reason spring from the Evidence and Cogency
of the extrinsick Motives we have to believe, or from the Proofs suggested to
us by what we know of the Thing believed, nay, though there be something in the
nature of that Thing, which does puzzle and pose our Understanding.

That many things that are very hard, and require a great attention, and a good
judgment (...) made out, may yet be true, will b^ ^^nifest from what I shall
within a Page or two note about diverse Geometrical Demonstrations, which
require, besides a good stock of knowledge in those matters, an almost
invincible Patience to carry so many things along in ones Mind, and go through
with them. That also there are other things, which, though they be as
manifestly Existent, as those newly mentioned can be demonstratively True, are
yet of so abstruse a kind, that it is exceeding difficult to frame clear and
satisfactory Notions of their Nature, we might learn, if we were inquisitive
enough, even from some of the most obvious things; such as, for instance,
Matter and Time: As to the former whereof, ( Matter,) though the World and our
own Bodies be made of it, yet the Idea's that are wont to be framed of it even
by the greatest Clerks, are encumbered with too great difficulties (some of
which I elsewhere mention) to be easily acquiesc'd in by considering Men. And
as for the latter, (Time,) though that justly celebrated saying of Augustine,
Si nemo ex me quaerat quid sit Tempus, scio; si quaerenti explicare velim,
nescio; seem in (...) ^^rst part of it to own a knowledge (...) what Time is,
yet by the latter part, (wherein he confesses he cannot declare what it is,) I
am not only allowed to believe that he could not propose an intelligible Idea
of it, but invited to think that in the first part of the sentence he only
meant, that when he did not attentively consider the Nature of it, he thought
he understood it, or that he knew that there is such a thing as Time, though he
could not explain what it is.

And indeed, though Time be that, which all Men allow to be, yet, if per
impossible (as the Schools speak) a Man could have no other Notion or Proof of
Time and Eternity, (even such Eternity as must be conceded to something,) than
what he could collect from the best Descriptions of its Nature and Properties
that are wont to be given; I scarce doubt, but he would look upon it as an
unintelligible thing, and encumbered with too many Difficulties to be fit to be
admitted into a wise man's Belief. And this perhaps you will grant me, if you
have ever put your self to the Penance of perusing those confounding Disputes
and Speculations about Time and Eternity, that partly in Aristotle and his
Commentators, and partly among the Schoolmen, and others, are to be met with
upon these abstruse Subjects. And no wonder, since the Learned Gassendus and
his Followers have very plausibly (if not solidly) shown, that Duration, (and
Time is but Duration measured) is neither a Substance nor an Accident, which
they also hold of Space; about which the Altercations among Philosophers and
Schoolmen are but little, if at all, inferior to those about Time. And I the
rather choose to mention these instances of Time and Space, because they agree
very well with what I intimated by the expression of Primary or Heteroclite
things.

To which may be referred some of those things, that are called Spiritual or
Supernatural, about which the same Considerations may have place, especially by
Reason of this Affinity between them, that when we treat of either, some Proofs
may in certain Cases be sufficient, in spite of such Objections, as in other
(and more ordinary Cases) would invalidate Arguments seemingly as strong as
those Proofs.

If it be here objected, That I am too bold in venturing without the Precedence
or Authority of Learned Men, to introduce so great a difference betwixt other
things and those which I call Primary and Heteroclite: I answer, That I shall
not solicitously enquire, whether any others have had the same thoughts that I
proposed; since, whether they be new or no, they ought not to be rejected, if
they be Rational.

And I have this inducement to suppose, that there ought to be in some cases a
great difference between them and other things, and consequently between the
judgments we make of the ways of arguing about them, and about other things; so
that they are exceeding difficult to be clearly conceived and explicated by our
imperfect Faculties, and by that difficulty apt to make what Men say of them,
though true, to be less satisfactory and acquiesced in, than things not more
true or rational, suggested upon enquiries about Subjects more familiar, or
which are at least more proportionate to our Faculties: For, those abstruse
things, of which we have been speaking, being such, as either have no proper
and clear Genus, by the help of which they may be comprehended, or have not any
thing in Nature, that is (sufficiently) like them, by a resemblance to which we
may conceive them; or being perhaps both Primary and Heteroclite too, as not
being derived from the common Physical Causes of other things, and having a
Nature widely differing from the rest of things; it is no wonder, that our
limited and imperfect Understandings should not be able to reach to a full and
clear Comprehension of them; but should be swallowed up with the Scruples and
Difficulties that may be suggested by a bold and nice enquiry into things, to
which there seems to belong, in some respect or other, a kind of Infinity.

Upon these, and other Considerations of kin to them, I count it not
irrational, to think that things Primary and Heteroclite, as also by a parity
of Reason, some things Immaterial and Supernatural, may be sufficiently proved
in their kind, if there be such a positive proof of them as would be competent
and satisfactory, in case there were no considerable Objections made against
the thing proved (especially supposing that the asserted Doctrine be not
encumbered with much greater inconveniences than the contrary Doctrine, or than
any other, proposed concerning that Subject:) Nay, I know not, why we may not,
in judging of Primary and of Immaterial things, safely enough prefer that
Opinion, which has the more Cogent Positive Proofs, though it seem liable to
somewhat the greater inconveniences; because in such cases our understanding
is gratified with what it most requires in all cases, that is competent
Positive Inducements to assent; and it is not confounded by the Objections,
because a disability to answer them directly and fully may very well proceed
either from the too abstruse Nature of the thing, or the limitedness and
weakness of our humane Intellects.

And thus we may render a Reason, why, when we discourse of such uncommon
Matters, we may sometimes reasonably acquiesce in proofs in spite of such
Objections as in ordinary cases would be prevailing ones. For the things, about
which these proofs are conversant, being Primary or Heteroclite, or of as
abstruse a Nature as if they were so, it too often happens, that, what Opinion
soever we choose about them, we must admit something that is encumbered with
great difficulties, and therefore will be liable to great Objections, that
perhaps will never be directly and satisfactorily answered. And since it may
fare thus with us, where two opposite Opinions are contradictory, we may
conclude, that those difficulties will not cogently evince the falsity of a
Theological Opinion, which are but such, that the same, or as great, may be
objected against another, that either is manifestly or confessedly a Truth, or
which must necessarily be admitted to be one, if the contrary Theological Tenet
be supposed not to be one.

2. Another Corollary that may be drawn from the Discourse that afforded us the
former, may be this; That it may not be unreasonable to believe a thing, though
its Proof be very difficult to be understood. To manifest this, I shall need no
other Argument, than what may be afforded by diverse Geometrical and other
Mathematical Demonstrations; some of which are fetched by intermediate
Conclusions from Principles so very remote, and require so long a series of
Mediums to be employed about them, that not only a Man that were of Pilate's
temper, who having asked Him that could best tell him, What is Truth, would not
stay awhile to be satisfied about his Inquiry, would before he reaches half way
to the End of the Demonstration, or perhaps of the Lemma's, be quite
discouraged from proceeding any further; but even sedulous and heedful Perusers
do find themselves oftentimes unable to carry along such a chain of Inferences
in their minds, as clearly to discern whether the whole Ratiocination be
coherent, and all the particulars have their due strength and connection. And
if you please to make a Trial upon some of the Demonstrations of Vitellio, or
even of Clavius, that I can direct you to, I doubt they will put you to the
full Exercise of your Patience, and quite tire your Attention: And though the
modern Algebrists by their Excellent way of expressing Quantities by Symbols,
have so abridg'd Geometrical and Arithmetical Demonstrations, that by the help
of species it is sometimes easy to Demonstrate that in a Line, which in the
ordinary way would require a whole Page, (as our most Learned Friend Dr. Ward
has ingeniously shown, by giving the Demonstrations of about twenty of Mr.
Hobbs's Theorems in less than so many Lines;) yet some Demonstrable Truths are
so abstruse, that even in the Symbolical way Men need more attention to discern
them, than most Men would employ in any Speculation whatsoever. And Descartes
himself, as famous and expert a Master as he was in this way, confesses in a
Letter to one of his Friends, that the Solution of a Problem in Pappus cost him
no less than six weeks study; though now, most Mathematical Demonstrations do
indeed seem far shorter than they are, because that Euclid's Elements being
generally received among Mathematicians, all his Propositions are so many
Lemmata, which need be but referred to in the Margin, being known and
demonstrated already. By all which it may appear, that, granting some
Theological Truths to be complained of by many as things so mysterious and
abstruse, that they cannot readily discern the force of those Proofs, that
Descartes, and other subtle Speculators have proposed to evince them; yet if
other Learned Men that are competent Estimators, and are accustomed to bring
much Patience and Attention to the discernment of difficult and important
Truths, profess themselves satisfied with them, the Probations may yet be
cogent, notwithstanding the difficulty to have their strength apprehended. For
if such a difficulty ought to pass for a mark that a Ratiocination is not
valid, no Reasonings will be found fitter to be rejected or distrusted, than
many of those whose Cogency has procured such a Repute to Mathematical
Demonstrations.

3. It may also be deduced from the foregoing discourse, That it is not always
against Reason to embrace an Opinion which may be encumbered with a great
Difficulty, or liable to an Objection not easy to be solved; especially if the
Subject be such, that other Opinions about it avoid not either the same
Inconveniences, or as great ones. The first part of what is said in this
Consideration, will often follow from the Supposition made in the precedent
Discourse. For those things that render a Doctrine or Assertion difficult to be
conceived and explained, will easily supply the Adversaries of it with
Objections against it.

And as for the latter, viz. the Clause which takes notice that the
Consideration, to which it is annexed, will chiefly take place in that sort of
Opinions that are specified in it; it will need but little of distinct Proof.

For it is manifest enough, that if the Subject or Object, about which the
Opinion proposed is conversant, be such, that not only the contradictory
Opinion, but others also, are obnoxious either to the same Inconveniences, or
to others that are equal or greater; the difficulties that are urged against a
Theological Doctrine, may (as has been shown already in the first Corollary)
be rationally enough attributed, not to the unreasonableness of the Opinion,
but to somewhat else.

The last Consectary, that (as I intimated) may be deduced from the precedent
Discourse, is, That it is not always Unreasonable to believe something
Theological for a Truth, which (I do not say is truly inconsistent with, but)
we do not clearly discern to comport very well with something else that we also
take for a Truth, or perhaps that is one indeed; if the Theological Tenet be
sufficiently proved in its kind, and be of that sort of things that we have
been of late and are yet discoursing of.

The generality of our Philosophers, as well as Divines, believe, That God has
a foreknowledge of all future Contingencies; and yet how a certain Prescience
can consist with the Free Will of Man, (which yet is generally granted him, in
things merely Moral or Civil,) is so difficult to discern, that the Socinians
are wont to deny such things, as depend upon the will of free Agents, to be the
proper Objects of Omniscience; and the Head of the Remonstrants, though a very
subtle Writer, confesses that he knows not, how clearly to make out the
consistency of Gods Prescience and Man's freedom; both which he yet confesses to
be Truths, being compelled to acknowledge the former, (for the latter is
evident,) as well by the Infiniteness that must be ascribed to Gods
Perfections, as by the Prophetic Predictions, whereby such contingent Events
have been actually foretold. And the reconcilement of these Truths is not a
difficulty peculiar to the Christian Religion, but concerns speculative Men in
all Religions, who acknowledge the Deity to be infinitely perfect, and allow
Man, as they do, to be a free Agent.

[But I have made this Section so prolix already, that I must not enlarge on
this third particular. And therefore I shall shut it up with an acknowledgment
of Descartes, which may be applied not only to it, but to almost all that has
been discoursed in this Section, and indeed to a great part of this Letter. He
then in an Epistle, that came not forth till some years after the Writers
death, speaks thus to the Philosophical Adversary to whom it is addressed: As I
have often said, when the Question is about things that relate to God, or to
what is Infinite, we must not consider what we can comprehend of them, Volume
2. Letter 16.
(since we know that they ought not to be comprehended by us) but only what we
can conceive of them, or can attain to by any certain Reason or Argument.

SECT. VII.
And now it is time to advance to one of the main Considerations I had to
propose to you concerning the Subject of this Letter, and it is this; That when
we are to judge, whether a thing be contrary to Reason or not, there is a great
deal of difference, whether we take Reason for the Faculty furnished only with
its own innate Principle, and such Notions as are generally obvious, (nay, and
if you please, with this or that Philosophical Theory;) or for the Faculty
illuminated by Divine Revelation, especially that which is contained in the
Books commonly called the Scripture.

To clear and enforce this the better, I shall invite you to take notice with
me of the two following particulars.

We may then in the first place consider, That even in things merely Natural,
Men do not think it at all Irrational, to believe diverse such things upon
extrinsecal Proofs, especially the Testimony of the skilful, as, if it were not
for that Testimony, a Man, though born with good parts, and possibly very
Learned in the Peripatetick or some other particular Philosophy, would look
upon as Irrational to be believed, and contrary to the Laws of Nature.

Of this I shall give you some Instances in the Phenomenon of the Loadstone,
and particularly such as these; That the Loadstone, though (as was above
intimated) with one part it will draw, yet with another the same stone will
repel the same point of the same excited Needle; and yet at the same time be
fit to attract either point of another Needle that never came near a Loadstone
before: That though it be the Loadstone that imparts an attractive virtue to
the Iron, yet when the Loadstone is cap'd, as they called it, and so a piece of
Iron (and consequently a distance) is interposed betwixt the stone and the
weight to be raised, it will take up by many times more than if it be it self
applied immediately thereunto, insomuch that Mersennus relates In his little
Tract de Magnetis Propri^tatibus. p. m. 350.
, that (if there be no mistake,) he had a Loadstone that of it self would take
up but half an Ounce of Iron, which when armed (or cap'd) would lift up ten
Pounds, which (says he) exceeded the former weight three hundred and twenty
times: That a Mariners Needle, being once touched with a vigorous Loadstone,
will afterward, when freely poised, turn it self North and South; and if it be
by force made to regard the East and West, or any other points of the Compass,
as soon as it is left at liberty, 'twill of its self return to its former
Position: That a Loadstone floating on water, will as well come to, and follow
a piece of, Iron that is kept from advancing toward it; as, when it self is
fixed, and the Iron at liberty, 'twill draw that Metal to it: That without any
sensible alteration in the Agent or the Patient, the Loadstone will in a trice
communicate all its virtues to a piece of Steel, and enable that to communicate
them to another piece of the same Metal: That if a Loadstone, having been marked
at one end, be cut long-wise according to its Axis, and one Segment be freely
suspended over the other, the halves of the marked end, that touched one another
before, will not now lie together, but the lower will drive away the upper; and
that which regarded the North in the marked end of the entire Loadstone, will
join with that extreme of the lower half, which in the entire stone regarded
the South: That (as appears by this last named Property) there are the same
Magnetical Qualities in the separated parts of a Magnet, as in the entire
stone; and if it be cut, or even rudely broken into a great many parts or
fragments, every one of these portions, though perhaps not so big as a Corn of
Wheat, will, if I may so speak, set up for its self, and have its own Northern
and Southern Poles, and become a little Magnet, sui juris, or independent upon
the stone from which 'twas severed, and from all its other parts: That, if a
Loadstone be skilfully made Spherical, this little Magnetic Globe, very fitly
by our Gilbert called a Terrella, will not only, being freely placed, turn
North and South, and retain that Position, but have its Poles, its Meridians,
its Equator etc. upon good grounds designable upon it, as they are upon the
great Globe of the Earth. And this will hold, whether the Terrella be great or
small.

I might not only much increase the number of these odd Magnetical
Phaenomena's, but add others about other Subjects: But these may suffice to
suggest to us this Reflection, That there is no doubt to be made, but that a
Man, who never had the opportunity to see or hear of Magnetical Experiments,
would look upon these as contrary to the Principles of Nature, and therefore to
the Dictates of Reason, as (accordingly) some Learned Aristotelians, to whom I
had occasion to propose some of them, rejected them as Incredible. And I doubt
not, but I could frame as plausible Arguments from the mere Axioms of
Philosophers, and the Doctrine of Philosophic Schools against some Magnetical
Phenomenon, which Experience has satisfied me of, as are wont to be drawn from
the same Topics against the Mysterious Articles of Faith; since among the
strange Properties of the Loadstone there are some, which are not only
admirable and stupendous, but seem repugnant to the Dictates of the received
Philosophy and the course of Nature. For, whereas Natural Bodies, how subtle
soever, require some particular Dispositions in the Medium through which their
Corpuscles are to be diffused, or their Actions transmitted, so that Light it
self, whether it be a most subtle Body, or a naked Quality, is resisted by all
opacous Mediums, and the very effluvia of Amber and other Electricks will not
permeate the thinnest Glass, or even a sheet of fine Paper; yet the Loadstone
readily performing his Operations through all kind of Mediums, without
excepting Glass it self.

If the Poles of two Magnetic Needles do both of them regard the North,
another Philosopher would conclude them to have a Sympathy, at least to be
unlikely to ^isagree; and yet, if he bring these Extremes of the same
Denomination within the reach of one another, one will presently drive away the
other as if there were a powerful Antipathy between them.

A somewhat long Needle being placed horizontally, and exactly poised upon the
point of a Pin, if you gently touch one end with the Pole of a vigorous Magnet,
that end shall manifestly dip or stoop, though you often take it off the Pin,
and put it on again. And this inclination of the Needle will continue many
years, and yet there is not only no other sensible change made in the Metal by
the Contact of the Loadstone; but one end has required a durable Preponderancy,
though the other be not lighter, nor the whole Needle heavier than before. And
the Inclination of the Magnetic Needle may be by another touch of the
Loadstone taken away without lessning the weight of the part that is deprived
of it.

The Operation that in a trice the Loadstone has on a Mariners Needle, though
it makes no sensible change in it, or weakens the Loadstone it self, will not
be lost, though you carry it as far as the Southern Hemisphere; but it will not
be the same in all places, but in some the Magnetic Needle will point directly
at the North, in others 'twill deviate or decline some degrees toward the East
or the West: And, which seems yet more strange, the same Needle in the same
place will not always regard the same point of the Compass, but, looked on at
distant times, may vary from the true Meridian, sometimes to the West, and
afterward to the East.

All the communicable virtues of the Magnet may be imparted to Iron, without
any actual Contact of the two Bodies, but barely by approaching in a convenient
way the Iron to the Loadstone for a few moments. And the Metal may likewise be
deprived of those virtues in a trice, without any immediate Contact by the same
or another Loadstone.

If you mark one end of a Rod, or other oblong piece of Iron, that never came
near a Magnet, and hold it perpendicularly, you may at pleasure, and in the
hundredth part of a minute, make it become the North or South Pole of a
Magnetical Body. For if, when it is held upright, you apply to the bottom of it
the North-extreme of an excited and well-poiz'd Needle, the lower end of the
Iron will drive away that Extreme, which yet will be drawn by the upper end of
the same Iron. And if by inverting you make this lower end the uppermost, it
will not attract, but repel the same Lilly or North-point of the Needle, just
under which it is to be perpendicularly held.

Though, vis unita fortior, be a received Rule among Naturalists; yet
oftentimes, if a Magnet be cut into pieces, these will take up and sustain much
more Iron than the entire stone was able to do.

If of two good Loadstones the former be much bigger, and on that account
stronger than the other, the greater will draw a piece of Iron, and retain it
much more strongly than the lesser; and yet, when the Iron sticks fast to the
greater and stronger Loadstone, the lesser and weaker may draw the Iron from
it, and take it quite away.

These Phenomenon, (to mention now no more,) are so repugnant to the common
sentiments of Naturalists, and the ordinary course of things, that, if
antecedently to any Testimony of experience these Magnetical Properties had
been proposed to Aristotle himself, he would probably have judged them
fictitious things, as repugnant to the Laws of Nature: Nevertheless, though it
seems incredible, that the bare touch of a Loadstone should impart to the
Mariners Needle a Property, which, (as far as we know,) nothing in the whole
World that is not Magnetical can communicate or possess; and should operate (as
Men suppose) upon it at three or four thousand Leagues distance; yet this is
believed by the Peripateticks themselves upon the Testimony of those Navigators
that have sailed to the East and West Indies; and diverse even of the more rigid
of the modern Philosophers believe more than this, upon the Testimony of
Gilbert, Cabaeus, Kircherus, and other Learned Magnetical Writers, who have
affirmed these things; most of which I can also averr to you upon my own
knowledge.

Thus the Habitableness of the Torrid Zone, though (as I lately noted) upon
probable grounds denied by Aristotle, and the generality of Philosophers for
many Ages; yet not only that, but its Populousness is now confidently believed
by the Peripatetick Schoolmen themselves, who never were there.

And though Ptolomy, and some other eminent Astronomers, did with great care
and skill, and by the help of Geometry, as well as Observations, frame a Theory
of the Planets so plausibly contrived, that most of the succeeding
Mathematicians for 12 or 14 Ages acquiesc'd in it; yet almost all the modern
Philosophers and Astronomers, that have searched into these matters with a
readiness to believe their Eyes, and allow their Reason to act freely, have
been forced, if not to reject the whole Theory, yet at least to alter it quite,
as to the Number and Order of the Planets, though these last named Innovations
are sometimes solely, and always mainly built upon the Phenomenon discovered to
us by two or three pieces of glass placed in a long hollow Cane, and honored
with the name of a Telescope.

The last of the two things I invited you to consider with me, is this, That
when we are to judge, which of two disagreeing Opinions is most Rational, i.e.
to be judged most agreeable to right Reason, we ought to give sentence, not for
that which the Faculty, furnished only with such and such Notions, whether
vulgar or borrowed from this or that Sect of Philosophers, would prefer, but
that which is preferred by the Faculty furnished either with all the Evidence
requisite or advantageous to make it give a right Judgment in the case lying
before it; or, when that cannot be had, with the best and fullest Informations
that it can procure.

This is so evident by its own light, that your Friend might look upon it as an
affront to his Judgment, if I should go about solicitously to prove it. And
therefore I shall only advertise you, that, provided the Information be such as
a man has just cause to believe, and perceives that he clearly understands, it
will not alter the case, whether he have it by Reason, as that is taken for the
Faculty furnished but with its inbred Notions and the more common Observations,
or by some Philosophical Theory, or by Experiments purposely devised, or by
Testimony Humane or Divine, which last we call Revelation. For all these are
but differing ways of informing the Understanding, and of signifying to it the
same thing; as the Sight and the Touch may assure a Man, that a Body is smooth
or rough, or in motion or at rest; (and in some other instances several senses
discover to us the same Object, which is therefore called Objectum Commune;)
and provided these Informations have the conditions lately intimated, which way
soever the Understanding receives them, it may safely reason and build Opinions
upon them.

Astronomers have within these 100 years observed, that a Star has appeared
among the Fixed ones for some time, and having afterward disappeared, has yet
some years after that, showed it self again. And though, as to this surprising
Phenomenon, our Experimental Philosophers could have contributed nothing to
the producing it, and though it is quite out of all the received Systems of the
Heavens that Astronomers have hitherto delivered; yet the Star it self may be a
true Celestial light, and may allow us to Philosophize upon it, and draw
Inferences from the Discoveries it makes us; as well as we can from the
Phenomenon of those Stars that are not extraordinary, and of those Falling
Stars that are within our own Ken and Region.

That the Supernatural things, said to be performed by Witches and Evil
Spirits, might, if true, supply us with Hypotheses and Mediums whereby to
constitute and prove Theories, as well as the Phenomenon of mere nature, seems
tacitly indeed, but yet sufficiently, to be acknowledged, by those modern
Naturalists, that care not to take any other way to decline the Consequences
that may be drawn from such Relations, than sollicitously to show, that the
Relations themselves are all (as I fear most of them are) false, and occasioned
by the Credulity or Imposture of Men.

But not to do any more than glance at these matters, let us proceed upon what
is more unquestionable, and consider, that, since even our most Critical
Philosophers do admit many of the astonishing Attributes of Magnetic Bodies,
which themselves never had occasion to see, upon the Testimony of Gilbert, and
others, who never were able to give the true causes of them; because they look
upon those Relators as honest Men, and judicious enough not to be imposed upon
as to the matter of Fact: Since (I say) such amazing things are believed by
such severe Naturalists, upon the Authority of Men who did not know the
intimate nature of Magnetic Bodies; and since these strange Phenomenon are not
only assented to as true by the Philosophers we speak of, but many
Philosophical consequences are without haesitancy deduced from them, without
any blemish to the judgment of those that give their Assent both to the Things
and the Inferences; why should it be contrary to Reason to believe the
Testimony of God either about his Nature, which He can best, and He alone can
fully know, or about the things which either he himself has done, as the
Creation of the World and of Man; or which he means to do, as the destroying
the World, (whether the whole World, or our great Vortex only, I dispute not,)
and the raising both of good and bad Men to life again, to receive Rewards and
Punishments, according to their Demerits. For methinks that Apostle argues very
well, who says, If we receive the testimony of men, 1 John. v. 9.
the testimony of God is greater; especially about such things concerning his
own Nature, Will, and Purposes, as it is evident that Reason, by its own
unassisted light, cannot give us the knowledge of.

So that we Christians in assenting to Doctrines upon the account of
Revelation, need not, nor do not, reject the Authority of Reason, but only
appeal from Reason to it self, i. e. from Reason, as it is more slightly, to
its Dictates, as it is more fully informed. Of which two sorts of Dictates there
is nothing more rational, than to prefer the latter to the former.

And for my part I am apt to think, that, if what has been represented in this
Section were duly considered, this alone would very much contribute to prevent
or answer most of the Objections, that make such of the Questioners of
Religion, as are not resolutely vicious, entertain such hard thoughts of some
Articles of the Christian Faith, as if they were directly repugnant to Reason.
For, (as we were observing) that is not to be looked on as the judgment of
Reason, that is pronounced even by a rational Man according to a Set of
Notions, though the Inferences from these would be rational, in case there were
nothing else fit to be taken into consideration by him that judges; but that is
rather to be looked upon as the judgment of Reason, which takes in the most
Information procurable, that is pertinent to the things under consideration.
And therefore Men, though otherwise learned and witty, show themselves not
equal Estimators of the case of those that believe the Articles we speak of,
when they pronounce them to assent Irrationally, because the things they assent
to cannot be demonstrated or maintained by mere natural Reason, and would
probably be rejected by Democritus, Epicurus, Aristotle, or any other of the
ancient Philosophers, to whom they should be nakedly proposed, and whose
judgment should be desired about them. For, although this Allegation would
signify much, if we pretended to prove what we believe only by Arguments drawn
from the nature of the thing assented to; yet it will not signify much in our
case, wherein we pretend to prove what we believe, chiefly by Divine Testimony,
and therefore ought not to be concluded guilty of an Irrational Assent, unless
it can be shown, either that Divine Testimony is not duly challenged by us for
the main of our Religion; or that in the particular Articles we father
something on that Testimony which is not contained in it, or rightly deducible
from it. And to put us upon the proving our particular Articles of Faith,
sufficiently delivered in the Scriptures, and not knowable without Revelation,
by Arguments merely natural, without taking notice of those we can bring for
the proof of that Revelation on whose account we embrace those Articles, is to
challenge a Man to a Duel, upon condition he shall make no use of his best
weapons; and is as unreasonable, as if a Schoolman should challenge your Friend
to prove, that the Torrid Zone is inhabited, against the Reasons that the
Aristotelians are wont to give to prove it uninhabitable, without allowing him
to make use of the testimony of Navigators, who assure us of the constant
Brises that daily ventilate the Air, and qualify that heat which otherwise
would not be supported, and who furnish us with those other circumstances
whereon to build our proofs, which we, that were never there, can have but by
Relation.

And indeed, the limitations, that Christian Religion puts to some of the
dictates of Philosophy, which were wont to be admitted in a more general and
unrestrained Sense, and the Doctrines about God and the Soul, etc. that it
superadds to those which the light of Nature might lead Men to about the same
Subjects; though to some they may seem injurious to Philosophy and Reason, are
as little unkind to either, as is the Gardener to a Crab-stock, or some such
other wild Plant, when by cutting off some of the Branches, and by making a
slit in the Bark, that he may graft on it a Pare-main, or some other choice
Apples, by this seemingly hard usage he brings it to bear much nobler fruit,
than, if left to its own natural condition, it ever would have done.

I know not, whether to all that has been said in this Section. I may not add
thus much further, that it sometimes happens, that those very things, which at
first were proposed to the understanding, and believed upon the score of
Revelation, are afterward assented to by it upon the account of mere Reason. To
which purpose I consider, that not any of the ancient Philosophers, nay (as far
as I have read) even of those that believed God to be the Author of the World,
dreamed, that He created Matter of nothing, but only formed the World out of
praeexistent Matter, whereas Christian Divines usually teach as an Article of
Faith, That, besides what they call a mediate Creation, as when Fishes were
made out of the water, or Adam's body was made out of the earth, there was an
immediate Production of Matter it self out of nothing.

SECT. VIII.
After what has been hitherto discoursed, it may be seasonable to consider,
what kind of Probation, or what degree of Evidence may reasonably be thought
sufficient to make the Christian Religion thought fit to be embraced.

Perhaps I shall not need to tell you, that, besides the Demonstrations wont to
be treated of in vulgar Logic, there are among Philosophers three distinct,
whether kinds or degrees, of Demonstration. For there is a Metaphysical
Demonstration, as we may call that, where the Conclusion is manifestly built on
those general Metaphysical Axioms that can never be other than true; such as
Nihil potest simul esse and non esse; Non Entis nullae sunt Proprietates
Reales, etc. There are also Physical Demonstrations, where the Conclusion is
evidently deduced from Physical Principles; such as are, Ex nihilo nihil fit.
Null a substantia in nihilum redigitur, etc. which are not so absolutely
certain as the former, because, if there be a God, He may (at least for ought
we know) be able to create and annihilate Substances; and yet are held
unquestionable by the ancient Naturalists, who still suppose them in their
Theories. And lastly, there are Moral Demonstrations, such as those where the
Conclusion is built either upon some one such proof cogent in its kind; or some
concurrence of Probabilities that it cannot be but allowed, supposing the truth
of the most received Rules of Prudence and Principles of Practical Philosophy.

And this third kind of Probation, though it come behind the two others in
certainty, yet it is the surest guide, which the Actions of Men, though not
their Contemplations, have regularly allowed them to follow. And the
Conclusions of a Moral Demonstration are the surest that Men aspire to, not
only in the conduct of private Men's affairs, but in the Government of States,
and even of the greatest Monarchies and Empires. And this is considerable in
Moral Demonstrations, that such may consist, and be as it were made up of
particulars, that are each of them but probable; of which the Laws established
by God himself among his own People, as well as the practice of our Courts of
Justice here in England, afford us a manifest instance in the case of Murder,
and some other Criminal Causes. For, though the Testimony of a single Witness
shall not suffice to prove the accused party guilty of Murder; yet the
Testimony of two Witnesses, though but of equal Credit, that is, a second
Testimony added to the first, though of it self never a whit more credible than
the former, shall ordinarily suffice to prove a Man guilty; because it is
thought reasonable to suppose, that, though each Testimony single be but
probable, yet a concurrence of such Probabilities (which ought in Reason to be
attributed to the Truth of what they jointly tend to prove) may well amount to
a Moral certainty, i. e. such a certainty as may warrant the Judge to proceed
to the sentence of death against the Indicted party.

To apply these things now to the Christian Religion: If you consider, with how
much approbation from discerning Men that judicious Observation of Aristotle
has been entertained, where he says, that it is as unskilful and improper a
thing to require Mathematical Demonstrations in Moral Affairs, as to take up
with Moral Arguments in matters Mathematical; you will not deny, but that those
Articles of the Christian Religion that can be proved by a Moral, though not by
a Metaphysical or Physical, Demonstration, may without any blemish to a Man's
Reason be assented to; and that consequently (by virtue of the foregoing
Considerations) those other Articles of the Christian Faith, that are clearly
and legitimately deducible from the so demonstrated Truths, may likewise
without disparagement be assented to.

We may also here consider further, That the choosing or refusing to embrace
the Christian Religion, which is not proposed to us only as a System of
Speculative Doctrines, but also as a Body of Laws, according to which it
teaches us, that God commands us to worship Him, and regulate our Lives; the
embracing, I say, or not embracing this Religion, is an act of humane choice,
and therefore ought to be determined according to the dictates of Prudence.
Now, though in matters that very much import us, we may wish for and endeavor
after such Reasons, whereby to determine our Resolves, as may amount to Moral
Demonstrations; yet Prudence will not always require, that we should refuse to
act upon Arguments of a less Cogency than Moral Demonstrations. For oftentimes
in humane Affairs it so falls out, that diverse hazards or other inconveniences
will attend whatever resolution we take; and in that case, all that Prudence
requires, or can enable us to do, is, to take that resolution which upon the
whole matter seems to be preferable to any other; though that which is thus
preferred, may perhaps be liable to some Objection that cannot be directly
answered, but only obliquely, by the preponderancy of the Arguments that
persuade the choice against which the Objection is made.

But here perhaps you will tell me, that the safest way in a case of such
importance, is to suspend an action that is every way attended with
difficulties, and to forbear either embracing or rejecting the Christian
Religion, till the truth or falseness of it come to appear evident and
unquestionable.

To which I answer, that indeed in matters of bare Speculation, about which our
Understandings only need to be conversant, the suspension of Assent is not only
practicable, but usually the safest way; but Descartes himself, who has been
the greatest Example and Inculcator of this Suspension, declares, that he would
have it practiced only about humane Speculations, not about humane Actions;
Sed haec interim dubitatio ad solam contemplationem veritatis restringenda; non
quantum ad usum vitae: quia persaepe rerum agendarum occasio praeteriret,
antequam nos dubiis nostris exolvere possemus. Non raro quod tantum est
verisimile cogimur amplecti, vel etiam interdum, etsi e duobus unum altero
verisimilius non appareat, alterutrum tamen eligere. And in some of his other
writings he speaks so much to show, that it is unreasonable to expect in
matters, where embracing or rejecting a course that requires practice is
necessary, such a certainty as he judges necessary to make a true Philosopher
acquiesce in reference to Propositions about speculative matters, that I find
by one of his Letters, that he was vehemently accused for having taught, that
Men need not have as sure grounds for choosing virtuous and avoiding vicious
courses, as for determining about things merely Notional.

And here let me observe to you the difference, that I take notice of in the
cases where we are put upon deliberating, whether we will choose or refuse a
thing proposed. For it may be propounded to us, either as a proffer on whose
acceptance an advantage may be hoped, or as a duty, which, besides the
advantage it promises to the performance, has a Penalty annexed to the
nonperformance, or as an only expedient to avoid a great mischief, or obtain
a great good.

Thus when in the Theatrum Chymicum some of its chief Authors, as Lully, Geber,
Artephius, who pretend to have been Adepti, i. e. Possessors of the Elixir,
very earnestly exhort their Readers to apply themselves to so noble and useful
a study as Alchymy (by the help of which, the last named Artephius is said to
have lived a 1000 years,) they make but a Proposition of the first sort. For
though a prosperous attempt to make the Philosophers stone (supposing there be
such a thing) would possess a Man of an inestimable Treasure; yet, if he either
refuse to believe these Writers, or, if he do believe them, refuses to take the
pains required of him that would follow their counsel, he can only miss of the
wealth, etc. they would make him hope for, but is really never a whit the
poorer, or in a worse condition than if they had not endeavored to engage him.

But if an absolute Sovereign commands something to be done by his Subjects;
and to enforce his Command, does not only propose great Recompenses to those
that shall perform what is prescribed, but threatens heavy penalties to the
disobedient; this will belong to the second sort of Cases above mentioned, in
which, as it is evident, a Man has not the same latitude allowed him as in the
first.

But if we suppose, that a Man by a translation of very peccant Matter has got
a spreading Gangrene in his Arm, and a skilful Surgeon tell him, that, if he
will part with his Arm, he may be recovered, and save his life, which else he
will certainly lose: This Case will belong to the last sort above mentioned;
the Patients parting with his Arm being the only remedy of the Gangrene, and
expedient to save his life, and recover his health. And here also it is
manifest, that there are far stronger Motives, than those mentioned in the
first Case, to make a positive and timely Resolution.

To bring this home to our Subject, I need but mind you, that the Christian
Doctrine does not only promise a Heaven to sincere Believers, but threatens no
less than a Hell to the Refractory.

The voice of Moses to the Jews is this, Behold, I set before you this day a
blessing and a curse; Deutr. 11.26, 27, 28.
a blessing, if ye obey the Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command
you this day; and a curse, if ye will not obey the Commandment of the Lord your
God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day.

And the Commission that Christ gave his Apostles to preach the Gospel, runs
thus: Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, i. e.
to all Mankind; Mark 16.15, 16.
he that believes, and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believes not,
shall be damned.

By this you may perceive, that as far as there is either truth or probability
in the Christian Religion, so far forth he that refuses to become a Disciple to
it, runs a venture, not only to lose the greatest blessings that Men can hope
but to fall eternally into the greatest miseries that they can fear. And indeed
our Case in reference to the Christian Religion may not only be referred to the
second sort of Cases lately mentioned, but to the third sort too. For as the
language of the Author of the Christian Religion was to his Auditors, If ye
believe not that I am He (the Messiah) ye shall dye in your sins; John 8.24.
so of the two greatest Heralds of it, the one tells the Jews that neither is
there salvation in any other: For, there is no other Name under heaven given
among men whereby we must be saved: Acts 4.12.
And the other tells the Thessalonians, That the Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; 2 Thessalonians.
1. 7, 8, 9.
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power.

By all this it appears, that the Christian Religion is not proposed barely as
a proffer of Heaven in case Men embrace it, but as a Law that Men should
embrace it upon the greatest penalty, and as the only expedient and remedy to
attain eternal happiness, and escape endless misery; so that the forbearing to
submit our necks to the yoke of Christ, being as well a ruinous course, as to
reject it, that which Reason here puts us upon, is, not so much to consider,
whether or no the Arguments for the Christian Religion be Demonstrations, and
will enable a Man to answer directly all Objections and Scruples; (for there
are diverse courses that Prudence may enjoin a Man to steer, whilst Philosophy
suggests speculative doubts about the grounds of such Resolutions;) but whether
it be more likely to be true, than not to be true, or rather, whether it be not
more advisable to perform the conditions it requires upon a probable
expectation of obtaining the blessings it promises, than by refusing it to run
a probable hazard of incurring such great and endless miseries as it
peremptorily threatens.

It will perhaps be said, that this is a hard Case. But that is an Allegation I
am not here to consider; since it properly belongs to the Doctrine about the
Providence of God, who being the only Author and absolute Lord of the
Creatures, who can receive neither Laws nor Benefits from them, that can oblige
him to them; has a right to prescribe them what Laws he thinks fit, that are
not impossible for them to obey, and to punish their disobedience to such Laws;
and much more has a right to annex what conditions he pleases to that
inestimable Felicity he holds forth; the proffer of it upon any terms being a
free act of his mere goodness, and the value of it incomparably surpassing
whatever we Men can do or suffer to obtain it; especially considering, that, as
he might ensorce his Commands, as Sovereigns commonly do by threatening
Penalties to the disobedient, without proposing Rewards to the performers; so
he has given Men such probable Arguments to ground their expectations on, that
they will be self-condemned, if they reject the Religion he proposes, and yet
maintain it to be decent (if I may so speak) for him to crown their Faith with
unvaluable blessings. But, as I was saying, the direct and full Answer to this
Allegation belongs not to this place, where it may suffice to say, that whether
the Case be hard or no, yet this is the Case. And therefore though the proofs
of the Christian Religion did not amount (which yet I do not grant) to Moral
Demonstrations, a Man may act rationally in embracing that Religion, if, all
things considered, it appear more likely to be true, than not to be true.

And I shall by and by show you, that this is not the only Case, where
Prudence puts us upon making resolutions notwithstanding contrary doubts.

I know the harshness of the Case is by most Men made to consist in this, That
for a Religion, whereof the truth supposed in its promises and threats is not
demonstratively proved, we must resign up our pleasures, and sometimes undergo
considerable hardships and losses, and consequently we must quit what is
certain, for what is uncertain. I have in another Paper had occasion to say
something else to this Objection, than what (to avoid repetition) shall make up
my present Answer, which consists of two parts.

The first whereof is, That what we are to give up to become Christians, is not
really so valuable in itself as the Objecters think, and that it is of scarce
any value at all, if compared to the goods we may acquire by parting with them.
For alas! what is it that Christianity requires us to forego, but small petty
enjoyments? which those, that have had the most of, have found them, and
pronounced them unsatisfactory whilst they possessed them, and which manifest
experience shows to be no less transitory, than they have been declared empty,
since a thousand Accidents may take them from us, and Death will infallibly
after a short time (which can be but a moment compared to Eternity) take us
from them. And if it be said, that these Enjoyments, such as they are, are at
least the only happiness that we can make our selves sure of, I must freely
profess, that I think it therefore the more reasonable to part with them, if it
be necessary upon the hopes that Christian Religion gives us. For (especially
if a Man behold those things not only with a Philosophical eye that can look
through them, but with a Christian eye that can look beyond them,) if there be
no greater happiness, I do not think so poor a thing as Men call Happiness
worth being greedily desired; and if there be such a transcendent happiness as
Christianity holds forth, I am sure, that deserves to be the object of my
Ambition. So that either the Meanness of worldly happiness will make me think
it no great misery to want it, or the Excellency of heavenly Felicity will make
me think it great wisdom to part with earthly for it.

And now, in the second part of my Answer, I must invite you to consider with
me, that Christian Religion requires not of us actions more imprudent, than
diverse others, that are generally looked upon as complying with the dictates of
Prudence, and some of them practiced by great Politicians themselves in the
weighty affairs of State.

You know what a common practice it is in great storms at Sea, for the
Merchants themselves to throw overboard their Goods, and perhaps too their
Victuals (as in Paul's case) though they be sure to lose what they cast away,
and are not certain either that this loss will save the ship, or that the ship
may not be saved without it. The wisest, and even the worldliest Men, whether
Princes or private persons, think themselves never more so, than when they toil
and lay out their care and time, and usually deny themselves many things to
provide advantagiously for Children which they have but a Woman's word for, and
consequently a bare Moral probability to assure them to be theirs.

In the Small Pox many Physicians are for Bleeding, and others (as most of our
English Practitioners) are very much against it. Supposing then (which is no
very rare Case) that a person invaded by that disease, be told by one of his
Physicians, that unless Nature be eased of part of her burden by Phlebotomy,
she will never be able to overcome the disease; and on the contrary, the other
assures him, that, if by exhausting the treasure of life (the Blood) he further
weakens Nature which is but too weak already, the disease must needs overcome
her: What can a prudent Man do in this Case, where he can take no resolution,
against which probable Arguments, that are not directly and fully to be
answered, may not be opposed, and where yet the suspension of his resolution
may be as ruinous, as the venturing to take either of those he is invited to?

And in the formerly mentioned Case, of a Man that has a spreading Gangrene in
his Arm, if he consents that it be cut off, which Prudence often requires that
he should do, he is certain to lose one of his usefullest limbs, and is not
certain but that he may save his life without that loss, nor that he shall save
it by that loss.

And to give you an Instance or two of a more public nature: How many Examples
does History afford us of famous Generals and other great Commanders, who have
ventured their Forces and their Lives to seize upon places promised to be
betrayed to them by those they had corrupted with money; though the ground,
upon which they run this hazard, be the engagement of some, who, if they were
not Traitors that could falsify their faith, would never have been bribed to
make so criminal and ignominious an engagement? How often have the greatest
Politicians either resolved to enter into a War, or taken courses that they
foresee will end in a War, upon the informations they receive from those they
have corrupted in other Princes Councils; though, to believe such
Intelligencers, those who venture so much upon their informations, must suppose
them faithless and perfidious Men?

It were not difficult, to add other Instances to the same purpose, by which
joined with what has been above discoursed, it may appear, that a Man need not
renounce or lay aside his Reason to resolve to fulfill the conditions of the
Gospel, though the Arguments for it were none of them demonstrative ones. For
so much as a Probability of attaining by it such inestimable blessings, as it
proposes, and little more than a bare Probability of incurring, by rejecting
it, such unspeakable miseries as it threatens, may rationally induce a Man to
resolve upon fulfilling its reasonable conditions, and his Prudence may very
well be justified if it do but appear, that (1) It is more probable that some
Religion should be true, than that so many well attested Miracles alleged by
the ancient Christians should be false; and that God who is the Author of the
World, and of Men, (for so much, I think, may be Physically proved) should
leave Man whom he has so fitted, and by benefits and internal Laws obliged to
worship him, without any express direction how to do it: And that (2) If there
be any true Religion, the Christian is the most likely to be that, in regard
not only of the excellency of its Doctrine and Promises, but of the Prophecies
and Miracles that bare witness to it, the Records of which were made by honest
plain Men, who taught and practiced the strictest virtue, and who knew their
Religion condemned Lying, freely joined their Doctrine and Narratives with
their blood: the truth of which was so manifest in the times when they were
said to be done, that the evidence seemed abundantly sufficient to convert
whole Nations, and among them many considerable and prudent persons, who had
great opportunity as well as concern to examine the truth of them, and who were
by their interest and education so indisposed to embrace Christianity, that, to
make a sincere profession of it, they must necessarily relinquish both their
former Religion, and their former Vices, and venturously expose for it not only
their Fortunes, but their Lives.

If it be here objected, that it is very harsh, if not unreasonable, to exact
upon so great penalty as Damnation so firm an assent, as is requisite to Faith,
to such Doctrines as are either obscurely delivered, or have not their truth
demonstratively made out: I answer, that whatever others may think, I don't
believe, that there is any degree of Faith absolutely necessary to salvation,
that is not suitable to the evidence that Men may have of it, if they be not
wanting to themselves through Laziness, Prejudices, Vice, Passion, Interest, or
some other culpable defect. For considering that God is just, and gracious, and
has been pleased to promulgate the Gospel, that Men whom it supposes to act as
such (that is, as rational Creatures) should be brought to salvation by it; I
see no just cause to think, that he intends to make any thing absolutely
necessary to salvation, that they may not so far clearly understand as they are
commanded distinctly and explicitly to believe it; and what is not so
delivered, I should, for that very Reason, unwillingly admit to be necessary to
salvation: And you may here remember, that I formerly told you, I was far from
thinking all the Tenants either of the Schools, or of particular Churches, to
be so much as Christian Verities, and therefore am very unlike to allow them
here to be fundamental and necessary ones; and I take it to be almost as great
as common a mistake, that all the Doctrines that concern fundamental Articles,
must be fundamental too; as if because the Head is a noble part of the Body,
and essential to life, therefore all the hair that grows upon it, must be
thought such too. But then as to the absolute firmness of Assent, that is
supposed to be exacted by Christianity to the Articles it delivers, I am not
sure that it is so necessary in all cases to true and saving Faith, as very many
take it to be. For first the Scripture itself tells us, that some of the Truths
it reveals, are unfathomable Mysteries, and some other Points are (...), hard
to be understood; and it is unreasonable to suppose, that the highest firmness
of Assent is to be given to such Articles, or to those parts of them, as their
obscurity keeps us from having so much reason to think that we clearly
understand them, as we have to suppose we understand those that are far more
plainly revealed. And (secondly) to speak more generally, it is harsh to say,
that the same degree of Faith is necessary to all Persons, since Men's natural
capacities and dispositions, and their education, and the opportunities they
have had of being informed, do very much, yet perhaps not culpably, dispose
some more than others to be diffident, and apt to haesitate, and frame doubts.
And the same Arguments may appear evident enough to one Man to make it his duty
to believe firmly what they persuade, which in another, naturally more
skeptical, or better acquainted with the difficulties and objections urged by
the opposite Party, may leave some doubts and scruples excusable enough. And
when either the Doctrine itself is not clearly delivered, or the Proofs of it,
that a Man could yet meet with, are not fully cogent; for that Man, not to give
such Truths the same degree of Assent that Demonstration may produce, is not,
as many interpret it, an affront to the Veracity of God, since he may be
heartily disposed and ready to believe all that shall appear to him to be
revealed by God, and only doubts, whether the thing proposed be indeed revealed
by him, or whether the diffident Party rightly understands the sense of these
words wherein the Revelation is contained; which is not to distrust God, but
himself: And that in some cases, a degree of Faith not exempt from doubts, may,
through Gods goodness, be accepted, we may learn from hence, that the Apostles
themselves, who were so much in Christ's favor, made it their Prayer to him,
That he would increase their Faith: And he that begged, that if he could do any
thing for his son, and cried out, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, was so
far accepted by that merciful High Priest, who is apt to be touched with the
sense of our infirmities, that his Request was granted, though it could not be
so but by having a Miracle done in his favor. The Disciples distressed by a
storm, and crying to their Master, as thinking themselves upon the very point
of perishing, were saved by him at the same time when he gave them the Epithet
of men of little faith: And at another time, Peter walking upon the Sea, though
he had lost a degree of that Faith that made him first engage upon that
adventure, and was reproved for it by Christ, was yet rescued from that sinking
condition which both he and his Faith were in. And we are told, in the Gospel,
of a Faith, which, though no bigger than a grain of Mustard Seed, may enable a
Man to remove Mountains: And though this passage speaks not primarily of
justifying Faith, yet still it may serve to show, that degrees of Assent, far
short of the greatest, may be so far accepted by God, as to be owned by
miraculous Exertions of his Power. For the Faith then that is made a necessary
condition under the Gospel, as the genuine fruit and scope of it is Obedience;
so it is not indispensably such a Faith as excludes doubts, but refusals. And
though the Assent be not so strong as may be produced by a Demonstration; yet
it may be graciously accepted, if it be but strong enough to produce Obedience;
and accordingly whereas Paul in one place declares, that in Christ Jesus
neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but faith
operative through love; we may learn his meaning from a parallel place, where
varying the words, and not the sense, of the latter part of the sentence, he
says, that in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision but the keeping of the Commandments of God. I readily grant,
that attainment of a higher degree of Faith is always a blessing, and cannot be
sufficiently prized, without being sincerely aimed at; but there are in some
Virtues and Graces degrees, which though to reach be a great happiness, yet
it is but the endeavoring after them that is an indispensible Duty. Likewise
it is true, that the firmness of assent to Divine Verities, does, in some
regard, bring much honor to God; as it is said of the Father of the Faithful,
(who in reference to the promise made him of Isaac, did not consider his own
age, nor Sarahs long barrenness, so as to entertain any diffidence of what God
had told him,) that being mighty in faith, he gave glory to God: But it is true
too, that in another respect a practical assent built upon a less undoubted
evidence, may have its pre-eminence; for when Christ now risen from the dead,
had said to the distrustful Didimus, Thomas, Because thou have seen me, thou
have believed; he immediately adds, But blessed (that is, peculiarly and
preferably blessed) are those that have not seen, and yet have believed; and
indeed he does not a little honor God, (in that sense wherein Mortals may be
said to honor him) who is so willing to obey and serve him, and so ambitious
to be in an estate where he may always do so, that upon what he yet discerns to
be but a probability of the Christian Religions being the most acceptable to
God, he embraces it with all its difficulties and dangers, and upon this score
venturously resolves to submit, if need be, to a present and actual dereliction
of all his Sins and Lusts, and perhaps his Interest and his Life too, upon a
comparatively uncertain expectation of living with him hereafter.

The Conclusion of the First Part.
And here I will put a Period to my Answer to your Friends Question in one of
the two senses of it, and so to the first Part of this Discourse. Against all
which perhaps your Friend will object, That at this rate of arguing for the
Christian Religion, one may Apologize for any Opinion, and reconcile the most
unreasonable ones to right Reason. But it is not difficult for me to reply, That
this Objection is grounded either upon a mistake of the design of this Letter,
or upon the overlooking of what is supposed in it. For I do not pretend, that
the Considerations hitherto alleged should pass for Demonstrations of the
Truth of Christianity, which is to be proved by the excellency of the Doctrines
it teaches, and that of the Rewards it promises, (both which are worthy of
God,) and by diverse other Arguments, especially the Divine Miracles that attest
it: But that which I was here to do, was, not to lay down the grounds why I
received the Christian Religion, but to return an Answer, backed with Reasons,
to the Question that was proposed: Whether I did not think, that a Christian,
to continue such, must deny or lay aside his Reason? The sum of the Answer is
this, That the Doctrines really proposed by the Christian Religion, seeming to
me to be by proper Arguments sufficiently proved in their kind, so as that the
proofs of it, whether they be demonstrative or no, are sufficient, (the nature
of the things to be proved, considered) to justify a rational and prudent
Man's embracing it; this Religion (I say) seeming to me to have such positive
Proofs for it, I do not think, that the Objections, that are said to be drawn
from Reason against it, do really prove the belief of it to be inconsistent
with right Reason, and do outweigh the Arguments alledgable in that Religions
behalf. To propose some of the general grounds of this Answer of mine, was the
design of the Considerations hitherto discoursed of; which (as I hinted to you
at the beginning) could be no other than general, unless you had mentioned to
me some of your Friends particular Objections, which when he tells you, you
will perhaps find that I have already given you the grounds of answering them.
And though to propose Arguments to evince positively the Truth of our Religion
after the example of the excellent Grotius, and some other very learned
Writers, be not, as you see, either my task or my design; yet if you
attentively consider what I write in that short Discourse, wherein I manage but
that seemingly popular Argument for Christianity, that is drawn from the
Miracles that are said to attest it, you will perchance be invited to think,
that when all the other Proofs of it are taken in, a Man may, without
renouncing or affronting his Reason, be a Christian.

But to proceed to the more considerable part of what I presumed your Friend
will object, I answer, That the considerations I have alleged in the behalf of
some Mysteries of the Christian Religion, will not be equally applicable to the
most absurd or unreasonable Opinions. For these Considerations are offered as
Apologies for Christian Doctrines, but upon two or all of these three
Suppositions. The first, That the Truth of the main Religion of which such
Doctrines make a part, is so far positively proved by real and uncontrolled
Miracles, and other competent Arguments, that nothing, but the manifest and
irreconcilable Repugnancy of its Doctrines to right Reason, ought to hinder us
from believing them. The second, That diverse of the things, at which reasonable
Men are wont to take exception, are such, as Reason it self may discern to be
very difficult, or perhaps impossible for us to understand perfectly by our own
natural light. And the third, That some things in Christianity which many Men
think contrary to Reason, are, at most, but contrary to it, as it is
incompetently informed and assisted, but not when it is more fully instructed,
and particularly when it is enlightened and assisted by Divine Revelation. And as
I think these three Suppositions are not justly applicable, (I say not, as the
Objection does, to the most absurd, or unreasonable Opinions, but,) to any
other Religion than the true, which is the Christian; so the last of these
Suppositions prompts me to take notice to you, that, though we ought to be
exceeding wary, how we admit what pretends to be supernaturally revealed; yet
if it be attended with sufficient evidence of its being so, we do very much
wrong and prejudice our selves, if out of an unreasonable jealousy, or, to
acquire or maintain the repute of being wiser than others, we shut our eyes
against the light it offers. For besides that a Man may as well err by
rejecting or ignoring the Truth, as by mistaking a falsehood for it; I consider,
that those Men that have an Instrument of knowledge, which other Men either
have not, or, (which is as bad) refuse to employ, have a very great advantage
above others toward the acquiring of Truth, and with far less parts than they,
may discover diverse things, which the others, with all their Pride and
Industry, shall never attain to. As when Galilaeo alone among the modern
Astronomers was Master of a Telescope, 'twas easy for him to make noble
discoveries in Heaven of things, to which not only Ptolomy, Alphonsus, and
Ticho, but even his Masters, Aristarchus Samius, and Copernicus, themselves
never dreamed of, and which other Astronomers cannot see but by making use of
the same kind of Instrument. And on this occasion let me carry the Comparison,
suggested by the Telescope, a little further, and take notice, that if Men
having heard, that there were four Planets moving about Jupiter, and that Venus
is an opacous body, and sometimes horned like the Moon, had resolved to examine
these things by their naked eyes, as by the proper Organs of Sight, without
employing the Telescope, by which they might suspect, that Galilaeo might put
some Optical delusion upon them; they would perhaps have assembled in great
multitudes to gaze at Venus and Jupiter, that (since plus vident Oculi quam
Oculus) the number of eyes might make amends for their dimness. This attempt
not succeeding, they would perhaps choose out some of the youngest and sharpest
sighted Men, that by their piercing eyes that may be discovered which ordinary
ones could not reach. And this Expedient not succeeding neither, they would
perhaps diet their Stargazers, and prescribe them the inward use of Fennel, and
Eyebright, and externally apply Collyriums and Eye-waters, and those to as
little purpose as the rest. With such a pity, mixed with Indignation, as
Galilaeo would probably have looked on such vain and fruitless attempts with,
may a judicious Christian, that upon a due examination admits the Truth of the
Scriptures, look upon the presumptuous and vain endeavors of those Men, who, by
the goodness of their natural parts, or by the improvements of them, or by the
number of those that conspire in the same search, think, with the bare eye of
Reason to make as great discoveries of heavenly Truths, as a person assisted by
the Revelations, contained in the Scripture, can with great ease and
satisfactoriness attain. To which let me add this further improvement of the
Comparison, that as a skilful Astronomer will indeed first severely examine,
whether the Telescope be an Instrument fit to be trusted, and not likely to
impose upon him; but being once resolved of that, will confidently believe the
discoveries it makes him, however contrary to the received Theories of the
Celestial Bodies, and to what he himself believed before, and would still, if
the Telescope did not otherwise inform him, continue to believe; so a well
qualified Inquirer into Religions, though he will be very wary, upon what terms
he admits Scripture; yet if he once be fully satisfied, that he ought to admit
it, he will not scruple to receive upon its authority whatever supernatural
Truths it clearly discloses to him; though perhaps contrary to the Opinions he
formerly held, and which, if the Scripture did not teach him otherwise, he
would yet assent to. And as the Galaxy and other whitish parts of the Sky, were
by Aristotle and his Followers, and many other Philosophers, who looked on them
only with their naked eyes, for many Ages reputed to be but Meteors; but to
those that look on them with an eye assisted by the Telescope, they plainly
appear true Constellations made up of a multitude of bright (though little)
Stars; so there are Theological Doctrines, which to Philosophers, and others
that look on them with the naked eye of Natural Reason, seem to be but light
and fantastical things; which yet, when Reason, assisted and heightened by
Revelation, comes to contemplate, it manifestly sees them to be true and
celestial Lights, which only their sublimity keeps concealed from our weak
(naked) eyes.

FINIS.
SOME Physico-Theological CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT THE POSSIBILITY OF THE
Resurrection.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire; Fellow of the Royal Society.

(...). Angelus Gabriel, Luc. I. 37. LONDON, Printed by T. N. for H.
Herringman, at the Anchor in the Lower Walk of the New Exchange. 1675.

THE PREFACE.
Whilst the Considerations about Religion and Reason, (to which the following
Essay is annexed) were not yet come from the Press, the Learned Publisher of
them falling one day into Discourse with me about the Design they aimed at, and
some of the Points they treated of, and particularly the Resurrection; our
Discourse occasioned my letting him know, that I had long since had thoughts,
and perhaps imparted some of them to my Friends, about such Subjects; and that
in particular about the Resurrection I had yet by me a Manuscript, wherein
diverse years ago I had endeavored to show, that the Philosophical
Difficulties, urged against the Possibility of the Resurrection, were nothing
near so insuperable, as they are by some pretended, and by others granted to
be. Upon this Notice, the Curiosity he expressed to see this Essay, engaged me
quickly to bring it him; though my being ready to go from London made me do it
without staying to look it over my self; much less to add what since occurred to
me about the things treated of in it. But notwithstanding its Imperfections,
and my unwillingness to let it go abroad; especially without some Papers that
should have preceded it, the Learned Peruser would not be denied leave to send
it, (in my absence) unaltered to the Press, and join it to the Tract he
expected thence; positively affirming, that I ought no longer to stifle a
Discourse, that he judged very seasonable, and thought likely to do good. In
which Conjecture if he do not prove mistaken, I hope some more ingenious than
religious Men, seeing what can be easily said by so incompetent a Pen as mine,
for one of the most opposed Doctrines of Christianity, will hereby be made less
forward to condemn all those for Desertors of Reason, that submit to
Revelation. And I shall hope too, (on the other side,) that some more
Religious, than, in this matter, well-inform'd Men, will be induced to think,
that what they call the New Philosophy may furnish us with some new Weapons for
the defense of our ancientest Creed; and that Corpuscularian Principles may not
only be admitted without Epicurean Errors, but be employed against them.

ERRATA.
Page 3. line 26. read decease for decrease. p. 10. l. 21. read Kircherus, a
Polonian Physician in Quercetanus. p. 12. l. 36. r. require. p. 13. l. 27. r.
is meant. p. 15. l. penult. read first possessor. p. 17. l. 1. r. are of a. p.
29. l. 4. r. I did (purposely) but touch. p. 39. l. 7. r. and for an.

Some Physico-Theological CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT The POSSIBILITY OF THE
RESURRECTION.
THe Question about which my thoughts are desired being this; Whether to
believe the Resurrection of the Dead, which the Christian Religion teaches, be
not to believe an Impossibility? I shall, before I proceed any further, crave
leave to state the Question somewhat more clearly and distinctly; that, being
freed from Ambiguities, you may the better know in what sense I understand it
in my Answer; in the returning whereof, your Friend need not desire me to
insist but upon my own Thoughts, unless he could do me the favor to direct me
to some Author, which I have not yet seen, that has expressly treated, upon
Philosophical grounds, of the Question he proposes.

First then I take it for granted, that he does not mean, whether the
Resurrection is a thing knowable, or directly provable by the mere Light of
Nature. For, if God had not, in the Scripture, positively revealed his purpose
of Raising the Dead, I confess, I should not have thought of any such thing,
neither do I know, how to prove that it will be, but by flying, not only, to
the Veracity, but the Power of God; who having declared that he will raise the
Dead, and being an Almighty Agent, I have reason to believe, that he will not
fail to perform what he has foretold.

Nor do I (secondly) understand the Question to be, Whether the Resurrection be
possible to be effected by merely Physical Agents and means. For that it is not
to be brought to pass according to the common course of Nature, I presume;
after the universal experience of so many Ages, which have afforded us no
instances of it. And though perhaps in Speculation it seems not absolutely
repugnant to Reason, that the scattered parts of a dead Body might be
reconjoin'd, soon after the death of the Man; yet I think you will easily grant
it to be morally impossible, that this should happen to any one person, and
much more, that it may, nay, that it will, happen to all the persons of Mankind
at the worlds end: So that when I treat of the possibility of the General
Resurrection, I take it for granted, that God has been pleased to promise and
declare, that there shall be one, and that it shall be effected, not by or
according to the ordinary course of Nature, but by his own Power. On which
occasion, I remember, that when our Savior, treating of the Resurrection,
silenced the Sadduces that denied it, he conjoins, as the causes of their
Error, the two things I have pointed at in this Observation, and in the first
that preceded it: You err, says he, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power
of God. And when an Angel would assure the blessed Virgin, that she should bare
a Child without the intervention of a Man, (which was a case somewhat akin to
ours, since 'twas a production of a Humane Body out of a small portion of
humane substance in a supernatural way,) he concludes his speech by telling
her, That nothing shall prove impossible to God.

In the third place, I suppose, that the Article of the Resurrection, taught by
the Christian Religion, is not here meant by the Proposer in such a latitude,
as to comprize all that any particular Church or Sect of Christians, much less
any private Doctor or other Writer, has taught about the Resurrection; but
only what is plainly taught about it in the holy Scriptures themselves. And
therefore, if besides what is there so delivered, the Proposer has met with
any thing that he judges to be impossible in its own Nature, he has my free
consent to deal with the Authors and Abettors of such unreasonable Opinions,
(which I declare my self to be not only unconcerned to defend, but sufficiently
disposed to reject,) as rashnesses unfriendly to the growth of Christianity.

4. And now, that I may yet further clear the way for the Discourse that is to
follow, and obviate some Objections and Scruples, which I think it is better
seasonably to prevent, than solemnly to answer; I shall desire your leave to
lay down in this place a couple of Considerations; of which I shall begin with
this, that it is no such easy way, as at first it seems, to determine what is
absolutely necessary and but sufficient to make a portion of Matter, considered
at differing times or places, to be fit to be reputed the same Body.

That the generality of Men do in vulgar Speech allow themselves a great
latitude about this affair, will be easily granted by him, that observes the
received forms of speaking. Thus Rome is said to be the same City, though it
has been so often taken and ruined by the Barbarians and others, that perhaps
scarce any of the first houses have been left standing, and at least very few
remain in comparison of those that have been demolished, and have had others
built in their stead. Thus an University is said to be the same, though some
Colleges fall to ruin, and new ones are built; and though once in an Age all
the persons that composed it, decrease, and are succeeded by others. Thus the
Thames is said to be the same River, that it was in the time of our
Forefathers, though indeed the water that now runs under London Bridge, is not
the same that ran there an hour ago, and is quite other than that which will
run there an hour hence. And so the Flame of a Candle is said to be the same
for many hours together, though it indeed be every minute a new body, and the
kindled Particles, that compose it at any time assigned, are continually
putting off the form of flame, and are repaired by a succession of like ones.

Nor is it by the Vulgar only that the Notion of Identity has been uneasy to
be penetrated. For it seems, that even the ancient Philosophers have been
puzzled about it, witness their Disputes, whether the ship of Theseus were the
same after it had (like that of Sir Francis Drake) been so patched up from time
to time to preserve it as a Monument, that scarce any Plank remained of the
former ship, new Timber having been substituted in the place of any part that
in length of time rotted. And even in Metaphysics themselves, I think it no
easy task to establish a true and adequate Notion of Identity, and clearly
determine, what is the true Principle of Individuation. And at all this I do
not much wonder; for almost every Man that thinks, conceives in his mind this
or that Quality or Relation, or Aggregate of Qualities, to be that which is
essential to such a Body, and proper to give it such a Denomination; whereby it
comes to pass, that, as one Man chiefly respects this thing, and another that,
in a Body that bears such a name; so one Man may easily look upon a Body as the
same, because it retains what he chiefly considered in it, whilst another
thinks it to be changed into a new Body, because it has lost that which he
thought was the denominating Quality or Attribute. Thus Philosophers and
Physicians disagree about Water and Ice, some taking the latter to be but the
former disguised, because they are both of them cold and simple Bodies, and the
latter easily reducible to the former, by being freed from the excessive and
adventitious degree of coldness; whilst others, looking upon fluidity as
essential to Water, think Ice upon the score of its solidity to be a distinct
species of Bodies. And so Peripateticks and Chemists often disagree about the
Ashes and Calces of burnt Bodies; the first referring them to Earth, because of
their permanency and fixtness, and diverse of the Spagyrists taking them to be
Bodies sui generis, because common Ashes usually contain a caustic Salt,
whereas Earth ought to be insipid: And the like may be said of some Wood-ashes
and Limestone, and even Coral, which, when well-calcin'd and recent, have a
biting taste, besides that some of them that are insipid may be reduced into
Metals, as may be easily enough tried in the Calces of Lead and Copper.

These difficulties about the Notion of Identity I have therefore taken notice
of, that we may not think it strange, that among the ancient Hebrews and
Greeks, whose Languages were so remote in several regards from ours, the
familiar expressions employed about the sameness of a Body should not be so
precise as were requisite for their turn, who maintain the Resurrection in the
most rigid sense. And this leads me from the first of my two Considerations to
the second.

That (then) it is not repugnant or unconsonant to the Holy Scripture, to
suppose, that a comparatively small quantity of the matter of a Body, being
increased either by Assimilation or other convenient-Apposition of aptly
disposed matter, may bear the name of the former Body, I think I may reasonably
gather from the three following Expressions, I meet with in the Old and New
Testament.

For first, St. Paul in the 15th Chapter of his first Epistle to the
Corinthians, where he professedly treats of the Resurrection, and answers this
Question; But some Man will say, How are the Dead raised up? And with what Body
do they come? ver. 35: He more than once explains the matter by the similitude
of Sowing, and tells them, Ver. 37. That which thou sowest, thou sowest not
that Body that shall be; but bare Grain, it may chance of Wheat, or of some
other Grain. Adding, that God gives this seed a Body as he thought fit, to each
seed its own Body, ver. 38. Now, if we consider the multitude of Grains of
Corn, that may in a good Soil grow out of One; insomuch that our Savior
speaking in the Parable de Agro Dominico, of a whole Field, tells us, that the
Grain may well bear a hundred for one: We cannot but think, that the Portion of
the matter of the Seed that is in each of the Grains (not to reckon what may be
contained in the Roots, Stalk, and Chaff,) must be very small.

I will not now consider, whether this Text justifies the supposition of a
Plastic Power in some part of the matter of a deceased Body; whereby, being
divinely excited, it may be enabled to take to its self fresh matter, and so
subdue and fashion it, as thence sufficiently to repair or augment itself;
though the Comparison several times employed by St. Paul, seems to favor such
an Hypothesis. Nor will I examine, what may be argued from considering, that
Leaven, though at first not differing from other Dough, is by a light change of
Qualities, that it acquires by time, enabled to work upon and ferment a great
proment a great Proportion of other Dough. Nor yet will I here debate, what may
be said in favor of this Conjecture from those Chemical Experiments, by which
Kircherus, Quercetanus and others, are affirmed to have by a gentle heat been
able to reproduce in well-closed Vials the perfect Idea's of Plants destroyed
by the fire: I will not, I say, in this place enter upon a Disquisition of any
of these things, both because I want time to go through with it; and because,
though the Resuscitation, supposing the matter of Fact, may give no small
countenance to our Cause; yet I do not either absolutely need it, or perhaps
fully acquiesce in all the Circumstances and Inferences that seem to belong to
it. But one thing there is, that I must not leave unmention'd in this place;
because I received it, soon after the Trial was made, from two eminent Persons
of my Acquaintance, Men of great Veracity as well as Judgment; whereof one made
the Experiment, and the other saw it made in his own Garden, where the Tryer of
the Experiment, (for he was so modest, that he would not confess himself to be
the Author of it,) took some Ashes of a Plant just like our English red Poppy,
and having sowed these Alcalisate Ashes in my Friends Garden, they did, sooner
than was expected, produce certain Plants larger and fairer than any of that
kind that had been seen in those parts. Which seems to argue, that in the
saline and earthy, i. e. the fixed Particles of a Vegetable, that has been
dissipated and destroyed by the violence of the fire, there may remain a
Plastic Power inabling them to contrive disposed Matter, so as to reproduce
such a Body as was formerly destroyed. But to this Plastic Power, residing in
any portion of the destroyed Body itself, it will not perhaps be necessary to
have recourse; since an External and Omnipotent Agent can without it perform
all that I need contend for: As I think I might gather from that other
expression of Holy Scripture, that I meet with in the second Chapter of
Genesis, where it is said, That the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon
Adam, and he slept; and he took one of his Ribs, and closed up the flesh
instead thereof. And the Rib which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a
Woman, and brought her unto the Man, Ver. 21, 22. For, since it cannot be
pretended, that either the whole or any considerable portion of Eve's Body was
taken out of Adams, which was deprived but of a Rib: And since it cannot be
probably affirmed, that this Rib had any Spermatick Faculty, both because the
Text assigns the Formation of the Woman to God, and because the Seminal
Principles in Animals requires the commixture of Male and Female, the latter of
which the Text supposes not to have been then made; Why may I not conclude,
That, if it please God by his immediate Operation to take a Portion of the
Matter of a Humane Body, and add to it a far greater quantity, either of newly
created, or of pre-existent, Matter; the new Body so framed may, congruously
enough to Scripture-expressions, be reputed to be made of the former Body. And
accordingly Adam (Ver. 23.) gives the reason why he called his Wife Isha, which
our Translation renders, Woman; because she was taken out of Ish, which in our
Version is rendered, Man.

The other Text that I consider to my present purpose, is the mystical
Resurrection described in Ezekiel's Vision, where all, that remain of the dead
Men that were to rise up an Army of living Men, was a Valley full of dry Bones,
which being by the Divine Power approached to one another, and made to join
together in a convenient manner, were afterward by the supernatural Apposition
of either newly created, or extrinsecally supplied, Matter, Ezekiel. 37.
furnished with Sinews, (by which I suppose it meant not only Nerves, but
Vessels, Tendons, Ver. 7, 8.
Ligaments, etc.) and Flesh covered with skins; and last of all a vivifying
spirit was conveyed into them that made them stand upon their feet alive, Ver.
9, 10.
an exceeding great Army. Whence I gather, that it is not unconsonant to the
expressions of Scripture, to say, that a Portion of the Matter of a dead Body,
being united with a far greater Portion of Matter furnished from without by God
himself, and completed into a Humane Body, may be reputed the same Man that was
dead before. Which may appear both by the tenor of the Vision, and particularly
from the expression set down in the 10th verse, where God calling for the
enlivening Spirit, names the completed, but not yet revived, Bodies, These
slain, as if he now counted them the same, that had formerly been killed,

These preliminary Considerations being thus laid down, we may now proceed to
examine more closely those difficulties, which are said to demonstrate the
Impossibility of the Resurrection; the substance of which difficulties may be
comprised in this Objection.

When a man is once really dead, diverse of the parts of his Body will,
according to the course of Nature, resolve themselves into multitudes of steams
that wander to and fro in the Air; and the remaining parts, that are either
liquid or soft, undergo so great a corruption and change, that it is not
possible, so many scattered parts should be again brought together, and
reunited after the same manner wherein they existed in a humane Body, whilst
it was yet alive. And much more impossible it is to effect this Reunion, if the
Body have been, as it often happens, devoured by wild Beasts or Fishes; since
in this case, though the scattered Particles of the Cadaver might be recovered
as Particles of Matter, yet having already past into the substance of other
Animals, they are quite transmuted, as being informed by the new form of the
Beast or Fish that devoured them, and of which they now make a Substantial part.

And yet far more impossible will this Redintegration be, if we put the case,
that the dead Body be devoured by Cannibals; for then the same Flesh belonging
successively to two differing persons, it is impossible that both should have it
restored to them at once, or that any footsteps should remain of the Relation
it had to the first Professor.

In answer to this (indeed weighty) Objection, I have several things to offer.

And first, I consider, that a Humane Body is not as a Statue of Brass or
Marble, that may continue; as to sense, whole ages in a permanent state; but is
in a perpetual flux or changing condition, since it grows in all its Parts, and
all its Dimensions, from a Corpusculum, no bigger than an Insect, to the full
stature of Man; which in many persons, that are tall and fat, may amount to a
vast bulk, which could not happen but by a constant apposition and assimilation
of new Parts to the primitive ones of the little Embryo; and since Men, as
other Animals, grow but to a certain pitch, and till a certain age (unless
perhaps it be the Crocodile, which some affirm to grow always till death,) and
therefore must discharge a great part of what they eat and drink by insensible
transpiration, which Sanctorius's Statical Experiments, as well as mine, assure
me to be scarce credibly great, as to Men and some other Animals, both hot and
cold; it will follow, that in no very great compass of time, a great part of
the substance of a Humane Body must be changed: And yet it is considerable, that
the of a stable and lasting Texture, as I found not only by some Chemical
Trials, but by the Sculls and Bones of men, whom History records to have been
killed an exeeding long time ago, of which Note we may hereafter make use.

Secondly, I consider, that there is no determinate Bulk or Size that is
necessary to make a humane Body pass for the same, and that a very small
portion of Matter will some times serve the turn; as an Embryo, for instance,
in the Womb, a new born Babe, a Man at his full stature, and a decrepit Man of
perhaps an hundred years old, notwithstanding the vast difference of their
sizes, are still reputed to be the same person; as is evident by the custom of
Crowning Kings and Emperors in the Mothers belly, and by putting Murderers etc
to death in their old age for Crimes committed in their youth; and if a very
tall and unweildy fat Man should, as it sometimes happens, be reduced by a
Consumption to a Sceleton, as they speak, yet none would deny, that this wasted
Man were the same with him that had once so enormously big a Body.

I consider also, that a Body may either consist of, or abound with, such
Corpuscles, as may be variously associated with those of other Bodies, and
exceedingly disguised with those Mixtures, and yet retain their own Nature; of
this we have diverse instances in Metalline Bodies: Thus Gold, for example, when
dissolved in Aqua Regis, passes for a Liquor, and when dexterously coagulated,
it appears a Salt or Vitriol: By another operation, I have taken pleasure to
make it part of the Fuel of a Flame: Being dexterously conjoined to another
Mineral, it may be reduced to Glass: Being well precipitated with Mercury, it
makes a glorious transparent Powder: Being precipitated with Spirit of Urine,
or Oil of Tartar per deliquium, it makes a fulminating Calx that goes off very
easily, yet is far stronger than Gunpowder: Being precipitated with a certain
other Alkali, the Fire turns it to a fixed and purple Calx. And yet in spite of
all these and diverse other disguises, the Gold retains its Nature; as may be
evinced by Chemical operations, especially by Reductions. Mercury also is a
greater Proteus than Gold, sometimes putting on the form of a Vapor; sometimes
appearing in that of an almost insipid water; sometimes assuming in that
condition the form of a red Powder; sometimes that of a white one, and of a
yellow one, or of a Chrystalline Salt, of a Malleable Metal; of what not? And
yet all these are various dresses of the same Quicksilver, which a skilful
Artist may easily make it put off, and re-appear in its native shape.

And though it be true, that instances of the permanence of Corpuscles, that
pass under successive disguises, may be much easier found among Metals and
Minerals, than Vegetables and Animals; yet there are some to be met with among
these: For, not to mention Hippocrates his affirmation about purging a Child
with the Milk of an Animal that had taken Elaterium, (if I misremember not the
Drugg,) not to mention this, I say; I remember, that when I once passed a
Spring in Savoy, I observed, that all the Butter that was made in some places,
tasted so rank of a certain weed, that at that time of the year abounds there
in the Fields, that it made strangers much nauseate the Butter, which otherwise
was very good. If it be considered, how many, if I may so call them, Elaborate
Alterations the rank Corpuscles of this weed must have undergone in the various
digestions of the Cows Stomach, Heart, Breasts, etc. and that afterward two
Separations at least were superadded, the one of the Cream from the rest of the
Milk, and the other of the unctuous parts of the Cream from the Serum or
Butter-milk; it will scarce be denied, but that vegetable Corpuscles may by
association pass through diverse disguises, without losing their Nature;
especially considering, that the essential Attributes of such Corpuscles may
remain undestroyed, though no sensible quality survive to make proof of it; as
in our newly mentioned Example the offensive Taste did. And besides what we
commonly observe on the Seacoast, of the Fishy taste of those Sea-birds, that
feed only upon Seafish, I have purposely enquired of an observing Man that
lived upon a part of the Irish Coast, where the Custom is to fatten their Hogs
with a Shellfish, which that place very much abounds with, about the taste of
their Pork: To which he answered me, that the Flesh had so strong and rank a
taste of the Fish, that strangers could not endure to eat it. There is a
certain fruit in America, very well known to our English Planters, which many
of them call the Prickle-Peare, whose very red juice being eaten with the pulp
of the fruit, whereof it is a part, does so well make its way through the
diverse strainers and digestions of the Body, that it makes the Urine red enough
to persuade those that are unacquainted with this property, that they piss
Blood; as I have been several times assured by unsuspected Eyewitnesses. But
more odd is that which is related by a Learned Man, that spent several years
upon the Dutch and English Plantations in the Charibe Islands, who speaking of
a Fruit, (which I remember I have seen, but had not the liberty to make trial
of it,) called Janipa, or Junipa, growing in several of those Islands, he tells
us, among other things, that au temps, etc. which is at the season when this
Fruit falls from the Tree, the Hogs that feed on it, have both their Flesh and
Fat of a violet color, as Experience witnesses, (which color is the same
that the juice dies;) and the like happens to the Flesh of Parrots and other
Birds that feed upon it. I shall by and by give you an instance of a Vegetable
substance, which, though torn in pieces by very corrosive Liquors, and so
disguised as to leave no suspicion of what it was, does thereby not only not
lose its Nature, but is in an immediate capacity of re-appearing clothed even
with the sensible qualities of it, as color, taste and smell.

Having thus shown, that the Particles of a Body may retain their Nature under
various disguises, I now proceed to add, that they may be stripped of those
disguises, or, to speak without a Metaphor, be extricated from those
Compositions wherein they are disguised, and that sometimes by such ways as
those that are strangers to the nicer operations of Nature, would never have
thought upon, nor will not perhaps judge probable when proposed. It Is not
unknown to expert Chemists, that, in despite of all the various shapes, which
that Proteus, Mercury, may be made to appear in, as of a Christalline
Sublimate, a red Precipitate, a yellow Turbith, a Vapor, a clear Water, a
Cinnaber, etc; a skilful method of Reduction will quickly free it from all that
made it impose upon our senses, and reappear in the form of plain running
Mercury. And though Vitrification be looked upon by Chemists as the ultimate
action of the Fire, and powerfullest way of making inseparable conjunctions of
Bodies; yet even out of glass of Lead, for instance, (made of Sand, and the
ashes of a Metal,) though the Transmutation seems so great, that the dark and
flexible Metal is turned into a very transparent and brittle mass; yet even
from this have we recovered opacous and malleable Lead. And though there be
several ways, besides Precipitations, of divorcing substances that seem very
strictly, if not unseparably, united; (which though I may perhaps have
practiced, it is not now convenient I should discourse of;) yet by
Precipitation alone, if a Man have the skill to choose proper Precipitants,
several Separations may not only be made, but be easily and thoroughly made that
every one would not think of: For, it is not necessary, that in all
Precipitations, as is observed in most of the vulgar ones, the precipitant Body
should indeed make a Separation of the dissolved Body from the mass or bulk of
that Liquor or other Adjunct, whereto 'twas before united, but should not be
able to perform this without associating its own Corpuscles with those of the
Body it should rescue, and so make in some sense a new and further Composition.
For, that some Bodies may precipitate others without uniting themselves with
them, is easily proved by the Experiment of Refiners, separating Silver from
Copper; for, the Mixture being dissolved in Aqua Fortis, if the Solution be
afterward diluted by adding fifteen or twenty times as much common water, and
you put into this Liquor a Copperplate, you shall quickly see the Silver begin
to adhere to the Plate, not in the form of a Calx, as when Gold is precipitated
to make Aurum fulminans, or Tin-glass to make a fine white Powder for a Fucus;
but in the form of a shining Metalline substance that needs no farther
reduction to be employed as good Silver. And by a proper Precipitant, I
remember, I have also in a trice (perhaps in a minute of an hour) reduced a
pretty quantity of well disguised Mercury into running Quicksilver. And if one
can well appropriate the Precipitants to the Bodies they are to recover, very
slight and unpromising Agents may perform great matters in a short time; as you
may guess by the Experiment I lately promised you: Which is this, that, if you
take a piece of Camphire, and let it lie awhile upon Oil of Vitriol, shaking
them now and then, it will be so corroded by the Oil, as totally to disappear
therein without retaining so much as its smell, or any manifest quality,
whereby one may suspect there is Camphire in that Mixture; and yet, that a
Vegetable substance, thus swallowed up, and changed by one of the most fretting
and destroying substances that is yet known in the world, should not only
retain the essential qualities of its Nature, but be restorable to its obvious
and sensible ones, in a minute, and that by so unpromising a medium as common
water, you will readily grant, if you pour the dissolved Camphire into a large
proportion of that Liquor, to whose upper parts it will immediately emerge
white, brittle, strong-scented, and inflameable Camphire, as before.

One main Consideration I must add to the foregoing ones, namely, that Body and
Body being but a parcel, and a parcel of universal Matter Mechanically
different; either parcel may successively put on forms in a way of Circulation,
if I may so speak, till it return to the form whence the reckoning was begun,
having only its Mechanical affections altered.

That all Bodies agree in one common Matter, the Schools themselves teach,
making what they call the Materia Prima to be the common Basis of them all, and
their specific differences to spring from their particular forms: And since
the true Notion of Body consists either alone in its Extension, or in that, and
Impenetrability together it will follow, that the differences, which make the
varieties of Bodies we see, must not proceed from the Nature of Matter, of
which as such we have but one uniform Conception; but from certain Attributes,
such as Motion, Size, Position, etc. that we are wont to call Mechanical
Affections. To this 'twill be congruous, that a determinate portion of Matter
being given, if we suppose that an intelligent and otherwise duly qualified
Agent do watch this portion of Matter in its whole progress, through the
various forms it is made to put on, till it come to the end of its course or
series of changes; if, I say, we suppose this, and withal, that this
intelligent Agent lay hold of this portion of Matter clothed in its ultimate
form, and extricating it from any other parcels of Matter wherewith it may be
mingled, make it exchange its last Mechanical Affections for those which it had
when the Agent first began to watch it; in such case, I say, this portion of
Matter, how many changes and disguises soever it may have undergone in the mean
time, will return to be what it was; and if it were before part of another Body
to be reproduced, it will become capable of having the same Relation to it that
formerly it had.

To explain my meaning by a gross Example; suppose, a Man cut a large Globe or
Sphere of soft Wax in two equal Parts or Hemispheres, and of the one make
Cones, Cylinders, Rings, Screws, etc. and kneading the other with Dough, make
an appearance of Pie-crust, Cakes, Vermicell^ (...) the Italians call Paste
squeezed through a perforated Plate into the form of little Worms,) Wafers,
Biskets, etc. it is plain, that a Man may by dissolution, and other ways,
separate the Wax from the Dough or Paste, and reduce it in a Mould to the
self-same Hemisphere of Wax it was before, and so he may destroy all that made
the other part of the Wax pass for several Bodies, as Cones, or Cylinders, or
Rings, etc. and may reduce it in a Mould to one distinct Semi-globe, fit to be
reconjoined to the other, and so to recompose such a Sphere of Wax as they
constituted, before the Bisection was made. And to give you an Example to the
same purpose in a case that seems much more difficult; if you look upon
Precipitate, carefully made per se, you would think, that Art has made a Body
extremely different from the common Mercury; this being consistent like a
Powder, very red in color, and purgative, and for the most part vomitive in
operation, though you give but four or five grains of it, and yet if you but
press this Powder with a due heat, by putting the component Particles into a
new and fit motion, you may reunite them together so as to re-obtain or
re-produce the same running Mercury you had, before the Precipitate per se was
made of it.

Here I must beg your leave to recommend more fully to your thoughts, that
which soon after the beginning of this Discourse, I did but (purposely) touch
upon, and invite you to consider with me, that the Christian Doctrine does not
ascribe the Resurrection to Nature, or any created Agent, but to the peculiar
and immediate operation of God, who has declared, that before the very last
judgment, he will raise the dead. Wherefore, when I lately mentioned some
Chemical ways of recovering Bodies from their various disguises, I was far from
any desire it should be imagined, that such ways were the only or the best that
can possibly be employed to such an end. For, as the generality of Men, without
excepting Philosophers themselves, would not have believed or thought, that, by
easy Chemical ways, Bodies that are reputed to have passed into a quite other
nature, should be reduced or restored to their former condition; so, till
Chemistry and other parts of true Natural Philosophy be more thoroughly
understood and farther promoted, it is probable, that we can scarce now imagine,
what Expedients to reproduce Bodies a further discovery of the Mysteries of Art
and Nature, may lead us Mortals to. And much less can our dim and narrow
knowledge determine, what means, even Physical ones, the most wise Author of
Nature, and absolute Governor of the World is able to employ to bring the
Resurrection to pass, since it is a part of the imperfection of inferior Natures
to have but an imperfect apprehension of the powers of one that is incomparably
superior to them. And even among us, a Child, though endowed with a reasonable
Soul, cannot conceive, how a Geometrician can measure inaccessible heights and
distances, and much less how a Cosmographer can determine the whole compass of
the Earth and Sea, or an Astronomer investigate how far it is from hence to the
Moon, and tell many years before, what day and hour, and to what degree, she
will be eclipsed. And indeed in the Indies, not only Children, but rational
illiterate Men, could not perceive, how 'twas possible for the Europeans to
converse with one another by the help of a piece of Paper, at an hundred Miles
distance, and in a Moment produce Thunder and Lightning, and kill Men a great
way off, as they saw Gunners and Musketeers do, and much less foretell an
Eclipse of the Moon, as Columbus did to his great advantage; which things made
the Indians, even the chiefest of them, look upon the Spaniards as persons of a
more than humane Nature. Now among those that have a true Notion of a Deity,
which is a Being both omnipotent and omniscient; That he can do all, and more
than all, that is possible to be performed by any way of disposing of Matter
and Motion, is a Truth, that will be readily acknowledged, since he was able at
first to produce the world, and contrive some part of the universal Matter of
it into the Bodies of the first Man and Woman. And that his power extends to
the Reunion of a Soul and Body that have been separated by Death, we may learn
from the Experiments God has been pleased to give of it both in the Old
Testament and the New, especially in the raising again to life Lazarus and
Christ; of the latter of which particularly we have Proofs cogent enough to
satisfy any unprejudiced Person, that desires but competent Arguments to
convince him. And that the miraculous Power of God will be, as well as his
Veracity is, engaged in raising up the Dead, and may suffice if (...) be so, we
may not difficultly gathe^ from that excellent Admonition of ou^ Savior to the
Sadduces, where he tell^ them, (as I elsewhere noted) that the two Causes of
their Errors are, their no^ knowing the Scriptures wherein God has declared he
will raise the Dead, nor the Power of God, by which he is able to effect it.
But the engagement of Gods Omnipotence is also in that place clearly intimated
by St. Paul, Act. 26.8. where he asks King Agrippa and his other Auditors, why
they should think it a thing not to be believed ((...),) that GOD should raise
the Dead. And the same Truth is yet more fully expressed by the same Apostle,
where speaking of Christ returning in the Glory and Power of his Father to
judge all Mankind, after he has said, that this divine Judge shall transform or
transfigure ((...)) our vile Bodies (speaking of his own, and those of other
Saints,) to subjoin the Account on which this shall be done, he adds, that
'twill be according to the powerful working ((...)) whereby he is able even to
subdue all things to himself, Phil. 3.21.

And now 'twill be seasonable to apply what has been delivered in the whole
past Discourse to our present purpose.

Since then a Humane Body is not so confined to a determinate Bulk, but that
the same Soul being united to a portion of duly organized Matter, is said to
constitute the same Man, notwithstanding the vast differences of bigness that
there may be at several times between the portions of Matter whereto the Humane
Soul is united:

Since a considerable part of the Humane Body consists of Bones which are
Bodies of a very determinate Nature, and not apt to be destroyed by the
operation either of Earth or Fire:

Since of the less stable, and especially the fluid parts of a Humane Body
there is a far greater expense made by insensible Transpiration than even
Philosophers would imagine:

Since the small Particles of a resolved Body may retain their own Nature under
various alterations and disguises, of which it is possible they may be
afterward stripped:

Since, without making a Humane Body cease to be the same, it may be repaired
and augmented by the adaptation of congruously disposed Matter to that which
pre-existed in it:

Since, I say, these things are so, why should it be impossible, that a most
intelligent Agent, whose Omnipotency extends to all that is not truly
contradictory to the nature of things, or to his own, should be able so to
order and watch the Particles of a Humane Body, as that partly of those that
remain in the Bones, and partly of those that copiously fly away by insensible
Transpiration, and partly of those that are otherwise disposed of upon their
resolution, a competent number may be preserved or retrieved; so that stripping
them of their disguises, or extricating them from other parts of Matter, to
which they may happen to be conjoined, he may reunite them betwixt themselves,
and, if need be, with particles of Matter fit to be contexted with them, and
thereby restore or reproduce a Body, which, being united with the former Soul,
may, in a sense consonant to the expressions of Scripture, recompose the same
Man, whose Soul and Body were formerly disjoined by Death.

What has been hitherto discoursed, supposes the Doctrine of the Resurrection
to be taken in a more strict and literal sense, because I would show, that even
according to that, the difficulties of answering what is mentioned against the
possibility of it are not insuperable; though I am not ignorant, that it would
much facilitate the defense and explication of so abstruse a thing, if their
opinion be admitted, that allow themselves a greater latitude in expounding the
Article of the Resurrection, as if the substance of it were: That, in regard
the Humane Soul is the form of Man, so that whatever duly organized portion of
Matter it is united to, it therewith constitutes the same Man, the import of the
Resurrection is fulfilled in this, that after Death there shall be another
state, wherein the Soul shall no longer persevere in its separate condition,
or, as it were, Widowhood, but shall be again united not to an etherial or the
like fluid Matter, but to such a substance as may, with tolerable propriety of
speech, notwithstanding its differences from our houses of Clay (as the
Scripture speaks) be called a Humane Body. Job 4.19.


They that assent to what has been hitherto discoursed of the Possibility of
the Resurrection of the same Bodies, will, I presume, be much more easi^y
induced to admit the Possibility of the Qualifications the Christian Religion
ascribes to the glorified Bodies of the raised Saints. For, supposing the Truth
of the History of the Scriptures, we may observe, that the Power of God has
already extended itself to the performance of such things as import as much as
we need infer, sometimes by suspending the natural actings of Bodies upon one
another, and sometimes by endowing humane and other Bodies with preternatural
Qualities. And indeed Lightness, or rather Agility, indifferent to Gravity and
Levity, Incorruption, Transparency and Opacity, Figure, Color, etc. being but
Mechanical affections of Matter, it cannot be incredible, that the most free
and powerful Author of those Laws of Nature, according to which all the
Phenomenon of Qualities are regulated, may (as he thinks fit) introduce,
establish, or change them in any assigned portion of Matter, and consequently
in that whereof a Humane Body consists. Thus, though Iron be a Body above eight
times heavier, bulk for bulk, than Water, yet, in the case of Elisha's helve,
its native Gravity was rendered ineffectual, and it emerg'd from the bottom to
the top of the water: And the gravitation of St. Peter's Body was suspended,
whilst his Master commanded him, and by that command enabled him, to come to
him walking on the Sea. Thus the Operation of the activest Body in Nature,
Flame, was suspended in Nebuchadnezar's fiery Furnace, whilst Daniels three
Companions walked unharm'd in those Flames, that in a trice consumed the
kindlers of them. Thus did the Israelites Manna, which was of so perishable a
Nature, that it would corrupt in little above a day, when gathered in any day
of the Week but that which preceded the Sabbath, keep good twice as long, and
when laid up before the Ark for a Memorial, would last whole Ages uncorrupted.
And to add a Proof, that comes more directly home to our purpose, the Body of
our Savior after his Resurrection, though it retained the very impressions,
that the Nails of the Cross had made in his hands and feet, and the wound, that
the Spear had made in his side, and was still called in the Scripture his Body,
as indeed it was, and more so, than, according to our past discourse, it is
necessary that every Body should be that is rejoined to the Soul in the
Resurrection: And yet this glorified Body had the same Qualifications, that are
promised to the Saints in their state of Glory; St. Paul informing us, that our
vile. Bodies shall be transformed into the likeness of his glorious Body, which
the History of the Gospel assures us was endowed with far nobler Qualities than
before its Death. And whereas the Apostle adds, as we formerly noted, that this
great change of Schematism in the Saints Bodies will be effected by the
irresistible Power of Christ, we shall not much scruple at the admission of
such an effect from such an Agent, if we consider how much the bare slight
Mechanical alteration of the Texture of a Body may change its sensible
Qualities for the better. For without any visible additament, I have several
times changed dark and opacous Lead into finely colored transparent and
specifically lighter glass. And there is another instance, which, though
because of its obviousness it is less heeded, is yet more considerable: For who
will distrust, what advantageous changes such an Agent as God can work by
changing the Texture of a portion of Matter, if he but observe, what happens
merely upon the account of such a Mechanical change in the lighting of a Candle
that is newly blown out by the applying another to the ascending smoke. For in
the twinkling of an Eye, an opacous, dark, languid an stinking smoke loses all
its stink, and is changed into a most active penetrant and shining Body.

FINIS.

