OF THE Reconcileableness OF SPECIFIC MEDICINES TO THE Corpuscular Philosophy.

To which is Annexed A Discourse about the Advantages Of the Use of SIMPLE
MEDICINES.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for Sam. Smith at the' Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

August 24.
Imprimatur

Hen. Maurice, Rmo. D^o. W. Cant. Archpo. a sacris.

THE PREFACE.
THE rise of the following Tract, intimated near the beginning of it, was not
such a fictitious thing as the Reader may imagine. But though I really received a
Visit from a Physician, known to me, but by his Reputation purposely to propose
to me his Objections against the Corpuscular Philosophy, and he had a long
conference with me about them; yet, because the Historical passages of that
interview, cannot be circumstantially related in few words, I suppose the
Reader will willingly allow me, to employ this Preface in giving him
Advertisements about the scope and design of the Treatise it ushers in.

I shall therefore advertise him, that he will be much mistaken, if he shall
expect, as I perceive several have done already, to find in this Book a
Collection of Receipts of Specific Remedies. For a moderate attention to the
Title Page will enable him manifestly to discern, that the following Paper in
its own nature, and in the direct and immediate design of it, is a Speculative
discourse; since it tends but to show, that, in case there be Specific
Medicines (as it is probable there are some) their experienced virtues are
reconcilcable to the principles of the Corpuscular, or (as many call it) the
new Philosophy; and at least do not subvert them; if these Effects and
Operations be not clearly explicable by them. And as this is the, avowed scope
of the following Essay, so I chose to treat of it less like a Physician than a
Naturalist. For Physics being a Science, whose large extent invites and
warrants its Cultivaters, to search into the nature and Phaenomina of things
corporeal indefinitely; it must often happen, that the Medicinal Art and this
Science will be conversant about the same subject, though in differing ways, and
with differing scopes. For there are diverse hurtful or advantageous accidents
and changes of the humane Body, whereof the Naturalist takes notice, but as
they are Phaenomina or changes produced by Natural causes in the Body of an
Animal, whilst the Physician considers them as Symptoms of Diseases, or Effects
of Medicines, the former directing his Speculations to the discovery of truth,
and the other his Theory to the recovery of health. But because I else where
particularly consider the Cognation and distinction, between the Discipline
that the Naturalist, and that which the Physician cultivates, I shall for bear
to mention them in this place; but rather acknowledge, that I scarce doubt but
that I might have enriched the following discourse with some choice
particulars, if I would have perused and borrowed from the learned writings of
the famous Dr. Willis: But besides that I had not his Books at hand, I was
unwilling to be prepossessed or biased by his notions, and I presumed the
Person I wrote to would not be unwilling to see, what, without their help, the
consideration of the thing I treated of suggested to me. About this I shall now
proceed to observe, that though the direct scope of the following discourse,
being to explicate the Phenomenon of some bodies, which from their use, are
called Medicinal, and declare how possibly they may produce the Effects
ascribed to them, the ensuing discourse is for the main of a Speculative
nature; yet the consequences that may be drawn from it, and the applications
that in this industrious Age are like to be made of some things that it
contains, may probably render it practical. For I have more than once observed,
that diverse considerable Remedies, and some not unpromising methods too, have
either remained unthought of, both by many Galenical Physicians, and diverse of
their modern Antagonists too, or if proposed by others, have been rejected or
slighted, barely upon this supposition, that no rational account can be given
of their way of working, or how they should do good, and it is said to be
unworthy of a rational Physician; to make use of a Remedy, of whose manner of
operating he cannot give a reason. How prejudicial it may be to many Patients,
that Physicians be prepossessed with a bad opinion of an useful Remedy, may be
guessed by him that shall consider, what multitudes of Teeming Women, that
probably might have been saved by the skilful use of Phlebotomy, have been
suffered to dye for want of it, upon a dislike of that Remedy that Physicians
for many Ages thought to be grounded upon no less authority than a positive
Aphorism of Hippocrates. And therefore if, to remove the specious objection
newly mentioned against that whole kind of Remedies called Specificks, the
following Tract has been so happy as to show, that it is at least possible, that
Medicines said to be Specific, may perform their operations by ways, which
though not explicable by the vulgar Doctrine of the Schools, are intelligible,
and reconcilable, to the clear Principles of the Mechanical Philosophy: If, I
say, this have been done by the Theory proposed in this Treatise, it may
conduce somewhat to enlarge the minds of many Physicians, and invite them to
make use of several Remedies, of which they did not think, or against which
they were prejudiced. And since Specificks, where they can be had, are wont to
be free from any immoderate manifest quality, and for the most part to work
more benignly, as well as more effectually, caeteris paribus, than other
Medicines; I think that to bring them into due request, and invite Physicians
to search for new ones, as well as employ those already known, may tend much to
shorten many Cures, and make them more easy and more safe.

Est aliquid prodire tenus si non datur Vltra.
THE Advertisement OF THE PUBLISHER.
THE Author had occasion to touch upon some of the same Subjects that he here
treats of, in a Book, The Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, long since
published; but he had the misfortune to be reduced to write the following
Discourse about Specific Medicines, and the Utility of Simple Remedies, in a
Village where he had not that Book at hand, and could not call to mind all that
he had therein published seventeen or eighteen years before: On which account,
though he studiously forbore to repeat the particulars that he remembered to
have set down in that Treatise, how opposite soever they would have been to his
present purpose, yet having since the following Discourse was sent to the
Press, got a sight of that other (which he had not read in many years) he finds
upon a transient View that some of the same things are mentioned in both Books:
at which discovery, though he be somewhat troubled, yet he is the less so,
because they are but few, in comparison of the new ones, and set down on such
occasions, or with such other circumstances, that may make a favorable Reader
look on them, as not bare repetitions. And though in the forecited Treatise, some
of the motives to make use of simple Medicines, be lightly touched, yet
besides, that they are not all that are mentioned in the following invitation,
those arguments that are there but pointed at, are here treated of, and both
confirmed, and explained by other Observations, and Receipts. And since the
Printed Book above mentioned has been for diverse years very scarce, it is
presumed that those many Readers that have it not, will not be displeased to
find here some few things for which they cannot resort thither: And as the
Author foresaw he might be obliged to consent to the translation of the
following papers into the Roman Tongue, so he thought his Latin Readers would
not repine, though a great number of particulars had been borrowed of a Book that
is not yet extant in their Language.

I shall give you no farther account of the particulars contained in the two
ensuing Treatises, since the title pages give a sufficient hint of the Noble
Authors main scope, and chief design, I shall only say, that the first Treatise
effectually performs what has not been as yet attempted by answering a very
considerable objection against the Doctrine of the Corpuscularian Philosophers,
namely, that which is taken from what we call Specific Medicines, their
virtues, and operations being hitherto judged by several of the learnedest sort
wholly irreconcilable to the principles of the new Philosophy; whereby he
gratifieth not only the curiosity of Speculative Philosophers, but does
likewise a notable piece of Service to all Physicians, ushering in here and
there such notions as may be the Principles of a sure, and easy Practice, yea
and enable them too, to give a good account of their own Receipts; I mean of
those that contain Specific Medicines, whose virtues hitherto we could not
describe to our Patients, but by saying they did work we knew not how, or by
some Specific, that is by some occult or hidden quality. The second Treatise,
which is an Invitation to the use of simple Medicines, is of such a general
use, that Mankind is much indebted to this Noble Author for it, it is so well
grounded both upon Reason, and Experience, that this as well as the
forementioned discourse, does fully answer the great repute of the Author both
at home, and abroad, where he is commonly styled the English Philosopher.

The Publisher thought fit to translate for the benefit of every common Reader,
some Latin passages contained in the foregoing Treatises.
P. 70. From the year of our Lord 1645. in the space of fourteen years I cured
above a thousand Frebricitants without Bleeding, Purging, or Sweating, by the
help of a single precipitating Remedy, without any regard to the nature of the
Fever, whether it were intermittent, or continued, whether it were a Tertian,
or a Quartan, which is harder to cure than any other, yea without considering
any other circumstance either of Time, Place, Sex, or Age, and that in a very
short time, without any danger of Relapse, and without any considerable trouble
of the Patient, if through his own. Intemperance, he fell not into new Fits
again.

Kergerus de fermentati Sect. 3. cap. 3. p. mihi 250.

P. 130. I have made my self a frequent trial of this Stone, having carried
several of those little Stones tied together about my Neck in such a manner,
that the Stones did touch the Mouth of my Stomach, yet they were beneficial,
tho they had nothing graven upon 'em, etc.

Galen. de simpl. med. facul. 1. 9. tit. de lap.

P. 131. We have seen sometimes the Hemerods cured, as likewise the copious
monthly issues by wearing Rings made of this Stone.

Nic. Monard. simpl. med. histo. c. 36 P. 329.

OF THE Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines, TO THE Corpuscular Philosophy.
The Introduction, To my Learned Friend, Dr. F.
SIR,
PErceiving, by our late Conference, that the thing which most alienates you,
from the Corpuscular Philosophy, is an Objection drawn from your own Profession
and Experience, namely, that the Specific Virtues of Medicines are not
reconcilable to it; my unwillingness that an Hypothesis, I am so kind to as I
am to the Mechanical, should continue under the disfavour of a Person I so much
esteem, as I do Dr. F. makes me venture to offer you the annexed Paper, tho it
be but an Enlargement of a dismembered part of what I long since, to gratify a
Friend, noted about the Origin or Production of Occult Qualities. For tho I
pretend not, that this Trifle should satisfy a man of your Judgment and
Learning, yet it may perhaps serve to keep you from thinking it impossible,
that a skilful Pen may be able quite to surmount those Difficulties, that so
bad a Pen as mine is capable of lessening.

A Paper belonging to the writings about the Mechanical Origin of Qualities.
AMong the several kinds of occult qualities that, which is afforded by
Specific Virtues of Medicines, is not here to be pretermitted. For these
Qualities do not only, like other hidden ones, invite, our curiosity, but
concern our health and may hereafter (if I mistake not) appear to be of much
greater importance, than as yet they are commonly thought. However it may be
worth while to take some notice of them in this place, if it were but because
diverse Learned Physicians do, as some of themselves owned to me, reject or
disfavour the Corpuscular Philosophy upon this account, That they think it
cannot be reconciled to the virtues of Specific Remedies, or at least cannot,
either in a particular or in a general way, give any tolerable account of them.

I find three sorts of Qualities mentioned in the Books of physicians, under
the notion of Specific Virtues. For by some a Medicine is said to have a
Specific Faculty, because it is eminently and peculiarly friendly to this or
that particular Part of the Body, as the Heart, the Brain, the Eye, etc. By
others it is said, by a Specific Power, to attract and evacuate some
determinate Humor, as Choler, Phlegm, etc But the most usual account, upon
which a Medicine is said to be Specific, is that it has the virtue to cure, by
some hidden property, this or that particular disease, as a Pleurisy, an
Asthma, the colic, the Dropsy, etc. And this being the principal and most
common sense, in which the word Specific is employed by Physicians, I shall
ordinarily make use of it, in that sense, in the following discourse, but yet
without so confining my self to it, as not to consider it in the two other
senses, when occasion shall require.

But before I descend to particular considertions 'twill not be amiss to
obviate mistakes by declaring, in what sense in this Paper, I shall employ the
Term Specific Medicine, especially in the last of the three forementioned
Acceptions.

I do not then by a Specific understand a Medicine, that will cure the disease
it is good for Infallibly, and in all Persons that take it, for I confess I
never yet met with any such remedy. Nor do I by Specific understand a Medicine
that, almost like a Charm, works only by some latent and unaccountable
Property, without the assistance of any known Quality, as Purgative, Diuretic,
Sudorific, etc. to be found in other Medicines: But by Specific I mean, in
this discourse, such a medicine as very often, if not most commonly, does very
considerably, and better than ordinary Medicines, relieve the Patient, whether
by quite curing, or much lessening, his disease, and which acts principally
upon the account of some Property or peculiar virtue; so that if it have any
manifest Quality that is friendly, yet the good it does is greater, than can
reasonably be ascribed to the degree it has of that manifest Quality, as hot,
cold, bitter, sudorifick, etc.

There are two grand Questions, that may be proposed about the Specific
virtues ascribed to Medicines, The first is, whether there be really any such,
and the second whether, if there be, the Mechanical Hypothesis can be
accommodated to them.

The former of these Questions may admit of a double sense, for it may be
proposed with respect, either to the present measure of our knowledge, or to
those further seize that, in future times, men may arrive at.

In the latter of these senses, (to dispatch first the consideration of that) I
shall not presume to maintain, without restriction, either part of the
Question. For I do not only hope, but am apt to think, that in time the
Industry and Sagacity of men will be able to discover Intelligible causes of
most of those Qualities, that now pass for Occult, and among them of many of
the Specific virtues ascribed to Medicines. And yet, on the other side, I much
fear that men will not be successful, in tracing out the true and immediate
causes of those good effects of some remedies, that depend upon such fine and
uncommon Textures, and such latent and odly guided Motions, as fall not under
our Senses, tho perhaps assisted by Instruments. Which conjecture will appear
the less improbable, if we consider those admirable Idiosyncrasiae, or
Peculiarities of Disposition, whereof the Books of eminent Writers afford us
many instances, to whose number I could, upon my own Observation, add several,
if I thought it needful. And, tho I am not ignorant that some of these may be
plausibly accounted for, as that of some men's aversion to cheese, or to cats;
yet I do not think that the like explications can be extended to some others,
that might be named, if it were here pertinent to discuss that thoroughly.

As to the former sense, of the Question lately propounded, I confess my self
very amiable to the Affirmative, as far as I can judge by those writings of
Physicians I have had occasion to peruse. Which limitation I add, because I
would not derogate from the knowledge of particular persons, who in so learned
and inquisitive an Age, may be arrived at far greater seize than those
Physicians have done, that have entertained the Public about the Occult and
Specific Qualities of Medicines.

I know there have been, and still are, Dogmatical Physicians, that upon the
Principles, as they pretend, of the School-Philosophy, reject all Medicinal
virtues that they think not reducible to manifest Qualities. But of such Galen
somewhere justly complains, that they either deny matters of fact, or assign
very incompetent causes o the effects they pretend to explain. And, for my
part, I am so far from believing these men capable of giving sufficient reasons
of the more hidden Properties of Medicines, that I am not apt to think them
able, by their Principles, to give clear and particular explications, even of
the more easy and familiar virtues of simples.

I am therefore disposed to think that, in the sense formerly delivered of the
Term Specific Medicines, there are some Remedies that deserve that name.

To this opinion I have been led by several Reasons* And first (to begin with
the least weighty) it has the suffrage of many learned Physicians, both Ancient
and Modern, and particularly that of Galen himself in several places of his
Works. And I remember that, treating of a Specific Remedy against the biting
of a mad Dog, which virtue he ascribes to an occult Quality, or, as he speaks,
to the Propriety of the whole Substance; Galen. de Simpl. Medicam. Fac. Lib. 11.
he takes occasion to promise, that he would write a Book of things that
operate upon that account. Which Book, if it had escaped with his other Works
(for he elsewhere cites it as having written it) would probably have furnished
us with several things to strengthen our opinion. And tho in Matters
Philosophical I am little swayed by mere Authority, yet the concurrent
suffrage, of many eminent Physicians, may in this controversy be the more
considerable, because most of them, being noted Practitioners, had opportunity
to observe whether or no any Remedies deserved the name of Specificks: And
their Testimony is, in our case, the more to be regarded, because Physicians,
especially famous ones, are not wont to be willing to acknowledge, that there
are Effects, which fall under the Cognizance of their art, whereof they cannot
give the causes.

My next Inducement, to admit Specificks, is founded upon Parity of Reason: For
it is manifest, that there are divere formidable Maladies, that are produced by
inconsiderable quantities of Poisons, that have not been discovered to produce
such great and dismal Effects by any Manifest Quality, whether first, second,
or third, as Medical Authors (I doubt not over accurately) distinguish them.

On this occasion I shall add a very odd Accident, about which I was advised
with by an expert oculist, very soon after it happened: The Case was this. A
man lying somewhat long in Bed in the morning, and chancing, as he lay upon his
Back, to cast up his Eyes to the Tester, saw a great Spider, that stood still
just over his Face: Wherefore having reproached his Wife, who happened to be in
the Room, with gross negligence, she took a Broom, and struck it upon the upper
part of the Tester, to beat down the Spider; but the Animal held so fast with
his Feet that she missed her aim, and he, whether frighted or irritated by this
rude shake, let fall upon the Man, that was staring at it to see what would
happen, a drop of Liquor that lighted directly upon one of his open Eyes. But
finding no heat nor sharpness ensue, but rather a very sensible coldness, he
made nothing of it, but rose and put on his clothes. But presently after,
happening to rub with his finger the other Eye, he was sadly surpised to find
himself suddenly benighted, and calling for assistance, he found that the Eye,
which the Spider had let fall something on, tho no change were noted in it by
the bystanders, was totally deprived of sight. Upon which score he repaired to
the above mentioned Oculists: But whether he afterward recovered his sight or
no, I cannot tell; all the endeavors the Oculist arid I employed to find out
his Lodging (to which it seems he had left a wrong direction) having been
Fruitless. This brought into my mind, that I had sometimes wondered to see how
much more quickly Spiders will kill Flies, than the cutting off their Heads, or
running them quite through with Pins or Needles will do.

But to return to what I was saying, of the great Mischief done to Humane
Bodies, by very small quantities of Poison; methinks one may thence argue that
it seems not improbable that Appropriated Medicines, especially when
administered in greater quantity, may produce very notable changes in the Humane
Body to the advantage of it. But on this occasion I expect to be told, that
it is much more easy to do harm, than good, and I confess it is so in the
general, but yet, in the particular case before us, I consider that some
Poisons, that produce such dreadful Symptoms in the Body, are frequently cured
by their appropriated Antidotes, which therefore must have a Sanative Power
great enough, with the help but of the ordinary Concourse of Nature, to
surmount the efficacy of the venomous Matter. To which I shall add this more
familiar instance that as Perfumes do often enough produce various, and
sometimes frightful, Symptoms in many Histerical Women; so the fumes of the
burnt Feathers of Patridges, Woodcocks, etc. do frequently cure the Fit in as
little time as the sweet smell procured it. And I have often found the smell of
strong Spirit of Hartshorn, or Sal-Armoniac, recover such Women in far less
time, than the fragrant odours employed to make them si^^.

The Third and Principal Inducement I had, to think there are Specific
Remedies, is from Experience. I might urge, on this occasion, the Testimony of
Galen, who tells us more than once, that he himself therefore confided, in the
Ashes of burnt Craw-Fishes, for the cure of the biting of a Mad Dog, because
never any of those that took it died. And to annex that upon the by, for the
usefulness of it, he adds, that tho the effect of these ashes be admirable,
Galen. de simpl. Med. Fac. lib. 11.
even when given alone, yet their virtue may be increased, by adding to ten
parts of burnt Craw Fishes five of Gentian and one of Frank-incense. And the
great virtue of these burnt Shell-fishes I find to have been taken notice of
some ages before Galen; Dioscorides much commending them against the same
Disease that the Pergamenian does.

I shall in this place purposely forbear to mention such Medicines, as, tho by
diverse learned Physicians commended as Specificks, are yet by others much
questioned, if not flatly denied to be so. Since it may be more proper, and may
perhaps suffice, to mention two or three, whose efficacy is more notorious.

It Is known, by almost daily experience, in Italy and diverse other hot
Countries, that tho the stings of Scorpions oftentimes produce very acute
Pains, and formidable Symptoms, yet the Mischief is easily remedied, either by
presently crushing the Body of the Scorpion upon the Hurt, or by anointing the
part affected with Oil of Scorpions, (for that reason to be almost every where
found,) which being made by suffocating those Insects in common Oil, and
keeping it long in the Sun, the Liquor does not at all appear to have any
manifest Quality, to which its sanative Efficacy may be ascribed.

The Bitings of those Serpents, which for the noise they are wont to make, with
a kind of empty Bladders in their Tails, the English call Rattlesnakes, are
counted much more poisonous and dangerous than the stings of Scorpions. Of
which I remember a learned Eye witness, that lived diverse years in Virginia,
where they much abound, related to me a very strange Instance, which I cannot
now stay to set down. And yet the English Planters, when they have the
misfortune to be bitten by these Serpents, are wont to cure themselves very
happily by the use of that plant, which from its effects, and the place it
grows in, is well known by the name of Virginian Snakeweed, [ or Serpentaria
Virginiana.

That the Peruvian Bark, commonly called here in England the Jesuits Powder, is
a Specific against Agues, particularly Quartans, diverse learned Physicians not
only grant but assert. And I remember the justly famous Dt. Willis gave me this
Character of it in private discourse, (not without taking notice that some
decry'd it,) It Is the noblest Medicine we (meaning the Physicians) know. But
tho I will not dispute, whether it be so certain and safe a Specific for
Agues, as it is believed by, diverse eminent Doctors, yet I think it can scarce
be denied, to be a Specific Medicine to stop the fits of Agues, (in the notion
of Specific Remedies formerly delivered) since it does that far more
effectually, than the generality of Physicians, for many ages, were wont to do,
with their other Antifebrile Medicines.

I might here tell you, that I have my self seen a stone, whose efficacy in
stopping Hemorrhagies invited my Wonder; and another, which performed
extraordinary things in more than one Distemper tho I could not perceive that
either of them did these things by any manifest Quality. And I might here add
some other particulars, that may be borrowed from Experience, in favor of our
opinion, but that it is like they will be more properly alleged hereafter in
some places of the remaining Part of our Discourse.

I know those, that have rejected Specific Medicines, have confidently urged
three plausible Arguments against them. For some Physicians deny there are any
Effects of Medicines so considerable, as to make them deserve the name of
Specific. Others would probably allow that Experience favors our opinion, if
they did not think the way of a Specific Medicines operating must be
inexplicable, and consequently ought not be admitted by Physicians. And others
again (being of Sentiments very differing from these) will allow them to be
very efficacious, but endeavor to derive their whole Efficacy from Manifest
Qualities, as heat, cold, tenuity of Parts, faculty of making large Evacuations
by Vomit, Siege, etc.

But these objections will be more opportunely considered in due places, Only
there is one Argument, that may be objected by the deniers of Specific
remedies, which I confess is so specious, as to deserve to be particularly
examined in this place, lest it should, if unremov'd, beget too strong a
prejudice against a great part of the ensuing Discourse. For it may be said,
that a Medicine taken in at the Mouth must, in the Stomach and Guts, be at lest
very much changed by Digestion, and the Aliments it meets with there, and a
good Part of it will be proscribed among excrements. That alter it has passed
out of the Stomach, it must meet with diverse strainers of differing Textures,
which will probably stop all or most of the Medicinal Corpuscles that would
pervade them. And that if any shall be so lucky, or so penetrating, as to
surmount all these obstacles, they will probably either be assimilated unto the
Substance of the Body, or quite changed by the parts they will be fain to
combine with there. Or, if yet any should be able so obstinately to retain
their pristine Nature, they will in all likely hood be too few to have any
considerable operation upon the Body. But to this plausible objection I have
several things to oppose by way of Answer.

1. And first I may represent, that diverse Specific Medicines, as some some
Ointments, Plasters, Poultis's Amulets, Pericarpia, etc. Being outwardly
applied, their Corpuscles can get into the Mass of Blood without passing
through the Stomach, and consequently are not concerned in the proposed
objection.

2. Against most of the Galenical Physicians, that are wont to urge the
formerly proposed objection, I see not why one may not argue ad hominem by
putting them in mind, that the same Difficulties for the main, or others not
inferior, may be alleged against a common opinion of their own. For since they
believe that Purgatives, Cordials, Diaphoreticks, besides Cephalicks,
Hepaticks, and some other sorts of Medicines, do contemperate, and sweeten the
Blood, and usefully affect the newly mentioned stable Parts; and since these
Medicines act not by naked Qualities but by small Particles, of their own
substance, if they can give us an intelligible account of the ingress of these
Particles in considerable numbers, into the Recesses of the Body, without
being, dispoyl'd of their particular virtues, they will at the same time
instruct us, how to answer the objection they urge against us.

3. And in regard the generality of Physicians hold, that Milk, and Urine, were
materially in the Mass of Blood, and are separated from it by the Breasts, and
Kidneys; I think one may by experience show she invalidity of their
ratiocination against Specificks. For it is obvious to observe, and I have
several times done it my self, that Rubarb will (perhaps for many hours) tinge
the Urine of those that take any considerable dose of it And in some of our
English American Colonies, there grows a fruit, which the planters call the
Prickled Pear, whose inward Substance is exceeding red, and whose being
pleasant in taste, as well as color, frequently invites eaters; but its Juice
is of so penetrating a nature, that it passes from the stomach into the
Bladder, and then into the chamberpot, with so little loss of its redness, that
strangers are wont to be surprised and frighted at it, as thinking this unknown
fruit had made them void bloody Urine, if not blood rather than Urine. This is
a known thing among those, that have dwelt in our Southern Plantations, and has
been affirmed to me by unsuspected Eyewitnesses, and among them by a famous
Physician. As for Milk, the great Hippocrates himself informs us, that if a
Woman, or a she-goat take Elaterium, the Cathartick virtue passes into the
Milk, and will purge the Child that drinks it. And I remember that haying
occasion to make some stay, in the Spring or beginning of Summer, in the
confines of Switzerland and Savoy, I had the opportunity to observe this odd
Phenomenon, That when the Cows, in that District, fed, as they would in that
season plentifully do, upon a certain weed, said to be a kind of Wild-Garlick,
that grew copiously in the Pastures, the very Butter made of their Milk had so
rank a taste of the Herb, that though I was not, yet diverse other strangers
were, thereby diverted from eating of it, though otherwise fresh and good. And
I remember too, that having passed a Winter on the Seacoast of the County of
Cork in Ireland, I found it a known observation, that a sort of greedy
Sea-fowl, whose name comes not now into my mind, living almost wholly upon
Fish, (upon whose schools I have sometimes wondered to see such a multitude of
ravenous Fowls attending) they acquire a Taste that makes some pleasantly
Question, whether the food they afford be to be reputed flesh or fish. But how
constantly the Particles of diverse Bodies may retain their nature in all the
digestion, and strainers they pass through, I have more amply discoursed in
another Tract, About the concealments and disguises of seminal Principles. And
I presume I have here said enough, to allow me to proceed to the fourth part of
my answer.

4. I consider then, in the last place, that whereas it is objected, that so
small a quantity of the matter of a Specific, as is able to retain its nature
when it arrives at the part it should work on, must have little or no power
left to relieve it. This difficulty will not much stagger those that know, how
unsafe it is to measure the power that natural Agents may have, to work upon
such an engine as the Humane Body, by their bulk rather than by their subtilty
and and activity A sober Gentleman, that was Governor of a Colony in the
Torrid one, and commanded a Warlike English Vessel, that sailed up very far in
the great River of Gambia or Gambra in Africa, and staid there some time to
trade with the Negro's of the Inland Country, being inquired of by me, among
other things, about the Poisons that are said to be extraordinarily powerful in
the Parts he came from; he answered me, that the Blacks had a Poison, that was,
though somewhat slow, yet very mortal; in so small a dose, that it was usual
for them to hide enough of it to kill a man, under one of their Nails, which
they wear somewhat long: Whence they would drop it so dexterously into the
Drink, or Milk, or Broth or other Liquid Aliment of those they ow a spite to,
that it is scarce possible for a stranger to be watchful enough to prevent it.
For which reason, as he told me, though he sometimes eat with their petty
Princes, or Governors, at the same table, yet he would never eat out of the
same dish, nor drink out of the same Cups with any of them. He added that, in
another part of Africa, a famous Knight, who commanded the English there, and
lately died a shipboard in his way home, was so poisoned at a parting Treat,
by a young Negro Woman of Quality, whom he had enjoyed and declined to take
with him, according to his promise, into Europe. And though my Relator early
gave him notice of what he suspected to be the cause of this Indisposition, and
engaged him thereupon to take Antidotes, and Cordials, as Treacle, etc. yet his
languishing distemper still increased, till it killed him.

I could name a Vegetable Substance, growing in Europe, and perhaps not far
from hence, which though some Empiricks employ as a Medicine, is so violently,
operative, that a Learned and famous Modern Physician relates, that no more
than half a grain would work so violently, as to cause very dangerous
Hypercatharses, of which though he remedied some, yet he was not able to keep
all from being Mortal. And because many ingenious men deny that out English
Vipers are poisonous, I shall add in favor of the Argument that I have been
enforcing that I know a Young man, who having been bitten by an English Viper,
which he too rashly laid hold on, though the tooth pricked but his hand, yet
the venom, conveyed by so small a hurt which perhaps equaled not in quantity
the hundredth part of Pins head, quickly produced in him the bad Symptoms that
usually follow the Biteing of that Serpent,; And among others (for I
particularly asked him about that) a violent vomiting of ill conditioned stuff.
I know also a person, that practiced Physic in the Isle of Iava, where
Scorpions are held to be more venomous than in Italy who having, after he had
drank some what freely, provoked, and bin stung by, a Scorpion, tho the Hurt
was but in his Thumb, and was so small that I could not perceive the least scar
it had left, that it put him presently to such violent tortures, for some
hours, till he had procured Specific remedies, that he looked upon himself a
dead man; and felt so raging a heat within that he thought (to use his own
Expression) that hellfire was got into his Body. Nor is it only by mere
poisons, that a Humane Body may be greatly affected, tho the agent be but very
inconsiderable for bulk and weight, for we see, that diverse Women, otherwise
strong and healthy, will be cast into sounding fits, and perhaps will complain
of suffocation, and be put into convulsive Motions, by the fragrant Odours of
Musk, or Civet; though if all the Effluvia, that cause these Symptoms, were
reduced into one aggregate, this would not probably amount to a hundredth, nor
perhaps to a thousandth, part of a grain. And I have oftentimes speedily
suppressed such fits, by the odor of the volatile Salts Hartshorn, Sal
Ammoniac, or the like, or of destill'd Spirits abounding with such Salts;
though perhaps all the Particles, that actually relieved the patient, and
calmed these frightful Symptoms, if packed together, would not have equaled,
either in bigness or in weight, the tenth, not to say the fifteenth, or the
hundredth, part of a grain of mustard seed. And as for inward remedies, it is
vulgarly known, that in the infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Corpuscles that
render the Liquor vehemently vomitive and Purgative, are so very minute, that
great proportions of Wine, or other Vehicles may* be strongly impregnated with
them without any sensible diminution of the Body that parts with them. And of
this we have a not less, if not more, considerable instance, when Quicksilver
is decocted or long infused in common Water. For Helmont observes that, though
the Liquor be not altered in Color, or Taste, nor the Quicksilver at all
sensibly changed, nay nor grown any thing lighter in a balance, yet the Liquor
does, by means of these insensible and unponderable Effluxes of the
Quicksilver, acquire a notable virtue against worms; for which purpose not only
Helmont, but before him that experienced Chemist Hartman, and another eminent
Writer, extol this Medicine. And on this occasion I remember that a fine Boy,
born to be heir to a very illustrious family, falling into a dangerous Fever,
which was judged to proceed from worms or verminous matter; a famous and
Experienced Physician, that treated him, confessed to me, that he was out of
hopes of him; Because the Child, having been bred to have his will, and tired
with unsuccessful Remedies, was so obstinate and careful in refusing to take
any thing, that smeld or relished of a Medicine, that he forbore, in spite of
all the art used to deceive him, even to drink any thing but small Beer
Whereupon I persuaded both the Doctor, and the Lord, whose son the child was,
to impregnate his small beer with Mercurial particles, by frequently shaking it
with good Quicksilver in it. By which means the patient, perceiving no change
of Color or Taste in the Drink, swallowed it greedily, and through the blessing
of God was soon after restored to a Health, which the Parties concerned
ascribed to the Mercurial remedy.

I should condemn my self, for having bestowed so many words upon one
objection, but that I hope the Answer, given to it in this place, will
facilitate and shortens several things relating to my present Subject Specific
Medicines. About which I shall now proceed to offer my thougths in some
Propositions, and short discourses upon them.

Having now dispatched the first of the two formerly proposed Inquiries, I
proceed to the second, namely, whether the Mechanical Hypothesis can be
accommodated to Specific Medicines, so as that they may be either intelligibly
explicated by a, or at least shown to be reconcilable to it. I presume you will
easily believe, that there are few writers more inclinable, than I Am, to
confess the dimness of our knowledge, and the obscurity of many things in
nature; or that are more forward than I to grant, that many of the operations,
of Specific Medicines, are to be reckoned among those abstruse things, whereof
nature seems to affect the concealment. But notwithstanding this, when I
consider how comprehensive and fertile the principles of the Corpuscular
Philosophy are, I cannot despair bur that it will be found, that diverse of the
effects of these Medicines may be, in a general way explicated by them, and not
any will appear inconsistent with them. This I desire may be here taken notice
of once for all that, retaining the Scope of the following discourse still in
your memory, you may not think it strange, that I content my self, on most
occasions, to give in general possible explications, and to show that Specific
Medicines may operate on some such account as I propose, without affirming that
they certainly do so I observed soon after the beginning of this Paper that
there were three sorts of virtues to which Physicians (tho not unanimously)
have given this Title of Specific; namely such as evacuate some particular
humor, such as are peculiarly friendly to this or that part of the Humane
Body, and such as in an unknown way cure or much lessen this or that
determinate Disease. But yet I shall now apply my discourse peculiarly to the
last sort of these Medicines, as being both more considerable in it self and
the chief subject intended in present Discourse, giving nevertheless, as
occasion serves, such additional Hints and observations, as may make the
Reflections, belonging to this Third sort of Specificks, easily applicable
Mutatis Mutandis to the other two.

And I shall begin with laying here for a foundation what I have in another
Treatise had occasion to deliver and make out, namely, That a living Humane
Body is not to be looked upon as a mere statue, or a mere Congeries of the
Materials it is composed of, Flesh, Blood, Bones, Fat, Nerves, Veins, Arteries,
etc. But an admirably framed Engine, consisting of Stable, Liquid, and
Pneumatick Substances, so exquisitely adapted to their respective functions and
Uses, that oftentimes the effects of an agent upon it are not to be measured so
much by the power of that agent considered in it self, as by the effects that
are consequently produced by the action of the parts of the Living Engine it
self upon one another.

This premised, I consider* that there is no need to grant that the operations
of all Specificks, or of the same in differing Diseases, must be of one kind;
but that differing Specificks may operate in several manners, and some by one
of these ways may oppugn such a disease, and others may do good against such
another. And of these general ways I shall briefly propose six or seven that
now occur to my thoughts. For having first given you this important caution,
that the Specific Remedy does not commonly (though sometimes it may) relieve
the patient by this or that single way of operating, but by a concurrence of
two or more, that as it were join their forces to produce the desired effect.

PROPOSITION. I.
And first, sometimes the Specific Medicine may cure by discussing, or
resolving the morbifick matter, and thereby making it fit for expulsion by the
greater common shores of the Body, and the Pores of the skin.

It Is known that many Diseases, and those oftentimes stubborn and Chronical,
proceed from certain tough or viscous Humors, that obstruct the passages
wereby the blood should circulate, or other useful Liquors be transmitted. And
these peccant Humors are oftentimes so viscid and obstinate, that ordinary
Remedies will do little or no good upon them. And yet a Specific may, by the
smalness, and congruous Figure of some of its Corpuscles, get through the Pores
into the Recesses of this stubborn matter; and by their solidity, Figure, and
Agitation, promoted by the heat of the patients Body, may dissolve and ruin
the texture of the Morbifick matter, and render it capable of being proscribed
by nature, by Urine, Sweat, or some other commodious and innocent Evacuation.
Thus the blood, or some other Liquor of the Body, being (to use the Chemists
Phrase) impregnated with the friendly and operative Particles of the Remedy,
becomes an appropriated Menstruum in referrence to the Pecant matter:
impregnated with Sal Armoniack becomes a Menstruum, that by degrees will
dissolve both Copper and Iron, as compact bodies as they are. I said
appropriated Menstruum, because there is no sufficient reason to suppose, that
the Menstruum works by any manifest quality, as Heat Moisture, etc. or even by
Acidity it self: But rather by virtue of the fitness, which the shape, bulk,
solidilty, and other Mechanical affections of its particles, concur to give it,
to disjoyn the parts of a body of such a determinate Texture. For as I have in
another Paper amply shown, there are far more Menstruums of distinct sorts than
are commonly taken notice of, and the operations of these cannot safely be
measured by the strength of their manifest qualities, since it may several
times happen, that a Menstruum, less acid or less strongly tasted, may dissolve
this or that body, which another Menstruum, that seems far stronger, will not
work on. Thus cold water will dissolve the white of an Egg, which pure spirit
of wine will be so far from dissolving, that it will coagulate it; [and so will
spirit of Salt and Oil of Vitriol it self.] Thus dephlegm'd spirit of Urine
will readily dissolve minute filings of Copper, which spirit of Vinegar will
but slowly work upon; and yet this Liquor will speedily dissolve Crabs Eyes,
which spirit of Urine will leave entire. Thus Quicksilver, that is insipid,
will in the cold dissolve Gold, which Aqua Fortis it self, though assisted by
exeternal heat will not work upon; and yet Aqua Fortis will furiously bear
asunder the parts of Iron, though Quicksilver will not so much as adhere to its
surface. And thus in fine (not to accumulate instances) common Oil, that is so
smooth upon the Tongue, and will not dissolve so much as an Egg-shell, will
dissolve Brimstone, which yet will resist Aqua Fortis it self, that will
dissolve almost all Metals, beside many hard Stones and Minerals. And I know a
liquor, having more than once prepared it, which, though so weak that one may
drink a Wine Glass full of it pure without danger, will yet work on some very
hard bodies, both Stones and Metals, in a way that is not to be matched, among
the highly corrosive Menstruums in use among Chemists.

And now, supposing that the active Corpuscles, of a specific
Medicineassociated with the blood, or other Vehicle they impregnate, may act
upon the morbifick matters they meet with in the body, after the manner of
Menstruum; supposing this I say, we may hence illustrate several things that
have reference to the operation of specific Medicines.

1. And we may hence derive a Guess, why an appropriated Medicine will perform
things, which will not be done by another, whose manifest qualities seem to be
the same for kind, and much stronger in degree. For Menstruums do not always
act according to the degree of their Acidity, or the like sensible quality, but
according to the congruity of their Corpuscles to the pores of the body they
are to dissolve; and also oftentimes according to a fitness that depends upon
other Mechanical Affections of the acting Liquor. And therefore Physicians, as
well as others, may easily mistake in their Argumentations a majori ad minus,
and a minori ad majus. For the consequence is not good to argue either thus,
Water, which is so strengthless Liquor, will dissolve Gum Arabic, therefore
highly rectified spirit of Wine, which is a much more subtle and penetrateing
Liquor, will do the same thing more powerfully; for Experience shows, it will
not dissolve it at all: or thus, strong Oil of Vitriol is more corrosive in
taste, and will dissolve many bodies that Aqua Fortis will not, therefore it
will also dissolve Silver as well as Aqua Fortis, the contrary of which is
true. Nay it is not a good inference to argue thus, Aqua Fortis is dissolves
Silver by virtue of its acid Spirits, therefore the more it abounds with these,
the more potently it will dissolve that Metal, whereas I have elsewhere proved
by Experience, that if Aqua Fortis be made exceeding strong, it will not work
upon Silver, but it will readily do it if it be weakened by the addition of a
fit quantity of Common Water.

To this I shall add, that the dissolution of a Body may depend, as well upon
the peculiar texture of the body it self, as the manifest strength of the
Menstruum.

2ly. The foregoing Doctrine may suggest a Reason, why a Medicine that does
wonders in one disease, may do little or nothing in another, that some may
think to be a kin to it, and perhaps too, more easily superable by it. For the
presumed cognation may not be so great, but that some dissimilitude of texture
in the morbifick matters, may make one of them unfit to be wrought upon by the
same Menstruum that dissoloves the other. And though pure Spirit of Wine will
easily enough dissolve Gummi Guajacum, and also the little portion of resinous
matter that are harbored in the Pores and small cavities of the Wood; yet the
same Menstruum will not work upon the Wood it self of the Tree that affords
those soluble Substances.

3. This may keep it from being thought strange, that Specific Medicines
should sometimes fail of their usual Effects. For, as the Bodies of individual
Patients, may differ very much, either according to their natural Constitution,
or to that which they acquire by the disease that distempers them, or on both
those accounts; So it ought not to seem strange, that in some sick Persons
among many, the congruity between the agent ct patient should be altered,
either by some considerable change in the Texture of the Morbifick matter, or
by some notable alteration that the Corpuscles of the Medicine receive in their
passage through the Vessels, by the admixture of some incongruous Particles of
the Blood or other Vehicle. Thus Spirit of Salt will, as I have tried, dissolve
Copper, as Spirit of Niter does: which notwithstanding, tho this last named
Liquor will dissolve Silver, yet if you mix with it Spirit of Salt, which by
the like operation of both upon Copper, seems to be amicable to it, the Spirit
of Niter will no more be able to dissolve Silver, as it could before.

4thly. Our Hypothesis may also hint to us an answer to one of the main and
most plausible objections of the deniers of Specific Medicines. For some of
them ask in a Scornful way, how it is possible that a Medicine should rove up
and down in the Mass of Blood, and neglecting all other things, should single
out, and fasten upon the Morbifick matter men wish it should proscribe. For if
the Medicine acts by impregnating the Blood, or some other Liquor of the Body,
and turning it into a kind of Menstruum, it is very possible, both that the
strainers through which the Corpuscles must pass, may keep back the
inconvenient parts of the vehicle, and (which is in our case more considerable)
the Menstruum may be either appropriated to the peccant Humor, as has been
formerly declared, or else may at least be qualified, to resolve that more
easily than any other Substance it meets with in the Body. As if you take some
Bone-ashes, and Crocus Martis, and Saw-dust, and powdered Sea Salt, and Filings
of Gold, and blend all these together, if upon one half of this mixture you
pour common Water, it will not meddle with any other of the Ingredients except
the Sea Salt, which it will readily dissolve: and if upon the other half of the
same mixture, you put a sufficient quantity of Quicksilver, and rub them
together, this Metalline Liquor will neglect all the rest of the Ingredients,
and the Sea Salt it self, and fasten upon the Gold. And those that work in the
Spanish Gold mines inform us, that when they have well ground some Ore, that
contains Gold and Copper, besides Heterogeneous Minerals, well heated
Quicksilver will take up the Gold much sooner and better than it will the
Copper, scarce meddling with the latter, as long as there remains any not
despicable quantity of the former, to be wrought upon by it. And as for the
supposed difficulty, that the Medicine should Ferret out, if I may so speak,
the morbifick matter, in what vessel soever of the Body it lies, this objection
might have been considerable, before the discovery of the Bloods circulation:
But it is not so now that we know, that things that once get into the Mass of
Blood, are presently whirled about with it, and may be conveyed by it even to
small vessels lying in the remotest Parts of the Body.

5thly. And this prompts me to take notice, that our Hypothesis may help us to
answer those many learned Physicians, that either reject, or at least despise,
most External remedies, especially Pericarpia, Amulets, and Appensa, upon a
supposition, both that they neither can furnish the Body they do but externally
touch, with any store of Medicinal Particles; and which is chiefly in this
place to be considered, that being but external remedies, they must be very
unable to do good in Internal diseases, especially such as are seated in Parts,
remote from those which the Medicine is applied to. But as to the former part
of the objection, 'twill not be difficult to answer it to him that has read
what I have elsewhere written of the subtility, numerousness and efficacy of
Effluviums. And we need but consider, what plenty of Particles sensible to the
nostrils, are for a long time emitted by a small quantity of Ambergris, or
even of Camphire (which is often externally used) and the multitude of
Magnetical Corpuscles, that for many years constantly effluviate from a small
vigorous Lodestone, to think it possible that even dry and stable Bodies may
afford sufficient store of effluvia, to perform considerable things in so
curiously framed an Engine, as the Humane Body is; where we see that the odor
of Musk, or Civet, for instance, may speedily cast diverse Persons into Fits,
and the smell of Castor or Assa faetida, and much more that of Salt of
Hartshorn or of Sal Armoniack, quickly relieve them. And as to the Second Part
of the objection, what I have elsewhere made out, and the best Modern
Physicians grant, The Essay of the Porosity of Animal Bodies.
of the Porosity of the Skin, shows, that it is very possible for the subtle
Effluvia of several Bodies, to get through the Pores of the Skin; and when they
have once got admittance, so much as into the smaller Vessels, it is easy to
conceive how these may carry them into the greater, and consequently into the
Mass of Blood, by whose Circulation they may be readily conveyed to all the
Parts of the Body, and among them to the seat of the disease: and perhaps, (to
add that upon the by,) the efficacy of these Corpuscles, that, if I may so
speak, get in at the Keyhole, not at the Door, may be the more considerable,
because they get presently into the Mass of Blood, without passing through those
Digestions in the stomach and other Parts, which oftentimes much weaken the
virtue of Medicines taken in at the Mouth, before they arrive at the Blood.

PROPOSITION. II.
Sometimes a Specific Medicine may mortify the over Acid, or other immoderate
Particles that infest the Mass of Blood, and destroy their coagulatory or other
effects.

Tho I am not of their opinion, who of late are wont to impute almost all
Diseases to acidity, abounding in the Blood and other Liquors of the Body, by
whose intervention the stable parts also are offended; yet I readily grant that
a considerable number of Distempers are, at least in great part, produced
either by Acids themselves, or by their bad effects or Productions. Agreeably
to which Doctrine we may very probably conceive, that several Maladies may be
either quite cured, or much lessened, by a Specific Remedy that abounds in
Corpuscles fitted to mortify Acids. This mortification may be effected by more
than one way, and of these ways the chief that now occur to my thoughts, are
two.

For there are some Bodies, that mortify or disable Acids by a positive
Hostility, if I may so term it; that is, by such a contrariety as is
discernable by the Taste, and more by the visible conflict, and manifest Tumult,
that is produced, when they come to invade an Acid. Of this sort of mortifiers
of Acids, are the most part of those that are called Alcalisate Salts. Whether
fixed, as the Lixivial Salts of Plants, or volatile, as the Spirits and
ascending Salts of Urine, Blood, Hartshorn, Soot, etc. As may be exemplified,
when any of these comes to be mingled with Aqua fortis, Spirit of Salt, Oil of
Vitriol, or the like Acid Liquors, by which by the way we may see, that those
Galenists mistake, who ascribe the virtues of Spirit of Hartshorn, and of
Urine, only to their tenuity of Parts, Briskness of Motion, and the like
affections, that they might not seem beholding to the Chemists for so useful a
notion, as that of the contrariety of Acids and Alcalies.

The other principal way, by which Acids may be mortified, or disabled to bite,
is by Sheathing them, if I may so express it. For as a knife may be disabled to
cut, either by filing off or otherwise blunting its Edge, or else by covering
the Blade with a sheath fit for it, or by sticking it into a Loaf of Bread, or
the like Body fit to receive and detain the whole Blade; so an Acid Corpuscle
may lose its power of cutting or pricking, either by having its Figure spoiled
by the action of a strong and manifest Alcaly, or else by being as it were
sheathed in a Porous Body, tho perhaps endowed with no Taste, or any other
manifest Quality, by which one would think it contrary to the Acid it disables,
as a file is to the edge of a knife. Of this way of mortifying Acids, Chemical
operations afford us many instances, as when Menium destroys the Acidity of
Spirit of Vinegar, as I have found Chalk will do that of Aqua Fortis it self;
and Lapis Calaminaris very much lessens, as well as alters, the Acidity of
Spirit of Salt, and even of Spirit of Niter. And I the rather mention this
Mineral, both because its Qualities are less known to Physicians, and the
generality of Chemists, and because it supplies me with an Argument to prove
that Acids may be, tho I do not think they always are, rather sheathed in,
than destroyed by the Bodies that silently mortify them. For, as Glauber has
truly enough observed, Acid Spirits (as I have tried in some) may by force of
fire be driven in Distillation out of the Lapis Calaminaris, very much
dephlegm'd, and stronger than before.

I know it may be here objected, that the Mortification of Acids is performed
by a manifest Quality, and therefore makes nothing for the feavourers of
Specific Medicines. But to this I answer.

1. That the power of mortifying Acids, especially by sheathing them, or if you
please, by Absorption of them, is none of those Qualities, whether First,
Second or Third, that the former Physicians took notice of in Medicines; tho
the sufficiency of these Qualities to cure diseases, has been, and still is,
used by many as a ground of denying the Specific virtues of remedies.

2. That I have often looked upon it as an happy mistake, and of ill
consequence, that so many learned modern Physicians take it for granted, that
if a Medicine be endowed with a manifest Quality, as Acid or Alcalisate, the
good it does, (and the like for the most part may be said of the Harm) may
safely be abscrib'd to that Quality, that is to its being of an Acid, or else
of an Alcalisate nature; whereas in my poor Judgment, there being a
considerable disparity, as various Trials have assured me, between Acid and
Acid, as likewise between Alcaly and Alcaly, it is fit to distinguish betwixt an
Acid for instance, as merely such, and the peculiar modification that may
belong to that Acid. Thus, tho all Acid Menstruums that I know of, if they be
well dephlegm'd, will dissolve Copper, yet Aqua Regis that will dissolve not
only that Metal, but the much more closely compacted body of Gold, will not at
all dissolve Silver; as on the other side Aqua Fortis, as corrosive a Menstruum
as it is, will not of it self dissolve Gold, but if you give it a new
Modification, by adding to it common Spirit of Salt, which it self I have often
found (whatever Chemists think or have written to the contrary) will leave it
entire, the Aqua Fortis will easily dissolve that Metal. Nay a different
Modification may not only make a Disparity between Acid, but that which
according to the received way of Judging, ought to be called a contrariety: for
Spirit of Salt will precipitate Silver, which Aqua Fortis has dissolved, and
Spirit of Niter, tho one of the Acidest Menstruums we have, will not only
precipitate an Antimonical powder out of that odd substance, that Chemists call
Butter of Antimony, but will do it with a wonderful conflict, tumult, and
effervesence; and yet this Butter of Antimony is so highly Acid, that a little
quantity of it, put into a considerable one of Water, makes it so sour, that
many Chemists call it Acetum Philosophorum. And now to apply these things to
the lately proposed objection, I desire it may be remembered, that near the
beginning of this Letter I plainly intimated to you, that I did not deny, but
that a Specific Medicine may sometimes be accompanied with, or even in part
operate by a manifest quality, but that yet I thought the good effect was not
due, barely to the kind or degree of the manifest Quality, but to somewhat
superadded which gave it a Specific virtue, against this or that particular
Disease. And suitably to this it may be said, that, as there are several kinds
of Acids, and of Alcalies too, it is not every Acid that will be mortified by
every Alcaly; and have its Effects destroyed by it, which may be illustrated by
this, that, tho when Copper is dissolved in Aqua Fortis it is possible, by the
help of mere Chalk skilfully applied to make the Menstruum let go the
Corpuscles of the Metal, yet if upon such a high colored solution of Copper,
you shall pour (as to convince some ingenious men, I have purposely done a due
quantity of Spirit of Urine, or the like volatile Alcaly, tho there will
presently ensue a great conflict and manifest ebullition, with noise and store
of Bubbles, yet between these Hostile Salts, a multitude of the Acid Corpuscles
of the Aqua Fortis will not be so mortified, as to let go the Metal, but the
solution varying its color, will have and keep a deeper one than before.

And when I consider the differences that a Skilful Observer may find, between
Vinegar, Alum, Crystals of Tartar, Juice of Lemmons, Juice of Barbaries, the
essential Salts (as Chemists call them) of those Plants that are sour in Taste,
to omit diverse other Acids, I am apt to think, that disordered nature may have,
in a diseased Body, produced Acids of several sorts which are not particularly
known to us, and that some of these may be of such a nature, that none of our
common Alcalies, as such, is able to mortify them, and which yet may be
mortified, at least by the way of Sheathing, by some appropriated or peculiarly
modified Corpuscles of a Specific Remedy which may be illustrated by what is
elsewhere observed, that, tho neither Spirit of Vinegar, nor Spirit of Salt,
nor Oil of Vitriol it self, would, as far as I have tried, dissolve a stone
taken out of a man's Body, yet Spirit of Niter, (which does not dissolve several
Podies, that I have found dissoluble in Oil of Vitriol) will readily work upon
it, and thereby lose, its Corrosiveness.

Before I leave this Subject, 'twill not be amiss to intimare a couple of
things, that perhaps you will not think impertinent to it.

One of these is, that, whereas I not long ago distinctly named Acids
themselves and their Productions, I did it (not out of Inadvertence, but)
because I think Preternatural Acids do not only disaffect the Body whilst they
continue sensibly Acid, but may in diverse cases be the causes of some
Distempers, whereof most men would think them more likely to be the remedies.
For, tho Acids be reputed to have an Incisive and Resolutive virtue, and
therefore Oxymel and some other Acetous Medicines are commended to cut tough
Phlegm, and Spirit of Vitriol is used for the same purpose, and to dissolve
coagulated Blood; Yet, as I am willing to grant this virtue unto Acids in some
cases, so there are others wherein I much suspect, that obstructions, and
consequently the diseases that usually attend obstinate ones, may be occasioned
by Acids, as they coagulate some Fluids in the Mass of Blood, that are disposed
to be thickened by them, and by that consistence made unfit to pass with the
rest of the circulating Blood, through the smaller Vessels and strainers of the
Body, where upon that account they make obstructions. This I shall exemplify by
the coagulation that I have made by some Acid Salts, as Spirit of Salt, of the
White of an Egg, especially if by beating reduced to an Aqueous Consistence.
And the like coagulation may easily be effected in Milk, which may not only be
speedily curdl'd with Spirit of Salt, but, as is known by Bodies not Chymically
prepared, as Rennet and Juice of Lemons. And Experiments purposely made have
shown, that, if some Acids be conveyed immediately into the Mass of Blood, they
will coagulate even that Liquor, whilst it continues in the Vessels of the yet
living Animals.

The other thing I lately told you, I was to observe, is, that, tho Acid
Corpuscles are those, that modern Physicians and Chemists are wont to take
notice of as hurtful, both in the Blood and stable Parts of the Body, except
the Stomach, and perhaps some few neighboring Parts, as the Spleen and
Pancres. And, tho some ingenious men proceed so far, as to impute almost all
Diseases to the bad Effects of Acids, yet I am very inclinable to think, that
diverse maladies and ttoublesom Symptoms proceed from Corpuscles, that, whether
they be of a Saline nature or not, are different from Acids properly so called.
For I consider, that there may be many Body, which may as 'twere result from
the combination of Acids with other Saline Particles, that much alter their
nature, as I have elsewhere noted, that Spirit of Salt will, with Spirit of
Urine, compose a kind of Sal-Armoniac; and Spirit of Niter with Salt of Tartar
dissolved in common Water, will concoagulate with it into Salt Petre (or a Body
exceeding like it,) and the same Spirit of Niter or Aqua Fortis with Spirit of
Urine, or of Blood, or the like, will afford a very fusible Salt, differing
enough from what either of the Ingredients was before their conjunction. And
it is vulgarly known, that Oil of Vitriol, and Oil of Tartar per deliquium, do
by their coalition produce Tartarum Vitriolatum, in which the Acidity of the
former, and the Alcalisateness of the latter, are very much infringed, a third
Body being by resultancy produced, that differs much both from the former and
the latter Oil, or rather Saline Liquor. And when, besides Instances of this
nature, I consider how many differing sorts of Corpuscles so fruitful a
Principle as nature may have formed, that, without being Acid, may yet have
notable and hurtful Effects upon the Blood, or some particular solid part of
the Body. It seems probable to me, that there may be other Qualities required,
to mortify or disable these Morbifick Corpuscles, than a contrariety to Acid
Salts, and consequently, that a Medicine that affords Corpuscles peculiarly
fitted to correct or enervate this particular sort of hurtful ones, may deserve
the name of a Specific.

And here I further consider, that, as in the Body there may be diverse
coagulations made by Saline Corpuscles manifestly Acid; so there may be others
produced by Corpuscles, Whether Saline in taste or no, that are not manifestly
Acid, but perhaps rather of a contrary nature, which observation, being wont to
be overlooked by Physicians, and yet in my opinion of no small importance, may
deserve to be a little the more carefully made out. I have sometimes for
curiosity made a Liquor, that was not in Taste either Acid or Urinous; to which
having put a moderate proportion of a distilled Liquor, which it self was not
in taste either Acid, or Urinous, or lixiviate, it would in a very short time,
perhaps in not many minutes, be coagulated into so consistent a Body, that, tho
the wide mouthed Vessel were held with the Orifice downwards, nothing would
fall out of it.

I have taught in another (unpublish'd Paper, that if upon a certain solution
(which I there show how to make) one drop some Spirit of Urine, or anorhet
Volatile Alcaly, there will presently be produced a Gelly, whose consistence
and color may make it easily be taken for common Starch, ready to be employed
to stiffen Linen.

The like Gelly, but more transparent, I have more than once made, without the
help of any thing, that is sensibly Acid or Urinous.

I have also, to convince some virtuosi, showed them somewhat to their
surprise, a substance I had prepared without the help of Urine, or any volatile
Alcaly, (and sometimes almost in a trice) that would in very few minutes
coagulate above twice, if not thrice its weight of highly rectified and
inflamable vinous Spirit into a stable Mass.

And to show you, that it is not requisite that a Liquor be strongly, or so much
as sensibly Acid, to coagulate an Animal Substance, as I lately noted, that the
Spirit of Salt did the White of an egg, I shall add, that well dephlegm'd
Spirit of Wine will do the same thing as well, if not better.

PROPOSITION III.
Sometimes the Specific Medicine may help the Patient, by precipitating the
Peccant matter out of the Blood, or other Liquor (of the Body) that harbors it.

Tho Precipitation be oftentimes a consequent of the Mortification of Acids, or
of Alcalies, by Corpuscles of a contrary Quality, yet I thought fit to say
something of it apart: Because I have observed that some Acids and Alcalies may
be put together without causing Precipitation by their contrariety; and on the
other side, that diverse Precipitations may be produced where there does not
appear any Hostility, though I know diverse ingenious men, who think this Effect
it self a sufficient Argument, that the hostility of Acids and Alcalies must be
the cause of it. But that should not be taken for granted, but proved by
collateral Experiments, that do not suppose the Truth of the Hypothesis it
self. But to proceed to our Exampls, I know (and elsewhere mention) several
Urinous Spirits, that I could mix with Acid Menstruum without making any
manifest Conflict, or Precipitation; And on the otherside, Acids and Alcalies,
that will make a manifest Conflict by their mutual creation, and yet if they be
mingled in a just proportion, will have for the consequent of their Mixture,
Coalition instead of Precipitation; as may be exemplified in certain Mixtures
of Spirit of Sal-Armoniac (made with Salt of Tartar, or Potashes) and Spirit
of Nitre or Aqua Fortis; and also when Spirit of Urine and Spirit of Salt,
being mingled in a certain proportion, convene into Corpuscles for the making
of Sal-Armoniac, which the Phlegm of those Liquors will keep swimming. But that
which makes most for my present purpose, is, that there may be Precipitations,
where, whatever may be supposed, it does not appear that there is any Tumult or
Contrariety, as when Silver being dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and the Menstruum
diluted with 30 or 40 parts of distilled Water, or of Rain Water, if clean
Plates of Copper be immersed in the Solution, the Metal will be very slowly
Precipitated out of it, in the form not of a Calx, consisting of Metalline, and
Saline Parts incorporated together, but, at least at the beginning in the form
of pure shineing Scales of Silver, almost like the white and glittering Scales
of some small Fishes. There is also a way, by which I have brought dissolved
Gold to settle about a Body, suspended in the Solution, in the form of a fine
and high-colour'd Calx of pure Gold. But you may easily see an Instance of
silent Precipitation, if you do but rub a little either Roman or Dantzick
Vitriol, upon the well whetted blade of a knife wetted with Water or Spittle,
for you will have the Steel, almost in a trice, overlaid with a reddish
substance, which by its color and other signs appears manifestly to be
Cupreous. And here I shall advertise you, that it is not only, as is wont to be
supposed, out of Solutions made with Acids, that bodies may be thus
Precipitated, for upon search I have found that there are in nature
Precipitants, that are capable of silently Precipitating some Bodies dissolved
in Urinous Menstruums, or others not Acid. I know it may be suspected, and that
not without color of Reason, that such Precipitations may be dangerous, by
producing Heterogeneous Corpuscles in the Blood, that may be too-heavy or gross
to be evacuated. And I look upon this as a suspicion, for whose Resolution
'twere fit to consult Experience. But in the mean time one may represent.

1. That, tho some Inconvenience may happen from the Bulk of the precipitated
Corpuscles, yet that may be much inferior to the danger threatened by the
over-active and hostile Particles, that produced or fomented the disease.

2. That, it is not necessary that all concretions should consist of Corpuscles
so bulky, as to be too big to be thrown out of the Mass of Blood, for we see
that stony matter, which, as the Chemical Analysis of it shows, is of a very
compounded nature, may be carried to all Parts of the Body. And I remember I
knew a Lady, who a while before she told me the Story, had a stone taken out of
the lower part of her Tongue. And Physicians, that prescribe great quantities
of Mineral Waters impregnated with Iron, such as I found those of Tunbridge to
be, and with Sulphur, such as some of the Bath Waters are, are wont to build
their expectations of Curing with them, upon a supposition, that they are
carried into the Mass of Blood, and consequently to the innermost parts of the
Body.

3. That yet it is possible, Precipitations may be made of matters contained in
the Blood, by Medicines that do not get into the Mass of it. As Physicians give
Steel in Substance sometimes crude, as well as oftentimes prepared, to mortify
the Acidities of the Blood, though the Metalline Corpuscles do not, for ought
we know, pass into the Mass of it, but are wrought upon by the matter, that in
its circulation is thrown out of it into the Stomach and Guts, where their
operation on it is probably inferred from the blackness, that Chalybeates are
wont give the excrements of the lower Belly; and if they will have it, that
prepared Steel, for instance, calcined with Sulphur, gets through the Pores of
the Bowels, or the extremities of the capillary Vessels, into the Mass of Blood
it self, 'twill be obvious to demand, why nature should not be able to expel
Precipitate Corpuscles at the same passages, at which such compounded
Concretions, as those of Sulphur and Metal, can get in.

4. That some may very speciously pretend; that Experience has been already
consulted about the expediency of employing Precipitating Medicines. For not to
urge, that the learned and judicious Sennertus seems to intimate, that in some
cases the Fibrile Matter may be surmounted by being Precipitated out of the
Blood; there is a Professor of Physic, who, tho I cannot assent to some of his
Principles and Doctrines, has delivered several considerable things about
Fermentation and Fevers: and this Professor, by name Kergerus, very solemnly
declares Ego ab anno 1649. in hunc diem per integros 14 annos ultra mill
Febricitantes sine Ven., sectione, sine Purgatione, sine Sudoriseris, sine
Diureticis, sine Alterantibus, sine Corrobarantibus, sine Topicis, and siquid
praeterea unico fere Medicamento Praecipitante, Deo inprimis benedicente,
curavi: non considerando, an Febris sit Intermittens, an Continua, an Tertiana
vel Quartana (quae tamen difficilius curatur quam aliae) nec expectata
Coctione, nec habito respectu sexus, (ne p^erperis quidem exceptis) aetatis,
anni, temporis, vel aliarum Circumstantiarum: and quidem paucorum dierum spatio
sine Recidiva vel aliquo notabili incommodo, nisi ubi aeger ipse per
Incontinentiam de novo Paroxysmos provocarit. Kergerus de Fermentatione, sect.
3. cap. 3. Page mihi 250.
, that for fourteen years he cured above a thousand Febricitants without
bleeding, purging, or sweating Medicines, (to which he adds some others sorts)
by a single precipitating Remedy. I endeavored to obtain from Germany an
account of the truth of the matter of fact, but did not receive it; only I
found that a Physician of this Emperors, does, in a lately published Book,
declare himself inclined to believe it to be true.

I shall much the more easily be induced to think, that great and desirable
changes may be wrought in the fluid Parts of the Body by appropriated
Precipitants, if that be true which is unanimously taught by a multitude of
Physicians, who impute many Diseases to the Putrefaction of the Blood and other
Liquors of the Body. For, tho certain Reasons oblige me to desire you, not to
ask me any Questions about the Remedy I am going to speak of, because I must
not yet Answer them; yet I am willing you should on this occasion know
Historically, (what probably you will think strange) that there is in rerum
natura, a certain Substance, which is so powerful an Enemy to Putrefaction,
that, when a few grains or drops of it were put into a considerable quantity of
Water, that had been kept till it stunk so strongly and offensively, that, if I
had not known what it was, I should have judged the smell to have proceeded
from Carrion. This Medicinal Liquor, I say, (for so I may call it,) being
diffused by agitation through this abominably stinking Water, (which did not
appear turbid to the Eye) in so very small a proportion, Precipitated out of it
a very little and light Feculency, which being separated, the rest of the
Liquor was quite freed from all stink; nor did I observe that the Feculency it
self had any. And, which is very notable, all this was done in a very few
minutes, by a Precipitant, whose Taste was not at all either Bitter, or Acid, or
Urinous, or Lixivial. All which are Circumstances, that may afford good Hints
to speculative and sagacious Inquirers.

PROPOSITION IV.
Sometimes the Specific Remedy may work, by peculiarly strenthening, and
cherishing the Heart, and by that means, or without it, the Part affected.

This Observation can scarce be made good, without entering into the
Controversy, which for its difficulty and importance, has perplexed diverse
Modern Physicians; whether there be any Medicines, that have a Sympathy with
the Head, Heart, Liver etc and thereby deserve the name of Cephalic, Cordial,
or Hepatic etc. Or, to speak somewhat more clearly, whether there be any
Medicines, that in a peculiar manner do good to this or that particular
internal part of the Body. In this dispute the Affirmative part has been held,
but I doubt upon slender grounds of reason, in most of the Physic Schools for
several Ages. But in our times, many do not only maintain the Negative, but
deride the Opinion they have forsaken. For some of them object in a Triumphant
Style, that it is ridiculous to fancy such a Sympathy, betwixt a dead Medicine,
and the Parts of a living body. As that the Physician may send the Drug, as
'twere of an Errand, to find out one in the dark, among a multitude of others,
and do it good offices.

But notwithstanding this, I think it very possible, that a Medicine may so far
respect a particular Part, as, though not to be beneficial to that only, yet to
be friendly to that, in a peculiar manner or degree. And this I conceive it may
be, upon one or more of the Accounts, that I shall briefly mention.

And First, when I consider that the stable Parts of the Body, as the Heart,
Brain, Liver, Kidneys etc. have each its particular structure, wherein it
differs from others, and probably the fluid Parts also, as Blood, Gall, Lympha
etc. have their distinct Textures, it seems not improbable to me, that the
Corpuscles of a Medicine dissolved in the Stomach, and carried too and fro by
the Liquors of the Body, may according to the determinate shape, size,
stiffness or flexility, motion, etc. be much more fit to be detained by one
part of the Body, as the Brain, the Heart etc. than by the rest; and so, by
lodging it self in its Pores, or associating with its Fibers, may supply it
with such congruous Particle, as it either does want, or in case it do not, may
by their congruity be of advantage to it, by re-establishing or strengthening
the Tone of it. And by this Corroboration, the Part may be made able to resist
the Hostilities of Morbifick Matters, which Physicians usually observe to be
wont, by the more Vigorous Parts, to be thrown upon the Weakened or Distempered
ones; as is manifest in persons that are much subject to the Gout, in whom
oftentimes peccant humors are very apt, upon several occasions, to be thrown
off by the nobler Parts, if they be robust, upon the frequently debilitated
Joints; on which score the Gout, if it be well managed, is, not irrationally,
wont to be thought conducive to long life. And on this occasion I remember,
that I formerly knew a Learned Physician, who, though a great Traveller, and,
as such, accustomed to great varieties in point of Diet, had such a peculiar
indisposition in his Jaw, that though he could moderately drink Wines of
several sorts without inconvenience, yet the drinking even of a very little
Brandy, would soon after give him the Tooth Ach, of which odd distemper he has
sometimes complained to me. But this upon the by: For I must now proceed to
illustrate and make probable, what I was saying of the possible fitness of some
Medicinal Corpuscles, to associate themselves with those of the Part they are
to befriend, by observing what happens in Nutrition, especially in that of
sucking-children. For in these, one single Aliment, namely Milk, does afford,
besides various excrements, such as the grosser faeces of the Guts, and the
more fluid ones of the Bladder, the Mouth, the Nose, the pores of the Skin etc.
a great number of Corpuscles, that are not only detained, but assimilated by
Parts of differing Structures, as the Brain, the Heart, the Bones etc. since
otherwise these parts could never be so plentifully nourished by them, as daily
to increase in all their Dimensions. And it is considerable, that some Parts,
which in Babes are Cartilaginous, do in process of time become Boney, which
change seems not probably referable to the bare exsiccation, produced by Native
heat, increasing with the Persons Age.

Secondly, the friendly Corpuscles of a Specific Medicine, may not only
confirm the good estate of a determinate Part, but, which makes most for our
present purpose, they may very much conduce to restore it to a sound condition,
when it is distempered, and this they may do upon two or three Accounts.

For in the first place, those friendly Particles may dispose the Obstructing
or other Morbifick matter, to be more easily and safely expelled. And this they
may do, not barely as they impregnate the whole Mass of Blood, and so may be
carried by it, as well to many other Parts, as to that we now consider; but as
by their particular Texture, Motion etc. they may in a peculiar manner respect
that peculiar Modification, which the Peccant matter may have acquired by being
produced or harbored in that determinate part: And that the distinct Structure
of an affected Part may much diversifie the condition of a Morbifick matter, I
argue from this, among other things, that Physicians are wont to teach (though
I have found the Observation rather to hold commonly than unreservedly) that in
those that are subject to this Stone, the Petrescent matter, when it is bred in
the Kidneys is reddish or yellowish, but when in the Bladder, white, or of a
light gray; and that the Stones that are generated in the first named Parts,
are more friable, or at least of a slighter Texture, than those that have their
Original in the Bladder, some of which are exceeding hard, especially in
comparison of large ones, that I have had out of the Bladder or Gall of lusty
Animals. The aptness then that the Corpuscles of the Specific may give the
Blood, or other Liquor that conveys them, to act as an appropriated Menstruum,
upon the peculiarly modified Matter that obstructs, or otherwise disaffects,
the Liver, for Instance, may enable the Remedy, to be very helpful to that
Part, by preparing the molesting Matter for expulsion. But it may also succor
the same Part in another way.

For in the second place, it may so work upon the Fibers, and stable portion of
the Part affected, as both to enable it, and excite it to free its self from
its Enemy. For it may give firmness and strength to the Fibers of the part; it
may also contemperate, or correct the immoderate heat, coldness etc. of it: It
may mortify the Acid, or other incongruous Particles, that are lodged in the
minute Intervals of the stable Parts, end perhaps, even in the Pores of the
Fibers: It may appease its Convulsions, Cramps, or other inordinate motions,
that hinder it from daily executing its proper Functions; it may relax or widen
the Pores, according to the exigency of the work to be performed. And having
thus, by means of its friendly Corpuscles, prepared the matter to be expelled,
and disposed the part to expel it, it may then also excite the Part to do its
office, by irritating the Fibers, or motive Organs, or stimulating them to
disburthen the Part of the Matter that offends it, as a very small Dose of
Cantharides is known by this way of irritation, to be capable of making the
Bladder forcibly, though not safely, discharge it self of Urine, and with that
oftentimes expel the Sand and Gravel, or lesser Stones, and the Excrementitious
Slime that molested it before.

And this Instance may be of use to us, in answering that which we formerly
noted to be so confidently urged by the Rejecters of Specific Medicines. For
here we have a Medicine, though a dangerous one, whose Corpuscles have such a
peculiar reference to the Bladder, and Urinary Organs, that though being gotten
into the Mass of Blood, they are carried by it indiscriminately to other parts
of the Body, as well as to these; yet oftentimes, without manifestly
disaffecting the rest, they exceedingly irritate the Bladder, and determine it
to the excretion of what it contains. And whereas it may be objected, that the
first of the three ways, by which we noted, that a particular Part may be
succored by a Specific, seems contrary to the second; the former tending to
corroborate the Part, and the later to relax and irritate it: I answer two
things, one, that since the Part may be sometimes in a Natural, and sometimes
in a Preternatural state, in the former, a Medicine may deserve the name of
Friendly or Appropriated, because it keeps it sound, which is most properly
done by strengthening it; and in the later it may merit the Title of a
Specific, because it helps to restore it to a state of soundness: And the
other, that though to effect this Recovery, it is often very expedient, if not
necessary, that the Medicine procure an Evacuation of some matter that offends
it; yet that Evacuation itself is often much promoted and facilitated, by
stengthening the Part so, as to enable it to disburthen it self. And the same
Medicine may contain, and communicate to the Blood, Corpuscles of such
differing shapes, sizes, motions etc. as may at least successively relieve the
Part by both these ways; as Physicians observe that Rhubarb does, not only by
its finer and Laxative Parts, purge the Liver of Choler, but by its more earthy
Astringent Corpuscles strengthen the Tone of that Part: [What farther belongs
to the Illustration of this matter will be met with in due place.] On this
occasion, 'twill not be impertinent to add, that in some cases, this very
Corroboration of a Distempered Part, may restore it to soundness; there being
some Diseases of such a nature, that they are, if I may so speak, almost always
in Fieri, that is, they could not continue to subsist in the affected Part,
unless through its debility, and the consequences of it, it were subject to
admit from time to time fresh recruits of peccant matter, to foment the Malady:
And in such Distempers, if the Structure and Tone of the Part be re-established
by the operation of the Specific Medicine, its acquired vigor will enable it
to resist the Ingress of new supplies of peccant Matter, and to turn them off
into the Mass of Blood, to be thence discharged by the Common Shores of the
Body; whilst in the mean time Nature will be able by degrees to subdue,
dissipate, or otherwise dispose of, that comparatively little Portion of
peccant Matter, that was lodged in the Diseased Part.

We have not in this Paper given any Example of the peculiar respect of a
Specific Medicine to a determinate disaffected Part, that one would think so
incredible, as that a heavy stony substance, being in no great quantity taken
in at die Mouth, should manifestly contribute to the Cure of a broken Bone in
one of the Limbs, as the Leg or the Hands. And yet, not to urge the Testimony
of Chemical Writers, I remember a German Physician, that was Famous for notable
Cures, related Wonders to me of the efficacy of that Stone growing in his
Country, which from its effect they call Osteocolla, especially if it be
improved by a Skilful Preparation, which he communicated to me, but I had not
opportunity to make Trial of it. But without Preparation, the judicious and
long experienced Surgeon Fabricius Hildanus much commends upon his own
Observation a single Dram of it finely Powdered, for the breeding of a Callus
to soder together the Parts of a broken Bone: Insomuch that he gives a caution
to use it but sparingly in young and vigorous Patients, lest it breed too great
a Callus, of which he gives a notable Instance. And the like caution was
inculcated to me from Experience, by the lately mentioned German Doctor,
because otherwise (he said) his Preparation would in such Persons make the
Medicine generate a Callus too soon and too great.

PROPOSITION V.
Sometimes a Specific Medicine may do its work, by producing in the Mass of
Blood, such a disposition, as may enable Nature, by correcting, expelling or
other fit ways, to surmount the morbifick Matter, or other Cause of the
Disease.

He that shall heedfully observe the practice of diverse Learned and succesful
modern Physicians, may discern that many, if not most, of their Prescriptions
are founded upon a supposition, that a great Part of the Diseases incident to
Man's Body, and the recovery from them, depends mainly upon the vitiated
Constitution of the Blood, and the restoring it to a sound Condition.

This advantageous change of the Blood may be effected by a Specific, several
ways, (sometimes separately, and sometimes jointly,) and particularly by those
that follow.

1. That which I shall first name, is, by furnishing the Blood with some sort
of active Corpuscles, that it needs to ferment it, or excite an useful
Commotion or Agitation in it.

I will not here examine, whether the Mass of Blood, contained within the
Vessels of a living man, is capable of a Fermentation properly and strictly so
called; and therefore I employed also the word Commotion, which will be easily
admitted, if the other be disliked. But in regard Fermentation is a Term that
has generally obtained, I shall not scruple to make use of it, after what I
have intimated about it.

But because many modern Physicians, especially since the Learned Dr. Willis's
Notions came to be in request, have looked upon Fevers and Agues to consist
in, or be produced by vicious Fermentations of the Blood; I thought fit to add
to the Fermentation I am about to speak of, the distinguishing Epithets of
useful.

This premised, it seems not improbable to me, that, as there is oftentimes a
vicious Fermentation of the Blood, so there may be sometimes a want of
Fermentation, or a certain Sluggishness, upon whose account, either the brisk
intestine Agitation, that it ought to have as a warm Fluid of such a Nature as
it is wont to be in sound Persons, or a due quickness of Circulation through the
Heart is wanting: To which Sluggish State of the Blood, if it be obstinate and
lasting* several Distempers are wont to be consequent. Now, although there be
diverse Medicines, such as Spices, Brandy, and other Spirituous Liquors
distilled from fermented vegetables, that are usually, and oftentimes
succesfully enough, employed to correct this dull Indisposition of the Blood;
Yet in regard they are wont to be very hot, being usually pitched upon by those
that prescribe them because they are so; there are several constitutions of
Patients, and diverse other Circumstances, wherein they are not safe, but may do
more harm by their immoderate Heat, than good by their Spirituosity, Besides,
that the Sluggishness of the Blood may sometimes proceed from Causes, that this
sort of hot Medicines will not correct. I remember, that having for Trials sake
moderately dried a parcel of Human Blood, a Vinous Spirit Total inflammable
would not, at least in many hours that my Experiment lasted, make a Solution of
it, or draw a red Tincture from it, though it were well pulveris'd: Whereas a
well rectified Vrinous Spirit grew red upon it in less than the tenth, or
perhaps the twentieth, part of that Time.

Now a Specific Medicine may abound in Corpuscles of such a Nature, that
without dangerously, or incommodiously heating the Blood, they may disable
those Corpuscles, they meet with in the Blood, that make that Liquor viscous,
or roapy, or dispirited; and also by enlivening the Mass of Blood, if I may so
speak, or putting it into a more brisk and kindly Agitation, may make it fit to
throw off those Heterogeneous Parts, or recrements, that were blended with it
before, and to permeate, as freely as it ought, the Viscera, whose Capillary
Vessels and Pores would formerly scarce, and but very sparingingly, admit it.

That a Specific may perform this, you will perhaps the more easily allow, if
you consider, that the generality of Physicians teach, that there are several
Cordials, which they style some of them Temperate, and diverse of them Cold, (as
in effect it is not usually observed, that they considerably, if at all
sensibly, heat the Body;) as Pearls, and some of them, being gratefully Acid,
should rather cool it, as Wood Sorrel ( Alleluja) and Goats-Rue ( Galega.) And
it is very possible, that the Corpuscles, that make the Blood thick, and
Sluggish, may not be of a Cold Nature, but of a Hot, and therefore may have
their Effects rather befriended than destroyed by diverse Hot Remedies: As, if
the white of an Egg be by beating reduced to Water, (which is not necessary to
the Experiment, but shows it better) if you put to it a certain Proportion of
well dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, instead of destroying the viscosity of the
Liquor, it will curdle a good part of it, and thereby produce a Body far more
remote from Thinness and Fluidity.

And I remember, I once for Trial sake made a vegetable Liquor, which, from
somewhat Sluggish that it was before, did presently by the Addition of a little
Spirit of Wine, grow surprisingly viscous, and roapy.

2. Another way, by which a Specific may befriend the Mass of Blood, is, by
imparting to it a dilatation or tenuity that it wants. This Second way is of
much affinity to the First, but yet is not the same: Because in that, the thing
mainly considered was, the Fermentation or Agitation of the Blood; Whereas this
mainly respects the Consistence of it, which is a thing of no mean importance
to health. For if the Blood be too thick, as oftentimes it is, it cannot pass
so freely and readily, as it ought, through the Capillary Vessels, which
thereby come to be by little and little obstructed, and the Circulation
inconveniently retarded; Whence it is easy to foresee, that diverse mischiefs
must in time arise. And on the other side, if the Blood be too thin, especially
if it be over much agitated too, it is apt to make its way out of the Vessels,
and produce Hemorrhagies, in case it flow out of the Body, or other bad Effects
that usually attend the Extravasation of the Blood. Which Liquor, when it is
out of its proper Vessels, in so warm a place as a Living Human Body, is very
Subject to Putrefaction, and thereby apt to produce Imposthumes and several
mischievous Symptoms.

Now a Specific Medicine may remedy this faulty Consistence of the Blood, by
furnishing it with Corpuscles, fitted by their figure, bulk, motion, etc. to
disable those peccant ones that make the Blood gross, or else to cut, or divide
the Parts of the Blood it self, and so dispose them to be more fluid: Or else
they may produce in it such Pores, as may, as it were invite the subtle
Aetherial matter, that abounds in the Atmosphaere, to insinuate it self into
the Mass of Blood, and rarifie it. And on the other side, when the Blood is too
thin, as not only some Diseases, but some Medicines, especially Aloes, are wont
to make it; A Specific Remedy may reduce it to a good Consistence, either, by
furnishing it with Corpuscles, apt to Combine themselves with the active ones,
that did too much Attenuate the Blood; Or, by helping Nature to expel those
over-busy Particles, by insensible Transpiration, or some other undisturbing
way.

3: There is yet another way, by which a Specific Remedy may conduce to
rectify the State of the Blood And that is, by so working on the Heart, as to
make it advantageously regulate the Transmission of that Liquor through it.

That a Specific Medicine may peculiarly befriend this or that particular
Part, and consequently the Heart, is granted by the Generality of Physicians,
who are wont to reckon up many Cordials, (of which yet I fear, but few deserve
that name.) But, since it is elsewhere in this Paper shown, that some Medicines
may particularly respect a determinate Part of the Body, and consequently the
Heart; One may be allowed to suppose, that the Corpuscles of a Specific may
either dissolve some Particles they meet with in the Heart, by which that Noble
Viscus is by Irritation, or otherwise disturbed in the Regularity of its
Dilatations, and Contractions; Or, so Corroborate the Fibers, or Motive Organs
of it, as to dispose it to moderate the Circulation of the Blood that passes
through it, in the most advantageous way. And that the Disposition of the
Heart, even when men have no sense of it in the Part it self, may be of moment
as to health and sickness, will appear credible, if we reflect on two thing.
One, that a living Human Body is not a mere Aggregate of Flesh, Bones, etc. But
an exquisitely contrived, and very sensible Engine; Whose Parts are easily set
a work by proper, though very Minute, Agents; And may, by their Action upon one
another, perform far greater things, than could be expected from the bare
Energy of the Agents, that first put them into Motion. The Second, (which
supposes the first,) that the Disposition of the Heart, being, though perhaps
insensibly, changed, it may produce a notable Alteration in the Motions of the
Blood, and its passage through the Heart, in point of quantity, celerity, or
both.

How much this change in the Circulation may in many Cases conduce to sickness
or recovery may partly appear by the Effects of vehement or durable passions of
the mind. As it is observed, that in a deep sorrow, which does in a manner
straiten the Passages of the Heart, the Blood being too sparingly dispensed,
the enlivening Spirits are not generated plentifully enough; And (besides other
bad Effects of this State of the Heart) the Blood is so dispirited, as (in
these Parts of Europe) to dispose the Body to the Scurvy, which does either
produce or irritate diverse other Maladies. We see also, that the Passion of
shame does oftentimes suddenly alter the Motion of the Blood, and make it swell
the little Vessels that lie under the Cuticula of the Face, and sometimes other
Parts; as is very manifest in young Maids, and other Persons of a Delicate
Complexion, the white Part of whose Faces in blushing turns Red. The like
Effect I have seen produced by a great and sudden Joy. And though Grief, which
is the opposite Passion to it, has been usually taken notice of, as a thing
that deads the Appetite to meat; Yet so much does depend upon a well moderated
Transmission of the Blood, that it has been observed in diverse Persons, and I
have known an eminent Instance of it, that great Joy has very much lessened
Hunger: Of which Effect Mr. Des Carts ingeniously attempts to derive the
cause, from the varied Dilatation and Motions of the Heart. And it seems not
absurd to conceive, that such like Motions may be caused by the Corpuscles of
a Specific Medicine; Which by affecting the Fibers of the Heart, after the
like manner that Joy is wont to do, may produce in it such friendly Dilatations
and Contractions, as are wont to flow from the agreeable Passions. In favor of
which conjecture, I shall take notice that a Lady of my acquaintance has
complained to me, that the smell of perfumed Gloves is wont to make the Blood
fly to her Face, and continue there for a great while, giving it such a color
as if shame, or joy had covered it with blushes. And the like she says she has
observed in others of her Sex. But having in another Tract spoken of the power
of the Passions of the mind, to alter the state of the Body, by producing
changes in the Blood, that is transmitted through the Heart; what has been said
may now suffice to make it credible, that a Specific Remedy, by peculiarly
befriending the Heart, may contribute much to introduce, or re-establish a
healthy Crasis in the Blood. And this being thus rectified, and invigorated it
self, may both befriend the Body in general, and conduce to the removal of some
particular Diseases, by strengthening, and perhaps too exciting, the particular
part, in which the peccant matter resides, to subdue or expel that which it
already harbors, and resist any accession of more. And the Blood, being it
self well constituted, as well as the stable Parts corroborated, the Specific
Medicine that produces these good effects, may be said to cure, though perhaps
but slowly, diverse particular Diseases; such as those elsewhere mentioned in
this Paper, which to continue, must be frequently supplied with vicious matter
by the Circulating Blood.

EXPERIMENT VI.
Sometimes a Specific Remedy may unite its Particles with those of the Peccant
matter, and with them constitute a Neutrum quid, that may be easily proscribed,
or not necessary to be expelled.

This I take to be one of the most proper and genuine ways of doing good, that
belongs to a Specific Medicine, as such, because in this operation an effect
is produced, either without the assistance, or beyond the mere power, of the
manifest qualities (as Physicians call them) of the remedy; and the cure or
relief the Patient finds, is usually attained without violence, and without
tormenting or much disordering him.

This way of working of a Specific Medicine is of near affinity with one or
two of those formerly discoursed of; but yet these ways differ in some things,
as may be gathered by the sequel of this discourse sometimes when a certain
kind of Acid has impregnated the Blood, or lodged it self in some stable part,
as the Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, etc. The Corpuscles of a Specific may, without
any sensible luctation or conflict, which usually happens when Acids are
mortified by Sapid Alkalies, be so qualified, as both to make Coalitions with
the small Parts of the Peccant Acid, and with them to constitute little
Concretions, which differing from the minute Parts of the Acid, either in Bulk,
Figure, Solidity, Stifness, Motion, or in two or more of these; may be quite of
another nature, and of a much innocenter, than the Acid was before 'twas so
corrected. Of this we may be furnished with a notable Illustration, by what I
have elsewhere taken notice of about Aqua Fortis it self; for as corrosive a
Menstruum as that is, yet by digesting it, and perhaps, distilling it too, with
an equal, or rather double weight of Ardent Spirit, I found the highly Acid
Liquor would be so changed, as not to retain any sensible corrosiveness; and
exchange its piercing Stink and great Acidity, for a not only inoffensive, but
pleasant Scent, and a grateful and possitively sweetish Taste. Which brings into
my mind the practice of a President of the Famous London College, who (as
himself told me) was wont to relieve a Patient of very great Quality in
Nephritick Torments, by giving her a good Dose of an inflammable Spirit. (But
this upon the by.) I have elsewhere given an account of the effects of Spirit
of Wine, upon several other Acid Menstruums, wherewith I mingled and digested
it; by which it may appear, that it does not work upon them uniformly, as they
are all of them Acids; but differingly enough, according to the Nature and
Proportion of the Acid Corpuscles, with which the vinous Spirits are brought to
be associated.

And, to show that this change and contemperation of the Menstruum by the
Spirit of Wine, is produced rather by a peculiar fitness of the convening
Corpuscles of both, than by the contrariety or hostility, that the vinous
Spirit, which some Moderns will have to be an Alcaly, has to the Aqua Fortis as
an Acid; I shall add, that pure Spirit of Wine being mixed in a due proportion
with Highly rectified Spirit of Urine; which is reckoned by Chemists among
volatile Alcalies, and of which a drop or two is so fiery upon the tongue; as
to be ready to burn it, or to blister it; this Vinous Spirit I say, will very
much take off the caustic penetrancy of the urinous one, and compose with it a
Salt much more moderate than the Spirit was, and which being sublimed, or
(which is better but harder to be done, N. B.
) reduced into a Liquor, affords a mixture of no little use in foam Fevers and
other Diseases as a Medicine; and with a small, if skilful alteration, is of
great use in diverse Chemical Experiments as a Menstruum.

A few grains of Glass of Antimony made without addition, being taken inwardly,
will vehemently both vomit and purge. But though Wine, notwithstanding its
copious Spirits, will, if it be well impregnated with the Corpuscles of this
Glass, work upwards and downwards violently enough; yet of Spirit of Vinegar,
that is, of degenerated Wine, be for a competent time digested upon this Glass
finely powdered, and, when the Liquor is sufficiently impregnated with the
Particles of the Glass, be abstracted from it, there will emerge from the
Antimonial and Acetous Corpuscles, a multitude of minute Concretions, of which
many grains may be given without ordinarily provoking either Vomits or Stools:
Which correction may hint, that it is not necessary that all Mortifications
usefully made by Medicines, should be of Acids, since here we see, that Acids
themselves prove Correctors. And perhaps it may be by some such kind of
Combinations, that some Poisons (for I do not think they all work one way, or
peculiarly assault the heart) may be subdued. And I have sometimes suspected,
that it may as probably be upon this account, as upon any that has been
offered, that a man stung with a Scorpion may be cured, by crushing the Animal
that stung him upon the hurt, as is prescribed by many Physicians, and as an
acquaintance of mine told me, he tried upon himself (as another Virtuoso did on
a Soldier) with good success: And when I consider what a multitude and variety
of figures may fit the Corpuscles that are endowed with them, to make
Coalitions very different from both the component parts; I can scarce think it
very improbable, that in a Patients Body there may be made, between the
Corpuscles of the Peccant matter, and those of a Medicine, such useful
combinations as may produce resulting Concretions, innocent, if not also
beneficial.

If I had leizure, and thought it fit, I could easily add a great number of
instances, about such changes of Colors, Odours, Tastes, and other qualities,
as are produced by the coallescence of the small parts of differing Bodies, and
discourse of the natural consequent of such Coalitions: but having done that
sufficiently in other Papers, it will be here more proper to intimate to you,
that when a particle of peccant matter comes to be associated with one of a
Specific Medicine, that combination may alter it for the better, not only by
changing its bigness and figure, but also by increasing, or lessening its
stifness, and its solidity, and giving a new modification to its motion; as a
little attention to the natural consequences of the Coalitions of Bodies, may
easily induce you to grant.

And I shall add (as it were ex abundanti) that the small Concretions, made by
the union of some Morbifick with some Medicinal Corpuscles, may not only become
innocent, but sometimes also beneficial, which may be illustrated by what
happens by a further preparation, to common sublimate; for though this be a
substance so highly corrosive and mischievous, that a few grains of it may
suffice to kill a man; yet by making a Coalescence of it with less than its
weight of Quicksilver, which is a Body insipid as well as modorous, the
Corrosive sublimate will be so altered and tamed, as to be turned into what
Chemists call, because it is freed from sharpness, Mercurius Dulcis; which if it
be skilfully prepared and given, though in the quantity of many grains, is not
only for the most part an innocent thing, but a very good Medicine, and that
perhaps in more cases than Physicians generally know it to be good in.

The newly mentioned account may hint to us a probable Argument, to show, that,
notwithstanding all the digestions and changes that a Specific Medicine may
receive in its way, it may prove a salutary one, when it arrives at the Part it
should relieve. For, though the Corpuscles of the Medicine should in their way to
the Part affected be considerably changed, yet it is possible that these altered
Corpuscles may, by that very alteration, be made Medicinal; since they may be
qualified, (even by those changes) when they arrive at the Part affected, to
combine themselves strictly with some Corpuscles, whether Morbifick or others,
that they find already there; and may with them compose new Concretions that
may acquire a new Nature very friendly to the Patient. Something Analogical to
this we may observe in Asparagus, which being eaten, afford store of Particles,
that mixing with those they meet with in the Kidneys or the Bladder, produce a
new Odor, very differing, both from that of mere Urine, and from that of the
Plant it self. And so if good Turpentine be taken at the Mouth, it is known that
arriving at the Kidneys and Bladder, it will mingle its minute Parts with those
it meets with there; whence will emerge Corpuscles, that will impregnate the
Urine with a very differing Odor, from that which belongs to either of the
Liquors, since it oftentimes has a fragrancy somewhat like the smell of Violets.

Before I conclude this Paper, it is like it will be thought fit that I should
take notice of a difficulty, that I know maybe objected, if not against the
past discourse, yet against the sufficiency of it to answer the design I
propose to my self in writing it. For it may be said, that, whereas my
Arguments and Explications suppose all along, that the Specific Remedies are
taken in at the Mouth; it is known that diverse of the Asserters of Specificks
reckon among them, some that are not by swallowing taken into the Body, but
only outwardly applied, or perhaps do but barely touch it; as may be observed
in Amulets, Rings, etc. On occasion of this considerable difficulty, I have, if
I misremember not, represented diverse things in another Tract. But however it
may be fit in this place, briefly to say somewhat, by way of Answerto it. We
may then take notice, that the confidence with which many Physicians reject,
and some of them deride, External Specificks, if I may so call them, seems to
be built upon these two things: The One, that the Medicine cannot in part, as
it is certain it does not in the Mass, get into the Body; and the other, that,
in case a Specific should have some part of it subtle enough to gain
admittance, that Part must be too small and inconsiderable, to be able to
produce in the Body any such notable change, as is necessary to the expulsion
of Peccant Humors, and the conquering of a Disease.

As to the former of these Grounds, I largely enough show in another Paper, The
Paper here meant is the Essay of the Porosity of bodies.
that a Man's Skin, though it seems an entire continued Body, is really perforated
with a great multitude, and perhaps a not inconsiderable variety, of little
Cutlets and Inlets, which we call Pores; many of which are visible, even in the
Skins of dead Animals, by good Microscopes; and others are manifestly inferred,
from the numerous little drops that cover all the Skin, at the first Eruption
of Sweat. And that these little Perforations may be Inlets to the finer
Particles of Externally applied Medicines, may appear probable by several
Phenomenon, such as these. That Water will soak through the Pores of a fine
Bladder, and dissolve Salt of Tartar, or even white Sugar, contained in it:
That I have prepared a certain Liquor, whose Fumes, though not agitated by Heat,
would quickly penetrate diverse Membrans of dead Animals, and manifestly work on
Metalline Bodies wrapped up in them: That it is a known thing, that Quicksilver
outwardly applied in Ointments, Girdles, etc. will get in at the Pores of the
Skin, and invade the Internal Parts of the Body, and stay there longer, and
perhaps too operate more, than the Physician desired. And when once the
Effluvia of these Externally applied Remedies have gained admittance at the
Pores of the Skin, it is not very difficult to conceive, how they may proceed
further. For underneath the Cuticula or Scarf Skin, and close to it, there are
so great a multitude of Capillary Vessels, that you can scarce thrust a small
Pin into any Part, but that the point of it will meet and tear some of these
little Vessels; as will appear by a small drop of Blood, that will be made to
issue out at the new made hole, as small as it is. To which instance, if it
were necessary, I could add diverse others of the multitude and spreading of the
Capillary Vessels, that lie close beneath the Skin, and for the most part carry
Blood, though some of them may contain other Juices, and discharge their
recrements by Sweat, or insensible Transpiration, at the Cutaneous Outlets. Now
these Capillary Vessels, as small as they are, having their Cavities
immediately continued with those of less slender ones, and by their
intervention with those of the greater, which are branches of the greatest of
all; the Corpuscles of the Medicine, once got into the Capillary Vessels, may
have an easy passage, by means of the Liquors they contain, into these greater
branches of the principal Veins, and so, by virtue of the Circulation, come to
be quickly mingled with the Mass of Blood, and by it may be easily conveyed to
all the Parts of the Body: As it has been diverse times observed, See this at
large proved by the Learned Diemerbro^^k de Peste, lib. 2. cap. 11. in Annotat.
that Arsenical Amulets worn upon the Breast, did, though they scarce touched the
Skin, produce threatening Distempers in the Heart, and several mischievous
Symptoms in other Parts of the Body. And I find it recorded in good Authors,
that Cantharides, even when but held in the Hand, nay sometimes, though but
carried in ones Pocket, transmitted their hurtful Effluvia as far as the
Bladder, and excited great Pain and other bad Symptoms there.

As for the second Ground on which Specific Remedies are rejected, that, though
they could get entrance into the Body, yet it would be but by their Effluvia;
and these are no way likely to prove efficacious enough, to have any
considerable effect upon an Internal Disease: To remove this difficulty, I
shall briefly observe;

1. That the number of the Corpuscles, that may pass from the outward Medicine
into the Body, may be far greater, and therefore make them more considerable,
than most men are apt to think. This may be rendered probable, by the great
multitudes of Odorous, and consequently Sensible, Expirations, that are
continually emitted for a very long time together, by Ambergreece, Musk, Civet,
and much more by skilfully made Compositions of them. And that also subtle
Effluvia, even without the assistance of Heat, may quickly penetrate Membrans
so plentifully, as to act on stable Bodies contained in them, I have intimated
a little above, and have experimentally made appear to diverse curious men.

2. That the Corpuscles of a Medicine may retain their Nature, and not loose
their power of operating, notwithstanding their being, as it were, strained
through the Skin; as may be argued from the Mercury, that we not long since
mentioned to have been found in the form of Quicksilver, in the Bodies of some
men, that had been too frequently anonited with Mercury, mixed up with unctuous
things into an Ointment: By which the Patient may be as long and violently
Salivated, as if he had swallowed a Bolus or Pills with Mercury.

And so I have diverse times observed, as I doubt not but others have oftener
done, that a little Opium, mixed up with other Ingredients for Plasters, did
by outward application take off the Acute Pains of inward Parts, though
moderately remote from the Plaster.

3. And that the Corpuscles of a Specific may on diverse occasions act more
powerfully, by getting in at the Pores of the Skin, than if the Remedy that
afforded them had been taken in at the Mouth: Because if it had, the Particles
might be divided, or perhaps on other accounts, (as by dilution, composition
with those of the Chyle, etc.) much altered, by the Ferment or the Menstruum of
the Stomach, by their Filtration through the Guts, and their long and winding
passage through them and the Lymphiducts, before they arrive at the Heart, to
be mingled with the Blood; whereas the Corpuscles of the External Specific,
presently after they are past the Skin, get into the Capillary Vessels of the
Blood that lie under it, and by their means are speedily mixed with the
Circulating Mass of that Liquor, and so escape the formerly mentioned
alterations, that other Medicines are subject to before they are admitted into
the Mass of Blood. By which it may appear, that those Physicians are much
mistaken, that think a Topical Medicine can at best relieve but the Part it is
applied to, because its Corpuscles cannot be supposed to reach beyond that Part
of the Body, that lies very near the Medicine they issue from. But, though this
reasoning might be excusable enough, if not allowable, before the Circulation
of the Blood was discovered, yet, now it is known how great an intercourse that
Liquor maintains between distant Parts of the Body, the Argument is not
seasonable.

And on this occasion, I shall add an advertisement, that I remember not I have
met with in Authors; which is, that Body's outwardly applied may prove
Specificks for some Diseases or Distempers, that one would not think them very
good for, by the bare knowledge of their effects when taken in at the mouth.
Thus Camphire swallowed, is, in the dose of a very few grains, a great heater
of the Blood, and is in some Country's, perhaps not altogether without reason,
extolled by Physicians in some kinds of ill conditioned Fevers: but outwardly
it is applied to take off those Rednesses of the Face, that are thought to
proceed from Heat of Blood; and it is used in Ointments against Burns. So Spirit
of Wine, that is so hot when drunk, is a very good remedy to take out the fire,
as they speak, in Burns, especially if the Part be early moistend with it.
Bread, that is counted so moderate and well tempered and Aliment, when eaten,
if it be chewed and outwardly applied, has considerable virtues in several
external affections. And I know an ancient and experienced Physician, that uses
to purge. Children, that will not easily be brought to swallow Medicines, by
applying something to their Navels, that does not offend them by Color, Smell,
or Griping: And this himself more than once confessed to me, is but an ordinary
Aliment, that most men, and I among others, have frequently taken unprepared,
which he freely named to me, but which I have not yet had opportunity to make
Trial of.

That what we have been saying about the possible efficacy of external
Specificks, may appear the less improbable, 'twill be fit to take notice of
soms observations, that comport very well with our Doctrine. And though the
Instances to be brought will not be all of them of remedies that deserve the
name of Specificks; yet, besides that some of them may perhaps have a Title to
it, they will all conduce to show, that Simples or Druggs externally applied,
may have considerable operations against Internal Distempers of the Body.

'Twere easy for me to mention a great many external Specificks out of
Physicians Books. But I purposely forbear it, because to speak freely, I
suspect that most of those Remedies, though greatly extolled, have been but
little examined, by the deliverers of them. And it may suffice for my present
purpose to allege a few Instances that have been recommended to me, either by
my own experience, or that of some Friends. Only there is one observation that
is so solemnly and expressly delivered by Galen, upon his own knowledge, and so
well backed, by other eminent Physicians, that I shall let it lead the way.
This memorable story, that is related by Galen, is of a Piony Root, which
having been worn as ah Apensum about a Boy, that had been Epileptick for diverse
months, kept him from his Disease as long as he wore it about him; but when by
an accident he ceased to do so, the Disease invaded him again, and yet by
applying the Remedy again, he was the second time freed from it, which Galen
observing, did for curiosity make the Root be laid aside, but finding the Fits
to return, he employed it again with the former success.

I lived in the same house with a learned and Judicious Person, that was
subject to be Paralytick, who being frequently tortured by violent Cramps, was
ordinarily and speedily relieved by wearing or handling the Tooth of a true
Hippopotamus or River-Horse. And he affirmed to me, that upon leaving off, the
use of it, for any considerable time, either out of curiosity, or to
accommodate some Friend, the Fits would return with violence upon him. I
remember also, that having my self been for some years frequently subject to
Cramps, and complaining of it to a Physician that had been a Traveller into
cold Country's, he told me, that he had brought home with him some Rings made
of the true Elks hoof, from a place where these Animals are usually employed,
and that with these he had cured many of the Cramp, and therewithal presented
me one to make trial of, which I the more willingly accepted, because he
confessed to me, that diverse Rings that were sold for such as his, and looked
like them, were either counterfeit or of no efficacy. And though I did not find
that if the Cramp seized me in the calf of the Leg, the Ring would much relieve
me, yet when the Fits were but moderate, and in other Parts, especially the
hands, I found my self eased, so often, and so soon, that I was at first
surpised at it, and used to have the remedy laid every night by my Bedside,
to have it ready when occasion should require. And that which I thought some
what strange, was, that several times, when the Cramp seized my Foot or my
Toes, the Pain was quickly removed, though I applied the Ring but to my Finger:
which made me much regret the loss of it.

An eminent Physician speaking to me one day of a Patient of his, that was
subject to a nocturnal Incontinentia Urinae, that was very inconvenient as well
as shameful; I told him of an Empyrical Remedy, which is mentioned in another
Paper, whose success I neither would warrant, nor did altogether despair of,
and which at least seemed safe, though it should not prove effectual. This was
only a simple substance, (belonging to the Animal Kingdom) that was to be worn
in a sine Sarsanet Bag between the Shift and the Skin, for which a good while
after the Physician gave me great thanks, telling me, that he was surpised at
the effect of it, and that he observed that when the Patient had worn it so
long, that probably the virtue began to decay, that is in my sense, that the
Effluvia were almost spent, the Patient found need to take a fresh Remedy, to
continue the benefit she had found by the former.

I do not affirm or expect, that the three fornam'd Appensa, nor the other
Remedy's I am about to mention, will always succeed. And I think, one may
assign some not improbable reasons of the want of uniformity in their effects.
But for my present argument, it suffices that they do sometimes succeed, since
that is enough to show it possible, that outward Medicines may operate upon
inward Distempers.

Having one day given a visit to one of the skilfullest and candidest
Physicians of the Famous College of London, I observed in his Chamber, a fine
new fashioned Clock; and having taken notice of it to him, as a thing I had not
seen there before; he desired me not to think, he was rich and vain enough to
purchase, so dear a rarity; but that it belonged to a Courtier whom he named to
me, of whose Daughter he told me this story. This young Lady had a great Tumor
in her Neck or Throat, which being apprehended to be of a Scrophulous Nature,
made her Father fear it would oblige him to increase her Portion more than his
Estate could conveniently bear. Wherefore at length he addressed himself to my
Relator, who judging the case to be difficult, and being unwilling to torment
the Lady with a long course of Physic, told the Courteour, that if he could
animate her to suffer a Remedy he would propose, and would assist him to
procure it, he hoped to remove this Tumor without weakening her, or putting her
to pain. Soon after, all Parties being agreed, and the desired convenience
procured, the Patient was brought into a Room, where there was yet in Bed the
Body of a man that had died of a lingering Disease. This man's Hand the Doctor
took, and laid it upon his Patients Tumor, keeping it there till she either
complained or confessed that she felt the coldness of it penetrate to the
innermost Parts of her Tumor. This application was afterward repeated more
than once, whilst the Body continued without smelling: And by this course the
Tumor was dispelled, and the Patient so relieved, that her Father, by way of
gratitude, knowing how much the Physician was a lover of curiosities, made him
a present of that Clock.

The Learned Doctor ascribed this odd Remedy to Helmont, who is indeed to be
thanked for having mentioned and recommended a Medicine, that was unlikely to
be good, besides that it was not in use. But the knowledge of it seems to me to
have been for the main very much ancienter than our Age: since there is mention
made of one very like it by so Ancient an Author as Pliny; though since his time
till Helmonts it has been generally forgotten or disbeliev'd, save that one
Physician ( Franciscus Ulmus) who, though no ill Observer, has not had the
Fortune to be Famous, takes notice of a case very like that of our Courtiers
Daughter, affirming, that by that one Remedy, after others had been fruitlesly
employed, he knew a Noble Virgin to have been perfectly cured.

I was one Summer, to my great surprise obnoxious to frequent Bleedings at the
Nose; for which I sometimes used one Remedy, and sometimes another, for the
most part with good, but not still with quick success. But falling once
unexpectedly into a Fit, whose violence somewhat alarmed me, I resolved to try
an unusual Remedy: And having easily obtained of my Sister, in whose house this
Accident happened, some true Moss of a dead Man's Scull, which had been sent
her, by a great Person, for a present out of Ireland, in which Country, I found
it less rare and more esteemed than elsewhere: I was going to employ it after
the usual manner, which is to put it up into the Patients Nostrils, but before
I did it, I had the curiosity to try, notwithstanding the briskness of my
Haemorrhagy, whether the Medicine would produce its effect by being only held
in my Hand, and therefore covering a piece of the Moss with my Fist, that the
warmth might a little actuate the Medicine, I found, to the wonder of the
bystanders, that the Blood speedily stopped, nor thanks be to God have I been
troubled with a Haemorrhagy for some years from that very time. But this is far
less strange than what was affirmed to have happened to one of the Eminentest
Members of the Royal Society. This Learned Gentleman, who was of a very
Sanguine Complexion, found himself much affected by the use of the Moss of a
human Scull, [pieces of which I have seen sticking to the Roots of the
Vegetable, when it was genuine] which had so strange an operation upon him,
that sometimes when he was let Blood, if for curiosities sake he held a
quantity of this Moss in his Hand, the Efflux of the Blood would cease, till he
laid it by again; which was not only solemnly averred to me by himself, but
confirmed to me by his Ingenious Physician, with both whom I had a particular
Acquaintance; which otherwise I should have thought scarce credible, unless
imagination, a faculty very strong in that Gentleman, contributed to the
strange effect of the Remedy.

The hitherto mentioned External Specificks are afforded by Vegetables and
Animals, which being Bodies of a slighter Texture, may be supposed to have
their Parts more Effluviable: And therefore I shall now add two or three
examples afforded by the Mineral Kingdom, which consisting of Bodies that never
were living, and which are for the most part very close and compact, are
generally thought to have their Parts indisposed to emit Effluvia.

I knew a Person of great Learning, and by Profession a Physician, who enjoyed
a Health good enough, save that usually after a few hours sleep, he waked in
the Night with great Terrors, followed for a long time with such violent
Palpitations of the Heart, as were very troublesome, and sometimes frightful to
him. To remove this Distemper, he tried all that his Art suggested to him, but
without success, Whereupon he complained of it to several of his Acquaintance;
and mentioning it one day among a Company of Merchants, whereof some frequented
very remote Country's; one of them told him, he would easily relieve him, by a
Remedy that had been found efficacious both upon himself and others. This he
told him was, to take diverse flat and smooth Cornelian Stones, such as they
bring from the East Indies, to cut Rings out of, and to sow eight or ten of
them to a piece of Scarlet or Flannel, to be hung about his Neck, so as that
the Stones may immediately touch the Skin over against the Heart, and the Mouth
of the Stomach. This Remedy the Physician procured, and in no long time, found
the great benefit of it, insomuch that he thought he might now securely leave
off the use of these Stones, which he did once or twice out of curiosity, as
well as for his ease, but finding the Distemper to return each time, within
very few Weeks after he had laid aside his Remedy, he resolved to keep it
always on, as he had long successfully done, when he told me the story. And to
convince me, presented me with some of the Cornelians, that he had, for fear of
wanting them, procured in greater number than he needed at once. But since I
have not yet had occasion to make trial of them, I shall not conclude that the
Remedy will always succeed, but only (which is enough for my present purpose)
that it is at least possible that such an External Remedy may be very effectual.

I afterward thought (which I here note, to add to the probability of what I
have been relating) that pos;sibly those that first made use of the
forementioned Remedy, may have had a hint from what Galen says of the Jasper:
Which Stone we observe to be various in point of Color, and I have seen in the
green mixtures of Red almost as deep as that of Cornelians. Of this Stone Galen
relates that some made Rings, in which were graven a Dragon having Beams
issuing from him, and commended it as very friendly to the Stomach, being
applied to the Mouth of it. And though he omitted (and found he safely might do
it) the Sculpture, he yet approves the Stones upon his own frequent experience,
applying them almost as our Merchant did; Galen de Simp. Med. facultatib. Lib.
^ono. Tit. de Lapid.
Sane hujus (says he) ego quo lapidis abunde feci periculum Torquem enim ex
hujusmodi lapillis confectum collo suspendi ita ut lapides os ventriculi
contingerent apparebant, autem nihilominus prodesse etiamsi sculpturam non
haberent, etc.

I have lately mentioned the efficacy of a Cramp Ring upon some Parts of the
Genus Nervosum. But some will perhaps think it more considerable, if a Stone
Ring worn on the Finger shall be able to work upon the Mass of Blood, and
particularly that depraved Portion of it, that Nature relegates to such distant
Parts as the Hemorrhoidal Veins. And yet the experienced Monardes, having
desrib'd the Boodstone that is brought from New- Spain, and represented it as
a Jasper, not only commends it against Hemorrhages, being applied to the
Bleeding Part, Nic. Monard Simpl. Med. Hist. cap. 36. p. 329.
but adds the following words, which declare that he speaks upon experience,
Vidimus nonnullos Haemorrhoidum Fluxu afflictos Remedium sensisse, Annulos ex
hoc Lapide confectos in Digito continue gestando: nec non and Menstruum Fluxum
sisti.

I know you will expect here, that I should not on this occasion pretermit the
Lapis Nephriticus; of which sort of Stones, though many have been found
ineffectual against the Disease that gives them their name, and though it be
scarce possible to choose those few that are good, without having particularly
and actually tried them; yet that some of them are of great virtue, we have the
Testimony of the inquisitive and judicious Boethius, and that other Learned
Writer about Gems Johannes de Laet, whose Praises are confirmed by the
Historical Testimonies of Monardes and others. But none that I have met speaks
more home to our purpose than a considerable Merchant of Leipsick, whose rare
Observations are recorded by a man of very great reading the Learned Untzer. de
Nephrit. Lib. 1. cap. 24.
Untzerus, to whom I refer you, contenting my self to mention in this place two
of the ten Remarks he sets down, the first, that the Merchant affirmed to our
Author, that by wearing this Stone for some days, the calculous matter was so
powerfully proscribed, that a multitude of small grains of Sand were expelled,
even at the corners of his Eyes. The like effect, to which he often observed of
that Remedy in diverse other Persons. The second, that by wearing the same
Stone, his Wife who was troubled with a great Catarrh found it considerably
Cathartick, insomuch that the first day she was thereby purged fourteen or
fifteen times, the next nine or ten times, and afterward had her Body kept
very open. And he adds, that he found also this Stone to operate like a Purge,
though not so strongly upon himself.

But enough, if not more than enough, of the virtues of Periapta and Appensa
especially, since more instances of them may be met with in some other Papers:
And even without them, or at least with them, those particulars I come from
mentioning, may furnish a sufficient Answer to the Objection that has
occasioned them.

The Conclusion.
And now, Sir, you have what the consideration of the Nature of the things I
treat of suggested to me, about the Principal ways, by which I conceive
Specific Medicines may cure Diseases, or at least much lessen them. I said the
Principal ways, because I am far from denying, that there may be many others,
that must not here be mentioned, lest I should too much transgress the limits
that become an Epistle; especially, this being already far more prolix than I
at first intended; though I purposely omitted the Authorities and Arguments of
diverse Physicians and Chemists, that maintain that there are Specific
Medicines, bccause they proceed upon Principles, (such as substantial Forms,
real Qualities, Ideas, or Chaoses and the like,) which I could not fairly
employ, because I do not admit them. But though I forbore to lengthen my
discourse, by improper, and I hope needless Transcriptions out of others; yet
it is long enough to prompt me, now at the close of it to remind you of two or
three things that I declared at the beginning.

As First, that I did not pretend that a Specific Medicine, or Nature by a
Specific, does commonly effect the cure by one of the particular ways that I
proposed, exclusively to the rest; since I rather think that oftentimes two,
and sometimes more, concur to the effect. Secondly, that I proposed to my self,
to explicate the ways of working of Specific Remedies, only in general. And
Thirdly, that I did not assert, that the ways I pitched upon were the true and
genuine ones, by which the Medicine does act, but only propounded them, as ways
by which it may act: So that without being Dogmatical, I offer you my
Explications, but as possible, and perhaps not improbable; and that may suffice
for the occasion and scope of this Letter; in which I presume, you remember I
aimed but at showing you, that the operations of Specific Medicines are not
irreconcilable to the Principles of the Corpuscular Philosophy: Which I hope
you will without reluctance grant, if, by my good Fortune, the difficulties
that made you hesitate, seem to you to be lessened by so barren an intellect as
mine, discoursing of an abftruce subject, which belongs to a prosession that I
am not of. Upon which account it may be justly presumed, that you, who have so
much more sagacity, and are so much more concerned than I in the subject I have
been treating of; and who being a professed Physician, have much more
opportunity to discover the various courses that Nature does or may take in
curing Diseases; will be able to give your self far more satisfaction, than you
could hope to receive from me, who have therefore proposed to you my
conjectures very diffidently, though I am very poisitive in asserting my self to
be

SIR, Your most, etc. ROBERT BOIL.

THE ADVANTAGES Of the Use of SIMPLE MEDICINES.

Proposed by way of INVITATION To it.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOLE Fellow of the Royal Society.

AN INVITATION To the Use of Simple Medicines.
To the very Learned Dr. F.
I.
SIR,
Since SPECIFIC MEDICINES, to deserve that name, must be very Efficacious; and
yet are for the most part either simple or very little compounded, what has
been said about them in the foregoing Tract concerning Specificks may afford me
a not improper rise to invite you, and thereby others of your Profession, on
whom your Authority and Example may justly have much influence, to seek after
and Employ, more than they are wont to do, such Remedies as are either simple,
or, when there happens a necessity to compound, are made up of no more
Ingredients than are absolutely requisite to answer the Indications, and the
Physicians Scope.

This sort of simple, or but lightly Compounded, Remedies, I am induced to
prefer before those pompous compositions, wherein men seem to have hoped to
surmount diseases by the multitude of the Ingredients, upon the following
Reasons. In all which I desire the advantages ascribed to simple Medicines,
above others may be understood, not in an absolute and indefinite sense, but,
as they speak caeteris paribus, which I here give you notice of once for all

And the first advantage that I shall mention, is, That it is much less
difficult, to foresee the operation of a simple, than of a very compounded
Medicine. So that Physicians may proceed more securely, in employing the former
than the latter sort of Remedies. And indeed, if I do not greatly mistake, we
often presume too much of our own Abilities when we believe that we know before
hand, what the Qualities and Effects of a Mixture of many Ingredients of
differing Natures, will be: Since many Bodies, by Composition, and the change
of Texture consequent thereupon, do receive great and unexpected Alterations in
their Qualities. Several manifest Instances of this Truth may be met with in
our History of Colors; In diverse of whose Experiments, the Color produced
upon the Mixture of Bodies, is quite different from that of any of the
Ingredients. As, when a blew Solution of Copper made in Spirit of Urine, does
with Syrup of Violets, which is also blew, produce a fair Green. And even since
I began to write this Section, a Trial purposely made has afforded me a new
Instance of the same import.

For having put together some Tincture of Iron, made with good Spirit of
Vinegar, and a Volatile Tincture of Sulphur, (which I elsewhere show how to
make) from a Confusion of these two very red Liquors, there emerg'd in a trice,
a very dark and almost Inky Mixture, that retained nothing at all of Redness.

The like notable changes I have several times produced by Mixtures, in diverse
other Qualities of Bodies than their Colors, as in their Odours, Tastes, etc.
And why such Alterations may not be also effected by Composition, in some of
the Medicinal Qualities of Bodies, I do not yet see. Quicksilver it self
inwardly taken, does usually cause, either no manifest evacuation, or one that
is made at the mouth: But if it be dissolved in Spirit of Niter, and
Precipitated with Sea Salt, this white Precipitate being edulcorated, if it be
warily given in a just Dose, does (as far as I can yet learn) seldom fail of
working, and yet seldomer work by Salivation, but by Siege. On the other side
Glass of Antimony (made per se) whereof a very few Grains given in substance,
are wont to work violently upwards and downwards, being dissolved in Spirit of
Vinegar, (which is not easily and quickly done) will not usually either Vomit
or Purge, tho the Menstruum be drawn from it, and tho it be given in a larger
Dose, than that of the uncompounded Glass.

And tho if Crude Antimony be flux'd with Niter and Tartar, as in the ordinary
way of making Crocus Metallorum, there is produced, as is vulgarly known, a
Medicine so Emetick and Cathartick, that an Ounce or less of the Wine wherein
it has been infused, without sensibly loosing its weight, is wont to work
strongly enough both upwards and downwards: Yet I have known some that would
without scruple, take several Grains of Crude Antimony in substance, and one
particularly that continued the use of it long, without being vomited or purged
by it. And Trials purposely made have informed me, that if, instead of
Saltpeter and Tartar, Antimony be prepared with well dried Sea Salt, and a
little Salt of Tartar, tho both, these amount not to above half the weight of
the Niter and Tartar vulgarly used, yet the Antimony well flux'd with these
(for about an hour) is thereby so altered and corrected, that it affords an
useful Medicine, of which one may give from 12 or 15 Grains to half a Dram, or
more in substance, without ordinarily working, either by Vomit or Siege, but
usually by Sweat, and sometimes by Urine. Whence we may gather, that Antimony
may be either made a more dangerous, or a more friendly Medicine, than of it
self it is, according to the Ingredients it is associated with, tho these be in
themselves Innocent, and perhaps of kin to one another. And even Chemists, as
well as other prescribers of Remedies, may be found, tho less frequently, to
add to a Simple, such things as rather deprave, than improve it. As one of
their great Patrons (a happy Practitioner) complains, that Flower of Sulphur,
by being sublimed, (as by many it is) from Calcined Vitriol, and one or two
other things, under pretense of purifying and subtillizing it, does really
acquire a hurtful Corrosiveness. And if I had here the Leizure, Instances
enough might be brought to show, that Chemists sometimes mistakingly produce by
their additions to a Medicine, other Qualities, if not also worse, than they
designed or expected.

II.
ANother Advantage of Simpler Medicines, is, that caeteris paribus, they are
more safe than compounded ones, especially if the Patients be valetudinary
persons. It Is too much the custom, both of many Herbarists, and several other
Writers on the Materia Medica, to give us rather Encomiums than impartial
Accounts of the Simples they treat of; enumerating and magnifying all the
virtues they have, and sometimes more than they have, without taking notice of
their ill Qualities, upon whose account nevertheless they may be inconvenient,
if not hurtful and dangerous, to some Constitutions, and in diverse Cases. We
know that diverse Perfumes, as Musk and Amber, tho very grateful and refreshing
to most Men's Spirits, are yet very hurtful to many Women, and especially to
those that are Hysterical. And I have known the smell of Musk very much
disaffect an eminent Person, though otherwise of a robust Constitution. I have
also known several Persons, not all of them of the same Sex, very much offended
by the smell of Roses, which yet is very moderate, as well as to most Persons,
whether Men or Women, very grateful. I know a very great Person to whom Honey,
whether inwardly taken, or outwardly applied, is almost as hurtful as Poison,
having several times produced strange and frightful Symptoms, even when the
Patient knew not that any Honey had been employed, and consequently could not
be thus oddly distempered by the force of Imagination. I think I have elsewhere
taken notice of the harm, that both I and others, subject to Diseases of the
Eyes, have received, even by the moderate use of Parsley.

On this occasion I shall add what occurred to me long after I had dictated
what I said of Parsley, that Wormwood, tho for many uses, an excellent Plant,
has been found by many so apt to disaffect the head, and so unfriendly to the
Eyes, that I have for some years forborne it my self for fear of the headache,
and forewarned others of it that are subject to weak Eyes. But I know a very
Learned Man, whose Elegant Pen has made him deservedly be taken notice of by
many, who, tho he have naturally very good Eyes, found upon an Obstinate Trial,
that his Curiosity seduced him to make of the plentiful use of Worm-wood-Wine
and Beer, that within less than three Weeks, his sight was by degrees brought
to be so weak, that he could not read a Gazet without Spectacles; but by
totally leaving off Wormwood, he quickly recovered the vigor of his sight,
without the use of any of the helps that his profession, which is Physic,
would have plentifully suggested to him. this Relation I had from himself soon
after the thing happened, on occasion of what I told him about Parsley, etc.

And to speak more generally, I doubt not, but if Men were not so prepossessed
with the Praises that Authors give to Simples, that they overlook the
Inconveniences they may on diverse occasions produce, we should find in many
Medicines bad Qualities, that are not yet taken notice of. And I have more than
once hit, but too well, in the Prognostics I made of the Hurt, some Patients
would receive by the use of applauded Medicines, prescribe them, even by
considerable and Learned Men, when upon their Authority my warnings were
neglected, and the use of the Medicines unhappily persisted in. I remember I
once saw in the hands of a learned and curious Traveller into the Eastern Parts
of the World, an Arabic Manuscript about the Materia Medica, which made me
regret the loss of the most part of the little skill I once had in that
Language. For besides that it was written in a delicate hand, and the Letters
in fit Places, curiously adorned with Gold and Azure, the Method seemed to be
more accurate than any thing I had seen on that Subject. And that which pleased
me not a little, was, that the Author had been so wary, that after the columns
wherein he taught, besides many other things, the Virtues, Doses, etc. of every
Drug he treated of, he had a distinct column for the bad Qualities of it, and
the constitutions and Diseases wherein the use of it may be dangerous or
inconvenient. I think it therefore not unreasonable to suspect, that, where a
great many Ingredients are blended into one Medicine, one or other of them may
have other operations, besides that designed by the Physician; it may awaken
some sleeping Ferment, and, if not produce a new Distemper, may excite and
actuate some other hostile matter, that lay quiet in the Body before, and
perhaps would have been little by little subdued by nature, if it had not been
unseasonably roused and assisted by some Ingredient, that perhaps was needlessly
put into the Medicine. I have had so many unwelcome Proofs of this in my self,
that it engages me to be the more careful to caution others against the like
Inconvenience.

III
ANother benefit accrewing from the use of Simpler Medecines, is, that thereby
the Patient may, without burdening his Stomach, or nauseating the Remedy, take
a larger Dose of the Medicine, or of that Ingredient of it wherein the virtue
chiefly resides. For, whereas Physicians are obliged to stint themselves in the
Dose of the Medicine, for fear of disgusting the Patient, or oppressing his
Stomach; when there are many things heaped together in a moderate Dose of one
compounded Medicine, these Ingredients that are either superfluous, or at least
are less efficacious, must necessarily take up a considerable part of that
determinate Dose, and consequently leave much the less of the more appropriated
or useful Ingredients.

To say, that all the Ingredients that are thrust into a great composition, are
proper and conduce unto the same purpose, I doubt is not always true. And
however is not a sufficient Answer, since it does not avoid the Inconvenience I
have been objecting.

If a Baker, being to make the best Bread he can, especially for a Person of a
weak Stomach, should to Wheaten Flower add the Meal of Rye, of Barley, and of
Oats; though all these Ingredients be good and nourishing, and each of them is by
many used to make Bread, yet none will take him for a skilful Baker, and few
would prefer this compounded Bread, to that more simple one made of Wheat
alone. And so to make good Gunpowder a skilful man would not to Saltpeter,
Brimstone, and Charcole add Wax, Rosin, and Camphire, though these be very
inflammable Substances as well as Sulphur. And thus if one would make an Aqua
Vitae, whereof but one small cup were to be given for the quick recovery of
fainting Persons, he would not with Spirit of Wine, or good Brandy, mix Mead or
Cider, and strong Bear or Ale, though each of these be it self a Spirituous
Liquor.

Gum Arabic (whereof I prefer that which is transparent and colorless) is
prescribed in several compositions, as a Drug proper to mitigate the sharpness
of Urine. But by the quantity of the other Ingredients that it is mixed and
clogged with, no more than a small proportion of it usually comes to be given in
one Dose. But when I have had the Curiosity, leaving out all the other things,
to give about a dram, or perhaps more of it at one time, reduced by long
Pounding (for the best is very tough) to fine Powder, in a large draught of
small Ale or Beer, or some other convenient Vehicle, I found very considerable
Effects of it. And I remember that a Gentleman of great note, coming to bid me
farewell, because of a long and troublesome Journey, he was taking to Mineral
Waters, which he intended to drink for many weeks, to ease him of a very
painful sharpness of Urine; I that knew it was not venereal nor from the Stone
of the Bladder (for when those Causes of the Strangury, the Medicine is not
near so powerful) I desired him, before he went to make use of this Powder,
once, or (if there should be need) twice a day. Which when he had done, it so
relieved, him that he thought himself quite cured, and forbore his intended
Journey not only that Year, but the next. For the Chin-cough, as they call it
in Children, whose odd Symptoms do usually fright the Parents and Attendants,
and oftentimes frustrate the Endeavors of Physicians, skilful in curing other
Coughs, I have not known any magisterial composition so effectual, as the
simple Juice of Pulegium (by many called Pennyroyal) sweetn'd a little with
SugarCandy, and given long enough from time to time, in the quantity of a
Child's Spoonful. (This Plant may be also made to afford a Syrup, that will
keep, and is useful in Coughs, but which I doubt, is not so efficacious as the
Simple Juice.) There are many and obvious experiments of the great efficay of
so simple a Remedy as Asses Milk; (which yet in some cases, I think inferior
to Goats Milk,) if it be given in a sufficient quantity, and for a competent
time, there are also many Instances of dangerous and stubborn Diseases, that
have been cured even by Common Cows Milk, when it has been very plentifully
taken, and for a long continuance of time, and perhaps it is no less
remarkable, that in a far less time now and then, not extending to very many
days, Fluxes, as Dyarrhaeas, and tho more seldom even Dysenterical ones, are
happily and easily cured, as I have sometimes known by the bare use of so
slight a Remedy as Milk, wherein, whilst it is gently boiling, an equal
quantity of fair Water is little by little put, till at last there remains but
as much Liquor as the Milk alone amounted to at first. This simple Alimentous
Medicine being liberally taken (for it should be used instead of all other
Drinks whilst the Disease continues) has been very frequently found to cure
Fluxes, not all of one sort, in Ireland it self, where that kind of Disease is
Endemical. And, tho I have formerly in another Paper recommended the use of
Paronychia foliis rutaceis, against that sad and stubborn Disease the
King's Evil, yet I presume you will allow me, by the mention of a Trial that was
since made with it, to give a notable Confirmation of the Utility of giving an
Alterative Simple, if need require, in considerable quantity. A Physician that
I knew, was sent for to a Scrophulous Patient, in whose Throat there was a
Tumor, so big and so unluckily seated, that much compressing the Asophagus it
rendr'd Deglutition exceeding difficult: So that being likewise so hard and
stubborn, that tho the Physician was also a famous Chyrurgion, he could neither
discuss it, or bring it to Suppuration; The Patient, tho rich, was in imminent
danger of being starved. In this Strait the Physician remembering the Character
I had given of Paronychia, or Whitlom Grass, sent about the Country to to get
all that could be procured: And at first gave a little of it in form of
Infusion, in such liquid Aliments as the Patient was able, with much ado,
little by little to get down. And having by this means, after some time, made
the Deglutition less difficult, he gave the Remedy more and more plentifully,
to imbue the whole mass of Blood and Juices of the Body with the Virtue of the
Herb, whereby the Tumor was at length resolved, and the Patient secured, so
much to the Physicians Reputation as well as Profit, that, as he said, he
thought Gratitude obliged him to give me a Circumstantial Account of his
Success; as he very civilly did in a long Letter whereof I have given you the
Substance.

And tho I might here entertain you with the Virtues of some other Simple
Remedies, plentifully given, yet for brevity sake I shall rather observe in
general, That I doubt not but several Simple Medicines (I speak of alterative
not evacuating ones, would be found far more effectual than they are commonly
thought, if they were given in a much larger Dose, and continued for a
competent time. And probably so many Physicians (especially of the Old School,)
would not be so forward to reject either Specific or simple Remedies, as
having found some of them not to answer Expectation; if they would allow them
as fair a Trial, as they give to their own Prescriptions, such as the
Chalybeats of the Shops, the Spaw, or Tunbridge Waters, the Decoctions of
Guajacum, etc. which they often give with diverse intermediate helps for a Month
or six Weeks, and sometimes for two Months together, without expecting that in
a few weeks, much less in a very few days, they should perform the cure.

IV.
THE Fourth thing that may recommend the use of Simple Medicines, is, That
caeteris paribus they are more easy to be procured then Compounded ones. This
Assertion needs little proof. And where several Simples are required, one or
more of them may oftentimes be difficult to be got; and all of them will still
be troublesome to be fetched, and to be made up into a Composition. How useful
the knowledge of Parable Remedys may be, I have endeavored to show in a
distinct Paper; and therefore shall not discourse of it here, but only add this
one Observation, that some Medicines are so parable, that without resorting for
them to Apothecarys shops (which are not every where at hand, nor always
furnished with them) we may find them in those of other Tradesmen. Thus among
Masons and Bricklayers we most commonly meet with Quicklime; whose bare
Infusion in common Water [about a pound of the former, as it is more or less
strong, to about three or four Quarts of the latter,] is of it self a good
Medicine in diverse Cases, and as Experience has persuaded me, may be made the
Basis of several good Remedys, both Inward and Outward. Among the latter of
which may be reckoned an Ointment, that I usually kept by me for Burns, and
made only by beating up strong Limewater with as much good Lin-seed Oil, as
could be made thoroughly to incorporate with it into a very white Unguent.

And I shall add concerning Linseed Oil, (since I have mentioned it) which is
to be had in the shops of Varnishers and Painters; that of it self, being
exhibited in a large Dose, as of several Ounces at a time, I have known it
answer the Commendations given it by eminent Physicians, for breaking of
Pleuritical Empyemas Simple Oil of Turpentine also, that may be usually had in
the shops of the same Tradesmen, is in reality a noble Remedy in diverse
Affections, not only Inward, in which Chemists commend it, but Outward too. And
I have had great thanks, both from Physicians and Chyrugeons, for recommending
the use of it to them in Wounds, and particularly, where one would expect
little from it in the stanching of Blood, if it be seasonably applied very hot
to the wounded Parts, where it also much promotes a good Digestion. And I am
confirmed in the good Opinion I have long had of this Oil, by the Information
that is given me, That very experienced Chyrurgeon has lately been so
charitable, as to publish a little Book, considerable for the useful
Observations it contains, of notable Cures done by him in Chyrurgical Cases,
chiefly with Oil of Turpentine. And I shall add, that a Chyrurgeon to a great
Monarch, and one of the skilfullest men I ever met with of his Profession,
confessed to me, that in an admired Cure that he had then lately done of a
desperate Gangrene, in an eminent person, very aged and almost bedridden, the
Medicine he ascribed most to, was the Oil we were speaking of. And, because
both he and others make much and good use of Spirit of Wine in Gangrens, which
yet is thought to be unmingleable with Oil of Turpentine, because if it be
shaken with it, it will quickly separate again from it; I thought it might do
Practitioners some service, to make for them a Mixture of Oil of Turpentine and
Spirit of Wine, that might probably be more penetrant than the former, and less
fugitive than the latter, which of it self does not stay long enough upon the
Parts it is applied to. Which Mixture I easily made, by digesting for a while,
and strongly shaking from time to time, about equal parts by guess of good Oil
of Turpentine and thoroughly dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, till this Liquor, by
imbibing or dissolving great store of the Oleaginous Parts, have attained a
Yellow Color, for which reason I call it the Tincture of Oil of Turpentine.

And, since my subject has led me into the shops of Colour-sellers, I will
before I leave them, take notice of one Simple that is wont to be found there,
which if it were not very offensive to the Taste, and somewhat disagreeable to
the stomach, would be perhaps preferable for its Antinephritick Virtue, to the
most pompous Compositions of the shops, and some of the celebrated Arcana of
the (vulgar) Chemists. I procured it, not without some difficulty, from a
Spagyrist, very well versed in the School of Paracelsus and Helmont; who, tho a
sparing Commender of Remedies, extolled this as the best he had ever met with,
to cure the Stone where it was not too big to pass, and to prevent the increase
of it where it was. I have known it used in Clysters, with very good success in
a Fit of that Disease. But Inwardly I had no occasion to try it but upon my
self. And judging it innocent enough, (as indeed I found it rather Anodyne than
Driving, I took it now and then, mixed with Oil of sweet Almonds chiefly to
allay the Taste, for otherwise I had long found that alone, insufficient) as a
Preservative from Grave. And, thanks be to God, I diverse times thought it more
manifestly effectual to that purpose, by lessening either the bulk of the
Grains, or the quantity of the Sand, or both, than any of the Remedies I had
taken for prevention in several years before. And yet I scarce took a quarter
of the Dose, prescribed by the Spagyrist that communicated the Medicine to me;
which in short is (for I presume you would gladly know it) to take from time to
time, by it self or in some convenient Vehicle two or three ounces of the
expressed Oil of Walnuts, which, if the great staleness of it he requires be
necessary, (which I mean to examine by Trials) is scarce to be had but at the
shops of Artificers, because he would have it at least a year old, and judged
it the elder the better.

Before I quite leave the Shops of Tradesmen, I shall take notice of one
Medicine more, that seems to have been first lodged there, and from thence
translated into the Shops of Apothecaries. The Medicine I mean is Castile or
else Venetian Soap, (for either is often employed in stead of the other) which
being a Body abounding with Alcalisite Salts and Oleaginous Parts well
combined, invited me to make some Experiments with it, as a Substance that may
be applicable to good uses, not only Mechanical but Medical. Of some of tho
former sort I elsewhere make mention. And as to its Medicinal virtues, I take
notice in another Paper of its Efficacy against the Jaundise; for which I have
since been informed, that, as nauseous a Medicine as it is, it is in great
request among some Skilful Men in Holland. And some fresh, but not sufficient,
experience has recommended it to me against the Stone. But that virtue of it
which I as yet most prize it for, and now intend to communicate to you, you
will best gather from the following Story. Having had some dealings with a
considerable Merchant (of Cork, in Ireland) he sadly complained to me, that he
was afflicted with a necessity of making Bloody Water to that degree, that he
feared he must soon quit his Profession, being already unable to ride about his
business, and scarce able to walk a foot the length of a Street, without
stooping to make red Water. Hereupon I told him I had a Medicine, that, if he
could digest the unpleasantness of it, would, I thought, by the blessing of
God, do good even in his case. And it was only to scrape with a Knife as much
Castile Soap into a Spoon, as it would conveniently hold without being pressed,
i. e. neat a dram, and having filled the vacant part with small Ale, or some
other, convenient Drink, to facilicate the swallowing so nauseous a Remedy,
wash it down with a somewhat large Draught of the same Liquor, or other fit
Vehicle, repeating the Dose twice or thrice a day, if need required. The
manifest relief he found by this seemingly despicable Medicine, within (if I
misremember not) two or three days, invited him to continue the use of it a
while longer, and afterward to return me solemn thanks for it; declaring that
now for four years together he had lived quite free from his Distemper, without
scrupling to ride Journeys on Horse Back, as his occasions required. To which
he added, that in regard I had not confined him to secresy, he presumed I
intended the Medicine should do as much good as might be, and therefore
scrupled not to give it to several others, who were likewise happily cured by
the use of the same Remedy. Which Account was therefore the more welcome to me,
because in the place were I lived, I had not opportunity to make further Trials
of its Efficacy. And on this occasion I shall beg leave to advertise you once
for all, in reference to the Remedies delivered by me, either in this Paper or
in my other Writings; That I am as sensible as another of the almost
insuperable Difficulty, of making any certain Experiments in Physic; and that,
having of a long time (for Reasons given in due place) studiously, tho not
unreservedly, declined the Occasions of giving (and consequently of
reiterating) Medicines: I justly desire that none of my Readers, and especially
that Dr. F. would too much rely upon them, till they have been more competently
tried, than perhaps some of them, for want of opportunity, have been; and
administered to Patients of differing Complexions, Ages, and other Circumstances.

You may find other Instances of the virtue of Parable, and some of them
unpromising Medicines, in one of my Essay's Of the Usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy; to which I the less scruple to refer you, because I do not remember
what I have there written many years ago, so perfectly, as not to fear that I
might by enlarging this Section, put you to the trouble of reading some things
here that you have met with there already. And yet I am somewhat encouraged
both to mention to you that Book, and to present you some other Receipts in
this Paper; because it has pleased God so far to bless diverse of the Medicines
I have there recommended, or do there mention, that they have been prosperous
to many Patients, and not altogether unuseful to some noted Physicians; and
have procured me from both more thanks than I pretended to; besides inviting
Encouragements to further Communications.

. V.
THE last thing in order, but not in importance, that induces me to wish, that
Physicians would employ Simpler Medicines as much as conveniently may be, is,
that it is one of the likeliest ways, (and perhaps little less than absolutely
necessary) to promote the Practical knowledge of the Materia Medica. For,
whilst in one Receipt* a multitude of Ingredients are mingled, if not
confounded, it is almost impossible to know with any certainty, to which of the
Simples the good or bad Effect of the Remedy is to be attributed, or whether it
be not produced by a Power, resulting from the particular Quality's of all of
them, united into one Temperament, and by its means acting conjointly, and, as
the School men speak per modum unius. So that by this way of heaping up or
blending Simples into one compounded Remedy, I see not how in many Ages Men
will be able to discover the true qualities good and bad, of the particular
Bodies, that are comprised under the name of the Materia Medica; whereas, when
a Physician often imploys a Simple, and observes the Effect of it, the relief
or prejudice of the Patient, may very probably, if not with medical certainty,
be ascribed to the good or bad Qualities of that particular Remedy.

And this difficulty of discerning, what Ingredient it is of a very compounded
Medicine, that helps or hurts the Patient, is much increased to those that
affect to write Bills, wherein something is prescribed, which tho, because it
goes under one name, passes but for one Ingredient, is yet a very compounded
Body; as is evident, in those many pompous Receipts wherein Treacle, (that
alone consists of above sixty several Simples) Methridate, and diverse other
famous ancient compositions; that each of them consists of good store of
Ingredients. I had once thoughts of drawing up a discourse of the Difficulties
of the Medicinal Art; and had diverse materials by me for such a work, which
afterward I laid aside, for fear it should be misimploy'd to the prejudice of
worthy Physicians. But among the difficulties that occurred to me, I shall on
this occasion mention one, which was; That it is a harder work than most men
think, to discover fully the nature, or the good and bad quality's in reference
to Physic, of this or that single Plant, or other Simple, that has a place in
the Materia Medica. For besides the great difference that there may be in
Plants of the same denomiation, according to the Climate, Soil, the goodness of
the seeds that produce it, the culture, or the want of it, the time of the
year, the seasonableness or intemperateness of the weather, the time and manner
of gathering it, how it has been kept, the parts of it that are, and those that
are not made use of, together with other circumstances too many to be here
enumerated: besides all these, I say, the unheeded Textures of parts that are
thought of an uniform nature, and the length of time during which they have
been kept, without being suspected to be superannuated, and indeed without
being so, may so much vary the nature of a Plant, that I have sometimes almost
in a trice shown the curious a notable disparity in the parts of the same fresh
Leaf of a common Plant: And (NB.) I have found by Trial purposely made, that
some seeds of common use in Physic (and not putrefy'd) will, being distilled
at one time of the year, afford an Acid Spirit or Liquor; but at another time
of the year, tho destill'd the same way without any addition, afford not an
Acid, but a kind of urinous Spirit, that contains a volatile Salt, which in
Smell, Taste, and diverse Operations, I found to be of great affinity to the
volatile Salt of Urine, or that of Hartshorn. And indeed so many things may be
pertinently and usefully proposed to be inquired into, about this or that
particular Plant made use of by Physicians, that perhaps they would be less
inclined to compound numbers of them in one Receipt, if they were aware how
much useful employment the indagation of the Quality's of so much as a few
single Plants would give them: and yet without the knowledge of the properties
of the separated Ingredients, a Physician prescribes, it will be scarce
possible for him to know, with sufficient certainty, how the compound made up
of them, will be qualified and operate, which reflection, I the less scruple to
propose, because I am conifirm'd in it by Galen himself, Galen. de Con. p. Sec.
Genesis lib. 1.
who very Book, where he largely treats De Medicamentorum Compositione, has
this Assertion; In universum, nemo probe uti possit medicamento composito, qui
simplicium vires prius non accurate didicerit.

I presume you will easily allow, that much of what has been said in favor of
those simple Medicines we owe to Natures (or rather to its Authors) Bounty, may
be extended to many of the Remedy's that are afforded us by the Chemists Art.
For without now entering into the Question, whether the Spirits, Oils, and
Salts, that are obtained by what Spagyrists call Analyzes by the fire, are
Principles in the strict sense of the word; it will scarce be doubted, but that
the Spirit, or the Oil, or the Salt of a mixed Body chymically resolved, is so
slightly or unequally composed, that the Ingredient whence it takes its name,
is far more predominant, than it was when combined with others, in the entire
or not yet Analys'd Concrete. And that such supposed Principles, OF Medicines
of a simpler Order, may be very efficacious Remedys, may be justly argued from
the great and beneficial effects of such as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Urine
(NB.) a Medicine of great use both Inward and Outward, Spirit of Hartshorn,
Spirit of Niter, Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Turpentine; of which last named
Liquor I shall add, that, besides the virtues already ascribed to it in this
Paper, whilst it retains its simplicity, it may in many Cases be employed as a
Menstruum, and by being combined with an Ingredient or two, be made to afford
diverse Medicines, which tho but little compounded, are not of little virtue.
For I have found it readily enough to dissolve Camphire, Mastick, and some
other Gums, of which Balsoms may be made, and others may be obtained by the
help of the same Liquor, even from diverse Mineral and Metalline Bodies. I will
not insist on so known a Medicine as the common Terebinthinate Balsom of
Sulphur; tho this be a Remedy, with as much as it is peculiarly extolled for
Diseases of the Lungs, (wherein yet its heat requires that it be very warily
given to Patients of some complexions) has virtues that are not confined to the
Distempers of those parts; since both I and some I commended it to, have found
it very effectual (outwardly applied) in troublesome Haemorroidal Pains and
Tumors: and (NB.) some experience inclines me to think its virtues may not be
much greater in Pulmonick than in Paralytick Distempers: in which (last) it may
be used, not only Outwardly, but chiefly Inwardly; and that in a pretty large
Dose with a Cephalic, and, in some Cases, an Antiscorbutick Vehicle. But I
shall rather take notice to you, that perhaps it will be found worth while to
try, at least in external Affects, the use of diverse Tinctures, and
consequently Balsoms that may be obtaind by the help of Oil of Turpentine from
diverse solid Mineral Body's, upon which I have found by trial, that this Liquor
may be tinged (tho not of the same color on all of them,) among which I shall
name, besides Crude Zink, Crude Antimony, and even Crude Copper (in filings;) a
noble Subject, Antimonial Cinnabar; from which, tho I found I could (but not
hastily) draw a fine Tincture, I had not opportunity to make trial of that
promising Medicine.

. VI.
ANd as for those other Medicines, that are not made by bare Analysis, but by
Synthesis or composition; tho I think an experienced Chemist may, in many
cases, with less uncertainty than a Galenist (who employs Crude Ingredients of
a more compounded nature) foresee what quality the produced mixed Body may
have: Yet I could wish, that even the Spagyrists themselves were more sparing,
than many of them are, in the number of the Ingredients they employ to compose
one Medicine. For most of the Arguments, upon which I grounded my Invitation to
the use of simple Remedies, are applicable to Chemical ones, as well as others:
And on this occasion I shall represent two things.

First That in many cases, preparations skilfully diversified, may be usefully
substituted to composition: Since one Body dexterously exposed to differing
Operations, may acquire as various, or as considerable, Qualities, as would
accrue to it by the addition of such other Bodies, as an ordinary Chemist would
in probability associate with it. Thus, not to mention Quicksilver, Antimony
alone, whether prepared without addition, as when Flowers of several sorts are
made of the more Volatile, and true Antimonial Glass of the more fixed part, or
being associated but with one or two Ingredients, may afford a skilful
Spagyrist, Medicines numerous and various enough, almost to furnish a Shop; or
at least to answer the Physicians Scope, where he would employ an Emetick, a
Cathartick, a Diaphoretick, a Deobstruent, a Diuretic, a Bezoardick or cordial
Medicine; to name now no other Qualities, that may be found in some Antimonial
preparations, in a degree considerable enough to ennoble them. Which.
Instances, and others of the like nature I presume you will allow me to make
use of in this discourse, because, though I do commonly, yet I do not always,
employ the Term Simple Medicine or Remedy in the strict and absolute sense, but
in a comparative one, that excludes compositions of more than two or three, or
at the utmost a very few, Ingredients.

Secondly, Without bringing together a Chaos, or so much as a considerabe
number, of Ingredients, one or two, or at most three auxilary ones, if
judiciously chosen and skilfully managed, may oftentimes produce more
efficacious Remedies, than the admirers of pompuous Processes would expect, or
perhaps be able to make those Processes vye with. The violently Emetick and
purgative virtue of Glass of Antimony made per se, may be, as I elsewhere show,
more powerfully corrected by mere distilled Vinegar, than by many famous
Stomachick and Cordial Elixirs, and other Elaborate Preparations. And sometimes
a seemingly improper addition may not only correct, but give new and unexpected
virtues to a Drug. Thus, though Sublimatum corrosivum be a mercurial concrete,
so fretting, that a very few Grains of it may be able to kill a man; yet by
adding and carefully uniting to it about an equal weight of running Mercury,
there is obtained, when they are well united by Sublimations, a Compound that
is so free from being corrosive, that Chemists call it Mercurius dulcis, which
though some unwary Practitioners, as well Galenists as Chemists, have too often
by their misimployment of it, discredited, yet experience shows that in Skilful
hands it may be usefully employed, not only in some venereal affections, but in
diverse other Distempers. And I shall now add, that being carefully prepared,
and well given, it may not only be freed from corrosiveness, but much allay the
Sharpness both of some emptying Medicines, and of some peccant humors. To
countenance the latter part of which observation, I shall acquaint you with one
use of it, that perhaps you have not yet made. I remember, I had an opportunity
to observe the Efficacy of Mercurius dulcis, in a stubborn disentery, that had
baffled the Remedies of an eminent Physician. But though a reflection on the
virtue, I knew this Medicine to have, of allaying Sharp humors, and resisting
Putrefaction, may justly increase my favorable opinion of it; yet not thinking
my Experience competent, I imparted it to an ancient and expert Chyrurgeon,
that was the chief of those that belonged to a famous and judicious General of
an Army; who thereupon frankly confessed to me, that this was his great
Arcanum, wherewith he had cured many scores, or rather hundreds of Soldiers in
this generals Army. Only, where as my way is to give from 8, or 10, to 12, or
at most 15 Grains of Mercurius dulcis for a Dose, made up with some little
Rhubarb, etc. Or other Ingredient that would make it work, once, twice, or
thrice with another Patient, (for the disentery it self helps to carry off the
Medicine) he, both to disguise it, and to make it more easily takeable, made it
up with Sugar and Mucilage of Cum-dragon into Lozenges, whereof one might
containfrom near a Scruple to half a dram of the Mercurius dulcis, of which he
ordered the Soldiers to take one at a time, without hindering their March;
only bidding them have a great care, that nothing should stick between their
Teeth, or in their Throats.

3. But the efficacy of this simple preparation of Mercury, is much inferior
to that more simple, although more tedious, preparation of Gold, which was made
the same way in two differing Countries, by two dexterous Physicians, both of
them of my acquaintance. For though I had long been prejudiced (not without
specious grounds) against pretended Aurum potabiles, and other boasted
preparations of Gold; (for most of which I have still no overgreat esteem) yet,
I saw such extraordinary and surprising Effects of the Tincture of Gold I speak
of, upon Persons of great note, that I was particularly acquainted with both
before they fell desperately sick, and after their strange Recovery, that I
could not but change my former opinion, or a very favorable one of some
preparations of Gold; and I should have thought that this Medicine (as little
compounded as it is,) could scarce he paid, by a great store of the Noble Metal
that afforded it, if it could have been made in great quantity, or without a
great deal of pains and time. I can speak thus circumstantially, because by the
kindness of the Artists, and the pains I had spent in working on the same
Subject they make their Menstruum of, I so far knew, and partly (by themselves
invited) saw, the preparation of it, that to bring home what has been said, to
the present occasion) I can tell you, that there is no Ingredient associated to
the Gold, save one, that comes from above, and is reputed one of the simplest
Bodies in nature, and of which one may take two or three Ounces altogether
unprepared, without the least inconvenience. And yet the Dose of this almost
insipid Medicine, that was given to an old Courtier, even in a violent
Apoplexy, wherein other Remedies had by skil'ful men been used in vain, was but
six or eight drops.

In another very ancient and corpulent person the Dose was greater, because the
Tincture was more unripe and diluted; but the effect was as sudden, tho the
Patient was not bled, and tho there was not in either of these two cases, any
notably sensible, evacuation made. [Both these recovered Persons are yet alive]
the same Medicine a while after, saved the life of another Gentleman I know,
who, having lain above two and twenty days sick of an ill conditioned Fever,
was condemned by three Physicians, whereof one told me with great grief, that
he would not outlive the next morning; and yet upon the taking of a large Dose
of this Tincture, he was presently relieved, and from that time found a
sensible amendment toward a recovery, which he now injoys; tho he were then
reputed to be about, if not above fourscore years old. Some other odd effects
of this. Remedy I could tell you of: But it has already much swelled this
Section, and yet I thought it not amiss to relate these things to you, both,
because they are very pertinent to the scope of it, and because you may be, as
I long was, prejudiced against Medicines made of so fixed, and, as is supposed,
un-alterable a Metal as Gold.

4. This is not the only Medicine made of that noble Body, of which I have
known very notable effects. But, because they belong to another Paper, I shall
not particularly mention them in this; but pass on to tell you, The Usefulness
of Exp. Philosophy.
that the Preparation of Silver, that I have long since delivered in another
Book, though it may seem but slight, has been found very effectual, and much
used, by one of the eminentest Physicians of this nation, to whom I recommended
it: and who acknowledged to me, that He gave it to Patients of very high
Quality, though disguised, to avoid alarming those that are fearful of Chemical
Medicines. And since that I gave it to a great Lady that was Hydropical, and
judged to be dangerously ill, with notable success; and the Cure has already
for some years held good. But I confess to you, that I look upon Copper, and
its Magistery Blew Vitriol, as a much nobler Subject to make Remedy's of, than
Silver, and perhaps than Gold it self. And if I were to make Physic my
Profession, there is no Metal which I should so willingly bestow pains upon as
Copper induced thereunto by the excellent and very extraordinary Effects, (not
all of them to be mentioned in this Paper, that I have had opportunity to see,
of some Remedies, which though I could never learn how to make, I knew were made
of that Metal, or Vitriol abounding in it. [But first freed from all cruelticle
violence.] And for appeasing of Pains, produced even by inveterate Maladies,
the Laudanums) and other opiate Preparations, that are prescribed and praised
in Physicians and Chemists Books, and much used (oftentimes with good success)
in their practice, seem to me, bccause of the Stupor, and some other
inconvenient Symptoms, they are wont more or less to be followed by, far
inferior to the Sulphurous Parts, as a Chemist would call them, of skillfully
prepared Venus; these being much more harmlesly and friendly Anodynous. And I
remember that an Empyrick, to whom, at his request, I taught a very uncertain
way (for it rarely hits) of making a kind of Sulphur of Vitriol alone, in the
form of a Brick colored Powder; came purposely to give me solemn Thanks for
the Reputation he had gained by that Medicine, of which the first time he had
the good luck to make it, he gave, as he was instructed, four or five grains of
it, to a Woman that could not sleep, but had been for diverse months raving mad,
[ Maniaca.] which single dose not only gave her a good Nights rest, but
brought. her to talk sense when she waked in the Morning. I knew also a
Chemist, that was much courted even by learned Doctors, for an internal Anodyne
he used, and could sell at almost what rate he pleased, to take off inveterate
Pains in the Heads and Shins of venereal Patients; and the same Person cured
venereal Ulcers in a very short time, only by strowing on them an Indolent
Powder. And tho he was so shy, that he would not let even the Physicians, I
recommended to him, see his Medicine, yet having one day been told of a
kindness I had done him, unknown to him; he took it so well, that he not only
allowed me to see and handle his Medicine, but when I guessed by the
ponderousness and effects; of it, that it was some. Preparation of Mercury fixed
with Sulphur of Venus, he frankly acknowledged to me, that, tho it would endure
not only Ignition, but a strong and lasting fire, that in the former part of my
Conjecture ( that the Body of it was Mercurial) I was in the right; and in the
latter part I shot very near the Mark; but added, that that the true
Sulphurous parts of Venus were in his way so difficult to be obtained, and
required so much time, that he could seldom prevail with himself, (who indeed
was voluptuous enough) to go through so troublesome a work. And in effect I
found, upon various Trials, the constituent Parts of that Metal to be much more
strictly united than the generality even of Chemists imagaine. For the
extraordinary effects of this Medicine, I can refer you to the Testimony of
very ingenious men of your own Profession, (and probably acquaintance too.) And
since I know you study Helmont, I presume you will the more readily believe
them, if I put you in mind of that notable Passage, where he says: Nihil, aeque
victoriose in Humidum Radicale, agit atque primum ens cupri, vel ad vitam
longam Sulphur vitrioli est benignius; ideoque Sulphur Philosophorum
indigitat. But my intended Brevity forbids me to insist longer on this Metal,
or to take notice of more than one other Metal. And because that of Steel,
Physicians as well as Chemists make great variety of Remedies, some of which
are produced by Preparations slight enough; And the like may be said of
Mercury, witness the Remedy formerly commended against the Worms, made of
nothing but crude Quicksilver barely decocted in common water: For this
reason, I say, I shall pitch upon Lead, whose calx dissolved in Spirit of
Vinegar affords as you know, Saccharum Saturni, which tho so easy and simple a
preparation, is a magistery that has more virtues than every Physican knows, or
perhaps so much as suspects; especially in mortifying sharp humors in the
Eyes, which I have known or made it do sometimes almost in a trice. [But I do
not think it safe to make the Plantain or Rose Water it is to be dissolved in,
considerably strong of it.] And for Burns, I have seldom seen any thing equal
to it, and therefore have often used it upon my self (barely dissolved in
Common, or else Plantain Water.) But I fear it is not so safe as effectual, in
some inward Distempers of the Bowels, that are judged to be caused by Acid
humors; unless it be very warily and skilfully given. [But as to its external
use, I presume, I need not tell so skilful a Doctor as you (NB.) how great it
is in healing, and in the mean time appeasing, the Pains of diverse sorts of
Ulcers. And therefore I shall mention but one Particular, which it is like you
have not met with; namely, that I know a very Ancient and experienced Person,
who, besides a vast practice otherwise, was Chyrurgeon to a great Hospital; who
professing much kindness, and owning some obligation to me, confessed to me,
that amongst all the Medicines he has tried to stop Bleeding, and prevent
Accidents in Amputations, that which he oftenest used, and most relied on, is a
solution of Saccharum Saturni in Plantain Water (or for a need in pure common
Water:) for having dissolved j. of the former in about a Pint or pound of the
latter; as soon as ever the Limb or other part is taken off, he immediately
apply's Stupes drenched in this Liquor, as hot as the Patient can well endure;
and having bound them carefully on, he makes, no have to take them off, but
allows the Medicine time enough to perform its operation: To countenance this I
would tell you an odd experiment of mine, of the efficacy of a Saturnine Liquor
to resist Putr faction, in the Bodies of Animals, but that the relation would
take up too much time.]

5. Perhaps I need not tell you, that I could here mention diverse other
Experiments, as well upon Saturn, as the other Metals I have named above; but
that my Scope confines me to such Preparations, as wherein the Metaline Subject
is compounded but with very few others; and also that of those that are more
remote from simplicity, you may meet with several in some of my other Papers,
which I am not in this to defraud.

What has been above noted about Metals, may be extended to Minerals: namely,
that when there is need to compound them, it may of tentimes be sufficient to
associate them with one or two, or at most a very few Auxiliary Ingredients, if
I may so-call them; this is apparent in several useful Preparations of
Antimony, that are vulgarly enough known. To which diverse may be added that are
made of common Sulphur, by slight additions. Of which sort, because I
elsewhere deliver several, I shall now mention but one, which though I have
many years ago described in the History of colors, I shall not scruple to take
notice of here, because I there consider not its Medicinal virtues, which yet
are very great, especially in Asthmas and Coughs, in which I do not remember
that I ever gave it without benefit to the Patient; nor was it less successful
in the hands of Physicians, that were willing to try it for me, especially in
those of a Person, who though well furnished with choice Remedies of his own,
often came to me for a supply of this Spirituous and penetrating Tincture, with
which he assured me he did notable things in Asthmatical cases; and
particularly in one that was very obstinate, and had lasted many years. But not
having had quite so many opportunities as I wished of giving it my self, I
shall be glad, that further Trial may be made of it by so skilful an
Administrer as you. And therefore lest you should not have the Book lately
referred to at hand, I shall here repeat, that our Medicine is made of Flowers
of Sulphur, exactly mix't with an equal weight of finely powdered SalArmoniac,
and somewhat more than an equal weight of good Quicklime, separately reduced
to a Subtle Powder. For these three Ingredients being diligently and nimbly
mixed, and put into a Retort, to be placed in a sand Furnace, and fitted with a
large receiver very well luted to it. This Mixture, I say, being duly distilled
in such vessels, will afford a Blood red and smoking spirit, exceeding
Sulphurous both in smell and oven Mechanical Operations. And in this
Distillation the Sulphurous Parts sometimes came over accompanied with such
store of saline ones, that a good part of what past into the Receiver shot into
the form of a Volatile Sulphurous Salt. And I remember that having for
curiosity's sake added to the Fluid Tincture a due proportion of an Ardent
Spirit (such as that of Wine) exactly dephlegm'd, I had a Mixture (whether in
the form of a Coagulum or not) which afforded me some odd Phenomenon not here
to be mentioned, and which we subled with a gentle fire to unite them into a
composition that may for distinction sake be called Sa trium regnorum, because
it contains Urinous Particles, Vinous ones, (and perhaps some of Soot) and
Sulphurous ones: whereof the First belongs to the Animal, the Second to the
Vegetable, and the last to the Mineral Kingdom, as Chemists are wont to speak.
But what virtues this Salt (that would presently gild Silver,) and the Spirit
that may be made to accompany it, may have in Physic, I had not occasion to
try. But yet I have mentioned it upon the by, that you may make use of it, if
you think it worth while to do so. To whch I shall here present you with no
Inducements, since I perceive that the Particulars above mentioned about simple
preparations of Gold and other Metals, have already made this Section
enormously great. And yet I hope you will not be displeased at it; since to so
sugacious a person as Dr. F. these passages may afford some not altogether
useless hints: and at least it is an Encouragement to Industry, to know that the
subjects a man works on are capable of affording Excellent things.

. VII.
1. I Foresee it may be objected against the frequent use of simple Medicines,
that oftentimes it happens that a Disease, or a morbisick Matter, is not the
effect of a single Cause, but is produced by the concurrence of two, or perhaps
more, Causes, which producing several symptoms, it is not probable that one
Simple Drag will be able to answer those different Indications This Objection I
confess is considerable, and there are cases wherein I acknowledge it to be so
weighty as to invite and warrant a Physician, to employ in them a Medicine
consisting of more Ingredients than one or two; which I can admit without
prejudice to any Design, since I formerly declared I did not intend to persuade
you to consine your self to Simple Remedy's (so much as in the late sense above
intimated of that Term) but only to employ them where they may suffice; and
where they cannot to make use of Medicines as little compounded as the case
will permit,

2. But having premised this Advertisement, I presume I may offer you two or
three considerations, that may lessen the force of the lately proposed
objection And first, tho I readily grant, that there are Diseases, whereof each
may proceed from differring causes, and that a Remedy may be available against
it, When it is produced by one of those causes, without being so when it flows
from another; yet it may also easily happen, that in one case the Disease may
be cured by one simple Medicine, and in another, by a Remedy not compounded.
Nay, it may also happen, that the same simple may cure a Distemper, by which
soever OF the two causes it is produe'd. This I have in another Paper
endeavored to make out. And what we see of the Effects of the Jesuits Powder,
as they call it in different kinds of Agues, as Tertians, Quartans, etc. and of
pacating Medicines (most of which indeed owe their virtue to Opium, but some
are Mineral, and have nothing of the Poppy in them) in appeasing Pains produced
by Humors, and other causes very differing; may keep what has been said from
appearing improbable, And, if I mistake not, it may diverse times happen, that,
whatever it were that at first produced a portion of Morbisick matter, that
first produced matter, is the cause of the continuance of the Disease, by
virtue of some peculiar Texture or Noxious Constitution, which if a generous
Medicine can destroy, the Disease will, at least little by little, cease.

3. It not unfrequently happens, that several Symptoms that seem very
differing, may so depend upon the primary or principal cause of the Disease,
that if a Medicine, how simple soever, be capable to destroy that cause, all
the various Symptoms will, by degrees at least, vanish of themselves: as we
often see, that when Mercury, tho perhaps but crude, is skilfully applied, and
raises a kindly salivation, a great variety of Inconveniences that afflicted a
Venereal Patient, and seemed to require many differing and topical
Applications, are removed by the same Remedy; insomuch that not only frightful
Ulcers, but such Modes as one would think searce possible to be dissipated by
the strongest Plasters, are sometimes happily cured by well prepared
Quicksilver, taken in at the mouth, as I have been assured by more than one
eminent Physician upon his own Experience, And tho not unfrequently there be
several, and sometimes very different Symptoms, that accompany that Disease of
children that in England we call the Rickets; (and of which there dye several
almost every week in London alone)* yet that Medicine which I have elsewhere
described under the name of Ens (primum) Veneris [made of strongly calcined and
well dulcified Colcothar of Dantsick Vitriol, and elevated with Sal Armoniack
into the form of a reddish sublimate] has proved, by Gods blessing on it, so
successful, that partly by a Sister of mine, (to whom I communicated it) and
partly by my self, and those I directed to take it, or to give it; I think I
may safely say, that two or three hundred children have been cured by it, and
that almost always without the help of any other inward Medicine, or using any
Topical application at all.

4. But the main thing that I intended, by way of answer to the foreseen
Objection, was, that in a simple Medince nature her self does oftentimes so
well play the Apothecary, as to render the compositions made in his shop
unnecessary. For, tho we are wont to look upon this or that Plant or Mineral,
as an entire and simple Body, yet we may much mistake, if we look upon it as a
Homogeneous one. In several Plants that are organical Bodies, this Truth is
manifest; as for instance, in Oranges the Succulent part is sour and cooling,
but the Yellow Rind considerably bitter and hot: and so in Lemons the Pulp, the
Yellow part of the Rind, and the seeds have their differing Qualities and
Medicinal virtues. And even in such vegetable Substances as are Homogeneous as
to sense, there may be Parts, whose operations may be not only differing, but
contrary; as is manifest in the Root, we call Rhubarb, which affords as well
notably Astringent, as Laxative and Purgative Parts. And so in Minerals
themselves good and clean Lead-Oar, for instance, tho an uniform body as to
sense, consists of very dissimilar Parts, and affords Sulphurous and perhaps
other Recrements, besides Malleable Lead, which is it self a compounded Body.
Thus also shining Marcasites, tho they appear Homogeneous, will by barely being
exposed for a competent time to the moist Air, afford an Efflorescence, that is
perfectly vitriolate, and consequently contains an Acid Salt, two kinds of
Sulphur, a Terrestrial Substance, and at least one Metal, (for oftentimes it
holds both Copper and Iron, tho one predominate,) which last named Substances
themselves are neither of them simple Bodies.

5. And if we admit the Chemical Analysis of mixts to be genuine, we shall find
that almost all those that belong to the Vegetable Kingdom, or to the Animal,
and many that are referred to the Mineral Kingdom, how uniform soever they may
appear to the Eye, do each of them contain several different, and sometimes
hostile Substances. Thus Hartshorn, tho it appears a dry and Homogeneous
Substance, will in distillation afford a volatile Salt, an urinous Spirit, a
waterish Liquor, or Phlegm, a swiming Oil and a sinking one, a white and porous
Earth, or Terra damnata, and perhaps some, tho but very little, fixed Salt. Thus
also in the Vegetable Kingdom, Tartar, for instance, may without addition be
made to afford, as Experience has assured me, a volatile Salt very like that
of Urine, a Phlegm, an Acid Spirit, another Spirit too which I have elsewhere
given the name of Adiaphorous, two faetid Oils, whereof one will sink in Water,
and the other swim on it, an Earth or Terra Damnata, and a fixed Lixivial Salt,
upon which the newly mentioned Acid Spirit manifests such a hostility, that
when they are put together, they tumultuate with noise and Bubbles, and in the
Conflict mortify each other. And thus likewise in the Mineral Kingdom, not to
repeat what I lately said of the compoundedness of Vitriol; Nor confidently to
urge the Opinion of diverse Eminent Physicians, that Mars (as they call Steel
and Iron) affords parts whereof some are Astringent, and other Operative,
because I am not yet sure these contrary qualitys, do not proceed from the
differing degrees of Fire, and other Circumstances of the preparations of the
Metal: We see that Native Cinnabar affords by Distillation, besides running
Mercury, a dry substance, whence I have obtained a Sulphur that would presently
gild Silver, and a Terrestrial substance, whose nature I had not occasion to
examine. And I the rather take notice of these differing Parts in Native
Cinnabar, because it is a Mineral that I much esteem; and tho here in England
it is very rarely, or scarce at all employed as an inward Medicine, yet I know
some Foreign Physicians of several Nations, that look upon it, as one of their
chief Arcanums, and both use it, and conceal it, accordingly. But I do not
willingly employ it, till it has been prepared, by grinding it exactly, upon a
Porphire, or other fit Stone, as a Painter would do to make a Pigment of it,
and by freeing it from certain Salts, that often undiscernedly adhere to it,
and sometimes may be hurtful; which is done by First washing it very carefully
with boiling Water, and then, after it has been thoroughly dried, by burning
upon it several times, one after another, some Vinous Spirits perfectly
dephlegm'd. [The Dose, if it be to be long continued, may be three, four or
five grains: but when it is to be given but seldom, and for an urgent Case, it
may be from six or seven, to ten or twelve grains.

. VIII.
1. WHat has been said in the foregoing discourse, to manifest, that a simple,
whether Organical or not, may notwithstanding its intireness or its seeming
Homogeneity, contain or afford very, dissimilar parts; may help us to conceive,
that being really a compounded Body, it may afford Parts differing enough to
answer differing Indications, or attain several Scopes, that are wont to be
looked on by Physiciaus as necessary, or at least very useful to the cure of
this or that disease; as in many Diarrhaeas or Fluxes of the Belly, whereas,
it is judged requisite first to evacuate the Peccant matter, and then to give
Astringents, to hinder the immoderate evacuation wherein the disease is thought
to consist; Rhubarb answers both those Indications, by its Purgative and its
more terrestrial Parts, whereof the former dispatch their work first, which
makes the Astringent operation of the latter seasonable and safe.

2. I have diverse times observed, that so common and despicable a simple as
Ground Ivy, has performed things whose variety seemed to argue, that it
contains Parts of very differing virtues (as of opening, contemperating,
healing, etc.) and is thereby capable of answering differing intentions,
especially in Distempers of the Lungs and Breast, and indeed partly by the
Syrup of it, partly by the infusion of the Leaves, and partly by Medicines made
of them in a consistent form; the happy Effects of this simple have procured me
the thanks of diverse considerable persons, some of which had before
unsuccesfully used many Prescriptions of learned men. And I remember I knew an
Ingenious Person, who being Master of a considerable manufacture, which was
gainful to him, whilst his Servants continued tolerably well, was very much
incommodated and perplexed, to find them so obnoxious to violent Colicks,
(which he imputed to the Copious Steams of the Vinegar his Art required,) that
he was forced almost weekly to allow them some days of cessation from working,
to preserve or recover themselves. And I remember that from this Inconvenience,
he was at length, as himself confessed to me, in great part freed by making his
workmen frequently use a strong Infusion or Tincture of the Leaves of our
Ground Ivy made with (not pure or dephlegm'd Spirit of Wine, but) good
unrectify'd Nants Brandy.

I could here add diverse other uses, both Internal and External, of this
seemingly despicable Plant, there being scarce any one English Herb known to
me, of which, for its manifest virtues, the Experience of others and my own
have given me a greater Esteem. And I am apt to think, that the Efficacy which
this and some other Simples, that the fear of Prolixity makes me silently pass
by, would be found both greater and more various than they are commonly
thought, if Physicians in prescribing Medicines would more often either ordain
Simple ones, or at least associate but very few together, and compensate the
small number of Ingredients, by the greater quantity of those that are the most
appropriated or operative, and by persisting in their use for a competent time.

Tho it is not every efficacious Simple, or but lightly compounded Remedy, that
can fitly be employed about the Proof of what I am now endeavoring to show,
yet I shall subjoyn such Instances, as will, I hope, suffice for the present
Occasion.

Mineral Waters, as well Acidubae, as the German Spaw, our Tunbridge, etc. as
Thermae, such as those of Bath, etc, tho but Natural Medicines; and some of
them but outwardly administered, are notoriously known in their native
simplicity to be able one of them single, frequently to cure several Diseases,
and consequently to take off a good number of differing Symptoms, that afford
various Indications. It may help much to make it probable that the same Simple
may comprise Qualities fit to answer differing Scopes, and thereby cure
differing Symptoms, if it be considered, that there are several Poisons that do
each of them produce Symptoms not only very frightful, but very various, and
yet all these have been oftentimes conquered by a Specific Antidote, that is
perhaps but a simple Herb or other uncompounded Drug. I had once, (and but
once) the opportunity of making a Trial, whereof I shall now give you a brief
Account, of the virtue of a stone taken out of the Head of an enormously great
African Serpent; which stone was affirmed to the Possessor of it, Governor of
the famous English East India Company, to be highly available against the
Bitings of all venomous Animals. The substance of the Experiment (to give it
you in short) was this, I caused a young Cat to be bitten by a fierce and
highly irritated Viper, which so enraged the Cat, that in revenge he
endeavored to bite off her Head, which he took in his Mouth, and did not let
go, till, as the Spectators concluded, she had bit him again, at, least by the
tongue; soon after which venomous Hurt, the Cats Head swelled very much, and
tho he soon grew so weak, that he was not able to stand on his Legs, but lay
along on the ground, yet he seemed to be grown quite mad, for he foamed at the
Mouth, and snapt at the end of a Wand, or such like things, that were but held
near him; and, which was more, in his rage bit one of his own Legs, that lay
not far from his Mouth, much to the surprise of the Spectators. But, tho in
this desperate condition it seemed in vain to attempt any thing for his Rescue,
because one could make him take nothing, and every one was afraid to come near
him; yet having mixed a little of the powdered stone with some sponfuls of fair
Water, it was by the help of the neck of a glass Retort, that we employed in
stead of a funnel, poured by degrees upon the Cats Mouth; which lying open, tho
he endeavored to shake it off, yet some of it was concluded to have got in;
and within one hour or two after, if not less, he did, to the no small wonder
of the Bystanders, get upon his Legs again, and not only seemed to have much of
the Tumidness of his Head, but readily enough took the Medicine I caused to be
given him; and would probably have escaped very well, if, whilst I was at dinner
with the Company, some unruly People had not hurt him more mortally than the
Viper had done.

Physicians and others have observed in the Plague a great variety of Symptoms,
among which there are diverse, whereof each, if single would psas for a
particular Disease. And this diversity of Symptoms may be not unfrequently
observed, not only in Pestilences that happen at times, or in Countries distant
from one another, but in the same Plague reigning in the same Place. And yet
it is possible, that a simple Remedy may be available against this so
multifarious or manifold (if I may so call it) and violent a Disease. Of Which
Observation (to omit what might be alleged out of some other Authors) I shall
give one instance out of Galen himself, who, treating at large of the Terra
Samia, takes occasion 'to bring in the virtues of Bolarmony ( Bolus Armena)
which I should guess by his manner of mentioning it to have been little, if at
all, known to Physicians till his Time. This Earth, that appears a Body so
simple and uniform; He not only commends for sevearal Diseases, as spitting of
Blood, Fluxes of the Belly, Dysenteries Catarrhs, Defluxions from the Head upon
the Breast, Difficulty of Breathing thence ensuing, and even Ulcers of the
Lungs; but adds, what makes very much and directly for our purpose, in the
following words. In magna hac Peste, Galen. de Simpl. Med. Facult. lib. ix.
Tiul. de Terra Samia.
(whereof he had spoken before) cujus eadem facies fuit atque ejus quae
Thucidydis memoria grassabatur, quotquot hoc Medicamen bibere celeriter curati
sunt. [The way of giving it (which I add by the by, because it may sometime or
other be of use) was this, Bibitur, says He, ex vino albo consistentia tenui,
modice diluto, si aut plane Febri careat, aut leviter ea teneatur, sin gravius
febriat, admodum aqueo.] And so excellent a Medicine did this simple one prove
in that terrible Plague, that our Author says, Quibus non profuit omnes
interiere; Scil. cum nec alio quovis Medicamine, juvarentur: unde colligiter,
concludes He, quod iis duntaxat non fuerit auxilio qui plane erant incurabiles.

3. There are few Diseases that put on so many forms, or are attended with
greater variety of Symptoms, than that which Physicians call Affectio
Hysterica, and whose Paroxysus or effects are vulgarly known in England by the
name of Fits of the Mother. And yet we have often removed, and not seldom in a
quarter of an hour or less, Hysterical Paroxysus and Symptoms, and sometimes
such as made the Patient swoon or lie along as almost dead, by the bare Odor,
of well rectified Spirt of Hartshorn, or the mere pungent and powerful smell of
a Spirit of Sal Armoniack, which by a peculiar way I made very strong,
purposely for external Uses. And if I had not out of the experienced Monardes,
See Nicol. Monard Simpl. Med. Histor. Cap. 36. P. m. 329.
Physician to the Viceroy of the Spanish Indies, already mentioned in another
Treatise an Antiscorbutical Gem; I would here add another Remedy against the
same Disease, more considerable to my present purpose, since it is only a simple
Stone outwardly applied.

4. But, because I think not fit in this place to insist on a Testimony already
alleged, tho its Credibility, as well as that of the thing to be confirmed by
it, may be much favored by what has been related, concerning the Virtues of
Stones outwardly applied, in the latter part of the Discourse about Specificks:
For this Reason, I say, I shall add a couple of other remarkable Instances, of
the Efficacy of even Dry and Solid Bodies, tho but externally applied in
Diseases attended with several, and diverse of them uncommon Symptoms, whereof,
whatever many think of the harmlessness of our English Vipers, I have here
known several Instances, in Men as well as Brutes. And yet in these dangerous
Cases, many that come from East India extol the great Efficacy of some of those
Stony Concretions, that are said to be found in the Heads of a certain kind of
Serpents about Goa, and some other Eastern Countries: for tho most Physicians
reject or question the Power ascribed to these stones, for curing the Bitings
of Vipers, and tho I do not wonder at their diffidence, because in effect many
of the stones brought from India are but counterfeit; and of those that were
really taken out of Serpents, several, for a Reason I must not stay to mention,
are insignificant; (and such perhaps were those that the learned and curious
Ready made his Trials with) yet there are others, whose virtues are not well to
be denied. For, not to build on vulgar Traditions, which are but too often
deceitful, one of the eminentest Doctors of the London College assured me,
that he had, with one of these stones, done, tho contrary to his expectation; a
notable Cure, which he related to me at large. And one of our chief English
Chyrurgeons affirmed to me, that he had done the like upon another person; both
of these Cures being performed by the bare application of the Stone, to the
Place bitten by the Viper or Adder. And a very intelligent person, who had the
direction of a considerable Company of Traders in East India, where he long
lived, assured me that he had with this Stone cured several persons of the
Hurts of venomous Animals, But, this Testimony is much less considerable, as to
the number of Cures, than that of a great Traveller into the Southern parts of
the same India, who, tho he were bred by a famous Cartesian Philospher, and
were forward enough to discredit vulgar Traditions about the Countries he had
long lived in; yet being for those Reasons asked by me, what I might safely
believe of the Stones I speak of, seriously affirmed to me, that he had cured
above threescore persons of the Bitings or Stings of several sorts of poysonus
Creatures; and that he perform most of those Cures, by the outward Application
of one Stone; because, finding it excellent, He was invited to keep to it,
especially in difficult. cases. And this same Experience of my own, made with a
Genuine Stone of this kind, upon the Bodies of Brutes, much inclines me to give
credit to. But, because this Stone is afforded by an Animal, I shall add the
virtues of another, that properly belongs to the Mineral Kingdom; in a Disease,
whose Symptoms, tho not so various, are sometimes dangerous, and too often
mortal.

To show you then, that in spite of great Closeness and Hardness, a simple
Remedy outwardly applied, may be a very effectual one, I shall inform you, that
tho the Solid I am speaking of past for a Bloodstone, yet by its color and
some other visible qualities, I should rather have taken it for an Agat. It was
but about the bigness of a small Nutmeg, and had in it a Perforation, by which
a stiring past through it, to fasten it to the Part affected. This Stone had
been long kept in the Family that possessed it, when I saw it, being for its
rare virtues left by one to another. But, to omit the reports that went of it,
the notable case, that makes it pertinent for me to mention it here, was this.
An ingenious Gentleman, that was a man of Letters, and when I saw him, was in
the Flower of his Age, and of a complexion so highly Sanguine, as is not
usually to be met with, was from time to time subject to Hemorrhages at the
Nose; so profuse and so difficult to be restrained, that his Physician, tho a
Person famous and very well skilled in his Art, told me he often feared he
should loose his Patient, and that he would be carried away by this unbridled
Distemper* But when good method and variety of Remedies had been tried, without
the desired success, this Stone was at length obtained from an ancient
Kinswoman of the Gentleman's, to tie about his Neck, so as to touch his naked
Skin. This when he did in the Fits, it would stop the Bleeding; and if he wore
it for some considerable time together, he all that while continued well, as
both his learned Physician and himself informed me. And, because I was apt to
ascribe somewhat of this effect to imagination, on, the Patient told me, that a
while before one of the chief Women in the City, (whom he named to me) fell
into so violent a Bleedings, that, though it brought her into a Swoon, yet that
it self, which is somewhat strange, did not hinder her to Bleed on, till the
Stone, having been tied about her Neck, made her cease to do so, though she knew
nothing of its having been applied to her. And this it self is less strange
than what the Gentleman affirmed to me of the Power of this Gem, as it may
deservedly be called. For his complexion inclining him, as was above intimaed,
to breed great store of Blood, his Doctor thought fit to order him, for
prevention, to breath a Vein, from time to time, which when he was about to do,
he was obliged to lay aside the Stone for a while, because, whilst he kept it
on, the Blood would not issue out, at least with the requisite Freedom.

But how far have I already past beyond the designed Limits of this little
Tract! wherein I at first intended, but to lay before you the five chief
advantages I had observed, mere simple Remedies to have of very compounded
ones; and briefly to propose the main grounds, on which I ascribed those
advantages to such Remedies. But though the better to keep this writing from
being prolix, I designed that it should consist chiefly of such particulars, as
I could best spare from other Papers; And though for that reason I have purposely
omitted many parable, and other but little Compounded or Elaborate Medicines:
Yet I now perceive that, so many new particulars having offered themselves on
several occasions, whilst I was writing, my Pen has slipped into the mention of
many more Receipts, and Historical passages, than were at first intended. But
believing the subject to be very useful, and not despairing but that the things
delivered on it may not be altogether useless; I dare hope you will pardon such
faults, as only my desire of making the Parts of this small writing, rather
serviceable than Methodical or well proportioned, drew me unawares into. But
whatever were the cause of my Prolixity, the bulk which I see this Paper has
already swelled to, admonishes me, that I ought to put a speedy period to it,
without spending time solicitously to declare in what sense I commend the
Medicines delivered in this Invitation, For by recalling to mind, what I have
formerly wrote (in a Treatise you have been pleased to peruse See the Appendix
to the I Section of the II Part of the usefulness of Exper. Philosophy. p.
389-390 And of the 2d. Edition.
) about the Limitations, with which I would have the praises I give of Tome
Remedys understood, and the cautions with which I would have them administered;
you will easily be persuaded, that looking upon them but as fit Tools in a
skilful Workmans Hands, I do not pretend that any of them should do the Offices
both of Physic and Physician too: and that I propose not the Medicines
mentioned in this short Paper, as sure Specificks, but as instances that there
are Remedies, which notwithstanding their being but simple ones, may be very
good ones.

I am Sir your most etc. R. B.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of late Physic Books sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms,
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Fol.
BOneti Anatomia, 2. Vol. 1680. -- Mercurius, 1682. -- Medicina
Septentrionalis, 1684. Bidloo Anat. humani Corporis (105 fig. illnjirata) 1685.
Breinii Plantarum Exoticar. Cent, cum Figuris, 1680. Bibliotheca Anatom. cum
fig. 2 vol. 1685. Fabriti Hildani opera cum Severino, 1682. HippocratisOpera
Foetii. Hartmanni Opera omnia, 1684, Horstii Opera Med. Paracelsi Opera, 2 vol.
Dioscoridis Opera, G. Lat. Saxoniae Opera Mid. 1680. Piso Hist. natsiralis de
rebus Indiae. Schenkii Observat. Med. Mentzelii Index Plant, cum Figuris, 1683.
Lepenii Bibliotheca Med. 1683. Riverii Opera, 1679. Zwelferi Pharmacopeia, 2
vol. Pharmacop. Angust. Renovata, fine Notis, 1685. Wedelii Tabulae.
Quartoes.
Alpinus Medicina Egypt. Borriehius de ortu and progressu Chimiae. Borrichii
Hermetis Aegyptiorum and Chym. Sapientia. -- De Somno and somniferis. Baubini
Pinax cum Prodromo. Broeckbuysen Oeconomia Corporis Anim. 1683. Blasii
Anatomia, 1681. Borellus de motu Animalium, 2 vol. 1685. price 12 s. Bellinus
At Urinis and Pulsibus. 1685. Bohn Chymia, 1685. Barbetti Opera omnia. 1685.
Blegny Zodiacus Galen. Med. Chymic. 1682 -- Zodaius Gal. Med. An. 4 and 5.
1685. Bartholini Acta Medica. 4 vol. Castelli Lexicon Med. 1682. per Bruno,
Cardilucil Officina Sanitatis. Clauderi Methodus Balsamandi. -- De' Tinctura
universali. Collectanea Chymica Leydensia, 1684. Clauderi Inventum
cinnabaricum, 1684. Cleyer Specimina Medicinae Sinicae, 1682. Coberi Observat.
Med. 1684. Charas Pharmacopeia Regia, 1683. Charas Theriaca Andromachi, 1684.
-- Opera Omnia, 1684. Diemerbroeck Anatomia. Davissoni Comment, in Medicinam
Severini Ettmulleri Opera Med, 1685. -- Medicus, 1685. -- Chimia. Dolaei
Encyclopedia Med. 1684. Fernelii Opera, 1683. Van Helmontii Opera, 1682.
Glisson de Naturae Substantia. Hoffmanni Praxis Med. 1680. Helwigii
Observationes Med. 1680. Hoffmannus in Schroderum. Joel Opera medica. Kyperi
Anthropologia corporis humani. Konig Regnuim Animale, 1682. Kunckelii Ars
Vitraria. Kirekringii Specilegium Anatom. Licetus de Monstris. Micaelis de
Apoplexia, 1685. Morhoff de Scypho Vitreo. Museum Hermetic. Miscellanea Curiosa
M. Physica, 7 vol. An. X -- Id. Decuria secunda Anni Primi, 1683. -- Dec. 2.
An. 2. -- Dec. 2. An. tertius, 1685. Margravi Materia Medica. -- Prodromes.
Pauli Quadripartitum Botanicum. -- De Febribus. Plateri praxis. Pecblinus de
potu Theae, 1684. Paulini Cynographia curiosa, 1685. Peyeri Merycologia, 1685.
Regii Medicina. Rolfinchius de purgantibus, 1683. -- Ordo and Methodus Med,
Specialis -- Concilia Med. -- Chimia. Sacra Eleusinia patefacta, 1684.
Schenckii Hist. de humor, totius corporis, 1684 Salamandrae Descriptio, 1683.
Sylvii Opera Med. Schrokii Pharmacopeia, Augustana. -- Hist. Moschi. Sturmii
Collegium Curiosum, 2 vol. 1584. Du Verney de auditu, in fig. 1685. Ang. Salae
Opera Med, 1682. Swammerdam miraculum Naturae. Vigerii Opera med, Versaschae de
Apoplexia. Weltheri Sylva medica. Welschii Decades X. med. -- Observat. and
curat, med. -- Concilia, med. Wedelii Opiologia. -- Physiologia Med. --
Pharmacia. -- de medicam. facultatibus. -- de medicam. compositione. -- Am
aenitates Materiae Med. 1684. -- Disputationes variae, 2 vol. Weidenfeld de usu
Spir. Vini Lulliani, 1684 Wepferi cicutae Aquaticae. Zwelferi Pharmacop.
Octavoes.
Bartholin de ductu Salivali; 1685. Bruelis praxis Med. Bontekoe de Febribus,
1683. Tho. Bartholini Hist. Anatomica. Beck de Procidentia Uteri, 1683.
Borelli Observat. Med. Briggs Opthalmo Graphin. -- Nova Visionis Theoria,
Barthol. Anatomia. Beck. Experimenta, 1684. Beckeri Physica subterranea cum
supplemento, 1681. Brunneri Experimenta nova circa Pancreas, 1682. Charleton de
Causis Catumor, etc. 1685. Ent contra Parisanum, de circ. Sang. 1685. -- Contra
Thruston de Respiat. 1685. Camerarii Sylloges memorabilium Me. 2 vol. 1683.
Deckeri Exercitationis Med pract. Dodonaei Praxis Medica. Franchimont
Lithotomia Med. 1683. Franciscus de Venae Sectione. 1685. Felicis de Ovis cont.
Malpighi, 1684. Funerwalfi Anatomia. Gockelii Concilia and observat. Med 1683.
De Graaf Opera. Grulichius de Hydrope, 1681. -- De Bile, 1682. Grimm Compend.
Med. Chym. 1684. Gieswin Hodegus, med. Guiberti Opera Med. Hartmanni Praxis
Chymiatrica, 1682. Heide Anatome mytuli and observat. Med. 1684. Hippocratis
Opera, 2 vol. Juncken Chymia Experiment alis, 1681. -- Medicus praesenti Seculo
Accom. 1682. Inventa nova Antiqua Med. 1684. Le Mort Pharmacia and Chimia,
1684. Lossii Council. Med. 1684. Lister de Fontibus Med. Angliae. -- De
Insectis, 1685. -- Appendix ad Hist. Animal. Angl. 1685. Liseri Culter
Anatomicus: Maachetti Anatomi Meekren Observat. Med. Chyrur. 1682: Merett
Pinax: Oeconomia Animalis, 1685. Plateri Observat. Med. Peonis and Pythagor.
Exercit. Anat. and Med. 1682: Plot de Origin Fontium, 1685. Rulandip de
Phlebotomia. Riverii Institutiones: -- Praxis, 2 vol. -- Observat. Rulandi
Curationes Empericae, 1680. Sydenhami Opera Universa Londini, 1685. Sraussii
Isagoge Physica, 1684. Schroderi Pharmacopeia: Sacchius iris Febrilis, 1684. --
Methodus Curandi Febris, 1685. Sculteti Chyrurgia cum Append. Sthal Aetiologia
Phys. Chym. 1683. Tilingii Lilium Curiosum, 1683: Prodromus, med. -- De Laudano
opiato. -- De Febribus. Theatrum Chymicum, 6 vol. Tulpii observat. med. 1685.
Versaschae Observat. med. Welsch rationale Vulnerum Lethalium, 1685. Wepferi de
Apoplexia: Witten memoria medicor. Weberi Anchora Saucitor. Zypaei Fundamentu
med. 1683:
Twelves.
Bail Tract. de Apoplexia. -- Dissertationes Physicae. -- Dissertationes
Medicae. -- Problemata Physica Med. Blondel Thermarum Aquis granen. and porcet.
descript. 1685. Barbetti Chyrurgia: -- Praxis cum notis Deckerii: Broen de
Duplici Bile Veterum, 1685. Barthol. De Ovariis: -- De Unicornu: -- De Pulmenum
substantia: Beughen Bibliographia Med. and Physica, 1682: Beguini Tyrocinium
Chymicum: Comelini Catalogus Plantarum, 1682: Closs. de Aquis min. and
mixtionibus, 1685. Drelincurt Praeludium Anat. -- Experimenta Anat. 1684. -- De
Foeminarum Ovis. -- De Conceptione Advers. 1685. -- De Hum, foetus membranis. P
685. Guiuri Arcanum Acidular. 1682. Glissoni Opuscula, 3 vol. Van Helmont.
Fundamenta Med. 1681: Hoffmanus de usu Lienis, etc. 1682: Harvey de Gener.
Animal. -- De motu cordis: Hoffman de Cinnabari Antimonii, 1685. Ab Here Fons
Spadanus and Observe. Med. 1685. Kirchim de Peste, 1681. Kirckring. in
BasilValent. currum Triumph. Kunckelii Observat. Chymiae, 1681: Le Mort
Compendium Chymicum, 1862. Muralti Vade mecum Anat. 1682. Mysteria
Physico-Medica, 1681. Maurocordatus de motu Pulmonum, 1682. Macasii
Promptuarium Materiae Med. Matthaei Experimenta Chymica, 1683. Muis Praxis
Chyrurgica duabus partibus, 1684. -- Decus quinta, 1685. Morelli Methodus
perscribendi formulas. Remedior. Primerose ars Pharmae. Pecket Anatomia. Redus
de Insectis. Reidlini Observe. med. Rivinus de peste lipsiensi, 1680. Riverii
Arcana. St. Romani Physica, 1684. Recuell de Curiositez, en Medicine, 1685.
Smitzii Compend. med. 1682. Stockhameri Micocosmographia. Severi in Synopsis
Chyrurgio. Schraderi Observationes, med. Schola Salernitana. Sponii Aphorismi
Hippoc. 1684. Swalve Quaerelae Ventriculi. -- Alcali and Acidum. Tilingius de
Renum structura, Verlae Anat. Oculi. Vigani Medulla Chymiae. Du Verney traite
de L'organe de L'ouvie, 1683. Tencke Instrumenta curat. morb, 1683. Wedelii
Theoremata Med. -- De Sale Volat. Plantarum.
Advertisement.
THat these before mentioned Books in Physic and Chemistry, with many other
Foreign Books, are sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Church yard; and that he will furnish himself with much variety of new Books in
that kind, from time to time, as they shall come from Franckfort Mart; and
likewise he can procure such other Books for Gentlemen, which perhaps are not
to be met with here, from his Correspondents, if to be had, beyond Sea.

Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel Smith.

THe Philosophical Transactions published by the Royal Society Monthly,
beginning January 1683:

Jo. Goedartius de Insectis in methodum redactus cum Notularum Additions Opera
M. Lister, item Appendicis ad Hist. Animalium Angliae, cum 21 Figuris Aeneis
illustrata, 1685.

Enquiry after Happiness by the Author of Practical Christianity, 1685.

The Duty of Servants, etc. by the same Author, 1685.

R. Boyl's Memoirs for the Not. History of Human Blood, especially the Spirit
of that Liquor, 1684. Price 2 s.

-- Experiments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies, in two Essays,
1684, Price 1 s. 6 d.

History of Mineral Waters, 1685. Price 1 s.

-- Of the Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines to the Corpuscular
Philosophy, with an Invitation to the use of Simple Medicines.

Tuta ac Efficax Luis Venerea, sepe absque mercurio ac semper absque Salvatione
mercuriali curandae Methodus Authore D.A.M.D. 1684.

De variatione, ac varietate pulsus observationes, accessit ejusdem Authors
nova Medicinae tum Speculativae, tum practicae clavis. Sive Ars Explorandi
medicas plantarum ac corporum quorumcumqne faultates ex Solo Sapore, 1685.

The whole Art of the Stage, etc. Translated out of French. In Quarto, 1684.
Price 5 s.

A New History of Ethiopia, being a full and Accurate Description of the
Kingdom of Abessinia, vulgarly, though erroneously, called the Empire of
Prester John, in four Books (illustrated with many Copper Plates) and also a
new and exact Map of the Country, and a Preface showing the usefulness of this
History, with the Life of Gregorius Abba, etc. By the Learned Job Ludolphus
Counceller to his Imperial Majesty and the Dukes of Saxony, and Treasurer to
His Highness, the Elector Palatine. In Fol. 1684 Price 12 s.

Guideon's Fleece, or a Vindication of the College of Physicians, in answer to
a Book entitled the Conclave of Physicians. By Dr. Harvey, in Quarto, 1684.
Pr. 6. di

An Anatomical account of an Elephant which was lately Dissected in Dublin,
June 17, in the year 1681. By A. M. Med. of Trinity College near Dublin,
illustrated with Cuts, in Quarto, 1682. Price 1. s. Swammerdami (Johan.) Amst,
M. D. Miraculum Naturae. In Octavo.

A Philosophical Account of the hard Frost, with what Effects it may probably
have upon Human Bodies, as to Health and Sickness, in Quarto. 2 d. Stitcht.

The true method of curing Consumptions. By S. H. Med. D. 1683. Price 1. s.

A Discourse about Bagnio's, and Mineral Baths, and of the drinking of Spaw
Water, with an Account of the Medicinal Virtues of them, and also showing the
usefulness of Sweating, Rubbing, and Bathing, and the great benefit many here
received from them in various Distempers. By S. H. Med. Doct. 1683.

Miracles, Works above and contrary to Naturer; or an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinosa's Tractatus Theologice-politicus, Mr. Hobs
Leviathan, etc. in Quarto, 1683. Price 1. s.

A Treatise of Self Examination, in order to the worthy receiving the Holy
Communion. By Monsieur John Claude Minister of the Reformed Church at Paris:
Translated from the French Original, in Twelves, 1683.

Protestancy to be Embraced; or a new and infallible Method to reduce Romanists
from Popery to Protestancy. 1683. pr. 1. s.

The Art of Divine Converse, being a New Years-Gift, directing how to walk with
God all the year long, in Twelves, pr. 6, d.

The Councils of Wisdom, or the Maxims of Solomon, in Twelves, 1683. pr. 1. s.

The Ten Pleasures of Marriage. In Twelves.

The Dutch Rogue: or Gusman of Amsterdam, traced from the Cradle to the
Gallows, 1683. In Twelves.

Dr. Thomas Smith's Sermon about frequent Communion, 1685.

Mr. Fish's Sermon on the 9th of May, 1684.

History of the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues, by the
Learned P. Simon, 1685.

Contra Hist. Aristeae de LXX Interpretibus dissertatio, five responsio ad D.
Isaac Vosfium de Septuaginta, etc. per H. Hoday A. M. 1685.

Epigramatum delectus ex omnibus tum veteribus tum recentioribus Poetis s
accurate decerptus, etc. cum dissertatione, de ver a pulchritudine and
adumbrata, in qua ex certis principiis, rejectionis at Selectionis Epigramatum
Causae reduntur. Adjectae sunt Elegantes Sententiae ex Antiquis Poetis parce,
sed severiori judicio selectae. 1685.

A Discourse about Toleration, wherein the late Pleas for it made by the D. of
B. and the nameless Author of the Considerations concerning Toleration are
fully answered, and the Popular Arguments drawn from the Practices of the
United Netherlands stated at large, and shown to be weak, fallacious and
insufficient; in Quarto, Pr. 1 s. 1685.

FINIS.

