Apostate Men fit Objects of Divine Care and Compassion. A SERMON Preached in
the Cathedral Church of St. PAVL, February the 6th, School/9.

Being the Second, for this Year, of the Lecture, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire;

By SAMUEL BRADFORD, M. A. Rector of St. Mary le Bow.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1699.

1 TIMOTHY I. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners, --


THESE Words are the more remarkable to our present purpose, because they were
written by one, who, as himself tells us, had been before a Blasphemer, Ver. 13.
and a Persecutor, and injurious; that is, he had bitterly inveighed against
the Christian Profession, and it is very probable had spoken ill of its divine
Author; it is certain he had vexed and persecuted the Disciples of Jesus in a
most grievous manner: and yet after all this was thoroughly convinced of the
Truth and Excellency of the Christian Revelation, and was not only so honest as
to own this his Conviction upon all occasions, but endeavored also to make
what reparation he could to the honor of our Lord, and his injured Disciples,
by a zealous preaching and promoting this Religion in the World.

Where by the way it may not be unseasonable to remark, that whatsoever
injuries he had done to our Lord, his Doctrine, or his Followers, had been the
Effect of Ignorance and Unbelief; nay, he verily thought with himself that he
ought to do what he did, Acts 26.9.
being strongly prejudiced from the Principles he had imbibed by his Education.
He was not a man that acted against the present Judgment and Conviction of his
own Mind: on the contrary, as he elsewhere tells the great Council of the Jews,
Acts 23.1.
he had lived in all good Conscience before God. His Conscience indeed had been
grossly misinformed, with respect to the matter of Christianity, and in that
respect not good; but what he means is, that he acted according to his then
present Persuasion; and therefore he says, he obtained Mercy; because he did it
ignorantly, Ver. 13.
in unbelief; which I take notice of partly as an Admonition to all of us, to
beware how we indulge any kind of Prejudices, whereby our Judgments may be
biased in our Inquiries after Truth; seeing this otherwise welldispos'd Man
was, merely from the force of Prejudices unwarily received, kept off from
embracing Christianity, nay put upon doing very unwarrantable and evil things:
but especially I mention this as a serious Warning to such, as shall in any
degree act against their Consciences, those who knowingly and wilfully allow
themselves in any Vice, presuming to contradict the plain Rules of Natural
Religion, even such as they cannot but allow to be so. Had St. Paul done thus
in his state of Judaism, we have reason to conclude, from what he says of
himself, that in all likelihood he had not obtained that Mercy, whereby he
became a Christian. But to proceed.

St. Paul being a Person, on whom God thought it fit to bestow a Miracle, to
conquer the Prejudices he lay under, and being by that means thoroughly convinced
of his former Error, and of the Truth of Christianity, he had from that time
forward a very warm sense of the Goodness and Mercy of God, both to himself in
particular, and to Sinners in general, in appointing this admirable Method for
our Salvation, which he expresses very emphatically in the words of my Text,
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save Sinners; of whom, says he, I am chief.

And were we all but as deeply sensible of the evil and danger of Sin, and of
the wretchedness of our state considered as Sinners, as our Apostle was, we
should have the very same apprehensions concerning the Salvation offered to us
by Jesus Christ, which he had.

This is a faithful saying, (...), it is a true saying, of which we have certain
and unquestionable Evidence of various kinds; and worthy of all acceptance,
(...), that is, it is not only evidently true; but it is moreover what we ought
to receive with all readiness and thankfulness, admiring and adoring the divine
Goodness therein expressed toward the Children of Men, and congratulating one
with another upon account of the Benefits we receive thereby, entertaining what
God has thus revealed to us with most grateful and joyful hearts. That Christ
Jesus came into the world, to save Sinners; This is the saying which the
Apostle so highly magnifies, and recommends to our acceptance, and which is the
sum of the Christian Revelation, that the only-begotten Son of God appeared
in Humane Nature, in order to the saving the apostate Children of Men; that is,
to the delivering them from the guilt and the power of their Sins, and the
confering upon them all that Happiness which their Nature is capable of.

My business in treating on this Argument will be, by God's assistance, to make
good this Assertion, by such Evidence as is fit to be offered to one who
antecedently believes the Being of God, and his Providence, and has his
internal sense exercised to discern Moral good and evil.

Now the Truth of this saying, and its Worthiness to be received by us must
appear, either by the intrinsic Evidence which it carries along with it, I
mean the Credibility of the thing it self: or the external Attestation which
has been given to it, both which are included in this Expression, Faithful,
and worthy of all acceptance. It Is highly worthy of God, and exceedingly
Beneficial to us his Creatures, and upon both accounts credible: it is also
sufficiently attested from without, which still increases its Credibility.

The Attestation it has received from without, viz. from Prophecies compared
with Events; from Miracles wrought in confirmation of it; from the surprising
success of its being published to the World, is of great use, both for the
exciting Men seriously to consider it, and the persuading them to believe it;
and that the rather, because it must be owned, that there are some particulars
within the compass of the Christian Revelation, and some circumstances
attending it, which we could not have thought of our selves, and which we are
not able fully to comprehend or to account for, even after they are in part
discovered; but must submit our Faith to the Declaration of Almighty God, as it
is very fit that a Creature should submit it self in all things to its Maker.
Besides that there may be some Doctrines which may thwart the commonly received
Prejudices of Mankind, and may therefore require something more than their mere
internal Evidence, at least at first, to awaken Men to a through and impartial
Consideration of them.

But yet forasmuch as I am verily persuaded, that God never did, and that he is
so Good, that he never will or can give any external Attestation to what
directly contradicts the Faculties he has given us by Nature, nay not to any
thing, but what if thoroughly and impartially considered will in the main appear
in its own nature reasonable and credible, I shall therefore begin with the
intrinsic Evidence of the Assertion in our Text, showing from the Nature and
Reason of what is here affirmed, that it is a credible Saying, every way worthy
of God, and very fit to be most readily entertained by us, that Christ Jesus
came into the World to save Sinners.

In doing this, the Text will lead me into a proper Method, by offering to our
Consideration these three general heads, viz.

Who the Persons are,





The last of these will take up a considerable part of my following Lectures,
wherein I shall endeavor to show the admirable contrivance and suitableness of
this Method of our Salvation. But as a foundation to this, I think it necessary
to discourse first of the other two, and that as briefly and plainly as I can.

I begin with the first, viz. to consider who the Persons are, whom Christ
Jesus came to save.

The Apostle calls them Sinners; that is in other words, They are Men,
Creatures composed of reasonable Souls, and Bodies of Flesh, who were formed
after the Image of God, and were innocent and upright as they came out of his
hands; but had apostatized from their Maker, violating their Allegiance to him,
and thereby disordering their Natures, and exposing themselves to the just
displeasure of God, with the miserable effects and consequences thereof. Now I
think it may very much conduce to our present Design, to show that these
Creatures were really fit Objects of that exceeding great Concern and
Tenderness expressed toward them by their Maker, through his Son Jesus Christ;
that considering their original Constitution, together with the manner and the
effect of their falling from it, it was highly becoming the good God thus to
appear in their behalf.

It must be acknowledged, and why should we be shy of owning it? Nay we
Christians justly glory in it, that the Method of our Salvation by the Gospel
is the most surprising thing that falls within the compass of humane thought.
It Is what, before its Revelation, Eye had not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9.
nor Ear heard, neither had it entered into the Heart of Man. It Is what the
Prophets, before our Lord's Incarnation, inquired and searched diligently into.
1 Pet. 1.12.
It Is what, since the Incarnation, the Angels themselves with great curiosity
and admiration desire earnestly to pry into. 1 Cor. 2.14.
It Is what the mere natural Man does not receive, and is not at all disposed to
know; nay what he is apt to account foolishness. It Is what even to the Saints,
or real Christians, has its breadth and length, and depth and height,
expressing and testifying a Love which passes knowledge. We may as often as we
think of it, Ephesians. 3.18, 19.
in a just sense of our infinite distance from God, well cry out with the
Psalmist. Lord! what is Man, Psalm. 8.4.
that thou art mindful of him; and the son of Man, that thou thus visitest him!
The truth is, there is nothing which at first view renders Christianity so
incredible, as the boundless and unconceivable Condescension and Love of God
expressed thereby.

But if on the other hand we take into Consideration, that the Goodness of God
is infinite, like his other Attributes; if we remember that his thoughts are
not our thoughts, nor our ways his ways: Isa. 55.8, 9.
but that, as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his ways higher
than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts; if we call to mind what he
himself has told us in his Word, and what our own Reason readily subscribes
to, Psalm. 103.13, 14.
that like as a Father pityeth his Children, so the Lord pityeth us his
Creatures; that he knows our frame, he remembereth that we are dust; if we
take in all that is proper to be thought of upon this Argument, both concerning
God and Man, we shall then be forced to acknowledge, that Sinners were a proper
Object of the Divine Care and Compassion in this extraordinary manner.

Let us therefore take a distinct view of the Persons to be saved by Jesus
Christ, both as they are Men, and as they are Sinners.

As they are Men.

It Is an unworthy thought of God, to suspect that he should disregard any thing
which he thought fit to make. The giving Being to Creatures was without all
doubt the effect of his mere Bounty, because he is Good, and takes pleasure in
doing Good; and the very same motive which induced him to make any Creature,
must in all Reason be supposed to prevail with him, to take care of it
according to the Nature he has given it.

Now of all the Creatures in this lower World, there are none that pretend to
vye with Man, for excellency and dignity of Nature: nay if we consider Humane
Nature thoroughly, we shall find it endued with such Faculties, as that we cannot
conceive there are any Creatures more excellent in kind, though in degree there
may, in the Regions above.

Men have Bodies indeed formed out of the Dust of the Earth, like the other
Animals that dwell upon Earth, though in Shape and Portraiture more noble much
than any of them: Psalm. 8.5.
but with respect to their Souls, they are made a little lower than the Angels,
being created in the Image, Genesis 1.26.
and after the likeness of God, as Moses expresses it. And of this we may be
satisfied, besides the Testimony of Moses and the Psalmist, by viewing our
selves, and observing the present Ruins of a once more stately Fabric.

The Resemblance of our Maker appears evidently in our Natural Faculties, and
much more in our Moral. Our Souls are invisible indeed, but evidently manifest
their Being by their various Operations. They inhabit these Bodies in such
manner, as to influence and govern every part of them. They do at pleasure move
each Joint and Limb, nay the whole Body at once, without difficulty, in a
moment, and by the power of a single thought. They not only manage the
Tabernacles they dwell in, but by their means also have communication with a
world of Beings without them. By the mediation of the Senses they take in
continual Notices from all the material Objects within a certain Sphere. They
see, and hear, and feel whatsoever makes a near approach to them, nay they
reach to things at a vast distance from them. They do not confine their
Observations to the Earth and Air; but view at once the vast circumference of
the Heavens, and pry into the Bodies that are placed in those distant Regions.
They not only receive and take in Notices by the mediation of the Senses; but
form Ideas of their own of various kinds, inventing, compounding, dividing,
either according to the nature of things, or at their own pleasure. They can
reflect upon what is past, nay recollect what they have forgot, and foresee
things yet to come. They can stretch and extend their thoughts till they are
quite lost in the oceans of Immensity and Eternity. They acquaint themselves
not only with the material part of the World, but the immaterial also. From
contemplating themselves, they enlarge their thoughts to other Beings of the
same kind. They discern the Spirits of other Men through the veil of their
Bodies, and find out and contemplate an unknown and innumerable number of
Spiritual Natures, till at last they ascend to God himself, that infinite
Spirit, who was the Maker and is the Preserver of all.

And here we are arrived at the top of their knowledge. Not that the Souls of
Men are able to comprehend the Nature of that first and most excellent Being;
but they can make such discoveries of his Divine Perfections, as will naturally
produce in them an high Admiration, a profound Reverence, and an ardent Love
toward the Deity, and will incline and dispose them to adore and serve him, to
resign themselves to him, and to yield a ready obedience to his Commands.

And what those Commands are, the Soul is in some measure also capacitated to
discern, infering its Duty from the consideration of its own nature, and the
relation it stands in to God, and to its fellow creatures.

And, which is yet an higher Perfection than mere Knowledge, the Souls of Men
can perceive the Will of God, and consequently their own Duty, from certain
secret inclinations and propensions which they feel within themselves, and of
which they are apprehensive even in this degenerate state. That natural regard
to God, and looking toward him upon all Emergencies, that approbation of
Justice and Kindness between Man and Man, especially that gratitude for
benefits received, and unavoidable commiseration toward miserable Objects,
which are to be found in most Men, not debauched in a more than common degree,
are plain and undeniable Instances of this kind, which will not be controverted
by those to whom I am offering these Considerations, and for which I may be
allowed to appeal to the far greater part of Mankind. And I question not, but
the like might be observed, as to most other plain and considerable instances
of Moral Virtue. For which reason it is, that the Consciences of Men do so
naturally and universally either accuse or excuse them, according as they
contradict or comply with, not barely the reasonings, but the natural
apprehensions and inclinations of their Minds.

And this indeed I take to be the Perfection of the Humane Soul, as it came out
of the hands of God, that it had a capacity not only of knowing God, and it
self, and of inferring its Duty by exercising its Reason: but that it was also
made to resemble the Divine Nature in its inclinations and propensions to all
that is good; which inclinations and propensions, had they been cherished and
improved, as they might and ought to have been, would have fully discovered the
dignity of Humane Nature, and made Men to have appeared, what God by their make
designed them to be.

There is yet one Ability more, with which the Humane Soul is endued, not to be
past over, when we are considering the excellency of its Nature, and that is
Freedom or Liberty of choosing, and a Power consequently of acting according to
such choice, without which its Liberty would have been given to it in vain.

But shall I call this a Perfection, or an Imperfection?

As it is a Power of freely choosing that which is good, and as freely pursuing
that choice, it must be thankfully acknowledged to the praise of our bountiful
Creator, that it is a Perfection, even whereby we are made to resemble God
himself, who always freely chooses and acts according to the eternal and
immutable Laws of Goodness. It Is a Talent of great worth, with which Mankind is
entrusted, and which may be improved to very great advantage. It gives us an
Ability of offering to God a free will Offering, of voluntarily doing that
which is acceptable to, and rewardable by our Maker. It Is that which indeed
makes us, strictly speaking, capable of a Reward.

But then as Men can at the same time choose that which is Evil, and pursue the
unhappy choice, it must be owned to be an Imperfection; but such an one as
seems necessarily to result from the condition of a Creature. Absolute
Perfection belongs to God only; his Nature is too good ever to choose or act
amiss: but the condition of a Creature is to be defectible of its self; so that
if it be made capable of choosing aright, it must at the same time also be
capable of choosing wrong. Liberty implies a Power to determine its choice one
way or the other; and there is no such absolute Perfection in a Creature, as
can always necessarily oblige it to determine it self the right way. Experience
and Use may produce strong and confirmed Habits of Virtue; and the Grace of God
may at any time put a Creature out of all Danger: but I cannot see, how it is
possible to frame an Idea of a created Agent left at Liberty, but it must at
the same time be fallible and mutable. But this may suffice to show the dignity
of the Humane Soul with respect to its Liberty, that it is made capable of
choosing and acting freely by the same Rules by which God himself chooses and
acts.

And had Men always acted, according to the design of their Beings, the
excellency of their Nature would have plainly appeared in a whole world of
intelligent and reasonable Agents, exercising all the Faculties
beforementioned regularly and orderly; acknowledging, adoring, magnifying, and
serving their Maker; admiring his wonderful Works, and rendering to him with
one consent the Praises due upon the account of them; living in perfect Amity
one with another; discharging readily all the Offices of Beneficence;
performing and enjoying all the Benefits and Pleasures of mutual Society; and
deriving from Heaven all those Blessings which would have rendered their abode
here perfectly easy and comfortable; and if God should have thought it fit to
have translated them to any superior Regions, as a reward of their Obedience
here, they would there also have spent a happy Eternity, in the Enjoyment of
their Maker, themselves, and one another.

I mention their translation to some other Regions, because all those Powers of
Soul which I have been discoursing of, imply nothing but what is immaterial and
spiritual, and consequently immortal; and if Men had used their Liberty aright
in this state of trial, it is not to be conceived, that God would have
permitted the corruption of the Body; but rather have preserved for ever that
Union which himself had given to the two constitutive parts of Humane Nature,
and have assigned them such places of residence as might have been fit for Men
improved and confirmed in Virtue and Goodness.

What I have hitherto been discoursing concerning the Nature of Mankind,
appears to me in it self highly reasonable, and I think will do so upon serious
consideration, to such a Deist as I am arguing with: and if so; I would then
proceed to ask, whether such Creatures as these are not fit Objects of the
Divine Care; and if they are fallen, of the Divine Compassion also, supposing
any of them capable of a Recovery from their lapsed Estate? Will it not appear
very worthy of the infinitely good God, to concern himself in some
extraordinary way, for the restoration and salvation of Beings, whom he had
formed after this excellent manner, to whom he had imparted so many of his own
Perfections in such a degree, and whom he had made capable of being for ever
happy in his Favor?

But for the farther illustration of this matter, Sinners, as our Text calls
them, and see whether under that denomination also, they are not proper Objects
of the Divine Compassion, even in such a degree as it is expressed by the
undertaking of our Redeemer.

The Method of our Salvation by Jesus Christ is so contrived (as I hope to show
hereafter) as not only to testify the Compassion of God toward Sinners; but
also his Hatred of Sin: To make it appear therefore that such a Method was
agreeable to the Divine Nature, we shall do well to consider the condition of
Men, as Sinners; to which purpose it may be proper,









I doubt not but those, who undervalue our blessed Savior's Undertaking for
the recovery of Sinners, have at the same time very slight apprehensions of the
evil of Sin. They are apt to account it a matter of no great consideration or
consequence, for so inconsiderable a Creature as they would have Man to be, to
gratify (suppose) the inclinations of his fleshly part, though against the
Dictates of his Mind, and the Laws of his Maker. But this proceeds from their
want of a due sense of the nature and reason of things.

For to sin against God, is for a Creature to rebel against his Creator and
Preserver; it is to oppose his Will to the Will of the supreme Lord and
Sovereign of the Universe; it is to disturb that excellent Order, which is
appointed and settled by him who made all things very good; it is for a Man to
assume to himself a Liberty of doing that which God will not allow himself to
do, namely to vary from the eternal and unalterable Laws of Truth and Goodness,
those Laws which result necessarily from the Nature of God, and the condition
of created Beings; it is resisting the highest Power; contradicting unerring
Wisdom; disobliging infinite Goodness; making disingenuous and ungrateful
Returns to the most endearing Obligations; it is in a word thwarting the true
judgment and perverting the natural bias of a Man's own Mind, and acting
contrary to the very frame and design of his Nature.

Now whatsoever is absurd or monstrous in Nature, we are apt to conceive an
abhorrence at the first appearance of it: and whosoever is endued with Moral
Principles ought in like manner to feel a detestation arising in his Soul, when
he considers the nature of Sin, as I have here represented it.

Does not every ingenuous and well-disposed Mind severely censure and detest
the untoward behavior of a graceless Child toward a wise and tender Parent?
The unworthy carriage of a rebellious Subject, toward a just and kind Prince,
one who is truly the Father of his Country? Especially when the Rebel not only
dishonours his Superiors, but at the same time disturbs the Peace and good
Order of the whole Community? Do not all Men of good sense and honest
disposition abhor him who shall make spightful or ungrateful returns to a
Benefactor, or a Friend, to whom he has been extremely beholden? Who is there
that does not despise the Man that degrades and vilifies himself, by doing
things altogether unworthy of his Birth, and Education, or Profession?

Why all this, and infinitely more is in the nature of a Sin voluntarily
committed against Almighty God.

And is it not credible then, that so holy and good a Being as God is, should
be inclined to save such of his Creatures as are capable of Salvation, from so
great an Evil? and that he should effect it in such a way, as may convince them
at once both of his compassion toward them, and his abhorrence of their evil
doings?



The state of every particular Sinner is extremely miserable. A Man has no
sooner consented to Iniquity, but he is naturally filled with great uneasiness
of Mind, arising from Shame and Fear, from a consciousness of having done an
unworthy act, and an apprehension of the Mischiefs that may follow.

The very first Act is a mighty Disorder, as being an abuse of that Liberty
with which he was entrusted, and a contradiction to that natural inclination
with which he was endued by his Maker.

By this means the tone of his Spirit is (as it were) immediately relaxd; the
Will corrupted; the natural propension of the Soul toward God and Goodness
weakened, and a contrary disposition perhaps introduced; the Appetites and
Passions, which were made to be ruled, having once broke loose from the
Government they were placed under, are apt thence-forward to become impetuous
and arbitrary; the Understanding having been once mislead or over ruled, is for
the future less able to discern clearly, or to judge Impartially; in a word,
Innocence and Integrity are lost.

Every repeated Act strengthens the evil Habit, and increases the disorder
which is thus unhappily begun in all the Faculties.

If the Man continues to be a Sinner only in a lower degree, he will find a
perpetual struggle and conflict within his breast, his Understanding, and
Reason, and Conscience directing and leading him one way, whilst his Appetites
and Passions hurry him the other, Romans 7.23.
the Law in his Members warring against the Law in his Mind, and for the most
part bringing him into Captivity; he neither approving what he does, nor
finding himself at all disposed to do what he approves; wretched Man that he is!

And if he be grown a hardened Sinner, he is still the more wretched, because
more incurable; though at the same time less sensible of his evil condition.

And all this while he is exceedingly estranged and alienated from God, the
Author of his Being, and the Fountain of all Good; he is ashamed and afraid to
approach to him, upon whom he entirely depends, or to address himself to him
whose aid he stands in need of every moment; he is conscious of having given
him offense, and therefore justly apprehends his displeasure.

This is livelily represented by Moses, in the case of our first Parents, Genesis
3.8, 9, 10.
who immediately upon their disobeying the Command of God, hid themselves from
his face, being ashamed and afraid to see or hear of him, whom just before they
had conversed with to their great satisfaction and comfort. And every Sinner,
that is not past feeling, may find something very like this within himself.

This is the natural state of Sin; besides the consequences which may also
follow from the displeasure of Almighty God, who, we see, even in this World
has made us sensible of his displeasure, by the many Evils we are necessarily
exposed to, during a short Life, such as Disappointments, Wants, Sickness,
Pain, Sorrows and Miseries of various kinds; and at last Death it self, with
the very fear of which most Men are all their life time subject to bondage. All
these Evils the Scriptures assure us are the results of Sin; and even without
Revelation, upon the mere Principles of Morality, I cannot see how we can judge
otherwise.

And besides all this, the Soul (as I took notice before) being apprehensive of
its own Spiritual and Immortal Nature, cannot but forebode the perpetual
continuance of its present infelicity, with the addition of it knows not what
Evils in some future state of things, the very forethought of which must be
very terrible to it even in this Life.

And if we can observe so much Misery in the condition of a particular Sinner,
how much more shall we discover, if we enlarge our thoughts to the whole mass
of Mankind?

If we might be allowed to take our view from the History of Moses, it would
give us a very melancholy prospect. The very first Man that was born into the
World fell into no less a Crime, than that of imbruing his hands in the blood
of his innocent Brother. Genesis 4.8.
From that time forward Wickedness of all sorts increased apace, till it seemed
good to Almighty God to cut off at once the whole race of Mankind, excepting
Noah and his Family, declaring this as the reason of his severe proceeding,
that God saw, that the wickedness of Man was great in the Earth, Genesis 6.5.
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually.

In the sequel of that History we find that soon after the Flood, the World was
again corrupted in a prodigious manner, in so much that in the time of Abraham,
within little more than Four Hundred Years, Idolatry had spread it self so
universally, as to have infected even the Family of Shem, so that God thought
fit to call forth Abraham from his Country and his Kindred, in order to the
preserving him and his Posterity in the Worship of the one true God, the Maker
of Heaven and Earth. And if Idolatry had thus prevailed, we may conclude that
other Crimes were no less rife; forsaking of God being the foundation of all
other Evil.

If, laying aside the History of Moses, we should consider the state of
Mankind, according to all other accounts given of it, it will still come to the
same issue, namely that the generality of Men were soon degenerated into the
most unreasonable and unnatural practices that can be thought of.

The representation which St. Paul makes of the Pagan World, was undoubtedly
true, Romans 1.21,
that they were become vain in their imaginations, having their foolish hearts
darkened; they had changed the glory of the uncorruptible God, into images made
like to corruptible Man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things. Nay, which is yet more to be detested, they paid their religious
Adorations to Devils themselves; for, as St. Paul truly pronounces, 1 Cor.
10.20.
the things which the Gentiles sacrificed, they sacrificed to Devils, and not
to God. The Prince of the power of the Air, with all his accursed attendants,
had assumed the Title and Style of Gods, and so far tyrannized over the
Children of Men, as to reduce them to a slavish dread, and vile Worship of
these wicked and infernal Spirits. And what after this could be expected, but
that as we are again told in the place before-cited, they should fall into the
most unnatural and brutal Lusts also? For this cause, says he, Romans 1.26.
namely their having thus forsaken God, he gave them up to vile affections,
etc. We cannot better describe them, than in the elegant Expressions of the
same Apostle; Ephesians. 4.17, 18,
They walked in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened,
being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them,
because of the blindness of their heart; as he elsewhere says, Tit. 3.3.
foolish, disobedient, deceived; not only serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
but moreover, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another. This
was the state of the Pagan World, when our Savior appeared in it.

There were indeed some few to be found, even in the midst of all this
Corruption, who had not forsaken God, and degenerated into Vice, in so heinous
a degree; the Principles of natural Religion having in some measure prevailed
with them: but these were very rarely to be met with.

There was, it is true, a small Body of Men, the Jews I mean, whom God had by an
extraordinary Providence taken out of the mass of Mankind, in order to instruct
and educate them in better manner. But even these were very hardly kept to the
observance of those Laws which God had given them. They easily and frequently
degenerated into Idolatry, and the other evil practices of their Neighbors;
and when after a tedious Captivity they were at last cured of their Idolatry,
yet after all they generally attained to but very mean apprehensions either of
God, or of the nature of Religion; they contented themselves for the most part
with the observance of the ritual part of their Law, whilst the two great
Commandments both of their Law, and of all true Religion, the Love of God and
their Neighbor, were grossly neglected by them; in so much that when our
Savior appeared amongst them, he found the greater part of them as indisposed
to receive him and his Doctrine, as the Gentiles themselves were.

It Is true, God had not left Mankind, not the rest of the World, much less the
Jews, without various means proper for the preserving of them from these
Corruptions. He taught all Men diverse ways, as I showed in my former Discourse,
though they did not hear and learn of him. But this was still an aggravation of
their Misery, that all the Methods of Divine Providence for their good had been
frustrated and rendered ineffectual by them.

And was not this a deplorable state, and such as might well move a God of
infinite Goodness to find out and appoint some more effectual Method, for the
recovery of this his ruined Creation? Could he, do we think, look on, and
behold the great Enemy both of himself and his Creation, thus insulting and
triumphing; the most excellent Creature he had in this lower Region thus abused
and spoiled; and as the consequence thereof the whole inferior Creation in
disorder and confusion; and not interpose in some extraordinary and surprising
manner? But this will still appear more becoming the Divine Nature, if we
enquire, in the last place,



The case, as represented by Moses, which is what the Christian Revelation
takes for granted, was certainly very compassionable. That our first Parents
were set upon, whilst they were as yet unexperienced, by a subtle and malicious
Enemy, who made his attacks first upon the weaker Sex, and by her prevailed
upon the Man, inveigling them by a sly and false Suggestion, artificially
represented, making use of their sensitive Powers to bafflle their
intellectual, imposing upon their Understandings by craft and confidence, and
persuading them on a sudden, without consulting either God or their own Reason,
to do a rash and dangerous Act, by which they exposed both themselves and their
Posterity to all the evil consequences, which either naturally or judicially
followed.

But waving this (though without considering it as a Divine Revelation, it is
most reasonable to suppose that the general Corruption of Humane Nature began
in some such way) waving this I say, and taking Humane Nature as it appears,
the circumstances of Sinners will still seem very compassionable.

For although Man was without Question made upright, yet being endued with
Liberty, he must at the very best, (as I before observed) be fallible and
mutable. His immaterial Spirit is joined to a Body of Flesh, and placed in the
midst of abundance of sensible Objects, that it may be capable of a Trial; and
though it might have many advantages in its incorrupt state, which at present
it wants, yet still it was liable to be imposed upon and drawn in.

Those who first sinned may very well be supposed to have done it, before their
good Habits were confirmed by Experience and Use, and that consequently there
was somewhat of surprise, as well as some degree of inconsiderateness and
rashness in the action. And those who have since grown up, (as all but our
first Parents must have done from a state of infancy, are still in harder
circumstances. Their Bodily Tempers, which have a great influence upon the
Mind, can be no better than what their Parents could communicate. Their Senses
are for many years busily exercised, before their Reason is thoroughly awake.
They are surrounded with all manner of Temptations; and they see abundance of
dangerous Examples in a degenerate World. They are for a long time weak and
unexperienced; and many of them over and above betrayed by an untoward or a
careless Education.

It Is true, not one of all these Considerations will excuse the Sinner, and
that for this plain Reason; because the first Sinner, whosever he was, being
supposed to be made upright, it is not to be conceived he could have fallen, but
by neglecting to depend upon his Maker, and apply himself to him. For an
intellectual Creature not to depend upon God, and apply it self to him upon all
occasions, is an inexcusable fault; and had those who first consented to
Iniquity done but thus much, it is very reasonable to believe, that the God who
made them, would have afforded them his assistance. Nay (as I hope to show in
the progress of these Discourses) even now, under all the disadvantages we are
born into the World and brought up with, God has made such provision through
Jesus Christ, that nothing but a wilful and unaccountable neglect of God can
ruin us. Here began the Apostasy and the Misery of Mankind, and in the same way
they are still continued, viz. in Men's neglecting to depend upon and look up to
that God who never forsakes any of his Creatures, till they first forsake him.
So that what I have alleged under this last head, does not excuse the Sinner:
but yet (which is what I alleged it for) it renders his case exceedingly
compassionable to a God of infinite Goodness and Mercy.

The sum of all I have said upon this Argument is, that this is a credible
saying, that Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners. For if Sinners
be such Creatures as I have represented them, both before and since their
Apostasy, it cannot but be credible, that he who made them should appoint some
way for their Recovery. And though we could not be fully assured of this
without a Revelation, much less could have thought of the Method which it has
pleased God to take; yet as we might naturally hope, that God would extend his
compassion to us; so we have all the reason in the World readily to accept a
Revelation which assures us, that God has done it.

What the Way and Method of our Salvation is, our Text tells us, and this will
fall under Consideration in my following Discourses.

I am sensible there is one Objection, which, upon hearing the present
Discourse may arise in the Minds of Men who think seriously, and are not
disposed to cavil, viz. If the case of Humane Nature be so deplorable and
compassionable, how comes it to pass, that so small a part of Mankind have
received benefit even from the Christian Revelation? This Difficulty I would
have considered in this Lecture, if there had been room for it; but being
prevented, I shall not forget it; but assign it some fit place, if God please,
before my Lectures are finished, intending in my next, to proceed in
considering the nature of that Salvation, which our Savior has wrought out
for us, and the manner in which he has done it, whereby the Credibility of
this saying in the Text may yet farther appear.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
FOrty Nine Sermons on the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Colossians,
by Monsieur Daille, Minister of the Reformed Church in Paris. Folio.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love in Two Parts. By Mr. Richard Baxter, Quarto.

The Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide. Octavo.

An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism, in which the
Lawfulness is demonstrated, Objections answered, Usefulness asserted, the
Sinfulness of Re-baptizing manifested, Nonnecessity of Dipping evidenced, and
the Practical Use of Infant Baptism Urged and Enforced. Both by William
Burkitt, M. A. of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge; now Vicar of Dedham in Essex.
Octavo.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects. By the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.
Folio.

A Discourse concerning Meekness and Quietness of Spirit; to which is added, a
Sermon on Acts 28.22. showing that the Christian Religion is not a Sect. By
Mat. Henry. Octavo.

Mr. John Howe's John Spademan's Mat. Sylvester's Dan. Chadwick's John
Whitlock's John Barret's
Sermons concerning Reformation of Manners.

Mr. Bradford's Sermon preached before the King, Jan. 30th, School/9.

Theological Discourses, in Two Parts: The first containing Eight Letters and
Three Sermons concerning the Blessed Trinity: The second, Discourses and
Sermons on several Occasions. By John Wallis, D. D. Professor of Geometry in
Oxford. 40.

A Calm and Sober Inquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead, in a Letter to a Person of Worth: With certain Letters formerly
written to the Reverend Dr. Wallis on the same Subject.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity; relating to the Calm and Sober Inquiry on the
same Subject.

A View of that part of the late Considerations addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity; which concerns the Sober Inquiry on that Subject. All three by Mr.
John How. Octavo.

An Account of the Blessed Trinity, argued stom the Nature and Perfection of
the Supreme Spirit, coincident with the Scripture Doctrine in all the Articles
of the Catholic Creed. By W. Borough, Rector of Chenis in Bucks. Quarto.

Convivium Caeleste: A Plain and Familiar Discourse concerning the Lord's
Supper. The second Edition with Additions.

A Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, Nov. 9. 1692. Both by Richard
Lord Bishop of Bath and Wells.


