OF THE High Veneration MAN'S INTELLECT OWES TO GOD; Peculiarly for His Wisdom
and Power.

By a Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by M. F. for Richard Davis, Bookseller in Oxford. 1685.



Advertisements.
THe abrupt beginning of the following Paper will not ('it is hoped) be wondered
at, when it is declared, that the whole Excursion is to be looked upon as a
Fragment of a Discourse, from which, for certain Reasons, it has been separated
in its present Form. In which it ought to pass but for a rough Draught, the
Nobleness, Sublimity and Sacredness of the Subject, not allowing the Author to
presume, that the first thoughts he committed to Paper about it, might be for
good and all parted with by him, till he shall have heedfully revised and
corrected them; and left in them as few faults, as the disproportion of so vast
and sublime a Subject to his slender abilities, will permit. The loose sheets
this Paper consists of, having been written at somewhat distant times and
places, and hastily tacked together; so that when the latter sheets were
penning the former were often not at hand: it is hoped that if some few things
should chance to be either misplaced or repeated, the fault will be thought
venial, and be more easily excused than it could in the Author's Circumstances
be avoided. And lastly; notice is to be given, that those other long Passages
that are included in Such figures as these. [ ].
Paratheses, may with the Author's consent (or rather by his desire) be skip'd
over; being but Conjectural thoughts, written and inserted for the sake of a
Virtuoso, that is a great Friend to such kind of adventurous speculations.

OF THE High Veneration Man's Intellect owes to GOD.
1. UPON this Occasion I shall take leave to declare, that it is not without
some Indignation, as well as Wonder, that I see many men, and some of them
Divines too, who little considering what God is, and what themselves are,
presume to talk of Him and his Attributes as freely and as unpremeditately, as
if they were talking of a Geometrical Figure, or a Mechanical Engine. So that
even the less Presumptuous discourse, as if the Nature and Perfections of that
unparalleled Being, were Objects that their Intellects can grasp; and scruple
not to dogmatize about those Abstruse Subjects, as freely as about other
things, that are confessedly within the reach of humane Reason, or perhaps are
to be found among the more familiar Objects of Sense.

2. The presumption and inconsiderateness of these men might be manifested by
diverse Considerations, if I had Leisure to insist on them; but at present I
shall employ but these two; 1. That it is probable God may have diverse
Attributes, and consequently Perfections, that are as yet unknown to us; and
2ly, That of those Attributes that we have already some Knowledge of, there are
Effects and Properties whose Sublimity or Abstruseness surpassing our
Comprehension, makes the Divine Cause or Atuhour of them deserve our Highest
Wonder and Veneration.

3. To begin with the first of these; whereas there are two chief ways to
arrive at the Knowledge of God's Attributes; The Contemplation of his Works,
and the study of his Word; I think it may be doubted whether either or both of
these, will suffice to acquaint us with all his Perfections.

4. For, first, though Philosophers have rationally deduced, the Power, Wisdom
and Goodness of God from those Impresses of them that he has stamped upon
diverse of his Visible Works; yet since the Divine Attributes which the
Creatures point at, are those whereof themselves have some, though but
imperfect, participation, or resemblance: And since the Foecundity (if I may so
speak) of the Divine Nature is such, that its Excellencies may be participated
or represented in I know not how many ways; how can we be sure that so perfect
and exuberant a Being may not have Excellencies, that it has not expressed or
adumbrated in the Visible World, or any parts of it that are known to us?

5. This will be the more easily granted if we consider, that there are some of
those Divine Attributes we do know; which being Relative to the Creatures,
could scarce, if at all, be discovered by such imperfect Intellects as ours,
save by the consideration of some things actually done by God. As, supposing
that just before the Foundations of the visible World were laid, the Angels
were not more knowing than men now are, they could scarce think that there was
in God a Power of Creating Matter (which few, if any at all of the
Peripateticks, Epicureans, to omit others of the Ancient Philosophers, seem
ever to have dreamt of) and of producing in it Local Motion, especially
considering the puzzleing difficulties that attend the Conception of the very
Nature and Being of the one, and of the other. And much less (as far as we can
conjecture) could the Angels spoken of, have known how the rational Soul and
Humane Body act upon one another. Whence it seems probable, that if God have
made other Worlds, or rather Vortices, than that which we live in, and are
surrounded by, (as who can assure us that he has not?) he may have displayed
in some of the Creatures that compose them, diverse Attributes that we have not
discovered by the help of those Works of his that we are acquainted with. But
of this more hereafter.

6. I readily grant, (that I may proceed now to the second Help to acquire the
Knowledge of the Divine Attributes) that the Revelations God has vouchsafed us
in the Holy Scripture (which we owe to that Spirit which searches all things
even (...), 1 Cor. II. 10.
the Depths of God) have clearly taught us diverse things concerning their
adorable Author, which the mere Light of Nature either would not have shown us
at all, or would have but very dimly discovered to us. But the Scripture tells
us indeed, that the Promulgators of the Gospel declared to men the Act. XX. 27.
whole Counsel of God (as far as was necessary for their Salvation) but never
says, that they disclosed to them, the whole Nature of God; who 1 Timothy VI. 16.
is said to inhabit an unapproachable Light, which humane Speculations cannot
penetrate. Upon which score perhaps it was, that the Jews would have the proper
Name of God to be Ineffable, to signify, that his Nature is Incomprehensible.
And, though I will not adopt their Opinion, yet I cannot but take notice, that
it is at least no mere Talmudical Tradition, since we find not, that either our
Savior himself, or his Apostles (who are introduced so frequently making
mention of God in the New Testament) expressed in speaking either to him, or of
him, the Nomen Tetragrammaton (or four-letter'd name!) But not to insist on
Conjectures; the Scripture it self that brings so much Light to things Divine,
that the Gospel is called Light in the Abstract, the Scripture, I say, informs
us, that in this Life we know but in part, and see things but darkly 1 Cor.
XIII. 12.
as in a Glass; and that we are so far from being able to find out God to Job
XI. 7.
perfection, as to his Nature and Attributes, that even the ways of his Romans
XI. 33.
Providence are to us untraceable.

7. These are some of the Considerations that inclined me to think that God may
have Attributes that are not known to us. And this Opinion perhaps will appear
the more allowable, because of what I am going to add in answer to a weighty
Objection. For I know it may be alleged, that besides the two ways I have
mentioned of attaining to the knowledge of God's Attributes, there may be a
third way preferable to both the others, and that is, by considering the Idea
of a Being supremely or Infintiely perfect; in which Idea it may be alleged,
that all possible Perfections are contained; so that no new one can be added to
it. But though I readily grant, that this Idea is the most genuine that I am
able to frame of the Deity; yet there may be diverse Attributes which though
they are indeed in a general way contained in this Idea, are not in particular
discovered to us by it. It Is true that when, by any means whatsoever, any
Divine Perfection comes to our Knowledge, we may well conclude, that it is in a
sense comprised in the comprehensive Notion we have of a Being absolutely
perfect; but it is possible that That Perfection would never have come to our
knowledge, by the bare contemplation of that general Idea, but was suggested by
Particularities; so that such Discoveries are not so much derived from, as
referred to, the Notion we are speaking of.

The past Considerations have, I presume, persuaded you, that God may have, as
diverse Attributes, so diverse Excellencies and Perfections, that are not known
to us. It will therefore now be seasonable to Endeavor to show you, that of
diverse of the Attributes we do know that he has, we men have but an imperfect
knowledge; especially in comparison of that He has of them. Which is not to be
wondered at: since he possesses them in a manner or a degree peculiar to
himself, and far transcending that wherein we men possess them, or rather some
saint resemblances of them.

It would be very unsuitable to my intended Brevity, and more disproportionate
to my small abilities, to attempt the making this Good by insisting
particularly on all the divine Excellencies that we are in some measure
acquainted with. I therefore hope it may suffice to instance in a couple of the
most known ones; God's Power, and his Wisdom. Which two I pitch upon, as being
those that men are wont to look on as the Principal, and for which they have
the greatest admiration and respect, because we are not able to confer them on
our selves; as we think we can diverse other Virtues and Perfections. For every
man easily believes that he may be as Chaste, as Temperate, as Just, and in a
word, as Good, as he pleases; those Virtues depending on his own will; but he
is sensible that he cannot be as Knowing, as Wise, and as Powerful, as he
would. And thence he not Irrationally concludes, that Power and Wisdom slow
from, and Argue, an Excellency and Superiority of Nature or Condition. The
Power and Wisdom of God display themselves by what he does in reference both
to his Corporeal, and his Incorporeal Creatures.

Among the manifold effects of the Divine Power, my intended Brevity will allow
me to mention only two or three, which, though to discerning eyes they be very
manifest, are not wont to be very attentively reflected on. The Immense
Quantity of Corporeal Substance that the Divine Power provided for the framing
of the Universe; and the great force of the Local Motion that was imparted to
it, and is regulated in it.

And first; the vastness of that huge Mass of matter that the Corporeal World
consists of, cannot but appear stupendous to those that skilfully contemplate
it. That part of the Universe which has been already discovered by Humane eyes,
assisted with dioptrical Glasses, is almost unconceiveably Vast: as will be
easily granted, if we assent to what the best Astronomers, as well Modern as
Ancient, scruple not to deliver. The sixth Stars of the first Magnitude, that to
vulgar eyes look but like shining Spangles, are by Artists affirmed to exceed,
each of them, above a hundred times in bigness the whole Globe of the Earth:
and as little as these twinkling Stars appear to our naked eyes, they do (which
probably you will think strange) appear much lesser through our Telescopes;
which taking off those false lights that make them look to our maimed Sight as
they are wont to be painted, show them little otherwise than as speeks or
Physical points of light. And the Sun, which is granted to be some millions of
miles nearer to us than the other sixth Stars are, though it seem at this lesser
distance not to be half a foot broad; is by the generality of Mathematicians
believed to be above a hundred and threescore times bigger than the Earth. Nay,
according to the more recent calculations of some more accurate Modern Artists,
it is estimated to be eight or ten thousand times as big as the Terraqueous
Globe, and by farther Observation may perhaps be found yet much vaster. And it
plainly appears by the Parallaxes and other proofs, that this Globe of Earth
and Water that we Inhabit, and often call the World; though it be divided into
so many great Empires, and Kingdoms, and Seas, and though according to the
received Opinion it be 5400 German leagues in Circuit, and consequently contain
10, 882, 080, 000. Cubick miles in solid measure, and according to the more
modern observations have a greater Circumference (amounting to above 26000
miles:) yet this Globe, I say, is so far from being for its bulk, a
considerable part of the Universe, that without much Hyperbole we may say that
it is in comparison thereof but a Physical point. Nay those far greater Globes,
of the Sun and other fixed Stars, and all the solid masses of the World to boot,
if they were reduced into one, would perhaps bear a less proportion to the
fluid part of the Universe, than a Nut to the Ocean. Which brings into my mind
the sentence of an Excellent modern Astronomer, that the Stars of the Sky, if
they were crowded into one Body and placed where the Earth is, would, if that
Globe were placed at a fit distance, appear to us no bigger than a Star of the
first Magnitude now does. And after all this I must remind you, that I have
been hitherto speaking but of that part of the Corporeal Universe that has been
already seen by us. And therefore I must add that as vast as this is, yet all
that the eye, even when powerfully promoted by prospective Tubes, has
discovered to us, is far from representing the World of so great an Extent, as
I doubt not but more perfect Telescopes hereafter will do. And even then the
visible part of the World will be far enough from reaching to the bounds of the
Universe: to which the Cartesians and some other modern Philosophers will not
allow men to set any; holding the Corporeal World to be (as they love to speak)
Indefinite, and beyond any bounds assignable by us men.

8. From the vast extent of the Universe, I now proceed to consider the
stupendous quantity of local Motion, that the Divine power has given the parts
of it, and continually maintains in it. Of this we may make some estimate by
considering with what velocity some of the greater bodies themselves are moved,
and how great a part of the remaining bodies of the Universe, is also, though
in a somewhat differing way, endowed with motion.

As for the first of these; the least velocity that I shall mention, is that
which is afforded by the Copernican Hypothesis: since according to that it is
the Earth that moves from West to East about its own Axis; (for its other
motions concern not this discourse) in four and twenty hours. And yet this
Terraqueous Globe which we think so great that we commonly call it the World,
and which, as was lately noted, by the recenter computations of Mathematicians
is concluded to contain six or seven and twenty thousand miles in Circuit; some
part of this Globe, I say, moves at such a rate, that the learned Gassendus
confesses, that a point or place, situated in the Equator of the Earth, does
in a second minute move about two hundred Toises or Fathoms; that is, twelve
hundred feet: so that a Bullet when shot out of a Cannon, scarce slies with so
great a Celerity.

9. But, as I was saying, the motion of the Earth is the least swift that I had
to mention; being indeed scarce comparable to the velocity of the fixed Stars;
if, with the generality of Astronomers, we suppose them to move in four and
twenty hours about the Earth. For supposing the distance assigned by the famous
Tycho (a more accurate Observer than his Predecessors) between us and the
Firmament to be fourteen thousand semediameters of the Earth, a fixed Star in
the Equator, does, as Mullerius calculates it, move 3153333 miles in an hour,
and consequently in a minute of an hour, fifty two thousand five hundred fifty
five miles, and a second (which is reckoned to be near about a single pulsation
or stroke of the artery of a healthy man) 875 miles: which is about, if not
above, three thousand times faster than a Cannon bullet moves in the Air. It Is
true that according to the Ptolomean Hypothesis, a fixed Star in the
Aequinoctial does in a second move at most but three semediamiters of the
Earth; See Ricciol. Almag. nov. lib. IX. Sect. IV. Cap. VI.
but according to the learned and diligent Ricciolus, this velocity (of our
fixed Stars) is fifty times greater than in the Ptolomean Hypothesis; and
threescore and ten times greater than in the Tichonian Hypothesis. For
according to Ricciolus, such a fixed Star as we speak of, moves in a second
minute (or one beating of the pulse) 157282 German leagues which amount to six
hundred twenty nine thousand one hundred twenty eight English miles.

And now I shall add (what possibly you have not observed) that That portion of
the Universe which commonly passes for quiescent, and yet has motion put into
it; is so great, that for ought I know, the quantity of motion distributed
among these seemingly quiescent bodies, may equal if not exceed the quantity
of motion the first Mover has communicated to the fixed Stars themselves, though
we suppose them whirled about the Earth with that stupendous swiftness that
the Ptolemeans and Tychonians attribute to them. For I reckon that the fixed
Stars and Planets, or if you please, all the mundane Globes, whether lucid or
opacous, of which last sort is the Earth, do all of them together bear but a
small proportion to the Interstellar part of the Universe. And though I should
allow all these Globes to be solid, notwithstanding that it can scarce be
proved of any of them; and the Cartesians think the Sun (which they take to be
a fixed Star, and therefore probably of the same Nature with the rest) to be
extremely fluid: though I should, I say, grant this; yet it must be confessed,
that each of these solid Globes swims in an ambient fluid of very much greater
extent than it self is. So that the fluid portion of the Universe will in bulk
almost incomparably exceed the solid. And if we consider what is the Nature of
a fluid body, as such we shall find that it consists in having it is minute
parts perpetually and variously moved, some this way and some that way; so that
though the whole body of a liquor seems to be at rest, yet the minute parts
that compose that liquor, are in a restless motion; continually shifting places
amongst themselves, as has been amply shown in a late Tract entitled, the
History of Fluidity and Firmness.

10. And because the quantity of motion shared by the Corpuscles that compose
fluid bodies is not usually reflected on even by Philosophers; 'twill not be
here amiss to add that how great and vehement a motion the parts of fluid
bodies (perhaps when the Aggregates of those particles appear quiescent) may be
endowed with, we may be assisted to guess, by observing them when their
ordinary Motions happen to be disturbed, or to be extraordinarily excited by
fit conjunctures of circumstances. This may be observed in the strange force
and effects of boisterous Winds and Whirlewinds, which yet are but Streams and
Whirlepools of the invisible Air, whose singly insensible parts are by
accidental causes determined to have their Motion made either in a straight or
almost streight-line, or as it were about a common Center. But an instance much
more conspicuous may be afforded by a Mine charged with Gunpowder; where the
flame or some subtle Ethereal substance that is always at hand in the Air,
though both one and the other of them be a fluid body, and the powder perhaps
be kindled but by one spark of fire, exerts a Motion so rapid and furious, as
in a trice is able to toss up into the Air, whole houses and thick Walls;
together with the firm soil, or perchance solid Rocks, they were built upon.

11. But since the velocity of these discharged flames may be guessed at, by
that which the flame of Gunpowder impresses on a Bullet shot out of a well
charged Gun, which the diligent Mersennus, who made several trials to measure
it, defines to be about 75 toises, or fathoms (that is, 450 foot) in a Second,
being the 60th part of a Minute: if we admit the probable Opinion of the
Cartesians, that the Earth and diverse other Mundane Globes, as the Planets, are
turned about their own Axes by the Motion of the respective Ethereal Vortices
or Whirlepools, in which they swim, we shall easily grant that the Motion of
the Celestial Matter that moves, for instance, upon the remote Confines of the
Earths Vortex, is by a vast excess more rapid than that of the surface of the
Earth. And yet we formerly observed, that a place situated under the Equator
does (if the Earth turns about its own Axis) move as swiftly as a Bullet shot
out of a Cannon. But if we choose rather the Tychonian Hypothesis, which makes
the Firmament with all the vast Globes of Light that adorn it to move about
their common Center in 24 hours, the Motions of the Celestial Matter must be
allowed a far greater, and indeed a scarce imaginable rapidity.

These things are mentioned, that we may have the more enlarged Conceptions of
the Power as well as Wisdom of the Great Creator, who has both put so
Wonderful a quantity of Motion into the Universal Matter and maintains it
therein, and is able, not only to set bounds to the raging Sea, and
effectually say to it, Hitherto shall thou come, and no farther, and here shall
thy proud Waves be stayed, but, (what is far more) so to curb and moderate
those stupendiously rapid Motions of the Mundane Globes and intercurrent
Fluids, that neither the unwealdiness of their Bulk, nor Celerity of their
Motions, have made them exorbitate or fly out, and this for many Ages; during
which no Watch for a few hours, has gone so regularly. The Sun, for instance,
moving without swerving, under the same Circular Line that is called the
Ecliptic. And if the Firmament it self, whose Motion in the vulgar Hypothesis
is by much the most rapid in the World, do fail of exactly completing its
revolution in 24 hours, that retardation is so regulated that since
Hipparchus's time, who lived 2000 years ago, the first Star in Aries, which was
then near the beginning of it, is not yet come to the last degree of that Sign.

12. After what has been discoursed of the Power of God, it remains, that I
say something about his Wisdom, that being the Attribute to which those that
have elevated understandings, are wont to pay the Highest Veneration, when they
meet it even in Men, where yet it is still but very Imperfect.

The Wisdom of God which Saint Paul somewhere justly styles (...), Ephesians. III.
10.
manifold or multifarious, is expressed in two differing manners or degrees.
For sometimes it is so manifestly displayed in familiar Objects, that even
superficial and almost careless Spectators may take notice of it. But there are
many other things wherein the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge Col. II. 3.
may be said to be hid; lying so deep that they require an Intelligent and
attentive Considerer to discover them. But though I think I may be allowed, to
make this distinction, yet I shall not solicitously confine my self to it;
because in several things both these Expressions of the Divine Wisdom, may be
clearly observed.

Those Objects of this Wisdom that we shall at this time consider are of two
sorts, the material and visible, and the invisible and immaterial Creatures of
God.

In the First of these, whose aggregate, or collection makes up the Corporeal
World, commonly, called Universe, I shall briefly take notice, of the excellent
Contrivance of particular bodies; of the great variety, and consequently
number, of them; of their Symmetry, as they are parts of the World; and of the
connection and dependence they have in relation to one another. And though under
the two first of these heads, I might as well as under the other two, take
notice of many inanimate bodies, as well as of those that are endowed with
vegetative and sensitive Souls (as Naturalists commonly call them;) yet for
Brevities sake I shall here take notice only, of that more perfect sort of
living Creatures that we call Animals.

13. I. The contrivance of every Animal, and especially of a Humane Body, is so
curious and exquisite, that it is almost impossible for any Body, that has not
seen a dissection well made and Anatomically considered, to imagine or conceive
how much excellent Workmanship is displayed in that admirable Engine. But of
this having discoursed elsewhere more fully, I shall here only tell you in a
word (and it is no Hyperbole) that as St. Paul said on another occasion. That
the foolish things of 1 Cor. 1. 25.
God are wiser than Men, and the weak things of God stronger than Men. So we
may say, that the meanest living Creatures of God's making, are far more wisely
contrived, than the most excellent pieces of workmanship that Humane heads and
hands can boast of. And no Watch nor Clock in the World, is any way comparable
for exquisiteness of Mechanism, to the body of even an Ass or a Frog.

14. II. But God's Wisdom is recommended as well by the Variety, and
consequently the Number of the kinds of living Creatures, as by the Fabric of
each of them in particular. For the skill of Humane Architects and other
Artists is very narrow, and for the most part limited to one or to a few sorts
of contrivements. Thus many an Architect can build a House well, that cannot
build a Ship: and (as we daily see) a man may be an excellent Clock-maker, that
could not make a good Watch, and much less contrive well a Fouling-piece, or a
Windmill.

15. But now the Great Author of Nature has not only created four Principal
sorts of living Engines, namely Beasts, Birds, Fishes and Reptiles; which differ
exceedingly from one another, as the several Regions or Stages where they were
to act their parts, required they should do; but under each of these
comprehensive Genders are comprised I know not how many subordinate Species of
Animals, that differ exceedingly from others of the same kind, according to the
Exigency of their Particular Natures. For not only the Fabric of a Beast (as
a Lion) is very differing from that of a Bird, or a Fish, (as an Eagle or a
Whale;) but in the same Species the Structure or Mechanism of particular
Animals is very unlike. Witness the difference between the Parts of those
Beasts that chew the Cud, and those that do not; and between the Hog and the
Hare, especially in their Entrals; and so between a Parrot and a Batt, and
likewise between a Whale, a Star-fish, a Lobster, and an Oyster, (to mention
now no other Instances.) And if with diverse Philosophers both Ancient and
Modern, we admit Vegetables, into the rank of living Creatures; the Number of
these being so great, that above six thousand kinds of Vegetables were many
years ago reckoned up; the manifold displays of the Divine Mechanism, and so of
its Wisdom, will by that great Variety of living Engines, be so much the more
conspicuous.

16. III. That which much enhances the excellent Contrivances to be met with in
these Automata, is the Symmetry of all the various parts that each of them
consists of. For an Animal, though considered in his state of Intireness, he is
justly looked upon as one Engine; yet really this total Machine (if I may so
call it) is a complex thing made up of several Parts, which considered
separately may pass each of them for a subordinate Engine excellently sitted
for this or that Particular Use. As an Eye is an admirable Optical Instrument
to enable a Man to see; and the Hand is so well framed for a multitude of
Mechanical uses, that Aristotle thought sit to call it the Organ of Organs, (or
Instrument of Instruments.) It ought therefore highly to recommend the Wisdom
of the Great yotser hakkol Former of all things (as the Scripture Jer. X. 16.
styles him,) that he has so framed each Particular part of a Man (or other
Animal,) as not to let the skill bestowed on that, hinder him from making that
part or member it self, and every other, neither bigger nor less, nor (in a
word) otherwise constituted, than was most expedient for the completeness and
welfare of the whole Animal. Which manifests that this Great Artist had the
whole Fabric under his Eye at once; and did at one View behold all that was
best to be done, in order to the completeness of the whole Animal, as well as
to that of each member and other part, and admirably provided for them both at
once. Whereas many an excellent Artificer, that is able to make a single Engine
very complete, may not be able to make it a Commodious part of a Complex or
Aggregate of Engines. As it is not every one that can make a good Pump, that can
make a good Ship pump; nor every Chemist that can build an Oven for a Bake
house, that can make one fit to be set up in a Ship: and we see that our
Pendulum Clocks, that are moved with weights, and go very regularly ashore,
cannot yet be brought to perform their Office (of constantly measuring of time)
when set up in a sailing Ship.

17. IV. The fourth way by which God manifests his Wisdom in his Corporeal
Creatures, is, their mutual usefulness to one another, in a relation either of
dependency or of coordination. This serviceableness may be considered, either
as the parts of the Animal have a relation to one another, and to the whole
body they make up; or as entire and distinct bodies have reference to or
dependency on each other. To the first sort of utility belong the uses of the
parts of the Humane body, for instance; which are so framed, that besides these
public Offices or Functions that some of them exercise for the good of the
whole, as the Stomach for concocting aliments, the Brain for supplying Animal
spirits to move the limbs, and other parts, the Kidneys to separate the
superfluous Serum of the Blood; there are many other particular parts that have
that subserviency to one another, that no despicable portion of the Books of
Anatomy is employed in the mention of them. And diverse Consents of parts, and
utilities that accrue from one to the other, are farther discovered by
Diseases, which primarily affecting one part or member of the Body, discover
that this or that other part has a dependence on it, or a particular relation
to it, though perhaps not formerly taken notice of. To the second part of
utility belong those parts that discriminate the Sexes of Animals, which
(parts) have such a relation one to another in the Male and the Female, that
it is obvious they were made for the conjunction of both in order to the
propagation of the Species. I cannot here spend time to consider the fitness of
the Distance and Situation of the Sun, the obliquity of its Motion under the
Ecliptic, and (especially) the compensations that Nature makes by one thing
for another, the excess of whose qualities would else be noxious to men, as the
great heats and dryness that reign in many parts of the Torrid Zone and some
neighboring Climates, would render those Countries barren and uninhabitable,
as the Ancients thought them, if they were not kept from being so, by the
Etesians and the Trade-winds, which blow regularly (though not always the same
way) for a great part of the hottest seasons of the Year, and are assisted by
the length of the Nights, by the Copious and lasting Rains that fall at set
times, by the greatness of the Rivers, (some of them periodically overflowing
their banks to great distances) and by the winds that in many places blow in
the Night from the Land Seaward, and in the Morning from the Sea toward the
Land; for these, and some other such things, do so moisten and refresh the
Ground, and contemperate the Air, that in many of those Climates which the
Ancients thought parched up and uninhabitable, there are large Kingdoms and
Provinces that are both fruitful and Populous, and diverse of them very
pleasant too. But as I was saying, I cannot stay to prosecute what might be
represented to show the usefulness of many of God's other sensible works to the
Noblest kind of them Men. But I shall rather content my self by adding a few
lines, to point farther at the reference that God has been pleased to make many
other things have to the welfare of Men and other Animals; as we see that
according to the usual course of Nature, Lambs, Kids, and many other living
Creatures, are brought into the World at the Spring of the Year; when tender
Grass and other Nutritive plants are provided for their food. And the like may
be observed in the production of Silkworms, whose Eggs according to Natures
institution, are hatched when Mulbury Trees begin to Bud, and put forth those
leaves whereon these precious insects are to feed; the aliments being tender
whilst the Worms themselves are so, and growing more strong and substantial, as
the Insects increase in Vigor and Bulk.

18. There is one thing, which though it might perhaps have been more properly
brought in before, must not here be pretermitted. For besides what was lately
said of the excellent Fabric of the bodies of Men and other Animals, we may
deservedly take notice how much more wonderful than the structure of the grown
body must be the contrivance of a Semen Animatum: since all the future parts,
(solid as well as soft,) and the functions, and many of the Actions (and those
to be variable pro re nata) of the Animal to be produced, must be durably
delineated, and as it were couched in a little portion of matter, that seems
Homogeneous, and is unquastionably sluid. And that which much increases the
Wonder, is, that one of these latent impressions or powers, namely the
Plastic, or Prolifick, is to lie dormant perhaps above thirty or forty Years,
and then to be able to produce many more such Engines as is the Animal it self.

[I have hitherto, among the Corporeal What is included in this Parathesis may
be skip'd.
Works of God, taken notice only of those Productions of his Power and Wisdom
that may be observed in the visible World. So that I may be allowed to consider
farther, that not only the Peripateticks, but the generality of other
Philosophers, believe the World to be finite: and, though the Cartesians will
not say it is so, but choose rather to call it indefinite, yet as it is
elsewhere shown, their Opinion is rather a well meant piece of modesty, than a
strict truth. For in reality, the World must every way have bounds, and
consequently be finite, or it must not have bounds, and so be truly boundless,
or, (which is the same thing in other terms) infinite. And if the World be
bounded, then those that believe a Deity, to whose Nature it belongs to be of
infinite Power, must not deny that God is, and still was, able to make other
Worlds than this of ours. And the Epicureans, who admitted no Omnipotent Maker
of the World, but substituted Chance and Atoms in his Stead, taught that by
reason the causes sufficient to make a World, that is Atoms and Space, were
not wanting; Chance has actually made many Worlds, of which ours is but one;
and the Cartesians must, according to their Doctrine of the Indefiniteness of
Corporeal Substance, admit that our visible World, or if they please, Vortex,
by which I mean the greatest extent our eyes can reach to, is but a part, and
comparatively but a very small one too, of the whole Universe: which may extend
beyond the utmost Stars we can see, incomparably farther than those remotest
visible bounds are distant from our Earth.

Now if we grant with some modern Philosophers, that God has made other Worlds
besides this of ours, it will be highly probable that he has there displayed
His manifold Wisdom, in productions very differing from those wherein we here
admire it. And even without supposing any more than one Universe: as all that
portion of it that is visible to us, makes but a part of that vastly extended
aggregate of bodies: So if we but suppose, that some of the Celestial Globes,
whether visible to us, or placed beyond the reach of our sight, are peculiar
Systemes, the consideration will not be very different. For since the fixed
Stars are many of them incomparably more remote than the Planets, it is not
absurd to suppose that as the Sun, who is the fixed Star nearest to us, has a
whole Systeme of Planets that move about him, so some of the other fixed Stars
may be each of them the Center, as it were, of another Systeme of Celestial
Globes: since we see that some Planets themselves, that are determined by
Astronomers to be much inferior in bigness to those fixed Stars I was speaking
of, have other Globes that do as it were depend on them, and move about them;
as, not to mention the Earth that has the Moon for its Attendant, nor Saturn
that is not altogether unaccompanied, it is plain that Jupiter has no less than
four Satellites that run their Courses about Him. And it is not to be
pretermitted, that none of these lesser and secondary Planets, (if I may so
call them) that moves about Saturn and Jupiter is visible to the naked eye, and
therefore they were all unknown to the Ancient Astronomers, who lived before
the invention of Telescopes. Now, in case there be other Mundane Systemes (if I
may so speak) besides this visible one of ours, I think it may be probably
supposed that God may have given peculiar and admirable instances of His
inexhausted Wisdom in the Contrivance and Government of Systemes, that for
ought we know may be framed and managed in a manner quite differing, from what
is observed in that part of the Universe that is known to us. For besides that
here on Earth the Loadstone is a Mineral so differing in diverse affections, not
only from all other Stones, but from all other bodies, that are not
Magnetical, that this Heteroclite Mineral scarce seems to be Originary of this
World of ours, but to have come into it, by a remove from some other World or
Systeme; I remember that some of the Navigators that discovered America, took
notice that at their first coming into some parts of it, though they found
great store of Animals and Plants, yet they met with few of the latter, and
scarce any of the former, of the same Species with the living Creatures of
Europe.

19. Now in these other Worlds; besides that we may suppose that the Original
Fabric, or that Frame into which the Omniscient Architect at first contrived
the parts of their matter, was very differing from the structure of our
Systeme; besides this, I say, we may conceive that there may be a vast
difference betwixt the subsequent Phoenomena, and productions observable in one
of those Systemes, from what regularly happens in ours, though we should
suppose no more, than that two or three Laws of Local Motion may be differing
in those unknown Worlds, from the Laws that obtain in ours. For if we suppose,
for instance, that every entire Body, whether simple or compounded, great or
small, retains always a motive Power, (as Philosophers commonly think that the
Soul does, when it has moved the Humane Body; and as the Epicureans and many
other Philosophers think all Atoms do, after they have impelled one aonther)
this power of exciting Motion in another Body, without the Movents loosing its
own, will appear of such moment to those that duly consider, that Local Motion
is the first and chiefest of the second causes that produce the Phoenomena of
Nature: that they will easily grant that these Phoenomena must be strangely
diversifyed, by springing from principal causes so very differingly qualifyed.
Nor (to add another way of varying Motion) is it absurd to conceive, that God
may have created some parts of matter to be of themselves quiescent, (as the
Cartesians and diverse other Philosophers suppose all matter to be in its own
Nature,) and determined to continue at rest till some outward Agent force it
into Motion: and yet that He may have endowed other parts of the matter, with a
Power like that which the Atomists, ascribe to their Principles, of restlesly
moving themselves, without loosing that power by the motion they excite in
quiescent bodies. And the Laws of this propagation of Motion among bodies, may
be not the same with those that are established in our World: so that but one
half, or some lesser part, (as a third,) of the Motion that is here
communicated from a body of such a bulk and velocity, to another it finds at
rest, or slowlier moved than it self, shall there pass from a Movent to the
body it impells; though all circumstances, except the Laws of Motion, be
supposed to be the same. Nor is it so extravagant a thing, as at first it may
seem, to entertain such suspicions as these. For in the common Philosophy,
besides that the Notion and Theory of Local Motion are but very imperfectly
proposed, there are Laws or Rules of it well, not to say at all, established.

20. And as for the Cartesian Laws of Motion, though I know they are received
by many learned Men, yet I suspect that it is rather upon the Authority of so
famous a Mathematician as Descartes, than any convictive evidence, that
accompanies the Rules themselves: since to me (for Reasons that belong not to
this Discourse,) some of them appear not to be befriended either by clear
experience, or any Cogent Reason. And for the Rule that is the most useful,
namely that which asserts, That there is always the same quantity of Motion in
the World; every Body that moves another, loosing just as much of its own as it
produces in the other: the proof he offers, being drawn from the Immutability
of God, seems very Metaphysical, and not very cogent to me; who fear that the
Properties and Extent of the Divine Immutability, are not so well known to us
Mortals, as to allow Cartesius to make it in our present case, an argument a
priori. And a posteriori I see not how the Rule will be demonstrated: since,
besides that it may be questioned whether it is agreeable to experience in
diverse instances that might be given of communicated Motions here below; I know
not what experience we have of the Rules by which Motion is propagated in the
Heavenly Regions of the World, among all the Bodies, that make up the
Aetherial, (which is incomparably the greatest) part of the Universe. So that
the truth of the Cartesian Rules being evinced neither a priori, nor a
posteriori; it appears not why it should be thought unreasonable to imagine,
that other Systemes may have some peculiar Laws of Motion; only because they
differ from those Cartesian Rules, whereof the greatest part are, at least
undemonstrated.]

21. But though, if we allow of Suppositions and Conjectures, such as those
lately mentioned, that are at least not absurd; they may conduce to amplify
some of our Idea's of Divine things; yet we need not fly to Imaginary ultra
mundane Spaces, to be convinced that the Effects of the Power and Wisdom of
God, are worthy of their Causes, and not near adequately understood by us; if
with sufficient attention we consider that innumerable multitude, and
unspeakable variety of bodies, that make up this vast Universe. For, there
being among these a stupendous number, that may justly be looked upon as so
many distinct Engines, and many of them very complicated ones too, as containing
sundry subordinate ones: to know that all these, as well as the rest of the
Mundane matter, are every moment sustained, guided and governed, according to
their respective Natures, and with an exact regard to the Catholic Laws of the
Universe; to know, I say, that there is a Being that does this every where and
every moment, and that manages all things without either aberration or
intermission; is a thing, that if we attentively reflect on, ought to produce
in us, for that Supreme Being that can do this, the highest Wonder, and the
lowliest Adoration.

The Epicureans of old did with some color of reason, as well as with much
confidence, urge against the Belief of a Divine Providence, that it is
unconceivable, and therefore incredible; That the Gods should be sufficient for
such differing and distracting employments, as, according to the exigencies of
Natures works, to make the Sun shine in one place, the Rain shower down in
another, the Winds to blow in a third, the Lightening to flash in a fourth, the
Thunderbolts to fall in a fifth; and in short, other bodies to act and suffer
according to their respective Natures. Wherefore we, that upon good grounds
believe that God really does, what these Philosophers thought impossible to be
done, by any Agents whatsoever, are much wanting in our duty if we do not
admire an Al-pervading Wisdom, that reaches to the utmost extent of the
Universe, and actually performing what Philosophers professed they could not so
much as conceive, highly merits that those difficulties which they thought
insuperable, and so, a sufficient excuse for their unbelief, should be a
powerful motive to our veneration, of that transcendent Wisdom, that without
any trouble surmounts them.

22. We have seen some displays of God's Wisdom as well as Power, by what we
have observed in his Corporeal Works. But 'twill be easily granted, that some
of the Divine Perfections, could not be so well expressed or Copied upon
Corporeal creatures, as upon the Rational and immaterial soul of Man, and other
Intellectual Beings: as the picture of an Apple or a Cherry, or the character
of a Number, is not capable of receiving or containing so much of an excellent
Painter's skill, as he may exhibit in a Piece wherein the passions of the
mind, and the Laws of Optics, and of decency, may be fully expressed. And it
may well be presumed, that if we were as familiarly acquainted with God's
Incorporeal creatures as we are with his visible ones, we should perceive, that
as Spirits are incomparably more Noble than bodies; so the Divine Wisdom
employed in the Government and Conduct of them, is more glorious than that
which we justly admire in the frame and management of his Corporeal Works. And
indeed let a Portion of Matter be never so fine, and never so well contrived,
it will not be any more than an Engine devoid of Intellect and Will, truly so
called, and whose excellency, as well as its distinction from other bodies even
the grossest and imperfectest, can consist but in Mechanical affections, such
as the size, shape, motion and connection of its parts: which can neither excite
themselves into motion, nor regulate and stop the motion they once are in.
Whereas true Spirits, (by which I here mean immaterial Substances,) have by
God's Appointment belonging to their Nature, Understanding, Will, and an
Internal Principle, both of acting so and so, and of Arbitrarily ceasing from
action. And though God, as the Sole Creator of all Substances, has, and if He
please may exercise, an absolute Dominion over all his Creatures, as well
Immaterial as Corporeal; yet since He has thought fit to govern Spirits
according to the Nature He has given them, (which Comprehends both
Understanding and Will;) to create such Intelligent Free, and Powerful Beings,
as good and bad Angels, (to say nothing now of men) and to govern them on those
Terms so as effectually to make them (however they behave themselves,)
Instruments of His Glory, which multitudes of them do as subtily, as
obstinately oppose; to do these things, I say, requires a Wisdom and
Providence, transcending any that can be displayed in the formation and
management of merely Corporeal Beings. For inanimate Engines may be so
contrived, as to Act but as we please, whereas Angels and Humane Souls are
endowed with a freedom of acting, in most cases, as themselves please. And it is
far easier for a skillful Watch-maker, to regulate the Motions of his Watch
than the affections and actions of his Son.

23. And here give me leave to consider, that Angels whether good or bad, are
very Intelligent and active Beings; and that each of them is endowed with an
Intellect capable of almost Innumerable Notions, and degrees, or variations of
knowledge, and also with a Will, capable of no less numerous Exertions or Acts;
and of having various Influences upon the Understanding, as (on the other side)
it is variously affected by the Dictates of it. So that, (to apply this
consideration to my present purpose) each particular Angel being successively
capable of so many differing Moral States; may be looked upon, as, in a manner,
a distinct Species of the Intellectual kind. And the government of one Demon,
may be as difficult a work, and consequently may as much declare the Wisdom
and Power of God, as the government of a whole Species of inanimate bodies,
such as Stones or Metals: whose Nature determines them to a strict conformity
to those primordial Laws of Motion, which were once settled by the great
Creator, and from which, they have no Wills of their own to make them swerve.

The Scripture tells us, that in the Economy of Man's Salvation, there is so
much of the manifold Wisdom of God expressed, that the Angels themselves
desire to pry into those mysteries. When our Savior, having told his Apostles
that the day and hour of his future coming to Judgment (whether of the Jewish
Nation or the World, I now enquire not) was not then known to any; subjoyns,
no, not to the Angels of Heaven, Matt. 24. 36.
but to his Father only: he sufficiently intimates them to be endowed with
excellent Knowledge, Superior to that of Men: and that perhaps may be one of
the Reasons why the Scripture styles them Angels of Light. It also teaches us
that the good Angels are vastly numerous, and that as they are of differing
Orders* some of them being Archangels, and some Princes of particular Empires
or Nations: so that God assigns them very differing and important Employments
both in Heaven and in Earth; and sometimes such as oblige them, in discharge of
their respective Trusts, to endeavor the carrying on of Interfering designs.
The same Scripture by speaking of the Devil and his Angels, and of the Great
Dragon that drew down with his Tail the third part of the Stars from Heaven to
Earth, and by mentioning a whole Legion of Devils that possessed a single Man;
and by diverse other passages that I shall not now insist on, giving us ground
to conclude, that there is a Political government in the kingdom of darkness;
that the Monarch of it is exceeding powerful, whence he is styled the Prince
of this World, and some of his officers have the titles of principalities,
powers, rulers of the Ephesians. VI. 12.
darkness of this World, etc. that the subjects of it are exceeding numerous;
that they are desperate enemies to God and Men, whence the Devil is styled the
Adversary, the Tempter, and a Murderer from the beginning; that they are very
false and crafty, whence the Devil is called the Father of Lies, the Old
Serpent; and his strategems are styled the Wiles, and Depths of Satan; that
their malice is as active and restless, as it is great, whence, we are told that
our Adversary the Devil walks about like a roaring 1 Pet. V. 8.
Lion, seeking whom he may devour. These things being taught us in the
Scripture it self, though I shall not now add any of the Inferences that may be
drawn from them to my present purpose, we may rationally suppose, that if we
were quick-sighted enough to discern the Methods of the Divine Wisdom in the
Government of the Angelical and of the Diabolical Worlds, or great Communities,
if I may so call them; we should be ravished into admiration how such
Intelligent, Free, Powerful, and Immortal Agents* should be without violence
offered to their Nature, made in various manners to conspire to fulfill the
Laws, or at least accomplish the Ends, of that great Theocracy, that does not
alone reach to all kinds of bodies, to Men, and to this or that rank of
Spirits, but comprises the whole Creation, or the great Aggregate of all the
Creatures of God. And indeed to make the voluntary, and perhaps the most crafty
actions of evil Men, and of evil Spirits themselves, subservient to his Wise
and Just Ends; does no less recommend the Wisdom of God, than it would the
skill of a Shipwright and Pilot, if he was able to contrive and steer his Ship,
so, as to sail to his designed Port, not only with a side-wind, or very near a
wind, as many do; but with a quite contrary wind, and that a tempestuous one
too.

24. Perhaps you will think it allowable, that on this Occasion I antedate what
in due time will infallibly come to pass; and now briefly take some notice, as
if it were present, of the diffused and illustrious manifestation of the Divine
Wisdom, (as well as Justice and Mercy,) that will gloriously appear at the day
of the general Judgment, when every good Christians eyes shall be vouchsafed a
much larger prospect than that which his Savior himself had, when he surveyed
in a trice, and as it were at one view, all the Kingdoms of the Luke IV. 5.
World; and shall behold a much more numerous (not to say numberless) Assembly,
than that which is said to have consisted of all People, Nations Dan. III.
and Languages, that flocked in to the Dedication of Nebuchadnezar's Golden
Image.

At that great decretory Day, when the whole Offspring of Adam, shall by the
loud voice and trumpet of the Archangel be called together, from the remotest
Ages and the distantest Climates in the World: when, I say, besides the fallen
Angels, all the Humane Actours that ever lived, shall appear upon the Stage at
once: when the dead shall be raised, and the Books Rev. XX. 12.
shall be opened: (that is, the Records of Heaven and of Conscience) Then the
Wisdom of God will shine forth in its Meridian luster, and its full splendor.
Not only the Occurrences that relate to the lives and actions of particular
Persons, or of private Families, and other lesser Societies of Men; will be
there found not to have been overlooked by the Divine Providence; but the Fates
of Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and the Revolutions of Nations and of Empires,
will appear to have been ordered and overruled by an incomparable Wisdom. And
those great Politicians, that thought to out-wit Providence, by their refined
subtilties, shall find themselves taken in their own craftiness; shall have
their deepest Counsels turned into foolishness; and shall not be able to keep
the amazed World from discovering, that whilst they thought they most craftily
pursued their own Ends, they really accomplished God's. And those subtle
Hypocrites that thought to make pretended Religion the Instrument of their
Secular Designs, shall find those Designs both defeated, and made truly
subservient to that advancement of Religion, which they really never aimed at.

25. To employ and keep in Order a very complicated Engine, such as the famous
Strasburg's Clock, or a Man of War, though all the parts of it be inanimate and
devoid of purposes and ends of their own, is justly counted a piece of skill.
And this Task is more difficult, and consequently does recommend the conduct of
the Performer, in proportion to the intricate structure, and the number of
pieces whereof the Engine consists. At which rate how astonishing and ravishing
will appear that Wisdom and Providence that is able to Guide and Overruled
many thousand Milions of Engines endowed with Wills, so as to make them all be
found in the final Issues of things, subservient to purposes worthy of Divine
Providence, Holiness, Justice and Goodness.

In short, when all the Actours that had their parts in this World, shall
appear at once upon the Stage; when all Disguises shall be stripped off, all
Intrigues discovered, all hearts and Designs laid open, then to find that this
whole amazing Opera, that has been acting upon the face of the Earth, from the
beginning to the end of Time, has been so contrived and carried on by the Great
Author of the World and of Men, that their innumerably various actions, and
cross designs are brought, (commonly without, and often against their wills,)
to conspire to the accomplishment of a Plot worthy of God; will appear an
Effect of so vast and so allpervading a Wisdom, as Humane Intellects will
admiringly confess, that nothing but a Divine and Omniscient One could compass.

26. It Is like you may have taken notice, that among the several Instances I
have given of the Wisdom of God, I have not, (unless perhaps incidentally and
transiently,) mentioned the Economy of Man's Salvation by Jesus Christ. And
therefore I think my self obliged to advertise you, that though, for Reasons to
be given you* if you desire it, by word of mouth, I have thought fit, That
Subject, which has been already handled by so many professed Divines, should be
left untreated of by me, who am a Layman; yet I did not pretermit it, upon the
score of thinking it at all Inferior to those other Manifestations of God's
Wisdom, that I expressly discourse of.

For I think that in the Redemption of Mankind, more of the Divine Attributes
than are commonly taken notice of, have their distinct Agencies; and that their
Cooperation is so admirably directed by the Divine Wisdom, that an Apostle
may very justly call it the great mystery of Godliness; 1 Timothy III. 16.
and that it no less deserves our Wonder, than our Gratitude.

27. I am not ignorant that many learned Divines, have largely, and some of
them laudably, treated of this Subject. But I confess I doubt whether most of
them have not been more happy in their Care to avoid errors about it, than
skillful in their attempts, to unveil the mysteries couched in it. There are in
the great work of Man's Redemption, some characters and footsteps of the Divine
Wisdom, so conspicuous, not to say so refulgent, that a Believer endowed but
with a mediocrity of parts, may easily enough discern them. But there are also
in this sublime and comprehensive work, some depths of God, (to use a Scripture
phrase) and so much of the Wisdom of God in a Mystery, (...) 1 Cor. II. 10.
II. 7.
(that is, of the Mysterious Wisdom of God) that I cannot think it an easy
matter to have a mental Eye, so enlightened and so piercing, as to treat largely
and worthily of so vast and abstruse a Subject. And indeed when I consider,
that a Man must know much of the Nature of Spirits in general, and even of the
Father of them, God himself, of the Intellect, Will, etc. of the Soul of Man,
of the State of Adam in Paradise, and after his fall, of the influence of his
fall upon his Posterity, of the Natural or Arbitrary vindictive Justice of God,
of the Grounds and Ends of God's inflicting Punishments as a Creditour, a
Ruler, or both; of the admirable and unparalled Person of Christ the
Mediator; of those Qualifications and Offices that are required to fit him,
for being lapsed Man's Redeemer, of the Nature of Covenants, and the Conditions
of those God vouchsafed to make with Man, whether of Works, or Grace; of the
Divine Decrees, in reference to Man's final State; of the secret and powerful
Operations of Grace upon the mind, and the manner by which the Spirit of God
works upon the Souls of Men, that He converts, and brings by Sanctification to
Glory. To be short, there are so many Points (for I have left diverse unnam'd)
most of them of difficult speculation, that are fit to be discussed by him that
would solidly and fully treat of the Worlds Redemption by Jesus Christ, that
when I reflect on them, I am ready to exclaim with St. Paul, who is sufficient
for these things; and I am so far from wondering, that the generality of
Divines and other Writers on this Subject, have not fully displayed the Wisdom
that God has expressed in this great work, that to have been able to accomplish
it in so admirable a way, as God has actually contrived and made choice of, is
one of the chief Reasons of my Admiration of the Wisdom it self. And I am
persuaded, that for God to reconcile his inflexible Justice, his exuberant
Mercy, and all those other things that seemed to clash inevitably about the
designed Salvation of Men, and make them cooperate to it; is a stupendous
manifestation of Wisdom: there being no Problem in Diophantus, Alexandrinus,
or Apollonius Pergaeus, in Algebra, or in Geometry, near so difficult to be
solved, or that requires, that a greater number of proportions and congruities
should be attended to at once, and made subservient to the same Ends; as that
Great Problem propounded by God's Infinite Goodness to his Divine Wisdom; the
Redemption of lost and perverse Mankind, upon the Terms declared in the Gospel,
which are admirably fitted to promote at once, God's Glory, and Man's felicity.

28. Though what has been said of the Greatness of God's Power and Wisdom, may
justly persuade us that those Attributes are Divine and Adorable; yet I must
not deny that the Representation that I have made of them, is upon several
accounts, very disadvantageous. For first, there has not been said of them in
this paper all that even I could have mentioned, to set forth their excellency;
because I had elsewhere treated of that Subject, and was more willing to
present you with some things I had not said before, than trouble you with many
repetitions. But if instead of so unfit a Person as I, the manifestation of the
Divine Wisdom had been undertaken by the knowingest Man in the World, or
perhaps even by an Angel, he would find himself unable fully to make out the
matchless Excellency of it. For how much Wisdom has been exercised by an
Omniscient Being, cannot be fully comprehended or, consequently, described, but
by an infinite understanding. Besides, I have considered the Wisdom displayed
by God in the Works of His Creation and Providence, with respect to them not to
us. For they are excellent, absolutely, and in their own Nature, and would
simply upon that account deserve the wonder and the praises of Rational Beings,
as they are rational: as Zeuxis justly celebrated the skill of Appelles, and
modern Geometers and Mechanitians admire Archimedes. But in this irrelative
contemplation of God's Works, a Man's mind being intent only upon the
excellencies he discovers in them, He is not near so much affected with a just
sense of the inferiority of His to the Divine Intellect, as He would be if He
heedfully consider how much of the vast Subjects He contemplates, are
undiscovered by Him, and how dimm and imperfect the Knowledge is, which He has
of that little He does discover. And now, ( lastly) to the other disadvantages
with which I have been reduced to represent (and so to blemish.) the Divine
Attributes; I must add, that I have insisted but upon two of them, God's Power
and His Wisdom, whereas we know that He has diverse other perfections, as
(besides those Incommunicable ones, His, Self-experience, Self-sufficiency, and
Independency) His Goodness to all His Creatures, His Mercy to sinful Men, His
Justice, His Veracity, etc. And as I long since noted, we may rationally
conceive, that He may have diverse Attributes and consequently diverse
Perfections, whereof we have at present no Knowledge, or perhaps so much as
particular conjecture, the inexhaustible Fecundity of the Divine Nature being
such, that for ought we know, we are acquainted with but a small part of the
productions of an Almighty Power, accompanied with an infinite Wisdom, and
excited to communicate it self by an exuberant Goodness. And indeed I see not
why we may not say that by the Notion or Idea we have of Him, and by the help
of some Attributes we already know He has, we may in general conceive, that He
has other Perfections, that we yet know not in particular: since of those
Attributes that we do already know, though the irrelative ones (if I may so
call them) such as His Self-existence, Eternity, Simplicity and Independency;
may be known by mere speculation, and as it were all at once, by appearing to
us as comprehended in the Notion of a Being absolutely perfect; yet there are
diverse relative Attributes or Perfections, that come to be known but
successively, and as it were by experience of what He has actually done in
relation to some of His Creatures. As, the Mercy of God was not known by Adam
himself before his fall; and God's Fidelity or Faithfulness to His promises, as
particularly that of sending the Messiah in the fullness of time was not, (not
to say could not be) known but in process of time, when some of them came to be
fulfilled. And therefore, since some of God's Perfections require or suppose
the respective Natures and Conditions of His Creatures, and the actings of some
of them toward Him, as well as some of His toward them; we, that cannot be at
all sure that He may not have made many sorts of Creatures, and have had diverse
relations to them according to their several States and Conditions, that we are
altogether unacquainted with; cannot know but that some of the Attributes of
God exercised toward these Creatures, may remain unknown to us.

29. But whether the Attributes, known and unknown, be thought to be more or
fewer; it will not be denied, but that the Natural and genuine result of all
these Divine Perfections, (which we conceive under distinct Notions, because we
are not able to see them at one view, united in God's most simple Essence) must
be a most glorious Majesty; that requires the most lowly and prostrate
Venerations of all the Great Creatour's Intelligent Works. And accordingly we
may observe (from some of the formerly cited Texts) that the Angels, who of all
his mere Creatures are the most excellent and knowing, are represented in the
Scripture as assiduously employing themselves, not only in obeying and
serving, but in Praising, and Adoring the Divine Majesty. The very Name of
Angel in the Original Languages of the Old and New Testament, is a Name of
Ministry: the Hebrew Malach and the Greek (...) signifying properly a
Messenger. And our Savior intimates in his most Excellent Pattern of Prayer,
that the will of God is done most obsequiously and cheerfully in Heaven; since
Christians are directed to wish, that their Obedience there paid him might be
imitated upon Earth. And as they style themselves the Apostles Fellow Servants;
so these Celestial Rev. XIX. 10.
Envoyes (if I may so call them) make no scruple of going upon the meanest
Errands, as we would think them; considering rather by whom, than to whom, or
about what, they are sent. So the first Angel that we read of, to have been
sent to a particular Person, was employed to Hagar, a wandering and fugitive
Female Genesis XXI. 17, etc.
slave, ready to perish for thirst in a Wilderness; to direct her to a Well of
Water, and tell her somewhat that concerned her Child. And another Angel is
represented as taking the part of an Ass against a false Nu. XXII. 33.
Prophet. Nay of this glorious Order of Creatures in general, the Scripture
tells us, that they are All ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for Heb.
I. 14.
them who shall be Heirs of Salvation.

Though the Angels are Creatures so glorious in their Apparitions here below,
that they use to strike amazement and veneration, if not Terror, even into the
Excellent Persons they Dan. X. 9, 11, 17.
appear to, (as we may learn from diverse passages of the Scripture, where Luke
I. 29.
we are told that their presence was accompanied with a surprising Splendor,
and one of them is represented in the Apocalypse, as Inlightening Revel. XVIII.
^*
the Earth with His Glory: And though their multitude be so great that
sometimes the Myriades of them, and sometimes the Legions, are mentioned; and
elsewhere we are told of Thousand Thousands, and ten Thousand times ten
Thousand of them: Yet these Celestial Courtiers, that in comparison of us Men,
are so Glorious, as well as Intelligent and spotless, when they appear in
multitudes about the Throne of God, (according to that Vision of the Prophet,
who told the two Kings of Judah and Israel, that he saw the Lord sitting on his
Throne; and all the Host of Heaven 1 King. XXII. 19.
standing by Him on His right Hand and on His left,) they stand not to Gaze,
but as the Prophet Daniel Dan. VII. 10.
expressly says, to minister. And in Isaiah's Vision, the Seraphims themselves
Isa. VI. 2.
are represented as covering their faces before their Great Maker, Seated on
his Elevated Throne. And we may easily guess that their Employment is most
humbly to adore and celebrate such dazelling Majesty; by what we are told of
their crying one to another Holy, Holy, Holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole
Earth is full of his Glory. This profound respect of the Angels is not to be
marvel'd at: since, where esteem springs not from ignorance but knowledge, the
greater the ability and opportunities are of having the knowledge clear and
heightened, the greater Veneration must be produced in an Intelligent Being,
for the admired Object: whose Perfections are such, that even an Angelical
Intellect cannot fully reach them; since as a line by ^eing never so much
extended in leng^^ cannot grow a Surface; so neither ca^ created perfections,
be by any Idea's so stretched as to be amplifyed into Divine ones; (or Idea's
equal to them.) And indeed speaking in general, the Creatures are but Umbratile
(if I may so speak) and arbitrary Pictures of the great Creator: of diverse of
whose Perfections though they have some signatures; yet they are but such, as
rather give the Intellect rises and occasions to take notice of and contemplate
the Divine Originals, than they afford it true Images of them: as a Picture of
a Watch or Man, or the name of either of them written with Pen and Ink, does
not exhibit a true and perfect Idea of a thing (whose internal constitution a
surface cannot fully represent) but only gives occasion to the mind to think
of it, and to frame one. And what I have said of the Creatures in general,
holds true of the Angels themselves: who by several prerogatives do indeed much
surpass the rest of their fellow Creatures, but yet are but Creatures, and
therefore of a Nature infinitely inferior to God's; as, though a Thousand is a
far greater Number than ten, and a Million than a Thousand, yet the latter as
well as the two former is beyond computation distant from a Number supposed to
be infinite; since otherwise a finite Number (that by which the lesser differs
from the greater) would be able by its accession to make a finite Number become
infinite. But to return to what I was saying of the Angels. I thought fit to
mention both the Nobleness of their Nature, the splendidness of their
Apparitions, and the profound Veneration and ardent* Devotion which they paid
to their Creator; because we are wont to estimate remote things by comparison,
as modern Philosophers tell us, that we judge the rising or setting Sun and
Moon, to be greater and more distant from us than when they are nearer the
Meridian, because when they are in the Horizon we consider them as placed
beyond Mountains, or long Tracts of Land or Sea, that we know to be great
Objects, and look upon as remote ones; and yet see them interposed and
consequently nearer than the Celestial Globes. For thus since the Scripture
proposes the Angels to our Jud. IX.
Imitation, the awefull reverence paid to the Supreme Being by those Excellent
Spirits, who, as St. Peter tells us, are greater in Power and Might 2 Pet. XI.
11.
than we, ought to admonish us of the ecstatick respect we Mortals owe Him; and
teach us that whenever we speak either to God or of Him, we ought to be
inwardly affected (and in our outward expressions appear to be so) with the
unmeasurable distance there is between a most perfect and Omnipotent Creator,
and a mere impotent Creature; as well as between a most Holy God, and a most
sinful Man.

[30. If the Conjectures formerly proposed about Worlds differing from ours may
pass for probable, then it will be so too, that God in these other Systemes may
have framed a Multitude of Creatures, whose Fabric and Motions, and
consequently whose Properties and Operations, must be very differing from what
is usually met with in our World. And the various Contrivances wherein those
differences consist will be so many peculiar Instances, as well as Productions,
of the manifold Wisdom of the Great Former of all things; Jer. 11. 19.
or (as the Original expression yotser hackol will bear,) Maker of the whole
(Universe.) But to add something now of nearer affinity to what was last said
about God's Government of Spirits; how much will this Architecktonick Wisdom
(if I may so call it) exerted in framing and regulating an innumerable company
of differing Creatures, be recommended; if the other Worlds or Vortexes we not
long since spoke of, and the invisible part of ours, (as we may call the Air
and Ether) be peopled with intelligent, though no tvisible, inhabitants? For,
though the Scripture seems not to speak expressly of any more sorts of Spirits,
than those good ones that retain the name of (the whole Genus) Angels, and the
Apostates that are commonly called Devils, because these are the two sorts of
Spirits that it most concerns us Men, to be informed of: yet the Scripture,
that in the History of the Creation does not clearly so much as mention the
production of Angels, and elsewhere represents them, as well the bad as the
good, of very differing Orders, (as far as we can guess by the several Names it
gives Ephesians. VI. and XII. compared with Col. I. and XVI.
them;) the Scripture, I say, does not deny that there are any other sorts of
Spirits than those it expressly takes notice of. So that without any affront to
it, we may admit there are such, if any probable arguments of it, be suggested
to us, either by Reason or Experience. And it seems not very likely, that while
our Terraqueous Globe, and our Air, are frequented by multitudes of Spirits,
all the Celestial Globes, (very many of which do vastly exceed ours in bulk)
and all the Aetherial or Fluid part of the World, (in comparison of which, all
the Globes, the Celestial and Terrestrial, put together, are inconsiderable for
bulk) should be quite destitute of inhabitants. I have not time to set down the
Opinions of the Ancient as well Eastern as Grecian Writers, especially the
Pythagoreans and Platonists, to whose Master this sentence is ascribed
concerning the multitudes of Demons, (a name by them not confined to evil
Spirits) that lived in the Superior part of the World, (...) I will not
presume to be positive in declaring the sense of those two expressions which
the Scripture employs, where speaking of the head of the satanical kingdom, it
calls him the Prince of the Ephesians. II. 2.
power of the Air, (and the word Air, is among the Hebrews taken in a great
latitude, and several times used for the word Heaven) and where speaking of the
grand Adversaries of the Gospel, it styles the spiritual wickednesses, or
rather (as the Syriac reads it, spirits of wickedness, that is,) wicked
spirits not in high places, as our Translatours have it, but in Heavenly. But
though, as I was saying, I will not be positive in giving these two Texts such
a sense, as may make them direct arguments for my Conjecture, yet it seems that
if they do not require, at least they may well bear, an interpretation suitable
to my present purpose. And whatever become of the assertions of Heathen
Philosophers and Poets, it is very considerable what is noted by the Excellent
Grotius, (who quotes several Grot. on Ephesians. II. 2.
Hebrew Authorus for it) that 'twas the Opinion of the Jews, that all places
from Earth to Heaven, even the Starry Heaven, are full of Spirits. If this be
so, the Wisdom and Power On Ephesians. VI. 12.
of God must reach much farther than we are commonly aware of; since He has
Created, and does Govern, such an inestimable multitude of Spiritual Beings, of
various kinds, each of them endowed with an Intellect and Will of its own;
especially since, for ought we know, many or most of them, and perhaps some
whole orders of them, are yet in a probational state, wherein they have
free will allowed them; as Adam and Eve were in Eden, and all the Angels were,
before some of them (as the Scripture speaks) left their first Ep. Jud. 6.
estate and their own mansion. And if to these Angelical communities we add
those others of Children, Idiots and Madmen; of whom, though all be in a sense
rational Creatures, yet the first community have not attained the full use of
Reason, for want of age; and the two others cannot exercise that faculty for
want of rightly disposed Organs; the Wisdom and Power of God in the Divine
Government of such various and numerous communities of Intellectual Creatures,
will to a considering Man appear the more illustrious and wonderful.]

31. The distance betwixt the Infinite Creator and the Creatures, which are
but the limited and arbitrary productions of His Power and Will, is so vast,
that all the Divine Attributes or Perfections do by unmeasurable intervals
transcend those faint resemblances of them, that He has been pleased to
impress, either upon other Creatures, or upon us Men. God's Nature is so
Peculiar and Excellent, that there are qualities, which though high virtues in
Men, cannot belong to God, or be ascribed to Him without derogation: such as
are Temperance, Valor, Humility, and diverse others; which is the less to be
wondered at, because there are some virtues (as Chastity, Faith, Patience,
Liberality) that belong to Man himself, only in his mortal and infirm
condition. But whatever Excellencies there be that are simply and absolutely
such, and so may without disparagement to His Matchless Nature, be ascribed to
God, such as are Eternity, Independency, Life, Understanding, Will, etc. we may
be sure that He possesses them; since He is the Original Author of all the
Degrees or Resemblances we men have of any of them. And the Psalmist's
Ratiocination is good. He that planted Psalm. 94. 9. 10.
the Ear, shall He not hear? He that formed the Eye, shall not He see? He that
teaches Man Knowledge, shall not He know? Since all the Perfections
communicated to, or to be found in the Creatures, (whether Men, Angels, or any
other) being Emanations of the Divine Excellencies, do as much belong to God,
as in a bright day, all the luminous Beams, that are to be found in the Air,
belong to the Sun; (in whom they are united, and from whom they all proceeded.)
The vast difference then between the Perfections of the Great Creator, and
those that are Analogous to them in the Creatures; reaches to All the
Perfections that are though in very differing manners, to be found in both; but
yet the Humane Understanding, as it values it self upon nothing more than
Wisdom, and Knowledge; so there is nothing that it esteems and reverences more
in other Beings, and is less willing to acknowledge it self surpassed in. For
which Reason as I have in the soregoing part of this Paper inculcated by more
than one way; the Great Superiority of God's Intellect to Man's; so I think it
not improper to prosecute the same design; by mentioning to you some few
particulars, whereby that Superiority may manifestly appear. We may then
consider, that besides that God knows an Innumerable company of things that we
are altogether unacquainted with, since He cannot but know all the Creatures He
has made, whether visible or invisible, corporeal or immaterial; and what He
has enabled them to do; according to that of St. James, Known unto God are
Act. XV. 18.
all His works from the beginning of the World. Nay, since He cannot but know
the extent of His own infinite Power, He cannot but know numberless things as
possible, that he has not yet made nor perhaps ever will please to make. But to
confine my self to things actually existent; besides His corporeal and
immaterial Creatures and their faculties or powers whereof we have some kind of
notice, and besides perhaps multitudes of other things whereof we have no
particular Idea or Conjecture; He knows those things whereof we men have also
some knowledge, in a manner or degree peculiar to himself. As what we know but
in part, He knows fully, what we know but dimly, He knows clearly, and what we
know but by fallible Mediums, he knows most certainly.

32. But the Great Prerogative of God's Knowledge, is, that He perfectly knows
Himself: That Knowledge being not only too wonderful for a man (as even an
inspired Person confesses touching himself) but beyond the reach of an
Angelical Intellect: since fully to comprehend the Infinite Nature of God, no
less than an Infinite Understanding is requisite. And for the Works of God,
even those that are purely Corporeal, (which are therefore the meanest) our
knowledge of these is incomparably inferior to His. For though some modern
Philosophers have made ingenious attempts to explain the Nature of things
Corporeal, yet their Explications generally suppose the present Fabric of the
World, and the laws of motion that are settled in it. But God knows
particularly both why and how the Universal matter was first contrived into
this admirable Universe, rather than a World of any other of the numberless
Constructions He could have given it; and both why those laws of Motion rather
than others were established: and how senseless Matter, to whose Nature Motion
does not at all belong, comes to be both put into Motion, and qualifyed to
transfer it according to determinate rules, which it self cannot understand.
But when we come to consider the particular and more elaborate Works of Nature;
such as the Seeds or Eggs of living Creatures, or the Texture of Quicksilver,
Poisons, Antidotes, etc. the Ingenious Confess their Ignorance, (about the
manner of their Production and Operations) and the Confident betray theirs. But
it is like we Men know our selves better than what is without us; but how
ignorant we are at home; if the endless disputes of Aristotle and his
Commentatours and other Philosophers about the Humane Soul, and of Physicians
and Anatomists about the Mechanism and Theory of the Humane Body, were not
sufficient to manifest it; 'twere easy to be shown (as it is in another The
Title of this Paper is, The Imperfection of Humane knowledge manifested by its
own light.
Paper) by the very conditions of the Union of the Soul and Body; which being
settled at first by God's arbitrary institution, and having nothing in all
Nature parallel to them, the manner and Terms of that strange Union, is a
Riddle to Philosophers, but must needs be clearly known to Him, that alone did
Institute it, and, (all the while it lasts) does preserve it. And there are
several advantages of the Divine Knowledge, above that of Man, that are not
here to be pretermitted. For first, we Men can perceive and sufficiently
attend, but to few things at once; according to the known saying,

Pluribus intentus, Minor est, ad singula sensus.

And it is Recorded as a Wonder of some great men among the Ancients, that they
could dictate to two or three Secretaries at once. But God's Knowledge reaches
at once to all that He can know; His penetrating Eyes pierce quite thorough the
whole Creation, at one look; and as an inspired Penman declares, There is no
Creature Heb. IV. 13.
that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked, and (if I may so
render the Greek word) extraverted, (...)
to His Eyes. He always sees Incomparably more Objects at one View, than the
Sun himself endued with sight could do. For God beholds at once all that every
one of His Creatures, (whether visible or invisible to us) in the vast
Universe, either does or thinks. Next, the Knowledge of God is not a
Progressive or Discursive Thing, like that acquired by our Ratiocinations; but
an intuitive Knowledge: since, though we Men by reason of the limitedness and
imperfections of our understandings, are fain to make the notice we have of one
thing, a step and help to acquire that of another, which to us is less known;
as may easily be observed even in the Forms of Syllogisms: yet God, whose
Knowledge as well as His other Attributes are infinitely Perfect, needs not
know any one thing by the help of another: but knows every thing in it self (as
being the Author of it:) and all things being equally known to Him, He can by
looking, if I may so speak, into himself; see there, as in a Divine and
Universal Looking-glass, every thing that is knowable most distinctly and yet
all at once. Thirdly, God knows men's most secret thoughts and intentions.
Whence he is called (...), and the Searcher of all 1 Chr. 28. 9. Psalm. 139. 2.
hearts, that understands all the Imaginations of the Thoughts. Nay, he knows
men's Thoughts, afar off, and even never vented thoughts, which the Man himself
may not know. For not only St. John says, that if our 1 John 3. 20.
heart Condemns us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things; but God
enabled Daniel to declare to Dan. II. 5, 31.
Nebuchadnezzar, the whole Series of the Prophetic Dream, whereof that
Monarch's own memory could not retrieve any part. And here give me leave to
observe, (what perchance you have not minded) that even of a thing that happens
to a Man's self, and is of a Nature capable to make the most vivid impressions
on him; God's Knowledge may surpass His: Since St. Paul speaking of his being
caught up into Paradise, after having twice said, Whether in the Body I cannot
2 Cor. 12. 2, 3, 4.
tell, or whether out of the Body, I cannot tell, he both times subjoyns, that
God knows. Our knowledge of our selves, as well as that of those other
Creatures that are without us, being so defective, the confidence of some that
dare pretend to know God fully, by the Light of their Natural Reason, will not
hinder me from taking hence a Rise to ask this short question; How imperfect
must mere Philosophers knowledge of God's Nature be since they know Him but by
His Works; and know His Works themselves but very imperfectly! The other and
fourth Conspicuous Prerogative of the Divine Knowledge, is the Prescience of
future Contingents, that depend upon the Determinations and Actions of free
Agents. For we Men are so far from being able to stretch our knowledge to the
Discovery of that sort of Events, that the greatest Clerks have tried their
Wits in vain to discover how God himself can foreknow them; and therefore too
many, even among Christians, deny that He can; though by diverse accomplished
predictions recorded in Scripture, it manifestly appears, that He does.

33. When I consider the transcendent Excellency, and the numerous Prerogatives
of the Deity, I cannot without Wonder, as well as Trouble, observe, that
Rational Men professing Christanity, and many of them Studious too, should
wilfully and perhaps contemptuously, neglect to acquire or reflect on, those
Notices that are apt to increase their knowledge of God, and consequently their
Veneration for Him. To aspire to a farther knowledge of God, that we may the
better adore Him, is a great part both of Man's Duty and His happiness. God who
has put into Men an innate desire of knowledge, and a faculty to distinguish
the degrees of Excellency in differing Notices, and to relish those most, that
best deserve it, and has made it His Duty to search and enquire after God, and
to love Him above all things, would not have done this, if He had not known
that those that make a right Use of their faculties, must find Him to be the
Noblest Object of the Understanding, and that which most merits their Wonder
and Veneration. And indeed what can be more suitable to a Rational Creature,
than to employ Reason to contemplate that Divine Being, which is both the
Author of its Reason, and the Noblest Object, about which it can possibly be
employed? The knowledge of some dead Language, or some old rusty Medal, or the
Opinions and Customs of some Nations or Sects, that did not perhaps Reason nor
Live any better than we do now, are thought worthy of curiosity, and even of
the laborious industry of learned Men; and the study of things merely
corporeal, gains Men the Honorable title of Philosophers. But whatever these
Objects of inquiry be in themselves, it is certain the greatest Discoveries we
can make of them are but trifles, in comparison of the Excellency of the
Knowledge of God, which does as much surpass that of His Works, as He Himself
does Them. And it is the Prerogative of His Nature, to be infinitely above all
that He has made; whether we contemplate the works of Nature, or those of Art,
whereof the former are under another Name, His more immediate Works; and the
others the Effects of one of His Works; and by consequence are originally His,
though produced by the intervention of Man. And though it be most true, that on
the Corporeal World, God has been pleased to stamp such impresses of His Power,
Wisdom and Goodness, as have justly exacted the Admiration even of
Philosophers, yet the Great Author of the World is Himself Incomparably
Superior to all His Workmanship, insomuch that, though He could have made, and
always will be able to make, Creatures more Perfect than those He has made, by
Incomputable degrees of perfection; yet the Prerogative of His Nature will keep
Him necessarily Superior to the excellentest Creatures He can make, since the
very condition of a Creature hinders it from being (to name now no other of the
Divine Attributes) Self existent and Independent. It Is therefore methinks a sad
thing, that we Men should grudge to spend now and then a few hours in the
contemplation and internal Worship of that most. Glorious and Perfect Being,
that continually employs the Devotion of Angels themselves. This I judge
probable from hence, that those blessed Spirits are represented in the
Scripture as Celebrating with joyful Songs and Acclamations, the Nativity of
the World, and I think they may well be supposed, to have an ardent desire to
obtain a farther knowledge of God Himself. Since, as an Apostle assures us,
they earnestly desire to look into the truths contained in the Gospel, and the
Dispensations of God toward frail and mortal Men.

34. I know I may be told that Scrutator Majestatis, etc. and that it is a
dangerous thing to be inquisitive about the Nature of God. But, not to urge
that the Latin sentence is taken but out of an Apocryphal Book; I answer that
the Secret things of God that are to be left to Himself, seem to be His
unrevealed purposes and decrees and His most abstruse Essence or Substance, the
scrutiny whereof I readily acknowledge not to belong to us. But I think there
is a great difference between contemplating God out of a saucy curiosity,
merely to know somewhat that is not common of Him, and doing it out of an
humble desire by a farther knowledge of Him to heighten our Reverence and
Devotion toward Him. It Is an effect of Arrogance to endeavor, or so much as
hope, to comprehend the Divine Perfections so as to leave nothing in them
unknown to the enquirer, but to aspire to know them farther and farther, that
they may proportionably appear more and more admirable and lovely in our eyes,
is not only an excusable but a laudable curiosity. The Scripture in one place
exhorts us to grow 2 Pet. III. 18.
not only in Grace, but in the Knowledge of Christ; and in another to add 2
Pet. I. 5.
to our Virtue Knowledge; and when Moses begged to be blessed with a nearer
Exodus 33. 18.
and more particular view of God, though part of His request was refused,
because the grant of it was unsuitable to his mortal State, and perhaps must
have proved fatal to him whilst he was in it; yet God vouchsafed so Gracious a
return to his petition, as shows He was not displeased with the supplicant. No
action or suffering of His having procured for Exodus 34, 5, 6, etc.
him so glorious a view, as was then vouchsafed to his holy curiosity. And that
we may aspire to great degrees of knowledge, even at those supernatural Objects
that we cannot adequately know, we may learn from St. Paul, who prays that his
Ephesians, Ephesians. 3. 18.
as all true Christians, may be able to comprehend what is the breadth and
length and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ, which, says he in
the very next words, passes knowledge. Supposing it then lawful to
contemplate God, not with design to pry into His Decrees and Purposes, nor to
Dogmatize in points controverted among the learned about His Nature and
Attributes, but to excite in our selves the sentiments which His indisputable
Perfections, are by a more attentive view qualified to produce: I consider that
the Devout Contemplation of God, besides other great advantages that it brings
the mind, insomuch that the Humane understanding, like Moses Exodus 34. 29, 30,
etc.
in the Mount, does by an assiduous converse with God acquire a lasting
luminousness. Besides this, I say, and the improving influence that this happy
Conversation may have upon the graces and virtues of the mind, I take it to be
one of the most delightful exercises, that the Soul is capable of, on this
side Heaven. It Is generally acknowledged that admiration is one of the most
pleasing affections of the mind, which sometimes when the Object deserves it,
is so possessed thereby, as to forget all other things, or leave them unregarded
as it often happens in Masks and other pompous and surprising shows or
spectacles; and as upon a better ground it happened to St. Peter, when being
ravished with the glorious transfiguration of his and our Master upon Mount
Tabor, he exclaimed that 'twas good for them to be there, and talked of
building Tabernacles for those that had Heavenly Mansions; being so transported
with the ravishing sight, that the Evangelist expressly Notes that he knew not
what he said. Now; Lu. 9. 23.
the pleasure that admiration gives, being usually proportionate to the
uncommon Nature and indearing Circumstances of the thing admired, how can any
admiration afford such a contentment, as that which has God Himself for its
Object, and in Him the most singular and the most Excellent of all Beings. The
wonder produced in us by an humble and attentive Contemplation of God, has two
main advantages, above the admiration we have for any of His Works, or of our
own. For first when we admire Corporeal things, how noble and precious soever
they be, as Stars and Gemms, the contentment that accompanies our wonder is
allayed by a kind of secret reproach grounded on that very wonder; since it
argues a great imperfection in our understandings, to be posed by things that
are but Creatures, as well as we, and which is worse, of a nature very much
inferior to ours. Whereas it is no disparagement at all for a humane, and
consequently a finite Intellect to be possessed with wonder, though it were
heightened to amazement, or astonishment, by the Contemplation of that most
Glorious and Infinitely Perfect Being, which must necessarily exceed the
adequate comprehension of any Created Intellect. But I consider that there is a
farther and much greater (which is the second) advantage of the admiration of
God, above that of other things, for other Objects having but a bounded Nature
and commonly but some one thing fit to be wondered at, our admiration of them is
seldom lasting, but after a little familiarity with them, first languishes and
then seases. But God is an Object, whose Nature is so very Singular, and whose
Perfections are so immense, that no Assiduity of considering Him, can make Him
cease to be admirable, but the more knowledge we obtain of Him, the more Reason
we find to admire Him. So that there may be a perpetual vicissitude of our
happy acquests of farther degrees of knowledge, and our eager desires of new
ones. Because we give Him but one Name, we are apt to look upon Him as but one
Object of speculation; but, though God be indeed but one in Essence or Nature,
yet such is His immensity, and if I may so speak, Fecundity, that He is
unspeakably Various in the capacity of an Object. Thus Heaven goes under one
Name, but contains so many sixth Stars and Planets, and they by their diversity
of Motions exhibit so many Phenomenon, that though they have employed the
curiosity of Astronomers for many Ages, yet our times have in the Celestial
part of the World, made discoveries as considerable, if not as numerous, as all
those of the Ancients; and as our Optic Glasses have detected many sixth Stars,
and diverse Planets that were unknown to former times, so our Navigatours, by
their Voyages beyond the Line, have discovered diverse whole constellations in
the Southern Hemisphere. So that though Heaven be an Object, that has been
perpetually and conspicuously exposed to Men's view and curiosity, for some
thousands of years, yet it still affords new Subjects for their wonder: and I
scarce doubt but by the farther improvement of Telescopes, Posterity will have
its curiosity gratified by the discovery both of new Constellations, and of new
Stars, in those that are known to us already. We need not therefore fear our
admiration of God should expire, for want of Objects fit to keep it up. That
boundless Ocean contains a variety of excellent Objects, that is as little to
be exhausted as the Creatures that live in our sublunary Ocean or lie on the
shores that limit it, can be numbered. To the Wonderful Excellency of God, may
be justly applied that Notion, which Aristotle lays down as a kind of
definition of Infinite, namely that it is that of which how much soever one
takes, there still remains more to be taken. If the Intellect should for ever
make a farther and farther Progress in the knowledge of the Wonders of the
Divine Nature, Attributes and Dispensations; yet it may still make discoveries
of fresh things worthy to be admired; as in an infinite Series or row of
ascending numbers, though you may still advance to greater and greater numbers;
yet all that you can do by that Progress, is to go farther and farther from
the first and least term of the progression, (which in our case answers to the
smallest degree of our knowledge of God) without ever reaching, or which may
seem strange, but is true, so much as approaching to an Infinite number, (in
case there were any such) or even to the greatest of all numbers: as will be
acknowledged by those that have looked into the properties of progressions in
Infinitum.

35. The two advantages I come from mentioning which the admiration of God has
in point of delightfulness joined to the other advantages of our contemplation
of Him, have I hope persuaded you that they are very much wanting to
themselves, as well as to the Duty they owe their Maker, that refuse or neglect
to give their thoughts so pleasing, as well as Noble, an employment. And I am
apt to think upon this account in particular, that Reason is a greater blessing
to other Men, than to Atheists, who whilst they are such cannot employ it about
God, but with disbelief or terror; and that on this very score, Epicurus was
far less happy than Plato, since whereas the latter was oftentimes as it were
swallowed up in the Contemplation of the Deity; The former had no such glorious
Object, to possess Him with an equally rational and delightful admiration.

36. But now, (to apply this to the scope of this whole discourse) though so
pure and spiritual a pleasure is a very allowable attractive; to elevate our
thoughts, to the most glorious and amiable of Objects, yet it ought to be both
the design and the effect of our admiration of God, to produce in us less
unworthy Idea's, and more honorable and reverent thoughts, of that Wonderful
and unparalled Being. Of whom the more we discover, the more we discern Him
to be Superior to all His Works, and particularly to our selves, who are not
of the highest Order of them, and who, as mere men, are scarce in any thing
more Noble, than in the capacity and permission of knowing, admiring and
adoring God. Which he that thinks a mean and melancholy employment, might be to
seek for happiness in Heaven it self, if so unqualified a Soul could be
admitted there. The genuine effect of a nearer or more attentive view of
Infinite excellency, is a deep sense of our own great inferiority, to it, and
of the great inferiority, to it, and of the great Veneration and fear we owe
(to speak in a Scripture phrase) to this glorious and fearful Name, (that is,
Object) The Lord Deuteronomy. 28. 58.
our God. And accordingly when God had spoken to Job out of the Whirlewind, and
declared somewhat to him of the Divine greatness; This holy Philosopher much
alters his style, and confesses that in his former discourses of God, he had
uttered what Job. 42. 3, 4, 5, 6.
he understood not, things two wonderful for him, which he knew not. And
having thereupon implored instruction from God, he declares how fit a nearer
knowledge of Him is to make a man have low thoughts of himself; I have heard of
thee, (says he to his Maker) by the hearing of the Ear; but now mine Eye sees
thee: wherefore (infers he) I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

I know you may look upon a good part of this excursion as a digression; but if
it be, 'twill quickly be forgiven, if you will pardon me for it, as easily as I
can pardon my self, for finding my self in David's case, when he said, my heart
was hot within me, Psalm. 39. 3.
while I was musing the fire burned, as he said, Then spoke I with my tongue.
So I was content to let my Pen run on in so pleasant and Noble a Theme, and
endeavor to excite, at least in my self, such a well grounded admiration of
God, as may perhaps be a Romans 12. 2.
part of my Reasonable service to Him, or rational Worship of Him. God is
pleased to declare that he that Psalm. 50. 25.
offers (or as it is in the original Sacrifices) praise, glorifies him, and the
Scripture expressly styles our devotion Sacrifices of praise. And we Heb. 13. 15.
may well suppose that if the Calves of our lips, as our Celebrations of God
are somewhere called, are encouraged by God, those mental offerings that
consist in High and Honorable thoughts of Him, and in lowly humble sentiments
of our selves in the view of His Excellency, will not be less acceptable to
Him: such reverence and devout fear (to speak with Heb 12. 28.
the inspired writer to the Hebrews) being indeed a kind of adoring God Joh.
41. 23.
in Spirit and in Truth. And he that is so employed, may with contentment
compare his condition to that of Zacharias, when it was said of him that his
lot was to burn Incense, Luke 1. 9.
to offer up to God the noblest and purest sort of the Legal Sacrifices. But
that I may not too far digress, I shall only add, That I think my self very
worthily, as well as delightfully employed, when I am seeking after and
bringing together what helps I can, to greaten as much as I am able, those
sentiments of Wonder and Veneration for God, that I am sure can never be great
enough. Especially since the more we know and adore that Infinite Excellency
and Exuberant Fountain of Goodness, the more influence and advantages we derive
from it: agreeably to which God, is introduced in the Scripture, saying of one
of His adorers, to whom in the same Psalm many other blessings are also
promised, because he has set his love upon me, Psalm. 91. 14, 15, 16.
therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high because he has known my
Name.

We have generally, through Incogitancy, or Vice, or Prejudices, or the Majesty
and abstruseness of the Subject, so great an Indisposition to excite and
cherish in our selves an awful Veneration for God, and a studious
Contemplation of His adorable Attributes; that it seemed no more than needful
to employ variety of Arguments, drawn from different Topics, to engage our own
and other Men's minds, and repeated Inculcations to press them, to an Exercise,
which they neither are, nor are willing to be, acquainted with. This
Consideration will, I hope, be my Apology, if in the present Tract I lay hold
on several occasions, and make use of diversities of Discourse, to recommend a
Duty, that does very much both merit and need to be not only proposed but
inculcated. And yet I will not any farther lengthen this foregoing Excursion,
(as I hope you will think it, rather than a mere Digression,) nor any longer
forget, that when I begun it, I was discoursing of the great caution and
profound respect, with which we ought to speak of God.

37. 'Twere tedious to insist on all the Arguments that may be brought of the
Immense Inferiority of Man's Intellect to God's. And therefore I shall here
content my self to illustrate some part of it, by a Simile borrowed from the
superior and inferior Luminaries of Heaven: Humane reason, in comparison of
the Divine Intellect, being but like the Moon in reference to the Sun. For as
the Moon at best is but a small Star in comparison of the Sun, and has but a
dim light, and that too, but borrowed; and has her wane, as well as her full,
and is often subject to Eclipses, and always blemished with dark spots: So the
light of Humane reason is but very small and dim, in comparison of His
Knowledge, that is truly called in Psalm. 36. 9. Jam. 1. 17.
Scripture the Fountain, as well as the Father, of Light; and this Light it
self which shines in the Humane Intellect, is derived from the irradiation it
receives from God, in whose Psalm. 36. 9.
Light it is that we see light. And this, as it is but a communicated light, is
subject to be increased, impaired, and oftentimes to be almost totally
eclipsed; either by the darkning fumes of lusts or passions, or the suspension
of the provoked Donor's beams; and in its best estate, is always blemished with
imperfections, that make it incapable of an entire and uniform Illumination.

Upon these and diverse other Considerations, I, for my part, think it becomes
us Men, to use an awful Circumspection; not only when we make Philosophical
Inquiries or Scholastic Disputes about God, that is, when we presume to
discourse of Him; but when we solemnly design to praise Him, for it is one thing
to say true things of God, and another to say things worthy of God: Our Idea's
of Him may be the best we are able to frame, and yet may far better express the
greatness of our veneration for Him, than the immensity of His Perfection: and
even those Notions of them that may be worthy of the most Intelligent of Men,
will fall extremely short of being worthy of the incomprehensible God. The
brightest and least unlike Idea we can frame of God, is infinitely more
inferior in reference to Him, than a Parhelion is in reference to the Sun.
For, though that Meteor appear a splendid and sublime thing, and have so much
resemblance to the Sun (without whose own beams it is not produced) as to be
readily perceived to be his image, exclusively to that of any other: yet
residing in a Cloud, whose Station is near the Earth, it is by an immense
distance beneath the Sun; and is no less inferior to him in bigness and in
splendor; as well as in many other Attributes. He has in my Opinion the truest
Veneration for God, not who can set forth His Excellencies and Prerogatives in
the most high and pompous expressions: but he who willingly has a deep and real
sense of the unmeasurable inferiority of himself and his best Idea's, to the
unbounded and unparalled Perfections of his Maker. And here Indignation
prompts me to this reflection, that if [Since] even our Hymns and Praises of God
the Supreme Being deserve our blushes and need His pardon, what confusion will
one day cover the faces of those, that do not only speak slightly and
carlesly, but oftentimes contemptuously, and perhaps drollingly, of that
Supreme and Infinitely Perfect Being, to whom they owe those very Faculties and
that wit which they so ungratefully, as well as impiously misemploy? And
indeed, such transcendent Excellencies as the Divine ones must be, might justly
discourage us from offering so much as to Celebrate them, if Infinite Goodness
were not one of them. I shall not therefore allow my self the presumption of
pretending to make as it were a Panegyric of God, of whom it is very easy to
speak too much, though it be not possible to say enough: contenting my self
with an humble Adoration of Perfections whereof my utmost praises would rather
express my own weakness than their excellency: since of this Ineffable Object
the highest things that can be expressed in words, must therefore fall short
because words cannot express them. Which assertion, though it be a Paradox, yet
I think it is not truly an Hyperbole. For we are not able to determine and
reach, so much as in our thoughts, the greatest of all possible numbers: since
we may conceive that any one (whatsoever it be) that can be pitched upon or
assigned, may be doubled, trebl'd, or multiplied by some other Number; or may
be but the Root of a Square or Cubical Number. By which instance (that perhaps
you have not met with) you may perceive that any determinate conception that we
can have (for example) of God's Immensity (to specify now no other of His
Attributes) must therefore be short of it, because it is a determined or
bounded conception. It Is fit therefore that I should at length put limits to my
discourse, since none can be put to the Extent or Perfections of my Subject.

The Conclusion.
THE result of what has been said in the past Excursion, will, I hope, amount
to a sufficient justification of what has been said at the beginning of this
Discourse, about The High Veneration our Intellects owe to God. For Since we
may well think in general, that he has diverse Attributes and Perfections of
which we have no knowledge or suspicion in particular; and Since of those
Attributes of His that are the most manifest to us, as His Power and Wisdom,
we have but a very dim and narrow knowledge; and may clearly perceive that
there is in these an unbounded Extent of Perfection, beyond all that we can
evidently and distinctly discern of them: how unfit must such imperfect
Creatures, as we are, be to talk hastily and confidently of God, as of an
Object that our contracted understandings grasp, as they are able (or pretend
to be so) to do other Objects! And how deep a sense ought we to have of our
Inestimable inferiority, to a Being, in reference to whom, both our ignorance
and our knowledge ought to be the Parents of Devotion! Since our necessary
ignorance proceeds from the numerousness, and Incomprehensibleness of His (many
of them undiscovered) Excellencies, and our knowledge qualifies us but to be
the more Intelligent Admirers of His conspicuous Perfections.

If we duly and Impartially consider these and the like things, we may clearly
perceive, how great an effect and mark of ignorance, as well as presumption, it
is, for us Mortals to talk of God's Nature and the Extent of His Knowledge, as
of things that we are able to look through, and to Measure. Whereas we ought
whenever we speak of God, and of His Attributes, to stand in great awe, lest we
be guilty of any misapprehension or misrepresentation of him, that we might by
any wariness and humility of ours have avoided; and lest by an overweening
Opinion of our selves, we presume that we have a perfect, or at least a
sufficient, knowledge of every thing in God, whereof we have some knowledge;
since this at the least consists in such Notions, as are rather suited to our
limited faculties, than any way equal to His Boundless Perfections.

That Higher Order of Intellectual Beings the Angels; though their minds be so
Illuminated, and their Knowledge so extensive, the Angels themselves, I say,
are in the Scripture affirmed to be desirous to pry into the Mysteries of the
Gospel: whence we may guess, how far they are from penetrating to the bottom of
what the Scripture calls the Depths 1 Cor. 13. 10.
of God; and how much farther they are from comprehending the Infinite Nature
of God. And accordingly when in the (formerly mentioned) Majestic Vision, that
appeared to the Prophet Isaich, they are set forth Isa. 6.
as Attendants about the Throne of God, they are represented covering their
faces with their wings, as not Isa. 6. 2.
able to support, or not presuming to Gaze on, the Dazzling Brightness of the
Divine Majesty. And shall we poor sinful Mortals, who are infinitely beneath
Him, not only by the degeneracy and sinfulness of our lives, but even by the
imperfection and inferiority of our nature; presume to talk forwardly or
irreverently of the Divine Essence and Perfections, without considering the
immense distance betwixt God and us; and how unable, as well as unworthy, we
are to penetrate the recesses of that Inscrutable as well as Adorable Nature,
and how much better it would become us, when we speak of Objects so much above
us, to imitate the just humility of that Inspired Poet, that said Psalm. 136. 6.
Such Knowledge is too Wonderful for me; it is High I cannot attain unto it:
And join in that seemingly, and yet but seemingly, Lofty Celebration of God,
Nehe. 9. 5.
That His Glorious Name is Exalted above all Blessing and Praise.

THE END.

