SHORT MEMOIRS FOR THE Natural Experimental HISTORY OF Mineral Waters.

Addressed By way of Letter to a Friend.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for. Samuel Smith at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1684/5.

Advertisement OF THE PUBLISHER.
I Find by some discourse I lately had with the Author, that his design in
drawing up his Memoirs, being to set down what had occurred to him of his own
Observation and Experiments, he purposely forbore to consult the Authors that
have professedly written upon Medical Waters, he would by no means have it
thought, that he undervalued those Learned Writers that he forb^^e to cite,
because he had them not at hand, as well as because his design did not require
he should transcribe from them. And therefore he desires, that his Readers
should not be kept, by any thing he has written, from consulting other Writers
that have treated of Mineral Waters, especially the late Ingenious
Exercitations, of the Learned Doctor Lister De Fontibus Medicatis Angliae
(after mentioned by our Author,) and the curious little Tract of the French
Mineral Waters, that was brought our Author in English, after his Memoirs were
come to him from the Press, published by the Virtuosi of the famous Royal
Academy, of Sciences at Paris, especially where they curiosly examine the
Saline and earthly. Residences of Waters, which our Author has not done to the
remains of our English Acidulae, of which Liquors he had for the most part such
incompetent quantities as concurred with another reason to discouraged him from
publishing his Trials on them. Yet I may safely say what he offers here to the
Reader is far beyond any thing that has been published in this kind; for the
Virtuosi as well as the Water-drinkers may reap no small benefit by the perusal
of this learned Treatise, as containing a great number both of useful
Observations, and unusual Experiments.

Advertisement.
THe Author of the following Papers had thoughts of reviewing and enlarging
them before he parted with them; and at least, of an annexing Notes to several
of those Titles of the historical Platform, that are yet left untouched. But,
besides his want of health and leisure, he was, by the supervening of some
urgent occasions, obliged abruptly enough to lay aside this work he was about,
and apply himself to others, that concerned him more than the Scrutiny of
Mineral Waters could. Wherefore considering, that he had already made
Annotations, though but short ones, upon most of the considerablest Titles or
Topics of inquiry, enumerated in the Second and Principal Part of his Schemes
above them, he was content to give the ensuing writing unfinished as it was, to
the Solicitations of some Vertuosi, who rather than tarry till he should have
an opportunity, which he knows not how long he shall want, were desirous to
take what they sound ready, with all its imperfections. Which pressingness of
theirs he could not deny to be the more excusable, on this occasion, because
the communicated writing is not pretended to be a full and methodical History
of Mineral Waters, but only a bundle of Short Memoirs, contributed toward the
compiling of such a Work.

These, that they may be the more conveniently cited or referred to, I thought
sit to divide into six Sections; where of the First is introductory, and and
contains some General Considerations about the Occasion, the Subject, and some
other things relating to those Memoirs. The Second contains only a set of
Titles for the First Part of the proposed Work, because urgent occasions kept
me from making, as I intended, some Marginal Notes, upon several of the
particular Articles. The third exhibits a Scheme of Titles for the Second Part
of the proposed work, viz. The way of experimentally exploring portions of a
Mineral Water severed from the Spring or Receptacle. And because the Second
Part is that which I mainly designed, I have referred to it two other Sections,
one, which is the Fourth, containing a Collection of Experiments and
Observations relating to the usual way of examining Mineral Waters by Galls, as
a Specimen given on the 13th Title of larger Annotations on the Titles of the
Second Part; and the other consisting of less copious Annotations, and
sometimes much shorter Notes on diverse other Articles of the same Second Part.
To which Lastly is subjoined the sixth Section, consisting only of a Set of
Articles, referrable to the Medicinal use of Mineral Waters; together with a
Conclusion addressed to the ingenious Dr. that set me upon this Task. In
prosecuting of which I desire it may not be thought strange, that I have not
cited Authors that have written of Thermae or of Acidulae. For in the
disadvantageous Circumstances wherein I wrote, I should have been kept from
consulting them, if I had had them at hand. And I thought it enough for for me
at that time, to impart to my Friends, what my own Experiments and Thoughts had
furnished me with, how little or mean soever that was. Which Advertisement is
therefore the more fit to be here given, that I may not divert any from
studying those more elaborate Pieces, that have within no long time been
published by skilful Men, and especially by the very learned, Dr. Lister.

The most Material Heads contained in the foregoing Treatise.
1. THE Advertisement to the Reader, containing the Division, Method and Scope
of this present Treatise. 2. The occasion of this Treatise, and its importance.
page 1, 2 3. That the best way of discovering the Qualities of Mineral Waters,
is a long and sufficient Experience. 3 4. What may encourage us to undertake
the Natural History of Mineral Waters? 4 5. What things are fit to be taken
notice of by him that would give an historical account of Mineral Waters. 5, 6
6. That the Author has both qualified Practical and Speculative Physicians by
this Treatise. 7 7. What hindered the Author from illustrating all the sets of
Titles with a kind of Rationale. 8 8. Wherefore the Author has proposed so
many different inquiries about Mineral Waters. 9, 10, 11, 12 9. Upon what
account the Examine of the properties of Mineral Waters is of so great
importance. 13, 14 10. That men should make search both after Subterraneal
Springs and Wells, and their operations upon Humane Bodies. 15, 16 11. Titles
for the Natural History of a Mineral Water proposed considered as being gilt in
its Channel or Receptacles, being the first or Mineralogical part of the
designed Work. 17 12. Titles for the Natural History of a Mineral Water
proposed considered as drawn out of the Spring or Receptacle, being the Second
or Physico Chemical part of the designed work. 24 13. An Appendix containing
Paralipomena, and a Chaos of observations and Experiments. 32 14. The powder of
Galls fitter to produce a new color in Mineral Wa^^^^ than their infusion. 33
15. The parts of the infusion of Galls that produce the new color with
ferruginous Waters are apt to fly away; neither the tincture nor the powder
must be stale. 34, 35 16. The best way for producing of new colors with
Mineral Waters is to make the infusion of Galls with a certain weight of the
Powder in a determinate weight of Water. 35, 36 17. Oaken leaves, dried red
Rose leaves, the Juice, the Peel of Pomegranates, the Blossoms called commonly
Callaustia, and some other astringent vegetables may be substituted to Galls.
38 18. The Eye must be Judge of the Impregnation of the Water by the infusion
or Powder of Galls. 37 19. The way of trying Mineral Waters by the change of
colors that Galls produce in them, is neither of that extent, nor of that
certainty it is vulgarly presumed to be of 39 20. There are diverse Metalline
Oars, and other Mineral Bodies, which not particpating of Iron, will not be
discoverable by the infusion of Galls. ib. 21. A Body of a Metalline Nature and
not participating of Iron, may, with infusion of Galls, afford a very dark
color. 40 22. It Is not certain if all the Liquors impregnated with Iron will
be discovered to be so by the color they afford with Galls. ib. 23. That it is
a mistake generally taken for granted, viz. That the infusion of Galls will
certainly discover by becoming black, or Purple of a Mineral Water that is
mixed with it be to vitriolate. 41 24. An odd kind of whitish Earth to be found
in the Northern Countries of England where there come diverse Mineral Waters. 42
25. Galls being cast into the solutions of several Metals produced no blackish
color, except with the solution of Gold. 44 26. A Sulphurous Liquor
proclaiming notable changes of colors with several solutions of Metals. ib.
27. It Is fit, if not necessary, that the experimenter look upon the change of
colors made by Galls both while'tis a producing, and where'tis produced in a
good light, and with a heedful eye. 46 28. That there may be a kind of
Physiognogmy of natural Bodies, as well as of Humane faces. ib. 29. A way to
vary the Shades and other Phoenomena of Colors produced with Mineral Liquors.
47 30. Another way somewhat differing from the former. 48 31. It Is convenient
to use besides Galls or Oaken-leaves, for the producing of new Colors with
Mineral Waters, Red-Roses, Balerustium, Leolewood, Brasil, and other astringent
Pigments. 50 32. A way of making a Liquor which will turn black with a solution
either of Martial or Capreous Vitriol. 51. 33. Many Waters may partake of
Sulphur, without being taken notice of to do so. 54 34. That Copper that has
been melted into a body, may be so subtilised and disguised, as to have a
multitude of its metalline parts made ascend with others in the form of a
transparent Liquor like common Water, and yet by putting to it another
substance, as volatile and colorless as it self, it will presently discover
the Copper it contained by turning as blew as Sapphire. 55 35. Experiments
discovering the inexistence of Arsenick in Water, and somewhat of the nature of
that dangerous Mineral. 56 36. The deleterious nature of Arsenick consists not
only, or mainly in a transcendently Acid, nor in a lixiviate causticle quality,
but in a corrosiveness sui generis. ib. 37. An useful way for Water-drinkers,
of examining a Mineral Water suspected to contain Arsenick. 60 38. Why the
Author has insisted so much upon the Thirteenth Article of the set of Titles.
61 39. To what the knowledge of the degree of coldness in the Water, especially
if it be extraordinary may be useful. 63 40. Diverse ways of estimating the
degrees of coldness, and heat in the Water. 64 41. The usefulness of the
knowledge of the specific gravity of a Mineral Water. ib. 42. The difficulty
of weighing exactly Liquors. 67 43. The most exact way of measuring the weight
of Waters. 68 44. The determinate weights of most Mineral Waters, and others
about London, as likewise of the German Spaw-water. 69 45. How to discover the
kind of Soil through which the Water has passed. 71 46. No difference observed
between Mineral Waters, and common Water looked upon through good Microscopes.
72 47. That the little Creatures we discover through magnifying Glasses in
Water, wherein Pepper has been infused, are not inanimate concretions, but
really living creatures. 73 48. Where the Scent of several Mineral Waters are
best judged of. 74 49. That there are some Springs of ^^l Viny odor. ib. 50.
That men are apt to take all stinking Waters for sulphurous, whereas sometimes
they are bituminous, tho the Spring may sometimes partake both of Sulphur and
Bitumen. 75 51. That there is a manifest difference in reference to
transportation in such Ferruginous Waters as are lighter than common Water. 76
52. how we may ghess at the Saltness of Waters. 79 53. That it is not easy to
discover the accidity of Liquors. 81 54. By what ways we may know the
predominancy of Acidity in the Salt proposed? 85 55. How we may know the
predominancy of an Alcaly in the Salt of a Mineral Water. 86 56. Salt afforded
by the famous Waters of Bourben in France found to be Alcalisate. 88 57.
Several ways of discovering Vitriol to be predominant in the Saline part of a
Mineral Water. ib. 56. What Salts our English waters are impregnated with, and
from what Salt the purgative virtue that is found in many of them, as in Epsom,
Barnet, and Acton Waters, etc. does proceed. 90 57. That two Bodies, which are
neither of them Cathartick, may by change of texture wrought in one another,
compose a third Body, that is briskly purgative. 92 58. How great an inequality
may be sometimes met with in the proportion that the same quantity of two
differing Mineral Waters bear to the Caput Mortuum, they respectively afford.
94 59. That a small quantity of matter of which perhaps not one half is Saline,
or Metalline (the rest being terresstrial) may impart a manifest virtue to a
great proportion of Water. 95 60. A Spirit richly, impregnated with volatiliz'd
Sulphur, produces with Vitriol, in a trice whether in the form of a powder, or
solution, a very dark, or blackish color. 99 61. Titles for the natural
History of a Mineral Water proposed considered as a Medicine being the third
part of the designed work. 102 62. A short discourse of the Author relating to
this present Treatise. 110 63. If the fall of Rains weakneth the Virtue of the
Mineral Waters. 6, 113.
Short Memoirs FOR THE Natural and Experimental HISTORY OF Particular Mineral
Waters, Addressed to his Learned Friend, Dr. S. L*
SECT. I.
SO many years, Sir, have past, since I had occasion to consider Mineral
Waters, and opportunity to make Trials on them with any Application of Mind;
that, though since that time some Virtuosi have been pleased publicly to
declare, that they found some directions they received from me not unuseful to
the Examen of such Waters; yet having sorgotten many of my past thoughts, and
lost on mislaid most of my Memorials about matters of fact relating to those
Liquors, I fear I shall not be able to satisfy either you, or my self, by what
I now write about them. But how ever, since you will needs have me say
something upon this Subject since it is a noble one, as that where in the
health of thousands is concerned; since it is of late grown to be more prized
and discoursed of, than ever; and since I have observed men's curiosity about it
to have been confined to very narrow Limits, most men contenting themselves
with the discoveries they can make by the Infusion of Galls (or their Body,)
and perhaps a slightly improved evaporation: Since, I say, I have these
invitations to obey you, I am content to offer you my Advices, such as they
are, for the drawing up of such a natural History of a Mineral Water proposed
as, being comprehensive of many Inquiries and Ways of Indagation that even
Physicians have either not known or overlooked, may probably afford a more
reaching notice, and enlarged knowledge of the Subject treated of. Upon which
account I have, I confess, a desire and an aim, though no great hope, that this
rude Essay may, by your Improvements and those of your Learned Friends, be made
of some service to the Public.

2. But here I must ingenuously own to you, that notwithstanding the many ways
I propose, of discovering the natures or Qualities of Mineral Waters, yet I
think the surest way of knowing them, is a long and sufficient Experience of
their good and bad effects. For I strongly suspect, and it may be partly know,
that there are, beneath the surface of the Earth, diverse Mineral Substances,
some fixed, and some volatile, some in the form of hard Bodies, some of soft
ones, some of Liquors, and some of Fumes, diverse of which the generality, even
of Learned men, are altogether strangers to; besides those that, though some men
may chance to have seen, have their natures so little known, that they have not
so much as names assigned to them. So that when I consider, that of the
Ingredients we are unacquainted with (to pass by all the rest that the Earth
may conceal) the proportions wherein they are mingled may be numberless, and
the Qualities resulting from these Commixtures may be very differing from those
of the separate Ingredients, I am apt too look upon the difficulty, of Securely
determining the Effects of Mineral Waters a priori, as little, if at all, less
than insuperable to Humane Understandings.

3. But this difficulty is not such, as ought to make us think it useless, to
have a good Project of the natural History of a Mineral Water. For it is no
small advantage, to know what particulars are fit for our Inquiry, to be
furnished with a Set of heads, to which one may conveniently refer whatever he
tries, or observes, about the Subject proposed. And (which is yet more
considerable) to be furnished with variety of Methods or ways, to make Trials
fit for investigating the Nature, or examining the Qualities, of the proposed
Water; since by the number and variety of purposely and fitly devised
Experiments, he that makes them may, as it were, view his subject on all sides,
and be much assisted to conjecture, what Saline, or other Minerals known to us,
and what quantities of them, do impregnate the Water he examines, and
consequently what effects they are like to produce in Humane Bodies.

4. Though there be three sorts of things, fit to be taken notice of by him
that would give an Historical account of a Mineral Water, whether cold or hot,
yet contenting my self to treat but very cursorily of those that belong to the
first, and to the third of the three sorts, I have made a more full and
particular Enumeration of the Titles that peculiarly belong to the second sort
of observables, namely those that mention the various Trials, Chemical and
Mechanical, that are to be made with the Water after it is taken out of the
Spring. This I purposely did, chiefly because 'twas only of this sort of
particulars that you desired my thoughts, and partly also because they are most
wanted and desired by Naturalists and Physicians, and are like to prove the
most instructive to them; having also this to recommend them, that, to make the
greatest part of them by far, it is not necessary that a man repair to the
place where the Spring rises, but he may at leisure examine the Water at home,
where he may be accommodated with Furnaces, vessels, and other conveniences, to
make his Trials upon it.

5. A much less discerning Reader, than you, may perceive that in sorming the
ensuing Project of a Natural History, I aimed much more to assist practical
Physicians to find the virtues and effects of Mineral Waters, than to insorm
Speculative Naturalists of their causes and manner of being generated. But yet
a heedful peruser may find, that I have so endeavored to gratify Physicians
that I have not been altogether ^anting [especially in the First Part, which is
almost wholly Mineralogical,] to the curiosity of Philosophers, as it relates
to all sorts of Mineral Waters: Though you may easily enough discern, and readily
confess it, that the following Paper does much more regard those cold ones,
that from the Acid Taste that is found in most of them are called Acidulae, than
those other Waters, that from their heat are commonly styled Thermae, because
the former sort of Mineral Waters is that, which I have had the opportunity to
be the more conversant in, as well as that, about which alone you have desired
my Observations.

6. I had once thoughts of illustrating the following Setts of Titles with a
kind of Rationale, briefly declaring the reason of their order and their number
(sor both these were considerately pitched upon, not lighted on by chance.) But
I was obliged to omit it, when I sound (as I quickly did) that I had too little
leisure and health, to employ much of either upon a troublesome work of no
greater importance. And therefore, knowing your Perspicacity to be more than
sufficient to make you discern some reason for the order wherein I have
marshalled the Articles of the last Set of Titles which fall under the
Cognizance of your own Profession, I have not been solicitous to assign that
Reason. And I presume 'twill be no great harm, if my have have made me also
omit to perform at present the Intention I had to make here and there some
Brief Marginal Notes upon some of the Articles of the first Part. And I thought
it sufficient (if not also capable of making some amends for the newly
mentioned Omissions) to make them somewhat numerous, and some of them large
Annotations upon the Titles or Articles of the II Part: This being indeed the
chief that I designed to insist on, and present you.

7. I expect it will be wondered at, that so many Inquiries should be proposed,
and so many things directed to be taken notice of, about a Subject that has
been thought so barren, that men are wont to think their curiosity great
enough, if they inquire what colors the Mineral Water will strike with Galls,
or Oaken leaves; and do observe what kind and quantity of Salt will remain
after the evaporation of the Liquor: And I much fear, that some, even of your
profession, will think I cut them out a great deal too much work, by so many
troublesome Queries and Trials. But I confess that nature or long experience
having made me, tho'not a Skeptical, yet a suspicious and diffident
Philosophiser, I think my self obliged, on difficult occasions, to ask more
than ten Questions before I presume to answer one. Nor do I think that the
slightness of another curiosity dispenses me from industriously exercising
mine. I might on this occasion represent, that though the greatest Naturalists,
and Physicians among the Ancients, did not only mention, but admire and
discourse of the Loadstone; yet our Gilbert thought fit to examine it further,
and was thereby able to discover far more numerous Phenomenon, than all them
put together had taken notice of. And I might add other instances to the same
purpose; but to answer more closely, and directly, I say, that, to discover the
nature of Mineral Waters, being a thing far more difficult than those, that
have not tried, do imagine, I think we ought to view the Subject in as many
differing lights as we can expose it to, and take in as many helps to discovery
as we can; since a great many particulars, that singly, or at the first view,
seem not very pertinent, if they be surveyed in conjunction, and be skilfully
applied, may much conduce to the desired end. And perhaps hereafter it will be
found useful, if not necessary, to make large additions to the Topics, whose
number is now thought redundant: For the more qualities and other particulars,
we are acquainted with in any Subject, the better grounded, and the more
enlarged knowledge we have of it. As for the trouble it may cost, to make the
proposed Enquiries and Trials, it may be said, 1. That they are not all
necessary (though useful) nor yet of equal moment, and therefore the omission
of some, that are less important, may not disappoint the main Searches. 2. I
have purposely made most of the Trials as easy and short, as the matter and
Scope will permit; and those, that will not undergo some trouble in seeking an
useful truth, do not deserve to find it, especially since, in the chase of
noble discoveries, as in hunting the nobler game, the toil oftentimes makes a
part of the pleasure. And I have made the less scruple, to be somewhat ample in
the enquiries I propound, because diverse observations have persuaded me, that
Physicians ought to consider very well both the nature of the Waters they
ordain, and to what persons, for what Diseases, and in what manner, they
prescribe the use of them: For though many look upon them as such innocent
Medicines, as, if they do no good, can at least do no harm, yet the effects,
that have too often insu'd the unskilful use of them, especially when it was
long continued, allow me not to look upon the drinking of Mineral Waters as a
slight thing, that may safely be played with, but as that whereby we have seen,
as very much good, so a great deal of mischief, done, especially some time
after the operation is thought to be quite over, and perhaps almost forgotten.

8. I look upon the examen of the Properties, and other Qualities, of Mineral
Waters, as a thing that is therefore of the greater importance, because I am
apt to think, upon probable grounds that, by a diligent inquiry, there may be
discovered in England (and in diverse other Countries too) a far greater number
than is yet imagined of Mineral Waters, especially Ferruginous ones; which I
therefore guess will be found very numerous, because, by some uncommon ways of
Trial that I have employed, I have found that diverse Minerals that either men
knew not what to make of, or by reason of their passing under other names did
not suspect to be Martial, did yet partake of, and perhaps abound with, parts
of a Martial Nature. And I show in another Paper [about the Magnetism of the
Earth] that kindly provident Nature, or rather its Divine Author has, under
various disguises, furnished our Globe with a far greater plenty and variety of
Iron Ores and Minerals, that partake of that Metal, the most useful by far to
mankind, than of any other Metal. And as Martial Minerals do thus abound in the
Earth, so they are more disposed, than one would suspect such hard Bodies could
be, to impregnate even such Liquors as are not manifestly acid, and seem
unlikely to be able to work upon Minerals far less hard than they. To make this
probable, we took not Iron Ore, or Embryonated Mars, but pure Steel it self,
the same as Needles were made of; and upon the minute Filings of it, we put
some Tincture of Galls made with common Water, and filtred through Cap-paper,
that the present color of the Liquor, and the change we expected to be made in
it, might the better appear: And by this Trial we found that, in less than an
hour, the transparent infusion of Galls was so altered, as to be grown not only
opacous, but of a dark and almost inky color, which it retained even after
Filtration; and this though the Vial, that contained it, was very slender. A not
unlike effect was produced by small Filings of steel, but somewhat slow: lier
in the red Tincture of Brazil, and in that of Logwood, made with common Water.

9. I know not whether it may not be fit to be represented, on this occasion,
that, in Countries manifestly abounding with Metalline and other Minerals, it
may perhaps be worth while, that men's Curiosity descend much lower than the
superficies or Turf of the ground, and make search both after Subterraneal
Springs, and Wells, and their operations upon Humane Bodies. For I have upon
Inquiry been assured, by those that in several places have visited Mines, that
they have met with in them, and sometimes at very great Depths, running, as
well as Stagnant, Waters, of differing Tastes, and sometimes other Quality; and
that the Diggers, venturing to make use of them to quench their Thirst, as they
found some of them mischievous (as Corrosive, Petrific,) etc. so they met with
others that were not only innocently. Potable, but Medicinal. Of both these
sorts we have Instances in our Tin-Mines of Cornwall in Devonshire. And of the
latter sort I received from an ingenious Gentleman, that has the oversight of
some Cornish Waterworks, this memorable Answer to an Inquiry I sent him. The
strangest Account, says he, of Mineral Waters that I have yet had, was of that
in the bottom of a Tin-work called Karnkey, wrought above 60 fathom [that is
360 foot deep;] the Mineral being a mixture of Tin and Iron, and the Water Red
and Puddle, yet drunk was cool and not nauseous, and would pass by Urine, near
as Red as it was drunk, as I have been informed by those that drunk of it
whilst it [the Mine] was working, being now struck out, [that is, the vein of
Ore being degenerated, or lost.] However I believe Experiments might yet be
made with Water much of the same nature. Thus far he, from whom notwithstanding
the remoteness of the place he lives in, I hope to get some of this Liquor, to
make Trial of; which if I do, I design you an account of the Effects.

I could enlarge upon the Subjects of these two last (the 8th and the 9th)
Numbers. But after so long an Introduction to short Memoirs, it is high time
that I come at length to set down the Topics themselves that I design to
propose.

SECT. II.
TITLES
For the Natural History of a Mineral Water proposed, considered as being yet
in its Channel or Receptacles: (Being the first or mineralogical part of the
designed work.)

HE that would draw up the History of a Mineral Water. [to have its qualities
some examined and some investigated,] should, in my opinion, make three sorts
of observations about it. For first he ought to take notice of those
particulars that relate to it whilst it is yet under ground, or in its native
receptacles* Next he is to examine the properties and other qualities of it,
when it is drawn up by men at the Springhead or other receptacle: Lastly he is
to consider the operations and effects of it upon Humane Bodies, whether sick
or sound, according to the several ways and circumstances made use of in
administering it.

To the first of these three sorts of observations may be referred such heads
or titles as these.

1. In what climate and parallel, or in what degree of Latitude, the Mineral
Water does spring up, or stagnate?

2. Whether the Springhead, or other receptacle, do chiefly regard the East,
the West, the North, or the South?

3. Whether the Water be found in a Plain or Valley? And if not whether it
arise in a Hillock, a Hill, or a Mountain?

4. And whether it be found at or near the top, the middle, or the bottom, of
the rising ground.

5. Whether the waters leave any secrement, or other unusual substance, upon
the Stones, or other Bodies that lie in the Channels they pass through as they
glide along, or the Receptacles that contain them?

6. Whether there be beneath or near the Medicinal Water, any subterraneal
fire, that has manifest chimney's or vents and visibly (by night only, or also
by day,) burns or smoaks, either constantly, or at certain periods of time?

7. Whether at or near the mouth, or orifice, of the abovementioned chimneys or
vents, there be found either flowers of Brimstone, or a Salt like Sal-Armoniac,
or some other Mineral Exhalations in a dry Form?

8. Whether there be under or near the course or channel of the Water, any
subterraneal Aestuary, or latent mass, of hot, but not actually, or at least
visibly, burning matters? And whether such Aestuary afford an uniform heat as
to sense, or have periodical hot fits, as it were; and if so, whether these
come at certain and stated times, or uncertainly or irregularly?

9. Whether it be observed that over the Aestuary, or in some other
neighboring part of the place, where the Mineral Water springs, there arise
any visible Mineral fumes on smoke, (which when they do appear are wont to do
it early in the Morning, or late in the evening,) and if such fumes ascend, how
plentiful they are, of what color and of what smell*

10. What is the more obvious nature of the not manifestly Metalline, nor
Marcasitical part of the Soil, which the Medicinal Water passes through or
touches? And what are the Qualities of the neighboring Soil, and the adjacent
Country? As whether it be rocky, stony, clayish, sandy, chalky, etc.

11. Whether there be any Ores, marcasites, or Earths, (especially highly
colored ones) impregnated with Mineral Juices, to be met with in the course of
the medicinal Spring, or in the receptacle of the same water stagnant? And what
these Minerals are, whether copperish, ferrugineous, Marcasitical, etc. And
whether the Ores do, or do not, abound in the Metalline portion? As also with
what other Ingredient as spar, cauke, Sulphur, Orpiment, Arsenick, etc (Whether
Innocent or hurtful) they are mingled, or else compacted together?

12. Whether it can be discovered, that the Spring of the Medicinal Water was
common Water before it came to such a place, or part of the soil it runs
through, and there begins to be manifestly impregnated with Mineral Bodies?

13. And whether in this case, it makes any effervescence, or other conflict,
with the Mineral it imbibes, or with any other Water or Liquor that it meets
with in its way; and whether the conflict produce any manifest heat or no?

14. Whether, if the Mineral Water proposed be manifestly hot, or
extraordinarily cold; the Springs it flows out at, or the Receptacle it
stagnates in, have near it (and if it have how near) a Spring, or well of
Water, of a contrary quality, as it is observed in very neighboring Springs in
some few places of France, and elsewhere?

15. Whether, when the Water appears in the Spring or Receptacle there appear
also, either floting at the Top, or lying at the bottom, or swimming between
both, any drops or greater quantity of Oil, (like Naphta or Petroleum,) or some
other bituminous and inflammable substance.

16. Whether the Water be considerably altered in quantity or quality, bythe
different seasons of the year, as Summer, Winter, etc. By the much varying
Temperatures of the Air, as to heat, coldness, drought, etc. By the plenty, or
paucity, frequency, or unfrequency, of falling Rains, or Snows: And what may be
the bounds, and measures of these alterations of the Mineral Water?

17. Whether any thing considerable can be certainly discovered, or any very
probable conjecture made of the nature and qualities of the substances, that
impregnate the Water, by Chymically and Mechanically examining the Mineral
Earths, through which it flows, or in which it Stagnates? And particularly, by
observing their color, whether native, or acquired by being kept in the fire;
their specific gravity; their affording, or not affording, any Salt, or other
soluble substance, by decoction; their being soluble, or indissoluble, in
particular Chemical Menstruums of several sorts, as Aqua fortis, Spirit of
Salt, etc. And their being committed to destillation in Vessels of differing
sorts, and various degrees of fire, with care to receive separately the
differing substances they afford, whether in the form of Liquors, or of
Flowers; and by examining these substances by fit and proper ways as also the
Cap. Mort. by calcination, elixiviation, and (if it will bear such a fire)
vitrification?

SECT. III.
TITLES
For the Natural History of a Mineral Water proposed, considered as being drawn
out of its Spring or Receptacle: (Being the II. or Physico Chemical part of the
designed work.)

THat this Scheme of Titles may be the better understood, and the more
instructive and useful though I have not time to write an ample com meant upon it
all, yet I thought fit to illustrate most of its Particular Articles by such
Notes as may either explicate the meaning of what is but briefly couched, or
deliver some of the practical ways of Trial, that I make use of, on occasion of
the Subject mentioned in the Title or Article, whereto the Notes belong. These
being diverse of them too large to be conveniently placed the Margin, are all of
them set down together after this Set of Titles.

TITLE.
1. Of the actual coldness or heat of the Mineral Water proposed. 2. Of the
specific Gravity of the Mineral Water proposed. 3. Of the Transparency, the
Muddiness, or the Opacity of the Mineral Water. 4. Whether the Mineral Water
will, by slading for a competent time, let fall of it self any Oker, or other
earthy substance, especially though the Liquor be kept from the Air. 5. Whether
any thing, and if any thing, what can be discovered in the Mineral Water by the
help of the best Microscopes adapted to view Liquors? 6. Of the color or
colournes of the Mineral Water. 7. Of the odor of the Mineral Water, as
Acetous, Winy, Sulphurous. Bituminous, etc. 8. Of the taste of the Mineral
Water, as Acid, Ferruginous, Vitriolate, Lixivial, Sulphurous, etc. 9. Whether
any change will be produced in the transparency, color, odor, or taste of the
Mineral Water, by its being taken up at the Springhead or other Receptacle, or
removed to some distance, by its being kept stopped or unstop'd for a greater or
lesser space of time; and by its being much warmed or refrigerated, and also,
by naturally or artificially, produced cold, turned into Ice, and thawed again?
10. Of the thinness or viscosity of the Mineral Water. 11. Whether the Mineral
Water be more easy to be heated and cooled, and to be dilated and condensed
than common Water? 12. Whether the Mineral Water will of it self putrify, and
if it will, whether sooner or later than common Water, and with what kind or
degree of stink and other Phenomenon? 13. Of the change of colors producible
in the Mineral Water by astringent Drugs, as Galls, Pomgranate-peels,
Balaustium, red Roses, Myrobolans, OakenLeaves, etc. as also by some Liquors or
Juices of the Body. 14. Whether any thing will be precipitated out of the
Mineral Waters by Salts or Saline Liquors, whether they be Acid, as Spirit of
Salt, of Niter, Aqua Fortis, etc. Or volatile Alcali's, as strong Spirit of
Urine, Sal-armoniac, etc. Or Lixiviate Salts, as Oil of Tartar per deliquium,
fixed Niter, etc. 15. How to examine with evaporation, whether the Mineral Water
contain common Salt, and if it do, whether it contains but little or much? 16.
How to examine, without evaporation, whether the Mineral Water have any
acidity, though it be but very little. 17. Of the Liquor or Liquors afforded by
the Mineral Water by Destillation in Balneo, and other ways. 18. Of the
residence, Cap. Mort. of the Mineral Water, when the Liquor is totally
evaporated or distilled off; and whether the Cap. Mort. be the same in quantity
and quality, if produced by either of those ways? 19. Whether the proposed
Water, being in Glass-Vessels exactly luted together slowly and warily
abstracted to a thickish substance; This being reconjoin'd to the distilled
Liquor, the Mineral Water will be redintegrated, and have again the same
Texture and Qualities it had at first? 20. Whether a Glass-full of the Mineral
Water, being Hermetically sealed and boiled in common Water, deep enough to
keep it always covered, will have its Texture so altered as to suffer an
observable change in any of its manifest Qualities? And if it do, in what
Qualities, and to what degree of alteration? 21. Of the proportion of the dry
Cap. Mort. to the Mineral Water that affords it. 22. Of the division of the
Cap. Mort. into saline and terrestrial and other parts not dissoluble in Water,
in case it contain both or more sorts. 23. Of the proportion of the Saline part
of the Cap. Mort. to the Terrestrial. 24. Of the fixity or volatility of the
Saline part in strong fires. 25. Whether the Saline part will shoot into
Crystals or no? and if it will, what figure the grains will be of? and if it
will not whether, being combined with a Salt that will (as purified Sea Salt
Peter etc.) it will then chrystallize; and if it do, into what figures it will
shoot, especially if any of them be reducible to those of any species of Salt
known to us? 26. To examine whether the Saline part be, ex praedominio, acid,
alcalizate, or adiaphorous? 27. Of the observables in the Terestrial portion of
the Cap. Mort. as besides its quantity in reference to the Saline, its color,
odor, volatility or fixity in a strong fire; its being soluble, or not
dissoluble by diverse Menstruum's, as Spirit of Vinegar, Spirit of Urine, Oil of
Tartar, etc. 28. Whether, and (if any thing) how much the mineral waters Earth
looses by strong and lasting Ignition? What changes of color, etc. it thereby
receives? whether it be capable of Vitrification perse? and what color, (if
any,) it will impart to fine and well powdered Venice glass if they be exactly
mixed, and flux'd into a Transparent Glass? 29. Of the Oeconomical, and
Mechanical uses of the Mineral Water, as in Brewing, Baking, Washing of
Linen, Tanning of Leather, or Dying of Cloth, Callico's, Silks, etc, as these
may assist in discovering the Ingredients and Qualities of the Liquor proposed.
30. Of the imitation of Natural Medicinal Waters, by Chemical and other
artificial ways, as that may help the Physician to guess at the quality and
quantity of the Ingredients that impregnate the Natural Water proposed.
An Appendix
Containing 1. PAralipomena, or things directly belonging to the History and
pretermitted in it. 2. A Chaos of Observations and Experiments, remotely or
indirectly referable either to one or more of the foregoing Titles, or to the
common Subject of them all.


SECT. IV.
Experimental Remarks upon the (usual) way of examining Mineral Waters, by the
help of Galls: Delivered by way of Larger Annotations upon the XIII. Article of
the II. Part.

SInce the change of color that Mineral Waters produce in the Infusion or
Tincture of Galls, is the most usual way that many Physicians, and the almost
only that some of them, endeavor to discover or examine Mineral Waters by; it
may be worth while, in this place, to set down some remarks, that I have made
about this way of probation; and the rather because it may, mutatis mutandis,
be not unusefully applied to the exploring the Quality's of Mineral Waters by
Colorations, though made with other Materials than Galls. First then it may be
observed, that one need not make an Infusion or Tncture of Galls in common
Water, to try if by their means a new color will be produced. For I am wont to
beat them to Powder, and keep them in a Glass (not too big) exactly stopped, by
which means I have them always in readiness to mingle with the Mineral Water,
and alter the color of it, if Galls be able to do it, almost in atrice:
whereas to draw the Tincture of Galls with Simple Water, often takes up several
hours, and the tinging parts are much weakn'd by being diluted by the
Menstruum. If you would have a Tincture, the Powder of Galls, tied up close in
a Ragg, and with it hung in the Liquor, makes the Infusion less muddy. If you
be in have, and have none of the Powder at hand, you may scrape as much of a
Gall-Apple, as you need into the Mineral Water.

2. I have observed those Parts of the Infusion of Galls (especially it made by
heat) that produce the new Color with Ferruginous Waters, to be more apt to
fly away than one would think, the Infusion becoming often unfit to alter the
Color of the Martial Waters, whilst yet it self appears sufficiently high
colored. Upon which account, I choose to make a Tincture of Galls not long
before I mind to use it; And if I employ dry Galls, to take Powder that is not
stale.

3. It Is no safe way, and may be very erroneous, that is usually taken in
mixing Galls or their Infusion with the Water to be explored so carelessly, as
is wont to be done. For those that are curious to make good Ink, will easily
believe, that much of the deepness of the Color depends upon the Proportion of
Galls to the other Ingredient; and accordingly that by putting a much greater,
or a much lesser, quantity of Galls, into such a quantity of the Mineral Water,
the resulting Color may be more or less intense. To obviate which
inconvenience, I take this course when the occasion deserves it; I make my
Infusion of Galls with a certain weight of the Powder in a determinate weight
of Water. As for instance I put about five gr. of powdered Galls, to sleep for
so many hours in an Ounce of Water. But if I make use of the dry Powder, then I
am wont to put three or four grains into an Ounce of the Liquor to be examined;
which is a way far more certain than the Common, wherein the Ingredients are
aestimated but by Guess. I have have mentioned various proportions of powdered
Galls to the same quantity of Liquor, because I have observed that there is
really a great inequality among the Mineral Waters in which it may be put; and
I have found by Trial, that in an Ounce of the German Spaw, a single grain of
Powder would immediately produce a sufficiently deep purple color.

It Is an inconvenience, that not only Galls, but the other Drugs hereafter to
be mentioned, impart a high Tincture of their own to the common Water they are
infused in; and therefore it were to be wished, and is fit to be endeavored,
that we had some Drugg, that without imparting a color to the common Water it
impregnates, would afford an Infusion fit to strike a blackish or a purple
color with Martial Waters.

Though it be useful, yet it is not necessary, to employ Galls to produce a
color in the Mineral Water proposed. For besides that it is known that
usually, (though not always, as I have tried,) the same thing may be done, but
somewhat more faintly, with Oaken Leaves, we may successfully enough
substitute, for the same purpose, some other astringent vegetables, as dried
Red-Rose Leaves, the Peel, and, (as we have tried) the Juice of Pomegranates;
and (what I find to be a notable stiptick) the blossoms of the same plant,
(which are vulgarly called in the Shops Ballaustium.) To which may be added
Myrobolans, Logwood, and some others that need not now be mentioned, whose
strong Infusions have yielded me a Tincture very dark and blackish with some
Martial Liquors.

6. In regard that the Galls, or other Drugs, to be infused in common Water,
are not always of the same goodness or strength, it is advisable not so to
trust to any determinate proportion of the Pigment to the Water, as not to
take in the help of the Eye, to judge by the Color of the Tincture, whether
the Liquor be duly (and not too much or too little) impregnated.

8. Whereas there is an intimation in the Close of this thirteenth Article of
the present Set of Titles, that Animal Liquors may be employed to produce new
colors with Mineral Waters, I gave that hint, not only because it is usually
observed in Martial Waters, such as those of Tunbridge the Spaw, etc. that the
gross excrements of the lower belly are blackened by a commixture of their
Metalline Parts; but in Tunbridge Waters particularly I have observed, that
after the drinking of larger doses of them, the root of the tongue, and perhaps
some neighboring parts, would also acquire a dark color, by the operation of
the transient Liquor.

Though the way of trying Mineral Waters, by the change of colors that Galls
produce in them, be useful and recommended by being easy, cheap, and
expeditious, yet I do not take it to be either of that extent, or of that
certainty, that it is vulgarly presumed to be of: For its main, if not only
considerable, use is, to discover by striking, or not affording, a black or
blackish, or at least a purple or a purplish, color with a Mineral Water, to
manifest the Liquor to be, or not to be, either of a vitriolate, or a
ferruginous nature. But there are diverse Metalline Ores, and other Mineral
Bodies, which not participating of Iron, will not by this way be discoverable
and yet may strongly impregnate the Water proposed: As for example, to try
whether if Arsenic were mingled with Water, Galls would discover it by
producing with it a dark color, I put some of the Powder of them into a
Decoction of arsenic, but did not perceive that it gave the Liquor any deeper
color, than it would have done to common Water. And as the extent of this
explorer of Waters is not very great, so neither do I find the informations it
gives us to be so certain, as they are presumed. For, if I much misremember
not, I long since found upon trial purposely made that another Body of a
Metalline nature, and that did not partake of Iron, would with infusion of
Galls afford a very dark color, that might easily, among ordinary Beholders,
pass for the color produced by a Martial Water; and I do somewhat doubt,
whether so much as all Liquors impregnated with Iron, will de discovered to be
so, by the color they afford with Galls; for I have sometimes made such a
Liquor with no Mineral Substance in it, save steel or Iron but I did not find
it would turn the Infusion of Galls either blackish or purple, which made me
suspect, that these colors are afforded only by such Martial Waters, as have
been wrought upon more or less by some Acid Salts or Fumes.

9. Unto these things I shall add, that I found that to be a mistake, which is
generally taken for granted, viz. That the infusion of Galls will certainly
discover, by becoming black, (or purple,) if a Mineral Water, that is mixed
with it, be vitriolate; for, though it be true that if, in the vitriolated
Water, Iron be the only or predominant Mineral, or be at least considerably
participated by the Liquor, yet if the dissolved vit riol be altogether
copperish, I found by several Trials purposely made with a strong solution of
Roman vitriol, (wherein Copper is affirmed to be the only, or to be very much
the predominant, Metal,) that it would not with insusion or Tincture of Galls,
afford either a black or a blackish color, but only a thick and muddy one,
that was not so much purplish.

It comes into my mind upon this occasion that from one of the Northern
Countries of England, where there are diverse Mineral Waters, there was brought
me by a Virtuoso, a good quantity of very whitish Earth, which he suspected to
be of a peculiar nature, but could not tell of what. This odd earth being
examined, I concluded it to contain a considerable proportion of Lead Ore,
corroded by some Mineral Salts, and imbody'd with the Soil; so that if it had
been in a place where people had sought for Mineral Waters, it is probable
that, finding some peculiarity in the taste of those that passed through this
Earth, they would have taken it for a Mineral Water, but had been at a great
loss to determine what Mineralit did partake of; and perhaps, in endeavoring
to resolve the doubt by drinking it, they would have found very bad effects of
it. But probably the Sulphurous Spirit to be ere long described in this Paper
would have informed them, that the Water was impregnated with a Body of the
nature of vitriol, but not of common vitriol. For though Galls do not give a
black, or very blackish, color with a solution of Saecharum Saturni, (which is
indeed the vitriol of Lead) resolved in distilled or rain Water. Yet I found by
Trial, that this volatile Sulphur did manifestly and presently do it; which
Trial I was fain to take up with, because when I had occasion to consider this
matter I had not at hand the ores of Lead, Copper, etc. And therefore was fain
to content my self with the solutions of the Metals themselves in their proper
Menstruums; it being probable, that the Metalline parts of the Ores would have
afforded either the same solutions, or some very like them, in the same
Menstruums; which consisting of Niter, Sea Salt, and Vitriol, Bodies that
abound in diverse places of the Earth through which Springs flow, the
impregnated Water would afford Phenomenon of the same kind. I made trials also
upon a somewhat fine solution of refined Gold made in an Aqua Regalis, and upon
a solution of common running Mercury, made with Aqua fortis, and in a clear
solution of Tin, made, not with either of the foregoing Menstruums (for I have
not found them to dissolve it genuinely) but in a peculiar Solvent, (which I
have communicated in another Paper,) that does not only dissolve it readily,
but keep it permanently dissolved, as Aqua fortis does Silver, but not Tin. To
these solutions I put Galls, without obtaining any blackish color except from
that which contained Gold. But with our Sulphurous Liquor we produced notable
changes of color, and those in all the solutions but one a dark one or tending
to blackness, and though for that reason a careless eye might judge them
indiscriminately to be blackish; yet since I well remember that the degrees, or
some other modification, of the same dark color seemed plainly enough not to
be the same in all of them, I do not think it impossible but that a very
heedful Beholder (which when I made those Trials I had no great motive to be)
may discern between those obscure colors some little differences, that may
much assist him to guess, what metalline substance is contained in the Liquor,
or at least is predominant in it, if it be a compounded one. And I particularly
remember, that the color that sprang from our Sulphurous Liquor and solution
of Tin, was manifestly distinguishable from those produced in that of any of
the other solutions, being not black or blackish, nor so much as purple, but of
a kind of brownish yellow.

Though I am content that the things, I come from mentioning, should make men
cautious and diffident, yet not only I do not despise or slight the use of
Galls, etc. even as it it is vulgarly practiced, but I am apt to think that the
way of exploring Mineral Waters by the changes of color, that may be produced
in them or by them, when they are mingled with convenient Drugs or Additaments,
may be made of greater extent and use than he, that has read what I have
written in the foregoing number, will perhaps be forward to expect. But to make
the way of exploring Mineral Waters by colorations, of somewhat more general
use and less uncertainty, I would recommend these things to the experimenter,

(1.) It seems very fit, if not necessary, that he look upon the change of
colors, both while it is producing, and when it is produce in a good light and
with a heedful Eye. For by this means he may discover several shades or
varietys of the more principal colors, and some other circumstances that he
could not else take notice of; and which yet may afford good hints (in
reference to other Minerals, as well as Martial ones,) to a sagacious observer.
And I have sometimes fancied, that there may be a kind of Physio gnomy of many,
if not most, other natural Bodies as well as of humane faces, whereby an
attentive and experienced considerer may himself discern in them many
instructive things, that he cannot so declare to another man, as to make him
discern them too.

(2.) The Attention here encouraged may perhaps be made more instructive, by a
way that I have sometimes practiced to vary the Shades, and other Phenomenon of
Colors produced with Mineral Liquors. This way consists chieflly in preparing
Sheets of White Paper by drenching them in a strong Infusion of Brasil,
Log-wood, or some other convenient dying stuff, and then letting them dry
leasurely in the Air, which may give some of them, as I have observed, a color
differing enough from that of the Liquor looked upon in a Vial or drinking
Glass. Upon this dried Paper ye may let fall, but not all on the same place,
some drops of the Mineral Liquor to be examined, especially if it be of a
Saline nature, and by the Changes of Color, effected by these Drops on the
Parts of the Paper, they fell and spread themselves upon, a heedful observer
may be assisted to guess, what kind of Mineral impregnates the Liquor, and how
much it does so; especially if on the same Sheet of Paper some other fit
Mineral Water or idoneous Liquor be likewise dropped, that the changes of color
produced by the two Fluids, may be surveyed and compared together. I also
practiced another way somewhat differing from this; as the main part of which
we prepared white Paper, by rubbing well upon it, with a hares foot or some
such thing, some idoneous Powders, especially that of vitriol (whereof for this
purpose English seemed the best) lightly calcined in a gentle heat till it
became of a grayish color and friable between the Fingers. By this means 'twas
easy to make the Paper fit for our turn. For the finer parts having lodged
themselves in its Pores, without much discoloring it when the supersluous dust
was struck off, it became capable of affording a variety of Colors, or rather
shades, some deeper and some fainter, when I let fall on it some drops of
differing Martial Liquors. But of the Examen of the Materia medica, by the
changes of color produced in it or by it, more is said in another Paper; and
therefore, instead of transferring that hither, I shall here briefly intimate,
that diverse variations of color may be made, either by infusing or otherwise
mixing, as I have sometimes done something in the Mineral Water before the
tinging stuff be put to it: or by putting somewhat in the Infusion or Powder of
Galls, before it be mixed with the Mineral Water, or else by dropping fit
Liquors (such as Spirit of Salt sirst; and then Spirit of Urine, or Oil of
Tartar) into the Blackish or Purple Mixture of Galls and the Medicinal Water to
be examined. For by these means diverse variations of colors may be observed;
which, together with some other ways that I have made use of to multiply them,
I have not now leisure to set down.

(3.) It is not convenient to confine ones self to the use either of Galls or
Oaken Leaves, but to make use also of Red Roses, Balaustium, Log-wood, Brasil,
and other astringent vegetable Pigments. For, though some of these give a
deeper Tincture than Galls yet, by the diversity of colors produced by them in
Mineral Waters, an attentive Beholder may, as was lately intimated where I
mentioned diversity of Lights and Shades, discover some things that he would
not be informed of, or receive any hints of, by the help of Galls of Oaken
Leaves alone. Nay I would not have our experimenter employ none but vegetable
substances about his colorations, but sometimes make use of Animal ones, and
(more often) of Minerals: Since by this means he may much diversify his Trials,
and increase the number of Phenomenon, some of which he may probably find
instructive. Besides astringent Plants I have found, and sometimes devised,
other substances that will turn black as well as Galls, with vitriolated Water;
and that not only with those that are richly impregnated with Iron, but also
with those wherein Copper alone abounds, as in Roman vitriol. And though, for
certain reasons, I must not now set down a way I have, to discover in a trice
both these vitriols, without any Liquor or Tangible Body, yet I shall subjoin,
as a kind of Succedaneum that may suffice for the present occasion, the way of
making a Liquor that will presently turn black with a solution either of
Martial or Cupreous vitriol.

Take equal parts of pure Salt of Tartar, and either Flowers of Sulphur, or at
least Sulphur finely powdered, and good Sal-armoniac, reduce the first and the
last to powder separately, melt the Sulphur over a gentle fire, and by degrees
put to it the Salt of Tartar, stirring them well, to make them incorporate and
grow red (or reddish.) Then put this mixture pulverized into a Glass Retort, or
a cucurbite, and pour on it the Sal-Armoniac dissolved in fair Water, and
closing well the Junctures, distill all in sand by degrees of a moderate fire,
shifting the receiver once or twice, because the Liquors will be differingly
tinged and strong; and that which ascends last, may bring over but very little
of the Sulphur, whose volatile Tincture is yet the main thing we aim at in this
operation.

(4.) I do not despair but that he, who were able to make a skilful use of the
several Drugs and other Body's, Vegetable, Animal and Mineral, that may produce
new colors in or with Mineral Waters, (or in some cases with the substances
that impregnate them,) may by their means be also enabled to discover the
presence or inexistence of diverse other Minerals, some of them salubrious, or
at least safe, and some others either hurtful, or at least dangerous, that are
not taken notice of by those that content themselves to employ Galls and Oaken
Leaves, in the exploration of the Waters they examine. For some of these
Liquors contain Salts, that having not corroded either Martial or Cupreous Ores
or Marcasites, do not betray themselves by producing either an Inky or a
fainter degree of Blackness, or else a Purple, with the Drugs made use of to
change their Colors. Ofthese Salts I have met with more than one sort, which
may be more properly take notice of, when we consider the Mineral Water and its
contents.

12. I think it likewise very possible, that industrious men should find ways
to discover, by the help of the change of colors, whether Orpiment or native
Arsenick, or the like poisonous Minerals, do so impregnate the Water proposed,
as to make it very hurtful or dangerous, tho not absolutely pernicious. And as
for Sulphur, there may be several Waters that partake of it, without being
taken notice of to do so. For I remember, that I have sometimes purposely made
a Liquor, that was limpid and colorless like Spring Water, and which would
totally fly up, even with a gentle heat; and yet this Liquor was richly
impregnated with a Mineral Sulphur, as I convinced several virtuosi by manifest
and ocular proofs. So that if Sulphur chanced to be combined with any Salt or
Mineral, of those many subterraneal ones that nature has hid from us, that can
suppress or disguise its peculiar odor, the Water may be considerably, and yet
unobservedly, impregnated with it. And yet it is like this may easily be
discovered by the change of color, producible in such a Sulphurous Liquor by
vitriolate Bodies, and, other appropriate additaments: Which may be thought the
more probable, because, tho the Spirit lately described be very transparent and
totally volatile in the form of a Liquor sometimes pale enough, yet common
English Vitriol, as also that of Danzick which is Venereal, will presently turn
it of a black or very dark color. And to add here something more difficult to
be performed, I have devised a way, which A Paper referred to contain;
Observations, about the Salubrity and Insalubrity of the Air, under whose 4th
Proposition this Process is ranged.
I elsewhere deliver, whereby it may appear that even Copper, that has been
melted into a Body, may be so subtiliz'd and disguised, as to have a multitude
of its metalline Parts made to ascend, with others, in the form of a
Transparent Liquor like common Water: And yet by putting to it a little of
another substance, as volatile and colorless as it self, it would presently
disclose the Copper it contained by turning blew as a Sapphire.

13. Because Arsenic is a very pernicious Drug, and yet has been suspected to
be clandestinely mingled with some Mineral Waters, which I thought the less
improbable, because some of the Marcasitical Bodies by which some Mineral
Waters pass, are judged not to be devoid of Arsenic, for these reasons, I say,
and for this other which makes the mention of it pertinent in this place, that
Galls did not (as I elsewhere note,) discover at all the inexistence of this
poisonous Drug in Water, tho the Liquor were copiously impregnated with it, I
thought fit to make some Trials, that seemed to me likely to discover at once
the in existence of Arsenic in Water, and somewhat of the nature of that
dangerous Mineral.

Happening some years ago to taste Arsenic, not without some little danger and
inconvenience, the Taste of it did not seem to me to favor the vulgar
supposition, that its poisonous nature consists in a highly Acid Salt; whereas
its Taste agrees well with my Conjecture, who suspect it to be of an exceeding
corroding or fretting nature, but whose corrosiveness is sui generis, that is,
of a peculiar kind. Having then made a strong solution of Arsenic in common
Water, [which does not without some skill easily dissolve it,] we mixed a small
proportion of it with the German-Spaw Water, and then dropping into this
mixture some highly dephlegm'd Spirit of Urine, we perceived a light
Lactescence to be produced, and a whitish Precipitate very slowly to subside.

We found also that a little (excellent) Oil of Tartar per deliquium, being
dropped into some of the lately mentioned solution of Arsenic, produced a heavy
whitish cloud, which presently settled at the lower part of the Glass. We also
put Oil of vitriol, as one of the strongest Acids we know, into the solution of
Arsenic, but did not perceive, that the Oil made a Precipitation, or wrought
much otherwise on it than it would have done upon common Water. And by these
three Trials one would suspect, that Arsenic is, at least ex praedominio, an
Acid Body.

But not content with these, we put some of the Arsenical Liquor upon some
Syrup of Violets, and found it to change the Syrup, tho but slowly, rather to a
Green than a Red or Purple Color.

We put, to another portion of the same Liquor, some of our volatile
sulphurous Spirit, but took notice of no Precipitation that ensued.

For a severer Examen we employed a Trial that we successfully make use of (and
have delivered in another Paper) to discover such slight degrees of Acidity in
Liquors, as by ordinary Trials are not discoverable; but we could not by this
way discern the least Acidity in our Arsenical Solution, but rather a manifest
token of an Urinous or Lixiviate Quality.

With the former Experiment agreed very well that which we aftewards made, by
putting some of the Arsenical Liquor into a strong solution of common Sublimate
made in fair Water. For by this means we had a copious Precipitate, such as
might have been expected from an Alkaline Precipitant. And this was not
brick-colour'd, as fixed Alcali's produce with dissolved Sublimate, but white,
such as Urinous or Volatile Alcalies, (as they call them,) are wont to make
with the same Liquor.

The forgoing Trials having been made at one time, when I was in have, and not
at all fond of having to do with Arsenic (for which reason I caused the
solution to be presently thrown away to prevent dangerous mistakes;) tho what I
have hitherto tried seems very favorable to our proposed conjecture; That tho
Arsenic be a very corrosive Body, and perhaps upon that score poisonous, yet
its deleterious nature does not consist only or mainly in a transcendently
Acid, nor in a lixiviate caustic Quality, but in a corrosiveness sui generis,
I mean peculiar and distinct: Yet I shall forbear to be positive in this
conjecture till further Trial, pretending only, by what has been said, to show
the need of examining the vulgar supposition by further Inquiries, and to give
some hints toward the finding of Antidotes against this cruel Poison.

I shall now add that, for the sake of Water-drinkers, I cast about in my
Thoughts for some way that might be of some use, tho of no certainty, in
examining a Mineral Water suspected to contain Arsenic. To which purpose, for
Reasons which have forbids me to mention, I pitched upon vitriolate Bodies and
found that if a little solution of Dantzick Vitriol were put to a convenient
quantity of Arsenical Liquor, there would presently ensue a great change of
color, and a dark Substance would by degrees precipitate it self and settle in
the lower part of the Glass. The like effect we found, when we put English
vitriol, which (having no Copper added in the making, as that of Dantzick has,)
is either altogether or almost totally Martial, into a considerable proportion
of the Arsenical Solution.

I fear I shall be thought to have dwelt by far too long upon this one (13)
Article of our Set of Titles: But I was tempted to do it, Partly, because I
thought the Subject seemed both to merit and to need it, Partly, because I
thought fit to give an Instance that may show that even that part of the
Exploration of Mineral Waters, that is judged to be the most cultivated, has
been but superficially enough considered. And Partly, too, because my want of
health, and my preingagement to some Subjects that I am more concerned for then
I am for that I now treat of, permitting me to make few other than shorter
Notes upon the particular Articles and clauses of this Scheme of Titles; I
thought it not amiss, by referring all the foregoing Observations and Trials to
the same Topic, to give one Specimen (tho but an imperfect one) of those that,
for distinctions sake, I style Large Annotations. And though the Title, these
belong to, be the Thirteenth in the Scheme (of the II Part,) yet I thought fit
to premise these Notes to all the rest? though diverse of them be on Titles
antecedent to the Thirteenth, because one or other, of the many Particulars
referred to this last named Title, may probably be of use to you in considering
many of the other Articles of this Scheme, whether they follow the Thirteenth,
or precede it.

Marginal Notes For the II. Or Physico-Chymical Part of the Natural History of
a Mineral Water proposed.
Notes on the first Title.
I. 1. THe Article mentions Actual coldness and Heat, because we do not here
consider that which the Schools call Potential.

2. The knowledge of the degree of Coldness in the Water, especially if it be
extraordinary, may somewhat assist the Examiner to guess, whether the Spring
come from some notable depth under ground before it ascends, or whether it runs
through a soil abounding with Saltpeter or Sal-armoniac, or some such very
refrigerating substance.

3. The degree of Coldness or Heat may be estimated several ways as, if the
Water be cold, by its having, or not having, the power to coagulate Essential
Oil of Anis seeds, or that of Fennel seed; and if it be that, by its being, or
not being, able to melt Bodies of somewhat differing dispositions to Fusion, as
Butte, Tallow, Bees-was, etc. Or to coagulate the whites of Eggs, or to boil
Eggs in the Shell, etc. But the best way is to plunge into the Water proposed,
or least the whole Ball or globulous part of a good hermetically sealed
Thermoscope, whereon the degrees of cold and heat are carefully marked.

Notes on the Second Title.
II. The knowledge of the specific Gravity of a Mineral Water, may be of great
use to him that endeavonrs to discover its nature, not only as this knowledge
inables him to distinguish the proposed Water from others, but because it may
afford him a considerable and double information. For, by comparing the weight
of the proposed Liquor with that of common Water, he may be, in case the former
be heavier (as it usually happens to be) assisted to estimate what proportion
of Salt, or Martial, or other Mineral Substance, it is impregnated with. And if
it be very light, and much more if it be lighter than common Water, he may
probably conclude that the Substance, that impregnates it, is either very small
in quantity or proportion, or is not near so gross as is to be found in other
Mineral Waters, but of a Spirituous and Volatile nature which is a discovery of
no small moment in this affair. And tho that may seem a paradox which I here
suppose, that a Water impregnated with a Metalline or Mineral Substance should
be as light or even lighter than common Water. Yet upon Trial carefully made I
have found some Mineral Waters, as particularly that of Tunbridge well taken
up, and (tho they be somewhat less light) that of the German Spaw, and of some
of the Islington Springs, to be manifestly lighter than common Water, and some
taken up at Tun bridge I found to be lighter than common Water, even purified
by Distillation.

And tho it be very hard to conceive, yet I think it not impossible, that a
Subterreneal Substance, that impregnates Water, should be lighter in Specie
than it: but yet I would not refer this surprising Levity, in all cases, nor
all of it in most cases, to the admixture of lighter Corpuscles, because some
Trials justified the suspicion I had, that much of the Comparative Lightness
proceeded from this, That the Mineral Water was imbued with a smaller quantity
of vulgar or culinary Salt, than common Water uses to contain. But yet these
Trials did not satisfy me, that this paucity of common Salt was the sole or
adequate cause of the lightness of the mentioned Waters.

But, to discover such minute differences, one must have good Instruments, and
indeed, to speak freely, there are few, upon whose Reports I durst confidently
rely, for the Specific Gravity of Mineral Waters. For to weigh Liquors any
thing exactly there is requisite more Heedfulness, and more Skill, and better
Instruments, than are easy to be met with together, and than we usually
imagine. And, when Physicians and others weigh Mineral Waters, they are wont to
do it in some Apothecary or other Trades*mans Shop, where, if the Balances be
small, the Vessels and the Water are commonly too heavy for them, and
oftentimes wrong them. And if, as is usual, the Bottles or other vessels be
great, they require far better Balances than are usually employed in the Shops
of Apothecaries or Grocers, whose Balances a Critical Examiner will too often
find to be far from being accurate, insomuch that usually, without at all
altering the weights, tho perhaps not great ones, he may easily make which
Scale he pleases manifestly preponderate, and continue in that position, and
may as easily afterward give the other Scale the same advantage: The diligent
and experienced Mathematician Mersennus much complains of the difficulty he
found to weigh Liquors exactly, even by the help of his Nicer Instruments. The
accuratest way, I know, is by comparing the differing weights that the same
sinking Body has in common Water, and in the Liquor proposed. But this way
(which I elsewhere circumstantially deliver) requiring, besides good
Instruments, skill in Hydrostaticks, is practicable but by few. And the way of
comparing Waters, by the greater or lesser sinking of the same Cylinder or
other swiming Body into them, is scarce accurate enough. Wherefore I chose to
make a very skillful Artist blow, at the flame of a great Lamp, a thin round
vial with a flattish bottom, that it might stand upright, and be very light,
and this was furnished with a neck as large as a Goose quil drawn very even
into a hollow Cylinder of above 3 Inches long, and fitted at the top with a
little Gap, that hindered the Water from ascending above the due height.

This Glass contained iiiss and 43 grains of common Water, and yet when empty,
weighed but vi+ 42 grains: So that I could use it, when full of Liquor, in such
a Balance, that the addition or detraction of half a Grain, or less, would
make either Scale preponderate. The length and evenness of the stem was
designed for uses not needful to be mentioned here; where it may suffice for my
purpose to say, that this Glass was judged capable of holding Water enough for
not uncurious Trials, and yet not to be, tho well filled, too heavy for a
tender Balance. In this Vessel herefore we carefully weighed several Liquors
(whose Gravity belongs not to this place) and among them diverse Mineral
Waters, some of which, at least known here at London, were found to be of the
annexed weights.

The Glass being filled with several Liquors to the same height, and weighed in
the same Balances.

Ounces dr. gr. Common Water was found to weigh 3 4 43 Common Water distilled 3
4 41 Acton Water 3 4 48 Epsom Water 3 4 51 Dulledge Water 2 4 54 Straton Water
3 4 55 Barnet Water 3 4 52 North-Hall Water 3 4 50 The German Spaw Water 3 4 40
Tunbridge Water 3 4 38 Islington Water from the Music House 3 4 36 Islington
Water from the Vault with Steps 3 4 39 Islington Water from the Cellar 3 4 39

By this short account it may appear, that, as diverse Mineral Waters (that
contain Salts in them) are considerably heavier than Common Water, so some,
especially Ferruginous Waters, are impregnated with so fine a substance, as to
be lighter than common Water.

Notes on the Fourth Title.
IV. This Article may, in diverse cases, give some light to the discovery of the
kind of Soil, through which the Water has passed; and is also useful to
distinguish the Spontaneous residence, if I may so call it, that the Liquor
lets fall by mere standing, from that which they call the Caput Mortuum, that
remains after the total evaporation of the Water; by which means also the
weight of this last residence may be more truly known. Besides some other
Mineral Waters, I found that the German Spaw Waters, brought very well stopped
to London, afforded by long standing a pretty quantity of Terrestrial
substance, that looked almost like yellow Oke^, and perhaps was of great
affinity to it in nature. 3. That clause in the Article, tho the Liquor be kept
from the Air, was therefore set down, because I had found by Trials, that some
Liquors, by being exposed to the free Air, would have copious, and sometimes
surprising, substances separated from them; as if the Air contained some
Precipitating Salts, fit to work on the Liquors, so as to make in them such
notable separations.

Notes on the Fifth Title.
V. An accidental weakness I had, in my eyes, when I had the best opportunity
to endeavor satisfying my self about this Inquiry, forced me to leave the
prosecution of it to others. Only two things I shall take notice of on this
occasion: One is that, having caused one that had young Eyes, and was
accustomed to make use of such Microscopes as are mentioned in the Article, to
look upon some Mineral Waters through them, he said he could discern no
difference between them and common Water. Notwithstanding which the Trial ought
to be repeated by various persons, on several Waters, with differing
Engyscopes, and in differing Lights, and other circumstances. The other is,
that whereas it is by diverse learned men objected, against the goodness of
these magnifying Glasses we now make use of to look on Liquors, that the little
Bodies that the ingenious, Mr. Lewenhoeck, and since him diverse other Virtuosi,
have observed in Water wherein Pepper has been infused, are not, as he
pretends, living creatures, but little inanimate concretions, that are casually
formed, and carried to and fro in the Liquor: To convince these Doubters, of
whose number I was my self at first inclined to be, I devised the following
experiment: Having laid, upon the magnifying Glass, a part of a drop of Water,
wherein I could see store of these little Animals frisking up and down, we put
to the Liquor, with a bristle or some such very slender thing, part of a drop
of Spirit of Salt, which, as was expected, presently killed these little tender
creatures, and depriving them of their Animal Motion, left them to be carried
so slowly to and fro in the Liquor, as to make it visible that they were then
dead and had been before alive.

Notes on the Seventh Title.
VII 1. The Odours of diverse Mineral Waters are best judged of at the Spring
head or other Receptacle, whence some of them being removed scarce afford any
Odor at all (perceptible by us men.)

2. Perhaps the Sulphurous scent, that is sometimes, perceived in Tunbridge
and some other Waters in their sources, may in part proceed from loose
Exhalations, that casually happen to be mingled with the Waters, but do not
constantly belong to it.

3. The winy odor is mentioned among others: Because I am credibly informed
that, in France, there is a Mineral Spring, if not more or less than one, that
has such a smell.

4. I mention the Bituminous Odor, distinctly from the Sulphurous because men
are too apt to confound them, and take all stinking Mineral* Waters for
Sulphurous, whereas diverse are manifestly Bituminous; as may be gathered, to
omit other signs, not only from their proper odours, but from more or fewer
drops of Petroleum, or a kind of course Naphtha, that are found swimming upon
the Water.

5. I think it also not unlikely, that sometimes a Spring may partake both of
Sulphur and Bitumen, mingled together by the Subterraneal Heat, since I have
found that I could easily enough melt and incorporate these two substances here
above ground.

Notes on Ninth Title.
IX. 1. This is an almost necessary Article because many Persons, that drink
Mineral Waters, cannot well, either for want of strength or convenience, repair
immediately to the Spring head, but are obliged to drink them in their Beds or
their Lodgings, and perhaps to have them transported to a great distance, or
even to another country. 2. Many Purging Waters are found to retain their
Laxative virtue, and that perhaps for a considerable time, tho they be
transported to places distant from those they rise in. 3. In such Ferruginous
Waters, as are lighter than common Water, I found a manifest difference in
reference to transportation: For most of them, even such as will bear removing,
have something of freshness and quickness at the Spring head, (perhaps from
some Spirituous and Fugitive Exhalations, that there arise with them, but
presently vanish,) that they have not any where else. And some do not only lose
this briskness by being removed, tho in vessels well stopped, but they lose also
the power of producing, with the powder of Galls, a Purple color, as I found
by Trial purposely made in more than one of these Mineral Waters, which, to
prevent fraud, I sent for to the Springs themselves by servants of my own: For
tho these carried their Glass Bottles along with them, and had no other Errand
there but to fill and stop them carefully yet, by being transported less than
one league, I found them so altered, that they would no longer make a Purplish
color with powdered Galls, but a deep reddish one; whereas the German Spaw
Waters did almost always here in London afford me, with the same Powder of
Galls, a rich Purple Color. And Tunbridge Waters afforded me the like, but not
so deep a one. when I received them at London very well stopped. 4. This last
clause was not to be omitted, because the exact or negligent closing of the
vessels, wherein such Waters are transported, is a circumstance of great
moment. For more than once I received at London, Waters sent me from Tunbridge
by Physicians themselves, (who used at least a moderate care in putting them
up,) which yet would by no means afford with Galls a purplish Color. And I
found that even the German Spaw-Water would almost presently lose its capacity
of being made Purple by Galls, if it were considerably heated. 5. But the same
Spaw-Water being, in Summer time, kept all night in an open Vessel, did the
next morning till it was late, if not till Noon, retain a disposition to be
made Purple by the admixture of Galls; but that disposition it lost before the
next day.

Notes on the Fifteenth Title.
XV. 1. Because it often happens, that men have not the leisure and the
convenience totally to evaporate the proposed Mineral Water, it may be an
useful thing, to be able without evaporation to discover, whether it contain
any common Salt and, if it do, to make some estimate, how copiously or
sparingly the Liquor is impregnated with it. This might easily be done, with
nicety enough, if I were not by very just Reasons restrained, for a while, from
communicating that way of examining the saltness and freshness of Waters, of
which I did, by the Kings command, show his Majesty some proofs, whereof
mention was presently after made in the printed Gazets. But till it be free for
me to impart that way to the public, I shall only intimate, that some guess
may be made at the Saltness of Waters, by observing, whether they will lather
with wash-balls or Soap, and, if they will not, what quantity of curdled matter
they will produce; as also, whether the Waters will serve for washing of
Linen, and will boil Peace tender? Which two are the most usual ways that many
Sea men take to examine the goodness of unknown Waters by. In diverse Purging
Waters this way may be difficult to be practiced with certainty, because of
other Salts that may be predominant in them; but in the Examen of lightly
Ferruginous Springs it may be more relied upon. 2. It may not be unworthy
observation that, when I made use of my own way of examining the Saltness of
Mineral Springs, I did not find even the lightest sort of them devoid of common
Salt; which I found, but not in equal proportions, to be contained, not only in
the several Waters of Islington, Hamstead Water, and, if I misremember not, in
some others, but also particularly in Tunbridge Waters, and those of the
German-Spaw, which I did not much wonder at, because I had long known, that
more or less of common Salt is very usually harbored, tho not observed, in
many Soils, through which all sorts of Springs, and consequently Mineral ones,
have their course.

Notes on the Sixteenth Title.
XVI. Tho Acidity be so usually a manifest Quality of Mineral Waters, that
Authors are wont to divide them into Acidulae and Thermae, yet I have found, by
several Trials, that it is not near so easy as men presume, to find a manifest
Acidity in all Mineral Waters, that are not Sulphurous or Hot. For several
Ferruginous Waters, having probably spent the Acidity they had upon the Iron
Ore, which they dissolved in their passage, retain so little Acidity, that it is
hard to discover they have any, either by their working upon Coral, or by any
conflict with Spirit of Urine, or the like, or by mixing them with Syrup of
Violets, to change the color of it; insomuch that sometimes I should have
concluded some such Waters to have no Acidity at all, if I had not had a way of
discovering a far less degree of it, than I could discern it to have by other
Trials. The circumstances, that made this way of examining so critical, will
cost me too many words to set down here, and I have done it in another Paper
expressly written, of the way of discovering the Qualities of diverse Bodies, by
changes of color made in or with them: And therefore I shall here but briefly
tell you, that I discover the Acidity of Liquors by their operation upon the
colors of an Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum made in Lympid Water, (and ordered
after a certain manner.) By this means I found the German Spaw Water to retain
a little Acidity, even here at London; but more than one of our own Ferruginous
Springs did not, even upon this Trial, appear to have any. And (which some may
think strange) I did not find even some of the Purging Springs, particularly
that of Acton, to have any discernible Acidity.

Notes on the Twentieth Title.
XX. The Scope of this Inquiry was twofold: The first, to discover whether a
change of Texture would notably alter the Qualities of the Liquor, when the
Hermetical Seal hindered the Avolation of any Saline, Ferruginous, or
Spirituous parts: And the other was, to see whether such an Agitation, by heat,
as in the open Air would, as I had found, deprive the Spaw Water of the virtue
of making a Purple color with Galls, would cause any manifest separation of
parts in the Liquor, and make any grosser substance to precipitate or subside.
But tho we did twice (not without difficulty) make the experiment with Spaw
Water, yet we made it without success. For the first time the Glass broke at
the bottom, before the Water we immersed it in was near boiling hot. And tho
the other Glass resisted longer, and endured a greater heat, yet in not very
many Minutes that also broke at the bottom. Which disappointments a faithful
Historian ought as little to conceal, as better successes. And I choose to leave
this 20th Article of Inquiry in its place, among the rest of the Titles,
because possibly some other may be more happy, than I was, in endeavoring to
answer it. And I hold it not amiss, in drawing up Platforms of Natural History,
to set down what Questions we think fit to be proposed to nature; because we
cannot be sure, before Endeavors for Trial be used, whether the thing to be
attempted be practically performable or not.

Notes on the Twenty sixth Title.
XXVI. 1. Diverse ways may be propounded to discover which of the Qualities,
mentioned in this Article, is predominant in the Salt to be examined; but I
confess I somewhat doubt, whether these ways of Trial be so certain, as many
will be forward to think them. 2. If Acidity be guessed to be predominant in
the Salt proposed it will probably appear by such ways as these. By the Taste,
odor, or both: By working upon Coral or Crabs eyes finely powdered: By
curdling of Milk; By making Syrup of violets reddish: By the power of
destroying the blew color of the Infusion of Lignum Nephriticum: By not being
Precipitable by Potent Acid Liquors as Oil of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt; and by
being Precipitable by Oil of Tartar per deliquium, as also by strong Spirit of
Urine, and other volatile Alcaly's, as they are called. But, as I was noting
above, I doubt whether these proofs be absolutely certain; for, if I mistake
not, I found some Purging Mineral Waters that would not give even so slight a
proof of acidity, as to destroy the blewness of the Nephritic Tincture: Which
yet would curdle Milk, and turn it to a kind of Posset; and, on the contrary, I
found that some German Spaw Water would not curdle Milk, and yet would readily
deprive the newly mentioned Tincture of its ceruleous color; which yet I did
not find that some of our English Ferruginous Waters were, at least when
brought me to London, able to do. 3. The predominancy of an Alcaly, in the Salt
of a Mineral Water, may be probably discovered by such ways as these. By the
Lixiviate Taste, Smell, or both; the former of which may be observed in the true
Niter of the Ancients, (which I have had brought me from Egypt, and a
neighboring Country, whose name I do not now remember:) By the turning of
Syrup of violets green: By the Precipitation of solution of sublimate made in
Spring Water: By an effervescence or conflict with some potent Acid, as Aqua
fortis, or well dephlegm'd Sprit of Salt: By heightning the red Tincture of
Logwood or Brazil, drawn with common Water, to which, may be added a Nicer way
or two that I have elsewhere mentioned. But I propose these ways but as
appearing rational, upon the score of my having successfully tried them with
other Saline Bodies that were Alcalisate. For as to those Mineral Waters, I
have had occasion to examine, I do not remember I have yet met with any,
wherein an Alcaly was predominant. 4. But perhaps farther Inquiry will discover
to others here in England, what I have not yet met with: And I doubt not but
that there are, in diverse places of the Earth, Salts of an Alcalisate nature.
And I presume that, if the Egyptians were any thing curious of such things,
they would find, among their Springs or Wells, diverse Waters impregnated with
them. For I found by Trials, purposely made upon Latron, as some knowing men
call the true Egyptian Niter, presented me by an inquisitive Ambassador who
came out of the East, that the native Salt exhibited diverse of the same
Phenomenon that other factitious Alcali's do. And some Salt, afforded by the
famous Waters of Bourbon in France, being brought me thence, with a desire that
I would examine it, I found it to be evidently Alcalisate; insomuch that it
would make a conflict with Acids, and presently turn Syrup of violets green. 5.
If we suspect Vitriol to be much predominant in the Saline part of a Mineral
Water, we may endeavor to discover it by such ways as these. By its blackning
a Solution of Galls: By its vomitive operation upon the Drinkers, tho this may
sometimes be an uncertain way especially because an invisible permixture of
Arsenic, or or perhaps Arsenical Fumes, may give the Water they impregnate an
Emetic Quality: By putting Alcali's to a strong solution of the supposed
Vitriol, and observing whether it will afford a yellow or yellowish
Precipitate, if Salt of Tartar or Spirit of Urine be dropped into it. By taking
notice, whether a Sulphurous Spirit, especially* such an one as I formerly
told I had made tho not here described, will make a blackish or a very dark
color with it, as I first guessed, and then found it would do with several
vitriolate Liquors, and even with one, to make which we had dissolved but one
grain of a Natural Vitriolate substance in above four or five thousand times
its weight of Syrup or Water. But in the parts about London I remember not
that, in any of the Waters I have made Trials on, I have found Vitriol to be
predominant, or to be so much as a manifest Ingredient: Which seemed to me the
more remarkable, because several parts about this City are not destitute of
Marcasites, the Parents or Wombs of Vitriol. Since the writing of these Papers,
being casually visited by a discerning Stranger, who had a particular occasion
to take notice of the Residences of many of the Mineral Waters of France, his
native Country; he answered me that he never met with any that was manifestly
Vitriolate; and he seemed to be of opinion, that no Vitriolate Spring had yet
been discovered, among the many Mineral ones that are known to be in that
Country. 7. Since we so rarely meet with either manifestly Acid, or evidently
Alcalisate, Salts in our English Mineral Waters, it may deserve a serious
Inquiry, what other Salts they may be impregnated with; and especially from
what Salts, the Purgative virtue, that is found to belong to many of them, as
Epsom, Barnet, Acton, etc. does proceed? Common Salt indeed, as is already
noted, I have found tokens of in the German Spaw Water; and in all the English
Mineral Waters, I had occasion to try, not one that I remember excepted. But I
did not find that common Salt was so copious in any of them, as to disclose it
self by Chrystallizing in Cubical grains. And the way, I made use of, to
examine the Saltness of the Water without Crystallization, is not equally
certain in all sorts of them. And because I had not store enough of these
Liquors, to evaporate them in large quantities, tho I could not discern, in the
clear Salts they afforded, either Vitriol, or Salt Peter, or Allom, or even
common Salt, by their peculiar and genuine Figures; yet I dare not confidently
say, that none of our English Mineral Springs abounds with any of those Salts.
But as far as I can guess, by the Trials that I have hitherto had opportunity
to make, I am apt to think that the Salt, that is found in our Purgative
Waters, and and in some of them copiously enough, dos not belong to any one
known sort of Salts, but is either of a sort, for which as for many other
Minerals, we have yet no name: or, which seems more probable, is a Salt of a
compounded Nature, made up by the coalitions of some or all of the Salts above
mentioned, and perhaps of some other, as yet nameless, Subterraneal Salt that
the Spring inssolves in its passage, That two Bodies, which are neither of them
Cathartic, may, by a change of Texture, wrought in one another, compose a third
Body, that is briskly purgative, I have shown in another Paper. Besides having
formerly had occasion, in order to the resolution of a certain doubt I had
entertained, to burn Salt of Tartar with about a double weight of common
Sulphur, I thence obtained, as I expected, a Neutral Salt, that had peculiar
Qualities differing from those of the Bodies employed to make it up: And
talking of this Salt with an ingenious Empyrick, he told me it had a Quality I
had not mentioned, and that a very useful one, since in the dose of half a
dram, or in some Bodies, being taken in Wine or Broth, it would considerably,
and yet gently and without gripings, purge. And without the help of Salt of
Tartar have sometimes made out of common Sulphur, a Chrystalline Salt of a
somewhat Vitriolate Taste, the like to which might possibly be made under
ground, where there are Subterraneal fires, tho perhaps not observed nor
suspected, since we made this Salt without adding any thing to the Sulphur,
only by the help of Fire and common Water. And I remember that a great
Virtuoso, several years ago, brought me, in order to an Examen he desired I
should make of it, a certain Salt afforded by a Spring in or near his land,
which I remember was in the West of England, tho I have forgot the name of the
County: Which Salt no Body knew what to make of, but I quickly told him, I took
it to be of the nature of the Sal mirabile Glauberi, and predicted that in such
Trials it would afford such and such Phenomenon, which accordingly came to
pass. And I thought that, if opportunity had not been wanting this Salt would
have appeared Purgative, as some factitious Salts that resemble it in
transparency, colourlesness, and Figure have been observed to be.

Notes on the Twenty seventh Title.
1. It Is surprising to observe, how great an inequality one may sometimes meet
with in the proportion that the same quantity, of two* differing Mineral
Waters, bear to the Caput Mortuum they respectively afford: For a pound, for
instance, of one may, after evaporation, leave behind it perhaps more drams of
dry substance, than a pound of the other will leave behind it grains. But
because I have no notes of the considerablest Instances of this kind, that came
to my knowledge, I shall add only by and by the Product of a more recent Trial.
2. As far as I have hitherto observed, those Ferruginous Waters, that are not
heavier than common Water, and in most Drinkers prove but diuretic, afford but
very little Caput Mortuum, or dry Substance upon the total Evaporation of the
Liquor, whereas Mineral Waters, that are purging and manifestly more ponderous
in Specie than common Water, leave, upon Evaporation, a considerable quantity
of residence, tho some far less than others. 3. At once to explain, and partly
prove, what I have been saying, I shall here recite that, from a pound of
Barnet Water (which is known to be purgative) slowly evaporated, we obtained a
Dram of White Powder. But from the like quantity of Tunbridge Water, we
obtained but about one grain of Caput Mortuum: And, if I misremember not, we
had but about a grain and a half from 25. Ounces of the German Spaw Water. 4.
It may seem scarce credible to many, that so small a quantity of matter, of
which perhaps not one half is Saline, or Metalline, (the rest being
teresstrial,) should impart a manifest virtue to so great a proportion of
Water. But this difficulty did not much trouble me, who have purposely made
diverse Experiments, to discover how small a proportion of Mineral matter may
suffice, when dissolved, to impregnate common Water. I remember I took one
grain of Iron stone, casually found near the Springs at Islington, (from which
Mineral it is probable those Waters derive their virtue,) this being opened by
the fire, and dissolved as far as it would be in a little Spirit of Salt, we
let fall a drop or two of the yellowish solution into a great proportion of
Infusion of Galls, to which it presently gave a deeper color than Tunbridge
Water, or even the German Spaw Water, was wont to give here at London, with
the Powder of Galls: So that we guessed that, if we had then had at hand a
competent quantity of the infusion, the remaining part of the Martial Solution
would have been able to color ten times a greater quantity of the Infusion,
than our Trial was made upon. This will be easily believed by him, that shall
consider an Experiment, we afterward made to the same purpose, which was this,
We dissolved a half grain of a good Marcasite, taken up not far from London,
in a small quantity of Spirit of Niter, (which for a certain Reason I made
choice of, tho other Acid Menstruums, as Aquafortis, and Spirit of Salt would
have dissolved the Mineral.) This small solution we put into a pound of pretty
high Tincture of Galls, made by infusing them in common Water, and finding, as
we expected, that this mixture, grew very dark, we filled a Vial with it, and
emptying that Vial into a larger Glass, we filled the same Vial three times
with common Water to dilute it; notwithstanding which this new mixture, being
put into one of our usual Glasses, appeared of a color much deeper than that
which the Water of Tunbridge, or the German Spaw, had formerly given with the
Powder of Galls: So that probably, if another Vial of common Water had been
added, it would yet have afforded a purple color, if not a deeper; so that one
part of dissolved Marcasite communicated a Tincture to (61440) sixty one
thousand four hundred and forty parts of Infusion of Galls. And that which
makes this Experiment more considerable is, that this small quantity of
Marcasite was not it self all Martial or Metalline: For from our English
Marcasites, as well as others, I have obtained a pretty quantity of Sulphur
like common Sulphur; besides that they afford a not despicable quantity of
Terrestrial Substance, about whose nature I have not yet satisfied my self. 5.
I shall now add this reflection that, since the Marcasite impregnated so much
Water with its corporeal Parts, if I may so call them, obtained by bare
dissolution, it seems highly probable, that the same quantity of Liquor may be
impregnated by a far less quantity of Mineral matter, attenuated into a kind of
Spirituous slate, by being raised in the form of Fumes or exhalations; and that
imperfect or embryonated Iron may be so, will scarce be denied by them that
consider the way that I have, in another Paper, delivered to make Iron
manifestly emit copious Fumes, without the help of external Fire. And if it be
with some such Spirituous and volatile Exhalations, that a Mineral Water, as
that of Tunbridge or of Islington, is impregnated, it is not hard to conceive
that they may easily lose their chief virtue, by the avolation of most or many
of their fugitive Parts, upon their being removed to a distance from the Spring
head. And to make it probable, that vitriolate Corpuscles may be made to
ascend, without losing their nature, I shall here mention an Experiment, that I
devised to give some light in this matter. I had often found by Trial, that a
Spirit, richly impregnated with volatiliz'd Sulphur, would with vitriol,
whether in the form of a powder or a solution, produce in a trice a very dark
or blackish color; And guessing that, in Mercury turned by the addition of
Salt and Vitriol into corrosive sublimate, many of the Vitriolate Corpuscles
might ascend with the Mercurial ones, I took such a Volatile Sulphurous
Tincture as I have been mentioning, (which for this purpose ought to be deep,)
and having dropped it upon good Sublimate, I found it turn presently of a very
opacous color. To show also that, to make a great dilatation or dispersion of
the Martial Corpuscles of an Ore or Mineral, there needs no Spirit of Salt, or
the like distilled Menstruum, I procured from a copperas-work, (or place where
vitriol is made by art,) some of the Liquor they employ, before they cast in
Iron, that being corroded by it, it may increase the weight, and give solidity
and some other Qualities to the designed Vitriol. Now tho this Liquor be made,
without any Chemical Menstruum, barely by Rain or Snow-Water, that impregnates
it self with Saline or Metalline Particles in its passage through Beds of
Marcasites, that lie exposed to the Sun and Air; yet in this Water such numbers
of Martial Corpuscles are dispersed that, having shaken four drops of it into
12 Ounces and a half of common Water, this Liquor, as I expected, was thereby
so impregnated, that with powder of Galls it presently produced as deep a
color as good Tunbridge Water would have done. So that, supposing a drop of
this Liquor to weigh about a grain, (as by some Trials purposely made we found
it to do,) it appears that one part of the vitriolate Water was able manifestly
to impregnate 1500 Parts of common water. And yet of these 4 drops or Grains of
Vitriolate Liquor, a considerable part may very probably be concluded, from the
way of its production, to have been Rain Water, as will easily be granted when
I shall have added, that, to examine this supposition or conjecture, we slowly
evaporated some Ounces of the Vitriolate Liquor, and found that the remaining
dry Substance did not fully amount to the 4th part of the weight of the whole.
At which rate 'twas easy to conclude, that one grain of Vitriolate substance
would have been sound capable of so impregnating six thousand times its weight
of common Water, as to make it sit to produce with Galls a purple tincture. We
afterward found, upon Trial purposely and warily made, that the experiment
will hold, tho the proportion of the Water, to the grain of tinging substance,
should exceed that lately mentioned, by the weight of some hundreds of grains.

TITLES.
For the Natural History of a Mineral water proposed. Considered as a Medicine.

(Being the III. Part of the designed work.)

SECT. VI.
THough the effects of a Mineral Water upon Humane Bodies, as well as upon
other Subjects, may challenge a place in the Natural History of it, yet because
the Titles of this Third Part of this Scheme, for the most part, directly
regard the cure or prevention of diseases, which are held to be the proper
Offices of Physicians as such; I forbore to make any comments upon the
particular Titles of this Part of our Historical Idea, contenting my self, for
the sake of those that are strangers to Platforms of Natural History, to have
set down a series of Titles, which may point out to them what particulars may
be fit for their Inquiry, and furnish them with heads whereto they may refer,
and Receptacles wherein they may lodge what, upon Trials or otherwise, they
shall meet with worthy of observation. And so the accounts, that shall be given
on these Subjects, may be somewhat more distinct, and less incomplete.

To what Temperaments and constitutions the Mineral Water proposed is the most
proper, to what less proper, and to what noxious or inconvenient?

In what stated Diseases, and in what particular cases, the Mineral Water is
proper, or to be suspected of being dangerous, if not certainly hurtful?

What difference there is, if any, between the Water taken up and presently
drunk at the Spring it self or other receptacle, and that which is carried to
some distance off, whether in open, or in well stopped Vessels?

Of the manifest Operations of the Water in those that take it, whether it be
by vomit, by seige, by Urine, by several, or by two, or all of these waves.

Whether any, occult virtues, or other hidden Qualities, can be discovered in
the Mineral Water? And if any, what?

What variation, in the effects of the Mineral Water, proceeds from its being
drunk all of it quite cold, or hot, or lukewarm, or one part when it is in one
of those tempers, and the rest when in another?

Of promoting or facilitating the operation of the Water, in some by taking it
in Bed, and in others by Moderate exercise.

What assistance may be given to the operation of the Water, by giving with it,
especially in the first draught, something to make it pass the better, or to
correct its Crudity, or to strengthen the stomach and Bowels?

What advantages may accrue, from preparing the Patients Body before he enters
upon his course of drinking the Waters? And what inconveniences may attend the
neglect of such preparation especially in gross, foul, or much obstructed
Bodies?

Of the assistance the Water may receive by gently purging Medicines,
discreetly given from time to time.

Of the best Dose, or quantity of the Water, to be taken at once; of the
compass of time wherein it should be all drunk; and of the gradual increasing
and lessening the Dose at the beginning, and sometimes before the end, of the
whole space of time appointed for the taking it.

How much the greater or lesser length of time, spent in taking the Water,
conduces to its good Effects? and what is the fittest measure of time to
continue the drinking of it, respect being had to the Patients strength,
Disease, the time of the year, the accidental temperature of the Air, and other
considerable circumstances.

Whether the drinking of the Mineral Water, for several years together, be
found almost necessary, or more beneficial than to intermit it sometimes for a
year or two, or perhaps longer, and then to return to the use of it?

Of the Diet, as to meat, drink, exercise, sleep, etc. That ought to be
observed by those that take the Water, and of the inconveniences that are wont
to follow the neglect of it.

Of the signs that declare the Water to work kindly and effectually, and of
the Tokens of not doing so, and those of its being already hurtful or likely to
prove so.

Of the Inconveniences or unwelcome accidents (if there be any, as usually
there is) that have been observed to happen, during, or some time after, the
drinking of the Mineral Water, especially to Persons of such constitutions, or
that are in such and such circumstances, and of the ways to prevent or remedy
such inconveniences.

Whether there be any necessity, or great use, of taking Physic after one has
done drinking the Water? And if there be, what are the fittest times and
medicines to be employed for the prevention of any bad effects of it, and what
is the danger of neglect to make use of them?

Whether and how the Mineral Water may be usefully given by being simply
commix'd with other Liquors or Bodies, as by boiling meat in it; or by
receiving, together with the Additament, a further preparation, as when the
Water is mingled with Wine, or some other Drink; when with Milk it is made
into Posset drink; when brewed with Malt alone, or with that and hopps, it is
turned into Ale or Beer?

Whether any such saline, or other, substance may by evaporation Inspissation,
Calcination, etc. be extracted, or obtained, from the Mineral Water, as being
given in a small Dose, may be substituted, as a Succedaneum to large quantities
of the Water as nature affords it?

Of what uses (if of any) the Mineral Water is, when outwardly applied, as by
washing sore Eyes or Ulcers, bathing in it, etc. And whether the mud, or
Sediment it leaves, where it passes or stagnates, being externally applied,
have the same or other Medicinal virtues, and, if so, how the mud is to be
administered to make it exert them.

Of some Mechanico-Medical Trials, that may be made upon Animals, to help us to
guess at the Qualities of the Mineral Waters, as by injecting it into the
veins of a Dog, to try whether it will coagulate his Blood, or make it more
fluid, or operate powerfully by Vomit, Siege, or Urine: as also by keeping a
Dog very long without allowing him any other Drink at all than the Mineral
Water.

But I propose such Particulars, as are mentioned in this Article, but as
Analogous Experiments, or Succedaneums to Trials that should, but cannot well,
because of the worthiness of the Subject, be tried in living Humane Bodies. And
indeed all the Titles of this third part of our designed History, belong
porperly to Physicians; many of whom (at least if they resemble you) are far
better qualified, to cultivate this Medicinal Subject, than I, who being as
little desirous, as fit, to incroach upon their Province, shall not enlarge
upon this third member of our History, but willingly resign it into their, and
especially into your own, more skilful hands.

The Conclusion.
ANd now, Sir, it may be seasonable to put an end, at least for the present, so
this Rhapsody of Papers, by telling you, That theforegoing Idea or Platform of
a History of Mineral Waters, being a draught of, or a First essay upon, so
difficult and and uncultivated a Subject, as I have ventured to treat of; as I
know you are too Judicious to expect any thing of exactness and compleatness,
in what I now present you, so I hope you will be so equitable, or so
favorable, a Reader, as to forgive those omissions and other imperfections,
that I cannot doubt, but you, (and even I my self upon a review,) shall
discover in the first edition of the foregoing Papers. And tho, if hereafter
they shall be thought worthy of a Second, I may possibly be able, if God be
pleased to grant me health and Leisure, to rectify some oversights, and supply
some omissions; yet, to deal freely with you, I much fear, that it will be very
difficult for far skilfuller Pensthan mine to deliver such Histories of Mineral
Waters, as the curious would wish, and those Critics, that have never made
Trial of the difficulty of attempts of this nature, will be forward to require.
And this difficulty will, I presume, be found a great one, not only, (as I have
already noted,) by him that shall undertake to give a good account of Mineral
Waters a priori, but to him also that shall take in all the help he can obtain
a posteriori. For there are so many circumstances, of seasons, VVeather, place,
and a multitude of contingencies, that may vary the Phenomenon and effects of
Mineral Waters, that it is extremely difficult, either to comprize so many
different things at once, and as it were survey them at one view, or without
having such a comprehension and multitude of various regards, to be able to
pronounce with certainty about the nature, the Medicinal Operations, and the
other effects, of a Subject that may be influenced and diversified by so many
causes and accidents, as a Mineral Water may. And therefore, till further
disquisitions and Trials shall have better cleared up the Subject, I shall,
without pretending to more, think the past discourse not altogether useless, if
it can well perform the office of the virgula divinatoria; which, (supposing
the truth of what many Chemists and Metallists deliver,) of how little value
soever it be of it self, is fit to point at Mineral treasures, and show men the
places where they are to seek for them. Farewell.

This belongs to the 16th Title of the first Part.
It Is known, that the drinking of Ferruginous Waters, such as those of the
German-Spaw and our Tunbridge, is usually prescribed for many Weeks, during
which time it often enough happens, that the Fall of Rains makes men doubt
whether the Mineral Water be not so much diluted, as to be spoiled in its
Medicinal Capacity. And indeed I have more than once observed, that some such
Martial Waters, after considerable Rains lost their Power of producing the
wonted Color with Galls. And therefore it may in some cases be of good use, to
be assisted to Conjecture, whether or no the Rain have made the Mineral Water
unfit for Drinking. In order to this I shall take notice, that usually a small
Rain does little or no harm to the Medicinal Spring. And sometimes even a
moderate Rain, especially after a long Drought, may, instead of weakening it,
increase its virtue, by washing down into its Channel some Salts, that during
the dry weather, were concreted in the Pores of the Ground, and perhaps also by
heightning the Water in the Channel, so as to dissolve some Salts concreted
there, which it could not reach before. But if the Rain have long continued,
the Estimate may best be made, partly by the greater or lesser depth of the
Spring beneath the surface of the Ground, and partly and indeed chiefly, by the
peculiar nature or strength of the Mineral Water. For some Springs are much
more copiously impregnated than others, and therefore will bear a greater
dilution by Rainwater, of which I shall give you this notable Instance. That,
whereas I found (as I lately noted) that more than one of our English Martial
Springs, especially those near London, were too much weakened by the Water that
Rained into them; I had the Curiosity to try, how much of that kind of Liquor,
some German-Spaw-Water, that came to me to London very well conditioned, would
bear. In pursuit of which design I warily made some Trials, which showed, (what
probably will be thought strange, that when the Mineral Water was diluted with
no less than thrice its Weight of Rainwater, it yet retained strength enough
to produce with newly powdered Galls, a Purplish color.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of late Physic Books sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms
in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Fol.
BOueti Anatomia, 2. Vol. 1680. -- Mercurius, 1682. -- Medicina
Septentrionalis, 1684. Breinii Plantarum Exoticar. Cent. cum Figuris, 1680.
Fabritii Hildani opera cum Severino, 1682. Hippocratis Opera Foetii. Hartmanni
Opera omnia, 1684. Paracelsi Opera, 2 vol. Dioscoridis Opera, G. Lat. Saxoniae
Opera Med. 1680. Piso Hist, naturalis de rebus Indiae. Schenkii Observat. Med.
Mentzelii Index Plant. cum Figuris, 1683. Lepenii Bibliotheca Med. 1683.
Riverii Opera, 1679. Zwelferii Pharmacopeia.
Quartoes.
Alpinus Medicina Egypt. Borrichius de ortu and progressu Chimiae. -- Hermetis
Aegyptiorum and Chym. Sapientia. Bauhini Pinax cum Prodromo. Broeckhuysen
Oeconomia Corporis Anim. 1683. Boil Opera omina, 2 vol. Blasii Anatomia, 1681.
Borellus de motu Animalium, 2 vol. Blegny Zodiacus Galen. Med. Chymic. 1682*
Bartholini Acta Medica. 4 vol. Castelli Lexicon Med. 1682. Cardilucii Officina
Sanitatis. Clauderi Methodus Balsamandi. Collect anea Chymica Leydensia, 1684.
Clauderi Inventum cinnabaricum, 1684. Cleyer Specimina Medicinae Sinicae, 1682.
Charas Pharmacopeia Regia, 1683. Charas Theri ca Andromachi, 1684. Diemerbroeck
Anatomia. Davissomi Comment* in Medicinam Severini. Dolaei Encyclopedia Med.
1684. Fernelii Opera, 1683. Van Helmontii Opera, 1682. Glisson de Naturae
Substantia. Hoffmanni Praxis Med. 1680. Helwigii Observationes Med. 1680.
Hoffmannus in Schroderum. Joel Opera medica. Kyperi Anthropologia corporis
humani* Konig Regnum Animale, 1682. Kirckringii Specilegium Anatom. Licetus de
Monstris. Museum Hermetic. Miscellanea Curiosa M. Physica, 7 vol. 1682. -- Id.
Decuria secunda Anni Primi, 1683. Margravi Materia Medica. -- Prodromus. Pauli
Quadriparti tum Botanicum. Plateri praxis. Pechilinus de potu Theae, 1684.
Regii Medicina. Rolfinchius de purgantibus, 1683* -- Ordo and Methodus Med.
Specialis. -- Conoilia Med. Sacra Eleusinia patefacta, 1684. Schonckii Histde
humor, totius corporis, 1684* Salamandrae Descriptio, 1683. Sylvii Opera Med.
Schorkii Pharmacopeia. -- Hisi. Moschi. Ang. Salae Opera Med. 1682. Swammerdam
miraculum Natura. Vigerii Opera med. Versaschae de Apoplexia. Waltheri Sylva
medica* Welschii Decades X. med. Wedelii Opiologia. -- Physiologia Med. --
Pharmacia. -- de medicam. facultatiam* -- de medicam. compositione. --
Amaenitates Materiae Med. 1684. Weidenfeld de usu Spir. Vini Lulliani, 1684*
Wepfericicut^ Aquatica. Zwelferi Pharmacop.
Octavoc^.
Bartholini de ductu Salivali, 1685. Bruelis praxis Med. Bontekoe de Febribus,
1683. Tho. Bartholini Hist. Anatomica. Beck de Procidentia Uteri, 1683.
Borelli Observat. Med. Briggs de Oculo. Barthol. Anatomia. Beck. Experimenta,
1684. Beckeri Physica subterr anea cum supplemento, 1681. Brunneri Experimenta
nova circa Pancreas, 1682. Camerarii Sylloges memorabilium M(...) 2 vol. 1683.
Deckeri Exercitationis Med pract. Dodonai Praxis Medica. Franchimont Lithotomia
Med. 1683. Funerwalfi Anatomia. Gockelii Concilia and observat. Med. 1683. De
Graaf Opera. Grulichius de Hydrope, 1681. -- De Bile, 1682. Grimm Compend. Med.
Chym. 1684. Guiberti Opera Med. Hartmanni Praxis Chymiatrica, 1682. Heide
Anatome inytuli and observat. Med. 1684. Hippocratis Opera, 2 vol. Juncken
Chymia Experimentalis, 1681. -- Medicus prasenti Seculo Accom. 1682. Juventa a
nova Antiqua Med. 1684. Le Mort Pharmacia and Chimia, 1684. Lossii Council. Med.
1684. Lister de Fontibus Med. Angliae. -- De Insectis, 1685. Liseri Culter
Anatomicus: Marchetti Anatomi: Meekren Observat. Med. Chyruri 1682: Mereti
Pinax: Plateri Observat. Med. Peonis and Pythagor. Exercit. Anat. and Med.
1682: Plot de Origin Fontium, 1685: Riverii Institutiones: -- Praxis, 2 vol.
-- Observat. Rulandi Curationes Emperica, 1680. Sydenhami Opera Universa
Londini, 1685. Straussii Isagoge Physica, 1684. Schroderi Pharmacopeia:
Sculteti Chyrurgia cum Append. Sthal Aetioiogia Phys. Chym. 1683. Tilingii
Lilium Curiosum, 1683: Tilingii Prodromus, med. -- De Laudano opiato.
Versaschae Observat. med. Welsch rationale Vulnerum Lethalium, 1685. Wepferi de
Apoplexia: Witten memoria medicor. Zypaei Fundamentu med. 1683:
Twelves.
Bail Tract. de Apoplexia. -- Dissertationes Physicae. -- Dissertationes
Medicae. -- Problemata Physica Med. Blondel Thermarum Aquis granen. and porcet,
descript. 1685. Barbetti Chyrurgia: -- Praxis cum notis Deckerii: Barthol. De
Ovariis -- De Unicornu: -- De Pulmonum subst(...): Beughen Bibliographia Med.
and Physica, 1682: Beguini Tyrocinium Chymicum: Comelini Catalogus Plantarum,
1682: Drelincourt Praeludium Anat. -- Experimenta Anat. 1684. Guiuri Arcanum
Acidular. 1682: Glissoni Opuscula, 3 vol. Van Helmont. Fundamenta Med. 1682:
Hoffmanus de usu Li^nis, etc. 1682: Harvey de Gener. Animal. -- De motu cordis:
Hoffman de Cinnabari Antimonii, 1685. Ab Here Fons Spadanus and Observe. Med.
1685. Kirchim de Peste, 1681. Kirckring* in Basil Valent. currum Triumph.
Kunckelii Observat. Chymiae, 1681: Le Mort Compendium Chymicum, 1682. Muralti
Vade mecum Anat. 1682. Mysteria Physico-Medica, 1681. Maurocordatus de motu
Pulmonum, 1682. Macasii Promptuarium Materiae Med. Matthaei Experimenta
Chymica, 1683. Muis Praxis Chyrurgica duabus partibus, 1684. Morelli Methodus
perscribendi formulas Remedior. Primerose ars Pharmac. Pecket Anatomia: Redus
de Insectiss Reidlini Observe. med. Rivinus de peste lips^ensi. 1680: Riverii
Arcana. St. Romani Physica, 1684. Recueil de Curiositez en Medicine, 1685.
Smitzii Compend. med. 1682: Stockhameri Microcosmographia, Swalve Quarelae
Ventriculi: -- Alcali and acidum: Tilingius de Renum structura. Verla Anat
Oculi: Vigani Medulla Chymiae: Du Verney traite de L'organe de L'ouie, 1683
Spon Observations Sur les Fieures, 1684. Wedelii Theoremata Med. -- De Sale
Volat. Plantarum.
Advertisement.
THat these before mentioned Books in Physic and Chemistry, with many other
Foreign Books, are sold by Samuel Smith, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard; and that he will furnish himself with much variety of new Books in
that kind, from time to time, as they shall come from Franckfort Mart; and
likewise he can procure such other Books for Gentlemen, whichperhaps are not to
be met with here, from his Correspondents, if to be had, beyond Sea.

Books Printed for, and sold by Samuel Smith.

THe Philosophical Transactions published by the Royal Society Monthly,
beginning January 1683:

Jo. Goedartius de Insectis in methodum redactus cum Notalurum Additione Opera
M. Lister, item Appendicis ad Hist. Animalium Angliae, cum 21 Figuris Aeneis
illustrata, 1685.

Enquiry after Happiness by the Author of Practical Christianity, 1685.

R. Boyl's Memoirs for the Not. History of Human Blood, especially the Spirit
of that Liquor, 1684. Price 2 s.

-- Experiments and Considerations about the Porosity of Bodies, in two Essays,
1684. Price 1 s. -- 6 d.

-- Of the Reconcileableness of Specific Medicines to the Corpuscular
Philosophy, is now in the Press.

Tuta an Efficax Luis Venerea, ^sepe absque mercurio ac semper absque
Salivatione mercuriali curandae Methodus Authore D. A. M. D. 1614.

De variatione, ac varietate ppulsus observationes, accessit ejusdem Author is
nova Medicine tum Speculativae, tum practicae claevis. Sive Ars Explorandi
medicas plantarum ac corporum quorumcumque facultates ex Solo Sapore 16q85.

The whole Art of the Stage, etc. Translated out of French: In Quarto, 1684
price 5. s.

A new History of Ethiopia, being a full and Accurate Description of the
Kingdom of Abessinia, vulgarly, though erroneously, called the Empire of
Prester John in four Books (illustrated with many Copper Plates) and also a new
and exact Map of the Country, and a Preface she wing the usefulness of this
History; with the life of Gregorius Abba, etc. By the learned Job Ludolphus
Counselor to his Imperial Majesty and the Dukes of Saxony, and Treasurer to
his Highness, the Elector Palatine, in Fol. 1684. Price 12. s.

Guideon's Fleece, or a vindication of the College of Physlcians in answer to
a Book entitled the Conclave of Physicians. By Dr. Harvey, in Quarto, 1684.
Pr. 6. (...)

An Anatomical account of an Elephant which was lately Dissected in Dublin,
June 17, in the year 1681. By A. M. Med. of Trinity College near Dublin,
illustrated with Cuts, in Quarto, 1682. Price 1. s.

Swammerdami (Johan.) Amst. M. D. Miraculum Naturae. In Octavo.

A Philosophical Account of the hard Frost, with what Effects it may probably
have upon Human Bodies, as to Health and Sickness, in Quarto. 2 d. Stitcht.

The true method of curing Consumptions. By S. H. Med. D. 1683. Price 1. s.

A Discourse about Bagnio's, and Mineral Baths, and of the drinking of Spaw
Water, with an Account of the Medicinal Virtues of them, and also showing the
usefulness of Sweating, Rubbing, and Bathing, and the great benefit many here
received from them in various Distempers. By S. H. Med. Doct. 1683.

Miracles, Works above and contrary to Nature; or an Answer to a late
Translation out of Spinosa's Tractatus Theologice-politicus, Mr. Hobs
Leviathan, etc. in Quarto, 1683. Price 1. s.

A Treatise of Self Examination, in order to the worthy receiving the Holy
Communion. By Monsieur John Clade Minister of the Reformed Church at Paris:
Translated from the French Original, in Twelves, 1683.

Protestancy to be Embraced; or a new and infallible Method to reduce Romanists
from Popery to Protestancy. 1683. pr. 1. s.

The Art of Divine Converse, being a New Years-Gift, directing how to walk with
God all the year long, in Twelves, pr. 6. d.

The Councils of Wisdom, or the Maxims of Solomon, in Twelves, 1683. pr. 1. s.

The Ten Pleasures of Marriage. In Twelves.

The Dutch Rogue: or Gusman of Amsterdam, traced from the Cradle to the
Gallows, 1683. In Twelves.

Dr. Thomas Smith's Sermon about frequent Communion, 1685.

Mr. Fish's Sermon on the 9th of May, 1684.

History of the Original and Progress of Ecclesiastical Revenues, by the
Learned P. Simon, 1685.

Contra Hist. Aristeae de LXX Interpretibus dissertatio, sive responsio ad D.
Isaac Vossium de Septuaginta, etc. per H. Hoddy A. M. 1685.

FINIS.

