MVRTHER will OVT.
SIR,
BY yours of the 12th of this Instant, writ to Sir R. S. I perceive you never
heard, that since this happy Revolution, any proof was made in Detection of the
most Treacherous and Barbarous Murder of that Great, but unhappy Patriot,
Arthur late Earl of Essex: Wherefore according to the Commands laid upon me, I
shall as briefly as I well can, give you an Abstract of the most material
Depositions which in that Matter have been made; and upon what Information I
first moved, and for what Reasons I did engage in the Prosecution. In this
Compendium, I shall refer you to a large Discourse, Entitled, Essex's
Innocence and Honor Vindicated (in a Letter to a Friend) printed above two
Years since; and by your Nephew B* it will be shortly brought you.

The late Earl of Essex was committed to the Tower, Tuesday the 10th of July
1683. Bomeny, his own Servant, was immediately attending on his Lordship;
Monday, and Russel, were the two Warders, who (by turns) stood, one at his
Lordship's Chamber Door, the other at the Stairs-foot; and Floyd (a Soldier)
Sentinel at the House-Door, under the Earl's Chamber-window, Vide Letter, etc.
p. 2. Friday then next following, his Lordship was (falsely) said to cut his
Throat. To prove which (pretended) Self-murder, Bomeny and Russel, on the then
next day, deposed before the Coroner in Substance, That the Earl of Essex, in*
less than half an Hour before he was found dead, had a Razor delivered him to
pair his Nails: with which Razor, his Lordship retired into a little Closet,
and (...) soon after being opened. The Earl was there found with his Throat
cut, (Both Jugulars being divided,) and the Razor lying by the Body. L. p. 2.

This Evidence for the Self-murder is detected in every part; For it appears
by the many Contradictions between Bomeny, Russel, and Monday, and the
Depositions of many Witnesses; First, That there was no Razor delivered my
Lord, nor found by him in the Closet, but laid there after his Death, to color
the Self-murder. Secondly, That the Earl's Body was not locked into the Closet.
For the first of these, Bomeny in his first Oath, deposed, That he did not
deliver the Razor till the Morning his Lordship died, L. p. 34. and in his his
second Oath (taken within a few hours of the first) He says, he delivered the
Razor the Day before his Lordship's Death; L. p. 3. Russel swears the Razor was
delivered in less than half an Hour before my Lord was found dead; L. p. 4. and
often declared, that he saw it delivered by Bomeny, after Monday had left my
Lord's Chamber; But Monday affirms, That his Lordship had the Razor about 3
hours before he was found dead; and above 2 hours before Russel stood at his
Lordship's Chamber Door, that Morning the Earl died; L. p. 35. and 36. These
Contradictions destroy the credit of each other, and consequently prove the
falsity of all. That there was no Razor locked in with the Body, is evident; for
two Deposed they saw a bloody Razor thrown out of his Lordship's Chamber-window
(which is 16 foot distant from the Closet) before the Earl was known to be
dead, L. p. 40, 41, 42. and Floyd confessed he saw the Razor so thrown out.
Webster, one of the supposed Ruffians (whom Floyd declared he let into the
Earl's Lodging a little before his Lordship's Death, L. p. 41.) owned, That he
himself threw the Razor out; and being asked the Reason, replied, he was then
under a consternation, and knew not what he did, L. p. 42. Several that were in
the Tower that Morning my Lord died, deposed, That it was commonly discoursed
in the Tower, just after my Lord's Death, That there was a bloody Razor thrown
out of the Chamber-window, before ever it was known my Lord was dead, L. p. 42.
I perceive most are to seek of the Reason wherefore this Razor was so thrown
out, which might be what follows. The Ruffians having murdered the Earl,
before they laid all things in that posture they designed they should be found,
by such as should come to see the Earl's Body; A Person coming up Stairs, these
Varlets were surprised with fear, having not finished that Tragical Scene, as
they designed to have left it. Under this Amazement, one of the Ruffians threw
the Razor out of the Window. This was not politickly done, but it is to be
considered that what is the Effect of surprising fear and consternation (as
this action was) is not cunningly and judicially executed; for this I have some
ground; and the Truth time may discover. Secondly, That the Body was not locked
into the Closet; Bomeny first swore that he knocking at my Lord's Closet-door,
and calling, My Lord; his Lordship not answering, he (himself) pushed the Door
open, and there saw the Body, L. p. 35. In his second Deposition taken the same
Day, he deposed, That when he knocked at the Closet-door, and called, My Lord;
his Lordship not answering, he peeped through a Chink and saw blood, and part
of the Razor, whereupon (without opening the Door) he called Russel, and Russel
pushed the Door open, L* p. 3. This pushing supposes violence; but Russel
deposed, he himself opened the Closet door, the Key being on the outside, L. p.
4. and speaks of no difficulty in it; whereas Monday gives the Lie to both
Bomeny and Russel; amd declared that my Lord's Body lay so close and strong
against the Closet-door, that neither Bomeny or Russel could open the Door; but
he himself coming to the Door, and being much stronger than either of the two
former, put his shoulder against the door, and thrusting with all his might,
broke it open, L. p. 35. This Relation stuffed with Contradictions, argues the
whole is false, and contrived. For whenever two or more Deponents pretend to
be Co-witnesses of a Fact (as in this case Bomeny, Monday and Russel do) and
they materially contradict each other (as is herein most notorious) it is
evident all is forged. This rational conclusion was drawn by Daniel, from the
contradictory charge of the two Elders against Susannah. That the Closet was,
or could be locked upon the Body, is false, and contrived, as appears by the
Oath of such who coming up to my Lord's Chamber just after his death was first
discoverd; they observed the Legs, part out of of the Closet (so that the
Closet-door could not possibly be then fast) and a bloody foot was seen
imprinted on my Lord's Stocking, L. p. 40. This in contradiction of that
Evidence, which would prove his Lordship a Self-Murtherer. I shall now give you
some farther Testimony to prove the Earl Barbarously murdered.

D. S in substance deposed, that in July 83, she was Servant to one Mr. Holmes
(a notorious bigoted Papist) and about 9 Days before my Lord of Essex' s
Death, She overheard several Papists declare at the House of the said Holmes,
That the Earl of Essex was so averse to their Interest, that he must be taken
off; and that they had been with His Highness (the late King) and His Highness
was first for poisoning the said Earl, but that manner of death was objected
against; it was then proposed to His Highness, that the Earl should be stabbed;
but that was not liked; at last His Highness concluded, and ordered his Throat
to be cut; and His Highness had promised to be there when it was done. About 6
Days before his death, some of the same Consult, at the same place declared,
that it was resolved the Earl's Throat should be cut; but it would be given
out, he had done it himself, and whosoever should deny that, should be taken up
and punished. The very Day this Murder was committed, and after it was done,
one of these Villains leaped about Holmes' s Parlour for joy, and Holmes coming
into the Room, he struck Holmes on the Back, and cried, The Feat was done, and
he could not but laugh to think how like a Fool the Earl of Essex looked when
they come to cut his Throat, L* p. 23, 24. That this Relation was not invented
upon this Revolution to asperse the late King, many Witnesses have deposed,
That this servant gave them the Substance of this Account some years before the
late King abdicated; and that these Deponents cautioned her to secrecy, L. p.
23, 24. To avoid this Charge of D. S. Mr. Holmes procured 2 Witnesses. Mrs.
Hewet, a violent Papist, and the other of a loose Character, to depose that in
April before the Earl's Death, this D. S. was turned away from Holmes's House
upon Suspicion of Theft; and from April 1683, to 9 Months after, one Elizabeth
Cadman was servant with the said Holmes; and no other servant there (...) L. p.
24. But it is deposed by 6 Witnesses, That D. S. was servant with Holmes about
the time of the Earl's Death, L. p. 24, 25. and it is proved, continued there a
Servant sometime after his Lordship's death, L. p. 25. Hewet further swore,
That on the 6th of July 1683; She went out of Town with Holmes, and tarried out
with him till the 23th of the same Month; but in contradiction to this part,
it is deposed by a Tailor, That the very Week my Lord died, he delivered a
Dust-Gown to Mrs. Hewet, then in London; this appears by the Taylor's Book, to
which he has sworn, L. p. 25. but Mrs. Hewet told this Tailor, to this effect;
That if he did swear this, he would prove her Brother Holmes in Town (when she
had swore him above 60 miles off) and that her Brother was then a dead Man, L.
p. 26. Thus Holmes's Defense appears false in every part. And where a Defense
is detected to be false, it is not uncharitable to conclude that the Charge is
true. As a farther Evidence to confirm the Consult to murder my Lord; and that
His late Majesty the then Duke of York, was to be there when it was to be done,
it is proved by 8 Witnesses, that it was reported, at several remote places in
England, sometime before the Earl was dead; That the Earl had cut his Throat in
the Tower, L. p. 26, 27* and at one of these places, (viz.) Andover about 60
Miles from London, the very next Day after the Earl was committed to the Tower,
and two days before the King and Duke went to the Tower, it was declared; That
the Earl being Prisoner in the Tower, and understanding the King and Duke were
come into the Tower, his Lordship was afraid His then Majesty would have come
into his Chamber, which the Earl could not bear the thoughts of; and therefore
cut his Throat, to avoid it, L. p. 27. None but the most secret in that horrid
Contrivance, who knew the King and Duke were to be in the Tower, when the Earl
was to be murdered, or had it from such as were acquainted with the whole
Contrivance, could report two days before the Earl's Death, that his Lordship
cut his Throat when the King and Duke were in the Tower; for the King and the
Duke had been together in the Tower but once in 25 Years before; and their
going the day my Lord died, was a surprise to the very Yeomen of the Guard;
many of which, about five in the Morning were called out of their Beds to
attend His Majesty and Duke into the Tower. All these reports of the Earl's
Death before he was indeed dead, agreed in the manner how [cutting his Throat]
the Place where [the Tower] and one gave the pretended Reason wherefore [to
avoid seeing the King then in the Tower] which Reason was industriously urged
by the Papists, after his death, as an Argument for the Self-murder. All this
strongly proves, that the manner, place, and pretended reason, were some time
before my Lord's Death (or indeed commitment to the Tower) agreed upon; for it
could not otherwise be so particularly related, about 60 Miles from London, the
next day after his Lordship's commitment to the Tower. That His late Majesty
sent the Ruffians into the Earl's Lodgings to murder him, is reasonable to be
believed, it being deposed by several Witnesses, That on the Day of my Lord's
Death, two Soldiers (since taken off to prevent their discovery) declared they
saw the then Duke send two Ruffians into the Earl's Lodgings, and these two
Villains were observed to return to his then Highness, before the Earl^s Death
was known; and as they came near him, they smiled, and said, The Business was
done; upon which the then Duke seemed well pleased. Floyd the Sentinel
confessed, that by special Order he let in two or three Men, of which Webster a
Bailiff was one, into my Lord's Lodgings just before his death; that he heard
them going into my Lord's Chamber, upon which he soon observed a great noise
and trampling; a little after which, it was pretended the Earl of Essex had cut
his Throat. Whilst this Sentinel was in Newgate, as suspected privy to my
Lord's Murder, he desired liberty to send for a Neighbor, which being granted
by the Lords of the Committee; This Soldier after he had often enjoined his
Neighbor to be true to him, declared, That he was much troubled that he had
confessed the letting in these men to my Lord; for though it was indeed true, it
was what he should not have owned, L. p. 28. Whilst these Ruffians were thus
struggling with my Lord, one E. B. saw three or four men bustling together in
my Lord's Chamber; and she heard one of them crying out very loud and
dolefully, Murder, murder, murder; and this she soon discovered to one Mr.
P. who did immediately caution her to secrecy, because the discovery thereof
would be her ruin, L. p. 29.

Mr. P. has in this respect confirmed the Testimony of E. B. So that this
Evidence appears to be no new-made Story, L. p. 29.

That his Lordship by his struggling, endeavored to prevent their cutting his
Throat, appears by five Cuts that were observed on his right Hand, L. p. 45.

The many and gross irregular Practices, with respect to the Coroner's
Inquisition, are further Proofs of my Lords being Murdered; and these
Irregularities committed Contrary to the then King's Order; for as soon as King
Chapter heard of the Earls Death, he did immediately send a Gentleman to order that
all things should remain in those Circumstances the Body was first found dead,
till the Coroners Jury had sat upon the Body; but notwithstanding this positive
Order from the then King, the Body was soon taken out of the Closet, and that
very day the Body was stripped, the Clothes carried away, and the Room and
Closet washed; and the next day, when the Jury sat, one of the Jury insisted
upon seeing my Lord's Clothes in which he dyed; whereupon the Coroner was sent
for into the next room to the Jury, and upon his return told the Jury it was
the Body, and not the Clothes they were to sit upon; the Body was there, and
that was sufficient, L. p. 44. Now, had the Clothes been produced, the print of
the bloody Foot before observed, would have appeared, and that my Lord's Cravat
in the Neck was cut in three parts, besides other Circumstances in the Clothes,
which might have proved the Resistance made by the Earl to prevent his being
Murdered, had they been produced. Whilst the Jury was sitting, one of them said
to this Effect, That he had heard the Earl of Essex was a very Good, Sober, and
Religious Gentleman, and therefore this Action was very unlike that Character.
Whereupon Major Hawley (at whose House my Lord was Murdered) in substance tells
the Jury, (and this Man who thus spoke in particular) That whosoever thought
that Self-murder was not like the Earl of Essex's Character, did not well know
(...) intimately acquainted with the Earl, knew that it was his Lordships fixed
Principle, That any Man might (and ought rather to) cut his own Throat than be
brought to an Infamous Death; wherefore this Action was according to the Earl's
avowed Principle, L. p. 46. But when Major Hawley was asked before the Lords of
the Close Committee, how he knew this to be my Lords avowed Principle, Hawley
protested he did never hear it said to be my Lords Principle, till their
Lordships charged him with having suggested it to the Jury, and that he could
not possibly do for this further reason, because he was not near the Jury all
that time they sat upon this Inquisition. Hawley's now denying the suggesting
to the Jury this pretended Principle of my Lord, argues, That this pretended
Principle was a Forgery, and contrived to corrupt the Jury with a belief of the
Self-Murder. The Jury were for adjourning their Inquisition, and giving notice
to my Lord's Relations, so that if any thing could be proved on my Lord's
behalf, it might be heard. But to prevent this, Hawley tells the Jury, That the
then King had sent for their Inquisition, and declared he would not rise from
the Council Board till rheir Inquisition was brought him; wherefore they must
dispatch out of hand, L. p. 46. This being creditted, they made all imaginable
have, and did not take that time they would otherwise have done. Hawley being
asked who came from the King, thus to hasten the Jury, protested he never heard
that any Person was so sent; neither did he declare this to the Jury, nor could
he do it, for he was not near them all the time they were upon the Inquisition.
But the Coroner, and all the Jury very well knew Hawley; and it is sworn he was
with them, and made use of those Suggestions beforementioned.

Hawley's denial, That he was near the Jury, argues his being conscious that he
was with them to a very ill purpose. It being a general Observation, That
whenever a Person is charged with a Crime at a certain place, and he
positively denies his having been at that place, when the Crime is said to be
committed; if such his denial prove false, and it appears by undoubted
Evidence, that he was at the place when the Fact was done, it is taken for
granted, that he was there to do what he is charged to have done. A false
Defense still argues a true Charge.

Lloyd the Sentinel, the day he was first seized as suspected privy to this
Murder, declared, That when the Men came to my Lord's Lodgings just before his
Death, Monday, or Major Hawley ordered him to suffer the three Men to come in,
L. p. 27.

To avoid this Suspicion, Major Hawley declared before the Lords of the Close
Committee, that he went out of his own house about four or five of the Clock
that morning, and came not near his own House till after my Lord's Death, when
Monday the Warder, came and gave him notice of that Accident; but it was
positively sworn by one (that passed by Major Hawley's House about eight of the
Clock that Morning, which was a little before my Lords death) that he saw the
Major then go into his own House, L. p. 32.

Webster (beforementioned) one day very much abusing his Wife (or Whore), she
told him (to this effect). That he was a Fool, as well as a Rogue, to treat her
so, considering he knew it was within her Power to hang him, and one in the
Tower, L. p. 44.

This Webster the very day my Lord was Murdered, produced a very fine Cambrick
Pocket-Hankerchief, marked with an E. and a Coronet. The Hankerchief was very
Bloody, and this Barbarous Wretch shak'd it, and with a great rejoicing, cried
out, Here is the Blood of a Traitor.

The next day after the Earls Murder, this Fellow (before that time miserably
poor) produced a little Purse which he shook before a Neigbour of his, and out
of the Purse told Forty nine Guineas, and a Pistol.

But it seems he had a far greater Sum than this; for (sometime after his
Lordships Murder) his Wife, being upbraided with her Husbands Poverty, replied,
My Husband not long since had five hundred Guinea's, L. 44.

This is probable enough, considering the great Sums of Money this vile Fellow
was observed to play away shortly after the Earl's death, for (it is believed,
by those that observed his then losing, that) he lost above 400 l. within
twelve Months next after his Lordships Murder: Male parta, male distribuntur.
Ill got, ill spent.

Sometime after the Earls Death, Holmes (as before accused of being privy
thereunto) abusing his Wife, she was overheard to tell him, He was a Murderous
Rogue, and he well-knew she could hang him when she pleased. To which Holmes
answered, That he little thought she would have spoken of it, who of all the
World had the least Reason. For said this Scurrilous Fellow, You Bitch, you
Whore, don't you remember I bought you a good Sattin-Gown and Petticoat, and
therefore you above all the World ought not to prate. But she replied, You are
a Murderous Rogue for all that.

The many ill Practices, violent Prosecutions, and indeed barbarous Murders
that have been committed to avoid a discovery of my Lord's Murder, are further
strong presumptions of that Barbarous Cruelty: Of the first sort we have a
remarkable Instance in this particular, (viz.) When the Coroners Inquisition,
and the Depositions of Bomeny and Russel, were carried in all haste to
White Hall, in order to their immediate Publication; upon reading and comparing
these new Informations, it was found that they did (in point of time)
materially contradict each other; wherefore to make their Relations in this
respect, appear to the World more consonant to each other into Bomeny's
Deposition these words were foisted, (viz.) on Friday the Thirteenth Instant;
wherefore the then Authority might properly be said to have forged an
Information. For upon the least Alteration of, or Addition to what was sworn by
Bomeny, it ceased to be his Deposition.

Whomsoever the then Authority pitched upon to peruse and reconcile Russels and
Bomenys Depositions, so that they might not appear to the World inconsistent
with each other, it is plain he was not qualified for that Service; for the
words (before observed, to be added by this Reconciler) are foisted into
Bomeny's Deposition without the least congruity to Sense and Grammar; As at
large appears in L. p. 48.

It mattered not how contradictory Bomeny and Russell were in their Oaths
before the Coroner, provided they appear to public view in a credible Dress
For those Originals being kept by the Coroner, it could not appear to the
World, that either of these printed Depositions was different from what was
indeed sworn; 'twas taken for granted that the Coroner durst not contradict
what Authority had ordered to be printed.

Robert Meake, a Soldier in the Tower when my Lord was Murdered, (and that very
day discovered to several Friends what he knew of the matter) the next Morning
after the Earl's Death, desired those (to whom he had made that discovery) not
to reveal the least of what he had told them with relation to my Lord's Death:
For (said Meake) this very Morning several Soldiers were called together, and
by our Officer enjoined (under severe Threats, not to make known any thing of
what we saw or heard, with reference to my Lord's Death. And therefore he was
undone if they should declare what he had the day before told them.

But it seems it was soon known or suspected by my Lord's murderers, that
Meake had revealed his knowledge in this Matter; and therefore they were
resolved to take him off, to prevent his farther Relation; of which this poor
Soldier being very sensible; the very Day he was murdered, he came to several
of his acquaintance, and told them, That he found he went in danger of his
life; and he was afraid he should be murdered for discovering what he knew as
to my Lord's Murder; wherefore he desired those his Friends to keep him
company that very Day, for he much feared he should that very day be taken off;
but his friends dreading the danger themselves might be in whilst in his
Company, refused to go with him, and that very Night this honest Soldier (who
was commonly known in the Tower and amongst his acquaintance, by the Name of
honest Robin) was thrown into the Tower-ditch; and the then next Morning there
found dead, L. p. 49.

There was one Mr. Hawley, a Warder in the Tower, that Morning the Earl died,
who the day Mr. Speak and I were Tried, declared, That he knew Mr. Braddon
could know nothing of the matter; which a Gentleman observing, said to Hawley,
If you know Mr. Braddon knows nothing, what must you know then? To which Mr.
Hawley made no reply.

But this Warder's knowledge in the Matter, cost him dear; for about March next
after the Earl's Death, this Man was missing, upon which a Popish Warder said,
That Hawley had been prating about the Earl of Essex' s Death, and for what he
said, was forced to ran away, though it afterward appeared he was murdered; for
about 6 Weeks after he was first missed, he was found almost naked in Medway
River, having been villanously destroyed; and such barbarous cruelty acted
toward him, that none of his own Relations (not his own Wife) could know him
by his Face, nor by any thing but what he had on his Legs; for his Clothes were
stripped off (without doubt) that the Body might not be known, but his Stockins
left on, by which he was discovered; for he wore three Stockins upon one Leg,
and two Stockins and a Sere-Cloath (which he wore for some hurt) upon the
other; by which remarkable circumstance the Body was known to be Mr. Hawley's.

Had his Murderers took off his Stockins, as they did his Clothes, none could
have known it to be Mr. Hawley's Body. But the Avenger of Blood in his
Providence ordered this otherwise; and hereafter may detect those barbarous
Destroyers of Mankind, with all their (...) been perpretrated, with Relation to
their first perfidious Cruelty.

Many have been the Practices used, to prevent a public Discovery of what was
known by particular Persons in this matter; For,

About 6 Weeks after my Lord's Death, there was a Letter (unsealed) left with
one Mr. Cadman, then living in Durham Exchange. The Letter was directed to the
Right Honorable the Countess Dowager of Essex: The substance of this Letter
was; That if her Honor could prevail with the King for the Author's Pardon, he
would ingenuously make a full Discovery, how, by whom, and whose Order my Lord
was murdered; and this Letter did assure her Honor, that the Duke of York and
-- were authorizing this Murder.

This Letter was subscribed, P. B.

By the Hand that writ it, and the Letters Subscribed, it was Paul Bomeny,
beforementioned (who did once blasphemously say, that he could as well tell how
my Lord came by his Death, as God Almighty himself. For the Letter was fairly
writ in a Hand, between a Roman and Italian; and such an Hand Bomeny, when he
writ fair, did write; Besides, the two Letters subscribed, are the Letters of
his Name.

I do suppose it may be objected, That this Letter cannot be thought to be
writ, and subscribed by Bomeny; for the Letter, had it been brought in
Accusation against him, and proved to be his, would have cost him his Life;
seeing herein he confessed himself guilty of the Fact.

But with submission, I think Bomeny, by this Letter (could it have been
proved, to be his own Handwriting) was in no danger at all of being punished;
for had they seized Bomeny, they would have catched a Tartar, should they have
proceeded against him, for the Murder. Upon this Confession, the World would
have believed the whole Contents of this Letter, to be true; and consequently,
that the Duke of York, and -- authorized (or rather commanded) this most
Treacherous Murder; and then pray consider, what that Government could have
got by such Prosecution, Conviction, and Punishment.

This Letter was carried by Cadman, to a Justice of Peace, and by him to the
Secretary of State. But this Bookseller, was never sent for, nor any enquiry
made after the Author.

This Murder was a Noli me tangere of those times, which was not therefore to
be inquired into; but such as could make Discoveries, were to be threatened or
wheedled into silence. Of which (amongst many others) we have these Instances
following, (viz.)

William Edwards (who saw the bloody Razor thrown out of my Lord's
Chamber-window before his Death was discovered, and has deposed the same
before the Lords), further made Oath, That as he was going into Westminster
Hall (that Morning Mr. Speak and I were Tried) he met Major Hawley, who
(knowing Edwards was to be an Evidence at that Trial) in a very threatening
manner told him, That if he might have the management of him, the said Edwards
should be whipped once a Fortnight for 7 Years together. Which menace of the said
Hawley did so terrify this Boy (then about 13 Years of Age) that he was afraid
to own what he knew, lest he should have suffered for so doing.

But gentler Methods were sometimes thought more proper to be used toward such
as could reveal any thing material herein; for it is proved that one -- said,
Major Hawley was one of the best Friends she had in the world upon account of
somewhat which she knew with relation to the Earl of Essex' s Death, L. p. 33.

The bare disbelief of the Earl's Self-murder, was heretofore a (...) against
our then Mis-Government, and Severely prosecuted, tho not with fire, yet with
barbarous Usage; as appears by the treatment of an Ancient Soldier, who
sometime after the Earl's Death, was ordered to show a certain Dr. the Tower,
which, whilst he was doing, the Divine asked the Soldier which was the Chamber
the Earl of Essex cut his Throat in? Whereupon the Soldier pointed to the
Earl's Lodgings, and said, that is the Chamber, in which, they say, he cut his
Throat. The Dr. then asked the Soldier what he did believe? The poor Man (to
evade a direct answer) said, he believed in God; but the Dr. pressed him to
declare whether he did not believe his Lordship cut his own Throat. The Soldier
(with some unwillingness), replied, that he would not say he did believe it.
The Dr. looking on this Expression, as a great Offense, immediately complained
hereof to the Lord Allington, then Constable of the Tower: upon this Complaint
the Soldiers were ordered to be drawn out, that this Man might be discovered,
which this Soldier understanding, to avoid discovery, some way disguised
himself; but notwithstanding, the Parson knew him, and charged him with what
you have before heard; for which this unhappy disbeliever was put into the
Hole, and there fed some considerable time upon Bread and Water; and whilst the
Lord Allington was out of the Tower, an Officer then there, Commander in Chief,
ordered the poor old Man, then past 60 Years of Age, to be tied to the wooden
Horse, and stripped to his Waste, and the Marshal to give him Fifty three stripes
(though the usual number was but Twelve), after which, this Officer told the
Soldier, he ought to have been hanged for what he declared. And yet nothing
more in substance than what is beforementioned.

One of the Coroner's Jury, sometime after my Lord's Death, at a Coffee-house,
said, he thought that they of the Jury were all infatuated, to find the Earl
Felo de se; and he verily believed, that had they been allowed convenient time,
they should have brought it in otherwise. This Jury-man for these words was
taken up, imprisoned, prosecuted, and fined. Such were the violent Methods used
in those days, to avoid any Suspicion of my Lord's being murdered.

The timing the Earl's Death, and the sudden use thereof made, is another
Argument, not only of the Murder, but of one main end thereby designed. My Lord
was taken off, when that great Patriot, the Lord Russel was upon his Trial.

As soon as King Chapter heard of the Earl's death, he sent Sir C -- to go and view
the Body, and take the Examinations of such as were attending on my Lord, at
the time of his death. Sir C -- had no sooner began to examine those
Attendants, but a Messenger came (as he pretended) from the King, to tell Sir C
--, He must go to the Old Bailey, and give notice to the then Court, that the
Earl of Essex had cut his Throat. Whereupon Sir C --, by the same Gentleman
desired His Majesty, that he might finish the Examinations he was then taking,
and he would then go to the Old Bailey. But the same Gentleman soon returned,
and declared to Sir C --, that His Majesty did expressly command him to go
forthwith to the Old Bailey, and to give notice of my Lord's Death. In obedience
to which repeated Command, Sir C -- instantly went, and gave notice to the
Court of that deplorable Accident. But Sir C -- has unhappily forgot who thus
twice brought His Majesty's express Orders. L. p. 47, 48.

As soon as the Court received this Account from Sir C --, with what malicious
Application was it urged against the then unfortunate Gentleman at that time
there upon his Trial? It was said to be an argument from Heaven, of the truth
of the (then) pretended Plot. The Kings Council said, That Digitus Dei (but
indeed 'twas, Digitus Diaboli) appeared in that Evidence, and that it was more
than a thousand Witnesses. Vide L. Russel's Trial.

This Murder thus vehemently urged, not a little bias'd the Jury against the
then Prisoner; some of them having ingenuously confessed, that it much
influenced their Verdict against that unfortunate Gentleman. Thus by that fatal
Cut, wherewith those bloody Wretches murdered the Earl, they did (virtually)
destroy two of our greatest Patriots, true State-Martyrs for the Religion,
Laws, and Liberties of their Native Country.

SIR,
I Shall now give you a short Account upon what Grounds I did first engage in
this Prosecution, and what hardships I have met with from the Severity of the
two last Reigns, for having endeavored to detect this complicated Murder.

My Lord of Essex was taken off the 13th of July; the Coroner sat on the Body
the 14th, and on the 16th of the same Month, the Depositions (taken before the
Coroner) were printed, in which (amongst other things) it was sworn, That the
Razor was locked in with the Body into the Closet, and there found. Upon
reading this particular, a Friend of mine declared the Razor could not be
locked into the Closet; for there was a bloody Razor thrown out of my Lord's
Chamber Window before it was known that the Earl was dead, and that this Razor
so seen thrown out, one Edwards beforementioned, endeavored to take up; but a
Maid came out of my Lord's Lodgings, and took it up, running with it into my
Lord's Lodgings, and then first discovered his Lordships death.

Finding this Relation very inconsistent with what was sworn before the
Coroner, I concluded those forsworn Attendants did not swear false for any
other end, but to avoid the discovery of that Truth, which might detect this
Villainous Murder.

Hereupon I did advise with some Friends, to whom I did communicate my
Resolution of making inquiry into this matter; but with an unanimous Consent
they all dissuaded me, telling me, that if the Earl was Murdered, that Interest
and Power concerned therein was too powerful for me to cope with. To which I
made answer to this effect, That of this I was well satisfied, but I dreaded
what might be the consequence of no Man's engaging in this Detection; for if
that bloody Party which destroyed his Lordship, perceived such their Cruelty
was unsuspected, and that it was generally believed to be done by the Earl
himself, in probability many more might fall such Sacrifices to their Malice:
For if those cruel Men found any to oppose their Designs, it was but to pretend
a Crime, and thereupon Imprison them, placing over them perfidious Villains,
that would either Murder them, or suffer others to do it, and then add Perjury
to Murder. And they might destroy many Noblemen and Gentlemen, that were truest
Friends to the English Interest; but if those vile Men once perceived that this
their first Murder was suspected, and in danger of being exposed, they would
not so readily engage in a Second Part of that horrid Tragedy, the prevention
whereof I did prefer to my own private Interest and Safety; and tho to the
certain Ruin of both, I was resolved (by the grace of God) to engage therein.

With this Resolution, I made inquiry after this Edwards (whom before I never
saw) and finding this Boy to give the Relation beforementioned; and that as
soon as he came from the Tower (that Morning my Lord died) he declared the same
to his Mother and Sisters (as they were ready to attest) I took in substance
what the Boy and his Relations could depose, and therewith went to some
Magistrate; but I found all shy to meddle in the Matter.

Being thus disappointed, the very Thursday after the Earl's Death, I went to
White Hall, and carried with me what the Boy and his Mother could declare, and
were ready to make Oath of.

This I gave to my Lord Sunderland (the then Secretary of State) The Secretary
commanded me to attend the then next day, about Ten in the Morning; and so
bring with me the Boy and his Mother, and his Lordship said, If it were proper
he would take their Depositions.

Friday the 21th of July 1683, I went down to White Hall, with the Boy and his
Sister (who could testify the same, with the Mother, who was then ill) and sent
word to the Secretary, then in Council, That I did attend according to his
Lordship's Order. Upon which a Messenger was sent forth (and before the Boy or
his Sister, or any person was examined against me) I was taken into Custody;
and after some short time, carried before the King and Council.

When I first came before His Majesty, the King asked me, what moved Me to
engage in that Matter?

I told His Majesty, that I was altogether a stranger to that Honorable
Family; so that I lay under no greater personal Obligation than any man might,
who had met with the same Informations. It was my love to Truth and Justice,
that moved me to engage therein; and through the grace of God, would do my
duty, though Death star'd me in the Face every step I made.

After many foreign Questions from the matter in hand, I pulled out of my
Pocket the Coroner's Inquest, and observed to His Majesty some of the
Incoherences and Contradictions sworn before the Coroner.

The Duke then demanded to see those Depositions, which being delivered, his
Highness looked over them, but made no answer to what was objected. His then
Majesty received them from his Highness, and said as little in answer. The then
Lord Keeper North, endeavored to reconcile those inconsistences: But I did
object against such his Lordship's Reconciliation (...) This made the Lord
Keeper very angry.

I do conceive that the Printing the Depositions was an appeal to mankind,
Whether what was sworn before the Coroner was not sufficient to prove the Earl
Felo de se.

I do not so much wonder at the folly of those two inconsistent Deponents, as
at the indiscretion of the then Mis-Government, to print such incongruous
Informations, as by their material, notorious Difference, naturally rendered
both suspected, as false and contrived.

The Boy and his Sister being examined, I was called again before the Board,
where the Lord Keeper told me, That I must give Security to answer to an
Information, which in that Matter should be preferred against me; and that
Afternoon I gave 2000 l. Bail accordingly, and was discharged out of Custody.

Although thus treated, I was resolved to proceed in my Inquiry; and for some
Weeks was daily in search after many particulars of which I had been Informed;
amongst the rest I was told, that it was reported above an Hundred miles from
London, before the Earl's Death, that he had cut his Throat in the Tower, as is
before observed.

In Search after this Report, I rid into Wiltshire, where I and my Servant were
taken up, and sent to the County Gaol, upon a very illegal Warrant; in the
conclusion whereof, The Keeper was commanded to keep us both without
Conversation with any Person whatsoever; and without Pen, Ink, or Paper, till
the Jailer should hear from the King and Council. A strict obedience to this
Warrant might have confined me, and my man to that Prison all the time of our
lives.

From this Gaol I and my Servant were removed by Habeas Corpus, upon the Habeas
Corpus Act, to be bailed; my man was discharged without bail, but the Lord
Keeper demanded 24000 l. Bail for my Appearance, and Security for the Good
Behavior.

These were Terms I could not comply with, and was therefore some considerable
time continued in the Custody of a Messenger, at above Four pounds a Week,
directly Expenses, besides other collateral Disbursements.

To avoid this vast Charge, I Petitioned to be removed over to the King's Bench,
which after many Petitions, I did at last obtain. But before my removal I did
agree with the Marshal upon giving 2000 l. Security, and Five Shillings per
Week, to have the Liberty of the Rules. When I was removed, the Marshal
insisted upon 10000 l. Security, and Ten Shillings per Week, which when I had
given, I was notwithstanding locked up at no less Expense than 2 l. 5 s. 3 d.
per Week, for Prison-Charges.

Thus having lain some Weeks in this Place, I moved the King's Bench to be
bailed, and at last obtained it.

Having once more got my Liberty, I renewed my Prosecution; but as a designed
prevention hereof, I was about November 1683, again taken up upon as illegal a
Warrant as the former. For herein no Crime was specified, but it was granted
against me for being suspected to be disaffected to the then Mis-Government. By
virtue of this Warrant, I was first carried before Sir James Edwards, then
before the Lord Mayor; and after that to White Hall, before the King and
Council.

The Design of this was to charge me with bespeaking (...) the Destruction of
the (then mis-call'd) Loyal Party. But upon full Examination, in this
Accusation, there appeared such falsehood and inconsistent malice, that I was
ordered forthwith to be discharged.

Once more being at Liberty, I did renew my Inquiries, in which, till the
Hillary-Term then following, I was in almost a constant Hurry.

In Hillary-Term 83, Mr. Speak and my Self were Tried upon an Information for a
(pretended) Misdemeanour. In this Charge was set forth (in substance) That the
Earl of Essex, being Prisoner in the Tower for High Treason, did feloniously
destroy himself, and was so found by the Coroner's Inquest. Notwithstanding
this, Mr. Speak, and my Self, did conspire to procure false Witnesses, to
prove that the said Earl was murdered by Persons unknown, in whose custody he
was, L. p. 16.

The then Attorney General tells the Court, That they had a Cloud of Witnesses
to prove that the said Earl did indeed destroy himself, L. p. 16

When this Cloud appeared, it consisted in Major Hawley (at whose House my Lord
was murdered) Russel the Warder, who then kept the Chamber Door; Bomeny, my
Lord's Servant (then attending on his Lordship) and Floyd the Gentinel (who
kept the outward Door, whilst my Lord was murdered. Here are three (Monday
being the fourth) of the men in whose Custody my Lord was, and consequently
(according to the Information) the very men Mr. Speak, and my Self, had
conspired to Charge with my Lord's Murder; and these very men, in whose
Custody my Lord was, were like a Cloud of Witnesses brought to prove, that
those men, in whose Custody my Lord was, did not murder his Lordship; but that
the Earl himself feloniously, and as a Felon, of himself, did kill and murder.

How very Ridiculous would it have looked, should the then Court, or Kings
Council, have thus spoke to those three Witnesses, (viz.) Gentlemen, you being
three of the Men in whose Custody my Lord was at the time of his Death, are
designed to be charged by the Defendants, Speak and Braddon, with the Murder of
my Lord; but we have thought it convenient and just by you to prove, that your
selves did not Murder this Unfortunate Lord, but that this Lord himself
Feloniously, and as a Felon of himself, did Kill and Murder, as upon only some
of your Depositions, he has been already found by the Coroners Inquisition; do
you therefore upon Oath but purge your selves, and lay the Murder to my Lords
own Door, and we will inflict Exemplary Punishment upon these Defendants, whose
Conspiracy tended to the charging you as Actors in it, or privy thereunto.

I do humbly conceive, that all this was virtually included in the Examination
of those Witnesses, whose Oaths were not only admitted to purge themselves, but
to render such as Criminals as should endeavor to charge them. Should the like
be practiced in Protection of all accused, (I am well satisfied) no Man would
turn Accuser.

If any shall say, These being the Men attending on my Lord at the time of his
Death, and his Lordship then a close Prisoner, are the Persons to be presumed
privy to what was done by his Lordship, just before his Death, and therefore
the Parties which as to that could be sworn.

I answer, As they were the Men which were to be presumed privy to what was
done by his Lordship just before his Death, because they were the Persons (...)
Lordship; For this very Reason, they were the Parties which were likewise to be
supposed privy to what was done To his Lordship just before his Death; and
therefore admitting that his Lordship fell by Treachery and Violence, these
were the Men must be presumed knowing thereof, whereof these Men's Testimony
being in effect a Self-discharge, ought not be to have been admitted.

This Trial was carried on with all the Fury imaginable, and our Offense
represented as the worst of Crimes; tho I do hereby Challenge such of the then
Bench as are now living; the then Attorney General, and Kings Council, Jury, and
all the Witnesses against me, to produce out of all the Evidence against me,
(which I (...) suppose, but not grant to be true) any Action that deserved the
Name of a Crime; (although it ought to have been no small Offense to justify the
Judgment against us.) In this I refer my self to the printed Trial.

Mr. Speak was find a 1000 l. and ordered to give Sureties for his Good
Behavior during his Life. And I was Fined 2000 l. and to give likewise
Sureties for my Good Behavior, during Life.

Under this Fine Mr. Speak lay some years, and at last upon payment of about
5000 l. his Father, Mother, Brother, and himself, got a General Pardon; but I
continued about five years in Custody, even till the now King landed.

I have great reason to believe the late King would never have forgiven me; for
about August 1687. I saw a List of the King's Prisoners in Mr. Burton, or Mr.
Graham's hand, and my Name was the only Name marked, and that was twice crossed,
which they told me was done by the King himself. As soon as he had read the
List, many of the Prisoners were soon after discharged; but I was designed for
Judgment, not Mercy, and therefore kept Prisoner till November 1688. when upon
this King's Landing, I gave ten Guineas for my Security-bonds, and so made my
escape.

About the 21st of January, 1688. Hawley, Monday, Russel, Webster, and Lloyd,
were seized as suspected concerned in, or privy to my Lord's Murder; and the
23d of the same Month, being the second day the Convention sat, the House of
Lords constituted a large Committee to inquire into this matter; but afterward
the Lords appointed a Close Committee, consisting of these four Lords, (viz.)
The Right Honorable the Lord Steward, [the Earl of Devon], the Right
Honorable the Earl of Bedford, the Right Honorable the (now) Earl of
Monmouth, and the Right Honorable the (now) Earl of Warrington.

This Close Committee met (for the most part) twice a Week from the beginning
of February 1688. till about the Middle of May then following. The 23d of which
Month many Depositions and Examinations taken by the said Committee, were read
in the House of Lords; but the Lord Steward, Earl of Monmouth, and Warrington,
being then gone into the Country in His Majesty's Service, it was ordered that
these Depositions and Papers should be sealed up,and kept by the Clerk of the
Parliament in the mean time.

In the Clerks hands these Papers lay sealed up till the 26th of October then
following, when a new Order of their Lordships, revived the said Committee, and
soon after these Depositions were taken out of the Clerks hand by this
Committee, which for a considerable time did (...) Week: But before their
Lordship had reduced all those numerous Informations and Examinations, which
they (and some Justices of Peace) had taken in this Matter, into such method,
as 'twas thought proper to Report them to the House, a Prorogation came, which
of Course Dissolved this Commit. But when that Honorable House shall think
fit to Order that those Depositions and Examinations (so as before taken) shall
be reported to the House, (I hope) by them their Lordships will be convinced,
that that Great Champion of our Laws and Liberties, fell a Sacrifice to Popish
Zeal, and Tyrannical Fury.

The violent, barefaced, and irreconcilable Temper, therewith I was unjustly
prosecuted, has been no (...) Argument with most Men to believe the truth of
his Lordship's Murder. There being scarce one Instance more to be given, where
a Person was prosecuted for endeavoring by legal ways, to find out how the
King lost a Subject, especially when in Prison, under the more immediate
protection of the Law.

If it shall be objected (as it has been), That the Coroner's Inquest had
found his Lordship Felo de se, and therein I should have rest satisfied.

I answer, That if the Coroner's Inquisition was like the Laws of the Medes and
Persians which altered not, this would have been a strong Objection; but seeing
the contrary is true, and the Coroner's Inquests have been often questioned,
and upon melius inquiren^^ [better Inquiries] the first Inquisition set aside
(...) common Objection is (therefore) of (...)

Every man that makes inquiry after Blood, is supposed to do the King Service,
and prosecutes such inquiries in the King's Name, to know how the King lost a
Subject; whether by Self-violence (through which would accrue a Forfeiture of
personal Estate) or by the hands of others; for which such Murderers ought to
be brought to punishment.

But in this single instance, instead of being encouraged by the then
Government, I was furiously opposed, irregularly prosecuted, and (without the
least color of Justice) utterly ruined. For

I have spent above 1200 l. since the last 9 Years of my Trouble; for part of
which I have been some time a Prisoner, tho before Execution I have liberty to
go abroad.

But I have some prospect of Redemption out of these unhappy Circumstances by
that general consideration of my misfortune, which is now had of many
Gentelemen, who think it hard, that I, who voluntarily appeared to my expected
ruin, for a Common Good (hitherto) without any compensation, should continue
Prisoner for those Debts, such my misfortunes contracted. This Contribution was
first moved and promoted by that worthy Gentleman, Sir W. A. whose (with many
other Gentlemen's) Kindness in this Matter, I shall ever in all humble Gratitude
acknowledge.

In all my Sufferings, I did never lament my having engaged in this
Prosecution; and I hope, That no discouragement shall ever make me repent the
serving of a good Cause, nor the greatest Bribes prevail with me to promote a
bad.

Sir, I cannot but be sensible I have already trespassed upon your Patience, and
therefore what I did further (...) deavour to demonstrate,

1. That several Measures which the Papists took to conceal this Murder, have
(by Providence) been inverted, and made strong Arguments of the truth of the
Murder.

2. I shall give further Answers to all the Objections which have been made
against the proof of this Murder, and show the unreasonableness of the belief
of the Self-murder. Such as believe the Self-murder without Evidence, (for
Bomeny's and Russel's Informations before detected, can be of no Credit) and
shall disbelieve against Evidence, the Earl's Murder (which I conceive by the
many Informations beforementioned, is plainly proved) their belief is wrought
upon by their Affections, and they believe as they would have it to be, and not
upon such rational Grounds, as ought to convince them that it is.

Sir, The Character you bear in your great Zeal for your Countries good,
Commands me to subscribe my self, what I cordially am,

SIR, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, L. B.
July 18. 1691.

