NEW EXPERIMENTS AND OBSERVATIONS TOUCHING COLD, OR AN EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF
COLD, Begun.

To which are added An Examen of Antiperistasis, And An Examen of Mr. Hobs's
Doctrine about COLD.

By the Honorable Robert Boil, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

Whereunto is annexed An Account of Freezing, brought in to the Royal Society,
by the learned Dr. C. Merret, a Fellow of it.

Non fingendum, aut excogitandum, sed inveniendum, quid natura faciat, aut
ferat, Bacon. LONDON.

Printed for John Crook, at the Sign of the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCLXV.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE INGENIOUS READER.
I Am fully persuaded, you will much rejoice to see that Exquisite searcher of
Nature, the Illustrious Robert Boil, come abroad again, as knowing he never
does so, but when richly furnished with very Instructive and Useful matter. He
presents you here with a Treatise of New Observations and Experiments, in order
to an Experimental History of Cold. This is the Body of the Book, but it comes
accompanied with some Preliminaries, and an Appendix, whereof the former
contains New Thermometrical Experiments and Thoughts, the latter an
Exercitation about the Doctrine of Antiperistasis, followed with a short Examen
of Mr. Hobs' s Doctrine, touching Cold. From all which it will more and more
become manifest, with what spirit and care this Excellent Person advances real
Philosophy, with what exactness he pursues his Engagement therein, and how
great caution he uses, that nothing may slide into the Philosophical store,
that may prove prejudicial to the Axioms and Theories hereafter perhaps to be
deduced from thence.

Having thus shortly given you my sense of the substance of this Considerable
Treatise, I am now to advertise you of one or two circumstances, necessary to
be taken notice of in its perusal.

One is, that the Noble Author being at Oxford, when the Book was printed at
London, he hopes the Reader will not impute to him the Errors of the Press,
which yet he is persuaded will not be many, and out of which must be excepted a
Blank or two, occasioned by this, That the Authors Papers being near two years
since given to be transcribed to one, whose skill in writing was much greater,
than (as it afterward appeared) his knowledge of what was, or was not good
sense, or true English; this person suddenly going for Africa before the
Transcript had been examined, and not taking care to leave all the first Copy,
the Author found, (besides several Blanks, that he filled up out of his Memory,
or by repeating the Experiments, they belonged to) one or two, where he was not
able to repair the Copists omissions: And besides unexpectedly met with very
many Passages so miserably handled, that by putting him to the trouble of
writing almost a New Book, when part of this was already in the Press, it much
retarded the Publication of that, which now comes forth.

The other is, That, whereas in the Preface some passages are so penned, as to
suppose the Book to be published early in the Winter, the Reader is to be
advertised, That the (...) part of the Preface was sent a good while since to
the Press, though the latter, however then written out, was hindered from
accompanying it, by some hopes of the Authors to gain by delay an opportunity
(he missed of) to perfect an Experiment he was desirous to insert; and that,
when the Frost began, which was late in the season, the Coldness did within a
while arrive at that degree, that by its operation upon the moistened paper, it
long put a stop to the Proceedings of the Press. But the Author, that he might
neither be quite defeated of his aim, nor disappoint the Curious of their
Expectation, did in the first or second week of the Frost, which was about the
end of the year 1664. present the Royal Society with diverse Copies of the
History of Cold, though the Book were not then quite printed off. And these
Books being so near finished, that of 21. Sections, whereof the History of Cold
consists, the Press had then reached to about the 19. and I had the 20. in my
hands to supply it, when the weather should permit; the Author hoped, that by
seasonably communicating so much of his intended Treatise to so many of the
Virtuosi, that were the likeliest to make use of it, he had pretty well
provided against the Prejudice, that might otherwise accrue from the slowness
of the Press, and therefore allowed himself to subjoyn to the History, the
discourse of Antiperistasis, and the Examen of Mr. Hobs's Doctrine It was
thought needless to insert Mr. Hobs's Scheme, touching this subject, because it
only shows, that Wind is the cause of Cold.
, as belonging to the same subject: And finding the frosty weather to continue
later, than was expected (which had he foreseen, before his History was printed
off, it would have given him opportunity of Enlargements) he hopes the
Publication may not be yet too late for diligent Readers, to make some use of
the season for examining his Experiments, or trying some of the New ones, those
may suggest. And therefore for the quicker dispatch of the Book, he purposely
omits, and reserves for another occasion, besides the papers, that he has not
yet given me, some that I have already in my hands. And it is, I presume, for
the same reason, that he forbears to publish, what he long since writ about the
Origin of Forms and Qualities, in a small Tract, which he had thoughts of
sending forth in the company of the ensuing History, as a Discourse fit to be
an Introduction as well to That, as to his Historical writings about Colors
and some other Qualities.

This is all the Advertisement I had to give you. And seeing it would be
altogether impertinent, for me to take any pains, or to use any Art to procure
a Gust for a Book, composed by Mr. Boil, I have no more to say, but that the
Author being so Generous as to oblige Foreign Nations as well as his Own, has
already taken care of having it put into Latin, Farewell.

H. O.
London, March 10. 1664/5
THE AUTHORS PREFACE INTRODUCTORY.
COld is so barren a subject, and affords so few Experiments, that are either
very delightful for their surprising prettiness, or very considerable for their
immediate use, that instead of admiring, that any of my friends should wonder
at my having been induced to write of such a Theme, I freely confess, that I
have been sometimes tempted to wonder at it my self; and therefore I think my
self obliged to give my Readers an account of these three things, Why I thought
fit to write of Cold at all? For what Reasons I have treated of it after the
manner to be met with in the ensuing Book? And, Why I venture my unfinished
Collections about it, abroad so soon?

I. To satisfy the first of these Queries, I have several things to say.

And first, That the subject I have chosen is very noble, and important; for
since Heat has so general an Interest in the Productions of Natures Phenomenon,
that (Motion excepted, of which it is a kind) there is scarce any thing in
Nature, whose Efficacy is so great, and so diffused, it seems not likely, that
its Antagonist, Cold, should be a despicable Quality. And certainly Cold, and
Heat, especially when employed by turns, are the two grand Instruments by which
Nature performs so many of her Operations here below, that our great Verulam
did not speak inconsiderately, when he called Heat the Right hand of Nature,
and Cold her Left. And though in our temperate Climate the Effects of Cold seem
not to be very remarkable, yet besides that, in more Northern Regions they are
oftententimes stupendous, the Nature of that Quality must needs be very well
worth our considering, if it were but for the Power it has to (...) and check
the (...) of Heat, upon which account alone, if there were no other, it may be
looked upon as so considerable a Quality, that even lesser Discoveries about
it, may both be acceptable and prove useful.

In the next place I shall represent, that notwithstanding Cold's being so
important a subject, it has hitherto been (...) most totally neglected. For I
remember not, that any of the Classick Authors, I am acquainted with, has said
any thing of it that is considerable. They do indeed generally treat of it, as
one of the four first Qualities. But that which they are wont to say, amounts
to little more, then that it is a Quality that does congregate both things of
like, and things of unlike nature. The Unsatisfactoriness of which vulgar
Definition, I had some years ago Skeptical Chemist.
an occasion to manifest (in another Treatise.) And having given us this
inconsiderate Description of Cold, they commonly take leave of the subject, as
if it deserved no further handling, then could be afforded it in a few Lines,
wherein indeed they say too much about it, but not enough. And even among other
Writers of Bodies of (...) Philosophy, or of the Doctrine of Meteors it self,
the Reader will find, how little of true and pertinent has been contributed to
the ensuing History of Cold. And though among the Vulgar, and the Writers that
adopt their Traditions without examining them, I find same few particulars
delivered, touching Cold; yet some of them are so untrue, and others so
uncertain, that they have furnished me with little else, then the necessity of
Questioning, or of disproving them: so that when I considered all these things,
I could not but take notice, that very little has been hitherto said of Cold,
by those Schoolmen, and other Writers, (that I have yet met with) who have
professedly, (though but perfunctorily, and, as it were, incidentally) treated
of it. But yet instead of thinking it a Discouragement, that so many Learned
Men, to whom that Quality could not but be obvious, and to whom it was as
familiar as to me, had in so many Ages said little or nothing of it to the
purpose; I found this very thing an invitation to my attempt, that I might in
some measure repair the Omissions of Mankinds Curiosity toward a subject so
considerable, and so diffused, by trying what I could do toward founding the
History of a Quality, which has been hitherto so neglected, as if all men
judged it either unworthy of being cultivated, or incapable to be improved.

Another inducement to me was, that having six or seven years ago written some
Tracts (though I have not since had opportunity to publish them) in order to
the History of Heat and Flame; it seemed the more proper for me to treat of the
contrary quality, Cold, since according to the known rule, confronted Opposites
give themselves a mutual Illustration. And another inducement of almost the
same Nature, was afforded me by remembering, that whereas Cold in its higher
degrees, is wont to be communicated to us by the Air, (whencesoever the Air has
it,) and I have on several occasions been obliged to treat of diverse Properties
of the Air, as of its weight and spring (in my Physico-Mechanical Treatise) of
the several strengths of that spring, in proportion to the degrees of the airs
Condensation, the Experiments of which, reduced into Tables, were first
published (and for ought I yet know made) by us, (in the defense of that Book
against Franciscus Linus Chapter the fifth of that Treatise.
) and of diverse other Qualities of the air in several passages of our other
writings, which 'twere now superfluous to take notice of; all this made it
appear convenient enough, that among other Attributes of the Air, which we
either have had, or expect to have occasion to treat of, so eminent and diffus
d a one as its Coldness, should not be left untouched by the same Pen.

But though neither any, nor all these inducements had been sufficient to
engage me to draw together, and recruit my Observations concerning Cold, there
was another, that could not miss of prevailing, The Command of the Royal
Society, imposed on me in such a way, that I thought, it would less misbecome
me to obey it unskilfully, then not at all. Especially since from so
Illustrious a Company (where I have the Happiness not to be hated) I may in my
endeavors to obey and serve them, hope to find my failings both pardoned, and
made Occasions of discovering the Truths, I aimed at.

II. After this Account of the Motives that induced me to resolve to draw
together the Notes I had on several occasions set down, about the Phenomenon of
Cold, it may be now expected, that I render some reason, why I have thus
digested them, and why I have not written the following Treatise in a more
accurate way.

First then I readily acknowledge, that the Method is not exact. Nay, that it
is less so then the Scheme of heads of Inquiry, that I drew up to give my self
a general Prospect of the subject I was to handle. But when I had considered,
how comprehensive a Theme I had pitched upon, and how much more comprehensive,
future discoveries and hints might make it, I thought, it altogether
unadvisable for me, that had no more time, nor no more opportunity then I had,
when I began to compile the following History, to engage my self to a method,
according to which I was not perhaps able to treat of any one of the principal
parts of the designed History. And yet on the other side, being unwilling to
huddle my Experiments confusedly together, I thought it an expedient, that
might in great part decline both those Inconveniences, to draw up a company of
comprehensive Titles, under which might commodiously be ranged most of the
Particulars I had observed, reserving those few, that were not so easily
referable to any of those, to be thrown at last into a Section by themselves.
And this I the rather did, because I would not, by a Confinement to a strict
method, discourage others from continuing the History, by adding new Titles to
those 21. I have treated of, as well as by inserting other Experiments or
Observations in any of them.

That the Sections or Titles are very unequal, will not, I presume, be much
blamed by them, that consider, that my Design being to set down Matters of
Fact, not write a complete and regular Treatise, the length of each Section was
to be determined not by its Proportion, to that which went before it or
followed after it, but by the number and condition of the Particulars that were
to compose it. And I thought it much more pardonable, that any of the Sections
should be disproportionately short, then lengthened either by untruths or by
impertinencies.

Some of the accounts will probably to some Readers appear too prolix; and I
could very easily, as well as willingly, have prevented that objection, if I
had not more consulted the scope of the Book, then the ease or Reputation of
the Writer. But my design being, not only to gratify some Readers, but to
assist others to prosecute the work I had begun, as the Experiments are most of
them new, and many of them tried by methods hitherto unpracticed; I conceived
my self obliged to set down somewhat circumstantially, not only the Events, but
the Manner of my Trials, that I might at once, both the better satisfy the
scrupulous, and be assistant to those that would examine or repeat such
Experiments, and also gratify those, who are pleased to think, that a somewhat
assiduous Conversation with Nature, may have given me some little faculty in
devising Experiments, and the ways of making them, above those that have been
conversant only with Books and Notions. And in some of the following Trials I
was the more induced to set down all the principal circumstances, because, that
being not to be made, but by the help of Glasses skilsully shaped, and
Hermetically sealed, and other Instruments and Operations, that require more
tools, and more of manual Dexterity, then every ingenious Man is Master of;
it is very likely that most Readers will not be able, or perhaps willing, to
reiterate such Trials, and therefore will be glad to find them so delivered, as
that they may without too much danger acquiesce in them, as being made with
Diligence, as well as Faithfulness. The latter of which Qualities will, I
presume, be allowed me, as well upon the account of the plain and simple way,
wherein matters of fact are delivered in the following Book, as upon the score
of the Testimonies, that even Adversaries, as well as others, have thought fit
to give to the Historical part of my former Treatises. And (to intimate That on
this occasion) this strict Fidelity to Truth I scruple not to own, though
perhaps it may be attended with an inconvenience in point of Reputation, that
writers of less Veracity are less exposed to. For I have found by Experience,
that some Men, who probably would not mention the Experiments of most others,
without vouching their Authors, for fear of losing their own credit, in case
the thing related should not prove true; have, without taking the least notice
of me, made use of such Experiments of mine, as I have strong motives to think
they never made nor saw, only because they had been related by one, after whom
they thought they might without a hazard of their credit deliver any Matter of
Fact. And the liberty that some have allowed themselves in adopting my
Communications (such as they are) is notorious enough to have been publicly
complained of more then once, by Persons that are mere strangers to me. But
though I had not the Probability, which the Notice, that begins to be taken of
it, seems to give me, of having some Justice done me: yet Veracity is a Quality
that does, I think, so well become a Christian and a writer of Natural History,
that I had much rather (...) any Disadvantage, I may be subject to for it, then
decline the Practice of it. But to return to the following History.

I confess the Prolixity of some passages of our History is increased by the
transitions, excuses, and suspicions that are made use of in them; but I
confess too, That if this way of writing be a fault, it was not always caused
by inadvertency. For as to what is said to connect the parts of our History
together, or excuse the not prosecuting of this or that particular Trial, the
beedful Reader may oftentimes perceive, that they contain in them, though not
perhaps conspicuously, either cautions, or advertisements, or hints, not
impertinent to my main scope, and improvable by an attentive Peruser. And as
for the suspicions and scruples to which now and then I may seem to have too
long indulged, I had two or three inducements to invite me to what I did. For
the mention of conjectures, that every Reader was not so likely to light upon,
might more conduce, then at first one would think, to the main design of my
Book, which was to begin, and promote the natural History of Cold, since these
suspicions about the causes and scruples about other things, relating to our
Experiments, may probably produce, not only new reasonings and Inquiries, but
new Trials to clear the difficulties and determine the doubts. Besides I
thought it not amiss to take such occasions to make some Readers sensible, that
to make indubitable inferences even from certain Experiments, is not near so
easy a work, as many are pleased to imagine. And whereas I was not without
inducements to think, that some Critical and Sagacious Readers, will not only
excuse my having taken notice of so many scruples, but wish I had moved more on
some occasions, and proposed some in certain cases, where I have not mentioned
any, I thought it might invite such Jealous Readers to think, that I foresaw
diverse little difficulties and scruples, that might be moved in several cases,
where I have not expressly taken notice of them, either because I judged them
easy enough to be answered without my help, or because the things themselves
were not considerable enough to deserve a long or sollicitous discourse to
clear them, especially from ae Writer, that being often tired himself in
examining such Niceties, was afraid he should too much tire the generality of
his Readers, if he should too frequently insist upon them.

If it be objected, that notwithstanding some things are set down prolixly, yet
other Experiments, that might properly be referred to some of the Titles I
handle, are wholly omitted; I answer, that this were indeed a fault in one,
that should pretend to write full and accurate Discourses of the subjects
proposed in his Titles, but not in me, who do not at all pretend to say under
each head all that may be pertinently referred to it, (for that may probably be
a great deal more then is yet come to my Knowledge) but only those Particulars,
that I my self have tried or observed, or at least have received upon credible
Testimony. And perhaps some amends may be made for these Omissions, by my
having frequently enough mentioned the Experiments, that, when I proposed them,
I had only designed or attempted without perfecting them. For the Experience of
many Ages has shown us, that hitherto, not only men do not appear to have made
any store of Trials concerning Cold, but seem not to have so much as designed
it. And therefore it seemed not unreasonable to presume, that it would prove an
Assistance to the Generality of Readers, if probable and practicable
Experiments were proposed to them. And since it is the improvement of the
subject that I aim at, by whomsoever it may happen to be improved, I thought it
but reasonable to use my endeavor, that those Experiments, which for want of
opportunity I my self could not try, might be tried by others, who may be
befriended by more favorable Circumstances. Nor is that great Ornament and
Guide of Philosophical Historians of Nature, the Lord Verulam himself, ashamed
to substitute, on I know not how many occasions, his Fiat Experimentum, that is
a precept or a wish to have an Experiment made, instead of an Account of the
Experiment made already. And yet in this mention of things, I could wish to
have tried, I have been far more sparing then every Reader will take notice of.
For I judged it not discreet to mention all the Experiments I had thought upon,
or even already set down in several Catalogues, lest they should appear
extravagant to those, that are unacquainted with the several Notions, and
trials, and contrivances, which made them appear to me not irrational, and
which yet 'twould have been tedious, and not worth while to have particularly
mentioned.

But that in what we have newly (and a little before) had occasion to say of
our ways of making Experiments, our meaning may not be misconstru'd, we must
here Advertise the Reader, that though in many of the following Experiments,
the contrivances will not perchance be disliked, yet in many others they are
far enough from being such as might have been proposed by one, that had wanted
no Accommodations fit for such a work as ours. But I was reduced to make many
of those Experiments in a Village, and whilst I was writing them, was obliged
to make frequent Removes, by which means I seldom had the liberty to make my
Trials after such a manner, as I could contrive them, if I could have
Instruments and other assistances to my wish. For sometimes I wanted
conveniently shaped Glasses, sometimes the Implements necessary to seal them up
with, sometimes such ingredients as I needed to work on, oftentimes frosty
Weather, for the freezing of Bodies to be exposed to the open Air, and not
seldom Ice and Snow for Artificial congelations; sometimes Weather-glasses,
especially sealed ones, two of which being unluckily broken after one another,
kept me from being able to make diverse considerable Experiments; sometimes
tender Scales, and sometimes other Mechanical Instruments of several sorts, and
more then sometimes (for it happened very frequently) I wanted time so to
prosecute and finish the Experiments, as to satisfy my self about diverse
circumstances, which, though possibly few Readers will take notice to be
wanting; I would gladly have observed, if I had not been hindered, not only by
the haste I was often fain to make for fear of losing a frost, but the
importunity both of other Avocations, and even of the distraction given me by
the multitude of Experiments, which haste made me prosecute at once. And
indeed, as in diverse others of the Treatises, I have occasionally written, so
particularly in a great part of this History of Cold, my writing in places,
where I wanted such Mechanical Accommodations, as I could have wished for, and
devised, has reduced me oftentimes both to leave Experiments untri'd, that
would have much illustrated my subject, or cleared the difficulties of it, and
contrive several of those I mention, not after the best manner that might be,
but after the best manner, that was practicable by the accommodations I was
then able to procure: so that it need not be wondered at, or blamed, if in some
passages of these Papers, Experiments to the self same purpose are more
accurately tried, or by more Expedient ways at one time then another. For as a
Physician, if he come to practice in the Country, where Apothecaries shops are
but ill furnished, both as to the Number and as to the Quality of the Drugs,
must accommodate his Practice to the scant Materia Medica, of which alone he
has the command: So when I write of Experimental matters, in places where I
cannot have Workmen, nor Instruments fit for my turn, I must be content to vary
my Experiments accordingly, and suit them to the accommodations I am confined
to, which, though it be an unwelcome Condition, is made the less so to me, by a
Hope, that the Equitable Readers will think it to be all that a man is bound to
do in such cases, to procure the best assistances he can, and manage those, he
is able to procure, to the best Advantage.

And this I the rather take notice of on this occasion, that ingenious men
might not be too much discouraged by imagining, that, because they live in the
Country, or upon other scores cannot furnish themselves with the best
Instruments and accommodations, nor enjoy the assistance of the skilfullest
Artificers; they are either Unqualifi'd for the making of Experiments and
Observations, or Superseded from it. For though in some cases, where the
measures of things must be nicely determined, and principally in Observations,
whereon either Theorems or Hypotheses about the Proportions of things are to be
grounded; very good Instruments are exceeding useful, and sometimes necessary:
yet there are thousands of particulars, whose knowledge may be instructive to
those, that Are or Would be Naturalists, where no such Nieety is requisite, and
where the measuring things by Ounces and Inches will serve the turn, without
determining them to Lines, and to Grains. And even in cases, where Exact
observations are (to some purposes) Requisite, those that are not so, may be
oftentimes very useful, by affording Hints, by which others may be (...) and
assisted to make those more accurate Trials. And here let me take notice, that
a Tool or Instrument is not therefore to be despised, if it be Proper enough to
the Particular use to which it is applied, because some more Mechanical head or
hand, may propose or make another, that is more Artificially contrived, or more
Neat and Portable, or that will also perform Other things, then that we are
speaking of. For there is a vast multitude of Physical Phenomenon, wherein
Mathematical exactness is not necessary, and Observations about these, may be
well enough made by diverse Other ways, then by the most Artificial, that Can be
devised. As though a fine Watch may have these Advantages, That it is a neater
thing, and more portable then an ordinary Clock, that it may be improved by the
Addition of an Alarm, and that it may also perhaps show the Day of the Month,
the Age of the Moon, the Tides, and diverse other things, of which the Clock
shows not any; yet an Ordinary Clock may serve to measure an hour by, as well
as this finer Engine; and so may a Sun-Dyal, and many other Instruments on
diverse occasions, though in other Cases, and other Regards, they be far less
commodious, then either a Watch or Clock. Besides, that in many cases a skilful
Nature alist will by a variety and collation of Experiments, make the same
discoveries, and perform the same things, for which others are wont to be
beholding to Instruments, and perhaps do many things without them, that have
never been done with them. And since Necessity is proverbially allowed to be
the Mother of Inventions, even in Tradesmen, and Vulgar heads, why should we
doubt, but that the rich and inventive Intellect of a Philosopher, may in cases
of necestity turn it self, and contrive the things it can dispose of, into so
many differing forms, that it will often make its own Sagacity and Industry
supply the want of exact Tools and Instruments. And these Considerations that
tend to keep ingenious Men from Dispondency, I therefore think fit to
Inculcate, because the Commonwealth of Learning would lose too many useful
Observations and Experiments, and the History of Nature would make too slow a
Progress, if it were presumed, that none but Geometers and Mechanitians should
employ themselves about writing any part of that History.

But to return to those Trials of our own, that occasioned this (as I hope,
Seasonable) Digression, I was about to add, That as the acknowledgement I was
making, that some of the Trials were (...) want of Accommodations less
Artificial then I could have designed or wished them, touches not all, nor
happily the greatest part of the following Experiments; so it need not derogate
from the Readers reliance on those which it does concern. For though some of
them might have been more Artificially performed to the manner, yet they could
not have been more Faithfully registered, as to the Events. Which though I dare
promise my self, that most Readers will be induced to believe, upon the
Considerations not long since intimated; Yet I think it requisite to give this
intimation on this occasion, because, that though I have The two Essays of the
Unsuccesfulness of Experiments.
(...) largely manifested to what contingencies diverse Experiments are liable,
yet I have found very few, whose events are so subject to be varied, by slight
and not easily beeded circumstances, as several Experiments concerning Cold:
Where oftentimes the degree of that Quality, or the time during which it
continues applied, or the manner of Application, or the thickness, shape and
bulk, etc. of the vessels that contained the matter exposed to it, may have a
far greater influence on the success, then those, that have not tried, can
easily imagine. And it increases the difficulty, that these Experiments of ours
being (very few excepted) the only that are yet made public concerning Cold;
we cannot so easily, as in other cases, free our selves from the doubts, that
may be suggested by different events, by comparing together several Experiments
of the same kind, though to obviate this inconvenience, as far as I may, I have
diverse times in cases, where the Experiments seemed like to be thought strange,
or to be distrusted, set down several Trials of the same thing, that they might
mutually support and confirm one another.

Of those Contingent Experiments about Cold, I was newly speaking of, the
Reader may meet with an eminent Example in the 21. Title, where mention is made
of the differing Effects of Air blown out of a pair Bellows upon a
Weather-glass: and as for the suspicion I there conclude with, (though I yet
doubt, whether (...) will reach All the Cases incident to that Experiment) I
have since been confirmed in it, by finding, that by purposely varying the
temper of the Bellows themselves, I could diverse times considerably vary the
operations, which the Winds, blown out of them in their differing states, had
upon the Liquor in the Weather-glass Another remarkable instance of the
variable success of the Experiments of Cold, I (...) with in an Experiment
(...) the (...) Dr. (...), (...) the (...) of oil of (...). For though I (...)
that Liquor in smal' vessels of (...) and (...). and (...) in (...), (...) at
one (...), (...) the (...) of the Air in (...) nights, (...) extraordinarily
sharp, (...) is more, our (...) and Salt, would (...) the Experiment succeed,
(...) that we tried it with several parcels of Oil of Vitriol. And yet, that
the Learned Doctor by the help of the Air alone (for he uses not our (...)
mixture) did bring that Liquor, either to a true (...), or a coagulated
substance, that looked just like Ice; both (...) eminent Virtuosi, and I my
self, who had the Curiosity to (...) it, can bear him witness.
Of this I expect to have an opportunity of saying more, and therefore shall at
present add but this one particular, which may sufficiently justify me for
having said, That Weather-glasses and our Sensories may give very differing
Informations about the Temperature of the Air turned into Wind, by being blown
out of the same pair of Bellows. For having taken two Hermetically sealed
Weather-glasses furnished with highly rectified spirit of Wine, and purposely
made for my Experiments, by a person eminently dexterous in making such
Instruments, and having likewise provided a large pair of Bellows, I found,
that by blowing 20. blasts at a time on the Ball of one of them, though the
Pipe were not only slender, but of an unusual length, amounting to about 30.
Inches, yet the Liquor did not sensibly subside any more then rise. And in the
other Weather-glass, whose Pipe was less long, but whose Ball was purposely
made far greater to be the fitter for short and nice Experiments, we found more
then once, and (that as well in the cold Air, as in a close Room) that the wind
that was blown in diverse blasts out of the Bellows, against the lower part of
the Instrument, did not only make the spirit of Wine subside, but did make it
manifestly, though but very little, ascend. And it is not necessary, for the
making good of what I taught, that such Trials should always succeed just as
these did, since it may suffice to prove what I pretended, that a good sealed
Weather-glass did diverse times discover the Wind to be rather warm, then cold,
when upon Trial (then purposely made) it felt not only manifestly, but
considerably cold, both to a Bystanders Hand, and to my own Hand and Face,
though my hand, that was blown upon, were immediately before more then
ordinarily cold.

And I shall here add, That judging it fit to make further Trial, with an
unsealed Weather-glass, I made one, that was in some regards preferable to
those mentioned in the second Praeliminary Discourse, by making the Bubble
large, and the Cylindrical Pipe so proportioned to it, that instead of a Drop
of water, a Pillar about an Inch long of that Liquor was kept suspended, and
played as well conspicuously as nimbly up and down in the Pipe. And having
fastened this Instrument in an erected Posture, with the Sphaerical part
uppermost, to the inside of a Window, by blowing upon the Ball with the Bellows
above mentioned, which had lain some hours not very far from the
Chimney-corner, (but without seeming to be sensibly warmed by the neighborhood
of the fire) a very few blasts made the suspended water hastily subside, (and
thereby witness the Expansion, and so the warmth of the included Air) and upon
my ceasing to blow, the same water would reascend in the Pipe, and that, though
I stood near it to watch it, (which shows, that the former Depression was not
caused by the approach of my warm Body) and this I did more then once, both
alone and before witness, notwithstanding that the Air blown at the same time
out of the same Bellows upon our hand and face seemed cool enough. But fearing
to insist any longer on this matter in a Preface, I think it now unseasonable
to add, That as some contingent Experiments in subsequent Trials may Fail
oftener, so other may perchance Succeed oftener then is expected: As I have
sometimes observed in the figures, that appear in the Ice made of some Liquors,
that abound with Volatile, Urinous, or with certain other Salts. But to say a
word in general of Experiments, whose success is not always uniform: As a
Magnetic Needle, though it do not always precisely respect the Poles, but both
declines sometimes Eastward, and sometimes Westward, and varies that
Declination uncertainly as to us, does nevertheless so far respect the North,
as in spite of its Variations to be an Excellent guide to Navigators: So there
are contingent Experiments, whose Events, though they sometimes vary, are
seldom very exorbitant, but for the most part are regular enough to afford
Philosophers very useful Informations and Directions.

If it be demanded, why in the 15, 18, and 19. Sections I have inserted so many
Quotations out of several Authors, and how that agrees with what I have said
not far from the beginning of this Preface of the uncultivatedness of the
subject I have adventured on? I answer, That what I have done crosses not what
I have said. For my complaint was, That there has been very little, especially
of any moment, delivered concerning Cold by Classick Authors, and that even
other learned Writers, who have had occasion to say something purposely of
Cold, have handled it exceeding Jejunely; but this hinders not, but that if a
Man will take the Pains to seek out, and enquire of Travelers, and has the
curiosity and opportunity to consult Voyages and Navigations, he may among a
multitude of other things, that have nothing to do with Cold, meet with some
few that concern that subject: And yet the Authors that deliver such
particulars, can no more properly be said to have written professedly of Cold,
then of Botanicks, or Zoology, or Meteors, or Civil Philosophy, because in the
same Journal they mention a great frost, or a great snow, as chancing to happen
on such a day, with as little particular design as they mention a Storm, or a
Whale, or a Bear, or the manners of an Indian people. This Consideration being
premised, 'twill not be difficult to return an Answer to the former part of the
Question lately proposed. For the unfrequency of my Quotations in most of the
Sections of the following History, will, I presume, sufficiently persuade the
Reader, that I would not needlessly employ so many of them in the three
Sections, that are named in the Question. But the Writers of Physics being,
for ought I know, silent as to the particulars I have transcribed out of other
Writers, and the Observations being such as I could not my self make in this
Temperate Climate; I must either make use of other men's Testimonies, or leave
some of the Remarkablest Phenomenon of Cold unmention'd. And they that shall
try how much pains it will cost them, to range among Books, which many of them
contain little but melancholy Acounts of storms and distresses, and Ice, and
Bears, and Foxes, to cull out here and there a passage fit to make a part of
such a Collection as they may here meet with, will possibly rather thank, then
blame me for having, to gratify my Readers, given my self so laborious and
unpleasant an entertainment. And I was the rather content to enlarge a little
on the forementioned occasions, not only because I was unwilling to be engaged
more then once in so troublesome an Employment, but (and that chiefly) because
most of the particulars, I have collected out of Navigators, are afforded me by
the Voyages of our own Countrymen, who having written only in English, an
Account of what their Relations contain of most material concerning Cold, will
probably be welcome, as well as new to the curious of other Countries, who
cannot understand their Books, diverse of which having been long out of Print,
are so hard to be procured, even here in England, that I doubt not but these
Extracts of them will be acceptable, even to diverse of the Virtuosi of our own
(...), especially since I have been careful to allege most of the Testimonies
in the writers own words, though they are not always the best, wherein the
things he delivers might be expressed. And this course I the rather took, that
I might do what I think very useful to be done by all writers of Natural
History, who would do well to distinguish more carefully, then hitherto many
have done betwixt the matters of fact, they deliver as upon their own
knowledge, and those which they have but upon trust from others. I know it
would be more acceptable to most Readers, if I were less punctual and
scrupulous in my Quotations; it being by many accounted a more Gentile and
Masterly way of writing, to cite others but seldom, and then to name only the
Authors, or mention what they say in the words of Him, that Cites, not Theirs,
that are Cited. And there are some Writers of such known Diligence and
Veracity, as to be safely trusted, and some Cases wherein I do not dislike, but
comply with this Custom (after having (...) consulted my Author to be Master of
his true and genuine sense,) but in matters Historical, and whereon
Philosophical and Important Truths are to be built, I should think my self
beholden to a Writer, for setting them down in such a way, as that I may
satisfy my self, that the Testimony is faithfully reported. In order to which
it will be sometimes very useful to be enabled to repair to the Original
Witness, and, if need be, survey there the context of the alleged passage. For
I must here advertise (...) Reader, that in matters of any moment, (...) not
from every Writer, that I dare trust the Quotations he makes of the passages of
other Authors, in his Own words, not Theirs: For upon comparing very many
Quotations, I have found, that oftentimes there is no such thing, as is
pretended to be really met with in the place referred to; and even when neither
the Book, nor Chapter, nor Page are misquoted, I have too frequently found,
that the Alledgers of Testimonies, do either through Inadvertency misapprehend,
or misrecite the sense of the Author they quote, or out of Design make him
speak, that which may comply with their purpose, whether it were his own sense
or no: and by their Indefinite citations make it too troublesome and difficult
a work, for the Reader to find out, whether they have imposed upon him or not.
But this only by the by, to return therefore to the passages we were speaking
of, in the 15, 18, and 19. Sections, I shall now add, that having in the
beginning of the XIX. Title of the ensuing History itself rendered an Account
of my not scrupling to insert some strange Relations concerning Cold, it will
not be requisite to mention here, what the Reader will meet with there. And I
scarce doubt but he will excuse such passages, if he consider, That as I could
not omit them without leaving out some of the eminentest Phenomenon of Cold, so
being unable to examine them here in England, all I could do, was, to report
them faithfully, and mention only such as were either affirmed by Eye witnesses
(as the most, I have inserted, are) or, at least recommended by credible
Testimony, whereof we shall say more by and by; To which sort of Narratives, I
know not whether I may refer That, (which yet for its strangeness may deserve a
transient mention,) came awhile since to my ears, of an English man, who
related to an eminent Virtuoso of our acquaintance, That a Dutch Master of a
Ship, returning from the Northern Countries, very solemnly affirmed, being
therein seconded by one of his Countrymen, and offered to produce his Journal
for proof, That endeavoring to sail Northwards as far as he could, he came
within less then a degree of the Pole itself, and found the Sea open, and the
cold very tolerable. But to return to what we were saying, before this odd
Relation diverted us, I did not only decline the mention of diverse things, with
which I fear many Writers would have adorned a History of Cold, but even of
those that I my self have inserted, I would have left out diverse, were it not,
that many of the Relations, that may appear so wonderful, seem not to me to be
repugnant to the nature of things, but only suppose a far greater degree of
Cold, then we have in these parts, and yet the familiar effects of the Cold we
have here, would perhaps be looked on as incredible, by one that were born and
bred in the Kingdom of Congo, where Odoardus Lopes, who lived long there,
informs us, that Ice, that is water made solid, is so unknown a rarity, that it
would there be valued as much as so much Gold. And a Learned Physician, that
lived in Jamaica, being asked how far he found the Temperature of that Country
to be like that of Congo, answered me, That in that Island he observed not all
the Winter long, either Frost or Snow: And yet here it will not be unseasonable
to say a word or two of the three Principal Authors, from whom most of our
strange relations we are considering are transcribed.

The first is Gerat de Veer, who writ the Voyage of the Hollanders to Nova
Zembla, a Book so eminent in its kind, that it may seem a wasting of time to
set down a Character of it; and therefore I shall only advertise the Reader of
two things, the one, That the Dutch did indeed make three consecutive Voyages
to Nova Zembla, but that the third being that in which they wintered, there
most of the particulars are to be understood of that. The other thing is, that
having lost the Translation that was made of those Voyages out of Dutch into
English (published in a Book by themselves) without being able to procure
another, I was obliged to have the citations transcribed, as I found them
extant in that faithful Collection of Voyages compiled by Purchase, who seems by
the Style to have (as to the Book we are speaking of) only played the part of
an Interpreter. And here 'twill be seasonable to add, that whereas that
excellent Collection consists of several distinct Tomes (...) Volumes, the many
Quotations to be met with in the Margent of our History under the name of
Purchase, are to be understood, (unless the contrary be intimated) to belong to
the third Part of his Pilgrim, where the Dutch and other Voyages into Northern
Countries are to be found.

The next Book I intended to mention, is Olaus Magnus's History of the Northern
Nations. And though this Author is of very suspected Credit, and delivers some
things upon hearsay, which, they are kinder to him then I, that are pleass'd
to believe; for which reason I do but very sparingly make use of his History,
yet considering, that he was Archbishop of Upsale in Sweden, and appears to
have more Learning, then many that never read his Books, imagine; I thought I
might Now and Then, make use of his Testimony, in matters wherein he either
professes himself to speak upon his own knowledge, or delivers but such things
as being consistent with the Laws of Nature appear Improbable, only, because of
the Intense Cold that they suppose; which I the rather say, because he (...)
somewhere speaking of the Cold, that by the Laws of Nature reigns in the North,
subjoyns this Passage; Sub quo quia Lib. 1. Titulo de frig. Asperitate, page 9.
natus, and versatus sum etiam circa elevationem graduum Poli Arctici 86.
arbitror me posse hoc, and multis sequentibus Capitulis, nonnihil Caeteris vaga
opinione scribentibus clarius demonstrare, quam vehemens and horrendum sit
illic frigus.

And, though perchance few Readers will perceive it, I have been so Severe in
rejecting not only Relations, but even Authors otherwise not Obscure, that, how
much soever I foresaw my scrupulousness might impoverish my History, yet there
are some whole Treatises about Cold Countries, whence I have shunned to borrow
any one Authority, because I perceived the Authors had not observed the things
they recount themselves, and were too easy in believing others.

The third Writer I meant to take notice of, is Captain James, a Person from
whose Journal I have borrowed more observations, then from those of any other
Seaman, not only because his Book supplied me with them, and because it is
somewhat scarce, and not to be met with in Purchas's Tomes, (having been
written some years after they were finished) but because this Gentleman was
much commended to me, both by some Friends of mine, who were well acquainted
with him, and by the Esteem that competent Judges appear to have made of him.
For having been, not only employed by the Inquisitive Merchants of Bristol, to
discover a Northwest passage into the South Sea, but designed for so difficult
a work by so judicious a Prince, as the late King, and having at his return
published his Voyages by his Majesty's command; as by these circumstances,
though not by these only, this Gentleman's Relations may well be represented to
us, as likely to deserve our consideration and Credit: So by his breeding in
the University, and his acquaintance with the Mathematics, he was enabled to
make far better use then an ordinary Seaman would have done, of the
opportunity he had to observe the Phenomenon of Cold, by being forced to
Winter, in a place where he endured little (if at all) less extremity of Cold,
then that of Nova Zembla.

I presume 'twill easily be taken notice of, That in the following History I
have declined the Asserting of any particular Hypothesis, concerning the
Adequate cause of Cold. Not but that I may have long had Conjectures about that
matter, as well as other men, but I was willing to reserve to my self an Entire
Liberty of declaring what Opinion I most inclined to, till the Historical part
being finished, I may have the better opportunity to Survey and Compare the
Phenomenon; and the leisure, (which I cannot promise my selfin haste,) of
calmly considering what Theory may best agree with them: especially since I
freely acknowledge, That I found the framing of an Universal and
unexceptionable Hypothesis of Cold, to be a work of greater difficulty, then
every Body would imagine; especially to me, to whom some Experiments purposely
made have suggested a puzling Difficulty, which it is like that Philosophers
have not yet thought of. And whatever Applause is wont in this Age to attend a
forwardness to assert Hypotheses, yet though Fame were less to be sought then
Truth; this will not much move me, whilst I observe, That Hypotheses hastily
pitched upon, do seldom keep their Reputation long; and diverse of them that are
highly Applauded at the first, come after a while to be Forsaken, even by those
that devised them.

As for the Title of the following Book, I call the Experiments new, because
indeed, if I mistake not, nine parts of ten (not to say nineteen of twenty) are
so. But though a 150. or 200. Experiments of that kind, besides Collections
from Travelers, and Books that do not professedly treat of Cold, may, I
presume, allow me to have begun the natural History of Cold; yet in the very
Title Page I think fit to intimate, that I look upon what I have done but as a
Beginning. For though some very noted Virtuosi have been pleased to seem
surprised, to see what so barren and uncultivated a subject has been brought to
afford this Treatise; yet I look upon these as things, that do rather Promise
then Present a Harvest, and but as some early Sheaves of that Crop, which men's
future Industry will reap from a subject, that is indeed Barren, but not
Unimprovable. For I see not why it should not hold in the History of Cold, as
well as in many other attempts; That the greatest Difficulties are wont to be
met with at the Beginning, and those being once surmounted, the Progress
becomes far more Easy. And as the Magnetic Needle, though it point directly
but at the North and South, does yet discover to the Seaman the East and West,
and all the other points of the Compass: So there are diverse Experiments, which
though they do primarily and Directly teach us but a Notion or two, may yet
assist us to discover with ease many other Truths, to which they seemed not at
first sight to afford us a Direction. So that What is here already done, such
as it is, partly by Hinting various Inquiries about Cold, and partly by
Suggesting ways not formerly practiced of making further Experiments, may
possibly make it more easy for others to Add to these a number, far exceeding
that, which they will here meet with, then it would have been without such
assistances, (which I had not) to contribute to the History of Cold, even such
a stock as I have begun it with. And this I the rather incline to think,
because I find, that when once a Man is in the right way of making Inquiries
into such subjects, Experiments and Notions will reciprocally direct to one
another, and suggest so many things to him, that if I were now to begin this
work again, and had Cold, and fitly shaped Glasses, and Instruments, with other
Accommodations at command, there are diverse parts, on which my Inlargements
would not perchance be much Inferior to what is Already extant there, if they
did not much Exceed it. But besides That, I have other work enough, and that of
a quite other Nature upon my hands; the Truth is, that I am plainly Tired with
writing on this subject, having never handled any part of Natural Philosophy,
that was so Troublesome, and full of Hardships, as this has proved; especially
because, that not only the Experiments being New, and many of them subject to
miscarriages, required to be almost constantly Watched, but being unable to
produce or intend Cold as we can do Heat, nor command the Experiments that
concern Congelation, with as little difficulty, as we can do those, that belong
to diverse other subjects; I was fain to Wait for, and make Use of a Fit of
frosty weather (which has very long been a rarity) as sollicitously as Pilots
watch for, and improve a Wind.

III. It remains now, that I give some account, why I suffer so unfinished a
piece, as I acknowledge this to be, to come forth at this time. And I confess,
that if I had not preferred the gratifying the Curious, before the advantages
of my own Reputation, I should have kept this Book in my hands some Winters
longer, that It might come forth, both more rich, and less unpolished. But how
great a power my Friends have with me in such cases, the Reader may easily
guess by the Preamble he will find prefixed to the first Title of the ensuing
History. For by the Date of that, he will see, how early my Papers about Cold
were to have been communicated; nor was I any thing near so much befriended, as
I expected, by those interposing Accidents, that have for above a year and a
half, kept those Papers lying by me. For the then next, and now last Winter
proved so strangely Mild, as to be altogether unfavourable to such a work as I
had designed. Wherefore finding, that Delays had done me no more service, and
pressed by the solicitations of diverse Virtuosi from several parts, I
resolved, that I would suspend till another opportunity, the drawing together
of what I had Observed or Collected, touching the Regions of the Air, and some
of the chief Hypotheses, that are controverted about Cold, with what other
loose Papers, touching that Quality, I not could so readily dispatch to the
Press; and would not withold from the Curious what assistance my Collections
could afford them, to make use of this Winter to prosecute Experiments of Cold.
And remembering how favorable an entertainment my former Endeavors to gratify
Ingenious Men, had found among them, I took a Course, wherein I was more likely
to obtain Thanks then Praises, and chose rather to adventure on the Equity and
Favor of the Reader, for the Pardon of those faults and Imperfections, that
are imputable to Have, then to deny him the opportunity of this Cold season,
wherein to Examine the Truth, and Supply the Deficiencies of what I had
delivered. And this I the rather did, both because I was desirous to Quit this
subject, for another from which it had diverted me, and for which I have more
Value and Kindness; and because, that as a tender Constitution of Body kept me,
whilst I was writing the following History, from adventuring upon some Trials,
that might (probably) have enriched it; so the Continuance of the same
disadvantages, together with other inopportune Distempers super added to them,
do not permit me to Know, whether, and how far I shall be able to Prosecute the
work I have begun: and do oftentimes reduce me to be more concerned to Shun the
Effects of Cold, then Observe the Phenomenon of It. And indeed, whether those
prove true Prophets or no, that assure me I shall lose no reputation by this
History (as incomplete as it comes forth,) I think, if Ingenious Men knew, how
much Trouble and Exercise of my patience it has cost me, they would,
peradventure, vouchsafe me some of their thanks, if not for what I have done,
yet for what I have suffered for their sakes, (and would scarce have undergone
upon any Inferior account whatsoever;) it being, though a less Noble, yet no
less Troublesome an Employment, to Dig in Mines of Copper, then in those of
Gold: and Men being oftentimes obliged to Suffer as much Wet and Cold, and Dive
as deep, to fetch up Sponges, as to fetch up Pearls.

Errata.
PAge 5. line 17. read, that in not nice, for, that even in nice, p. 46. l. 8.
r. effected, p. 48. l. 16. dele and, together with (), p. 82. l. 28. r. 28.
chapter, p. 178. l. 7. dele which, p. 266. l. 22. r. it did rise four inches,
p. 292. l. 6. r. that stood on the ice, p. 302. l. 9. r. three, for, thee, p.
380. l. 10. r. cemented by intercepted and then frozen water, instead of
congealed by cold water, p. 488. l. 11. r. 52. degr. 52. min.

In the Appendix of Dr. Merret, page 35. lin. 36. read, upon these mixtures,
not in.

The Contents of the Experimental History of Cold.
Title I.
EXperiments touching Bodies capable of Freezing others. page 108. Title II.
Experiments and Observations touching Bodies disposed to be Frozen. p. 133.
Title III.
Experiments touching Bodies, Indisposed to be Frozen. p. 140. Title IV.
Experiments and Observations touching the degrees of Cold in several Bodies.
p. 149. Title V.
Experiments touching the Tendency of Cold, upwards or downwards. p. 173. Title
VI.
Experiments and Observations (...) the Preservation and Destruction of (Eggs,
Aples, and other) Bodies by Cold. p. 184. Title VII.
Experiments touching the Expansion of Water and Aqueous Liquors by Freezing.
p. 222. Title VIII.
Experiments touching the Contraction of Liquors by Cold. p. 237. Title IX.
Experiments in Consort, touching the Bubbles, from which the Levity of Ice is
supposed to proceed. p. 245. Title X.
Experiments about the measure of the Expansion and the Contraction of Liquors
by Cold. p. 279. Title XI.
Experiments touching the Expansive force of Freezing Water. p. 296. Title XII.
Experiments touching a new way of estimating the Expansive force of
Congelation, and of highly compressing Air without Engines. p. 382. Title XIII.
Experiments and Observations touching the Sphere of Activity of Cold. p. 328.
Title XIV.
Experiments touching differing Medium's, through which Cold may be diffused.
p. 345. Title XV.
Experiments and Observations touching Ice. p. 364. Title XVI.
Experiments and Observations touching the duration of Ice and Snow, and the
destroying of them by the Air, and several Liquors. p. 396. Title XVII.
Considerations and Experiments touching the Primum Frigidum. p. 412. Title
XVIII.
Experiments and Observations touching the Coldness and Temperature of the Air.
p. 464. Title XIX.
Of the strange Effects of Cold. p. 520. Title XX.
Experiments touching the weight of Bodies Frozen and unfrozen. p. 550. Title
XXI.
Promiscuous Experimeuts and Observations concerning Cold. p. 575.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READERS OF The following Experiments, by the Author of
the foregoing History.
AT the same time, that This is pointed at in the third Page of the following
Account, where mention is made of an Honorable Person, etc.
the Royal Society required of me an Account of what I had observed, or tried,
concerning Cold, they recommended the making of Trials, about that subject, to
the Learned Dr. C. Merret, who having dispatched what he intended, much earlier
then I could bring in my far more Voluminous Papers, he long ago presented His
to that Illustrious Company: and since That, has thought fit to let them indear
my Treatise, by their being Annexed to it, and composing a part of It; and that
such a part, as much might be said of it, if after I have informed the Reader
of its having obtained the Thanks of a Society, that is too much accustomed to
receive and produce Excellent things, to be suspected of valuing Trifles, I
could think it needful and proper to give those Papers any other Elogium. And
it falling out fortunately enough, That the Doctor and I (being at some miles
distance) did not communicate our Designs to one another; as I knew Nothing of
what he had been doing, till I heard it publicly read at Gresham College,
when far the greatest part of my Experiments were (as is known to more Persons
then one) already recorded; So I afterward scrupulously abstained from
borrowing the Trials mentioned in his Papers, to enrich mine: which forbearance
was the more easy to me, because after the first time I heard those Papers
read, I never Desired a Copy, nor Had a Sight of them. By this means it
happened; That besides those many Titles, which being handled at large in the
History, are left untouched in the following Tract, even on those Occasions,
where the Learned Doctor and I happen to treat of the same subjects; our Trials
are but Very few of them coincident; upon which score, the Reader will meet
with more Variety betwixt us, then probably he would have expected to find on
such an Occasion.

Having drawn up this Advertisement about the Doctors Papers, as supposing them
the very same, he presented to the Royal Society; upon a sight of the following
Sheets, (as they were some hours since brought me from the Press;) the
Additions I there find, make it appear necessary to say something further to
the Reader. I must inform him then, that about the middle of this Winter, and
about the end of December 1664. I presented to the Royal Society several Books,
containing each of them Eighteen or Nineteen of the Twenty One Titles, whereof
my History consists; that the Virtuosi might have the Opportunity of the Cold
(which then began to be so strong, as See the Publisher's Advertisement to the
Reader.
to keep the Press from dispatching the rest of the Book) to examine my
Experiments, and add to them; and one of these being delivered to the Doctor,
as the likeliest Person to make use of it, together with an Order to the
Stationer, to let him have the remaining Sheets of the Book, as fast as they
should from time to time be Printed; he had the Curiosity, as to Enlarge some
of the things he had already tried and brought in himself; (as is intimated in
the Forty Sixth Page) so to make Trial of some particulars, that I had proposed
and performed, which either their Importance (as the way of freezing from the
Bottom upwards, by me suggested, and the weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen)
or his Opportunity invited him to make choice of; and has been pleased to
afford them place among his own Experiments Among which I am since informed,
that he had tried diverse, before he saw my Papers.
; by whichmeans, though the coincidence of what we deliver will appear to
happen more frequently, then the Advertisement will make one expect: yet to
such Readers as do not prefer Variety before Certainty, these coincident
Passages will not in likelihood be unacceptable. For in those Cases, where the
Events of our Trials are the same, it is like the Truth will be the more
confirmed So one of the chief Passages of the Examen of Antiperistasis is much
confirmed by the Forty Fourth and Forty Fifth Pages (of the following Papers)
which contain an Account of a Trial made by the command of the Royal Society,
to whom it was proposed by the Author of the Examen, with a request, that they
would be pleased to order it to be made.
; and in Cases where the successes are very differing, the Reader will be
excited to make further Trials himself, and will be thereby enabled to judge,
which Trials have been the most carefully made, and the most warily delivered.
And, though I think it but a Necessary Profession for me, to say on this
occasion, That I am pretty Confident of my having performed my Duty, as to the
Historical part; yet this need not hinder, but that most of the differing
successes, we are speaking of, may prove but Instances of the Truth of what I
long since admonished the Reader (in my Preface,) That there are among the
Experiments of Cold, diverse that are liable to Contingencies: So that, as I
would not have the Papers of this Learned Man comprehended in what I said, of
the Jejuness of the Writers I had met with, who treat of Cold, in a Preface
written, when I was not sure the following Papers would be made public; so I
hope the Reception of these Papers of this Ingenious Person will be such, as
may invite him to hasten the Publication of those fruits of his Learning and
Industry on The Art of Pottery.
another subject, which diverse of the Virtuosi do not more Expect, then Desire,
to have communicated to them.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
THat the Reader may not wonder to find the following Dialogue cited in the
History of Cold, whereunto nevertheless it is subjoined; he is to be informed,
that a Section About Antiperistasis was really both written and transcribed
before any part of that History was sent to the Press. But finding, that the
Accession of new Particulars had so much swelled it, that 'twas unfit to pass
(as I first designed it should) for one of the Titles of the History of Cold, I
judged it convenient to sever it from the rest, upon the score of its bulk, and
yet annex it to them upon the Account of those many Historical Passages in it,
that belong to the same subject, that is handled in those Sections. The Reader
will quickly find, that the Tract consists of two parts, whereof the first
(which to allow the more Freedom of Inquiry and Discourse, written in the way
of Dialogue,) contains an Examen of Antiperistasis, without pretending to
question it absolutely and indefinitely, but rather, As it is wont to be Taught
and Proved. And this Dialogue, for reasons, that it too little concerns the
Reader to know, and would take up too much time to tell him, both begins as a
Continuation of some former Discourse, and somewhere mentions the Author, as a
Third or Absent Person. And to make it the likelier to other Dialogues, the
Quotations are not made with the Authors's punctualness in the rest of this
Book, but yet with his usual Faithfulness; nor has his Introducing men
Discoursing (as it were by chance) kept him from putting into the Margent the
very words of some Passages, which he thought the most important and likely to
be distrusted. But though this first Part be entire and finished in its kind,
and so might very well (if not best) have been put forth Single, to invalidate
the common Doctrine of Antiperistasis, (in the sense wherein it is there
opposed;) yet because in Philosophical Matters, it is not so much Victory or
Applause, that is to be sought, as Truth; I forbore not to subjoyn to a
Discourse, that may perchance satisfy most of my Readers, some scruples about
which I wished for further satisfaction and Certainty my self; of the chiefest
of which, the Skeptical Consideration will give the Reader an Account.

New THERMOMETRICAL EXPERIMENTS And THOUGHTS.
The I. Discourse, Proposing the I. Paradox, Viz. That not only our Senses, but
common Weather-glasses, may mis-inform us about Cold.
IT may to most men appear a work of needless Curiosity, or superfluous
diligence, to examine sollicitously, by what Criterion or way of estimate the
Coldness of Bodies, and the degrees of it are to be judged, Since Coldness
being a Tactile Quality, it seems impertinent to (...) any other judges of It
then the Organs of that sense, whose proper object it is. And accordingly,
those great Philosophers, Democritus, Epicurus, Aristotle, (and till of late)
all others both Ancient and Modern seem to have contented themselves in the
matter with the Reports of their Sensories.

But this notwithstanding, since we can scarce employ too much care and
diligence in the Examining of those (...), which we are to Examine many other
things by, perhaps it will be neither unseasonable nor useless to (...)
something touching this Subject.

For though it be true, that Cold in its primary and most Obvious Notion be a
thing relative to our Organs of Feeling, yet since it has also notable
Operations on diverse other Bodies besides ours; And since some of them seem
more sensible of its changes, and others are less uncertainly affected by them,
it would be Expedient to take in the Effects of Cold upon other Bodies, in the
Estimates we make of the degrees of it.

And to make this appear the more reasonable, I shall not scruple to propose
the following Paradox, namely, That our Sensories either alone, or assisted by
Common Weather-glasses are not too confidently to be relied on in the judging
of the degrees of Cold.

To make this Paradox Plausible (which is almost as much as I here pretend to)
I shall represent in the first place, that the account, upon which we are wont
to Judge a Body to be Cold, seems to be, that we feel its particles less
vehemently agitated then those of our Fingers or other parts of the Organ of
Touching. And consequently, if the temper of that Organ be changed, the Object
will appear more or less Cold to us, though it self continue of one and the
same Temper.

This may be exemplified by what has been observed by those that frequent
Baths, where the milder degrees of heat, that are used to prepare those that
come in for the higher, seem very great to them that coming out of the cold Air
dispose themselves to go into the Hot Baths, but are thought cold and chilling
to the same persons when they return thither out of much warmer places; which
need not be wondered at, since those, that come out of the cold Air, find that
of the moderately warm Room more agitated, then the cold Ambient would suffer
the External Parts of their Bodies to be, whereas the same warm Air, having yet
a less agitation then that in which the hotter parts of the Bath had put the
sensitive parts of the Bathers Bodies, must seem cold and chilling to Them.

But it is not only in such cases as this, wherein Men can scarce avoid taking
notice of a manifest change in themselves, that these mistaken Reports of our
senses may have place. For oft-times we are imposed upon by more secret changes
in the disposition of our Sensories, when there needs something of attention
and of Reasoning, if not of Philosophy to make us aware of them. For being apt
to take it for granted that our Temper is the same, when there is no very
manifest cause why it should be changed, we often impute that to (...), whereof
the Cause is in our selves; and if this change in our selves be wrought by
unsuspected Agents, or by insensible degrees, we do not easily take notice of
it. Thus though in Summer diverse Cellars, that are not deep, are perhaps no
colder then the External Air was, (when it was judged but Temperate,) in Winter
or the Spring; yet it will seem very Cold to us that bring into it Bodies
heated by the Summer Sun, and accustomed to a warmer Air; nay cold does so much
depend upon the degree of Agitation in the parts of the Object in reference to
the Sentient, that even when we may think the Sensory unaltered, it may judge
an Object to have a degree of Coldness which indeed it has not; as I remember,
that to satisfy some Friends, that it is not every Wind which feels cold to us,
that is really more Cold, then the still Air, I have sometimes shown, that
even in nice Weatherglasses Air blown out of a pair of Bellows does not appear
to have acquired any Coldness by being turned into Wind, though if it were
blown against the hands or face, it would produce a new and manifest sense of
Cold; of which the reason seems to be, That though the Organ in general seems
not to be altered, yet the Wind by reason of its Motion, is able not only to
drive away the parts of the Air contiguous to the hand, or face, and the warm
steams of the Body which tempered its Coldness; but to pierce deeper then the
calm Air is wont to do into the pores of the skin, where by comparison to the
more inward and hotter parts of the Sensory it must needs appear less agitated
and consequently colder.

Besides, that sometimes we may meet with certain Steams in the Air that have
in reference to the Blood and Spirits of humane Bodies (though not perhaps to
diverse other Liquors) a certain hidden power of chilling, as Opium, even in
outward applications (for in such ways I have known a great Surgeon much use
it and highly extol it) strikes a Coldness into the Body by the subtle
Effluvium's that insinuate themselves at the pores of the Skin; and perhaps
too, that Coldness is ascribed to External Bodies, which is produced in us by
some Frigorifick Vapor, or other distemper; which being too slight to be taken
notice of as a disease, may yet be of Kin to those Agents, that produce what
Physicians call horrors and Rigors at the beginning of Fevers, and some other
distempers; or produce that strange and universal Coldness of the external
parts, which is frequently enough observed among other Symptoms in Hysterical
Women. Moreover, Bodies may often appear colder to us then to a Weather-glass,
because our Sensories are more affected by the density and Penetrancy of the
parts. This may seem somewhat strange, but being suitable enough to some of my
Conjectures about Cold, I have often made Trials with very nice
Weather-glasses, that have assured me, that (at least oft-times) when water
seems to be cold enough to our touch, it appears not to be colder to the
Weather-glass then the Ambient Air.

These Trials I have sometimes made with sealed Weather-glasses, but the most
with another sort of Weather-glasses (whose structure and use are by and by to
be mentioned) which though they seldom prove durable, nor of any great use in
any other then such nice and short Experiments, yet they discover slighter
changes of the Temper of the Air then would be notable (not to say sensible) in
ordinary Thermometers. But of multitudes of Trials that I sometimes made with
these Glasses, I can at present find among my loose Papers but a very few; and
though I remember, that in one or two (made about the same time with some of
those that follow) I observed Things that make me now wish I had had
Opportunity to make those further Trials of Them, which some of their
Phenomenon seem to direct the making of: yet I shall annex these that follow as
I find them entered, because they are not perhaps destitute of hints improvable
by further prosecution. June 26. between two and four in the afternoon (the
Weather moderate for the season) I took a thin white glass-Egge blown at a Lamp
about the bigness of a Walnut, with a stem coming out of it about the bigness
of a large Pigeons Quill four or five Inches long, and open at the Top; this
slender pipe being dipped in water, admitted into its Cavity a little Cylinder
of Water, of half an Inch long or somewhat more, which (the Glass being
erected) subsided by its own weight, or the Temper of the Air in the Egg (in
reference to the outward Air) till it fell to the lower part of the Pipe, where
it comes out of the Egg, and thereabout it would rest. Now if taking this
Glass by the Top betwixt my Thumb and forefinger, I deprest the Egg under the
surface of a Basin of fair water (cold enough to the touch) the little Aqueous
Cylinder, that parted betwixt the Air in the Egg, and the external, would,
instead of being made to subside by the Eggs immersion into the Cold water,
presently rise up from the lower part of the Pipe, till it reached about the
middle of it, though the Glass were, in this and the following Trials, held
erected; and as soon as it was taken out of the Water into the Air, the water
would again subside, whether I held the Glass, or let it rest upon the Boards,
or a Linen Carpet, that covered the Table, on which the Trials were made. And
this I did several times as well with as without witness. I tried also that if,
instead of water, I made use of Quicksilver, though not big enough to cover the
Egg much above half way, and in the rest proceeded as above; the cold
Quicksilver would presently make the Aqueous Cylinder hastily ascend near three
Inches, sometimes almost, and sometimes quite to the Top of the slender pipe,
whence the water would again quickly subside, when the Glass was taken out into
the free Air, or set to rest upright as before.

Besides, having set the vessel of Quicksilver and the Basin of water very near
one another, I did at least upon three or four several Trials find, as I
expected, that when by immersing the Egg in water, the pendulous Cylinder was
raised so high, that it did no longer sensibly ascend, by nimbly taking the
Egg out of the water and depressing it in the Quicksilver, it would rise far
higher: and I also tried, that nimbly removing the Egg out of the Quicksilver
into the water, the pendulous Cylinder would subside, after plunging the Egg
under water, though not so fast, nor near so low as it would do, in case the
Glass were removed from the Quicksilver into the Air. Upon another Trial made
much about this time, though not the self same day; the pendulous water in the
same Glass, (the day being for the most part windy and rainy) did subside upon
the immersion of the Glass into water, not only a while before noon, but an
hour or two after dinner, and at distant hours afterward, though the Descent
of the Pendulous water was neither so quick, nor so considerable as it had been
formerly in the Mornings.

June 27. In the morning a small Cylinder of Water pendulous in the above
mentioned Glass, upon the immersion of the Egg in a Basin of water, would
immediately and very considerably subside, whereas the same glass, being
immersed in the Vessel of Quicksilver formerly mentioned, (...) presently
ascend. Both parts of this Experiment we several times tried, and the Reason
was suspected to be, that the Quicksilver had stayed all night in my Chamber,
which was somewhat warm, whereas the water was brought up that morning, and to
the touch seemed colder then the Quicksilver, and a while after dinner, the
same water having been still kept in the room, we diverse times found, that as
well That, as the Quicksilver, did immediately upon immersion impel up the
pendulous water in the slender pipe. Another time in frosty weather (and about
the beginning of January) we did with such a glass (as has been already several
times mentioned) take somedrops of water out of a vessel, wherein that Liquor
had for a good while been kept; that it might be reduced as near as we could to
the Temperature of the Ambient Air; then (...) the suspended water to continue
a convenient while in the long and slender stem of the Weatherglass, that the
internal Air might be reduced to the temper of the external, we took up the
Glass by the open end; and immersing the obtuse part of It into a shallow
Vessel containing some of the above mentioned Water, we found the suspended
drop suddenly impelled upwards about half an Inch or more, and the Ball of the
Thermometer being taken out of the Water into the Air, the pendulous drop did
again (though far more slowly then it ascended) subside. This was repeated
three or four times with some intervals between (and that in a Room where there
was no Chimney) and still with the like success, save that in the two last
Trials we took the Weatherglass out of the shallow water, and plunging it into
a deep vessel of the same water (that stood very near the other) we found (for
further confirmation of the Experiment) that the pendulous water was upon these
new immersions, impelled up, near (if not full) as high again, as when we had
immersed it only in the shallow vessel: and taking it out of this deep Glass,
we found the Cold of the external Air to reduce It to its former humble
station. Thus far the notes, I have yet been able to recover: and though, as I
said, I dare not build very much upon them, yet by small sealed Weather-glasses
I find enough to invite me to suspect, that of the degrees of heat and cold in
the Air we may receive differing informations, when we employ only our Organs
of Touching, and when we make use of fit Instruments.

I shall add on this occasion, that not only water it self, but moist vapors
abounding in the Air, may make Us think it colder then the Weather-glass
discovers it to be. For though it be generally taken for granted, that the
Thermometer does only more exactly measure or determine the Effects, which cold
has both upon it and upon our Sensories, yet I have long suspected that there
is somewhat else in the case. And I have observed, that sometimes the weather
seemed more or less cold to me, then that which preceded, when the contrary
appeared in the Weather-glass; and that, when upon consideration of the whole
matter, that difference did not appear to depend upon those circumstances of
Exercise or Rest, or the Temperature of the Air I came out of, or any of those
other things, to which a considerate man, that goes upon no better then the
common opinions about Weather-glasses, would be apt to impute to that
Phenomenon. And I was the less disposed to think my self mistaken, because
having purposely inquired of others in the same house, who were not told, what
Information the Weather-glass gave, they agreed with me in the sense I had of
the Temperature of the Weather. And having since, as occasion served,
communicated my Observations and suspicions to diverse Ingenious Men, I have
been by their recenter Observations confirmed, that what I have taken notice
of, was not the Effect of any (...). From which, and other particulars, that we
may have elsewhere opportunity to mention, we may plausibly enough infer, that
it were not amiss, not only to take notice, when we have opportunity, of the
sense, that is Expressed of the degrees of Cold by Birds and other animals,
whose diet is more simple and regular then ours, and whose perceptions are
commonly more delicate and less diverted; but, especially, to examine the
coldness of the Air and other Bodies as well by Experiments and instruments, as
by the touch. And on this Occasion I must not pretermit that memorable Account,
that is given us by Martinius in that Noble piece of Geography which he calls
Atlas Chinensis, where speaking of the Air of that populous Country he has
this singular passage: Ad Caeli (says he) solique temperiem quod attinet, Page
27, 28.
majus in hac provincia frigus est, quam illius poscat poli altitudo: vix enim
illa excedit gradum secundum supra quadragesimum; and tamen per integros
quatuor saepe menses flumina omnia adeo dure concrescunt gelu, ut currus
equosque (...) gravissima etiam onera glacies ferat, innoxie acsecurissime
transeant: ex iis ingentia etiam glaciei frusta exscindu^tur, quae in futuram
aestatem ad delicias servant. His (...) omnes naves ita in ipsa glacie defixae
sunt, ut progredi nequeant ubicunque illas frigus occupat (quod certo certius
circa medium Novembris ingruere solet) per quatuor illos menses immotae ibi
perstare coguntur, neque enim resolvitur glacies ante Martii initium; haec
plerumque glaciei concretio uno fit die, cum non nisi pluribus fiat
liquefactio; to which he adds what makes most to our present purpose, (...)
illud mirum, tantum non videri aut sentiri illud frigus ut Europeos ad
hypocausta subeunda videatur posse cogere, aut in Europa ad glaciem producendam
(...) unde ad subterraneas illic exhalationes pro harum rerum causis indagandis
(...) recurrendum est, etc.

But all that I have been implying of the Necessity and Usefulness of the
Weather-glass, is no way inconsistent with the truth of the latter part of our
formerly proposed paradox, namely that we are not rashly to rely upon the
Informations even of common Weather-glasses themselves. For though they be an
excellent Invention, and their Informations in many Cases preferable to those
of our senses, because those Dead Engines are not in such cases obnoxious to the
same Causes of uncertainty with our Living Bodies, yet I fear they have too
much ascribed to them, when they are looked upon as such exact Instruments to
measure heat and cold by, that we neither can have nor need desire any better.
For, not yet to mention some inconveniences in the contrivance of them, which
makes them unapplicable to some purposes, and less proper in others, then
Thermoscopes might be made, even in diverse cases, wherein they are presumed to
be unexceptionable, their Reports are not to me, I confess, quite exempt from
suspicion. For in ordinary Weather-glasses some part of the Liquor being
contiguous to the External Air, it is subject to be impelled more or less
upwards, not only according as heat or cold affects the included Air, but
according as the incumbent Air happens to be heavier or lighter. And though
this be a thing not taken Notice of by those that have treated of
Weather-glasses, yet (...) what we have elsewhere manifested concerning the
weight and spring of the Air, and what we have probably (...) concerning the
varying height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the Torrecellian Experiment; I see
not why It should See the 18. of our New Physico-Mechanical Experiments.
not much call in Question the Informations we receive from common
Weather-glasses in those cases, where the height or weight of the
Atmosphaerical pillar, that presses upon the Water in the Weatherglass, is
considerably longer or shorter, lighter or heavier then is usual.

For besides the reason of the thing, we have Experience on our side. I might
mention on this Occasion an Experiment I thought on, and also attempted last
winter to show even upon a Balance the varying gravity of the Atmosphaere in
one and the same place, by hanging a small Metalline weight at one End of a
pair of Scales so strangely exact, that they would turn with far less then the
500. part of a grain; and counterpoising it at the other end with a
Hermetically sealed Glass Bubble, which being blown as large and as thin as
could possibly be procured of so small a weight, might by its great
disproportion in Bulk to the Metalline Body lose more of its weight then That
would upon the Ambient Airs growing more heavy. But the particular Account of
this Attempt belonging to another place, the trial ought not to be more then
hinted here, especially since it may suffice for our present purpose to allege
that having found In the defense against Linus Cap. 4
(as we have already in other papers noted) that in a Weather-glass, where the
Water is not fenced from the External Air, the weight of the Atmosphaere may
make it alter considerably between the Top and Bottom even of a Church or
Steeple, though it appeared by more certain Thermoscopes, that 'twas not the
differing Temperature of the Air as to Cold and Heat, but the differing gravity
of the Atmosphaere, which being shorter and lighter at the Top pressed less
forcibly upon the subjacent Water and the included Air, as is more fully made
out in the Treatise above related to. And having by the intervention of a
Learned Acquaintance desired to have some Experiments made of the Effect of the
Air upon Weather-glasses in deep Pits or Mines, where the Atmosphaerical
Cylinder is longer and heavier, I received Information that an Ingenious Dr. H.
P.
Physician, who had the Opportunity of trying what I desired, had found, that
in the Bottom of one of those very deep Pits, the water in a common Weather
glass rose near three Inches higher then at the top, in a shank or pipe of
about thirty Inches long. And this notwithstanding the warmth, that is usual in
such deep places, which seems not any thing near so plausibly referable to any
other cause, as to the increased gravity of the Atmosphaerical Pillar incumbent
on the Water, that Pillar being heavier at the Bottom then at the Mouth of the
Pit, by the weight of an aerial Pillar equal in length to the pits
perpendicular height or depth.

But these are not the only Cases wherein the differing gravities of the
Atmosphaere may, as well as Heat and Cold, have an interest in the rising and
falling of the Liquor in Common Weather-glasses. For though you should not
remove them out of one place, and though consequently it may seem that the
Atmosphaerical Pillar, that presses upon the water, must be still of the same
length, yet (not to urge, that That may alter, unknown to us) if retaining its
length it retain not its gravity, we may be easily imposed upon, and take that
Ascension or Subsidence of the Liquor for the Effect of a higher or remiss
degree of Cold, which may either totally or at least in part (and in what part,
we are left to guess) be the Effect of the increased or lessened weight of the
Atmosphaerical Pillar, happening either by the copious dispersion of Vapors
and other heavy Steams through the Air, or upon other Occasions not necessary
to be here discoursed of, or by the Praecipitation of such vapors by rain or
into dew, or else by the Removal of the Occasions of the Augmented Gravity or
Pressure of the Air. For we have often observed great Variations to happen in
the height of the Mercurial Cylinder in the Torricellian Experiment upon great
rains and fogs, and other sudden and considerable mutations of the Incumbent
Air. But since I my self thought fit, notwithstanding the plausible
ratiocination, that led me to this Conjecture, to examine it by Experience; I
can scarce doubt but that others may have the like Curiosity that I had. And
therefore, because it may seem a paradox, it will not be amiss, of many to
annex three or four Trials I made to examine the proposed doctrine, especially
ours having been the first observations of this kind, that, for ought we know,
have been made by any. And indeed others could scarce have well made such,
though they had lighted on the same thoughts, for want of such sealed
Weather-glasses to make them with. To omit then those that I made with a sealed
Weather-glass, and an ordinary one (in which the water remains suspended
beneath the included Air) I shall briefly relate, that in a Room unfurnished
with a Chimney, I kept two Weatherglasses, which for more exactness sake, I
caused to be made of a length far greater then ordinary; so that the divisions
of the one were half inches, and those of the other not much less, and yet were
Numerous. The one of these which was furnished with good spirits of Wine, was
sealed, the other not, but this last I caused to be so made of the shape
represented by the Scheme, that the Air being shut up in the lower part of the
Instrument (not as in common Weather-glasses at the Top) the Liquor might as
well in this as in the sealed Weather-glass rise with heat and fall with Cold.
In these Thermoscopes (where the Ascension and relapse of the Liquors were, by
reason of the length of the Pipes, far more conspicuous then in Vulgar
Weatherglasses) I observed with pleasure, that the Hermetical Thermoscope (if I
may for distinction sake so call It, by reason of its being Hermetically
sealed) did regularly enough descend in cold weather, and ascend in (...): But
the other, which was not sealed, but had a little hole left open at the Top of
the Pipe, though, when the Atmosphaere continued of the same weight, it would
like the other rise with Heat and fall with Cold, yet when the Atmosphaeres
gravity was altered, they would not uniformly move together, but when (as we
gathered from other observations) the Atmosphaere grew heavier, the Liquor in
the Pipe did not ascend, as high as it would have done, if the Atmosphaere had
continued in its former degree of gravitation. And on the contrary, when the
incumbent Air came to be lighter, the Liquor would rise in the open
Weather-glass in a proportion greater then the single increase of heat would
have exacted; so that by comparing the two Weather-glasses together, I did
usually foretell, whether the Mercury in the Torricellian Tube (which I keep
purposely by me in a frame) were risen or fallen, and consequently whether the
external Air were heavier or lighter then before. As on the other side, by
looking on the height of the Mercurial Cylinder, I could easily tell before
hand, whether the Liquor in the open Weather-glass were higher or lower then
that in the Hermetical; the rising or falling of the Mercurial Cylinder one
quarter of an Inch (the Temperature of the Air continuing as to heat and cold)
usually signifying a great disparity betwixt the Ascension or the falling of
the Liquors in the two Instruments.

Among the several notes, I find among my loose papers, and in a Diary I kept
for a while of these observations, I shall content my self to transcribe the
following two, because, though diverse others were made by my Amanuensis, whose
care is not to be distrusted, yet by reason of my absence I could not take
notice of them my self. The first of these Memorandums runs thus:

Last night I took notice, that there was but one or two Divisions difference
betwixt the two Thermometers, but upon such a change of Weather, that happened
this day, as made me imagine, that the Atmosphaere would be lighter then (...),
consulting the Barometer (if to avoid Circumlocutions I may so call the whole
Instrument wherein a Mercurial Cylinder of 29. or 30. Inches is kept suspended
after the manner of the Torricellian Experiment.) I found the Quicksilver lower
then it had been a great while, and thereupon concluding, there would be a
notable disparity, between the sealed and open Weatherglass, I hastened to them,
and found that the latter being much alleviated from the weight of the
Incumbent Air, was no less then 17. Divisions higher then the others, and
comparing the height the two Instruments were this day at, with an observation
I my self made about a week ago, when the Quicksilver was much higher then now
it is; I found, that although this afternoon the sealed Glass being at 41, the
other was at 58; yet Then, when the sealed Weatherglass, was five divisions
higher, namely, at 46, the unsealed Weather-glass was but at 27. So that
betwixt that time and this, the Liquor in the sealed Weather-glass, has
descended five Divisions, but that in the open Weather-glass has ascended 31.

Thus far the first of the above mentioned Notes; the second is as follows.

The Mercurial Cylinder being higher, then it has been a good while, and yet
the Weather warm and Sunshiny, when the Liquor in the sealed Glass stood very
near the 50th division, that in the unsealed was fallen down as low as the 32.

So that it is very possible, that the unheeded change in the weight of the
external Air may have a greater power to compress the included Air in an
unsealed Weather-glass, then a not inconsiderable degree of warmth may have to
dilate it, and consequently in an ordinary Weatherglass, where the Air is
included at the Top, it may often fall out, that contrary to what men suppose
must needs happen, the pendulous Water may rise in warmer weather, and fall in
colder.

And even since the writing of the immediately foregoing part of this page,
within a few days that intervened, I have my self made observations, that do
yet more clearly manifest this truth, as may appear by the following notes. The
first of which speaks (...).

Memorandum, that Yesterday night the Quicksilver being at 29 Inches, the
Liquors in the sealed and unsealed Weather-glasses, were near about the same
Division, the former being at 40, and the other being but half a Division short
of that Number. But this night the Quicksilver being risen about of an Inch;
the Liquor in the sealed is ascended to 45, and the other descended beneath 35
about half a Division, so that there is now 10 Divisions between them.

This is the first Note, to which the following night enabled me to add this
other.

The Quicksilver being risen almost of an Inch above the station it rested at
the night before last night, the Hermetical Weather-glass being as it was then
above the 40 Division; the Liquor in the other, which was open, in two days and
nights is fallen to the 17, and consequently is subsided about 23 Divisions,
whilst the other is about the same height at which it was at the beginning of
that time.

Two or three days after, being returned to the place wherein I had made this
last observation, and from which some urgent Occasions had for that time
exacted my absence; I found the Disparity, betwixt the two Thermometers that is
expressed in the following Memorial.

This day the Quicksilver being risen to 30 Inches, when the Liquor in the
sealed Weather-glass was at about 41 Divisions, that in the other was depressed
a pretty deal below the Ninth Division, so that the difference between the two
Thermometers was increased since the last Observation from 23 to near 33
Divisions, all which the Liquor in the open Weather-glass had sunk down,
whilst that in the sealed continued almost at a stand. And the day after this
Memorial, I had occasion to register another, which being the last, I shall
here think requisite to take notice of in this (...), I shall subjoyn it with
that, which immediately preceded in order of Time.

This day the Quicksilver continuing at the same height, at which I observed it
yesterday, but the Weather being grown much colder, the Liquor appears in both
the Glasses to have uniformly enough subsided; that in the sealed
Weather-glass, being about the 33, and the other being sunk quite below the
lowest mark of all, which was more then I apprehended it would have done, when
there was no frost, especially since by my Diary it appears, that one of the
last times I observed the Hermetical Weather-glass to stand at near about the
same height, namely, the 34; the Liquor in the other Glass was no lower then
the 41: nor probably would there be now so great a difference, if the
Atmosphaere had not been this day very heavy; whereas, when this freshly
recited observation was made, I find by the Diary, the Quicksilver to have
ascended but to 29 Inches, and a pretty deal less then a half.

Since that time, being forced by several Avocations to be often absent from
the place where my Thermoscopes were kept, I was not careful to prosecute such
Observations, those already set down (not to mention those that are not here
transcribed) being judged abundantly sufficient to evince the Paradox proposed
to be proved by them: Only, to manifest that after I desisted from registring
my Observations, the Phenomenon may probably have been as remarkable as before;
I shall add, That one of the last times I chanced to take notice of the
Difference to be gathered by comparing the two Weather-glasses, I found (the
weather happening to be warmer then ordinary) the difference between them to
exceed any that I remembered my self to have then observed, amounting to forty
four, if not to forty five Divisions.

And even since the writing of the Last Line, we have had opportunity to
observe a Phenomenon, which if it had occurred to us in the place where we
might have compared the Barascope with the Exact Weather-glasses hitherto
mentioned, (and whereby we had been invited to rely upon it) would perhaps
appear more Considerable then any of the Observations yet recorded. For not
very many hours ago, finding in the Morning the Quicksilver to be risen in a
good Barascope of mine (though another from that, all this while referred to,
and elsewhere kept) above of an Inch higher then the place it rested at the
Night foregoing, and a somewhat Nice Weather-glass (where the included Air is
kept in the lower part of the Instrument, which is shaped like that already
described in this Discourse) being consulted to show what Effect so great and
sudden a change of the Atmosphaeres gravity would have upon it; I saw the
tincted Liquor in the shank depressed a full Inch or more beneath the Surface
of the Ambient Liquor in the Viol, which strange depression of the Liquor in a
pipe above 20 Inches long, and where the alterations of the Air as to Heat and
Cold are not wont to produce any thing near so great an Effect, I could not but
take much notice of. Since the season of the year makes it no way likely that
the night, though Cold, could have had so powerful an Operation on it,
especially since an Amanuensis that watched it much longer then I, affirms that
he saw the Liquor driven down quite to the very Bottom of the pipe, and a
Bubble of the outward Air to make its passage through the water, and to join
with the Air contained in the cavity of the Viol.

The II. Discourse, Containing some New Observations about the Deficiencies of
Weather-glasses, together with some Considerations touching the New or
Hermetical Thermometers.
ANd since I had occasion to speak of the Deficiencies of Weather-glasses, and
the mistakes whereto men are liable in the Judgment they make of Cold and Heat
upon Their Informations, it will not perhaps appear impertinent to add three or
four Considerations more to excite men to the greater Wariness and Industry,
both in the making and using Weather-glasses, and in their Judging by them.

1. And first, I consider, that we are very much to seek for a Standard or
certain Measure of Cold, as we have settled Standards for weight, and magnitude,
and time, so that when a man mentions an Aker, or an Ounce, or an Hour, they
that hear him, know what he means, and can easily exhibit the same measure: but
as for the degrees of Cold (as we have elsewhere noted concerning those of
Heat) we have as yet no certain and practicable way of determining them; for,
though, if I use a Weather glass long, it is easy for me to find, when the
Weather is colder, or when warmer, then it was at the time when the
Weather-glass was first finished, yet that is a way of estimating, whereby I
may in some degrees satisfy my self, but cannot so well instruct others, since
I have no certain way to know determinately, so as to be able to communicate my
knowledge to a remote Correspondent, what degree of Coldness or Heat there was
in the Air, when I first finished my Thermoscope; For besides that, we want
distinct Names for the several gradual differences of Coldness, we have already
declared, that our sense of feeling cannot safely be relied upon to measure
them; and as for the Weatherglass, that is a thing, which in this case is
supposed to be no fit Standard to tell us what was precisely the temper of the
Air, when it self was first finished, since that does but inform us of the
recessions from it, or else that the Air continues in the Temper it was in at
the making of the Instrument, but does not determine for us that Temper, and
enable us, to express it; as indeed it is so mutable a thing, even in the same
place, and oft-times in the same day, if not the same hour, that it seems
little else then a Moral impossibility, to settle such an universal and
procurable Standard of Cold, as we have of several other things. And indeed
there is scarce any Quality, for whose differences we have fewer distinct
Names, having scarce any for the many degrees of Coldness that may be conceived
to be intermediate, betwixt Lukewarmness and the Freezing degree of Cold, and
even these are undefin'd enough; for that, which to some men's senses will feel
Lukewarm, by others will be judged Hot, and by others perhaps cold; nor is even
the glaciating degree of Coldness well determined, since not only differing
Liquors, as oil, wine, and water, will manifestly freez much more easily one
then another, but even Liquors of the same denomination; and of waters
themselves some are more easily turned into Ice then others, and I see no great
cause to doubt but that there may be sufficiently differing degrees of Cold,
whereof the mildest may suffice for the congelation of some waters. I must not
forget to add, that the same person, that has made many observations with a
Weatherglass, is so confined by that numerical Instrument, that if by the
spilling of the Liquor, or the cracking of the Glass, or the casual intrusion
of some Bubbles of Air, or by any of diverse other Accidents that may happen,
the Instrument should be spoiled, he would, though he should employ again the
same Instrument, be reduced to seek out (...) new Standard, wherewith to
measure the varying temperature of the Air. And though it be not difficult to
include in the Cavity of a Weather-glass some other fluid Body instead of Air,
yet it will be very difficult, if not impossible, to include a Body, fit to
resent and show the Alterations of the Ambient Air, without being also liable
to receive impressions from it at the time of its being first shut up.

Yet I will not here omit that I have sometimes considered whether the
essential oil of Aniseeds (which is that that is distilled by the intervention
of water in a Limbeck) might not, during a good part of the year, be of some
use to us, in making and judging of Weather-glasses. For this Liquor, as we
(...) also note, having the peculiarity of loosing its fluidity during almost
all the Winter, and a good part of the Spring, and Autumn too, when the Weather
An Ingenious man has proposed another way of settling a Standard for
Weather-glasses; namely, by observing the coldness, which is requisite to make
distilled water begin to freez: But though the accurateness of this way may be
as well as the other justly Questioned, and cannot often be put in practice,
even in Winter it self, nor without trouble; yet it may also be advantagiously
made use of, when the cold happens to be great enough to freez water.
or the time of the day is colder; this Liquor, I say, being such, in case you
very gently thaw it, and then putting into it, the Ball of a Weather-glass
furnished with spirit of Wine that will burn all away, you suffer the oil to
re-congeal leisurely of it self, you may by observing the station of the spirit
of Wine in the Thermoscope, when the Oil begins manifestly to curdle about it,
be in some measure assisted, to make another Weather-glass like it. For if you
put such rectified spirit of Wine into a Glass, the Cavity of whose Sphaerical,
and that of its Cylindrical part, are as near, as may be, equal to the
correspondent Cavities in the former Glass, you may by some heedful Trials,
made with thawed and recongeal'd oil of Aniseeds, bring the second
Weather-glass to be somewhat like the first; and if you know the Quantity of
your spirit of Wine, you may easily enough make an estimate, by the place it
reaches to in the Neck of the Instrument, whose capacity you also know, whether
it expands or contracts it self to the 40, the 30, or the 20 part, etc. of the
(...) it was of, when the Weather-glass was made. By the help of the same Oil
you may make some kind of estimate, though a more uncertain one, of the
difference of two Weather-glasses of unequal bigness: And though I know how
much may be alleged to show the uncertainty of this way of making a Standard
for Weather-glasses; yet as what I have formerly represented, may manifest me
to be far enough from looking on it as an exact Standard of Cold; so perhaps
the way proposed may not be altogether useless in the making and comparing
Weather-glasses, since in such cases, where we are not to expect to hit the
mark it self, it is of some advantage to be able to shoot less wide of it then
otherwise we should.

II. But not to insist any further on a difficulty, which is so hardly (...) as
that, which occurs about settling a perfect Standard of Cold, there are
unaccuratenesses in the measuring of Cold by Weather-glasses, which may be
avoided, but are not; For, Men are not wont to take care, that the Stems be
even and Cylindrical enough, but are wont to make use of such, as are much
wider at the upper part near the bubble, then otherwhere; nor do they observe,
as they might, a proportion betwixt the Diameter of the Bore of the Cylinder,
and that of the Cavity of the Sphaerical Bubble, and diverse other circumstances
are commonly neglected, which if well ordered would make much toward the
Certainty and instructiveness of the Informations, afforded us by
Weather-glasses. To which may be added, that even in those, where some part of
the Liquor is exposed to the external Air, there may be made Contrivances much
more convenient, in order, at least, to some particular purposes, then that of
the Vulgar Weatherglass, some of which we have employed, and others have been
either skilfully devised, or also happily attempted by some eminently ingenious
Dr. Wren. Dr. Goddard.
Members of the Royal Society. And though that, which we have already Mr. Hook.
discrib'd in another Treatise, be very simple, yet it is much more commodious
for several of the following Experiments of Cold, then that, which is commonly
in use. For in this, where the included Air is as it were pendulous at the Top
of the Glass, it is very troublesome and difficult so to apply Cold Bodies, and
especially Liquid ones to it, as therewith to measure their Temper, whereas the
Thermometers, I speak of, being made by the insertion of a Cylindrical pipe of
Glass (open at both ends) into a Viol or Bottle, and by exactly stopping with
sealing wax, or very close Cement the Mouth of the Viol, that the included Air
may have no communication with the External, but by the newly mentioned Pipe:
In this kind of Instrument, I say, by choosing a Viol as large, as you please,
and fitting it with a Cylynder, slender enough, the proportion between the part
of the Viol possessed by included Air, and the Cavity of the Cylinder, in which
the Liquor is to play up and down, may be easily made so great, as to make the
Liquor in this Instrument, with the same degree of Heat or Cold, rise or fall
four or five, or more times as much as the pendulous Liquor is wont to do in an
Ordinary Weatherglass, where the cavity that lodges the Air, is wont to be much
too small, considering the Bigness of the pipe, whereinto the Air must, when
it is rarifi'd, expand it self. But it is not the greater sensibility (if I may
so speak) of this very kind of Weather-glasses, nor their not needing frames,
that makes me take notice of them in this place (where I purposely pass by
contrivances that I know to be more curious) but this other Quality, which
makes them fit for diverse of the following Experiments, wherein we shall have
occasion to mention them, namely, that with little or no trouble and
inconvenience we may employ Liquors or other Bodies to refrigerate the included
Air, by immersing the Viol, if need be (by a weight) into the Liquor to be
examined, and letting it stand there as long as we please. And so we may also
measure the Coldness of Earth, Snow, powdered Ice, and other consistent Bodies,
which may be heaped about the Viol, or in which it may be buried.

III. I consider too, that though men are wont confidently enough to conclude,
that in case (for instance) the Coldness of the weather make the Liquor in a
Thermoscope yesterday an Inch higher then 'twas the day before, and this day an
Inch higher then 'twas yesterday, the Air must be this day as cold again as it
was yesterday, or at least that the increase of Cold must be double to what it
was yesterday, and so in other proportions, yet the Validity of this Collection
may very justly be Questioned; For, though we should grant, that Cold is that
which of it self, or by its own power contracts the Air, yet how does it
appear, that a double degree of Cold must produce a double degree of
condensation in the Air, and not either more or less. Since besides that it is
taken for granted, but not proved, that the differing Quantities of included
Air in several Instruments, and the differing bignesses of the Pipes, and the
differing degrees of Expansion, wherein the included Air may happen to be, when
the Ascension of the Water begins to be reckoned, may render this Hypothesis
very suspicious; besides all this, (I say) I am not inclined to grant (what
Philosophers have hitherto supposed) that the Condensation of the Air, and the
ascension of the Water is only, or so much as principally, affected by the
proper Virtue of the Cold, but by the pressure of the Ambient Air, as we shall
ere long more fully declare: And if this be made out, then the computation, we
are considering, will be found to be very fallacious, for we have elsewhere
Defense against Linus Cap. the 5th.
shown, That the strengths required to compress Air, are in reciprocal
proportion, or there abouts, to the spaces comprehending the same portion of
Air; so that if a Cylinder (for instance) of four Inches of Air, be just able
to resist a strength or pressure equivalent to 10. pound weight, when it comes
to be compressed into two Inches; in this case, I say, an equal force
superadded to the former, (which makes that a double force, or equivalent to 20
pound weight,) will drive up that already comprest Air into half the space;
that is, into one Inch or thereabouts; whence it follows, that in estimating
the condensation of the Air in a Weather-glass, we must not only consider, how
much space it is made to desert, but also, what proportion that deserted space
bears to the whole space it formerly possessed, and to what degree of density it
was reduced, before the application of the then force; and we must remember,
that the resistance of the included Air is not to be looked upon, as that of a
weight, which may remain always the same, but that of a spring forcibly bent,
and which is increased more and more, as it is crowded into less and less Room.
But these Nicer speculations it would here be somewhat improper to pursue.

IV. Wherefore I shall proceed to what may seem a Paradox, that even the
particular Nature of the Liquors, employed in Weather-glasses, is not
altogether to be neglected, till we have a better and more determinate Theory
of the causes of Cold, then I fear we have: For, though usually it matters not
much, what Liquor you employ, yet it is not impossible, that in some cases men
may slip into mistakes about them, for it will not follow, that if of two
Liquors, the one be much the more obnoxious to the higher degree of Cold, that
of Glaciation, the other must be less easily susceptible of the lower degrees
of Cold; since those, that make sealed Weather-glasses, some with water, and
some with spirit of wine, have confessed to me, that they find these (last
named) much more apt to receive notable impressions from faint degrees of Cold,
then those that are furnished but with water, and (which yet is easily turned
into Ice) by the cold of our Climate, which will by no means produce the like
effect upon pure spirit of Wine.

Besides we cannot always safely conclude (as Philosophers and Chemists
generally do) that the more subtle and spirituous Liquors must be the least
capable of being congealed (that is, made to lose its fluidity, as oil and some
other substances are wont to be reduced to do by the Action of Cold) for the
Chemical Oil of Aniseeds distilled by a Limbeck is so hot and strong a Liquor,
that a few drops of it conveniently dissolved will make a whole Cup of Beer
taste as strong, and perhaps heat the Body as much as so much Wine, and yet
this hot and subtle Liquor I have found upon Trial, purposely made, to be more
easily congealable (in the sense freshly explained) by cold, then even common
water; and to continue so several days, after a Thaw had resolved the common
Ice into fluid water again. And I know some distilled Liquors, whose component
particles are so piercing and so vehemently agitated, that the tongue cannot
suffer them, and they are not perhaps inferior to most Chemical Oils, nor to
Aquafortis it self, and yet these may be congealed by far less degrees of Cold,
then such, as would yet prove ineffectual to freez either the generality of
Chemical Oils, or the generality of saline spirits.

And indeed till we attain to some more determinate Theory of Cold, and come to
know more touching its causes, then we yet do, I see not, why it should be
absurd to suspect, that though there be some kind of Bodies, which seem fitted
to produce Cold indiscriminately in the Bodies they invade or touch, yet if the
refrigeration of a Body be but the lessening of the wonted or former agitation
of its parts (from what cause soever that remisness proceeds) it seems not
impossible, but that besides those Bodies or Corpuscles, that may be looked
upon as the Catholic Efficients of Cold, there may be particular Agents, which
in reference to this or that particular Body may be called frigorifick, though
they would not so much refrigerate another Body, which perhaps would be more
easily affected, then the former, by (...) efficients of Cold. For we may
observe, that Quicksilver may be congealed by the Steams of Lead, which have
not been taken notice of to have any such Effect upon any other fluid Body, and
yet Quicksilver is not to be deprived of its fluidity by such a degree of Cold,
as would freez not only water but wine. And by what we have formerly related
upon the credit of that great Traveller, the Jesuit Martinius, it seems, that
water it self may in some Regions be so disposed by the constitution of the
Soil, that it is susceptible of strange impressions of Cold in proportion to the
Effect, which that degree of Cold produces there in humane Bodies. Besides,
Opium also, of which three or four grains have too often destroyed the heat of
the whole mass of Blood in a man's Body, though that be a very hot, subtle, and
spirituous Liquor, does not sensibly refrigerate water, as far as I could
observe with a good sealed Weather-glass, which I put sometimes in a glass of
ordinary water, and sometimes into a glass of water of the same Temper, and (as
we guessed) of the same Quantity, wherein Opium, enough to kill very many men,
was put in thin slices, and suffered to dissolve; which seems to argue, that as
differing Liquors have each their peculiar Texture, so there may be certain
Bodies, whose minute particles by their peculiar seize, shape and motion, may
be qualified to hinder, or at least lessen the agitation of the particles of
the appropriated Liquor, into whose pores they insinuate themselves; And
thereby, according to the lately mentioned supposition, they may refrigerate
that particular Liquor without having the like Effect on other Liquors, whose
Textures are differing. And I might countenance this by adding, that as fiery
and agitated a spirit as that of wine, when well (...), is justly thought to
be; yet I know more liquors then one, that being mingled with it, will in a
trice deprive it of its (...); and the like change I have sometimes made in
some other liquors also. But I must not insist on such matters, having
mentioned them but only to awaken men's curiosity and circumspection, and not to
build much upon them, which will be easily credited, if it be remembered, that a
little above I my self sufficiently intimated, that this Conjecture supposes
something about the Theory of Cold, which is not yet sufficiently cleared.
Only, because the former Experiments show, That the various Agitation of the
minute parts of a Liquor, whereon its Fluidity depends, may be hindered or
suppressed by the intervention of adventitious (...): But do not clearly show,
That the Liquor by being deprived of that Kind of Agitation does actually
acquire a Coldness: I might subjoyn thus much, that by the Addition of a
certain substance (which for just reasons I must forbear to describe) that
would scarce sensibly refrigerate common Water; I can make a certain (and for
ought I know, one only) Liquor, that is wont to the touch to be much of the
Temper of Water, to conceive a considerable degree of Coldness: This, I say,
(as strange as it may seem) I might here subjoyn to countenance the
Conjectures, I have been delivering, and afford some new Corrolaries; but for
the Reason newly intimated I forbear, and the rather because I think it high
time to return thither, whence the Considerations, I have offered about
Weather-glasses, have made me digress.

I was going then to take notice, upon the Occasion offered by what I related
of the Influence of the Atmosphaeres gravity upon common Weather-glasses, of
the difference between them and those that are Hermetically sealed. And indeed,
these are in some things so much more convenient then the others, that (if I be
not mistaken) it has already proved somewhat serviceable to the Inquisitive,
that I have directed the making of the first of them, that have been blown in
England; At the Beginning indeed I had difficulty to bring men to believe,
there would be a rarefaction and condensation of a liquor Hermetically sealed
up, because of the School Doctrine touching the impossibility of a vacuum, and
especially, because I had never seen any Experiment of this kind, nor met with
any that had, but after some Trials, which my Conjectures led me to make
succesfully enough, that in Hermetically sealed Glasses, both Air and Water
might be alternately rarifi'd and condensed; I found my work much facilitated
by the sight of a small sealed Weather-glass, newly brought by an Ingenious
Traveller from Florence, where it seems some of the Eminent Virtuosi, that
enobled that fair City, had got the start of us in reducing sealed Glasses into
a convenient shape for Thermoscopes. But since that, the Invention has in
England by a dexterous hand, that uses to make them for me, been improved, and
the Glasses we now use are more conveniently shaped, and more Exact then the
Pattern, I caused the first to be made by. But the filling of these long ones
that we now use, is a work of more niceness and difficulty, then they that have
not tried will be apt to imagine, and therefore may elsewhere deserve either
from our Pen, or his, that is most versed in making them, a more particular
account of the way of Performing it: The advantages of these Weather-glasses
being at no hand inconsiderable. For, the weight or pressure of the Atmosphaere
(which, as we have noted, may work very much upon others,) their being sealed
defends them from: And by this Advantage they may be used in the highest and in
the deepest places, with as much certainty as any where else. Next, whereas in
other Thermometers the Liquor is very subject to be spilt, in case they be
removed from place to place, and which is worse, though they be not removed, is
subject to be preyed upon and wasted by the Air, whereby informations of such
Weather-glasses are rendered in Tract of time somewhat uncertain: In sealed
Weather-glasses, there is no danger, that Liquor should either spill or
evaporate, And upon the same Account, (...) have this Advantage, that you may
safely let them down into the Sea, and immerse them in any Liquor, you please,
without excepting the most corrosive to examine their Coldness: Not to mention,
that instead of the courser Liquors used in common Weather-glasses, which are
some of them not unapt to freez, and others unapt enough to comply with the
slighter alterations of the Air, and instead of the colorless Liquor, whether
water or no (I know not) used in the Florentine Weatherglass I saw, We employ
highly rectified spirit of Wine, whose being brought to a lovely red with
Cochinele, opened by the most subtle volatile spirit of Urine, by which means
the included Liquor is not only very conspicuous and secured from freezing, but
so susceptible of even the slighter impressions of external Bodies (which would
work but faintly on water) that it is pleasant to see, how many Inches a mild
degree of heat will make the Tincture ascend in the very slender Cylindrical
stem of one of these useful Instruments; of which we have spoken the more
particularly in this place, because we shall have frequent occasions to mention
them in the following Papers; and no body as yet, that we know, has written any
Account of them.

But though these Weather-glasses be much more to be relied on, then those that
are commonly in use, yet we would have a Philosopher look upon both these and
our Sensories, but as Instruments to be employed by his Reason, when he makes
his Estimates of the Coldness of Bodies: And though perhaps it will signify
nothing in the Event, yet I see not, why it should misbecome a Naturalists
Diligence and circumspection to try, whether even such weather-glasses ought to
be so far allowed of, as to hinder men from looking after any other kind of
ways of estimating Cold.

For, though the sealing of these Weather-glasses protect the included Liquor
from the pressure of the Air, and keep it from evaporating, yet it will not
follow from hence, that they must be exempt from all the other imperfections,
which we formerly mentioned to be imputable to Weather-glasses.

I know not whether you will allow me to add on this occasion, that the tincted
spirit of Wine (and the like may (for ought we know) be said of any such
Liquor) being a particular mixture, in case it be allowed possible, that the
subtle steams of such Bodies (as we formerly noted to be frigorifick in
respect to some Liquors) may insinuate themselves through the pores of Glass;
as it is granted, that the Effluviums of the Loadstone do readily per-meat It:
in this Case, I say, though I willingly allow it not to be likely, yet it is
not absolutely impossible, that some Steams, that wander through the Air, may
be more or less Cold, or may more promote or hinder an agitation among the
minute parts in reference to It, then in reference to other Liquors: as we
formerly noted, that a grain or two of Opium will exceedingly allay the warmth
and motion of the whole mass of Blood in a man's Body, though ten times that
Quantity will not sensibly refrigerate the tenth part of so much water. And
that this may appear the less extravagant, I shall here add some mention of an
odd Phenomenon, that, as it were, by some Fate has occurred to me, since I
began the Discourse I am now upon; for whilst I was yesterday writing It, I
had occasion to Examine by such a Sealed Weather-glass (as I have been speaking
of) the Temper of a certain strange kind of mixture, that toward the close of
this Treatise, I shall have Occasion to take special Notice of: and though to
the touch it appeared but Lukewarm, yet having put into it the Ball, and part
of the stem of the sealed Weather-glass, I found the Included Liquor slowly
enough impelled up so high, that at length, to my wonder, it rose eight or nine
Inches in a Stem, which was not much above a foot long; but that which I
relate, as the surprising Circumstance, is, that when I had taken out the
Thermoscope, and removed it again into a deep Glass full of Cold water, whence
I had just before taken it out, to put it into the Anomalous mixture, I had a
mind to examine; the Tincture in the Weather-glass did not (as it was wont, and
as any one would have expected) begin to subside again toward its former
station, but continued within about half an Inch or less of the very Top of the
Instrument, though neither my own busy Eyes, nor those of a person very well
Versed in making and using Thermoscopes, could perceive, that the expanded
Tincture was any where discontinued by any Air or Bubbles, which at first we
suspected might possibly (though it were very unlikely) have been generated by
the Tepor of the mixture. But that which continued our wonder, if not increased
it, was, that during four or five hours, that the Instrument continued in the
Cold water, and during some hours also, that it was exposed to the Air, the
Tincture did not subside above half an Inch; and which is yet more strange,
having left the Glass all night, in the window of a Room, where there was no
Chimney, I found in the morning, that its descent was scarce sensibly greater,
for it continued about eight Inches higher, then the mark it stood at, when I
first put it into the Lukewarm mixture, and how long it will yet retain this
strange expansion, is more then I can tell. But by this and what I may have
occasion hereafter to relate concerning this mixture, it may appear somewhat
the more reasonable to suspect, that even sealed Weatherglasses furnished with
high rectified spirit of Wine, may in some (though very rare) conjunctures of
Circumstances, and from some peculiar Agents, either by their insinuating
themselves through the Pores of the Glass, or on some other Account, receive
impressions, that, as far as can easily be discerned, are not purely the
genuine and wonted Operations of Heat and Cold.

The Chemist Orthelius tells us, that Theatr. Chynic. volum. 6.
the Liquor distilled from the Oar of Magnesia or Bismute (which seems to be
the same Mineral, that we in English call Tin-glass) will swell in the Glass
it is kept in, not only manifestly, but very considerably at the full Moon; and
shrink at the new Moon; and if all my endeavors to procure that Oar had not
proved fruitless, I should be able by my own Experience to disprove or confirm
so admirable a Phenomenon; but being as yet unfurnished to make the Trial my
self, lest it might appear a Vanity, so much as to mention (without rejecting
it) a thing so very unlikely: I shall add, that since I find the Thing for the
main, which was delivered by the Chemist, employed as an Argument by a Vitrum
optime clausum ne quid exspir are posset, in loco ubi quiesceret statui, (...)
sine animi voluptate lice bat in Pleniluniis manifesta inclusi liquoris
incrementa observare, in Noviluniis vero Decrementa, etc. They are the words of
Paulus Casatus in his Terra Machinis mota, Page 143. But since the writing of
these Praeliminary Discourses, the Author of them having consulted by the means
of some Ingenious friends, the learned Casatus, finds, that He never made nor
saw the Experiment himself, but relates it upon the authority of a certain
Dutchman, whose name he adds not, and who therefore may probably be the same
Orthelius that is mentioned by the Author of these Praeliminary Discourses, who
thinks it requisite to give the Reader this Advertisement, because Casatus
himself did not, as he should have done, intimate that he de iver'd this but
upon another credit.
famous Mathematician (the Jesuit Casatus) whose expressions are such, as if
he himself had observed, that even in stopped Glasses, the forementioned Mineral
spirit increased very sensibly in Bulk about the time of the full Moon, which
wonder being admitted, may not only countenance what we were saying, but hint
some other very strange things in Nature. This brings into my mind (what I have
elsewhere mentioned) that a Tincture of Amber, I had made with high rectified
spirit of Wine, did for many Months in a well stopped Glass discover it self to
be affected with certain changes, which were thought to proceed from some
secret mutations of the Air, that did sensibly so work, as I had not observed
it to do upon other Liquors, wherein the spirit of Wine abounded. And perhaps
upon long and diligent observation, one might find a Disparity betwixt
Weather-glasses kept in the same place, but furnished with differing Liquors, a
Disparity, I say, that could not be so well ascribed to any thing as to the
peculiar Nature of the Respective Liquors, which, though of diverse kinds, may
(to add that toward the facilitation of Trials) be made of a very conspicuous
color, by the self-same Metal, Copper, which not only gives the Known color
in Aqua fortis, but affords a fair solution in Aqua Regis, and it makes a
Liquor of a most deep and lovely blew in spirit of Urine, or of Sal Armoniack,
and the like; nay, I have found, that in good Chemical Oil of Turpentine (for
expressed oils are too easily congealed) the bare filings of it will yield a
sufficient Tincture. But because it is yet but a bare suspicion, that Sealed
Weatherglasses made of differing Liquors, but in other points alike may be
otherwise then uniformly affected by the Temperature of the External Air; I
shall now add an observation already made, to show, that even the Sealed
Weather-glasses furnished with spirit of Wine are not so perfectly secluded
from all commerce with external Bodies, and liableness to their operations, but
that they may be wrought upon otherwise then we think. For I have more then
once observed, that even in sealed Thermoscopes (made purposely at home for me,
and with great care by the expertest maker of Them) after a good while, and
when no such matter was expected, there have emerg'd Bubbles, which, whether
they proceeded from some undiscernable Particles of Air, harbored in the Pores
of the Water, which in process of time, by their Union came to make conspicuous
Bubbles, or from some disposed particles of the spirit of Wine it self by
successive alterations brought to a state of Elasticity, I now examine not; but
only affirm, that sometimes I have had of these Bubbles great enough to possess
the space of many Inches in the shank of a long sealed Weather-glass, and I
have been troubled with them in more Weather-glasses then one or two: which I
therefore take Notice of, not only, because it serves to prove what I was
saying, but because it is very fit, an Advertisement should be given of it to
prevent mistakes. For when these Bubbles are small, and are generated or happen
to stay at or about the Place, where the Sphaerical and Cylindrical parts of
the Glass meet, they may easily (as I have observed) lurk unheeded, and
reaching from side to side, so divide the spirit of Wine in the Ball from That
in the Stem, that the latter shall not be able (...) rise and fall according to
the changes of the weather; the Bubble notwithstanding its aerial nature, being
more indisposed to be moved up and down in the slender Stem of a small
Weather-glass, then the spirit of Wine it self, as we have elsewhere shown,
that when Air is not forced, a Bubble of it will not in several cases so
readily pass through a very narrow passage, as would that grosser fluid, Water.

But all these difficulties (not to call them extravagances) which I have been
mentioning about sealed Weather-glasses, I represent not to show, that it is
(at least as yet) worth while to suspect ours so far, as to employ all the
Diligence and Inventions, that were (...) to prevent or silence the suspicions
of a Sceptick, or that might be thought upon, in case the matter did require or
deserve such extraordinary Nicety, but only to give men a rise to consider,
whether it would be amiss to take in (when Occasion presents it self) as many
collateral Experiments and Observations as conveniently we can, to be made use
of as well as our Sensories and Weather-glasses in the Dijudications of Cold.
And perhaps an Attentive Enquiry purposely made, would discover to us several
other Bodies, Natural or Factitious, which we might make some use of in
estimating the degrees of Cold. For though (to give an instance) (...) be
thought the Liquor, that is most susceptible of such an Intensity of Cold, as
will destroy or suspend its Fluidity, yet not here to repeat, what we formerly
delivered of the easy congealableness of Oil of Aniseeds, we have (as we
elsewhere note to another purpose) distilled a substance from Benzoin, which
becomes of a fluid, a consistent Body, and may be reduced to the state of
fluidity again by very much lesser alterations of the Ambient Air, as to Heat
and Cold, then would have produced Ice or Thawed it. I could also here take
notice of, what I have sometimes observed in Amber-greese, dissolved in high
rectified spirit of Wine, or in other Sulphurous or Resinous concretions
dissolved in the same Liquor; for now and then, though it seemed a mere Liquor
in warm Weather, it would in Cold weather let go part of what it swallowed up,
and afterward redissolve it upon the return of warm weather; some of these
concretions, as I have seen in Excellent Amber-greese, shooting into fine
figured masses, others being more rudely congealed. And I might also add, what
I have observed in Chemical Liquors, (not unskilfully prepared out of Urine,
Hartshorn, etc.) which would sometimes seem to be totally clear Spirits, and
at other times would suffer a greater or lesser proportion of Salt to
Chrystallize at the Bottom, according to the Mutations of the Weather, in point
of Cold and Heat. Such kind of instances (I say) I could mention, but I shall
rather choose to prosecute my Examples in that obviousest of Liquors, Water, and
add, that even That may afford us other Testimonies of the increased or
lessened cold of the Air, then that which it gives us in Common
Weather-glasses. For in some parts of France the Watermen observe, that the
Rivers will L' Hydrographie du P. Fournier, live. 18. Cap. 12.
bear Boats heavier laden in Winter, then in Summer; and I have upon inquiry
been credibly informed, that Seamen have observed their ships to draw less
water upon the Coasts of frozen Regions (where yet the Sea is wont to be less
brackish) then they do on our British Seas: which argues, that water is thicker
and heavier in Winter then in Summer. Nay, I shall add, that not only in
differing Seasons of the Year, but even at several times of the same day I have
often observed the Coldness of the Air to be (regularly enough) so much greater
at one time of the day then at another, that a Glass bubble Hermetically sealed
and poised so as to be exactly of the same weight with its equal Bulk of Water,
as that Liquor was constituted at one time of the Day, would about Noon, when
the warmth, that the Summers Sun produced in the Air, had somewhat rarifi'd the
water, and thereby made it bulk for bulk somewhat lighter then before, the
Bubble would sink to the Bottom of the water, which (for the better marking the
Experiment) I kept in a GlassTube; but when at night the coolness of the Air
had recondens'd the water, and thereby made it heavier, it began by little and
little to buoy up the Bubble, which usually by morning regained the Top of the
Water; and at other times of the day it not unfrequently happened, that the
Bubble continued swimming up and down betwixt the Top and the Bottom, without
reaching either of them, sometimes staying so long in the same part of the
Tube, that it much surpised diverse of the Virtuosi themselves, who thought the
poising of a weight so nicely, not only a very great difficulty (as indeed it
is) but an insuperable one. But of this Experiment I elsewhere say more; and
because about other Weather-glasses I have said so much already, I think it may
not be improper to Sum up my thoughts concerning the Criteria of Cold, by
representing the following particulars.

1. That by reason of the various and unheeded predispositions of our Bodies,
the single and immediate informations of our senses are not always to be
trusted.

2. That though Common Weather-glasses are useful Instruments, and the
informations they give us are in most cases preferrable to those of our sense
of touching, in regard of their not being so subject to unheeded mutations: yet
even these Instruments being subject to be wrought upon by the differing
weights of the Atmosphaere, as well as by Heat and Cold, may (upon that, and
perhaps some other accounts) easily mis-inform us in several cases, unless in
such Cases we observe by other Instruments the present weight of the
Atmosphaere.

3. That the sealed Weather-glasses, we have been mentioning, are so far
preferrable to the Common ones, as (especially they not being obnoxious to the
various pressure of the external Air) that there seems no need in most cases to
decline their reports, or postpose Them to those of any other Instruments: But
yet in some nice Cases it may be prudent (where it may conveniently be done) to
make use also of other ways of examining the Coldness of Bodies, that the
concurrence or variance to be met with in such ways of Examination, may either
confirm the Testimony of the Weather-glass, or excite or assist us to a further
and severer inquiry.

4. That I would not have Men too easily deterred from devising and trying
various Experiments (if otherwise not unlikely or irrational) about the
estimating of Cold, by their appearing disagreeable to the vulgar Notions about
that Quality. For I doubt, our Theory of Cold is not only very imperfect, but,
in great part ill grounded. And I should never have ventured at trying to make
sealed Weather-glasses, if I could have been withheld either by the grand
Peripatetick Opinion, that (to shun a void) water must remain suspended in
Glasses, where if it fall, the Air cannot succeed it; or the general opinion
even of Philosophers as well new as old, That Air must be far easier then any
visible Liquor condensed by Cold.

The III. Discourse, Containing The II. Paradox, Viz. Touching the Cause of the
Condensation of Air, and Ascent of Water by Cold in Common Weather-glasses.
THough I thought here to end the Praeliminary Discourse, as doubting it may be
thought prolix enough already, yet for confirmation of what I was lately
noting, about the incompleteness of the Theory of Cold (and because the
evincement thereof may give rise to many Trials that may enrich the History of
Cold) I will here subjoyn a Discourse formerly written on another Occasion. For
though upon that Account I am fain to leave out the beginning of It, as not
suited to the present Occasion, yet the main Body of the Discourse may be (I
think not improperly) annexed to what has been already said about
Weather-glasses, since it examines the causes of the principal Phenomenon of
them, and will perhaps help to discover the incompleteness of men's Notions
about Cold, by showing that the true cause, even of the most obvious
Phenomenon of Common Weather-glasses (though almost every man thinks he
understands It) has not yet been sufficiently inquired into.

The discourse then (that first part of It as foreign to our present purpose)
being omitted, is as follows.

-- To prosecute our Disquisition satisfactorily, it will concern us to
consider, upon what Account the water rises in Cold Weather and falls in Hot,
in common Weather-glasses, whose Construction being so well known, that we need
not spend time to set it down, we may forthwith proceed to take notice, That
concerning the reason, why in these Weather-glasses the water, or other Liquor
in the shank or pipe, ascends with Cold, and descends with Heat: there are
three opinions, that will deserve our Consideration.

The first is the common opinion of the Schools and Peripateticks, and indeed
of the generality of learned Men of differing Sects, who teach, that the Cold
of the External Air, contracting the Air included in the Weather-glass, and
thereby reducing it into a narrower Room then formerly it possessed, the water
must necessarily ascend to fill the place deserted by the retired Air, lest
that space should become a vacuum, which Nature abhors.

But against this Explication we have several things to object.

For first, I am not satisfied, that any of the Schoolmen or Peripateticks (at
least of those I have met with) have solidly evinced that Nature cannot be
brought to admit a vacuum. Nor do I much exspect to see that assertion well
proved, by these, or by any other, that forbear to make use of the Argument of
the Cartesians drawn from the Nature of a Body, whose very essence they place
in its having extension: which I say, because about this Argument I neither
have yet published, nor do now intend to deliver my thoughts.

Next, it seems a way of Explicating, that little becomes a Naturalist, to
attribute to the senseless and inanimate Body of water an Aim at the good of
the Universe, strong enough to make it act, as if it were a free Agent contrary
to the tendency of its own private Nature to prevent a Vacuum, that, as is
presumed, would be hurtful to the Universe.

But these Arguments we have elsewhere urged, and therefore need not insist
longer on them here.

Thirdly, if you take a Bolthead, with a large Ball and long stem; and do, with
that and Quicksilver make the Torricellian Experiment, there will be an
Instrument prepared like a Common Weather-glass, save that the stem is longer,
and that the Liquor is Mercury instead of Water, and yet in this case we see
not, that the Mercury, which remains pendulous in the pipe at the height of
about 30. Inches, offers to ascend into the cavity of the Bolthead, to fill up
the space, whence the Air was expelled by the Mercury, and which the
Quicksilver also by its subsiding deserted. And the outward application of Cold
Bodies to the (...) part of the head will not perhaps Occasion the rising of
the Quicksilver a of an Inch, is half so much, though the like degree of Cold
would make the water ascend in a Vulgar Thermometer, though shorter, to the
height of several Inches. But this Argument I also on another Occasion further
display and vindicare.

Wherefore I shall add one more, taken from the Consideration of these sealed
Weather-glasses, that are described in this (...) History of Cold. For, in
these the Air does not shrink, but rather seems to be expanded, when the
weather grows Colder. If it be said, that water being contracted by the Cold,
the Air follows it to prevent a Vacuum: I answer, that those, that say this,
should explain, why, whereas in Common Weather-glasses the water ascends to
follow the Air, in these the Air must descend to follow the water: And why,
since to avoid a Vacuum the one in common Weather-glasses, and the other in
sealed ones resists contraction, Nature does not rather make the Air in Common
Thermometers, retain the extension, they conceive due to its nature, then put
her self to the double Labor of suffering the Air to be preternaturally
condensed, and compelling the water to ascend contrary to its nature. But these
Arguments I will not urge so much, as this other, that in our present case, the
above proposed Answer will by no means salve the difficulty. For if the water
be really condensed into less, and the Air expanded into more space then they
respectively possessed before; I see not, how a Vacuum or a worse Inconvenience
will be avoided; for I demand, since Glass is granted to be impervious to Air
and water (as indeed else Nature would not need to make water ascend contrary
to its own tendency in a Common Weather-glass) what becomes of the Body, that
was harbored in the space deserted by the water upon its Condensation? Which
Question, those that do not say, any thing escaped away through the Glass, or
that any thing was annihilated, will not easily answer. But this is not all,
for I further demand, when the Air expands it self to follow the water, how by
that expansion of the Air, a Vacuum both coacervatum (as the old Epicureans
spoke) and interspersum, is avoided. For the aerial Corpuscles cannot advance
into this space deserted by the water, without leaving either in whole or in
part the spaces they filled before, so that by this remove an aerial Corpuscle
only changes place, but does not adequately fill any more place then it did
before. But if it be said, that the same Air without any substantial Accession,
may adequately fill more space at one time then at another: If this, I say, be
pretended, I shall not urge that it appears not, why it were not more easy for
Nature in common Weather-glasses, as well as in sealed ones, to rarifie the
Air, which they reach to be so very easily rarifi'd and condensed, then to make
the heavy Body of water to ascend. For I may very well reply, that I scarce
know any Opinion in Natural Philosophy, that to me seems more unintelligible,
and more worthy to be confidently rejected, then This harsh Hypothesis of
Rarefaction. Of which I should think it injurious to so judicious a
Philosopher, as my Lord Brouncher, to endeavor here to manifest the absurdity,
Defense against Linus Cap. 3.
though I had not in another place shown it already.

The next Opinion, we are to consider touching the cause of the ascension of
Water by cold in Weatherglasses, is that of Mr. (...), who, in the last Chapter
of his Book de Corpore, Sect. the 12. having premised a delineation of a common
Weatherglass, subjoyns this Explication:

In the sixth and seventh Articles of the 27. Chap. (where I consider the cause
of Cold) I have shown, that fluid Bodies are made colder by the pressure of the
Air, that is to say, by a constant wind that presses them. For the same cause
it is, that the superficies of the water is pressed at F, and having no place,
to which it may retire from this pressure, besides the Cavity of the Cylinder
between H and E, it is therefore necessarily forced thither by the Cold, and
consequently it ascends more or less according as the Cold is more or less
increased. And again, as the Heat is more intense, or the Cold more remiss, the
same water will be depressed more or less by its own gravity, that is to say,
by the cause of gravity above explicated.

But however the Author of this Explication, to prepare us to receive it, tell
us, that however the above mentioned Phenomenon be certainly known to be true
by experience, the cause nevertheless has not yet been discovered: yet I
confess, I think, this newly recited assertion might as well have been placed
after his explication, as just before it.

For first, whereas he remits us to the sixth and seventh Articles of the 27.
Chapter (for the reference is misprinted) as containing the grounds of this
Explication, I must profess my self far from being satisfied with the general
Theory of Cold delivered in that Chapter, as being partly precarious, partly
insufficient, and partly scarce intelligible, as I shall elsewhere have
Occasion to show: and as for what he particularly alleges in the sixth and
seventh Articles of a constant wind, that presses fluid Bodies, and makes them
Cold, besides that that is prooflesly affirmed, we shall anon have Occasion to
mention an Experiment, where water was not only much refrigerated, but turned
into Ice, though it were sealed up in Glass Vessels, and those suspended too in
other Glasses, wherein some of them had Air about them, and some others were
totally immersed in unfreezing Liquors, so that the water that was sealed up
was sufficiently protected from being raked by the wind, as Mr. Hob's conceit
of the Cause of freezing requires.

Secondly, I see no necessity, that the Cold should press up the superficies of
the Water into the shank of the Weather-glass, especially since it is manifest,
that the Water will rise with Cold in a Weather-glass kept in a still place,
and free from any sensible wind. Besides that, it should be proved, and not
barely affirmed, that an insensible Motion deserves the name of wind, and that
such a one is the cause of the refrigeration of water, and it should be also
shown, how this wind comes to be able to raise the water, and that to the
height of many Inches more in one part of the superficies then in another.
Besides all this, I say, we find by Experience, that Water powered into a
Bolthead, till it have filled the Ball, and reached a good way into the Stem,
will upon a powerful refrigeration, short of freezing (which is the case of
water in Weather-glasses, when the Air grows colder) manifestly shrink into a
narrower room, instead of being impelled up higher in the Pipe. And if in an
ordinary Weather-glass, with a long shank, you apply a mixture of Ice or Snow,
and Salt to the Bolthead, the water will readily ascend in the shank to the
height of diverse Inches, which how it will be explained by Mr. Hob's
Hypothesis, I do not well see.

Thirdly, I wonder he should tell us, that the reason why the pressed water
ascends into the shank of the Weather-glass, is, because it has no other place
into which it may retire from the pressure of the wind, since he, rejecting a
Vacuum, and affirming the world to be every where perfectly full, should not,
methinks, have so soon forgotten, that in the very Paragraph or Section
immediately preceding this, himself had told us, that he cannot imagine, how
the same place can be always full, and nevertheless Sect. 11. of the same 30.
Chap.
contain sometimes a greater, sometimes a less Quantity of matter; that is to
say, that it can be fuller then full. So that I see not, why the water should
find more room to entertain it, in the Cylindrical cavity of the Weatherglass
already adequately filled with Air, then otherwhere. And in the sealed
Weather-glasses, we have above been mentioning, and wherein the water descends
with Cold, 'twill be very hard for Mr. Hobs to make out the Phenomenon
according to his doctrine. Besides that his Explication gives us no account of
the Condensation of the Air by cold in such Weather-glasses, as those, wherein
the water descends with Cold and rises with Heat.

Fourthly and lastly, whereas Mr. Hobs takes notice of no other cause of the
(...) of water in Weather-glasses by Heat, but its own gravity, he seems to
have but slightly considered the matter. For though in some cases the gravity
of the water may suffice to depress it, yet in other cases that gravity alone,
will by no means serve the turn, but we must have recourse to the expansive
Motion or spring of the Air included in the Cavity of the Glass. For if you
place a Thermometer with a large Ball, wherein the water ascends but a little
way into the shank, in a window exposed to the warm Sun, you will often
perceive the surface of the water in the Pipe to be a good deal lower, then
that of the water on the outside of the Pipe, which shows, that this depression
proceeds not from the bare sinking of the water, but from its being thrust down
by the pressure of the incumbent Air; since the waters own weight, would make
the internal water fall but to a level with the surface of the external water,
and not so much beneath it. And for further proof, you may, by keeping such a
Weather-glass long enough in the hot Sun, bring the Air so far to expand it
self, as to drive the water out of the shank, and break through the external
water in diverse conspicuous Bubbles, after whose eruption the remaining Air
being again refrigerated by the removal of the Weatherglass into a cooler
place, the loss of that part of the Air, that escaped away in Bubbles, will
make the water ascend higher in the shank, then in the like degree of Cold, it
would formerly have been impelled. And thus much may suffice to show the
unsatisfactoriness of Mr. Hob's conceit.

The third and last opinion we shall mention, is, that of some ingenious modern
Naturalists, who acknowledging that the Air has a weight (which Mr. Hobs also
does in effect admit, though he make not so good use of it as they) do by that
explicate the ascension of water in Weatherglasses, teaching that the Cold of
the Ambient Air making the included Air shrink into far less room then it
possessed before, the water in the subjacent Vessel is, by the weight of the
incumbent Air, which presses on it more forcibly in all the other parts of its
surface, then it is pressed upon in that included in the shank, impelled up
into that part of the shank, which was newly deserted by the self-contracting
Air.

But though this Account be preferable by far to those which we mentioned
before it, and though it be not only ingenious, but, as far as it reaches,
true, yet to me I confess it seems not sufficient, and therefore I would supply
what is defective, by taking in the pressure, (and in some cases the spring) of
the external Air, not only against the surface of water (for That the newly
mentioned explication likewise does) but also against the internal or included
Air. For the recited Hypothesis gives indeed a rational account, why the water
is impelled into the place deserted by the Air; but then supposes, that the Air
is made to contract it self by cold alone, when it makes room for the water
that succeeds in its place, whereas I am apt to think, that both the effects
may proceed, at least in great part, from the same cause, and that the pressure
of the contiguous and neighboring Air, does according to my Conjecture
eminently concur to reduce the cooled Air, shut up in the Weather-glass, into a
narrower space. This it does in common Weather-glasses, because the Ambient Air
retains the whole pressure, it has upon the Account of its weight, whereas the
internal Air by its refrigeration, even when but equal to that of the External
Air, looses part of the pressure, it had upon the account of its now weakened
spring.

But this, as I newly intimated, is not the sole account, upon which the Air
may in some sorts of Weatherglasses impel up the water, and contribute to the
condensation of the Air incumbent on the water. For in some circumstances (one
or two of which we shall produce by and by) it may so happen, that the rest of
the Air, that bears upon the water to be raised, will not be so much
refrigerated, as the included Air, that is to be condensed, and consequently
the other Air will have a stronger spring, then this last mentioned Air will
retain, and therefore the former will have a greater pressure, then the latter
will be able to resist.

We shall not now examine, whether the spring of the Air depend upon the
springy structure of each aerial Corpuscle, as the spring of wool does upon the
Texture of the particular hairs it consists of, or upon the agitation of some
interfluent subtle matter, that in its passage through the aerial particles
whirles each of them about, or upon both these causes together, or upon some
other differing from either of them; but this seems probable enough, that as,
when Air, being sealed up in a Glass, is afterward well heated, though it
acquire not any greater dimensions, as to sense, then it had before, yet it has
its spring much increased by the Heat, as may appear, if the sealed Tip be
broken under water, by the eruption of Bubbles by the endeavor of the
imprisoned Air to expand it self; so upon the refrigeration of the Air, so
sealed up, though the additional spring (if I may so speak) which the Heat gave
it, will be lost upon the recess of that Heat, or as soon as the effect of that
heat is distroy'd, yet there will remain in the included Air a considerable
spring, and sufficient to make it as well fill (at least as to sense) the
cavity of the sealed Glass, as it did, when its spring was stronger. And
proportionably we may conceive, that though Cold, at least such as we meet with
in this climate of ours, do make the spring of an included parcel of Air
weaker, then it was before the refrigeration of that Air, yet it may not make
it so much weaker, but that the aerial Corpuscles may be kept so far extended
as not at all (or, scarce sensibly) to quit the room they possessed before, in
case there be not contiguous to them any other Body, which by its pressure
endeavors to thrust them inwards, and so make them desert part of that space:
which clause I therefore add, because, that if the case proposed do happen,
it is obvious to conceive, that the weakened spring of the Air cannot retain so
much force to resist an external pressure, as it would have, if the Cold had
not debilitated it, and consequently this cooled Air must yield and suffer it
self to be condensed, if it come to be exposed to a pressure, to which it was
but equal before its being weakened. And such in common Weather-glasses is the
pressure, that is constantly upon the surface of the water without the Pipe,
upon the account of the gravity of as much of the Air or Atmosphaere, as comes
to bear upon it.

Having thus explained our conjecture, we will now proceed to the Experiments
we made to countenance it, as we find them entered in our loose notes.

In one of which I find what follows.

We took a Viol capable of containing five or six ounces of water, and having
filled it almost half full with that Liquor, we inverted into it a Glass-pipe
of about 10. Inches long, and much bigger then a large Swans Quill, sealed at
one end, and at the other filled top full with water, so that the open Orifice
being immersed under the Vessell'd water (of the Viol) there remained no Air at
the Top of the Pipe: Then, as much of the Orifice of the Viols neck, as was not
filled by the pipe, being carefully closed with Cement, that no Air could get
in or out, the Viol was placed in snow and salt, till the vessell'd water began
to freez at the Top and Bottom: And according to our expectation we found, that
notwithstanding this great degree of infrigeration of the Air in the Viol, the
water in the Pipe did not at all descend. So that either the Air did not shrink
by so great a Cold, or the water, whether to avoid a vacuum, or otherwise, did
not remove out of the Pipe to possess the place deserted by the refrigerated
Air.

Afterward we endeavored to repeat the Experiment with the same Glasses, but
having had occasion to be absent a little too long (though not very long) we
found at our return the upper and sealed part of the pipe beaten out, which we
supposed to have been done by the intumescence of the water in the Viol upon
its glaciation.

Wherefore we fastened into the same Viol another Pipe some Inches longer then
the former, and drawn very slender at the sealed end, that it might easily be
broken there, and having set the viol to freez as before, without finding the
water to descend in the Pipe, we did with a forceps break off the slender
sealed end, that the outward Air might come to press upon the suspended water,
and, by it, upon the cooled Air in the viol, whereupon, as we expected, the
water was swiftly depressed, by our estimate, eight or ten Inches, but not so
low by a pretty deal, as the surface of the water in the viol.

After this, by rarifying the Air in the Viol, and by blowing into it through
the pipe, the water was raised within about half an Inch of the Top of the
Pipe, whose slender end being sealed, the viol was again placed in snow and
salt, but the spring of the Air at the Top, which was rarifi'd before, was by
refrigeration so weakened, that it was unable sensibly to depress the water;
wherefore breaking off the Apex, as before, the upper Air immediately drove it
down diverse Inches.

Our last Trial therefore, was to leave in the same Pipe about 3 Inches of Air
rarifi'd, as little as we could, and placing the viol in salt and snow, as
before, we observed, that the Air in the Pipe did, upon the refrigeration of
the Air in the viol, expand it self very little, though the water in the Viol
were in part turned into Ice; but upon breaking off the slender sealed end, the
outward Air presently depressed the water above two Inches beneath the last
level, and by removing the Glass into a warmer room, we found, that the water
ascended a pretty deal above an Inch higher, then the same uppermost level,
whereby we probably concluded our Weather-glass to be stanch.

Thus much I find together in one place among my promiscuos collections: but
after this coming to have the convenience of Glasses so shaped as to be easily
sealed, I judged it fit to make use of some of them to keep even the most
suspicious from objecting, that I should also have made some Trials with
Glasses, which being Hermetically sealed, would be sure most accurately to
hinder all immediate Intercourse betwixt the internal and external Air. And I
remember, that once we took a Glass, like the Bolthead of a common
Weather-glass, save that the small End was drawn very slender, for the more
easy breaking of the Apex: And into this Glass a convenient Quantity of water
was powered, and then the Glass being sealed up at the sharp end and inverted,
the water fell down to that end, and possessed its due space in the Pipe: Then
the round end of the Glass, having a mixture of snow and salt applied, about
it, though the internal air must needs have been thereby much refrigerated (as
will be readily granted, and may be gathered from diverse of the Experiments
mentioned in these papers) yet we observed not the water manifestly to rise.
And though an attentive Eye should in such a Trial discern some sensible
intumescence in the water; yet that may well enough proceed from some little
expansion of the Aerial particles, which we have elsewhere shown to be usually
latitant in Common water, upon the diminution of the pressure of the Air above
the water, caused by weakening that air's spring by the Cold. But when we had,
to complete the Experiment, broken the slender end of the Glass under water,
the included air, becoming then contiguous to water, that had obtained
immediate Intercourse with that water, whose surface was every where pressed by a
pillar of the External air that leaned upon it, the water was by the gravity of
that outward air hastily impelled into the Cavity of the Pipe (the spring of
whose air was, as we said, weakened by the Cold) to the height, if I misremember
not, of several Inches.

Another sort of Trials I remember we made after the following manner. We took
Glass Bubbles (blown with a Lamp) some of about the bigness of a Nutmeg, and
some much greater; each of these Bubbles we furnished with a very slender stem
(often no bigger then a Ravens Quill) which was usually diverse, and sometimes
many Inches long. Into this stem a drop or two of water being conveyed, might
easily enough, by reason of the Lightness of so little Liquor, together with
the slenderness See more concerning these Weather-glasses in the first of these
three Discourses.
of the Cavity (which permitted not the included air to penetrate the water at
the sides, but rather impel up the entire Body of it) be kept suspended, and so
betray very small changes, (and much smaller then to be taken notice of by
common Weather glasses) as to rarefaction and condensation in the air it leaned
upon. Now when in one of these Instruments, if watching when the pendulous
water was somewhat near the Top of the stem, we nimbly applied to the Orifice
of that stem the flame of a Candle, we could by that Heat almost in a moment
seal it up, by reason of the thinness of the Glass, and the slenderness of the
stem. And if then we placed the thus sealed Glass in a mixture of snow and
salt, how much soever the air within the cavity of the Ball must be, in all
probability, refrigerated by this operation, yet it would scarce sensibly, and
not at all considerably shrink, as we gathered from the pendulous waters
remaining in the same place, or its falling at most but inconsiderably lower.
But if then, with a pair of Scissars or otherwise, we dexterously broke off the
sealed end of the stem, and thereby exposed the internal refrigerated, to the
pressure of the external air, the water immediately would be hastily thrust
down, sometimes diverse Inches below its former station, and sometimes quite
into the cavity of the round end of the Glass. To which we shall add, that not
only, when these Thermometers were sealed, neither the usual degrees of Cold,
nor those of the Heat in the Ambient Air would at all considerably depress or
raise the pendulous water, which if the Glass were not sealed, would, as we
formerly noted, show it self wonderfully sensible of the mutations of the Air
as to those two Qualities: But we sometimes purposely tried, that though upon
the refrigeration of the sormerly rarefied air in the Glass, the pendulous
water were descending fast enough, yet if even then we nimbly sealed up the
open Orifice of the stem (which may easily be done in a trice) the descent of
the water would be presently stopped, and it would stay either just in, or very
near the same part of the shank, wherein it chanced to be, when by sealing of
the Glass it came to be fenced from the pressure of the Atmosphaere, and in
that place it would continue till the sealed end were broken off. For then in
case the ambient air were as cool as it was, when the Glass was sealed, the
water would for the reason already given be further deprest, according as the
weakened spring of the inward rarifi'd air was more or less remote from an
equality to the pressure of the ambient air.

Besides, for further Trial, we took a large Glass-egg with a long stem, which
stem was purposely so bent, that it represented a glass-Syphon, in whose
shorter leg the glass was drawn very small, that it might be the more easily
first sealed, and then broken.

This done, we got in a convenient Quantity of water, which ascended to a
pretty height in both the legs of the bent glass, after which the shorter leg
being nimbly sealed, after the manner hereafter to be mentioned, there remained
a pretty Quantity of air above the water in that shorter leg, which was
purposely left there, that it might by its spring impel up the water in the
longer leg upon the refrigeration of the Air included in See th(...)gure(...)
rest (...)
that longer leg. All this being done, the whole glass was so placed in a
convenient frame, that the oval part of it was supported by the frame, beneath
which the bended shank of the Weather-glass did hang so, that a mixture of Ice
and Salt might be conveniently laid upon this frame to surround and refrigerate
the air included in the Egg, without much cooling the air in the Cylindrical
part of the Glass. The account that I find of this Trial in one of my notes, is
this.

In the greater bent Egg, that was sealed up with water, in both legs, upon the
application of Ice and Salt to the Ellipsis at a convenient time, the water in
the longer leg ascended a little, but not by our guess above a barley Corns
length, if near so much, and about four Inches of air (as I remember) that were
left in the shorter leg, expanded it self (to sense) as much; but, as soon as I
broke off the slender wire, wherein the shorter leg ended, the external air
rushing in, made the water rise about two inches and a quarter in the longer
leg, and then, there not being water enough, broke through it in many bubbles.

Thus far the note, to which I shall only add, that in this case the ascension
of the water in the longer leg cannot be attributed to the weight of the air in
the shorter leg, that being, I know not how much, too small to lift up so much
water, but to the spring of that air. And also that we need not marvel, the
Expansion of that (...) should be so small, since some of the Experiments,
(...) to be related, will show us, that the refrigeration of the air in such
Trials (as that newly (...)) does not weaken the spring of it any thing near so
considerably as one would expect. So that the air in the longer leg could yield
but a very little to that in the shorter leg, especially since the smallness of
this last named portion of air made its spring to be more easily and
considerably weakened by a small Expansion.

Thus far our Paradoxical Discourse, which contains diverse particulars, that,
being added to the considerations, whereunto we have (by way of Appendix)
subjoyned It, might afford us several Reflections: But having dwelt too long on
one subject already, we shall now conclude with This, upon the whole matter;

That there is somewhat or other in the Business of Weather-glasses, which (I
fear) we do not yet sufficiently understand, and which yet, I hope, that by
other Trials and more heedful Observations we shall discover.

The Paper that was prefixed (by way of a short Prefatory Address) to the
ensuing History of Cold, when being to be brought in, and presented to the
Royal Society, it was put into the hands of (its most worthy President) the
Lord Viscount Brounker, was as follows.
Little-Chelsey, Feb. 14. 1662. S. A. My Lord,
THe time Your Lordship and the Society appoint me for the bringing in of my
Papers, concerning Cold, is so very short, that to give You the fruits of my
Obedience as early as You are pleased to require them, I must present them You
very immature, and I should say very unsit for your Perusal, if you were not
as well qualified to supply Deficiencies and Imperfections as to discern them.
For of all the Old Observations, I made diverse years ago in order to the
History of Cold, I have not yet found enough to fill up one Sheet of Paper: And
as for those, I made the last Frosty season, besides that I was several times
diverted by Avocations distracting enough, the same sharpness of the weather,
which gave me the Opportunity of making some Experiments, brought me an
Indisposition, which by forbidding me to be (...), and stay long in the cold
Air, hindered me from making diverse others; and (which is worst of all) whilst
I was confined to a place where I wanted diverse Glasses, and other Instruments
I would have employed, the ways both by land and water, were so obstructed by
the snow and ice, that I could not seasonably procure them from London, and was
thereby reduced to leave several trials, I should have made, (...) there
unattempted, or unprosecuted. But lest You should think, that, what I intend
only to excuse my unaccurateness, is meant to excuse my Pains, I shall without
further Apology apply my self to do what the shortness of the time will allow
me, which is little more then to transcribe into this Historical Collection,
most of the Particulars, which Your Lordships Commands exact, though haste will
make me do it in the very words, for the most part, that I find them, in a kind
of Note-book, wherein I had thrown them for my own private use, which I the
less scruple now to do, not only because the haste, that exacts from me this
way of writing, may serve to excuse it in me, but that it may the better
appear, how little I had designed to (...) or bias them to any preconceiv'd
Hypothesis.

THE EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY OF COLD Begun.
Title I. Experiments touching Bodies capable of Freezing others.
TO go Methodically to work, we should perhaps begin with considering, what
subjects are capable, or not capable of harboring the Quality we are to treat
of; And to invite us to this, it seems probable enough, that among the Bodies,
we are conversant with here below, there is scarce any except Fire, that is
not, at some time or other, susceptible of actual Cold, (at least as to sense:)
And even concerning Fire (...), till that difficulty be clearly determined,
which we have elsewhere started; namely, whether Fire be not, as Wind (at least
like such as is made by Air blown out of a pair of Bellows) rather a state of
Matter, or Matter considered whilst it is in such a kind of Motion, then a
distinct and particular species of natural Bodies? there may remain some Doubt,
since we see, that Bodies, which may be either in a Moment, as Gunpowder, or
(as far as sense can judge) totally, as high rectified spirit of Wine, turned
into fire, may yet immediately before their Accension, be actually Cold: And as
to Gunpowder, presently after Accension, its scattered Parts caught in closed
Vessels, will also appear cold to the Touch. But such things nevertheless we
must not now insist on, partly because it requires the resolving of a somewhat
difficult Question, which more properly belongs to the Considerations about
Heat, where we have already handled it; partly because our Design in the
following Collections, was not so much to gather and set down Observations,
that were obvious to any that was furnished with a Mediocrity of Attention, as
Experiments purposely made in order to the History of Cold; and partly too,
because in this Collection, though we do, as occasion serves, take notice of
some Experiments and Phenomenon, that relate to Cold in General, or
indefinitely; yet our chief work has been to find out, and deliver, the
Phenomenon of Congelation, or of that intense Degree of Cold, which either does
freez the Bodies it works upon, or at least were capable of turning common
water fitly exposed to it, into Ice. And this may serve for a general
Advertisement about the ensuing Papers; and consequently having premised it, we
shall without any further Preamble proceed to the setting down such things, as
we have tried and observed concerning those Matters: beginning with those that
belong to the Title prefixed to the first Part, or Section, of our History.

1. The Bodies that are cold enough to freez others, are in this climate of
ours but very few, and among the most remarkable, is a Mixture of Snow and
Salt, which though little known, and less used here in England, is in Italy and
some other Regions much employed, especially to cool Drinks and Fruits, which
men may easily do, by burying, in this mixture, Glasses, or other convenient
vessels, filled either solely with Wine, or other Drinks, or else with water,
that has immersed in it the fruits to be refrigerated.

2. The Circumstances we are wont to observe in making and employing this
mixture, we shall hereafter in due place deliver, and therefore here we shall
only take notice, that we could not find upon some trials, that such Glasses
filled with water, as would be frozen easily enough by this mixture of Snow and
Salt, would be in like manner frozen, in case we employed Snow alone, without
mingling any Salt with it. I deny not, that it is very possible, that in very
cold Countries, as well Snow as beaten Ice may freez water powered into the
Intervals of its Parts. But there is great odds betwixt water so intermingled
with Ice or Snow, and only surrounded with it in a vessel where the water is,
as it were, in one entire Body, and of a comparatively considerable thickness:
And there is also a great Difference betwixt the degrees of coldness in (...)
Air of Frigid Regions, and of England. And perhaps too there may be some
Disparity betwixt the Degrees of Coldness of Ice and Snow in those Climates,
and in ours. And we must have a care, that in case a Vial full of water buried
all night should freez, we ascribe not the Effect to the bare Operation of the
Snow, which may be (entirely, or in great Part) due to the coldness of the Air,
which would perhaps have performed the Effect without the Snow.

3. But though Snow and Salt mixed together will freez water better then Snow
alone, yet we must not think, that there is any such peculiar virtue in
Sea Salt, to enable Snow to freez, but that there are diverse other Salts, each
of which concurring with Snow, is capable of producing the like Effect. For we
found upon trial, that we could freez water without the help of Sea salt, by
substituting in its place, either Nitre, or Alume, or Vitriol, or Sal
Armoniack, or even Sugar; for either of those being mingled with a due
proportion of Snow, would serve the turn, though they did not seem equally to
advance the congealing power of the Snow; nor scarce any of them did do it so
well as Sea salt. But of this elsewhere more.

4. When we had made the newly mentioned trials, some particular conjectures we
have long had, about the nature of Salts, invited us to try, whether,
uotwithstanding the comminution and consequent change produced in Salts by
Distillation, the Saline Corpuscles, that abound in the distilled liquors of
those concretes, as well as in their solutions, would not likewise, by being
mixed with it, enable Snow to freez water, at least in small and slender
Glasses? This we first went about to try with good spirit of Salt, but we
found, as we feared, that though it made a sufficiently quick dissolution of
the Snow it wrought upon, yet its fluidity hindered it from being retained long
enough by the Snow, to the bottom of which it would fall, before they had
stayed so long together, as was requisite to freez so much as a little
Essence-bottle full of common water.

5. Wherefore we bethought our selves of an expedient, whereby to try the
operation, not only of those spirits, but of diverse other bodies, which were
unapt for a Due commixture of Snow after the way newly mentioned; or of which
we had too little, or valued them too much, to be willing to spend quantities
of them upon these trials. And this way (that remains to be mentioned) we
somewhat the better liked, because the Experiments made according to it would
also prove Experiments of the transmission of Cold through the extremely (...)
of Glass.

And even in this way of trying, we did at first meet with a discouragement,
which least it should happen to others, we shall here take notice of, namely,
that having put a convenient quantity of Snow into a somewhat thick green glass
Vial, though we copiously (...) mixed with it a somewhat weak spirit of salt,
(being loath to employ the best we had) and having well stopped the vessel, did
carefully (...) together, and thereby agitate the mixture in it, yet the Glass
appeared only bedewed upon the outside, without having there any thing frozen.
But suspecting, that the thickness of the Glass might be that, which hindered
the operation of the included mixture, we put snow and a convenient proportion
of the self same spirit of salt into a couple of thin Vials, one of which we
closed exactly, and the other negligently, and having long shaken them, we
found that what adhered to them on the outside, was (though but somewhat
faintly and thinly) frozen.

6. And, as to this sort of Experiments we shall here observe (...) all, that
the Snow or Ice included, (...) with the Saline Ingredient (whatever that were)
was always thawed within the Glass, and that consequently, 'twas the condensed
vapor of the Air, or other liquor that adhered to the outside of the glass,
which was turned into Ice, which is the Reason, why in mentioning these
Experiments we often use the word freez in a transitive sense, to signify the
operation of the frigorifick mixture upon other bodies.

7. This premised, let us proceed to relate, that we afterward took Oil of
Vitriol, and mixing it with Snow in such an other vial as that last mentioned,
we found its freezing power far greater then that of spirit of salt. And least
it should be pretended, that in these Experiments, the cold was not transmitted
through the sides of the glass, but that the Air within the vial, highly
refrigerated by the mixture, Did upon the account of their free intercourse
enable the Air contiguous to the outside of the vial to freez the Dew it met
with sticking on it; we prosecuted the Experiments with the addition of this
circumstance, that on several occasions we sealed up the vial, that contained
the (...) and the other frigorifick body it was mixed with, and afterward by
the help of this mixture froze the externally adhering moisture.

8. Having then according to this way substituted spirit of Nitre for oil of
Vitriol, or spirit of Salt, we found, that it froze yet more powerfully then
either of those two liquors, and continued to do so in those parts of the
outsides of the glass, that were adjacent to the included snow, till that snow
was almost totally resolved into a liquor. This we tried both in a thin sealed
glass, and in a pretty thick glass stopped only with a Cork.

9. Afterward we successfully enough tried the Experiment with spirits less
acid, as not only with spirit of Vinegre, but with spirit of Sugar, I mean the
Red Empyreumatical spirit forced over in a Retort, which mixed with snow,
according to the manner of the Experiment, did at length freez the externally
adhering moisture. But the filmes of ice were very thin, and very apt quickly
to disappear.

10. Having thus made a number of trials with acid spirits, we thought fit to
make some with Urinous spirits that abound in volatile salt, and accordingly
having mixed spirit of Urine and Snow in an open vial, and agitated them, we
found that the external moisture did discernably, though not very strongly,
freez.

But with spirit of Sal Armoniack drawn from Quick Lime (according to the way I
have delivered in another Treatise) the operation was quick and powerful enough.

11. Having tried to freez water with acid, and with volatile spirits (...), we
thought it not amiss to try what they would do both together, and accordingly
pouring upon snow both some spirit of Urine, and a little oil of Vitriol, and
shaking them into the snow in an open Vial, we found that the mixture did
freez, though the glaciation, in this case produced, were very languid.

12. Having thus tried salts disengaged from their grosser parts, or shattered
into Corpuscles by distillation, we made some trial likewise with grosser
salts, as with Sal Gem, with a sublimate made with common Sublimate and Sal
Armoniack, nay, and with both (...) and Kitchen Sugar, with all which among
(...) like bodies, that I can now Remember, the Experiment succeeded well
enough: also a very strong solution of Potashes, mixed with snow in a open
single Vial, did freez, but that very faintly. And both a very strong solution
of very pure salt of Tartar, and (at another time) a strong solution of
Potashes, being the one as well as the other, mixed and agitated with snow in a
single vial, produced filmes of ice (though thin ones) on the outside of the
glass.

13. After this, we thought fit to make a trial of another kind, of which I
find this account among my Notes. We filled a single vial with snow, and then
powered into it a convenient proportion of a strongly sweet solution of minium
in spirit of Vinegre, and having shak'd the mixture together, we found, that
this sweet Sugar of Lead, did as well as acid and alcalizate salts, excite the
cold of the snow so much, as to produce filmes of ice on the outside of the
glass: but a parcel of the same solution, being for diverse hours kept in snow
and salt, was not thereby frozen.

In order to the discovery of some hints of the account, upon which the above
mentioned mixtures were more intensly frigefactive then snow alone, we sealed
up a single vial full of snow unmingled with any other ingredient, and found it
to thaw much more slowly then any of those parcels of snow which we had mixed
with salts or spirits.

In prosecution of this conjecture, we shall add, that for ought we could find
by diverse trials, no salt, that helps not the snow to dissolve faster then else
it would, did enable it to produce ice, though usually it did produce dew on
the outside of the vial, that contained the mixture; and accordingly, neither
Chrystals of Tartar, nor Borax, both beaten to powder, nor, which is more
(considering what we lately noted of the effects of another sort of Sublimate)
would Sublimate enable the snow to freez; as well the powder of Sublimate, as
that of Borax, and that of Tartar, lying for a great while in the snow
undissolv'd.

14. Belonging to this matter, I find among my papers also this Note.

[Water of Quick Lime (made, by quenching store of unslak'd Lime in common
water) twice tried would not make snow freez, perhaps because though the water
were kept stopped, yet the liquor having been kept in the glass a twelve-moneth,
and more; probably the spirits may have flown away, which I find by inquiring
of one that Drinks much Limewater, that it abounds with, when fresh, and grows
destitute of a while after; and possibly also the badness of the Lime was the
cause, why being mingled with snow it would not freez, though all the vials,
that did not freez, did yet gather store of dew on the outsides (perhaps
because of the snow, whose melting alone may suffice to produce that effect.]

15. It may seem somewhat more strange, that distilled oil of Turpentine, which
is so hot and fiery a liquor, should not enable snow to freez, but this agrees
not ill with the conjecture lately mentioned, for it will hereafter appear,
that in oil of Turpentine Ice dissolves slower then in Diverse other liquors,
without excepting common water it self.

16. And yet notwithstanding the bad success of this trial, we were not
Discouraged from making another with spirit of Wine; for, though according to
the common opinion of Chemists and Physicians, it be a mere vegetable Sulphur,
yet we, that have elsewhere ventured to ascribe some such operations to it as
Chemists would have belong to Saline Liquors, did not scruple to seal up in a
single vial almost filled with snow, a convenient quantity of pure spirit of
Wine, (drawn off from quick Lime the better to dephlegm it) and of this mixture
we found the operation more powerful then any of those we have formerly
mentioned: for the freezing virtue of this did not only last long, both in the
sealed single vial, and in another that was open, but the enclosed mixture
presently crusted the outside of the glass (or of the neck, if it were made to
fill that) with ice, which might be taken off in flakes of good breadth, or in
pieces of good thickness. Nay, it presently froze Urine into Figured ice, which
might be taken off in scales.

17. This last circumstance puts me in mind of another Experiment, whereby we
tried by a vigorous mixture of Snow, and some choice spirit of Nitre, we had
met with to freez liquors of more difficult conglaciation then fair water.

We took then some snow, and mingled with it some of the newly mentioned spirit
of Nitre in so luckly a proportion, that it froze very vigorously and very
suddenly, insomuch that once almost as soon as it was set to the ground, it
froze the vial to the floor it was set on, and the outside of the glass, that
contained this mixture, we wetted with spirit of Vinegre, which was frozen into
pretty thick ice. But yet (not quite to forget that circumstance) retaining the
salt taste of spirit of Vinegre, and though this mixture would not discernably
freez spirit of Nitre on the outside, yet it transmitted cold enough to freez
weak spirit of Salt, and to give Us the pleasure of seeing some Saline liquors
presently turned into figured Ice, as not only the last mentioned spirit
exhibited some little (as it were) Saline Iceikles crossing each other, and
quickly vanishing, but (which was far prettier) having often observed, that Sal
Armoniack being dissolved in water, and the solution being put very slowly to
evaporate in part, but not too much, away, the remaining liquor would in the
cold shoot into parcels ofsalt very prettily figured, some of them resembling
combs with teeth on both sides, and others resembling feathers; having observed
this, I say, and being desirous to try, whether the spirit of Sal Armoniack,
distilled by the help of quick Lime, being put to congeal on the outside of a
glass, would not afford a Resemblingly figured Ice; we found upon trial, both
that the mixture was able to freez that subtle spirit, and also, that it shot
into Branches almost like those, exhibited by such salts undistilled. And it
was not unpleasant to behold, how upon the inclining the glass so, that the
freezing mixture rested a little, near any part of the spirit, this liquor
would shoot into such branches as we have been speaking of, so nimbly, that the
eye could plainly discern them, as it were, to grow, and hastily overspread the
surface of the glass, but those Branches were wont quickly to vanish.

I had almost forgot to mention, that I tried the freezing with snow, and
diverse fermented Liquors undistilled instead of spirit of Wine, and though the
Experiments succeeded not with small Beer, much less with water, yet there was
a glaciation, though but slight, produced not only by the addition of Wine, but
even by that of moderately strong Ale.

18. Having observed, that the Liquors and other bodies, that assisted the snow
to freez, were generally such as hastened its dissolution, we thought it not
altogether unworthy the trial, to examine, what would be the Event of procuring
a speedy dissolution of the snow, by substituting bodies actually warm, instead
of potential hot ones: Of this sort of trials, I find among my Notes these two
registered.

[1. Into a single vial almost filled with snow, there was poured a pretty
quantity of well heated sand, that it might dissolve the snow in many places at
once, without heating the ambient Air, or the outside of the glass; but though
the solution of the snow seemed to succeed well enough upon the shaking of the
vessel, yet the outside of the glass was only bedewed, not frozen.

2. Into another single vial almost filled with snow, we poured some water,
which we judged of a convenient warmth, and we poured it in by a funnel, that
had but a slender orifice beneath, that the warm water might fall into the
middle of the snow, without Running to the sides, and taking a convenient time
to shake the glass, we did by this way produce a very considerable degree of
cold, and much dew on the outside, but were not satisfied, that any of that dew
was frozen, though the success would have invited us to have made further
trials in greater glasses, if we had had any more snow at hand.]

Wherefore This Experiment is to be further and more artificially tried.

19. It is a common tradition, not only among the vulgar, but (I presume, upon
their account) among learned men, that the oftentimes variously, and sometimes
prettily enough figured hoar frost, which is wont to appear upon glass windows
in mornings, preceded by frosty nights, are exsudations, as it were, that
penetrating the glass-windows, are, upon their coming forth to the cold
external Air, frozen thereby into variously figured ice: How groundless this
conceit is, may be easily discovered, if men had not so lazy a curiosity, as
not to try (which they may do in a moment, and without trouble) whether the Ice
be, according to the tradition on the outside of the window, and not contrary
to it on the Inside, where indeed it is generated of the aqueous Corpuscles,
that swiming up and down in the Air within the Room, are by the various motion
that belongs to the parts of fluid bodies as such, brought to pass along the
window, and there by the vehement cold of the neighboring external Air,
communicated through the glass, condensed into dew, and frozen into Ice.

20. And because diverse modern Naturalists have taught (I think erroneously)
that glass is easily enough pervious, not only to Air, but to diverse subtle
liquors, lest the favorers of this Doctrine should object, that we have ill
assigned the natural cause of the ice, appearing on the outside of the glass in
the former Experiments, which according to them may rather proceed from the
subtler (but yet visible) parts of the excessively cold mixture of the snow and
saline bodies penetrating the pores of the glass, and settling on the outside of
it: To obviate this objection, I say, and to confirm what we have taught in
another Treatise about the wandering of store of aqueous vapors through the
Air, we will add the following Experiments, purposely made to evince these
truths.

21. At one time four ounces and a quarter, of a mixture of Ice and Salt, being
enclosed in a vial, and thereby enabled to condense the vapors of the ambient
Air, was by their accession increased 12. grains.

Another time a vial, wherein snow (weighing two ounces six drachms and an
half) was suffered to condense the vapid Air, the dew, that partly adhered to
it, and partly fell from it, made the whole weigh four grains more then the
vial did, when it was first put into the scale, in which scale we found some
water flowing from the dew, which gave that increase of weight. And here let me
add by the way, that the tip of This sealed vial, being broken under water,
sucked in a considerable quantity of it, whether, because of some little
rarefaction of the Air included in the sealing, or because of the infrigidation
of that Air by the snow, or for both these Reasons, or any other, I shall not
Now dispute.

22. But other Experiments to the same purpose we made, wherein the increase of
weight was more considerable; and that the way, we used, may be the better
understood, and the conclusion built upon it the more undiscuss'd, we will add
a couple of trials, that we find among our notes concerning this matter.

[In a single vial we sealed up as much snow and salt, as afterward, when
melted, we found to weigh between five and six ounces, after a while the salt
beginning to melt the snow, the Dew on the outside began to congeal, and being
rubbed off, the hoar frost would quickly begin to come again. This vial for
further trial being put into a pair of scales with a counterpoise, after a
while, as the vapors, that wandered through the Air in the warm room, happened to
be detained more and more upon the outside of the glass, and to be there
frozen, the scale, wherein the glass was, began to be deprest, and to shrink
lower and lower, after which, by adding a little to the counterpoise, we
reduced them again to an Equilibrium: And yet after a while, the scale, that
held the vial, subsided again more and more, till the Included snow was melted;
so that to reduce the scales to their first Equilibrium, we were fain to add in
all to the Counterpoise a weight, which we Estimated to be about eight or ten
grains, (for we had then no great weights by us.) The vial being taken out,
there appeared near half a small spoonful of Liquor in the scale it stood in,
which proceeded from the thaw of the Ice, that was generated about it. But in
that part of the scale, which was covered with the unequal part of the bottom of
the glass, there appeared no wet.

A like or smaller quantity of snow and spirit of Wine being sealed up in a
single vial, the outside quickly appeared cased with ice as high as the mixture
reached within, and this vial also being counterpois'd in a pair of scales, did
by degrees depress the scale that held it, till it had sunk it very low, and
about seven grains did but reduce the scales to an Equilibrium, but the scales
being somewhat rusty, we could not make the Trials with that Exactness we
desired.]

23. But at other times, when the Experiment was more luckily, though not more
carefully tried, with better scales, the increase of weight from the condensed
vapors of the Air, was somewhat more considerable; for I find in a short note,

[That at one time a mixture of spirit of Wine and Snow, weighing three ounces
and three quarters, afforded of condensed vapors about 18. grains.

And at another time a mixture of Snow and Sal Gem, weighing three ounces and
seventy grains, procured us (...) accession of water weighing about 20. grains.]

Title II. Experiments and Observations touching Bodies Disposed to be Frozen.
1. TWere almost endless to try particularly, which bodies are, or are not
capable of congelation, and the degree of cold would also in such Experiments
be (as near as men can) determined; because many bodies will freez in one
degree of cold, that will not in another; wherefore we are willing to leave
these trials to those, that have more leisure and opportunity to prosecute
them, and shall only set down some, and those, somewhat various, that we may
not leave this part of the History of Cold quite unfurnished. And we must
mention the fewer, because, being in the Country, we were not provided of
diverse of the bodies which we should have exposed.

2. In very cold snowy weather, we tried, that (besides common water) Urine,
Beer, Ale, Milk, Vinegre, and French and Rhenish Wine (though these two Last
but slowly) were turned into ice, either totally, or in part. But such
instances will possibly be thought too obvious to be insisted on; therefore I
shall add, That not only we froze a strong solution of Gum Arabic, and another
of white Sugar in common water, but that We took Alume, Vitriol, SaltPetre, and
Sea salt, and made of each of them in a single vial as strong a solution as we
could, we also made a strong solution of Verdegrease in fair water (which was
thereby deeply colored) all these we exposed to the cold Air. The solution of
Alume, Nitre and Verdegrease froze without affording any notable Phenomenon,
either in the figuration of the Ice, or otherwise: Of the solution of Vitriol
there remained at the bottom of the glass, a pretty quantity unfrozen, and of a
clear substance, whose color was very high of the Vitriol, whereas the upper
part of the same solution differed very little in color from common Ice.

3. But because it seems not so strange, that these gross sorts of Saline
bodies should be turned into Ice, we thought fit to try, whether or no also
diverse salts, freed from the grosser parts of their concretes by the fire, were
not likewise capable of congelation. We exposed therefore spirit of Vinegre in
one small glass, and spirit of Urine in another, to an intense cold, and found,
that not only the former, but the latter also froze.

4. We took likewise some of the fiery lixiviate salt of Pot ashes, and a
single vial, in which we put, to two ounces of (...), a dram of the Alcaly,
and exposing it to a very sharp Air, we did, when we came to see the success of
the trial, find Ice lying on the top in little sticks (something crossing one
another) almost like the Crystals of rocked Petre, and besides these that lay
levelled, there were others that shot downwards in very great numbers.

5. We also found that Oil of Tartar per deliquium, or at least a strong
solution of the fixed salt of Tartar, though it seemed much to resist the (...),
yet it was once by snow and salt brought to Congelation.

Appendix to the II. Title.
SInce I wrote the present Book concerning Cold (excepting some of the
Appendices) having once had the Opportunity of an Hours Discourse with an
Ingenious Man, that not only lived some years in Muscovy, but was, and is still
Physician to the great Monarch of that Empire, and having likewise at other
times conversed with Navigators, and some other credible persons, that had
traveled either to Greenland, Terra Nova, or other gelid Climates, I proposed
them diverse Questions, by their Answers to which, I learned some particulars,
which together with others, that I have met with in Voyages and other Books, I
think it not amiss to annex by way of Appendices to the foregoing, and some of
the following Sections, or Titles.

About the freezing of common expressed Oils, I know not well what to
determine; For that they may by a very intense Cold be deprived of their
Fluidity, and be made capable of being cut into portions, that will retain the
figure given them, my own Trials invite me to believe; but whether such oils
will be turned into true (by which I mean) hard and brittle Ice, is a Question
scarce to be determined by any Experiments we can make here in England, where
we could not reduce oil Olive into Ice: And for the Relations of those that
have lived in colder Countries, I find them to disagree: For when I asked the
lately mentioned Doctor the Question, how far he had known oil Congealed in
(...)? He answered me, That it did there freez much harder then in our Climate,
but would not, that (...) had observed, be turned into true and perfect Ice. On
the other hand I find the Testimony of that Ingenious Navigator Captain T.
James, who relating the effects of cold he met with in the Island where he and
his men were forced to winter, does in one place reckon Oil among the Liquors,
such as Vinegre, and Sack, that even in their house was firmly frozen, and more
expressly elsewhere. All our Sack (says he) Page 58.
Vinegre, Oil and every thing else that was liquid, was now frozen as hard as a
piece of wood, and we must cut it with a Hatchet. And Olaus Magnus speaking of
the fights, wont to be made upon the Ice in the Nothern Regions, Glacialis Olai
Magni Gent. Sept. Hist. Lib. 11. Cap. 24.
Congressus (says he) fit in Laneis Calcibus, non pellibus, aut Coriis unctis:
(...) enim frigoris, quodcunque sit unctuosum convertit in Lubricitatem
glacialem.

There being a great Similitude in point of Inflammability, and disposition to
mix with many subtle Oleous Bodies, betwixt spirit of Wine and Oil, and as
great an affinity in diverse other regards, betwixt that spirit and both aqueous
and saline Liquors, with which it will readily mix; I had a great Curiosity to
know, what kind of change would be produced in vinous spirits, in case they
were exposed to a cold great enough to work a visible change in their Texture;
I therefore solicitously inquired of the Russian Emperors lately mentioned
Physician, whether or no he had observed in Muscovy any manifest change
produced by cold in Hot Waters, and spirit of Wine? To which he returned me
this answer; That common Aniseed-water, and the like weak spirits would be
turned into an imperfect kind of Ice, and that even the very strong spirits,
though they would not be turned into Ice, would be turned into a kind of
substance like Oil.

Title III. Experiments touching Bodies Indisposed to be Frozen.
1. WE found many liquors, whose subtle parts being by Distillation brought
over, and united into very spirituous liquors, and so either totally, or in
great measure freed from those phlegmatickor aqueous parts, that dispose Bodies
to congelation, could not be brought to freeze, either by the cold of the
external Air, to which in frosty nights we exposed them, or by such an
Application of snow and salt, as served to freez other Bodies.

2. Of this sort were, among acid menstruum's, Aqua fortis, spirit of Nitre, of
Salt; also oil of Turpentine, and almost all, (I add the word almost, because
the Essential oil of Aniseeds, and the Empireumatical oil of common oil will
lose their fluidity in a less degree of Cold, then that of our mildest frosts,)
I say almost all the Chemical oils we had by us, as likewise spirit of Wine,
and other strong spirits of fermented Liquors, and even (...) it self, if it
were good, would very hardly be brought to afford us any Ice at all: But among
the many liquors, that would not freez, there were a few, whose trials afforded
us some circumstances not altogether unworthy their being mentioned.

As 1. I being desirous to satisfy some friends, that 'twas the brisk spirit
of the Grapes, whether resulting from, or extricated and exalted by
fermentation, that kept (all) the rest of the Sack from freezing: I took a
parcel of that liquor, that would afford us no Ice at all, and by the help of a
lighted candle, or some other actually flaming body, kindled it, and letting
the inflammable part burn away, the remaining part of the Liquor (which was by
vast odds the greatest part) was easily brought to freez.

Next when the formerly mentioned trial was made with water and Potashes, we
likewise, in another glass, exposed a solution, wherein the proportion of salt
of (...), in reference to the water was four times greater, there being in this
zij of the salt to (...) only of water, and this solution, though the glass
were covered with hoar frost and Ice on the outside, froze not at all within.
And likewise, when another time we made a very strong solution of salt of
Tartar, that was very pure and fiery, it did not freez, though a considerably
strong solution of salt of Potashes, that was exposed with it, did. So that
these Experiments about the glaciation of Lixiviate Liquors must be repeated to
be reduced to a certainty.

3. That the common expressed oils of Vegetables will, after their manner,
freez, that is, lose their fluidity, and become, as it were, curdl'd in very
cold weather, is a (...) of common observation; but I had a mind to try,
whether or no Train oil, that is made of the fat of Animals, (commonly that of
Whales) though not by distillation, properly so called, yet by the help of
fire, would not be more capable of resisting the violence of the cold, and
accordingly I found, that Train oil, exposed to the Air in a convenient vial,
continued fluid; notwithstanding a more then ordinary sharpness of weather, and
this I tried two or three several times, but at length one night proved so very
cold, that the next morning I found the oil unfluid; which differing (...) seem
a little to Countenance, but more to disfavour the Report of Olaus Magnus,
Olaus Magnus in Historia Gentium Septentrionalium, lib. 11. cap. 20. and 21.
who writes, That whereas in Northern Regions it is usual for strong places to
lose in winter the protection afforded them in Summer, by their Ditches, though
never so wide and deep, because the frost makes them easily passable to the
Enemy: This inconvenicy is wont to be prevented by pouring into the Ditches,
the Ice, if there be need, being first broken, great store of this Train oil,
which swimming upon the surface of the water, and being incongealable by the
cold, protects the subjacent water from the freezing violence of the cold, and
keeps the moats unpassable. But because our Author mentions this as a known and
vulgar Practice in those Icy Regions, it may perhaps deserve a little Enquiry,
whether the Whale Oil, used by the Swedes, Laplanders, Muscovites, and other
Inhabitants of those parts be not differing, either as to the Fishes, it is made
of, or as to the way of making it, or as to the way of keeping it from such
Train Oil as we Employed, unless perhaps it do already appear by the Relation
of writers belonging to those Countries, or of Travelers, that have been in
them, that Olaus Magnus has in that particular, as I fear, he has in some
others, misinformed his Readers.

4. We took notice, that a strong solution of common Sugar was easily enough
turned into Ice; but on a strong solution of Sugar of Lead we could not with
salt and snow work the like change, and this, though the trial were not
negligently made; which I therefore think not unworthy to be mentioned, because
that the two only Ingredients of this Sugar were Lead, which is esteemed a very
cold Body, and spirit of Vinegre, from which, as I noted above, we did by the
like degree of cold to that we here employed, obtain Ice: And though in this
metalline Sugar we may well suppose the Saline parts of the spirit of Vinegre
to be much more concentrated or united, then they were in the spirit; yet the
solution must abound with aqueous parts: and this Sugar seeming but a kind of
Vitriol of Lead, it is worth our Notice, that its solution would not freez, as
well as that of common Vitriol, though in this latter concrete the metal be
corroded by a spirit, which, as far as can be judged by the Liquors afforded in
distillation, is very much sharper and stronger then spirit of Vinegre.

5. We likewise tried to freez Quick silver, and for that purpose provided a
bubble, that being blown with a Lamp, was but thin, and so flat, that the sides
almost touched, and it held but a little Mercury, and that by the figure of the
Glass, being reduced to a large surface, with but very little depth or
thickness, it was far more exposed, then if it had been in a ordinary round
Bubble, to the action of the cold; but we could not at all freez this
extravagant liquor, though we tried it more then once, and though the last
time, we exposed it in the same (...) to the same degree of Cold, wherewith we
made one of the following Experiments, that required a very Intense degree of
that Quality. And in another thin glass-Bubble we long exposed Quicksilver to
an extraordinary sharp air, but though the cold had some operation upon it, not
here necessary to be mentioned; yet we could not find, that it did at all bring
it to freez: wherefore I could wish that trial were made in Muscovy, Greenland,
Charles Island, or some other of the most (...) Regions, where the Effects of
cold (which here are upon Quicksilver but languid) are the most considerable,
and sometimes stupendous.

6. It is very remarkable, that though not only the solutions of other gross
salts, but, as we have seen, diverse more saline and spirituous liquors, were
brought by snow and salt to Congelation; yet a brine made very strong of Common
salt, could not be brought to freez at all, though we kept it exposed with the
other saline solutions, that did freez, during a whole night, that was
exceeding sharp. Which Experiment I also tried many years since, to draw thence
an Argument in favor of the Cartestan Hypothesis about cold, which I shall not
now consider; but rather add, that being desirous to try, with what proportions
of Sea salt and water, the congelation of them might be effected, I found, I
could freez some Sea water, that had been brought up in a Barrel to that
Monarch of the Virtuosi, the King, for the making of trials with it; and that
having in a single vial exposed to the Air in a very bitter night, a solution
consisting of twenty parts of water, and one of salt, which is double the
proportion of salt to be commonly found in our Seawater, the next day we found
a good part of the Liquor frozen, the Ice swimming at the top in figures almost
like Broom, spreading from the surface of the water downwards. And to add, That
upon the by, we suffered the Ice of salt water to thaw, to try, whether it
would yield fresh water, but it seemed not devoid of some Brackishness, which
whether or no it proceeded from some parts of the contiguous brine, that
adhered to the Ice, I leave to further and exacter observations, since I am
credibly informed, that in Amsterdam there are diverse, that use the thawed Ice
of the Seawater to brew their Beer with, instead of common fresh water.

3. And since I made that Experiment, I find in the industrious Bartholinus's
newly published Book, De Cap. 6. page 42.
Nivis usu, a Confirmation of the probability of the Report I just now
mentioned, his words being these, De Glacie ex marina aqua certum est,
siresolvatur, salsum saporem deposuisse, quod etiam non ita pridem expertus est
Cl. Jacobus Finckius Academiae nostrae senior, and Physices Professor, been
meritus, in glaciei frustis e portu nostro allatis.

Title IIII. Experiments and Observations touching the Degrees of Cold in
several Bodies.
1. AFter having treated of the Bodies that are the most capable of producing
Cold, and of those that are most disposed, or indisposed to receive it, it
would be Methodical to take notice of the Degrees of Cold, to be met with in
differing Bodies: But though a work of this nature might somewhat conduce to
the Discovery of Cold in general, yet it is so laborious a Task, and, to be
well performed, requires so much more of Leisure, and Convenience, then I am
Master of, that I must resign it to those that are better furnished with them;
which I the freelier do, because the Experiments, which at this Time make the
principal part of our History, being chiefly of the highest Degrees of Cold, we
may seem to have done something of what more (...) concerns our present Design,
by having made the Experiments, anon to be subjoined within this present
Section or Title. And yet thus much we elsewhere do toward the framing of a
Table of the Degrees of Cold, that we do on other occasions set down those
hitherto unpracticed ways that we have employed, to estimate the greater or
lesser Coldness of Bodies, by several kinds of Weather-glasses, differing from
the common ones, and far more fit then they, for such a Purpose. For by
Hermetically sealed Thermoscopes furnished with high rectified spirit of Wine,
we can estimate the differing degrees of Coldness in Liquors, of which we shall
presently mention an Example. And by using such Weather-glasses, as have their
Air included not at the top, but at the bottom of the Instrument, we can within
some reasonable Latitude, measure the Coldness both of entire solid Bodies, or
minuter Bodies, as Salts, etc. by beating them alike, and very small, and
placing the Instruments at equal Depths in the powder of each of them. And
besides that the shape of these Thermoscopes does, as we have elsewhere shown,
make them proper for these uses, for which the vulgar ones, where the included
Air is at the top of the Instrument, are not fit: besides this, I say, it is
easy in these we make use of, to make the Pipe so slender in proportion to the
Cavity of the Vial, whereinto it is inserted, that very much minuter Differences
of Cold will be manifest in these, then are wont to be sensible in common
Weather-glasses. See the Praeliminary Discourses.
And besides these two sorts we have elsewhere proposed, and described a third
and new kind of Thermometer, wherein a drop of liquor being suspended in a very
slender Pipe of Glass, betwixt the outward and the inward Air, makes it far
more fit for those Experiments, wherein we either despair, or care not, to
measure the Difference of Cold betwixt two Bodies, but are only desirous to
try, whether or no they differ in Coldness, and in case they do, which of them
has most: For these Weather-glasses, are so exceeding sensible even of the
minute Differences of Heat and Cold, as manifestly to discover Disparities,
which other Thermoscopes are not nice enough to give us any Notice of. Only
this Advertisement we must add about them, that when we use them to examine the
Coldness, not of liquid, but of consistent Bodies, we alter a little the figure
of the wide end of the Glass; and instead of maing it a round bubble, as we
have elsewhere described, we make it with a flat or flattish bottom, that the
whole Instrument might thereon, as on a Basis, stand of it self upright, and
so, being still taken up by the open and slender end, for fear of rarifying the
included Air, (which Caution is here given once for all) may be transferred
with a pendulous drop in the Pipe, and placed sometimes on one, and sometimes
on another of the solid Bodies to be examined by it. For if the Body, it is
removed to, be more or less cold then that it rested on before, that coldness
communicated through the Glass to the Air, by which the pendulous drop is
supported, that Airs Expansion or Contraction will manifestly appear by the
rising or the falling of the drop. And thus we have taken pleasure to remove it
from one kind of wood to another, from woods to metals, and from metals to
stones, etc. But the Expedients, that may be proposed to improve these little
Instruments to the purposes we have been treating of, and the Cautions, that
may be added to prevent men's drawing mistaking Inferences from the Informations
they seem to give them, will take up more time, then we are willing to spend
npon an occasion, that will not perhaps be thought to deserve it, nor much to
require any others, then those we shall by and by subjoyn. And therefore I
shall proceed to the Experiment promised at the beginning of this Title or
Section.

2. To make so much as a tolerable Estimate of the Difference betwixt such
great Degrees as are not any of them too weak to congeal water, is a thing,
which, as we have not yet known to be attempted, so it seemed not easy to be
performed. For, Freezing having been commonly reputed the ultimate Effect or
Production of Cold, men have not been sollicitous to look beyond it. And though
the Disparity we find betwixt several Fits of weather, all of them frosty, seem
to be too manifest and frequent to be probably ascribed to nothing, but the
differing Dispositions of our Bodies, yet how to estimate that Difference, it
is not so obvious. For though we should have recourse to common
Weather-glasses, yet they might easily deceive us, since not only by estimating
by them, the coldest day of one Winter, with the coldest day of another, but in
judging of the Coldness of any two days in the same fit of frosty weather,
there intervenes time enough to make it doubtful, whether the vari'd
Gravitation of the Atmosphere, produce not the change observed in the
Weather-glass. Besides that, admitting vulgar Thermometers could not, as they
easily may, misinform us, they are employed only to give us an Account of those
degrees of Cold, (...) Nature of her own accord produces in the Air; but not to
discover, whether or no Nature assisted by Art, may not produce greater: And,
'twill easily be granted, that they are yet less made use of to help us to an
Estimate of this Disparity. And though some guess may be made by the operations
of Cold upon Liquors exposed to it, yet some, as water, and very aqueous
Liquors, will freez too soon, and others, as Vinous spirits, will not at all,
(that we have found) here in England. And though French-Wine will sometimes be
brought to begin to freez, yet that happens but very seldom, and in many
Winters not at all, and leaves too great an Interval, betwixt the degrees
necessary to congeal Wine, and sufficient to congeal Water, not to mention the
uncertainty proceeding from the differing strengths of the Wines.

3. Upon these and other considerations we thought it requisite to make use of
an Expedient, whose Nature and use will be easily gathered out of the following
Experiments: And though by a mischance, that broke my Weather-glass, I have
been hindered from measuring exactly in what Proportion to the whole bulk the
spirit of Wine was contracted, by the surplusage of Cold, that was more then
necessary to make water freez, yet I doubt not but something of use to our
present Theme, may be thence collected, and especially the main thing designed
will manifestly appear, which is the Intensity of Cold produced by Art, beyond
that which Nature needs to employ upon the glaciating of water.

[4. A small sealed Weather-glass furnished with spirit of Wine, the ball being
about the bigness of a large Nutmeg, and the Cylindrical stem being very
slender, and about ten Inches long, the Ball and part of the stem being
immersed in a vessel of water, half buried in snow and salt, when the water
began to freez at the top, the bottom and the sides (but before the Ice had
reached the Ball, for fear it should break it) the tincted liquor was found
subsided to 5 Divisions, being half Inches, and being taken out thence, and Ice
and Salt being immediately applied to the Ball, the Liquor fell lower to about
1 Division.]

And that it may not be doubted, but that the water, though in part congealed,
remained warm in comparison of the spirit of Wine, though uncongeal'd, that had
been refrigerated by the snow and salt, we will add this other Experiment,
which we find in another of our Notes thus set down.

[5. The sealed Weather-glass being 4. Jan. 15.
kept in the water till it began to freez, descended to 5: Being immediately
removed into the same snow and salt, that made the water begin to freez, it
descended at the beginning very fast, and afterward more slowly, till it came
to the very bottom of the stem, where it expands it self into the Ball; then
being removed into the same glass of water, whence it was taken, and which was
well stored with loose Pieces of Ice, it did nevertheless hastily ascend at the
beginning, and was soon after impelled to the former Height of five Divisions
and an half, or thereabouts.]

6. But perhaps some amends may be made for the disaster of the Weather-glass,
by adding, that I found by another Trial, that the Condensation of Liquors by
such Colds, as we are wont to have, or can easily produce here, is nothing near
so great as one would imagine. And though for want of a Glass-ball, furnished
with a neck slender enough, I could not make the Experiment so much to my
satisfaction, as perhaps else I might have done; yet the goodness of the
scales, I made use of, and some greater care, then possibly every Experimenter
would have employed, may make the following Observation Luciferous.

7. We took then (on a cold, but not frosty day) oil of Turpentine, as a
Liquor, whose being free from phlegm or water, we would easily be more certain
of, then if we had employed spirit of Wine; and this oil it self we rectified
in a gentle heat, to make it the more pure and subtle. Then we took a small
round vessel of clear glass furnished with a conveniently long stem or pipe,
and having first weighed the glass alone in a pair of very good scales, we
found it to weigh (...) 56 gr. then putting in oil of Turpentine, till it
filled the round part of the Glass, and ascended a little way into the stem, we
carefully marked with a Diamond on the outside of the Glass, how high it
reached, and then weighed the Glass and the Oil together, which weighed (...)
and 34 gr. then we put in by degrees a quarter of a Dram, and with a Diamond
carefully marked, how high it reached in the pipe, and so we continued putting
in several Quantities of oil, still carefully weighing each parcel in the
scale, and marking its height on the outside of the Glass (which we did in
order to a certain design, and found it a work tedious and troublesome enough)
till the Liquor and the Glass together weighed (...) 4 grains; then we put fair
water into an open-mouthed Glass, in which we also placed the little Bolthead
with oil of Turpentine, and by such a circumposition of salt and snow, as is
See the latter part of the next Title.
hereafter to be often mentioned, we made the water, which was contained in the
wide mouthed Glasses, and by which the Sphaerical part of the Bolt-head,
containing the Oil, was surrounded, we made this water, I say, begin to freez,
and when we perceived a little Ice to be produced in it, we carefully marked
with a Diamond to what part of the stem the oil of Turpentine was subsided, and
then transferring the Bolt-head into a mixture of snow and salt, where we kept
it for an hour or two, till we could perceive it to fall no lower, and marking
with a Diamond this station also of the Liquor, we afterward removed the Glass
into a warmer Air, till the Oil by expanding it self had regained the highest
mark, whence it had begun to sink. Then into a very little Glass, carefully
counterpois'd in a pair of exacter scales then the former, we gently poured out
of the Oil, till what remained rested against that mark on the outside of the
stem, to which it fell, when the water began to freez: and this we found to
amount to somewhat above 9 grains, so that for convenience of reckoning, we may
safely enough take the Entire number of 10. grains. After this we poured out of
the remaining oil into the same little Glass, till, what rested in the Pipe,
was even with that mark, to which the snow and salt had made it fall; and this
parcel of oil happened to be almost precisely of the same weight with the other;
so that in this Trial (for perhaps in others, which it were therefore worth
while to make, the degree of Cold may much vary the Events) the Artificial way
of freezing, we employed, made the oil subside as much after it had been
refrigerated and condensed by a cold capable of freezing water, as that degree
of Cold had been able to condense it at first. And lastly, having deducted the
weight of the Glass from the weight of the whole Oil and Glass, to obtain the
weight of the oil alone; and having divided the weight of the whole Oil, first,
by that of the former parcel, we have mentioned to be ten grains, and then by
the superadded weight of the second parcel, we took out, (both which parcels
together we estimated at twenty grains,) we found that rectified oil of
Turpentine of a moderate temper, being exposed to such a degree of Cold, as
would freez common water, did by by shrinking lose but about a ninty fourth
part of its Bulk, and being reduced to as great a degree of Cold as we could
bring it to by snow and salt, even then it lost but about a forty seventh part
of its Bulk; I say about, because I thought it needless, as well as tedious to
mind fractions and little odd numbers, especially since, as we formerly
intimated, it was scarce possible to arrive at a great exactness in such a
Neck, as that of our Bolthead, though it were proportionable enough to the
Ball, and chosen among several, that were purposely procured for the trying of
Experiments.

8. There are some other Trials about the Degrees of Cold, which for want of
Ice and other Accommodations we could not make, as we would have done, often;
nor shall scarce be able to do it, till more friendly Circumstances afford us
an opportunity: And yet because our Trials, though not prosecuted as far as we
thought, may possibly prove not unwelcome, we will subjoyn something about two
of the chiefest of them.

9. The one was designed to measure in what proportion water of a moderate
degree of Coldness, would be made to shrink by the circumposition of snow and
salt before it begin by Congelation to expand it self: of this, what we shall
here take notice, is only, That by a Trial purposely made with common water, in
a round Glass furnished with a long stem, we found the water in that stem to
subside so very little, that, whether or no it were insensible, it was
inconsiderable. But probably a greater Quantity of water, and a slenderer stem,
would have made the shrinking of the Liquor more Notable, and upon that Account
it is, that I here mention It.

10. The other Thing was, to measure by the differing weight and Density of the
same portion of water, what change was produced in it, betwixt the hottest time
of Summer, and first a glaciating Degree of Cold, and then the highest we could
produce by Art. And in order to this, we weighed with a pair of exact scales, a
glass bubble heavier then water, in that liquor, when it seemed to be at a
moderate Temper, as to Coldness, and by the Diminution, which we found of the
glasses weight in the water, we easily collected, according to the Rules of the
Hydrostaticks, the weight of as much water, as is equal in bulk to the glass
Bubble, and thereby the Proportion betwixt the glass and an equal bulk of such
water, as we first weighed it in; then by the application of snow and salt, we
made that water begin to freez, and weighing in it again the same bubble, 'twas
easy to collect by the Decrement of its weight in this refrigerated water,
what Proportion an equal Bulk of the liquor did then bear to the Glass; and by
comparing these two differing Proportions together, we were assisted to make an
Estimate, how much the water was made more heavy, and dense by the Action of a
freezing degree of Cold: Afterward taking our time in Summer, we thought fit
in the same parcel of water (that had been purposely reserved in a glass) to
weigh the same bubble, that by the difference of its weight in the water, when
made much lighter by the heat of the ambient Air, we might obtain the
Information we desired: to which we shall add, That we also recommended to some
Virtuosi, that were likely to have the opportunity of gratifying Us, that such
an Experiment might be procured to be made in the midst of Summer in some part
of Italy, by the help of the there not unfrequent Convenience of a Conservatory
of snow, wherein the water might be reduced to freez before the end of the same
hour, at whose beginning the there warmer Air had given it its greatest
Expansion, and so the Difference betwixt the Density of the same parcel of
water might be the more conspicuous. But as I have not received any Account of
my Desires from abroad, so coming now (...) home to review the Memorial, I
caused to be written of the newly mentioned Observation, I find, that through
the Negligence or Mistake of an Amanuensis, there must needs be a manifest
oversight committed in the (...) down the Numbers, which my Memory does not now
enable me to repair. And the season being now improper to repeat the
Experiment, as well as the numerical parcel of water I had kept, and I employed
both times, being thrown away, I think it may be sufficient, if not too much,
to have thus particularly intimated the way we took, without ading the
Cautions, where with we proceeded, nor what Trials we made to the same purpose
with high rectified spirit of Wine, since unlucky accidents frustrated our
Attempts.

11. Whether the making of these kind of Trials, with the waters of the
particular Rivers or Seas, men are to sail on, may afford any useful estimate,
if, and how much, Ships and other Vessels, may on those (...) be safely laden
more in Winter (...) in (...), may be an (...) of which I shall not in this
place (...) any (...) Notice, then to intimate thus much, That the difference
betwixt water highly refrigerated, and that which is but of an usual degree of
coldness, is not so great as some (...) seem to have thought. For on a Day,
which (though made cold by snow intermingled with the rain that then fell) was
not a frost, we took common water, and weighed in it a glass Bubble, whose
weight in the Air was 150. grains, and this Bubble weighed in that water, lost
so much of its former weight, as to weigh about 28 grains: and then by snow and
salt, reducing that water to such a degree of Coldness, that it began to be
turned into Ice about the inside of a small open glass that contained it, we
found the same Bubble not to weigh at all above one eighth part of a grain less
then it did before: So that, if we may judge of the shrinking and condensation
of the water by the Increment of weight, it shrunk but about a 230. part of its
former Bulk, and this according to a pair of scales, that would turn with about
the 32. part of a grain: which may keep us from wondering at what we lately
delivered concerning the very inconsiderable subsidence of the water, we
exposed to snow and salt in a small Bolthead. And it may also make that the
more probable, which we not long since related about the oil of Turpentines not
losing much above a 100. part of its Bulk, by being exposed to such a degree of
cold, as made water begin to freez. Whether we may from this, and from the
formerly recited Experiment, of the great subsidence of spirit of Wine in a
sealed Weather-glass, safely conclude, these subtle distilled Liquors to be
much more sensible then water of Cold, as well as of Heat, further Trials will
best resolve; and these I have not now so much opportunity, as I could wish, to
pursue.

12. But they that have a mind to prosecute Experiments of this kind, and
others, that relate to the Degrees of Cold, may perchance be somewhat assisted
even by these Relations, and especially by those Passages that mention the use
of the sealed Weather-glass, furnished with spirit of Wine, and of those
wherein a drop of liquor is kept pendulous. For the former of these being not
subject to the Alterations of the Atmospheres (...), nor (as may be probably
supposed, by reason of the strength of the high rectified spirit of Wine) to be
frozen, by sending the same Weather-glass (which may be made portable enough,
as I have tried by transporting one of them in a Case that might be easily
carried even in a Pocket) from one Country to another, one may make far better
Discoveries of the differing Degrees of Coldness in differing Regions, and know
(somewhat near) how much the Air even of Muscovy, or Norway, or Greenland it
self, is colder then that of England, or any other Country, whence the
Weather-glass shall be sent: The Instrument being accompanied with a memorial
of the Degree, it stood at, when exposed to such a Cold, as made water begin to
freez.

13. The other Thermometer, where a drop of liquor is kept pendulous, may not
only be employed in such cases, where the Pipe and Bubble can be erected upon
the Horizon, but by reason, that the outward Air will indifferently impel the
Bubble laterally or upwards, upon the Refrigeration of the inward, and that the
bubble will not barely by its weight drop out of the inverted Instrument,
because of the resistance of the subjacent outward Air; for these causes, I
say, such a Thermoscope may, as we have tried, be also used, where the Pipe
shall be held Horizontal, or inclined, or even Perpendicularly downwards, so
that the flat Part of the Bubble may be applied to discover the Coldness,
either of the Wall, or of the Ceiling of a room, or other Bodies however
situated. And if the Pipe be made long and even, (as sometimes we employ one
above a foot long) not only sensible, but great Effects of very little
Disparities in the Coldness of Bodies, to which the Instrument is applied, may
with pleasure be observed. And the same drop of liquor may be long enough
preserved useful in the Pipe. But this Advertisement I shall give, that as
sensible as this Instrument appears to be of the nicer Differences of Coldness,
as of Heat, yet they that shall have the Curiosity to examine with it, as I
have done, the Temperature, I say not, of more resembling Bodies, but of
Liquors, that may be thought to have their parts so differingly agitated, as
common Water, high rectified spirit of Wine, and even rectified oil of
Turpentine, (I add not Dephlegm'd oil of Vitriol, because of some odd
Phenomenon not here to be insisted on) will perhaps find the Event so little,
in many cases, answer the Expectation he would have had of uniformly finding
great Disparities in their actual Coldness, if he had not met with this
Advertisement, that he will not much wonder, that a Person, who wants not other
Employments for his Time, was willing to decline so tedious and nice a Task.

Title V. Experiments touching the Tendency of Cold Upwards or Downwards.
1. THough, after the consideration of the sphere of Activity of Cold, it would
be the most proper place to take some Notice of the Direction of its Activity,
yet because one of the Experiments, that belong to This head, is of great use
to facilitate the trial of many of those, that follow, throughout this whole
Collection; we will no longer delay to say something of this matter, namely, in
what Line, or, if you please, toward what part the frigefactive virtue of cold
Bodies does operate the furthest and the most strongly.

2. It Is a Known Doctrine among Philosophers, that the Diffusion of Heat tends
chiefly upwards, as the flame of a Candle will burn many things held over it at
a greater Distance, then it would considerably warm them at, in case they were
held beneath its level, or even by its sides: and it is true, that in all cases
vulgarly taken notice of, the observation, for reasons elsewhere discoursed of,
holds well enough; and therefore it may be worth enquiry, whether in Cold,
which is generally looked upon as the contrary Quality to Heat, the diffusion
(from cold bodies) be made more strongly downwards, then either upwards or
toward the sides.

About this matter, I can as yet find among my Notes but the two following
Experiments, (...) those not both together.

[A very thin bubble was blown at a Lamp, and purposely made flat at the
bottom, that it might be the more exposed to the cold, and it was suspended by
a string within a pretty deal less then an inch of a mixture of beaten Ice and
Salt, wherewith we had half filled a conveniently large wide-mouthed glass, but
we could not find, that a cold, Capable of freezing, did strike so high
upwards, for the water in the bubble remained altogether unfrozen; which agrees
very well with what we have observed, that a mixture of ice and salt did not
(...) the vapors, that wandered through the Air, above half a barley corns
breadth higher, then the mixture in the Glass reached.]

3. [A mixture of snow and salt being put into a vial with a long neck, the
round part of it was by a weight kept under water, out of which being taken
after a while, the outside of the glass beneath the surface of the water was
cased with solid Ice, N B. especially about the bottom of the vial, of greater
hardness and thickness then one could easily imagine.]

4. Thus far the notes, from which nevertheless I will not positively conclude,
though they seem to persuade it, that the tendency of the cold produced by
Bodies qualified to freez others, is greater downwards then upwards: For, the
satisfactory determination of that matter may, for ought I know, require Trials
more artificial and nice, then those we have been reciting. And I could wish,
that I could find the last of them to have been carefully repeated and
registered, because it seems somewhat strange, that the Ice should be much
thicker at the bottom of the vial, then elsewhere, in regard, that when we
have, as we very frequently have, put mixtures of snow and salt into vials, and
left them in the open Air, we generally observed, that the outside of the Glass
was cased with Ice, or covered with hoar frost, directly over against that part
of the inside of the Glass, wherein the frigorifick mixture was. So that part
of the snow and salt resolving one another, and falling down in the form of a
liquor to the bottom, the unmelted part of the mixture would float upon this
liquor, and the external Ice would appear over against the floating mixture, by
which it was generated: So that as the mixture grew thinner and thinner, so
would the Zone or girdle, if I may so call it, of external Ice, grow narrower
and narrower, till at length, when the snow was quite melted away, the external
Ice would quickly also vanish. But from this observation (which we frequently
made) That as in such vials (...) Ice did not appear (as I just now related)
above half a corns breadth higher then the mixture in the glass; so I remember
not to have observed it much lower beneath the mixture; from those things, I
say, it may be probably conjectured, that even the coldest Bodies (at least
unless their Bulk alter the case) do not diffuse their freezing virtue, either
upwards or downwards to any considerable distance.

5. These trials, as I was intimating, may suggest some difficulties about the
last of the two Experiments, transcribed out of my notes. But as it is evident
these observations were made in the open Air, by the freezing of its roving
vapors, and the mentioned Experiment was made under water, so how much this
difference of mediums may alter the case, as to the way of the Diffusion of
cold, I dare not, till further trial, boldly determine, especially since one
Circumstance, to be under the next Title mentioned, about the freezing of Eggs,
may pass for an addirional Experiment as to our present Enquiry: For the Cases
obtained by frozen Eggs suspended under water, which seem to argue, that the
Diffusion of their cold was made every way, since they were quite enclosed in
the Ice, they had produced.

6. Though the Experiment of freezing water by the Intervention of salt and
snow be not a new one for substance, yet I hold it not amiss, to make a further
mention of it on this occasion. Because that what I am to deliver about it, is
a Paticular not taken notice of (that I know of) by others; the premising of
which, will, according to what we lately intimated, much facilitate the trial
of many of the Experiments to be set down in the following part of these
papers, and will indeed appear to be of no small moment in our whole Attempt of
Framing an History of Cold. For it has long seemed to me one of the chief
things, that has hindered men from making any considerable progress in this
matter, that whereas glass-vessels are generally much the most proper to freez
liquors in, because their transparency allows us to see what changes the Cold
makes in the liquors exposed to it; the way of freezing with salt and snow, as
it has been hitherto used, does almost as little, as the common way of barely
exposing vessels to the cold Air in frosty weather, prevent the unseasonable
breaking of the glasses. For in both these ways, the water or other liquor,
usually beginning to freez at the top, and it being the Nature of Glaciation,
as we shall see anon, to distend the water and Aqueous liquors it hardens, it
is usually and naturally consequent, that when the upper crust of Ice is grown
thick, and by reason of the Expansion of the frozen liquor bears hard with its
edges against the sides of the glass, contiguous to it, the included Liquor,
(that is by degrees successively turned into Ice) requiring more Room then
before, and forcibly endeavoring to Expand it self every way, finds it less
difficult to burst the glass, then lift up the Ice; and consequently does the
former, and thereby spoils the Experiment, before it be come to perfection, or
have let us see what Nature would have done, if she had not been thus hindered
in her work.

7. The consideration of this invited me to alter the common way of freezing,
and order the matter so, that whenever I pleased, the exposed liquor should
not begin to freez at the top or sides, but at the bottom, which I concluded it
very easy to do, by mingling the salt with that part only of the snow, which
was to lie beneath and about the bottom of the glass I placed in it. For by
this means the snow, that was contiguous to the sides, was able but to cool the
water, and dispose it to Glaciation, whereas the mingled snow and salt, on
which the bottom of the glass rested, did actually turn the neighboring Liquor
into Ice, and lift up the incumbent liquor toward the higher and empty parts of
the glass: And this liquor also I could afterward freez at pleasure, without
danger of breaking the vessel, only by so applying salt and snow to the sides
of the glass, that they never reached, except perhaps at the very conclusion of
the Experiment, so high by a reasonable distance, as the upper surface of the
liquor in the glass; so that the superior parts of that liquor were always kept
fluid, and capable of being easily impelled higher and higher by the Expansion
of the freezing parts of the subjacent liquor.

8. The Speculative inference, that may be drawn from this Experiment, of
making water begin to freez at the bottom, not the top, will be more In the
Discourse touching the primum frigidum.
properly taken notice of in another place; In the mean time I shall only
intimate by the way, that there is no great necessity of any nice proportion of
salt to snow, nor of any exquisite mixture of them: a third or fourth part or
thereabouts of Sea salt, in reference to the snow, will not do amiss; nor do I
usually put salt to all the snow at once, unless in some case, wherein I have a
mind to freez a liquor quickly, and make a speedy resolution of the snow and
salt in order thereunto; to which I shall only add, that by the way above
mentioned, I do upon particular occasions make the exposed liquor freez, not at
the bottom or the top, but next to what side of the Glass I please, according
to the Exigency of the Experiment. But though it may suffice to have hinted the
Speculative Inference, that may be drawn from this way of freezing Liquors, it
will be expedient to give explicitly this practical Advertisement, concerning
it, that whereas it seems to have been taken for granted, that snow is
necessary in this Artifice, and we our selves were for some time led away with
the rest, by that supposition; yet that is but a presumption, and ought to be
removed as one very prejudicial to those that with us design the prosecuting
Experiments, in order to the History of Cold. For snow is but seldom to be
found on the ground in comparison of Ice, and being but a Congeries of many
small Icesicles with much Air intercepted among them, it is not ( (...)
paribus) near so durable as the more entire Body of solid Ice; and yet we have
found by frequent Experience, that Ice well beaten in a Mortar, will serve our
turn for Artificial Glaciations, as well (if not in some respects better) as
snow, and therefore in this History of Cold we indifferently prescribe Snow and
Salt, or Salt and Ice as the Ingredients of our Glaciating Mixtures.

Title VI. Experiments and Observations touching the Preservation and
Destruction of (Eggs, Apples, and other) Bodies by Cold.
1. IT is a Tradition common enough, though not here in England, yet among
those that have given us Accounts of very cold (...), that if Eggs or Apples,
being frozen, be thawed near the fire, they will be thereby spoiled, but if
they be immersed in cold water, the internal cold will be drawn out, as they
suppose, by the external, and the frozen Bodies will be harmlefly, though not
so quickly, thawed, This Tradition I thought fit to examine, not only because
it may be doubted, whether it will succeed in our more Temperate Climate, and
because I love not to rely upon Traditions, when I have the opportunity to
examine them (especially if no one Credible Author affirms them upon his
particular knowledge,) but also because I thought the Experiment, if true,
might be so varied and made use of, as to become luciferous enough, and afford
us diverse Phenomenon of cold, not so easy to be produced by the more known
ways of experimenting. And accordingly having exposed some of these Bodies to a
cold that was judged sharp enough, we afterward put them in water, but found
not the event answer our expectations, no Ice appearing to be generated;
nevertheless we were not hereby so discouraged, as not to repeat the Experiment
(which we judged to be not unlikely) with more sollicitousness and advantage
then before; and having thereby brought it to succeed, we afterward made
several trials of it with several distinct aims, but (...) now find any Entry
of diverse of them. But those I have hitherto met with among my Notes, I shall
subjoyn, as having in them some Particulars, that may afford useful hints to an
Enquirer into the History and Nature of Cold. And I shall set down together,
and that in this place (though it would not otherwise be the most proper) those
I have met with, because some Circumstances of one or other of them may be of
use to us on several occasions in the present Treatise.

2. [An Egg weighing twelve drachms and one grain wrapped in a waxed paper (to
keep it from the liquor of the thawing snow) and frozen with snow and salt,
wanted four grains of that weight: put into a dish of fair water there crusted
as much Ice about the outside as made the Egg and Ice fifteen drachms and nine
grains; the ice being taken off from the shell, and the shell very well dried,
the Egg was found to weigh twelve drachms and twelve grains; the Egg being
broken, was found almost quite thawed; the Egg frozen swam in water, being
thawed it sunk.]

3. [We took two Eggs strongly frozen, and in a room where there was a good
fire, we put one of them into a deep woodden-dish full of very cold water, and
set the other by it, upon a table about two yards from the fire, that they
might be in Air of the same temper as to heat and cold; then perceiving the
Egg, that lay under water, to have obtained a thick crust of Ice, we took it
out, and having first freed it from the Ice, broke it, and found that some part
of the white was not yet freed from a pretty store of little parcels of Ice,
but the rest of the white (which was much the greater part) and the Yelk seemed
to be much what of the same consistence, as if the Egg had not formerly been
frozen, whereas the other Egg, that lay by upon the dry table, had not only its
whole white frozen into a consistent Body, but the Yelk it self, though we saw
no distinct particles of Ice in it, was grown so hard, that it cut just like
the Yelk of an Egg over boiled, and being cut quite through, showed us certain
concentrical circles of somewhat differing Colors, with a speck much whiter
then any of them in the middle of the Yelk; which last circumstances, whether
they were accidental or no, further observation must determine.]

Note, that though we have not found above once, that frozen Eggs would swim,
yet when we had broken such Eggs, the frozen white would swim, but not the yelk.

4. We afterward repeated the Experiment of laying two frozen Eggs near
together in the place above mentioned, the one under water, and the other out
of it, till that put in water had got a thick Icy crust, and by breaking of
them both, presently after one another, were confirmed in the Persuasion, that
frozen Eggs will thaw by great odds ( caeteris paribus) faster when immersed in
water, then when surrounded only with Air.

5. [We likewise took a frozen Egg, and from a fixed place suspended it so by a
slender packthread, that it hung quite under water without yet touching the
vessel, that the water was in. This we did partly upon another Design, and
partly to observe, whether or no the Ice would in this case be considerably
thicker or thinner against the lower parts of the Egg, as we formerly mentioned
our selves to have observed it to be very manifestly at the lower parts of a
glass, which having Ice and Salt in it, was immersed under water; but when we
took out the Egg, after we saw that its Icy case had covered the packthread it
was hung by, we found the case upon breaking it, of a thickness uniform enough
to keep us from concluding any thing from this trial; since, though there were
a pretty deal of Ice generated at so small a distance from the case of the Egg,
that it seemed to owe its Production to the same cause; yet, which was somewhat
odd, we did not find, that this Ice stuck to that which did immediately embrace
the Egg, though we had some faint suspicion, that the Rudiments of it might
have been very early parted from the Egg, by some little shaking of the table
occasioned by peoples passing to and fro in the room.]

6. [We took some Pippins, and exposing them to freez all night, and putting
them the next morning into a Basin of very cold water (though in a warm room)
they were not long there without being enclosed with cases of Ice of a
considerable thickness; Where note, 1. That that part of a floating Apple, that
was immersed under water, had a very much thicker coat then the other part
which remained above it. 2. That the extant part seemed likewise to be harder
then the immersed. 3. That one of these Pippins being purposely left out of the
Basin, but laid by it, seemed upon cutting to be harder and more frozen then
those Apples which had been put into the water, which scarce seemed to be at
all harder then ordinary Pippins, that had never been set to freez, at least as
to those parts of the Apples that were near the rind, and consequently near
the Ice. 4. That neither frozen Pippins nor frozen Eggs, notwithstanding their
great power of turning part of the contiguous water into Ice, did appear to Us
to detain or congeal any of the roving vapors of the Air, as Ice or Snow
included with Salt in glasses is, (as we have formerly observed) accustomed
very remarkably to do.]

7. [We took Eggs, and froze them with ice and salt, till the shells of them
were made to crack, then we took them out, and put one of them in Milk, two of
them in a wide Drinking Glass full of Beer, and two more in a large Glass,
wherein we covered them with Sack, that was poured in till it reached much
higher in the Glass then the Eggs. But none of these trials produced, as we
could perceive one grain of ice.] And being desirous to see, whether the Acid
salt of Vinegre, or the Cold in a well frozen Egg, would have the chief
Operation, if those two Bodies were put together: I found upon Trial, that the
Saline parts of the Vinegre began to dissolve the Eggshell, as appeared by the
much altered Color of it, but the Cold of the ice in the Eggs was not able to
freez any part of the water or phlegm of the Vinegre.

8. We had also thoughts of trying whether or no pieces of Iron of several
shapes and bignesses, being for diverse days and nights exposed to the freezing
Air, and afterward immersed in water, would produce any ice, as frozen Eggs
and Apples do. For the Brittleness of the Laths of StoneBows in sharp frosts,
together with other observations elsewhere mentioned, seem to argue, that (to
use a popular phrase) the Frost does also get into these Bodies. And I have
been assured by one, whom the Trials, I had made with Eggs and Apples, invited
me to consult, that a great Cheese, he immersed in water in a Cold Country,
was presently covered over with ice. But though, as I said, I had thoughts of
making the above mentioned Trials, yet for want of a frost sufficiently
durable, I was not able to effect what I designed. But thus much I tried, That
though I kept good Lumps of Iron, and as I remember of other Metalls, besides
pieces of Glass, and a stone or two of a convenient size, in snow and salt, I
know not how much longer, then would have sufficed to make Eggs or Apples, or
such kind of things fit to produce store of ice in water, upon their being
thawed therein; yet we could not find, that upon the immersing the several
newly named Mineral Bodies, there was the least ice produced in the cold water,
where we kept them covered. I must not nevertheless omit to make some mention
of that which lately (...) to happen at the door of our own Laboratory
(respecting the North East) where some Glasses, newly brought from the shop,
and not employed, lying in a Basket, as they poured water into one of them to
rince it, part of it was presently turned into ice, whilst one of my
Domestics held it in his hand, who coming presently to show it me, I suspected
the ice might have come from, or rather with the water that was poured into the
Glass, but upon enquiring was assured of the Contrary.

9. But here I must not omit another trial relating to the former Experiments,
which may seem somewhat odd, if its Event prove constantly the same, as when we
tried it. For after these and diverse other Experiments made, with frozen Eggs
and Apples, we thought it might be worth the examining, whether or no Ice and
the Liquors of these Concretes would produce the like effects, as Frozen Eggs
and Apples; and because it is usually an easier way, then that which is more
common of bringing Bodies, whose degree of cold is more languid, to freez
water, to include them with ice or snow in a single vial, and so put them upon
acting only upon the minute, and easily congealable vapors that wander in the
Air: we took that Course in the trials we are mentioning, whose success is thus
briefly set down in one of our notes.

[10. Ice and Juice of Pippins well shaken together in a single vial, produced
abundance of dew, but we could not satisfy our selves, that it produced any
Ice.]

[11. Also Ice and the white of an Egg moderately beaten into a Liquor, were
tried, with just the like success: But these trials having scarce been made
above once, and at most but twice, are to be (...).]

12. As for what is said, That Eggs and Apples thawed in the water, are better
preserved then thawed by the fires side, we tried it in Pippins (for in Eggs
the Experiment is not so easily and quickly made) and as far as we could
discern, found it true, and somewhat wondered to see, how soon, and how much
putrefaction was induced into those loosely contexed Bodies by an overhasty
thawing.

13. If we may believe the Relations of Navigators, and others of good Credit
(of one or two of whom I had the opportunity to make Inquiry) there may be good
use made of what happens in the different ways of thawing Eggs and Apples, by
applying the Observation to other Bodies, and even to Men, that happen to be
dangerously nipp'd by excessive Cold. For it is a known Observation among
those, that have inhabited or visited the Northern Climates, that if those,
whose hands or feet, or faces happen to be frozen, approach them too near or
hastily to the fire, they are in danger of losing, or at least much prejudicing
the overhastily thawed parts. ( Upon diverse of us (says Captain James, speaking
of his companions) had the cold raised Blisters as big as Walnuts. This we
imagined to come, by reason that they came too hastily to the fire.) And
therefore they that are more careful to be safely then quickly delivered from
the painful cold, are wont, before they come near the fire, whether it be open
or in Stoves, either well to wash their hands, or other frozen parts, in very
cold water, or else to rub them well with Snow it self. And this brings into my
mind, that I sometimes endeavored to find by trial, what Beeflong exposed to
freez, and differingly thawed, would teach me by way of confirmation of this
Tradition; but being then obliged to unseasonable Removes from the place where
I made my Trials, they did not for that Reason afford me the satisfaction I
desired; but meeting with an intelligent person, that had been an housekeeper
in Muscovy, and enquiring of him whether he had observed any thing about this
matter, he told me, that having once had two very large Cheeses frozen, he
thawed one of them in water, and the other in a Stove, but found, that thawing
in water was much the better way of the two; and I was well pleased to be
answered by him, that the Cheese, thawed in water, did soon acquire therein a
Crust of ice.

14. But more memorable is that Relation, which I remember I have read in the
experienced Surgeon Fabritius Hildanus's Treatise of Gangrenes, where he
relates from credible Testimony, how the whole Body of a Man was succesfully
thawed, and which is more strange, cased all over with ice, by being handled as
our Eggs and Apples were. His own words, because the Narrative may prove of
some use, I shall subjoyn, and they are these; Narravit mihi vir quidam nobilis
and fide Gulielmus Fabritius Hildanus de Gangr. and (...) Cap. 10.
dignus, se, cum eas Regiones peragraret, incidisse aliquando in Viatorem
secundum Viam frigore rigidum, ac pene mortuum, quem plaustro suo impositum,
cum deduxisset in Diversorium, hospes illico demersit in frigidam, quo facto
undiquaque ita erupit Gelu, ut ipsius Corpus glacie, seu ferreo Thorace
contectum conspiceretur. Tum quoque propinatum illi aiebat Cyathum ampliorem
Hydromelitis, quo illi seu potu ordinario utuntur, addito pulves re Cinamomi,
Caryophyllorum and Macis, unde sudor in lecto provocatus est; atque ita aegrum
ad se rediisse amissis dunt axat manuum and pedum extremis Articulis. Hinc
intelligimus hanc Methodum sanandi congelatos veram ac tutam esse, ac eam etiam
probat Summus Philosophus qui regiones illas frequentavit, etc.

15. The Experiment delivered at the Beginning of this Title, (of speedily
producing ice on the outside of frozen Eggs and Apples, by immersing them in
Cold water) I take to be one of the two or three most illustrious, I have
hitherto met with about congelation; and as likely as any to assist us to
investigate the causes of it. But though the Phenomenon seem very favorable to
their Hypothesis, that suppose congelation to be effected by the ingress of
frigorifick Atoms into the water or other Bodies to be congealed; yet (for some
reasons) I shall not here offer to draw any speculative inference from the
Experiment, contenting my self to have here, and at the beginning of this
Section hinted in transitu the hopefulness of its proving Luciferous.

16. But I remember that the Title of this Section promises something
concerning the preservation and destruction of other inanimate Bodies, as well
as Eggs and Apples, by Cold; but as that intimated promise makes the last part
of the Title, so what I have to deliver on this subject must not be expected to
be other then the last part of this Section. And indeed to be able to add much
to that little, which is generally known about this subject, I should either
have lived in colder Climates then ours, or have had, which I had not, the
opportunity of making Experiments, that require length of time. And therefore I
shall only propose a general Consideration about this matter, and subjoyn a few
of the chief Observations I have met with in Navigators or others about it.
That then, which I would premise in general, is only this, That whether Bodies
be srozen by the ingress of frigorifick Atoms, which by their intruding in
swarms, can scarce avoid discomposing the Texture of the Body, or whether it be
made by the recess of some matter, that did before Congelation, more strongly
agitate its parts; which way soever, I say, freezing is effected, it is
manifest, that the Nature of a frozen Body is, at least for the time, much
altered, and therefore we thought fit to place it among our general Articles of
Inquiry about Cold, what the effects of it may be as to the Conservation or
Destruction of the Textures of Bodies. But as for the duly prosecuting this
inquiry, we do, as we lately intimated, want the time and convenience, we judge
needful for such a work, the matter seeming to require, that it be watchfully
and considerately managed, and that both the Nature of particular Bodies, and
the differing degrees of Cold, and the differing times wherein the Condition of
the exposed Body is estimated, be taken into Consideration. For we find, that a
moderate degree of Cold preserves many Bodies, and that glaciation destroys, or
at least prejudices most others (probably by discomposing or vitiating their
Texture) when they come to be thawed, though whilst the Frost is in them, it
keep almost all Bodies from disclosing any putrefaction.

17. This being the general Consideration I intended to propose, it remains
that I add out of credible Writers, or other Relators, some Observations to
illustrate and confirm the chief particulars comprehended in it.

And first, that a moderate degree of cold conduces much to the preservation of
the greatest part of inanimate Bodies, is a thing vulgarly taken notice of and
acknowledged. And I do not readily remember any instances that manifest, that
any degree of Cold, though more then moderate, provided it fall short of
freezing the Bodies exposed to it, does spoil them. Regii Mutinenses (says the
industrious Bartholinus) nivem hoc Barthol. de usu Nivis page 80.
fine arcte (...) servant in Cellis Nivariis, in quibus fervente aestate vidi
carnes mactatorum Animalium a putredine diu se conservasse. The next thing I
shall mention to our present purpose, is a memorable passage in Captain James's
Voyage, which shows, that so great a Degree of Cold, as may be supposed to have
reigned in his ship, that was frozen up all the Winter in one of the Coldest
Regions of the World, was not great enough to spoil the meat and drink, that
had layen all that time under water, because it seems by the story, that they
were not actually frozen; the words of his Journal are these. By the Ninth of
May we were come to, and got up our five Barrels of Page 74.
Beef and Pork, and had four Buts of Beer, and one of Cider, which God had
preserved for us: it had layen under water all the winter; yet we could not
perceive, that it was any thing the worse; which is the more remarkable,
because of what we shall note by and by, both out of other Books, and even out
of this, about what became of a stronger Liquor then Beer, once brought to
Glaciation: And it seems our Navigator found Cold, if extremely intended, so
destructive a thing, that he thought fit to take notice in his Journal, That
even a Cable having layen under the ice all the Page 79.
Winter, was not in June found a jote the worse.

18. And it seems by a passage in Simlerus's account of the Alps, that even
Entire Bodies may be very long preserved by snow, and, as far as I can guess by
the story, without glaciation. Refert (says Bartholinus, speaking of him) in
Rhetis apud Rinwaldios, Barthol. de figura nivis page 79
nivium e monte ruentium (...) sylvam and (...) Abietes dejecisse; accidisse
etiam Helvetio milite per Alps iter faciente ut 60. homines and plures eadem
nivis conglobatione opprimerentur. Hoc igitur Nivium tumulo sepulti, ad (...)
Aestatis delitescunt, quo solut a nonnihil Nive Decidua, Corpora mortua
inviolata patent, si ab amicis, vel transeuntibus quaerantur. Vidimus ipsi
triste hoc spectaculum, etc.

19. Secondly, I could allege many instances to show, that many, if not most
inanimate Bodies, (I say inanimate, because of the Gangraenes and Sphacelations
that often rob living men of frozen Toes, Noses, and sometimes other parts) if
they be actually frozen, will not disclose any putrefaction, whilst they
continue in that state. Nor is this much to be wondered at, since whether we
will suppose, that in Glaciation the moist and fluid parts are wedged in by
intruding swarms of frigorifick Atoms, or that those restless particles, that
were wont to keep the Body fluid or soft, are called forth of it, be the cause
of glaciation; which soever of these two ways we pitch upon, we must in frozen
Bodies conceive an unwonted rest to be produced of those movable particles,
whose internal commotions, and disorderly coalitions and Avolations, are either
the Causes, or the necessary Concomitants of Corruption.

20. On this Occasion I remember, that meeting with a knowing Man, whose
affairs stopped him during the Winter upon the Coasts of Sweden and Denmark,
being desirous to learn of him, how long they could in those colder Climates
preserve in Winter Dead Bodies unburied, and yet uncorrupted, he told me, he
had opportunity to observe, that though the frost lasted, as it usually did in
that season, three or four months together, or longer, the Bodies might
without any Embalming, or other Artificial way of preservation, be kept
untainted by the bare coldness of the Air. Of Bodies lasting long unputrified
in ice, Navigators and others have afforded us several instances, but we will
mention two, because they contain something more remarkable then the rest. The
one is thus delivered by Bartholinus. Notandum, Corpor a occisorum hyeme eodem
(...). de usu Nivis page 83.
positu, eademque figur a permanere rigida, qua ante eadem depraehensa sunt.
Visum id extra urbem nostram, quum 11. Feb. 1659. oppugnantes hosts
repellerentur, magnaque strage occumberent: alii enim rigidi iratum vultum
ostendebant, alii oculos elatos, alii ore diducto ringentes, alii Brachiis
extensis gladium minari, alii alio situ prostrati jacebant. Imo ex mari gelato,
primo vere resoluto, eques equo suo insidens integer emersit, nescio quid
manibus tenens. The other instance is afforded us by Captain Capt. James's
Trav. page 76.
James's Journal, and is by him thus delivered. In the Evening (of the 18. of
May) the Master of our ship, after Burial returned aboard ship, and looking
about her, discovered some part of our Gunner under the Gun-room ports. This
man we had committed to Sea at a good distance from the ship, and in deep water
near six months before. The 19. in the morning I sent Men to dig him out, he
was fast in the Ice, his head downwards, and his heel upwards, for he had but
one Leg; and the Plaster was as yet at his wound: in the afternoon they dug
him clear out, after all which time he was as free from noisomness, as when we
first committed him to Sea. This alteration had the Ice and water and time only
wrought on him, that his flesh would slip up and down upon his (...) like a
Glove on a man's hand. But there is one pertinent particular more, which if it
be strictly true, is so very remarkable, that I cannot on this occasion forbear
to annex it, which is, That according to the relation of the Merchants of
Copenhagen, that return thither from Spitzberg, a place in Greenland, the
extreme Cold will there Barthol. de usu Nivis Cap. 12.
suffer nothing to putrify and corrupt, insomuch that Buried Bodies are
preserved 30. years (...) and inviolated by any (...).

21. Thirdly, though whilst Bodies continue frozen, the cold (as may be
supposed) by arresting the insensible particles, from whose tumultuary motions,
and disorderly Avolations Corruption is wont to proceed, may keep the ill
operations of Cold upon the violated Textures of Bodies from appearing; yet
when once that (...) is removed, diverse bodies make haste to discover, that
their Texture was discomposed, if not quite vitiated by the excessive cold. I
might allege on this occasion, that I have shown diverse ingenious Men by an
Experiment I have taught in another Of the usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy:
Treatise, that the change produced in the Textures of some Bodies by
glaciation, may be made manifest even to the sight. For by freezing an Oxes
Eye, the Crystalline humor, which in its natural state is transparent enough,
to deserve its Name of Crystalline, though not fluid enough to deserve the Name
of humor, lost with its former Texture all its Diaphancity, and being cut in
two with a sharp knife, appeared quite throughout very white. But for
confirmation of this I shall rather add, that I remember, that the person
formerly mentioned, that had made trial of the two Cheeses, confessed to me,
That, though that which had been thawed in Cold water, was very much the less
spoiled, yet they were both of them manifestly impaired (and the other of them
was so in its very consistence) by the Frost, though the Bulk of the Cheeses
was very considerable, and though they were both of them, of a more then
ordinarily good and durable sort.

22. The next thing I shall allege to this purpose, is the Observation of the
Hollanders, even by such a degree of cold as they met with in Nova Zembla,
before the middle of October, at which time their strong Beer, by being partly
frozen, had its Texture so vitiated, that the reunion of its unfrozen to its
thawed parts could not restore it to any thing near such a spirituous Liquor,
as it was before. We were forced (says Gerad de Veer, that wrote the story) to
melt the Beer, Purch. Lib. 3. cap. 5. Sect. 2. page 493.
for there was scarce any unfrozen Beer in the Barrel, but in that thick yeast
that was unfrozen, lay the strength of the Beer, so that it was too strong to
drink alone; and that which was frozen tasted like water, and being melted, we
mixed one with the other, and so drank it, but it had neither ftrength nor
taste. And in the next Months Journal he tells us, that their best Beer was
for the most part wholly without any strength, so that it had no savor at all.
But a more remarkable instance to our present purpose, is afforded us by our
Countryman Captain James, because it manifests the Cold to have the same
effect upon a much stronger and more spirituous Liquor. I ever doubted (says he
in his Journal) that we should be weakest in Page 73.
Spring, and therefore had I reserved a Tun of Alegant Wine unto this time. Of
this by (...) seven parts of water to one ofWine, we made some weak Beverage,
which ( by reason that the Wine by being frozen, had lost his virtue) was
little better then water.

23. And I remember that a learned Man, whom I asked some questions concerning
this matter, told me, that in a Northern Country, less colder then Muscovy, he
had observed, that Beef having been very long frozen, when it came afterward
to be eaten, was almost insipid, and being boiled afforded a Broth little
better then common water.

24. If I had not wanted opportunity, I should here subjoyn an Account of some
Trials, for which I made provision, as thinking them not absolutely unworthy
the making, though extravagant enough not to be likely to succeed. For I had a
mind to try, not only whether some plants, and other Medicinal things, whose
specific virtues I was acquainted with, would lose their peculiar Qualities by
being thoroughly congealed, and (several ways) thawed; and whether thawed
Hartshorn, of which the Quantity of Salt and Saline spirit of such a
determinate strength should beforehand be tried by distillation, would, after
having been long congealed, yield by the same way of distillation the same
Quantity of those actual substances, as if the Hartshorn had not been frozen
at all. But I had also thoughts to try, whether the Electrical faculty of
Amber, (both the Natural, and that factitious imitation of it I elsewhere
teach) and whether the attractive or directive Virtue of Loadstones, especially
very weak ones, would be either impaired, or any ways altered by being very
long exposed to the intensest degrees of Cold within my power of producing. But
to have named such extravagancies, is that, which I think enough, and others I
fear may think too much.

25. Yet some few things I shall subjoyn on this occasion, because it will add
somewhat not impertinent to the Design of this Treatise (which is to deliver
the Phenomenon of Cold) as well as countenance what I have been proposing; and
those things are, That I can by very credible Testimony make it appear, that an
intense Cold may have a greater operation upon the Texture even of solid and
durable Bodies, then we in this temperate Climate are commonly aware of. I
shall not urge, that even here in England' it is generally believed, that Men's
Bones are more apt to break upon falls in Frosty, then in other Weather,
because that may possibly be imputed to the hardness of the frozen Ground. Nor,
that I remember when I was wont to make use of Stone-Bows, I found it a common
observation, that in Frosty Weather the Laths, though of Steel, would, by the
Cold, be made so Brittle, that unless extraordinary care were had of them, or
some Expedients were used about them, they would be apt to break. Nor yet, that
an Ingenious Overseer of great Buildings has informed me, that those that deal
in Timber and other Wood, find it much more easy to be cleft in hard Frosts,
then in Ordinary Weather. These and the like instances I do, as I was
intimating, forbear to urge, because these effects of Cold are much inferior to
those that have been met with in more intemperate Regions.

26. And to begin with its Operation upon what we were last treating of, Wood.
Of Charleton-Island Captain James has this passage about the Timber, they
employed upon their work, The Boys (says he) with Cuttle Page 67.
axes must cut Boughs for the Carpenter; for every piece of Timber, that he did
work, must first be thawed in the fire. And a little before, he tells us, that
even when they found a standing Tree, They must make a fire to it to thaw it,
otherwise it could not be cut.

27. And I remember, that two several persons, both of them Scholars, and
strangers to one another, that had occasion to travel as far as Mosco, assured
me, that they Diverse times observed in extreme frosts, that the Timber-work
(whether the Boards or the Beams) of some Houses, which, according to the
Custom of that Country, were made of wood, and perhaps not well seasoned,
would, by the operation of the Cold, be made to crack in diverse places, with a
Noise, which was surprising enough to them, especially in the Night.

28. I remember also, that a Physician, who lived for some years in one of the
Coldest Plantations of the West Indies, related to me, that he had observed the
Bricks, he had employed about Building, to be very apt to be spoiled by the
long and vehement frosts of the Winters there; where he likewise said, that
'twas a usual thing for the Houses builded of Brick, to decay in fewer years by
far, then here in England, which he said was generally, and, as he thought,
truly imputed to the excessive Cold, which made the Bricks apt to crumble, and
moulder away. But though I dare not lay much weight on this Observation, unless
I knew, whether the Bricks were sufficiently burned, and free from pibbles,
(...) by the heat that burned the Bricks: yet we must not deny, that extreme
Colds may be able to shatter or dissolve the Texture of as close and solid
Bodies as Bricks, especially if the Aqueous Moisture be not sufficiently driven
away, if we will admit, what I remember I have mentioned in another Treatise,
out of a very Learned and credible Author, of the power, that a sreezing Degree
of Cold has had to break even solid Marble. And much less shall we doubt the
possibility of what the Physician related, if we will not reject the Testimony
of the Learned Olaus (...), according to which, Instruments made even of so
hard a Metal as Brass, are not priviledg'd from the Destructive Operations of
some Degrees of Cold. For, Ex aere facta opera (says he in his Curious Musaeum)
Lib. 1. Sect. (...) Cap. 5. page 122.
vi frigoris quandoque rumpuntur, quod tamen pauci credunt, id tamen expertus
est Eratostenes, and Nostras Johannis Munckius in difficillimo suo Itinere, quo
per fretum Christianum transitum in mare Australe invenire moliebatur. To
which, perhaps most Writers, would, if they met with it, add this passage out
of the Dutch-mens Voyage to Nova Zembla. The 20. (of October) it was calm
Sunshiny weather, and then again we saw the Sea open, at which time we went on
Board, to fetch the rest of our Beer out of the ship, where we found some of
the Barrels frozen in pieces, and the Iron Hoops that were upon the Josam
Barrels, were also frozen in pieces. But though this Testimony seems to prove,
that extreme Cold may break even Iron it self, and though possibly such an
Affirmation might in the general not be erroneous, yet I shall forbear to draw
that (...) from this passage, because I suspect, that since the Irons, that
were broken, were Hoops, and since it seems probable by the story, that there
were Barrels not (...) with Iron, broken also by the same Frost; the breaking
of the Hoops may have been the effect, not of the violence of the Cold, as
acting immediately upon the Iron, but of the Liquor in the vessels, which being
by the Cold that froze it, turned into ice, was so forcibly expanded, as to
burst, what ever (...) its dilation, according to what we shall have occasion
in its due place more fully to deliver.

An Appendix to the VI. Title.
INquiring of the formerly mentioned Physician to the Russian Emperor, what
experience teaches about some of the matters treated of in this (sixth) Title,
in those cold Climates, where the effects of freezing are more notable: He told
me, that the tradition (mentioned above touching the safest way of thawing) is
in Muscovy generally received, and that it is usual for Men, that have their
Cheeks and Noses frozen, to rub them well with snow, and escape unharmed;
whereas if they go immediately into their Stoves, they often lose the Tops of
their Noses, and introduce into their Cheeks a kind of paralytick Distemper, or
benummedness, that they cannot get rid of in many Months.

And having also inquired of the same Ingenious person, whether Wine frozen,
and then permitted to thaw, till the unfrozen Liquor had quite resolved the
ice, was not thereby spoiled by having its Texture vitiated, he answered, that
in very strong Claret Wine he found the Color scarce at all destroyed, nor the
Liquor otherwise much impaired; but that in weaker Claret Wine the Color was
spoiled, and the Liquor was otherwise much the worse. But note, that in the
French-wine there remained a third part or more unfrozen, so that it seems not
to have been exposed to near so extreme a cold, as that of the Hollanders, or
of Captain James; and that Physician likewise told me, that of some very strong
Beer, that he had in great part frozen, the ice had some Taste of the Hops, but
was dispirited like phlegm.

Having inquired how long dead Bodies would keep, he told me, that if they were
thoroughly frozen, they would be preserved incorrupted till the thaw, though
that perhaps might not happen within four or five Months after the Death of
the Man. He added, that he had the Venison of Elkes sent him unsalted, and yet
untainted, out of Siberia (which is some hundreds of leagues distant from
Mosco) and that Beef and other flesh well frozen, would keep unputrified for a
very long time; and when I asked whether the freezing did (...) impair it, he
answered, that (...) keeping it congealed, it will grow very dry and be
impaired in Taste, and will not make so good (...) as meat that was never
frozen. And he further (...) me, (...) in case frozen meat (...) it would be
far the less impaired, and might be well roasted, but if before it was thawed,
it were laid down to the Fire, it would not ever be well roasted, and would eat
very scurvily; and though a shoulder (...) Mutton, for instance, were kept very
many hours turning before the fire, yet it would continue raw in the middle.

Having inquired about the rubbing Bodies with Snow to unfreez them, he told me
(agreeable to what I noted him to have said above) that he had seen several
persons, that had been frozen, and that when a man is told, that he is frozen,
and having asked whereabouts (for the party himself usually knows it not) is
informed, that it is in this, or that place, which is commonly the Nose or the
upper part of the Cheek, or perhaps the Tip of the Ear, he usually rubs the
part very well with Snow, and lets it thaw by degrees, else, if without that
preparation he should go immediately into the Stove, he would be in danger to
lose his Nose, or other frozen part. The Doctor added, that they use to rub the
frozen Meat and Fish with Snow, and that he once examined a Man, who in his
youth had been frozen all over, and informed the Doctor, that having had
occasion in a journey to quit his Sled for a while, and do some Exercise, that
had almost made him sweat, being careless of himself when he returned to the
Sled again, he was frozen all over, and had so died, had not the Company by
Accident taken Notice of him, and by rubbing him over with Snow, and by the use
of the like means recovered him again; but he told the Doctor, that by this
whole Accident he was put to no pain, save that when he came to himself again,
he felt such a pricking all his Body over, as men are wont to find in an Arm or
Leg benumbed by having been long leaned upon.

When I asked whether the sharpness of the Cold, did not work upon the stones,
he answered, That as to Flints he could not tell, but as to other stones, and
such as are oftentimes used for Building, the violence of the Cold made them
frequently moulder into Dust. And to satisfy my Curiosity about the Effect of
Cold upon Wood, he told me, that he had very often in the night, especially
when their keen frosts were unaccompani'd with Snow, heard the Trees cleave and
crack with very great, and sometimes frightful noises, and that the outside of
the FirTrees, that were laid upon one another in their Buildings, and was
exposed to the Air, would do the like, and that he had often seen the gaping
Clefts sometimes wide enough to put in his fingers, which would remain in the
Trees, and in the Fir-wood, till the thaw, after which they would pretty well
close of themselves.

Title VII. Experiments touching the Expansion of Water, and Aqueous Liquors by
Freezing.
1. THat water and other Liquors are condensed by Cold, and so much the more
condensed, by how much the greater the degree of Cold is that condenses them,
has been for many ages generally taught by the Schools, and taken for granted
among men, till of late some more speculative then the rest, have called it in
question upon the account of the levity of Ice, since which I have met with two
modern writers, that have incidentally endeavored to prove, that Ice is water,
not condensed, but rarefied by the intumescence of water exposed to freezing in
vessels fitly shaped.

These Attempts of these learned Men putting me in mind of what I had tried to
this purpose, when I was scarce more then a Boy, invited me to consider, that
by the usual ways of Glaciation, such as these ingenious Men employed, the
Experiment is wont to meet with a Disaster, by the breaking of the Glasses,
which not only makes the Event liable to some objections of theirs, that
befriend the common Opinion, but (which is more considerable) hinders them from
judging what this Expansion of water, that is made by freezing may amount to:
wherefore we will now set down what we have done to ascertain (and yet limit)
the Experiment, as also to advance it further.

2. Whereas then these two Nicholaus Zucchius, and Melchior Cornaeus
learned Men, we have been mentioning, do so expose the water to freez, that it
is turned into Ice at the top as soon as elsewhere; the inconveniences of which
way we have already noted, we, by freezing the water, as we have formerly
taught, from the bottom upwards, can easily preserve our Glasses entire, and
yet turn the whole contained water into Ice; so that if according to this way
You so place a Bolthead or a Glass-egg, in whose Cavity the water ascends to
the height of an inch, or thereabouts, within the stem or shank, in a mixture
of Ice, or snow and salt, as that the water is first turned into ice at the
bottom and sides, and not till the very last at the top, you shall manifestly
see, that the ice will reach a good way higher in the neck, then the fluid
water did, and that upon a gentle thaw of the ice, the water, it returns to,
will rest at the same height in the stem, to which it reached, before it was
exposed to be frozen.

3. We have likewise used other ways unspoken of by the lately mentioned
writers, to evince, that water is expanded by being frozen; as first, that we
took a strong earthen vessel of a Cylindrical form, and filling it with water
to a certain height, we exposed it unstopped, both to the open Air in frosty
nights, and to the operation of snow and salt, and found, that the ice did
manifestly reach higher then the water did, before it was congealed.

Besides, if a hollow Pipe or Cylinder made of some compact matter, be stopped
at one end with wax, or some things else, which it may be more easy to drive
out, then to burst the Cylinder, and if at the other end it be filled with
water, and that orifice also be stopped after the same manner, this Pipe
suspended in a sufficiently cold Air, will have the included water frozen, and
by that change, if the Experiment have been rightly made, the water will upon
congelation take up so much more room then it did before, that the above
mentioned stoppels, or at least one of them will be thrust out, and there will
be produced a rod of Ice a good deal longer then the pipe, at each of whose
ends (or at least at one of them) a Cylindrical piece of Ice of a pretty length
may be broken off, without meddling with the Pipe, or the ice that fills it.

Diverse other ways of proving the same Truth might be here alleged, but that,
though these were not, (...) they are, sufficient, the matter would yet be
abundantly confirmed by diverse of the Experiments, that will here and there
come in more opportunely in the following part of this Treatise.

4. But here it will not be altogether impertinent or unseasonable, to take
notice, that not only those School Philosophers, who have considered the
breaking of well (...) Glasses in frosty weather, (an accident but too frequent
in Apothecaries Shops, and Laboratories) but diverse modern Virtuosi, are wont
to ascribe the Phenomenon to this, that the Cold of the external Air,
contracting the Air and Liquor within, the Ambient Air must break the sides of
the Glass to fill that space, which being deserted upon the condensation of the
included Air, the liquor would otherwise leave a vacuum abhorred by nature; and
even those few Moderns, that are loath to ascribe this Phenomenon to Natures
abhorrency of a vacuum, either not being acquainted with the weight of the Air,
know not, what probable account to give of it, or if they acknowledge that
weight, are wont to ascribe it to that, and to the great contraction of the
internal Air, made by the Cold of the External.

5. But as for the Peripateticks, the above mentioned Experiments sufficiently
evince, that in many cases, it is not the shrinking, but the Expansion of the
liquors contained in the stopped vessels, that occasions their bursting, and
therefore in these cases, we need not, nor cannot fly to I know not what fuga
vacui for an account of the Phenomenon; and whereas it may be objected, that
even glasses not half full of distilled waters, if they be exactly stopped, are
often broken by the frost in Apothecaries shops: I answer, That neither in this
case do I see any need of having any recourse, either to the fuga vacui, or to
the weight of the external Air, for even here the Expansion of the freezing
liquor may serve the turn, for in such inartificial glaciations the liquor
begins to freez at the top, and the ice there generated, fastening itself (as on
other occasions we declare) very strongly to the sides of the Glass, contiguous
to its edg, as the liquor freezes deeper and deeper, this crust of Ice
increases in thickness and strength, so that the water is included, as in a
vessel Hermetically sealed betwixt this Ice at the upper part, and the sides
and bottom of the Glass every where else, and consequently, the remaining water
being incapable of Congelation without Expansion, when the ice is grown strong
enough at the top to make it easier for the expansive endeavor of the freezing
water to crack the sides or bottom of the Glass, then to force up that thick
cake of Ice, the vessel will be broken, how much soever there be of it empty
above the surface of the Ice. And this Conjecture may be confirmed by these two
Particulars, the one, That when water is frozen in a broad vessel, which is too
strong to be broken or stretched by the frost, the surface of the ice
contiguous to the Air will be unequal or protuberant, because that though the
glaciation began at the top, the thickness and Compactness of the vessel makes
it easier for the expansive endeavor to thrust up that cake of ice in those
parts of it, that are the remoter from the sides, whereunto they are strongly
fastened, then to break so solid a vessel.

6. The other Particular is afforded us by that Experiment of ours (mentioned
in the Vth. Title foregoing) wherein if a vessel half full of water be made to
freez, not first at the top, but at the bottom, that liquor may be turned into
ice without danger to the glass. But we will now add an Experiment, on whose
occasion we have set down these Considerations. For being inclined to think,
that the spring of the Air, shut up in a vessel stopped, will preserve it
expanded, or at least keep it from considerably shrinking, notwithstanding a
very great degree of Cold, in case the vessel be strong and close enough to
fence it from the pressure of the external Air, we conjectured that the bare
weight of the outward Air added to the Refrigeration of the included Air, would
not be sufficient to break much weaker glasses, then those we have been
speaking of. And therefore partly to satisfy some ingenious Men, that this
Conjecture made me dissent from, and partly to show the Peripateticks, and
those that adhere to them in the question under consideration, that either the
Cold alone cannot always, as they teach us, contract the Air, or that if it do,
the breaking of well stopped glasses in frosty weather is much fitter to
evince, that there may be a vacuum, then that there can be none, we made the
following Experiment.

7. We took three glass-bubbles of differing shapes and sizes, which we caused
to be blown with a Lamp, that, to make the Experiment very favorable for our
Adversaries, we might have them much thinner, and consequently, weaker then
those glasses that are wont to be made use of to keep liquors in, and which
notwithstanding are wont to be broken, though they be not full by the frost.

These Bubbles, when the Air was at a convenient temper within, were (as easily
they might be) nimbly sealed up with care, to avoid the heating of the Air in
them, and being afterward exposed sometimes to the Air it self in very frosty
weather, and sometimes to that greater Cold, which is produced by the placing
them in a mixture of snow and salt, we could not nevertheless find, that any
one of the three was at all broken or cracked, so that in case the included Air
were condensed into a lesser room, the space it deserted may be concluded
empty, or else it will hardly appear, what (...) there can be, that Nature
should break, as the Peripateticks pretend, very much stronger glasses in
Apothecaries shops, to prevent a vacuum.

8. Having shown, that water it self, acquires a considerable Expansion by
Cold, we will next show, that Aqueous Bodies, or those that abound with
waterish parts, do diverse, if not (...) of them, the like.

We took Eggs, and exposing them to a sufficient Degree of Cold, we observed,
that when the contained liquors were turned into Ice, they burst the shells
asunder, so that diverse gaping Cracks were to be seen in them, as long as they
continued frozen.

9. Milk, Urine, Rhenish-wine, and good spirit of Wine, being set to freez in
distinct glass Eggs, neither of the three former liquors (...) observed to
subside before it began to rise. The Event in sum was, that the Urine was much
longer, then either of the two other liquors, before it began to swell, but
rose to a far greater height, then they, afterward. The Wine did not leave the
mark above an inch beneath. The Milk ascended about two inches, and the Urine
by guess six or seven.

10. A strong solution of (...) Vitriol, being put into a Cylindrical Pipe,
sealed at one end so, that the liquor filled the Pipe to the height of about
six or eight inches, being frozen with snow and salt, the congealed liquor grew
very opacous, and looked as if it had been turned or shot into Vitriol, save a
little that remained fluid, and transparent near the bottom. And this Ice as
appeared, rose considerably higher then the liquor did before Congelation.

It were perhaps worth trying, whether or no even several Bodies of a stable
consistence, and durable Texture, might not be found to receive some, though
less manifest Dilatation by excessive Cold. And methinks those, who attribute
Glaciation to the plentiful Ingress of frigorifick Atoms into Bodies, should by
their Hypothesis have been invited to make some Trials of this kind, since we
see that the invisible Moisture of the Air against rainy weather, does seem
manifestly enough to alter the Dimensions of doors, window-shuts, and other
such works made of wood not well seasoned. And even without supposing the truth
of the Epicurean Hypothesis, if we consider, that in Bread, though we are sure,
that much more water was added to the Meal, or Flower, then was exhaled in the
Oven, yet there appears not the least drop of water distinct in the Concrete,
and that Hartshorn, Sponges, and many other Bodies, that seem very dry, will
afford by distillation good store of phlegm or water, and more then can
probably be ascribed to any transmuting Operation of the Fire: If, I say, we
consider these and the like things, it may seem worth while to try (which I
want the convenience to do) by accurate measures, whether the invisible and
interspersed water, its comminution notwithstanding, will not upon freezing
swell the Body that harbors it. And I would the more gladly have been
satisfied in this, because I hoped it might help me to unriddle a strange
(...), afforded us by the Narrative of the Dutchmens Voyage to Nova Zembla,
wherein they relate, That the Cold was so great, that their Clock was frozen,
and would not go, though they hung more weight upon it then before: So that
they were fain to measure their Time by hour-glasses. For though this odd
Effect might be suspected to proceed from some little Isicles sticking to some
of the Wheels, or the Line, in regard they not far off tell us, that the steams
of their Bodies, and other things within their close house, did It froze so
sore within the house, that the Walls and the Roof thereof were frozen two
fingers thick with Ice, and also in our Cabins, where we lay all those three
days, while we could not go out. Gerat de (...) in his third Voyage.
so fasten themselves to the walls, to the Roof, and even to their Cabins, as
to line them with Ice, of no less then two fingers thick; yet besides, that it
cannot be probably supposed, that they, who had so great need of their Clock,
during the tedious absence of the Sun for many weeks together, should not all
the Winter long be aware of this. Besides this, I say, I find that in Captain
James's wintering Page 64.
at Charleton, his Clock and Watch were so frozen too, That they could not go,
notwithstanding they were still kept by the fire side in a Chest, (...) in
clothes. So that in case it appear, that according to what we (...) noted out
of Wormius, the frost can get into Metals, it can also distend them, and other
stable Bodies: We might conceive, that the stopping of the Clocks might proceed
from the stiffness, or the swelling of the line, to which the weight was
fastened, or a swelling even of some of the wheels, or other Metalline parts of
the Clock, that may spoil the necessary congruity between the Teeth, etc. as I
have tried, that some parts of an Iron Instrument, I caused to be made, would
by no means fit one within another, when expanded by much Heat, (and though
Cold be the cause of the expansion, the Effect may be the same) though at other
times they would. And if we knew whether Springs lose any thing of their
Elasticity by the violence of the Cold, we might thence also be assisted to
guess, whether the frosts Operation upon the Spring of Captain James's Watch
(for he mentions that, as distinct from his Clock) might contribute any thing
to the forcing it to stand still. But these are bare Conjectures, from which I
will therefore pass on to the following Section.

Title VIII. Experiments touching the Contraction of Liquors by Cold.
1. BUt notwithstanding all the former Experiments, we must not conclude
universally, that all liquors are disposed to be expanded by Cold, neither by a
moderate degree, nor even by so intense a degree of it as suffices to freez or
congeal the liquors exposed to it; this we have tried, not only in spirit of
Wine, Aqua fortis, Oil of Turpentine, and diverse other liquors, that we could
not bring to freez, but also in oil congealed by the Vehemence of Cold, so that
as to the change of Dimensions produced in Liquors by Cold, there must be a
great difference allowed betwixt water and aqueous liquors on the one side, and
oil and diverse other liquors, that are some of them of an oleaginous, and some
of a very spirituous, or a very highly corrosive nature, on the other side. Nor
have we yet made trials enough to reduce this matter to a certainty. For though
we could not bring some strong Saline spirits, nor the most of Chemical oils to
freez, yet in some our Attempts succeeded not ill. But I remember not, that in
any liquor we could by Cold produce any sensible expansion, but rather a
manifest Condensation, unless we could bring it actually to freez.

2. The trials we made of the Efficacy of Cold to condense liquors, were many,
but it may, for the present, suffice to set down two or three differing ones,
that occur to us in our Collections.

To the entry of the Experiment, lately recited, of the expansion of Milk,
Urine, and the Rhenish Wine, there are subjoyned these words.

[But the Egg that held the spirit of Wine, though it were much smaller then we
usually employ, and fitted with a proportionably slender stem, and though it
were kept diverse hours partly in Ice, and Salt, and partly in Snow and Salt,
yet it froze not at all, but subsided by degrees below the first mark to the
quantity of of an inch in the stem; and though it afterward seemed to rise a
little, yet it never swelled up again to the said first mark.]

3. [We took a round Bolthead of about in Diameter, and poured in Mercury till
it reached a pretty way into the neck, which was purposely drawn more slender
then ordinary, and having, without approaching it to the fire, freed it from
some of the larger bubbles of Air, that appeared at the sides, we put it into a
mixture of Ice and Salt, where the Cold so wrought upon it, that watching it
attentively, we could discern not only its having moved, but its motion,
downwards, which it continued (though not visibly in the progress, as at the
first) till it was subsided in the neck two inches or better, which was far
more then could be attributed to the contraction of any sensible Aerial
Particles, though they had lost not only the 30. part of their Dimensions, as
we have sometimes observed, of the Air, but had been contracted to a point; and
we observed too, that the Quicksilver once thus infrigidated, though not
frozen, retained some of the acquired Cold, for many hours after, as appeared
by its keeping below the mark of its first height, though we had kept it all
night in a warm room.]

4. [We took a small Egg with a proportionably slender stem, into which we
poured common oil, till it rose a pretty way (but not much) above the oval part
of the glass, then having put a mark upon the station of the liquor, we placed
the vessel in snow and salt, and observed it not to swell as other liquors, but
to subside, with Cold, till being quite frozen or congealed, it appeared to be
shrunk about an inch or more beneath the mark, then being thawed, it swelled
again to the mark.]

5. The Experiment was repeated the second time, with not much worse success,
but we found, that if the glass were removed out of the snow into some place
near the fire, the hot Air would not only thaw it, but so rarifie it, as to
make it ascend above the mark. A third time we sealed up the same oil in the
same glass, and repeated the Experiment with like success to that, we had the
second time, and that the frozen oil was really condensed, we found, because it
would sink in oil of the same kind cold, but unfrozen; and this,
notwithstanding diverse bubbles, which we observed usually to be made about each
lump of congealed oil, that we cast in, upon its beginning to sink in the fluid
oil. This we tried, both with oil well congealed (or if another word please
better, Incrassated or Curled) by snow and salt, and with oil less congealed,
frozen by the bare cold of the Ambient Air; but this latter seemed to sight to
sink more slowly then the other, as being less congealed and ponderous, yet
would not lumps of the mass of oil sink or continue immersed. I say not in
common water, but in Sack or Claret Wine, and if thrust down into either of
these liquors, they nimbly enough emerged.

6. Whether or no Chemical oils, though, like expressed oils, they shrink with
a moderate degree of Cold, would by congelation be, like them, contracted, or
like Aqueous liquors expanded, we could not satisfy our selves by Experiment,
because we were unable to advance Cold to a degree capable of bringing such
oils to congelation, only we had thoughts to make a trial with oil of Aniseeds,
distilled with water in a Limbeck, in regard, that though it be a very subtle
liquor, and as Chemists call it, an Essential oil, and though in the Summer
time, and at some other seasons (if the weather be warm) it will remain fluid,
yet in the Winter, when the Air is cold, it will, if it be well drawn, and
genuine, easily enough lose its fluidity, and therefore we thought it might do
well to pour some of it in moderate weather, into a conveniently shaped glass,
and then to freez it externally by the application of Ice and Salt, that we
might observe, whether upon congelation it would shrink or be expanded. And
accordingly, though we were not provided with any Quantity of this oil, yet in
weather that was not sharp, we did by the help of some Ice which we procured,
when the season made it a Rarity, surround a glass pipe filled with fluid oil
of Aniseeds, and found, though the Pipe were but short, yet the enclosed
substance, when it had lost its fluidity, had considerably lost of the height
which it reached to before.

7. And because the Empyreumatical oils, that are driven out of Retorts by
somewhat violent fires, seemed to be of a nature differing enough from those
Essential oils (as Artists call them) which are drawn in Limbecks by the help
of water, as well as fire: And because we observed, that some of the firmer
oils may be used in Physic in much larger Doses, then it is thought safe to
give the latter in: Conjecturing from hence, that probably Empyreumatical oils
may be less hot, and so less indisposed to Congelation, we thought fit to make
trial (no body else in probability having done it) whether the Cold in our
Climate could be brought to freez these oils, and whether it would expand or
condense them; wherefore exposing, in conveniently shaped vessels, some good
oil of Guajacum, that was diaphanous enough, though very highly colored, to
the greatest Cold we could produce, we attempted, but in vain, to deprive it of
its fluidity. All that we were able to effect, being to make it very manifestly
shrink.

Title IX. Experiments in Consort, Touching the Bubbles from which the Levity
of Ice is supposed to proceed.
1. SInce the first thing that made the Moderns suspect, that water is expanded
by freezing, is the floating of Ice upon water, it will not be (...) for
confirmation of that Argument, to take some notice of the (...) of Ice in
respect of water; This is best observed in great Quantities of Ice, for whereas
in small fragments or plates, the Ice, though it (...) not to the bottom of the
water, will oftentimes sink so low in it, as scarce to leave any part evidently
extant above the surface of the water, in vast quantities of Ice, that extancy
is sometimes so conspicuous, that Navigators in their Voyages to Island,
Greenland, and other frozen Regions, complain of meeting with lumps, or rather
floating rocks of Ice, as high as their main Masts. And if we should meet with
Cases, wherein we might safely suppose the Ice to be as solid as entire pieces
of Ice are wont to be with us, and not to be made up of icy fragments cemented
together, with the interception of considerable Cavities filled with Air, it
would not be difficult for any that understands Hydrostaticks to give a pretty
near guess at the height of the Extant part, by the help of what we lately
observed of the Measures of water's Expansion, and by the knowledge of the
immersed part; which, supposing that the Ice were of a prismatical figure, and
floated in an erected posture, would in fresh water amount to about eight or
nine times the length of the part of the Prisme superior to the surface of the
water.

2. But because perhaps the great disparity in the degrees of Cold, whereby
water is in this, and in those gelid Climates turned into Ice, may breed a
difference in the expansion of the frozen water, and because some other
circumstances may be needful to be taken into consideration, about the height
of floating Ice above water, and these will be more properly taken notice of
under the following Title, I shall only upon this head ( of the Levity of Ice)
subjoyn the ensuing transcript of one of our notes concerning That subject.

[We found, that pieces of Ice, clear and free, for ought the Eye could take
notice of, from bubbles, would not be made to sink in spirit of Wine once
distilled from Brandy, and it floated likewise in strong spirit of Wine drawn
from quick Lime; but if the spirit of Wine were well warmed, such Ice, as I
mentioned, would sink in it, though as it grew cold the same Ice would slowly
ascend, and sometimes remain for a while, as if it were suspended without
sensibly rising or falling. But all this while the Ice, thawed apace in the
water whereinto it was dissolved, did manifestly seem to run down like a stream
through the lighter body of the spirit of Wine, the Diversity of the
Refractions making this easy to be taken notice of; yet common water, though
heated as hot as I could endure to hold the glass in my hand, would not let the
fragments of the same parcel of Ice sink into it: but in oil of Turpentine, and
in thrice Rectified spirit of Wine, the Ice would sink like a stone.]

3. That the levity of Ice in respect of water proceeds from the bubbles that
are produced in it, and make the water, when congealed, take up more room then
when fluid, has scarce been doubted by any, that has considered the Texture of
Ice, as well as taken notice of its levity. But if this be the true and only
reason, we may conjecture, that there must be great store of bubbles in Ice,
extremely minute, and undiscerned by the naked Eye. For though in very many
parcels of Ice, the bubbles are as well conspicuous as numerous, insomuch that
they render the Ice whitish and opacous, yet we have observed, that other
pieces would swim, which yet were of an almost crystalline clearness. And
therefore we thought fit to look upon some clear pieces of Ice in a Microscope,
and we shall subjoyn the Event, because that when we beheld some of this ice in
one of our Microscopes, which has been counted by several of the curious, as
good a Magnifier, as perhaps any is in the world, we could not discover such
store of bubbles, as it seemed there should appear upon the supposition, that
the adequate cause of the levity and expansion of frozen water is but the
interspersion of such bubbles.

The Observations I have been mentioning, I find thus set down among my Notes.

[A piece of Ice, that to the Eye looked clear like crystal, being put into the
great Microscope, appeared even there free from bubbles, and yet the same piece
of Ice being presently removed, and cast into common water, would swim at the
top, and if it were forcibly duck'd, would swiftly enough emerge.

Another piece of Ice, that to the naked Eye was not so clear as the former,
appeared in the same Microscope to have store of bubbles, some of them
appearing there no bigger then a small pins head, and some of them being yet
lesser, and scarcely visible in the Microscope it self.]

And here, because it seems a considerable doubt, and well worth the examining,
whether or no water, when frozen into Ice, grows heavier or lighter, not in
reference to such water as it was generated of (since it is evident, that upon
that it will float) but more absolutely speaking, we judged it not amiss to
examine this matter by an Experiment, but we could not discover any difference
between the weight of the same parcel of water fluid and frozen, as will appear
by the ninth Paragraph of the Experiment to be a little beneath recited.

But since that, whether or no we allow any other cause, together with the
bubbles, to the levity of Ice, it seems a thing not to be doubted, that its
expansion and lightness is mainly, if not only, due to the interspersion of
bubbles, the generation of them seems to be one of the considerablest
Phenomenon of Cold, and the Investigating by what cause those cavities are
produced, and in case they be perfectly full, what substance it is that fills
them, is none of the meanest enquiries, that should exercise the industry of a
searcher into the Nature of Cold.

4. Mr. Hobs, and some others seem to think, that the expansion of water by
congelation, is caused by the Intrusion of Air, which constitutes those
numerous bubbles wont to be observed in Ice; we might here demand, why in case
that upon freezing there must be a considerable accession of Air from without,
when oil is frozen, it is, notwithstanding the ingress of this Air, not
expanded, but condensed; but because these conjecturers do not allow glass to
be pervious to common Air, we shall at present press them with this Experiment,
which we have diverse times made.

We took a glass-Egg with a long stem, and filling it almost with water, we
sealed it Hermetically up to exclude the pretense that some adventitious Air
might get in, and insinuate it self into the water, and yet such an Egg being
exposed to congelation, the frozen water would be manifestly expanded, and
swelled by numerous bubbles, which oftentimes gave it a whitish opacity.

To which we may add, that new metalline vessels being filled with water, and
carefully stopped, the liquor would nevertheless, when exposed to the Cold, be
thereby expanded, and turned into Ice furnished with bubbles.

5. If it be objected, that in the Experiment of the Hermetically sealed glass,
the produced bubbles might come from the Air, which being sealed up together
with the water, might by the expansion of that water be brought to mingle with
it: I answer, that this is very improbable. For 1. if the bubbles must cause
the expansion of the water, how shall the water be at first expanded to reduce
the Air to a Division into bubbles. Next, it is evident by the Experiments we
shall ere long relate, that the Air as to the Body of it, retains its station
above the water, and preserves it self together in one parcel, since it suffers
a compression, that oftentimes makes it break the glass that imprisons (...),
which it would not need to do, in case it dispersed it self into the Body of
the water; for then there would appear no cause, why the Air and water should
after congelation require more room then they did before. 3. In this Experiment
we usually begin to produce Ice and bubbles in the water, contiguous to the
bottom of the vessel (that part being by the snow and salt first refrigerated)
in which case there appears no reason, why the Air, which is a thousand times
lighter then the water, should against its nature dive to the bottom of the
water, and if it were disposed to dive, why should we not see it break through
the water in bubbles, as is usual in other cases, where Air penetrates water.
4. In metalline vessels, and in Glasses quite filled with water, before they
are stopped, there is no pretense of the diving of the Air from the top, there
having been none left there. 5. and lastly, If all the bubbles of Ice were made
by, and filled with true Air descending from the upper parts of the vessels,
and only dispersed through the water, then, upon the thawing of this Ice, the
Air would emerge, and we might recover as much of real Air as would fill the
space acquired by the water upon the account of its being turned into Ice,
which is contrary to our Experience. And this Argument may also be urged
against any that should pretend, (for I exspect not to see him prove it) that
though Air, as numerous experiments evince, cannot get out of a sealed glass,
yet it may, in such a case as this, get into it. But we find upon trials, that
the Cavities of these bubbles are not any thing near filled with Air, if they
have in them any more Air at all, then that little which is wont, as we have
elsewhere shown, to lurk in the particles of water, and other liquors. And the
making good of this leads us to the second Enquiry, we were proposing about
these bubbles, namely, whether or no their cavities be filled, and filled with
Air.

6. The full resolution of this whole Difficulty would be no easy Matter, nor
well to be dispatched with so much brevity as my occasions exact. For it would
require satisfactory Answers, to more then one or two Questions, since, for
ought I know, it may lead us to the debate of those two grand Queries, whether
or no Nature admit a Vacuum, and whether a great part of the Universe consist
of a certain Ethereal matter, subtle enough to pass through the pores, not
only of liquors, but of compact bodies, and even of glass it self: we should
also be obliged to enquire, whether or no Air, I mean true and permanent Air,
can be generated anew, as well out of common water, as many other liquors, and
whether it may be generated by Cold it self, and perhaps we should be obliged
to inquire into the Modus of this production, and engage our selves in diverse
other difficulties, whose full Prosecution, besides that they would as much
exceed our present leisure, as Abilities, seems more properly to belong to the
more general part of Physics, where such kind of general Questions are fittest
to be handled.

Wherefore we will now only consider this Particular Question, whether or no
the Cavities of the Bubbles wont to abound in Ice, be filled with common Air;
and even this question, though it seem but one, comprizes two: for to resolve
it, we must determine, whether there be any true Air contained in those
Cavities, and whether in case there be, they be adequately filled with that
Air, (by true Air I mean such an invisible fluid, as does permanently retain a
spring like the common Air.)

7. The former of these two Questions, I must confess my self not yet resolved
about, my Experiments having not hitherto succeeded uniformly enough to
satisfy so jealous an observer. But yet I shall annex our trials, not only
because the thing has not been, that we know of, so much as attempted by others,
and our ways of Experimenting, if they be duly prosecuted, seem as promising
and hopeful (if the Question be reducible to any certain Decision) as perhaps
will be easily lighted on; but because also we have, if we mistake not,
resolved the second Question, by showing that there is but a small part of true
Air contained in the Bubbles of Ice, whatever Ingenious men, that rely upon
probable Conjectures without consulting Experience, have been pleased to
believe to the contrary.

That the bubbles observed in Ice cannot all be filled with the Aerial
particles lurking in the water, seems evident enough by the expansion of the
water, and the Quantity of space taken up by those bubbles, which how the
interspersed, and formerly latitant Air can adequately fill, unless the same
parcel of Matter could truly (...) much more space at one time then at another
(which I take to be physically impossible) I do not yet apprehend.

But two ways of trial there are, which we employed to show, that the Icy
bubbles are nothing near filled with true Air, whether Men will have that
pre-existent in the water, or stolen in from without, or generated anew; the
former of the two ways of trials probably arguing, that these bubbles proceed
not only (for that they may proceed partly we do not at all deny) from the Air
pre-existent in the water, and the latter concluding more generally, that but a
small part of the icy bubbles are filled with genuine Air.

8. And 1. we were invited to conjecture, both, that sometimes, or in some
cases, the Air latitant in the water might contribute to generate icy bubbles,
though it was unable adequately to fill them; and again, that sometimes or in
other cases such bubbles would be almost as numerously generated,
notwithstanding the recess of far the greatest part of that latitant Air, by
the three following Experiments taken verbatim out of our Collections.

I. We took fair water, and having kept it in the exhausted Receiver of our
Pneumatical Engine for a good while, till we perceived it not to send up any
more bubbles, we presently transferred it into snow and salt, where it was long
enough before it began to freez, and then we observed, that the water did not
swell near so much as common water is wont to do, and the ice seemed to have
few or no bubbles worth taking notice of: but when I afterward placed it
between my Eye and the vigorous flame of a Candle, I could perceive, that it
was not quite destitute of bubbles, though they were extremely small, in
comparison of those, that would probably have appeared in ordinary water.

Thus far the first Experiment; the second follows, which was made at another
time.

II. The water that had been freed from the bubbles in the Receiver, though it
afforded an ice, that seemed to have smaller bubbles, yet this ice being
thawed, part of the water was gently poured into a pipe of glass, wherein being
frozen, it swelled considerably enough above its first level, and besides burst
the glass, being also very opacous by reason of the bubbles.

The third Experiment was more industriously prosecuted, as may appear by this
ample Narrative of it, transcribed out of our Collections.

III. We took a small Egg with a pretty long neck, and pouring in water till it
reached an inch within the stem, conveyed it into a long slender Cylindrical
Receiver, provided on purpose to make trials with such tall glasses, the Air
being by degrees drawn out of the bubbles appeared from time to time greater
and greater, and when the Receiver was well exhausted, the water seemed to boil
a longer time then one would have expected, and sometimes the bubbles ascended
so fast and great, that we were in doubt, whether the water did not boil over
the top of the Pipe: the exhausted Receiver was permitted to be so for a good
while, till the water had discharged it self in bubbles of its Air, and then
the glassEgg was removed into a vessel furnished with ice and salt, and there
left ten or twelve hours, that all the water, save that in the neck, might be
thoroughly frozen, and then we found it to have risen a great way above its
first height, and removing it into an Air tempered like that wherein the first
part of the Experiment was made, and having left it there in a quiet place for
ten or twelve hours to thaw leisurely (lest too warm an Air, or too much
stirring the glass might be an occasion of generating new bubbles,) in the
exterior part of the ice near the glass, we saw pretty store of bubbles, but
when that was thawed, the rest of the ice appeared of a peculiar and unusual
texture, having no determinate bubbles, that I could easily distinguish, but
seeming almost like a piece of frosted glass, where the Parts, that made the
Asperity, were exceeding thick set, but this ice swam in the water, whereinto
the rest had been dissolved before it was all thawed: when there yet remained a
lump about the bigness of a small Walnut, we reconveyed it into the Receiver,
to try whether upon the exuction of the Air, the ice would be presently melted,
but the alteration produced, was so small, if any, that we durst not ground any
thing upon it. The Receiver being exhausted, there did at length appear some
bubbles in the water, but they were not numerous, and a hundred of them seemed
not to amount to one of those larger ones, the same water had yielded us the
first time it was put in: in the ice also some small bubbles disclosed
themselves, which we did not perceive there before, wherefore we took out the
Egg, and found (the ice being now thawed) that the water was subsided to the
mark we had made, before it was exposed to congelation, if not some very little
way beneath it: Then we went about to find the Proportion wherein this
dispirited water was expanded by glaciation, but in pursuing this there happened
a mischance to the glass, which kept the Experiment from being so accurate as
we designed. And therefore, though it seemed to us, that it amounted to about
the twelfth part, which is less then that of the undispirited water, yet we
designed the repetition of the Experiment. Only in this we could not be
mistaken, that the expansion wrs considerable, since the water rose three
inches and a half in the stem, though the whole water in the Egg and stem too,
weighed but two ounces and a half. (...) the vessel had not been unluckily
cracked, we should have frozen the water once more, and then sealing up the
glass Hermetically, and suffering the ice leisurely to thaw, should have
inverted it, and broken it under water, and have proceeded with it as we had
done with some other glasses in the formerly mentioned Experiments.

9. [A little glass Cylinder open only at one end, of a convenient length, was
thrust into a deep and wide mouth'd-glass about half filled with a mixture of
Ice and salt: but the Cylinder was neither so quite filled, that the water
should run over, nor yet far short of being so; that, (for all the opacous
mixture of Ice and Salt) we might guess at the freezing of that part of the
water, that we could not see by the changes appearing in the other. Then
conveying all into a Receiver, that we had in readiness beforehand, we quickly
pumped out the Air, upon which there came both from the upper and lower parts of
the water, great store of Bubbles to the top, where most of them brake into the
Receiver, having found upon trials purposely made, that the Engine had
continued stanch all the while, and perceiving by the intumescence of the
superior parts of the water, that the other were frozen, we let in the external
Air, and having removed the Receiver, and taken out the mixture before the Ice
was half melted, we found the water, as high as the mixture reached, to be
turned into ice, which besides some large and conspicuous bubbles had small
ones enough to render it opacous; and upon the account of this expansion it
was, that the water did in the free Air continue a good deal higher then the
mark, it was but level with, when the Cylinder was exposed to freez.]

10. The other way we employed to examine what was contained in icy bubbles,
and which seemed clearly enough to manifest, that they are very far from being
filled with true and springy Air, is intimated in the last clause of the
foregoing narrative, but will be best understood by the annexed Experiments
transcribed just as I find them registered in my Collections: and though they be
prolix, and contain some few Particulars, that make not directly for the
purpose I allege them for, yet I think not fit to dismember or to epitomize
them, or otherwise to alter any thing in them, partly, that the inference I
make from them, may be the less mistrusted, partly, because the way of
Experimenting being altogether new, will be best apprehended by the subjoyned
Examples, and partly too, because those Particulars that relate not directly to
the occasion of our mentioning these trials, may be useful to illustrate or
confirm some thing that is already delivered, or is hereafter to be delivered
in the present History of Cold.

11. [We took this day a glass of Feb. 4. 1661.
the form of an Egg, but of double the capacity, out of whose obtuse end rose
up a long Cylindrical neck, capable to receive the end of my little finger, and
no more, this being filled with common water, till the liquor reached a pretty
way within the pipe, and the surface of the water being carefully marked on the
outside, was placed in a vessel, wherein ice very grossly beaten, was mingled
with a convenient Proportion of salt (according to our way of Glaciation) the
Mixture not reaching up to the mark by above an inch. The Experiment afforded
us these Particulars.

I. A heedful Eye did not perceive the water sensibly to subside before it
began to freez.

II. The water began to swell, and some parts of it next the side or bottom of
the glass, to freez within a quarter of an hour.

III. The ascent of the water in the pipe increased so fast, that within an
hour, from the time the glass was put in, it did rise 4. inches and 2/9 above
the mark, and afterward the swelling connutied so, that we took it out, though
a good part of the water remained unfrozen, it had reached five inches and
somewhat more then a half above the first Mark.

IV. The ice and salt being purposely kept always beneath the surface of the
water, the lower parts of the water were frozen, and never the upper surface.

V. During all this great Elevation of the water, there appeared no bubbles
worth taking notice of in the unfrozen parts of the liquor, but the ice was
very full of them, diverse of which toward the latter end of the Experiment were
very large Bubbles (but not all of them round) some being about the bigness of
hail shot, some small like Mustard seed, and others again not much inferior to
little pease.

VI. Having taken out the glass, when the water was at the highest mark, we did
upon a certain design, pour in as much sallet Oil as swam about two inches
above it, and then the glass was nimbly at the flame of a Lamp sealed up,
during which time the included water subsided a little, but the glass being
again put into the ice and salt, the Cold quickly restored the water to its
former height, and there remained about an inch and a half of the sealed glass
unpossessed by the two contained liquors.

VII. Then with a good pair of scales we weighed the glass-Egg first in the
Air, and then in the water (the better to discern, whether any shrinking of the
glass intervened in the case,) where it hung freely, and was left hanging in
its Equilibrium with its opposite weight.

VIII. Whilst it thus hung, upon the thawing of the ice many bubbles, great
and small ascended (the great ones with a wrigling motion) and vanished at the
top.

IX. As the ice thawed, the water and oil descended, till the whole ice was
returned to water, at which time we observed these two remarkable things, the
one, That the Equilibrium remained the same; the other, (which was more
considerable) that the water was subsided again as low as the first mark, with
which it was level before it began to swell, without falling beneath it,
notwithstanding the recess of such a multitude of Bubbles, diverse of which were
very large.

X. The glass being inverted, the sealed end, which was drawn slender, was
gently broken under water, of which some, being impelled in, did sensibly
reduce the Air at the opposite end into a narrower room; and, as one of the
spectators observed, into a much narrower, which is consonant enough to reason.

XI. The glass being again inverted, and held till it was settled, we found,
that the water drawn in together with the water it found there, and the oil,
possessed the same places, (as appeared by the marks in the Cavity of the
Receiver,) that they did, when it was sealed up.

XII. And lastly, having thrown out the oil, and employing, where need was, a
little water of the same kind we had made use of all this while, we found the
glass filled to the highest mark, to weigh 4374. grains, when it was filled but
to the lowest mark, 4152. grains, and when quite emptied 1032. So that the
water contained betwixt the highest and lowest mark, and raised by the
Glaciation, was about a fifteenth part of the water set to freez, and probably
would have amounted to much more, if the water had been all frozen.]

12. [A large glass-Egg being taken December. 11. 1662.
with a proportionably big stem, we poured water into it, till it reached about
an inch above the bottom of the stem, and fastening a mark there, we exposed it
all night to freez in snow and salt, which was so placed, as not to reach so
high as the bottom of the stem; the next day about ten of the clock we found
the water risen in the stem about 15. inches above the mark, the whole Cylinder
of water being fluid by reason of the snows not reaching to it. (Then upon a
design to be elsewhere mentioned, we sealed up the glass by a very slender
pipe, that had been before purposely drawn out to a pretty distance from the
body of the Cylinder, that the glass might be sealed, in a trice before the
flame of a Candle could sensibly rarifie the Air, and after a while we broke
off the Apex of this slender pipe in prosecution of our former Design.) Then
suffering the water to swell freely, within seven or eight hours it reached the
very top of the glass, a drop or two running over at the slender Orifice
thereof, so that in all, the water ascended about 19. inches above the first
mark: then we tried by the flame of a candle to seal the glass, but by reason
of the Rarefaction of some of the water, by the Heat, into vapors, by which
some of the other water was, from time to time, spurted against the flame of
the Candle, we found it troublesome enough to seal it up, the vessel being
removed into a warm place, till next morning, and all the ice in the belly of
it (for the water in the stem continued fluid) being thawed, the water
subsided, not only to its first mark, but a little beneath it, by reason of
that which was thrown out, upon occasion of the sealing of the glass: but when
we came to invert this, after the manner above mentioned, into a vessel of
water, to see how much of the space deserted by the thawed Ice, was filled with
Air, and how much was filled with a subtiler substance, or empty, just then a
mischance frustrated our Expectation.]

13. [An Egg about the same bigness December.
with the former, was placed to freez in beaten ice and salt, and in less then
a quarter of an hour, it was risen near an inch above the Mark, where the
surface of the water was at the first, and the water in the ball and the
joining of the neck was frozen into Laminae. After an hour and a quarter, those
Laminae, that before appeared in the beginning of the neck, now disappeared,
but the ball seemed frozen into a white ice, and the water in the neck was
risen above the first mark four inches and a half. There now appeared abundance
of small bubbles, continually ascending through the neck (which so continued
all the time after, till it was quite thawed) and the white ice appeared full
of bubbles. The Experiment being further pursued, the water ascended higher and
higher, till it had reached about eight inches above the first mark: Then the
top of the pipe, being with a Lamp drawn out, into a very slender Cylinder (for
the convenience of sealing up) the glass was again put into the ice, that the
Air heated by the Lamp might cool, upon which the water continued swelling,
till it began to run over at the orifice of the slender pipe, which being held
by in the flame of a candle, was in a trice sealed up, so that the whole glass
now appeared full of water, bating an inconsiderable Quantity of rarifi'd Air,
(not amounting to the bigness of half a small Pea) that remained contiguous to
the sealed part; the Egg being brought into a warm room, was kept there all
night, and a good part of the next morning, before the ice was quite thawed,
which when it was, the water was found subsided to the first mark, and which
being done, the glass was inverted, and the sealed end immersed a good way
under water, where being broken, the external Air impelled the water in the
Basin into the Cavity of the pipe, insomuch, that when we took it out, which we
did, as soon as we thought no more water was impelled up, reinverting the glass,
we found, that the admitted water reached seven inches above the first mark,
and left an inch and a half of the stem, before it began to be wire-drawn,
besides as much of the slender part of the stem, as by guess amounted to a
quarter of an inch or more, so that it seemed, that the Bubbles, which made the
water swell, and appeared in the (...), amounted to an inch and three quarters
of Air, which consequently seemed to be for the most part generated by this
operation, and to seven inches either of a vacuum, or some (...) substance,
which by its having no spring to resist the Pressure of the outward Air,
appeared not to be Air: We could not exactly measure the Quantity of water we
had in all, and the proportion of it betwixt the marks, (...) having left the
glass in the window, to try whether time or Cold would make the admitted water
shrink (which we did not find it to do the weather was so sharp, that beginning
(as we concluded) to (...) the water in the stem, the increasing ice burst out
the belly of the glass into many pieces.]

Another time.

14. [A sealed glass being broken under water, there was impelled into the
Cylinder ten inches and a little above a half. And the mark, it should have
risen to, was eleven inches and a quarter above the first and lowest mark.]

Another time.

15. [In the same Bolthead, wherein December.
the greatest condensation of the Air was tried, the water was by the Cold made
to swell very near a foot above the mark it rested at, when it began to freez;
then the glass being (...) up, the contained water was removed, and suffered
leisurely to thaw, and upon the Dissolution of the ice, the water fell back to
the former mark: lastly, the glass being inverted, the Apex was broken off
under water, and the water in the stem was by the outward Air, pressing upon
the water in the Basin, with some Impetus and noise driven up into the Cavity
of the glass; and, the glass being seasonably and warily removed from the
Basin, we found there had been impelled up of the water in the Basin, a little
more then eleven inches, so that there seemed to be near of an inch of Air
generated or separated by the former operation.]

Another time.

16. [In the same glass we made December. the 17.
the water to swell about ten inches, and inverting the stem, and breaking the
Neb under water, we found about ten inches of water to have been impelled into
the stem; so that in this there seemed no generation of Air.]

17. To all these Experiments we shall subjoyn, in two words, that as in water,
so in some aqueous liquors we found, that the icy Bubbles were not filled with
Air (though we did not think fit to take the pains to measure their respective
Expansions by being congealed:) For in that elsewhere mentioned Experiment,
where we exposed Milk, Urine, and Rhenish-wine to freez, when all those liquors
were risen above their former marks, as is there related, our Notes inform us,
that the Experiment was thus prosecuted.

18. [Being sealed up (the foregoing words mentioned the abovenamed expanded
liquors) and suffered to thaw, the several liquors subsided to their first
marks or thereabouts, and the glasses being inverted and broken under water, we
were by an accident hindered from observing what we desired in that which had
the Wine, though when it was taken out of the freezing pot, it had ice, but not
much, swimming in it. But into the glass that had the Milk, the water was
manifestly impelled by the outward Air, and so it was into the glass that had
the Urine, which being removed from the Basin, and reinverted, appeared to have
as much new liquor in its stem, as amounted by guess to five or six inches.]

19. To which Experiment we may add, that another time a sealed glass of partly
frozen Claret Wine being broken under water, the water was impelled up between
half an inch, and an inch above the mark, beyond which it would not have
ascended, if the bubbles had been full of true and permanent Air.

20. If it be said, that though I have delivered too many Particulars about so
empty and slight a Theme as Bubbles, I have this to answer, that possibly all
these Experiments have rather showed us, what it is not that fills them, then
what it is, so that more then all these Experiments appearing requisite to
clear up the Difficulties about them, I shall not think I have altogether
misspent my time, especially if so many past Experiments, both new, and not
altogether impertinent, by their not having taught us enough about so
despicable a subject as a Bubble, shall, as they justly may teach us Humility.

Title X. Experiments about the Measure of the Expansion and the Contraction of
Liquors by Cold.
1. TO the Experiments (mentioned in the Seventh and Ninth Titles) which show,
that water has an Expansion, it will be proper to subjoyn some of those,
whereby we endeavored to measure that Expansion. And here we shall not content
our selves to say, that whereas the Authors, we had formerly occasion to point
at, take notice of their having raised water in a Bolthead half an inch or an
inch by freezing, we have made it ascend a foot and a half and more; This, I
say, we shall pass by, because that though by such Experiments we have very
clearly and undeniably manifested the Expansion of the water, yet unless the
Capacity of the vessel be known, they will signify but little toward the
determining the Quantity of that Expansion, which yet is the thing we are now
enquiring after, wherefore we shall add, that we employed two differing ways to
measure this Expansion.

2. The one was, by putting in, by weight, such a number of ounces of water,
into a Bolthead, till the water was risen a pretty way in the long stem,
wherewith it was filled, then marking on the outside, to what height every
freshly added ounce of water reached in the stem, we afterward poured out a
convenient Quantity of the liquor (yet leaving enough to fill the whole cavity
of the spherical or obtuse end of the vessel, and of the lower part of the
stem) then leisurely freezing this remaining water from the bottom upwards, we
observed, that when it was frozen, the ice that was made of 82. parts of water,
filled, as one of our Notes inform us, the space of 91. and (if I mistake not
the Character) an eight, so that by this troublesome way of Examination, we
found that the water by the Expansion, it received from Cold, was made to
possess about a ninth part more space then it did before congelation.

3. [In another of our notes, we find as follows, 55, parts of water extended
themselves by freezing into sixty and a half, about six of those parts
remaining unfrozen, so that in this Experiment the waters Expansion was not
much (though somewhat) differing from what it was in that last mentioned.]

4. The other way we made use of to measure the Dimensions, that water gains by
freezing, was, to take a Cylindrical pipe of glass sealed at one end, and left
open at the other, at which we filled it with water to a certain height, that
we took notice of by a mark applied to the outside, and then keeping it in an
erected posture, and freezing it from the bottom upwards, we found, that it had
acquired by a tenth part or thereabouts, greater Dimensions in the form of ice,
then it possessed in the form of water. But the nature of the particular parcel
of liquor exposed to the Cold (for it is not necessary that all waters should
be equally disposed to be expanded by freezing) and some other circumstances,
not now to be discoursed of, may well beget some little variety in the success
of this sort of trials. For in one that we made carefully, we found the
Expansion somewhat greater, then that last mentioned, as may appear by the
following Note, which compared with what was lately delivered, of the trials we
made by weight of the water's Expansion, may invite us to think, that we cannot
much err by estimating in general, that the room that Ice takes up more then
water, amounts to about a ninth part of the space possessed by the same water,
before it was turned into Ice. The note we were speaking of, is this.

5. [In a more then ordinarily even Cylindrical glass, we exposed some water to
freez, to measure its Intumescence, and found that it expanded its self to
about an eighth part, or at least a ninth upon glaciation; this we tried twice,
and thought that the Intumescence might have been more considerable, but that
in a Cylinder the freezing did not seem to succeed so well.]

But here we must resolve a difficulty, which though ordinary Readers may take
no notice of, yet may breed a scruple in the minds of those that are acquainted
with Hydrostaticks. For to such Readers this Account of ours may seem to be
contrary to the Experience of Navigators into cold Climates, who tell us (as we
shall have occasion to take notice in due place) of vast pieces of Ice, as
high, not only as the Poops of their Ships, but as the Masts of them; and yet
the Depth of these stupendous pieces of Ice, seems not at all Answerable to
what it may be supposed to be, in case we compare together the Estimate above
delivered of the Expansion of water, and that grand Hydrostatical Theorem
demonstrated by Archimedes and Stevinus, That floating Bodies will so far, and
but so far, sink in the Liquor that supports them, till the immersed part of
the Body be equal to a Bulk of water, weighing as much as the whole Body. For
Captain James in his often cited Voyage, makes mention of great pieces of Ice,
that were twice as high as the Top-mast-head of his Ship.

6. And the Hollanders in their famous Voyage to Nova Zembla, mention one
stupendous Hill of Ice, which I therefore take notice of here, not only
because it has been thought the greatest that men have met with, but because
they deliver its Dimensions, not as Captain James and Navigators are wont to
do, by comparison with the unknown heights of some of the Masts of their Ships,
but by certain and determinate Measures, which in the Icy Island, we are
speaking of, were so divided by the surface of the water, that there was 16.
fathom extant above it, though there were but 36. beneath it, which though a
vast depth in it self, yet (...) but little exceed double the height.

And the Danish Navigator Janus Barthol. de Nivis usu Chap. 6.
Munckius, employed by his King to bring him an Account of Greenland, mentions
some floating pieces of Ice, that he met with and observed in that Sea, which
though but somewhat above 40. fathom under water, were extant 20. fathom,
that is (near half as much) above water, whereas it seems, that according to
our above mentioned Computation of the Expansion of water, the part under the
water ought to be eight or nine times as deep, as that above the water is high.

7. To clear this difficulty, I shall represent these three particulars.

First, that in our Computation the Ice that sinks so deep, is supposed to
float in fresh water, whereas in the Observations of the above named
Navigators, those vast pieces of Ice floated on the Seawater, which by reason
of its saltness, being heavier then fresh water, Ice will not sink so deep into
that, as into this. And that salt may hugely increase the weight of the water,
wherein it is dissolved, may be clearly gathered from the ponderousness of
common Brine, and from the practice of several sorts of Tradesmen, who to
examine the strength of their Lixiviums, and other Saline Liquors are wont to
try, whether they will keep an Egg floating, which we know common water will
not do. And I have also by the Resolution of some Metalline Bodies in fit
Menstruums made Liquors, that are yet much more ponderous, then is sufficient
for the support of Eggs.

But yet we must be so candid, as to take notice of what some Modern
Geographers deliver with probability enough, namely, That nearer the poles the
Seas are not wont to be so salt, as in the temperate and the Torrid Zones, and
those Northern being not so salt as our Seas, there is the less to be allowed
for the difference in gravity (and consequently in the power to keep Ice from
sinking) betwixt those Seas and ours.

8. But secondly, this lesser saltness of the water in the Northern Seas, may,
as to our case be recompensed by the greater coldness of it. For though, as we
have formerly observed, the Condensation of fresh water, effected here by a
degree of Cold capable to make it begin to freez, is not so great as most men
would imagine; yet besides that, I have often taken pleasure to make the same
Body to sink or ascend in the same water, by a much less variation (...) Cold
then that we have been mentioning; it is to be considered, that the degree of
Cold, to which water was brought in the Experiment delivered in the fourth
Section, to which we are now looking back, was but such a degree as would make
fresh water begin to freez; whereas the salt Seawater, being indisposed to
congelation, may by so vehement a Cold as reigns in the Winter season in those
gelid Climates, be far more intensly refrigerated, and thereby more condensed
then common water is here, by such a measure of Cold, as may begin to freez
small portions of it. But though, what we have hitherto represented, may well
be looked upon as not inconsiderable to the purpose for which it has been
alleged, yet the main thing, that is to remove the scruple suggested by the
height of Icy hills above the water, is,

9. Thirdly, that such Hills of Ice are not to be looked upon as entire and
solid ones, but as vast piles or lumps, and masses of Ice, casually and rudely
heaped up and cemented by the excessive Cold, freezing them together by the
intervention of the water that washes them, which piles of many pieces of Ice
are not made without great Cavities intercepted, and filled only with Air,
between the more solid Cakes or Lumps; so that the weight of these stupendous
pieces of Ice, is not to be estimated by the bigness they appear of at a
distance from the Eye, but considering how much Air there is intercepted
between the Icy Bodies, of which they are compiled, there may be a hollow
structure of Ice reaching high into the Air, and yet the whole Aggregate or Icy
pile, will press the subjacent water on which it leans, no more then would as
much water, as were equal in Bulk only to the immersed parts; as we see in
Barges laden with Boards, which though pil'd up to a great height above the
water, make not the vessel to sink more then a Lading that would make a far
less show, and oftentimes be all contained within the Cavity of the vessel,
provided it be more ponderous in specie. But to enter into any further
Consideration of these Hydrostatical matters, would be improper in this place,
especially since we have In our Hydrostatical Paradoxes.
elsewhere treated of them. And that these floating Hills and Islands of Ice,
are not entire and solid pieces of it, we shall otherwhere have occasion to
show out of Navigators, and even in the Observation, we have mentioned out of
Janus Munck, the Learned Relator of it Bartholinus, takes notice, that those
vast pieces of Ice (we have been mentioning) that reached 20, fathom above
water, Ex nive copiosa glaciata compacta.
were compiled of store of Snow frozen together.

10. These Considerations may serve to render some Account of those
stupendiously tall pieces of ice, whose extant part bears so great a proportion
to the immersed part, when the whole mass does really float. But I confess I
doubt, that not only in the Examples we have alleged, but in other eminent
ones of mountains of ice, if I may so call them, there may be a mistake, and
that the height of them above the water, would be far less, and the depth under
water far greater, if the ice had water enough to swim freely. For Seamen by
reason of the difficulty, are not wont to measure the height of those pieces
that float at liberty in the Sea. And as for those that are on ground, as their
heights lie far more convenient to be measured, so the measurers not knowing
how long they may have been on ground, for ought I know, much of that admired
height, may be attributed to the snows, that from time to time fall very
plentifully in those frozen Regions, and are compacted together, either by the
Sun, whose Beams sometimes begin to thaw it, and sometimes by the water of the
waves that beat against the Ice, and being congealed with the snow, does as it
were cement the parts of it together, and sometimes by both of these causes. So
in the instance alleged Page 14.
out of Captain James, of pieces of ice that were twice as high as his
Topmast-head; it is said also, that they were on ground in 40. fathom. And in
the other Example mentioned out of Bartholinus, though there be 40. fathom
attributed to the immersed part of the ice, yet that measure is not exclusive
of a greater, for it is said, that the ice reached downwards above 40. fathom;
and how much downwards, and whether as far as the ground, we are left at
liberty to guess. And in that stupendous piece of Ice recorded in the Nova
Zembla voyage, to have been in all 52. fathom, that is, 300. and twelve foot
deep, though it be granted what they affirm, that it was 16. fathom above the
water, which is almost a third part of the whole depth; yet I observe, that of
this Icy mountain it is said, that it lay fast on the ground. So that as on the
one side it seems probable, that the upper part of Islands of ice may be
increased by snow; and as I remember, that in that famously inquisitive
Navigator Mr. Hudsons voyage for the discovery of the North-west passage, it is
related, that his company was Mr. Hudsons Voyage for the discovery of the
North-west passage, written partly by Mr. Abacuck Pricket.
so well acquainted with the Ice, that when Night, or foggy or foul weather
took them, they would seek out the Broadest Islands of Ice, and there come to
Anchor, and run and sport, and fill water that stood the Ice in ponds very
fresh and good. So on the other side we know not, how much lower the Dutch-mens
Ice and Captain James's would have reached into the Sea, in case the ground
they rested on, had not hindered them. For though one might probably think, that
these are the greatest depths that any Hills of Ice have been observed to
attain, that mentioned by the Hollanders reaching 36. fathom beneath the
water, and that mentioned by Captain James, no less then 40. fathom: yet I
find in Mr. Hudsons Voyage, that the English in the Bay, that bears his Name,
met with more then one or two Islands of Ice, of a fargreater depth underwater.
For among other things, the Relator has this memorable passage; In this Bay,
where we were thus troubled with Ice, we saw many of those mountains of Ice a
ground, in six or seven score fathom water. And if the Sea had been deep
enough, even these stupendous moles of Ice would probably have sunk much
lower, and so have lessened the heights of the mountains.

11. I know that delivering the measure of the Expansion of water alone, I have
not said all that may be said about the Expansion of Liquors: But because, as
it has not yet appeared to me, that any Liquor is expanded by Cold, unless by
actual freezing; I doubted, whether Aqueous Liquors, as Wine, Milk, Urine, etc.
were otherwise expanded by congelation, then upon the Account of the water or
phlegmatic (and, in a strict sense, congealable,) part contained in them; and
whether it were worth while, for a man in haste, to examine, their particular
Expansions, Notwithstanding which, I would not discourage any from trying,
whether or no by the differing Dilatations of Aqueous Liquors, some of them of
the same, and some of them of differing kinds, we may be assisted to make any
estimate of the differing proportions they contain, of phlegm, and of more
spirituous or useful Ingredients.

12. After what has been hitherto delivered concerning the Expansion of Liquors
by Cold, it may be expected we should say something of the measure of their
Contraction by the same Quality. But as for water, which is the principal
Liquor, whose Dimensions are to be considered, I have formerly declared, that I
could seldom or never find its contraction (in the Winter season when I tried
it) to be at all considerable. And I shall now add, that having for greater
certainty, procured the Experiment to be made by another also, in a Bolthead,
the Account I received of it, was, that he could scarce discern the water in
the stem to fall beneath its station, (marked at the upper part of the pipe,)
when the water in the Ball was so far infrigidated as to begin to freez. Though
I will not deny, that in warmer Climates, as Italy, or Spain, the contraction
of the water a little before glaciation begins, may be somewhat considerable,
especially if the Experiment be made in Summer, or in case (either there or
here) the water exposed to freez be put into a vessel very advantageously
shaped, or brought out of some warm Chamber or other place, where the heat of
the Air, that surrounded it, had rarifi'd it. But to examine the measures of
Contraction in the several Liquors, and with the nice Observations, that such a
work, to be accurately prosecured, would require, would have taken up much more
of my time then I was willing to employ about a work which I looked not on as
important enough to deserve it. And therefore I shall here add nothing to what
I have said under the Title of the Degrees of Cold, touching the contraction of
spirit of Wine, and of oil of Turpentine, by the differing degrees of that
Quality. And as for the condensation of Air, the vastest fluid we deal with, I
did indeed think fit to measure how much Cold condenses it. But the account of
that Experiment will be more opportunely delivered in In the Sect about the
Temperature of the Air.
one of the following Discourses.

Title XI. Experiments touching the Expansive Force of Freezing Water.
1. HAving shown that there is an Expansion made of water, and Aqueous Bodies,
by Congelation, let us now examine how strong this Expansion is, and the rather
because no body has yet, that we know of, made any particular trials on purpose
to make discoveries in this matter, so that although some unhappy Accidents
have kept our Experiments from being as accurate as we designed, (and as, God
assisting, we may hereafter make them) yet at least we shall show this
Expansion to be more forcible, then has hitherto been commonly taken notice of,
and assist men to make a somewhat less uncertain Estimate of the force of it,
then they seem to have yet endeavored to enable themselves to make.

2. And 1. we shall mention some Experiments, that do in general show, that the
Expansion of freezing water is considerably strong.

We took a new Pewter-bottle, capable to contain, as we guessed, about half a
pint of water, and having filled it top full with that Liquor, we scru'd on the
stopple, and exposed it during a very frosty night, to the cold Air, and the
next morning the water appeared to have burst the Bottle, though its matter
were metalline, and though purposely for this trial we had chosen it quite new,
the crack appeared to be in the very substance of the Pewter. This Experiment
we repeated; and 'twas one of those bottles filled with Ice that had cracked
it, which a Noble Virtuoso would needs make me (who should else have scrupled
to amuse, with such a Triffle, so great a Monarch, and so great a Virtuoso)
bring to his Majesty, to satisfy him, by the wideness of the crack, and the
Protuberance of the Ice, that showed it self in it, that the water had been
really expanded by Congelation.

3. We also tried, whether or no a much smaller Quantity of water, would not,
if frozen, have the like Effect, and accordingly, filling with about an ounce
of water a scru'd Pewter box (such as many use to keep Treacle and Salves in)
quite new, and of a considerable thickness, we found, that upon the freezing of
the included water, the vessel was very much burst.

Afterward filling a Quart Bottle (if I mistake not the capacity) with a
congealable liquor, and tying down the Cork very hard with strong Packthread,
we found that the frost made the liquor force out the stopple in spite of all
the care we had taken to keep it down.

But afterward we so well fastened a Cork to the neck of a quart bottle of
Glass, that it was easier for the congealing liquor to break the vessel, then
to thrust out the stopple, and having for a great many hours exposed this to an
exceeding sharp Air, we found at length the bottle burst, although it were so
thick and strong, that we were invited to measure the breadth of the sides, and
found that the thinnest place, where it was broken by the Ice, was 3/16 of an
inch, and the thickest that is twice as much (...) we also by the help of the
frost broke an earthen bottle of strong Flanders metal, of which the thinnest
part that was broken, was equal by measure, to the thinnest part of the other.

4. But the above mentioned Instances serving only to declare in general, that
the Expansion of water by Cold is very forcible, I thought fit to attempt the
reducing of the Matter somewhat nearer an Estimate less remote from being
determinate, and because the water exposed to congelation, may be probably
supposed to be Homogeneous, we judged, that the quantity of it, may very much
vary its degree of Force, and because some may suspect, that the Figure also
may not be inconsiderable in this matter, we thought fit to make our Trials in
a Brass vessel, whose Cavity was Cylindrical, and which to make it stronger,
had an orifice but at one of its ends: and whose thickness was such, that we
had reason to expect, that whilst the top remained covered, but with a
reasonable weight, the included water would find it more easy to lift up that
weight, then break the sides. To this Cylinder we fitted a cover of the same
metal that was flat, and went a little way into the Cavity, leaning also upon
the edges of the sides for the more closer stopping of the orifice; the cavity
of this Cylinder was in length about five inches, and in breadth about an inch
and three quarters. This Cylinder being filled top full with water, and the
cover being carefully put on, was fastened into an Iron frame, that held it
erected, and allowed us to place an iron weight, amounting to 56. pound, or
half a hundred of common English weight, which circumstance I mention (because
the common hundred that our Carriers, and c. use, exceeds five score by
twelve.) But this vessel being exposed in a frosty night, to the cold Air, the
contained water did not the next morning appear to be frozen, and the trial was
another time that way repeated with no better success, as if either the
thickness or clearness of the metal had broken the violence of the external
Airs frigefactive Power, or the weight that oppressed the Cover had hindered
that Expansion of the water, which is wont to accompany its Glaciation.

Wherefore we thought it requisite to apply to the outside of the vessel a
mixture of salt with ice or snow, as that which we had observed to introduce a
higher degree of Cold then the Air alone, even in very frosty nights; and
though this way it self, the glaciation proceeded very slowly, and sometimes
scarce at all, yet at length we found, that the water was by this means brought
so far to freez, that on the morrow the ice had on one side swelled above the
top of the Cylinder, and by lifting the cover on that side, had thrown down the
incumbent weight; but in this trial the cover having been uniformly, or every
where lifted up above the upper orifice of the Cylinder, we repeated the
Experiment diverse times, as we could get opportunity, sometimes with success,
and sometimes without it; and of one of the chief of our Experiments of this
sort, we find the following account among our Collections.

5. [The hollow brass weight, being about one inch and thee quarters in
Diameter, and the brass cover put on, was loaded with a weight of 56. pound
upon the cover, and exposed to an excessively sharp night, the next morning the
cover and the weight were found visibly lifted up, though not above (that we
could discern) a small Barley-corns breadth, but the thickness of the brass
cover was not here estimated, which was much less then half an inch, which
according to former observations, one might exspect to see the ice ascend. But
that which we took particular notice of, was, that the enclosed Cylinder of
ice, being by a gentle thaw of the superficial parts taken out, appeared so
full of bubbles, as to be thereby made opacous: Also when in the morning the
Cylinder was brought into my Chamber, before the fire was made, the 56. pound
weight being newly taken off. at a little hole, that seemed to be between the
edge of the Brass and Ice, there came out a great many drops of water, dilated
into numerous bubbles, and reduced into a kind of sroth, as if upon the removal
of the oppressing weight the bubbles of the water had got liberty to expand
themselves, but this lasted but a very little.]

6. After this, the difficulty we have often met with in the placing of great
weights conveniently upon the cover of a Cylinder, and the Expectation we had
to find the Quantity of the water, we made use of, capable upon its
Congelation, to lift up a much greater weight, invited us to make trial of its
Expansive force, by some what a differing way, which was, to fit a wooden plug
to the Cavity of the Cylinder (after we had suffered it to soak a convenient
time in water, that, swelling as much as it would before, it might be made to
swell no more by the water, which would lie contiguous to it in the vessel) and
then to drive it forcibly in, till by considerable weights appended to the
extant part of the plug, when the Cylinder was inverted, we could not draw it
out; the success of one of these Trials is thus set down in our Collections.

7. [A Plug was driven into the Cavity of a Brass Cylinder, first filled with
water, the Plug being also well soaked, then the Cylinder being inverted, the
Plug took up half a hundred and a quarter of a hundred weight, and would
possibly have taken up much more, and being exposed to a very sharp night, the
freezing water thrust out the plug about a barley-corns breadth, quite round
above the upper edge of the Cylinder, and it freezing all that day and the next
night, it was again exposed, the plug not being yet taken out, and then the
plug was beaten out a little more, namely (in all) near a quarter of an inch.]

8. Thus we see, that the expansive endeavor of the water forced a resistance,
at least equal to that which would have been made by a weight of 74. pound, and
probably, as the note intimates, would have appeared able to do more, if we had
had convenient weights and Instruments, wherewith to have measured the strength
of the waters endeavor outward, which some subsequent Trials, made us think
very considerable, though not finding their Events set down in our notes, we
think it fit at present to leave them unmentioned.

But one thing there is in these trials, that I think not unworthy a
Philosophers notice, and his considering, namely, that this endeavor of the
water to expand it self, is thus vigorous, though the uttermost term to which
it would expand it self, in case it were not at all resisted, would be but to
about a ninth, or at most an eight part of the space it possessed before it began
to freez; whereas Air may by Heat (which New Exp. Physico-mech. Exper. 6.
yet we have elsewhere shown, will not reduce it to any thing near its utmost
expansion) be brought to possess (though not to fill) according to the diligent
See the forecited place.
Mersennus's observation, seventy times, the Dimensions it had before
Rarefaction, and consequently the Air expanded by Heat, does by its endeavors,
tend to acquire above 60. times the space that the water does, when expanded by
so high a degree of Cold, as is capable to turn it all into Ice: not to mention
that the expansion to which the Air tends upon the Account of its own spring,
is, (as we show in another The Appendix to the Physico-mechanical Experiments.
place) many times greater then that to which Mersennus could bring it upon the
bare Account of Heat.

9. There remains yet one way, whereby we hoped, though not to measure the
Expansive force of freezing water, yet to manifest it to be prodigiously great,
or in case we failed of this aim, to produce at least some other Phenomenon
relating to Cold, that would not be inconsiderable. And though our endeavors
succeeded not, yet because a happier opportunity may bring them to be one way
or other succesful, we shall annex, That we caused to be made, an Iron Ball of
between two and three inches in Diameter, which Ball was solid, save that in
the midst there was a small Cavity left to place a little water in, together
with a female screw, as they call it, reaching from the outward surface of that
internal cavity; and to this was applied a strong Iron screw, so fitted to the
internal cavity of the other screw, as to fill it with as much exactness as
could be obtained. And this screw was made to go so hard, that it required to
be screwed in by the help of a Vice, that it might not be forced out, without
breaking the Iron it self. Our design in employing this Instrument was, that
having well filled the internal cavity with water, and forced in the screw as
far as it could be made to go, the Instrument thus charged with water, might be
exposed to the highest degree of Cold we could produce. For having thus ordered
the matter, we thought we might expect, either that the water how much soever
we heightened and lengthned the Cold, would not freez at all, being hindered from
the Expansion belonging to Ice in comparison of water; or, if it did freez,
that one of these two things would happen, either that the expansive force of
that little water, would by forcing such an Iron Instrument, manifest its
strength to be stupendous, or by not breaking it, present us with ice without
Bubbles, or at least not rarer and lighter, then the water it was made of; but
for want of a sufficient Cold our designs succeeded not, so as to satisfy us,
though we more then once attempted it. For the great thickness of the Iron
being considered, we were not sure that the waters not freezing, might not
proceed rather from the thickness and compactness of the metal, then from its
resistance to the expansion of water. And therefore we must suspend the
inferences, this Experiment may afford us, till we have opportunity to make
trial of it, with a Cold not only very intense, but durable enough, the want of
which last circumstance keeps us from daring to build any thing on our
Experiment.

10. And here we may take notice, that it may be an inquiry, more worthy a
Philosopher, then easy for him, whence this prodigious force, we have observed
in water, expanded by glaciation, should proceed. For if Cold be but, as the
Cartesians would have, a privation of Heat, though by the recess of that
Ethereal substance, which agitated the little Eel-like particles of the water,
and thereby made them compose a fluid body, it may easily enough be conceived,
that they should remain rigid in the Postures wherein the Ethereal substance
quitted them, and thereby compose an unfluid Body like Ice: yet how these
little Eels should by that recess acquire as strong an endeavor outward, as
if they were so many little springs, and expand themselves too with so
stupendous a force, is that which does not so readily appear. And on the other
side in the Epicurean way of explicating Cold, though the Phenomenon seems
some what less difficult; yet it is not at all easy to be salv'd: For though,
granting the Ingress of swarms of Cold Corpuscles, the Body of water may be
supposed to be thereby much swelled and expanded, yet besides that these
Corpuscles stealing insensibly into the Liquors they insinuate themselves into,
without any show of boisterousness or violence, it is not so easy to conceive
how they should display so strange a force against the sides of those strong
vessels that they break, when they may as freely permeat or enter them: besides
this, I say, we observe that in Oil, which requires a far greater degree of
Cold to be congealed to a good degree of hardness, the swarms of frigorifick
Atoms that invade it, are so far from making it take up more room then before,
that they reduce it into less, as may appear by those former Experiments which
manifested, that Cold does not expand, either oil or uncongealable Liquors, but
condense them.

11. After what I have thus largely delivered, concerning the expansive
endeavor of freezing water, I hope I may be allowed to leave to others (if
they shall think it worth the labor) the prosecution of the like Experiments
upon Wine, Milk, Urine, and other Liquors abounding with Aqueous parts,
concerning which we shall only in general remind those that may have forgotten
it, That by some of our Experiments it appears, that such Aqueous Liquors are
expanded by congelation, and, that their endeavor outward is considerably
forcible, seems more then likely from what we formerly noted out of the Dutch
Voyage to Nova Zembla, where it is related, that by the extreme Cold, both some
of their other Barrels, and some of those that were hooped with Iron, were, as
they speak, frozen in pieces, that is, according to our Conjecture, burst
together, with the Hoops, whether of Wood or Iron, by the expansive force of
the imprisoned Liquors brought to freez.

12. To which I shall add, that when I asked an Ingenious person, whether in
Russia, where he lived a good while, Beer and Wine did not, when brought to
congelation, break the vessels they were frozen in; He Answered, That he had
not observed wooden vessels to have been broken by them, (perhaps because of
their yielding) but glass and stone Bottles often.

Title XII. Experiments touching a New way of estimating the Expansive force of
Congelation, and of highly compressing Air without Engines.
1. THere is yet another way, that I bethought my self of, at once to measure
the force wherewith freezing water expands it self, and to reduce the Air to a
greater degree of condensation, then I have as yet found it brought to by any
unquestionable way of compressing it: But whereas by this method to determine
exactly the Expansive force of the water, it were requisite not only to know
the quantity of the water, and that of the Air exposed to the Cold, but to make
the Experiment in vessels conveniently shaped to measure the Dilatation of the
one, and the compression of the other; our Experiments being made in a place
where we were not provided of such glasses, we were not able to make our trials
so instructive and satisfactory, as else we might have done; nevertheless we
shall not scruple to subjoyn those of them, that we find noted down among our
Collections, allowing our selves to hope, that will not be unacceptable or
appear impertinent, not only upon the account of their novelty, but for two
other reasons.

2. The first, because though they do not accurately define the Expansive force
of freezing water, yet they manifest, that it is wonderfully great, better
perhaps then any Experiment that has been hitherto practiced (not to say,
thought of) as may appear by comparing what we have delivered in another
Treatise, of the great force requisite to compress Air considerably, with the
great compression of Air that has already been this way effected.

3. The second, because this new way affords us one of condensing the Air much
farther then hitherto it has, by any method I have heard of, been
unquestionably reduced, I say, unquestionably, because though the diligent
Mersennus, and others, seem to have conceived himself, to have reduced it in
the wind-Gun into a very narrow room, yet besides that, by our Expedient, we
have compressed it beyond what these Ingenious Men pretend to: Besides this, I
say, I have long much questioned, whether the way of compressing Air in a
wind-Gun, which both they and we have employed, may safely be relied on; for
the oil or some other analogous thing, that is wont this way to be employed,
and the overlooking of several circumstances, that are more necessary to be
taken into diligent consideration, then wont to be so, may easily enough
occasion no small mistake in assigning so great a degree to the compression of
the Air; but our Exceptions against this way of measuring it, may be more
opportunely discoursed of in another place. And therefore we will now proceed
to take notice, that of the two known ways of compressing Air, the clearest and
most satisfactory, seems to be that which is performed in the wind Fountain, as
it is commonly called, where yet I have seldom, if ever, seen the Air, (that I
remember) by all the violence men could use to syringe in water, crowded into
so little as the third part of the capacity of the vessel. And an ingenious
Artificer, that makes store of these Fountains, being consulted by me, about
the further compressing of Air in them, he deterred me from venturing to try
it, by affirming to me, that both he and another skilful Person of my
Acquaintance, had like to have been spoiled by such attempts; for endeavoring
to urge the Air beyond a moderate degree of compression, it not only burst some
Fountains made of Glass, but when the Attempt was made in a large, but thick
vessel, made of strong and compact Flanders Earth (the same with that of Jugs
and stone Bottles) the vessel was by the over-bent spring of the Air burst with
a horrid noise, and the pieces thrown off with that violence, that if they had
hit him, or his Friend that assisted him in the Experiment, they might have
maimed him, if not killed him out right, so that the greatest unquestionable
Compression of the Air seems to have been that, recorded in the Fifth Chapter
of our Defense against the learned Linus, where nevertheless, we could reduce
the Air by the weight of a Cylinder of Mercury of about 100. inches, (which
consequently might near countervale a Cylinder of six score foot of water) but
into a little less then a fourth part of its usual extent; but how much further
the Air may be compressed by our new purposed way, it is now time to show by
the ensuing notes, of which we have not omitted any that we could find, both
that some scruples, which might else arise about the way we employed, may be
prevented, or satisfied, and that the way, we employed in practicing this
method, might by some variety of Examples be the better understood.

4. [We took a large glass-Egg, December. the 13.
with a Cylindrical stem about the bigness of my middle finger, and pouring in
water, till it reached about a fingers breadth higher then the bottom of the
stem, we set it to freez in snow and salt, for some hours, with the stop of the
stem (which was drawn out into a very slender pipe almost at right angles with
the stem) open, and there left it for some hours, and the water was risen
betwixt six and a half, and seven inches. This we did in order to another
Experiment, but then easily and nimbly sealing up the slender pipe above
mentioned, that the Air in the stem might not be heated, we let it continue in
the snow, sometimes adding fresh for about 24. hours to observe, to what degree
the water, by expanding it self, would compress the imprisoned Air. The length
of the Cylinder of Air to be condensed at the time of the sealing, was
(accounting by Estimation for the slender pipe newly taken notice of) almost 9
inches. This space we observed the ascending water as the ice increased below,
to invade by degrees: (for we watched it, and measured it from time to time) so
much, till at length the water reached to 8. inches and almost, above the
station (which we had carefully marked with a Diamond) in which we found it,
when the glass was sealed up, leaving but about an inch of Air at the top, so
that of the whole space before possessed by the Air, the water had intruded
into near nine parts of ten; then being partly apprehensive the glass would
hold no longer, but have its upper part blown off, as it happened to us a
little before with another vessel, and partly being desirous to try that which
follows, we leisurely inverted the glass, that the Air might get up to the ice,
for all the water in the stem had been purposely kept unfrozen, and having
provided a Jar to receive the water that should be thrown out, we broke the
slender pipe which we had sealed up, and immediately as we expected, the
compressed Air with violence and noise, blew out of the stem into the Jar about
ten inches of water, which was somewhat more (between half an inch and a whole
inch, by reason of the Impetus of the self expanding Air) then the space
possessed by the Air, before it began to be compressed. And besides this, such
a strange multitude of Bubbles, that were formerly repressed, did now get
liberty to ascend from the lower parts of the glass to the top of the remaining
water, that it somewhat emulated that which happens to botled Beer; upon the
taking out of the Cork. N. B. when the Air was compressed beyond seven inches,
we observed diverse times, that the inside of the glass possessed by the Air,
and nearest to the water, was round about, to a pretty height, full of very
little drops like a small dew, but when we came to break the glass, we took noe
such notice, whether the rising water had licked them up, or their concourse
made them run down into it, or for some other reason, we determine not.]

Another.

5. [We took a single vial filled December. 13.
with water, about half an inch above the lower part of the neck, and leaving
about two inches of Air in the remaining part of the neck, which was drawn out
into a slender pipe, like that of the glass last mentioned, we sealed it up,
the Air being first well cooled, and exposing it to freez, we observed a while
after, that it had by guess condensed the Air into lesser room. A while after,
being in another Chamber, we heard a considerable noise, and imagining what it
was, we went directly to the glass, whose upper part consisting of about an
inch of the neck, besides the slender pipe, we found had been blown off from
the table upon the ground, the body and part of the neck remaining in the snow;
but this glass was of a metal that uses to be more brittle then white glass.]

Another.

6. [A round white glass, almost filled with water, was sealed up with care to
avoid heating the included Air, which amounted to a Cylinder of about two
inches and; after a while the water swelled and compressed the Air almost two
inches, that is full two thirds: and then (as we conjectured, because the snow
reaching too high, froze it in the neck) we found the glass cracked in many
places of the Ball, and the top thrown off at some little distance from it.]

Another.

7. [A large single vial sealed, in whose neck the Air was not condensed to
half its former room, just as we were going to break it under water, to observe
the sally of the compressed Air, suddenly blew off with a good noise, and threw
from the table almost the whole neck of the Vial in one entire piece, which is
near four inches long, and at the Basis above an inch broad.]

8. [A glass about the bigness of a Turkey Egg, and of an oval form, with a
Neck almost Cylindrical, but somewhat wider at the lower then the upper part,
was filled with water, till there was left in the neck four inches and a half,
whereof the last quarter of an inch, and a little more, was much narrower then
the rest, being drawn into a conical shape, that it might be easily sealed at
the Apex; along this Cylinder, from the surface of the water, to the top of the
glass, was pasted a list of Paper, divided into inches and quarters, and then
the glass being carefully and expeditiously sealed up by the flame of a candle,
we observed, that by holding the glass a while in a warm hand, and a room where
there was a good fire, the water was swelled up near a quarter of an inch, but
placing the glass amongst solid pieces of ice mixed with salt, the water quickly
began to subside upon the Infrigidation, and a while after beginning to freez,
it began to swell, and by degrees compressed the Air, till it had crowded it
into less then a 17. part, by what seemed indisputable, for by estimate, it
seemed to some to be crowded into less then a 20. part, is not a much lesser
part of the room it formerly possessed, which difference of Estimates,
notwithstanding the divided Paper, proceeded from the change of the figure of
the upper end of the glass, from the Cylindrical, and to show that there was no
leak at the place where the glass was sealed; besides, that by prying
diligently, we could discern none; besides this, I say, when the pressure of
the thus crowded Air grew too strong for the resistance of the glass, it burst
with a noise, that made us come to it from several places of the house; the
vessel broke not in the Cylindrical part (as I may so speak) but in the oval,
the whole pipe with the sealed end remaining entire, the ice appeared full
enough of Bubbles, which made it white and opacous, and the water that had
ascended into the neck, upon the breaking, was all driven out of it.]

Thus far our Collections, but because we had in another glass, where the
operation was sooner dispatched, an opportunity of watching and observing
somewhat more exactly, we will add,

9. That the last, and possibly the best Experiment we had of compressing Air
by freezing, was made in a short and strong glass. Egg, whose ball was very
great in proportion to the stem, that the expanding of the water might have the
more forcible operation: This vessel being exactly sealed, and having a divided
list of paper pasted along the stem, was set to freez with snow (or ice) and
salt, and the contained water did quickly begin to crowd the Air into a lesser
room, and for a good while ascended very fast, till at length it having thrust
the Air into so small a part of the Cavity of the pipe, that we vehemently
suspected there might be some unheeded flaw or crack of the glass, at which the
Air had stolen out, we drew near the vessel, and attentively prying all about
it, to try if we could discover any ground of our suspicion, we found (as far
as the divided list, and other circumstances could inform us) that the Air
(supposing none of it to have got away) was reduced by our Estimate into the
19. part of the space it possessed before. And this our curiosity proved not
unseasonable, for whilst we were narrowly surveying the glass, to spy out some
flaw in it, we were quickly satisfied there had been none, by a huge crack made
upon the Eruption of the included Air, whose spring being by so great a
compression made too strong for the glass to resist, it did with a great noise
break the ball of the glass into many pieces, throwing the unfrozen part of the
water upon me, and also throwing off the stem of the Egg, which yet I had the
good fortune to recover entire, and which I yet keep by me as a rarity.

10. Thus far we then proceeded in compressing the Air, which being done in
vessels Hermetically sealed, where no Air can get in or out, seems to me a more
unexceptionable way, then those that have hitherto been thought of. But
further, we could not then prosecute it for want both of convenient glasses,
and of ice or snow, of which if we were provided, and particularly of strong
glasses, we should little doubt of reducing the Air to a yet more considerable
degree of compression.

11. We may add on this occasion, that we looked upon the same way as somewhat
less unpromising then others, that have been hitherto used to try the
compression of water; for though hitherto neither the Experiments of Ingenious
Men, nor those made by our selves have fully satisfied us, that water admits
any more compression, then it may suffer upon the account of the little parcels
of Air, that is wont to be dispersed among it, yet the unsuccesfulness may
perhaps (for I propose it but as a mere conjecture) be imputed to the
porousness of the vessels, wherein by the ways already practiced, the
Experiment must be made, whereas in this new way of ours, not only the force
wherewith the compressed Air presses upon the water, grows at length to be
exceeding great, and is applied not with a sudden Impetus, as when a Pewter
vessel is knocked with a Hammer, but by slow and regular degrees of increase,
but the water is kept in a vessel impervious to its subtilest parts, so that it
may indeed crack the glass, but cannot get out at the pores, as water
compressed is wont to do at those of metalline vessels. The prosecution of this
Experiment to bring it to any thing of Accurateness, we omitted, partly through
forgetfulness and Avocations, and sometimes for want of convenience to try it.
But by the first of the lately mentioned Experiments, about the condensation of
Air, it seems by the strong multitude of Bubbles, which upon the breaking of
the glass appeared in the water that had been compressed betwixt the Air and
the (...), that those two Bodies had very violently compressed it: and this we
are the more apt to believe, because that another time, when we had sealed up
some Air, and water in a glass-Egg, and permitted the water to swell by the
operation of the Cold, but till it had reduced the Air, included with it, to
about three quarters of the space it possessed before, even then (I say) to try
whether the subjacent water were not also compressed by the Air it urged, we
broke off the sealed Apex of the glass, and perceived, as we expected, the
water to ascend, and that to the height of a quarter of an inch, as we found by
measure. But such trials having not been, as we just now acknowledged, duly
prosecuted, we shall at present content our selves to have named this way of
attempting the compression of water, without grounding any Inferences upon it.

Title XIII. Experiments and Observations touching the sphere of Activity of
Cold.
1. THe sphere of Activity of Cold, or to speak plainer, the space, to whose
extremities every way the action of a Cold body is able to reach, is a thing
very well worth the enquiring after, but more difficult to find, then at first
one would imagine: For to be able to assign the determinate limits, within
which, and not beyond them, a cold Body can operate, several things are to be
taken into consideration; as first, what the degree of Cold is, that belongs to
the assigned Body: For it seems rational to conceive, that if a cold Body as
such, have a diffusive virtue, those that have greater degrees of Cold, as Ice
and Snow, will be able to diffuse it to a greater distance, as we see that a
coal of Fire will cast a sensible heat much further then a piece of wood, that
is heated without being kindled. Secondly, the Medium through which the
Diffusion is made, may help to enlarge the Bounds, or straiten the Limits of
it, as that medium is more or less disposed to receive or to transmit the
Action of the cold Agent. Thirdly, Not only the Consistence, and Texture of the
Medium, but its Motion, or Rest may be considered in this case. For in frosty
and snowy weather, men observe the winds that come from frozen lands, to blow
more cold, then winds from the same Quarter would do, in case there were no Ice
nor Snow in their Passage. Fourthly, There may be made very differing Estimates
of the Diffusion of Cold, according to the Instrument that is employed to
receive, and acquaint us with the Action of Cold. For a liquor or other Body
may not appear cold to him, that examines it with a Weather-glass, whilst he
shall feel it cold with his hand; and, as we elsewhere also note, to that
sensory it self, as it is variously disposed, the same object will seem more or
less cold; so much may the Predisposition of the Organ impose upon the
unskilful or unwary. Fifthly, The very bulk of a cold Body may very much
enlarge or lessen its sphere of Activity, as we may have occasion to show ere
long. And besides there may be diverse other things, that may render it very
difficult to ascertain any thing in this matter. And therefore I shall reserve
them for other opportunities, and observe now in general, that in such small
parcels of Ice it self, as in our Experiments we are wont to deal with, we have
found the sphere of Activity of Cold exceeding narrow, not only in comparison
of that of heat in fire, but in comparison of the Atmosphere, if I may so call
it, of many odorous Bodies, as Musk, Civet, Spices, Roses, Wormwood, Assa
dulcis, Assa foetida, Castoreum, Camphire, and the like; nay, and even in
comparison of the sphere of Activity of the more vigorous Loadstones, insomuch
that we have doubted, whether the sense could discern a cold Body, (...) then
by immediate Contact?

2. And to examine this, having taken a piece of Ice, we did not find upon
trials, that I partly made my self, and partly caused in my presence to be made
by others, that if a man's Eyes were close shut, he could certainly discern the
Approach of a moderately sized piece of Ice, though held never so near his
fingers ends. Nay, which is more considerable, having had the curiosity to make
the Trial, with one of those very sensible Thermoscopes I have formerly
mentioned (wherein a pendulous drop of liquor plays up and down in a slender
pipe) I found, that by holding it very near to little Masses of snow (somewhat
compacted too) the movable drop, did not betray any manifest operation of so
cold a neighboring Body; but if the glass were made to touch the snow, the
effect would then be notable, by the hasty descent of the pendulous drop, or
its motion toward the obtuse part of the Instrument, in case that were not
perpendicularly, but laterally applied to the snowy Lumps. But this languidness
of operation, may perhaps proceed in great part from the smallness of the
Pieces of Ice that were employed: For hearing of a Merchant, that had made
diverse Observations about Cold in Greenland, I desired, by the mediation of a
very learned Friend, to be informed, whether or no in the night they could
perceive those vast heaps, or rather mountains of ice, that are wont to float
up and down in that Sea, by any new and manifest accession of Cold, and was
informed by way of Answer to that Question, that being at Sea, they could know
the approach of Ice, as well by the increase of Cold, as by the glaring light
which the Air seemed to receive from the neighboring Ice.

3. But that which makes me suspect, that there may in this account be some
mistake, is, that I have not yet met with any like observation in any of the
voyages into gelid Climates, that I have had occasion to peruse, though in some
of them the Navigators frequently mention their having met with vast rands (as
some call them) and Islands of mountainous ice in the night. And it is, as I
remember, the complaint of one or two, if not more of them, that the Ship lay
close by such vast pieces of ice, without their being aware of it, by reason of
the fogs. By which it seems that there was no sensible Cold diffused to any
considerable distance, whereby they might be advertised of the unwelcome
neighborhood even of so much ice: But possibly the approach of far smaller
masses of ice, would have been sensible to them in such a Climate as ours,
where the organs would not have been indisposed to feel, by a long
accustomance, of any thing near so intense a degree of Cold, as that which then
reigned in those Northern Seas.

4. Whilst we were considering the Difference, betwixt the operations of even
the Coldest Bodies at the very nearest Distance, and upon immediate Contact, we
thought it an Experiment not altogether unworthy to be tried, whether, though
ice and snow alone, that is, unassisted by salts, would not in some of our
formerly mentioned Experiments freez water, through the thickness even of a
thin glass, they may not yet do it when the water is immediately contiguous to
them. And I remember, that we took a conveniently shaped Glass, and having
frozen the contained water for some hours, from the bottom upwards, till the
ice was grown to be of a considerable thickness, we marked, what part of the
glass was possessed by the unfrozen water, and then removing the vessel to a
little Distance from the snow, and salt, it stood in before, we let it (...)
there, to try whether the ice would freez any part of the contiguous and
incumbent water; but some intervening accidents hindered us from being able to
derive any great satisfaction one way or other from our trial.

5. Wherefore we shall add by way Voyage de (...) and de Perse, Live. V.
of Compensation, that the diligent Olearius relates, that at Ispahan, the
Capital City of Persia, though it be seated in a very hot Climate, and though
it seldom freez there above a finger thick, and the ice melt presently at
Sunrising, yet the Inhabitants have Conservatories, which they furnish with
solid pieces of ice of a good thickness, only by pouring at night great store
of water at convenient intervals of time, upon a shelving floor of Freestone
or Marble, whereon, as the water runs over it, the most disposed of its parts,
are in their passage arrested, and frozen by the contiguous ice, which by this
means (says my learned Author) may be brought in two or three successive
nights, to a very considerable thickness.

6. We several times gave order to have this Experiment tried in England, but
partly through the negligence of those we employed, and partly upon the score
of intervening circumstances, our expectation was but ill answered. And in this
case I mention intervening circumstances, because having caused a servant to
pump in the night, upon a not very thin plate of ice, that was laid shelving
upon a Board, and another flat piece of Ice being about the same time laid
under a place, where water derived from a neighboring spring, is wont
continually to drop, he brought me word, that not only in this last named
place, the ice melted away, but that under the pump, instead of increasing in
thickness by the waters running over it, it was thereby rather dissolved. At
which somewhat wondering, I went in the morning my self to the pump, and causing
a good flake of ice to be in a convenient posture placed under it, I observed
the water as it came out of the pump, and was falling on the ice, to smoke, as
if the depth of the Well had made the water, though very Cold to the touch,
somewhat warm in comparison of the ice, and thereby fitter to resolve then to
increase it; (which inconvenience may be prevented by suffering the water of
deep Springs and Wells, to stand to cool in the Air, before it be put to the
Ice,) and this, though the neighboring Air were, as I found by manifest
proofs, so cold, that I was not tempted to impute the unsuccesfulness of the
Experiment, rather to its want of a sufficient coldness, then the water's: So
that till I have an opportunity of making a further Trial, I cannot (...) more
to the Persian way of augmenting ice. But to proceed, our having met with but
an unsatisfactory Account of this Experiment, which we were the more troubled
at, because this seemed a promising way of trying that, which otherwise is not
so easily reduced to Experiment; for the Temperature of the Air, must be
seriously considered in assigning the Cause of diverse trials, that may be made
for the resolving of the same Question. For to omit other Examples, here in
England we find, that water poured on snow, is wont to hasten the Dissolution
of it, and not to be congealed by it; whereas having inquired of an Ingenious
Person, that lived a good while among the Russians, he informed me, that it was
their usual way to turn water and snow into ice, by pouring a convenient
Proportion of that liquor into a great quantity of snow, and having also
inquired, (...) ice had not the like operation, he told (...), that it was usual,
and he had seen it practiced in (...), to cement Ice to Buildings, and other
things, and also to case over Bodies, as it were, with Ice, by gradually
throwing water upon them. But I doubt, whether that Effect be to be ascribed
barely to the Contiguity of the Ice, because I learned of him, that this way of
increasing ice is practiced in very frosty weather, when water thinly spread
upon almost any other Body, would be frozen by the vehement sharpness of the
Air.

7. The Glaciations, that nature unguided by Art, is wont to make, beginning at
those parts of Bodies, at which they are exposed to the Air, it usually
happens, that they freez from the upper toward the lower parts. But how far in
Earth and Water (the most considerable Bodies, that are subject to be frozen)
the frost will pierce downwards, though for some hints, it would afford, worth
the knowing, is not easy to be defined, because the deepness of the frost may
be much varied by the degree of Coldness in the Air, by which the Glaciation
seems to be produced, as also by the greater or (...) Duration of the frost, by
the looser or closer texture of the Earth, by the nature of the Juices
wherewith the Earth is imbued, and by the constitution of the subjacent, and
more internal parts of the Earth, some of which send up either actually warm,
or potentially hot and resolving steams, such as those that make corrosive
liquors in the bowels of the Earth; so that the frost will not seiz upon, or at
least cannot continue over Mines; and I have seen good large scopes of land,
where vast quantities of good Limestone lay near the surface of the Earth, on
which I have been assured by the Inhabitants, that the snow will not lie. There
are diverse other things, that may vary the depth to which the frost can
penetrate into the ground, (I say, into the ground, because in most cases it
will pierce deeper into the water.) But yet that we may not leave this part of
the History of Cold altogether uncontributed to, we will add some of our Notes,
whereby it will appear, that in our Climate the (...) less into the ground,
then many are pleased to think.

8. The notes I find about this matter are these that follow, which I (...)
unaltered, because 'twere tedious, and not worth while to add the way we
employed, and the cautions we used in making the observations, but we shall
rather intimate, that the following trials were made in a Village about two
miles from a great City.

[I. Jan. 22. After four nights of frost, that was taken notice of for very
hard, we went into an Orchard, where the ground was level, and not covered with
grass, and found by digging, that the frost had scarce pierced into the ground
three inches and a half. And in a Garden nearer the house, we found not the
Earth to be frozen more then two inches beneath its surface.

II. Nine or ten nights successive frost froze the grasless ground in the
Garden, about six inches and a half, or better in depth, and the grasless
ground in the Orchard, where a wall (...) it from the south Sun, to the (...)
of about eight inches and a half, or better.]

[ February the 9. we dug in an Orchard near a wall, that respects the
North, and found the frost to have (...) the ground (...) a foot and two
inches, at least above a foot: (...) the eight day since it was (...) inches
and a half.]

[A slender pipe of glass, about 18. inches long, and sealed at one end, was
thrust over night into a hole, purposely made with a Spit, straight down into
the ground, the (...) of the water being in the same level with that of the
Earth, the next morning the Tube being taken out, the water appeared frozen in
the whole Capacity of the Cylinder, but a little more then three inches. But
from this stick of ice, there reached downwards a part of a Cylinder of ice of
about six inches in length, the rest of the water remained (...), though it
were an exceeding sharp night, preceded by a Constitution of the Air, that had
been very lasting, and very bitter. The Earth in the Garden, where this Trial
was made, we guessed to be frozen eight or ten inches deep, as it was in
another place about the same house. But is this Tube had not been in the
ground, the ambient Air would have frozen it quite through.]

9. Another Note much of the same import, we find in another place of our
Collections.

Finding that by reason of the mildness of our Climate, I was scarce to hope
for any much deeper Congelation of the Earth or Water, I applied my self to
inquire of an Ingenious Man, that had been at Musco, whether he had observed
any thing there to my present purpose, as also to find in Captain James's
Voyage, whether that inquisitive Navigator had taken notice of any thing, that
might inform me, how far the Cold was able to freeze the Earth or Water in the
Island of Charleton, where that Quality may probably be supposed to have had as
large a sphere of Activity, as in almost any part of the habitable world: And
by my Inquiries I (...), that even in frozen Regions themselves, a congealing
degree of Cold pierces nothing near so deep into the Earth and Sea, as one
would imagine: For the Traveller, I spoke with, told me, that in a Garden in
Musco, where he took notice of the thing I inquired about, he found not the
ground to be frozen much above two foot deep. And in Captain James's Journal,
the most that I find (and that too, where he gives an Account of the
prodigiously tall ice they had in January) concerning the piercing of the frost
into the ground, is this, that The ground at Page 63.
tenfoot deep was frozen. Whence by the way we may gather how much sharper Cold
may be presumed to have reigned in that Island, then even in Russia. And as for
the freezing of the water, He does in another place occasionally give us this
memorable Account of it, where He relates the manner of the breaking up the Ice
in the frozen Sea, that surrounds the Island we have been speaking of. It is
first to be noted (says he) that it does Page 86.
not freez (naturally) above six foot, the rest is by accident, such is that
Ice, that you may see here six fathom thick. This we had manifest proof of by
our digging the Ice out of the Ship, and by digging to our Anchors before the
Ice broke up. The rest of that account not concerning our present purpose, I
forbear to annex, only taking notice, that notwithstanding our lately mentioned
Experiment of freezing water in a glass Tube thrust into the Ground, yet it
seems, that at least where Captain James wintered, the water was not much above
half so thick frozen as the Earth. But we have already noted the indisposition
of saltwater to congelation, and whether fresh water would not have been deeper
frozen may be justly doubted.

Title XIV. Experiments touching the differing Mediums through which Cold may
be diffused.
1. IN examining whether Cold might be diffused through all Mediums
indefinitely, notwithstanding their Compactness or the Closeness of their
Texture, we must have a Care not to make our Trials with Mediums of too great
thickness, least we mistakingly impute that to the Nature of the Medium which
is indeed caused by the distance which the Medium puts betwixt the Agent and
the Patient. For the mixtures of Ice and Snow, wherewith we made our
Experiments, will operate but at a very small distance, though the Medium
resist no more then the common Air, as may appear by some of the Experiments
recorded in this Treatise.

This premised, we may proceed to relate, that having placed a copious mixture
of ice and salt in Pipkins glazed within, and in white Basins glazed both
within and without, we observed, that the outside of both those sorts of
vessels was crusted over with ice: though, however the baked Earth had not been
compact, nor the vitrifi'd surfaces of a very close Texture; the very thickness
of the vessels was so great, that it seemed it would scarce have been able to
freez at a greater distance.

2. By the Experiments formerly mentioned of freezing water in Pewter bottles,
it appears, that Cold is able to operate through such mettalline vessels.

3. And this may be somewhat confirmed by one of the prettiest Experiments,
that is to be performed by the help of Cold, namely, the making Icy Cups to
drink in. The way we used was this; We caused to be made a Cup of Lattin (by
which I mean Iron reduced into thin plates, and tinned over on both sides) of
the shape and bigness I intended to have the Cup of; then I caused to be made
of the same matter another Cup of the same shape with the former, but every way
less, so that it would go into the greater, and leave a competent interval for
water, betwixt its unequal surface, and the concave of the other. This innermost
Cup was furnished with a rim or lip, by which it leaned upon the greater, and
by whose help its sides and bottom were easily placed at a just and even
distance from the sides and bottom of the other; but the Distance between the
two bottoms is made greater, then that between the sides, that the icy Cup
might stand the firmer, and last the longer. The interval between the two parts
of this Mould being filled with water, and the Cavity of the internal Cup being
filled with a mixture of ice and salt, (partly to freez the contiguous water,
and thereby cooperate to the quicker making of the Cup and partly by its weight
to keep the water from buoying up so light a Cup,) the external part was
surrounded with ice and salt, whose Cold so powerfully penetrated to the
internal metalline Mould, that the water was quickly frozen, and (the Parts of
the Mould being disjoined) appeared turned into an icy Cup of the bigness and
figure designed. And these Cups being easily to be made, and of various shapes
(and that in the midst of Summer, if snow or ice be at hand) are very pleasant
triffles, especially in hot weather, when they impart a very refreshing
coolness to the drink poured into them, and though they last not long,
especially if they be employed to drink Wine, and such like spirituous Drinks
in, yet whilst some are melting, others may be provided, and so the loss may
be easily repaired; all the difficulty we met with, was to disjoyn the parts of
the Mould which are wont to stick very fast to the ice they include. And we
tried to obviate this, sometimes by anointing the inside of the Mould with
some unctuous and not offensive matter, to hinder the Adhesion of the ice, and
sometimes by applying some convenient heat both to the unequal part of the
external, and the concave part of the internal piece of the Mould, which last
mentioned way is quick and sure, but lessens the durableness of the Cup.

(We were lately informed, that this way of making Cups of Ice, is set down
(...) (...) Argenis, and it is like enough, that (...) Man may have learned it
amongst some of the Virtuosi of Italy he conversed with: But if we that learned
it from none of them, had not been taught it by Experience, we should scarce
have ventured to try it upon the Credit of a Romance; that sort of Composures
being wont to be fabulous enough to pass but for Poems in Prose.)

4. The learned and industrious Mathematician Erasmus Bartholinus, mentions in
his newly published Discourse de Figura (...), an Experiment, by which he tells
us, that some Masters of Natures secrets, do easily, even in the midst of heat,
reduce water into Air. For they put a little snow or ice into a Funnel, and
thereby so refrigerate and condense the ambient Air, that there will dew
trickle down the sides of the Funnel: By which means it has been said, that
some Ingenious Men have hoped to make an artificial Fountain in the midst of
Summer. But I here mention this Experiment rather, because it is not unlikely to
please those to whom it is new, and because having purposely tried it in large
and thick funnels of glass, it may be pertinently enough delivered in this
place, (where we are treating of the Transmission or Propagation of Cold;
through close and thick Mediums,) then because we expect to make of it that
use, especially that Oeconomical use, that has been lately intimated. For
first, 'twill be very hard to prove, that it is the very Air it self, and not
rather the vapors swimming in it, that are by this means transmuted into
water. And secondly, it is true indeed, that a mixture of snow and salt will
condense vapors on the outside of a Funnel, but either they, that hoped to
make this use of the Experiment, have little Experience of it, and write
conjecturally, or else they have made it with a success very differing from
ours. For though, we employed a large Funnel, and suspended it by a string
(artificially enough ti'd about it) in the free Air: And though the mixture of
ice and salt we put in, were sufficiently infrigidating (as will appear by and
by) and far more so, then ice or snow alone would have been, yet that mixture
being not able to condense the vaporous Parts of the Air into dew, much, if at
all, longer then the mutual Dissolution of the salt and snow lasted, the liquor
that was this way obtained, and dropped down at the bottom of the Funnel (whose
internal Perforation ought to be carefully stopped, least any of the resolved
snow and salt should fall through, and spoil the other liquor) was indeed sweet
like rain water, but so very little, as well, as so slowly generated, that it
amounted not any thing near to that which the snow, employed and spoiled to
make it, would have afforded. So that it may be questioned, whether some
cooling liquors, which can as well as this mixture condense the vapid Air into
water, and whose Texture is not destroyed in this operation, as that of the
snow is, might not be more hopefully employed to obtain water from the Air; to
which I shall only add this one thing, That the mixture of snow and salt did
turn the vapors, that fasten themselves to the outside of the glass, first
into Ice, before they dropped down in the form of water; in almost all our Trials
of this nature, as well in thick Funnels, as in other and thinner glasses.

5. That in Hermetically sealed glasses, an included mixture of snow and salt
will freez the vapors of the Air on the outside of the glass, diverse of the
Experiments of the present Treatise do manifestly evince, which argue, that
even so extremely close a Medium as Glasses, is not able to hinder the
Transmission of Cold. And this is not superfluously added, because in vessels
not Hermetically sealed, it may be pretended, that it is the internal Air that
communicates its Coldness by some unheeded, but immediate intercourse, with the
external.

After this we thought it worth an Experiment, to try, whether, or how, Cold
would be diffused through a Medium, that some would think a Vacuum, and which
to others would seem much less disposed to assist the Diffusion of Cold, then
common Air it self; to compass this, the Expedient we bethought our selves of,
was, to suspend a slender glass full of water in one of the small Receivers
belonging to our Pneumatical Engine, and when the Air was very carefully pumped
out, to bury the exhausted Receiver in a copious and ready prepared mixture of
Ice and Salt, to see, whether notwithstanding the withdrawing of the Medium,
the water suspended in a kind of Vacuum, as to Air or gross substances would
yet be frozen by the Cold. That Event of our trials, which alone I find among
my Notes, is registered in these terms.

6. [A small pipe sealed at one end, was, at the other, filled almost with
water, and was put into a Receiver, consisting of a somewhat long and slender
Tube of Glass, sealed at one end, and inverted upon the Engine plate, then the
Air was carefully exhausted, for the pump was plied a while after no Air
appeared to come forth in any bubble out of the Receiver, through the external
water; nor did the water in the small pipe within, disclose any number of
bubbles worth taking notice of: then by the help of an almost Cylindrical plate
of Iron, beaten Ice and Salt, were heaped against the outside of the Receiver,
about the height, to which the water in the small pipe reached. And at length,
though, as we all thought, much more slowly then such a Congelation would else
have been performed, the water was for the most part frozen in odd kind of
flakes from the top to the bottom, and the ice seemed not to have any
considerable number of Bubbles.]

7. There is one Experiment, I have made about the Transmission of Cold through
indisposed Mediums, which may not be unworthy to be here inserted. For I had
once a mind to try, whether a cold Body could operate through a Medium, that
was, as to touch, actually hot, and had its heat continually renewed by a
sountain, as it were, of heat, that perpetually diffused through it, new
supplies of warm Liquor, so that the cold Body could not here, as in other
cases, first allay the heat of the Medium, and then lessen it more and more,
till it had quite extinguished it. To compass this, I had soon after an
opportunity of making some trials presented me: For being at the Mineral
Springs at Tunbridge, to drink those wholesome waters for my healths sake, I
soon accustomed my self to drink them in considerable Quantities very early in
the morning, when they were exceeding Cold, and sometimes drinking them in bed,
as well as sometimes at the Springs-head, I had the Curiosity to observe,
whether in case I took them down very fast, they would not through the warm
Muscles and outward Parts of the Abdomen, diffuse a sensible Coldness; and upon
more Trials then one, I found, that by laying my warm hands on the outside of
my Belly, I there felt at least, as it seemed to me, a manifest and
considerable Degree of Coldness. And when I related this to some ingenious
Persons, that were better acquainted with those Springs then I, they told me,
that there was among those many that then resorted to those famous Springs, a
Knight, whose Name I remember not, whose Disease being judged formidable, the
Physicians enjoined him to drink in a morning two or three times the Quantity,
that afforded me the Observation I was relating, and that when this Knight had
filled his Belly with so much water, he used mightily to complain of the
Coldness it diffused through his Abdomen, insomuch that he was fain to ply
those parts long with hot Napkins clapped to them, one after another, which
yet, as he complained, were soon refrigerated by the excessive Cold that the
water diffused to the outside of his Belly, which yet nevertheless was not,
that I could learn, at all prejudiced, no more then mine, by so sensible and
piercing a Cold.

8. It may be doubted, whether in case water be not fluid upon the account of a
congenite motion in the Corpuscles it consists of, its fluidness may not
proceed from the agitation of the ambient Air, either immediately contiguous to
the surface, or communicating its agitation to the water, by propagation of its
Impulse through the vessel that interposes betwixt them. To contribute to the
clearing of this, and some other things, we devised the following Experiment.
We provided a glassbubble of about the bigness of a Walnut, and the form almost
of a Pear, whose stem was purposely made crooked for the convenience of
suspension. This being filled with water (which is troublesome enough to be
done, unless one have the knack) we hung it at one end of a thread, whose other
end we past through a Cork, by a perforation purposely made: into which, we
afterward fastened the thread, by thrusting in a small peg to rivet it in. Then
filling a glass not very broad, but yet furnished with a mouth wide enough to
receive the bubble, with oil of Turpentine, such as we bought it at the shops,
we stopped the orifice with the newly mentioned Cork, so that the sealed Bubble
hanging at it, was covered, and every way surrounded by the oil of Turpentine,
which being a liquor, that (at least in such Colds as we here have) will not
freez, we placed the glass in beaten Ice and Salt, and as it were buried it
therein, and at the end of about three hours (having been diverted by some
occasions from taking it sooner out) we found, as we had conjectured, that
notwithstanding that, the oil of Turpentine continued perfectly fluid as
before, yet the Bubble totally immersed in this heating Chemical oil, was
frozen throughout, not excepting that which was harbored in the little Neck or
Stalk, and when I came to lift it out of the liquor, the glass being cracked
(as we supposed by the Cold) the string brought up a little part of that which
was nearest to it; the rest in the form above mentioned, staying behind and
subsiding. And that which was remarkable in this piece of Ice, was, that when
we had taken it out, it appeared cleft very deep (from the outside almost to
the center) according to a line drawn from the slenderest part of it, almost as
if one should with a knife cut a Pear in two, from the stalk downwards,
according to its whole length. And these two pieces were easily enough
separable, and (to add that circumstance) for trial sake we left them divided
in the same liquor and vessel, with some thawing Ice and Salt about them, for
14. or 15. hours, without finding them any thing near so much wasted or
resolved into water, as most would have expected.

Whilst the above mentioned Bubble was exposed to be frozen, we likewise
placed by it in another vessel a Glass-Egg, whose Ball and a little part of its
stem we had filled with some of the very same parcel of oil of Turpentine, and
placing about the sides of this Egg some ice and salt, we observed, as we
expected, that the liquor was, after a little while, made by the Cold to
subside about half an inch, so that it is worth some Philosophers considering,
why, if according to the lately mentioned Atomical doctrine, Cold be made by
the introduction of swarms of real and extended, though Atomical Bodies, they
should pervade the oil, and contract it without freezing it, but freez the
water without contracting it, but expending it rather.

9. [A small bubble of the bigness of a very little Nutmeg, filled with water,
and Hermetically sealed up, was by a cork and a string suspended in spirit of
Wine, so as to be surrounded therewith, and being exposed to the Air the same
night, in the stopped glass, was the next morning found altogether frozen, though
the spirit of Wine it self were not at all so: But another bubble, by the help
of a string Cork, and piece of Lead, carefully suspended in a strong solution
of Sea Salt, and exposed at the same time in a like vessel with the former,
when they both came to be looked upon, appeared to be no more frozen then the
brine it self, which was not so at all.]

10. [A glass Bubble of the bigness of a small Nutmeg, filled with water, and
Hermetically sealed, being immersed by a weight of Lead fastened to it, beneath
the surface of a very salt Brine, but yet not so as to reach the bottom of the
liquor or glass, was exposed all night to freez, in weather that was
extraordinarily cold, but neither the imprisoned water, nor the other appeared
to be at all frozen. The like Experiment we repeated another frosty night, but
without freezing either of the liquors. But to show the usefulness of repeating
Experiments about Cold, if there be opportunity, and especially in such cases,
where the degree or some other circumstance may much vary the event, we will
add, that having exposed a Bubble like that newly mentioned, and immersed in
spirit of Wine, we found the next morning the water in the bubble turned into
ice, and having likewise exposed such a bubble immersed in very strong Brine,
to be frozen by a mixture of ice and salt, within about two hours after, we
found the bubble broken, as we supposed, upon the Expansion of the water upon
its growing Ice. And we also found the upper part of the bubble with the Ice
sticking to it, and the other part of the glass was cracked, with lines running
from a point almost like the Pole and Meridian in a Globe, whence we concluded
the glass to have been, as it is probable, burst asunder upon the Expansion of
the fresh water into ice, and that the Reason why there remained but a
comparatively little parcel of ice, was probably, that the salt water getting
in at those crannies or chinks, dissolved as much of the new made ice, as in a
little while it could easily reach.]

Besides,

11. [We filled a glass bubble with fair water, and having Hermetically sealed
it, we suspended it by a string fastened to the cork in the cavity of a wide
mouthed glass, well stopped, so that the bubble was every way at a good distance
from the sides, bottom, and top of the glass. This we did to try, whether a
sufficient degree of Cold at that distance, would be freely transmitted through
the glass, without the intervention of a visible liquor, and accordingly we
found the suspended Bubble cracked by the ice that filled it.]

Title XV. Experiments and Observations touching Ice.
1. A Great part of our present History, being employed about delivering the
Phenomenon of Congelation, it is not to be expected, that in this Section,
where we treat of Ice as a distinct part of our Theme, we should deliver all
those particulars, that have occurred to us, wherein ice is concerned. And
therefore we shall restrain our selves to the mention of those, that belong to
ice, considered, as it consists of entire and distinct Portions of congeled
water. And though we shall deliver some few Experiments of our own, such as we
had any opportunity to make, yet much the greater part of this Section will
fitly enough be taken up by Collections out of Travelers, and Navigators, into
those Colder Regions, that afford much considerabler, or at least much stranger
Observations concerning ice, then are to be met with in so temperate a Climate
as ours. And what we have to deliver in this Section, will naturally be divided
into two parts, the one consisting of our own Experiments, (...) the other
containing some Passages, that we have selected out of Voyages, or that have
been afforded us by the Relations of credible Travelers. And of these two
sorts of Observables, that which has been first mentioned shall be first
treated of.

2. Some that have been in the East Indies inform us, that in some parts of
those Countries, they were looked upon as great Liars, for affirming, that in
Europe the fluid body of water, was often without any artifice or endeavor of
Man, turned in a few hours into a solid and compact Body, such as Ice. And
certainly, if custom did not take away the strangness of it, it would to us
also appear very wonderful, that so great a change of Texture should be so
easily and inartificially produced. But how solid the Body of ice is, or rather
how strong is the mutual adhesion of its parts, has not yet, that we know of,
been attempted by Experiments to be reduced to some kind of Estimate; and
indeed so many things must be taken into consideration, that it will be
difficult to arrive at any more then a fair conjecture in this matter;
especially, because ((...) think) it may justly be doubted, whether or no
differing degrees of Cold may not vary the degree of compactness of the ice,
and my doubt will not perhaps appear groundless, if I add, that having, to
satisfy my self, inquired of an intelligent Person, that lived some years in
Russia, he answered me, that he found the ice of those parts to be much harder
then that of these.

3. We had in our thoughts diverse ways to Estimate the cohesion of the parts of
ice, whereof one was, to freez water in a hollow metalline Cylinder, and taking
out the ice, and keeping it in a Perpendicular posture cast into a scale
weighed beforehand, and carefully fastened to the bottom of the ice, more and
more weight, till the mere weight broke the Cylinder, and this we had thoughts
to try in Cylinders of differing Diameters and lengths, but wanted
conveniences to make the Experiments; (which if they were made (as some of our
Trials were) in the open Air, and in places exposed to some gelid wind, it
would the better secure the ice from being weakened or thawed during the Trials.)

4. We therefore attempted by another way, to investigate the strength of ice.
For we took a plate of it, of an uniorm, and also of a considerable thickness,
and with sides cut parallel, that it might serve for a kind of leaver, and
placed it betwixt two wooden Bars, whose distance we knew, and then laying on
it a great weight, the Center of whose Pression, as near as we could estimate,
was equally, or in determinate measures, distant from the wooden fulcrums: we
endeavored to try, how great a weight it would support; but in the Village,
where we made the trials, we could not get weights that were conveniently
shaped, and ponderous enough, to break it, and though we caused a Man to stand
upon it, yet neither could his weight break it, till he chanced to add an
impressed force with his foot, to the weight of his Body. So that being unable
to determine, what that additional and impressed force might amount to, almost
all that we could safely conclude, either from this Experiment, or some other
ways of trial with scales, and other ways that we made use of (but for want of
conveniences unsuccesfully) was, that the force of ice to support weights, is
much greater then men are wont to imagine, which seems somewhat the more
strange, because it is not here in England so solid a Body, as by this one
would guess: for not only glass would readily scratch it deep enough, but even
with common Knives we would cut it, and that with great ease.

5. Yet one not inconsiderable Account I was able to give my self of the
strength of ice, which I find in my Notes thus delivered.

[There was taken a piece of ice three inches long, and three broad, and
somewhat less then a quarter of an inch thick; this was laid crossways upon a
frame, so that the two parts, on which the ice leaned, were distant three
inches, then there was taken an Iron, shaped like the figure of (the common
Arithmetical Cipher, that denotes Seven) 7, to whose hanging leg, if I may so
call it, there was fastened at the end, which was under the middle of the ice, a
scale, into which several weights were put, such as by some former Trials we
guessed to be almost as much as the ice would well suffer, after which the
horizontal leg of the Iron was very gently laid upon the ice, as near as we
could guess, in the middle of the distance, between the two sides of the frame,
and consequently parallel to them both, then the weights not proving altogether
sufficient to break the ice, we let them hang a while at it, and observed how
the edge of the incumbent leg of Iron (which edge was The breadth was, I know
not how, omitted in the note, but as I remember, it was about an 8. part of an
Inch.
broad) did work it self downwards into the ice, so that by our guess, when the
ice broke, as after a while it did, it had lost at one end of the Incision, if
I may so call it, half its thickness, and at the other, about a third part of
it.

The weights that broke it, amounted to 17. pounds Haberdupois, and 117. ounces
Troy.

6. The Experiment was repeated with all the former circumstances, only the
piece of Ice was two inches and a half broad, and a quarter of an inch thick,
the distance of the frame was three inches, as before, the weights that broke
it, were 17. pounds Haberdupois, and 48. ounces Troy. The horizontal arm of the
iron had melted somewhat more then half through the ice when it broke, viz.
more then of the thickness at one end, and somewhat less then half at the other.

7. We diverse times intimated in some of the first Sections of our present
History, that the addition of salt to Ice, did hasten the dissolution of it,
which though it may be easily proved by some other Phenomenon of our
Experiments, yet it will not be amiss to mention here a couple of particular
trials, by which we have more manifestly evinced it: And first, we diverse times
took a broad and flat plate of ice, less then a of an inch thick, and having
placed it horizontally upon a joyn'd-stool, (a table, or any other flat piece
of wood will do as well) we strewed here and there a convenient quantity of
Bay Salt upon it, and though we observed, that, if the surfaces of the ice and
stool, were not both of them flat, and congruous enough, the ice would be
thawed indeed, but the other part of the Experiment would not well succeed; yet
when we made the trial carefully, and watchfully, the plate of ice partly
thawed by the salt, would be so firmly frozen to the stool it leaned on, that
we were fain with an iron instrument, to knock it all to pieces, before we
could sever it from the stool, into whose pores the ice newly generated by the
Experiment, did pierce so deep, that notwithstanding our knocking, many little
parcels of ice would continue to stick close to the wood, whose pores they had
invaded. But the circumstances which in this Experiment made the most to our
purpose, are these two; The one, that having sometimes laid the salt but on
few, and somewhat distant parts of the plate, the intermediate parts would many
of them remain unfrozen to the stool, whilst those, where the salt had been
laid, were frozen so hard to it. And the other circumstance is, that the
grosser grains of salt, would so far dissolve the ice whereto they were
contiguous, as (if I may so speak) to bury themselves therein, whilst the
other parts of the ice, upon which, or near which, no salt had been laid, kept
their surfaces smooth and entire. We tried likewise two or three times to freez
a plate of ice to a flat piece of wood, by making use of Aqua fortis, instead
of common salt, but the Experiment succeeded not well, though once we brought
the ice to stick to the wood manifestly, but not strongly.

8. To this we shall add, the following Experiment, which when we watchfully
made it, succeeded well, and I find it among my notes set down in these terms.

[Solid fragments of ice having pretty store of salt thrown on them, upon the
first falling of the salt among the ice, there was produced a little (...)
noise, and for a good while after there manifestly ascended out of several
parts of the mixture, conveniently held betwixt a candle and the eye, a steam
or smoke, like that of warm meat, though the night were rainy and warm, and
though the morning had not been frosty.]

The mention here made of the crackling noise made by the ice upon the addition
of salt, (which seemed to proceed from the crackling of the brittle ice,
produced by the operation of the salt upon it) brings into my mind an
Experiment I had formerly made, whereof a greater noise of the same kind is a
Phenomenon: though the Experiment were chiefly made for the Discovery of the
texture of Ice: The event of the trial I find thus set down among my notes.

9. [We took some cakes of ice, each of the thickness between an (...) and a
part of an inch, but not so very compact ice, as to be free from store of
bubbles; some good Aqua fortis dropped upon this, did quickly penetrate it with
a noise, that seemed to be the cracking of the ice, underneath which the sour
liquor was very plainly to be tasted; Oil of Vitriol did the same, but much
more powerfully, and without seeming to crack the ice which it past through; so
that though but three or four drops were let fall upon the plate, it
immediately showed it self in drops exceedingly corrosive on the other side of
the ice. And the like success we had with a trial made with the same liquor
upon three such plates of ice frozen one upon the top of another.]

10. Having proceeded as far as we were able toward the bringing the strength
of ice to some kind of Estimate, by such Experiments as we had opportunity to
make here, we thought it not amiss to seek what information we could get about
this matter among the Descriptions that are given us of Cold Regions: But I
have not yet found any thing to have been taken notice of to this purpose worth
transcribing, except a passage in the Archbishop of upsal, wherein though the
estimate of the force of Ice be, as we shall by and by show, (...) after a
gross manner, yet since this it self is more then I have met with elsewhere, I
think it worth subjoyning, as our Author delivers it in these terms: Glacies
(says Olaus Ma. Gent. Septentr. Hist. Lib. 1. Cap. 14.
he) primae and mediae hyemis adeo fortis and tenax est, ut spissitudine seu
densitate duorum digitorum sufferat hominem Ambulantem, trium vero digitorum
equestrem Armatum; unius palmae and dimidiae, turmas, vel exercitus militares;
trium vel quatuor palmarum integram Legionem seu myriadem populorum,
quemadmodum inferius de bellis Hyemalibus memorandum erit.

But though this be sufficient to afford us an illustrious Testimony of the
wonderful strong cohesion of the parts of ice, yet we mentioned it but as a
popular way of estimate, which may better embolden Travelers, then satisfy
Philosophers, in regard that the Author determines only the thickness of the
ice, and not the distance of that part of it, that supports the weight from the
shore or brink, on which, as on a Hypomochlion, the remotest part of the ice
does lean or rest. And if we consider the ice as a Lever, and the Brink or
Brinks on which it is supported, as a single or double sulcrum, the distance of
the weight may be of very great moment in reference to its pressure or
gravitation on the ice, which may much more easily support the weight of diverse
men placed very near the prop, then that of one man placed at a great distance
from it, as will be easily granted by those, that are not strangers to the
Mechanics, especially to the nature and properties of the several kinds of
Levers. But not now to debate, whether in certain cases, the ice we speak of,
may not receive some support from the subjacent water, nor whether some other
circumstances may not sometimes be able to alter the case a little, our very
considering the ice as a single or double Lever, though it may hinder us from
measuring the determinate strength of ice upon Olaus's Observation, yet it will
set forth the strength of it so much the more, since by his indefinite
expressions he seems sufficiently to intimate, that when the ice has attained
such a thickness, its resistance is equivalent to such a weight, without
examining on what part of the ice it chances to be placed.

11. Thus far our Experiments concerning ice (with the Appendix subjoyned out
of Olaus to the same purpose.) We will now proceed to some of the observations
we have met with in Seamens Journals, and elsewhere. I say to some, because to
enumerate them all, would spend more time and labor then I can afford, and
therefore I shall restrain my self to the mention of some few of the chiefest.

I. And in the first place for confirmation of what I delivered at the
beginning of this Section, from the report of a Traveller into Russia, touching
the hardness of ice in those gelid Climates, in comparison of our ice, which I
have found it easy to scrape with glass, or to cut with a knife; I shall
subjoyn this passage of Captain G. Weymouth, in his Voyage for the Discovery of
the Northwest Purchase. Lib. 4. Cap. 13.
passage. As we were (says he) breaking off some of this Ice, which was very
painful for us to do, for it was almost as hard as a rock, etc.

II. Next to show, that it was not a superfluous wariness, that made me in a
former Section doubt, that even the ice made of Seawater might be altogether
or almost insipid; I will subjoyn, that I have since met with some Relations,
that seem to justify what is there delivered. And in one of our Englishmens
Voyages into the Northern Seas, I find more then one instance to my present
purpose, though I shall here set down but one, which is so full and express,
that it needs no companions: Our Navigator speaking thus; About nine of the
Purchase. lib. 4. cap. 13. page 813.
Clock in the forenoon, we came by a great Island of Ice, and by this Island we
found some pieces of Ice broken off from the said Island, and being in great
want of fresh water, we hoysed out our Boats of both Ships, and loaded them
twice with Ice, which made us very good fresh water.

But all this notwithstanding, I yet retain some scruple, till those that have
better opportunity to make a more satisfactory Experiment shall ease me of it.
For though by these Narratives it seems more then probable, that the ice in the
midst of the Sea consists but of the fresh Particles of water, that plentifully
concur to compose the Sea water, yet besides that, in case the fresh water were
taken, as some of that, I have found mentioned in Voyages, has confessedly
been, from the top of the ice, it might possibly be no more then melted snow,
which, as we elsewhere take notice, does in those extremely cold Regions easily
freez upon the ice it falls on, and oftentimes much increases the height of it:
Besides this, I say, the Argument from the insipidness of the resolved ice,
will conclude but upon supposition, that as that ice was found in the Sea, so
it was also made of the Sea water; which though it may have been, yet I
somewhat doubt, whether it were or no, since I find some Navigators of the most
conversant in the cold Climates to inform us, That most of those vast
Quantities of ice that are to be met with about Nova Zembla, and the strait of
Weigats, and that choke up some other passages, whereby men have attempted to
pass into the south Sea, are composed of the accumulation of numerous pieces of
ice (cemented together by cold water) that are brought down from the great
River Oby, and others, so that it may very well be supposed, that these Neither
hereafter will I marvel, though the strait of Weigats be stopped up to the
Northeast, with such huge mountains of Ice, since the Rivers Oby and Jenesce,
and very many more, whose names are not yet known, pour out such a quantity
thereof, that in a manner it is incredible: For it comes to pass in the
beginning of the Spring, that in places near unto the Sea, the Ice through the
excessive thickness, and multitude thereof, does carry down wood before it. And
without doubt this is the cause, that about the shore of the strait of
Weigates, so great abundance of floatiug wood is every where seen: and whereas
in that strait near nnto Nova Zembla, it is so extreme Cold, it is no marvel,
if in regard of the narrowness of the strait, so huge heaps of Ice are gathered
and frozen together, that in the end they grow to sixty, or at least to fifty
fathomes thickness: Says the Description of the Countries of Siberia, Samojeda,
etc. extant in Purchas's third part of his Pilgrim. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.
mountainous pieces of ice may be some of these, which, upon the shattering of
ice in Bays and straits, partly by the heat of the Sun, and partly by the
Tides, may be afterward by the winds and currents driven all up and down the
Seas, to parts very distant from the shore, and some of these it may be, that
our Countrymen met with, and obtained their fresh water from: Which I the
rather incline to think, because that (as we shall have occasion to observe in
another Section) the main Sea it self is seldom or never frozen. But my scope
in all this, is, but to propose a scruple, not an opinion.

III. The next and principal thing concerning ice, is the bigness of it, which
I find, by the Relations partly of some Acquaintances of my own, and partly of
some Navigators into the North, to be sometimes not only prodigious, but now
and then scarce credible. And therefore, as I shall mention but few instances,
that I have selected out of the best Journals, and other writings I have met
with, so I shall add a few more Testimonies to keep them by their mutual
support, from being entertained with a Disbelief, which their strangeness would
else tempt men to.

Of the vastness of single mountains of ice, the most stupendous Example, that
for ought I know, is to be met with in any language but ours, is that, which I
formerly took notice of out of the Dutch Voyage to Nova Zembla, which was ninty
six foot high (that is above twenty foot higher, than on a certain occasion I
found the Leads of Westminster Abbey to be.) But it is probable, that our
Captain James met with as great, if not greater: For though in some places he
mentions diverse hills of Ice, that were aground in 40. fathom water, and
consequently were as deep under water, as that newly taken notice of out of the
Hollanders: And though Page 14.
he elsewhere mentions other pieces of no less depth, and twice as high as his
Topmast head, and this in June, yet elsewhere, and long after relating his
return home, he has this passage; Page 106.
We have sailed through much mountainous Ice far higher then our TopMast head:
But this day we sailed by the highest that I ever yet saw, which was incredible
indeed to be related.

But the stupendiousest piece (for height and depth) of single Ice, that
perhaps has been ever observed and measured by men, is that which our Famous
English Seaman Mr. W. Baffin (whose name is to be met with in many modern Maps
and Globes) mentions himself to have met with upon the coast of Greenland,
whose whole Relation I shall therefore subjoyn, not only because of the
stupendiousness of this piece of ice, but because he takes notice of an
observation, which I knew not to have been made by any, and comes somewhat near
the estimate, we formerly made, of the proportion betwixt the extant and
immersed parts of floating ice, only the following Estimate makes the extant
part somewhat greater then we did, which may easily proceed from other men's
having, as Mr. Baffin here does, grounded their computation upon what occurred
to them at Sea, or in salt water, where the ice must sink less, then in fresh
water, such as my Estimate supposed. Our Navigators words then are these, The
17. of May we sailed by many great Purchase. lib. 4. cap. 18. page 837.
Islands of Ice, some of which were above 200. foot high above water, as I
proved by one shortly after, which I fonnd to be 240. foot high, and if the
report of some men be true, which affirms, that there is but one seventh part
of Ice above water, then the height of that piece of Ice which I observed was
one hundred and forty fathoms, or one thousand six hundred and eighty foot from
the top to the bottom. This proportion I know does hold in much Ice, but
whether it do so in all, I know not.

Thus far of the height and depth of single pieces of ice: as for the other
Dimensions (the length and breadth) I remember not, that I have read of any,
that had the Curiosity to measure the extent of any of them, excepting Captain
James, whose Ship being once arrested, between some flat and extraordinary
large pieces of ice, he and his men went out to walk upon them, and he took the
pains to measure some of the pieces, Page 17.
which he says he found to be a 1000. of his paces long. And probably among so
many mountains and Islands of ice, there would have been found some entire
pieces, of a greater extent then even these, if men had had the curiosity to
measure them.

Hitherto we have treated of the bigness of single pieces of ice, we will now
proceed to say something of the dimensions of the aggregates of many of them,
among which having selected four or five as the principal, I remember my self
to have yet met with, I presume it will be sufficient to subjoyn them only.

About ten of the clock we met with a mighty bank of ice, being by supposition
seven or eight leagues, or twenty four miles long, (says that experienced
English Pilot James Hall, in his Voyage of Denmark for the discovery of
Greenland.)

Another of our English Navigators mentions, that even in June all the Sea
(wherein he was endeavoring to sail) as far as he could see from the top of a
high hill, was covered with ice, saving that within a quarter of a mile of the
shore it was clear round about once in a Tide. By which last clause, it seems,
that this vast extent of ice, was either one entire floating Island, or at
least a vast bank or rand (as some Seamen term it) of ice.

But the strangest account of banks of ice, that I have yet met with in any
sober Author, is that which is mentioned by the learned French Hydrographer,
Fournier, who relates, that in the year 1635. the French fleet sailing to
Canada, met with several pieces of ice, as high as steeples, and particularly
one, whether piece or bank of ice (for the French word Glace may signify
either) which they were troubled to coast along for above forty leagues. If
this be the same story, (as one may suspect it to be, by the circumstances of
the place, and fleet,) there is a great mistake in another place, where our
Author speaks of the vastness of the ice: but if it be another story (as some
differing circumstances argue) the French it seems met with ice far more
stupendous, then even that already mentioned. For, (says our Author) in the
Sea which washes Canada, Hydrographie du P. G. Fournier, live. 9. cap. 29.
compared with the 22. Chap. of the same Book.
there is often seen, even in the month of August, to pass by, Ices much
bigger then Ships. In the year 1635. the French Fleet sailing there, coasted
along, for three days and three nights, one that was above 80. leagues long,
flat in some places like vast Champions, and high in others like frightful
hills. The latter part of which passage may confirm what we formerly delivered
in another Section, concerning the unequal compagination of (...) Islands.

To what has been said touching the extent, and other dimensions of floating,
or at least loose pieces of ice, it will be fit to add something of the extent
of ice, coherent to one or both of those shores, that bound the water, whose
upper part is congealed. And in the first place, we shall out of many instances
to our present purpose, that might be borrowed from the writings of Olaus
Magnus, select this one memorable one that shall serve for all: Neque minori
bellandi impetu (says he) Sueci ac Olai Mag. lib. 3. cap. 2. page 334
Gothi super aperta glacie, quam in ipsa solidissima terra confligunt; imo, ut
prius dictum est, ubi antea aestivo tempore acerrima commissa sunt bella
Navalia, eisdem in locis (...) concreta, aciebus militari modo instructis,
Bombardis ordinatis, habentur horrendi conflictus. Adeo solida glacies est in
equestribus turmis sufferendis, ampliter vel stricte collocatis. I pretermit
then, what he elsewhere relates of the Voyages and Wars made in Winter by the
Northern Nations. They that have lived in those Countries, relate, as things
most known and samiliar (what has been confirmed to me by more then one
unsuspected eye witness) the long Journeys that are commonly taken upon the Icy
Bridges, or rather plains, by travelers, with all their Carriages to very
distant places. And that which may bring credit to these strange relations, by
showing, that no less unlikely ones are sometimes true, is, what all Europe
knows, that within these three years the whole Swedish Army, led on by their
King, marched over the Sea to the Island of Zeeland, where Copenhagen the
Capital City of Denmark stands. -- Saepe alias and his annis fatalibus tam
profunde congelavit (marina Aqua) ut non tantum plaustra, sed integrum
exercitum ad aliquot Milliaria Germanica secure vexerit, etc. Inquit T.
Barthol. De nivis usu, page 43.
But it may seem much more strange, which I will therefore add, that as in the
North Countries frequently, so sometimes even in the warmer Regions of the
East, the Sea it self, has by the Cold, been congealed to a prodigious breadth.
Insolitum est, (says Bartholinus) quod refert Constantinus Barthol. de nivis
usu, cap. 6.
Manasses in Annalibus accidisse, Theophilo imperante, ut hyems saeva mare
cogeret in glaciem ad profunditatem sane immensam, humiduinque illud Elementum,
Lapidis ad duritiem, fluxione prorsus adempta, redigeret. And Michael Glycas
relates, That in the year 775. Glycas apud Fournier, live. 9. cap. 19.
the Winter was so sharp in the East, that along the Coast, the Sea (he means
the Mediterranean) was frozen for 50. leagues, and the Ice was compacted as
into a rock, 30. Cubits deep; so strange a Quantity of snow, likewise falling,
that it was raised to the height of 30. Cubits above the Ice, which likewise
agrees very well with what we formerly noted, touching the possible increase of
the height of some pieces of ice by the falling of the snow upon them.

IV. It remains now, that we subjoyn a few promiscuous observations concerning
ice, that are not so readily reducible to the three foregoing heads.

And we shall begin with what was taken notice of by the Dutch in their Nova
Zembla Voyage, where relating how they fastened their Ships to a great piece of
ice, to shelter themselves from the stormy winds, There (add they) we went upon
the ice, and wondered much thereat, it was such manner of Ice: for on the top it
was full of earth, and there was found about (...) eggs, and it was not like
other ice, for it was of a perfect Azure color, like to the skies, whereby
there grew great contention of words amongst our men, some saying that it was
ice, others that it was frozen land; for it lay unreasonable high above the
water, it was at least eighteen fathom under the water, close to the ground,
and ten fathom above the water. In the Evening we were enclosed amongst great
pieces (of Ice) as high as our Poop, and some of the sharp blew corners of them
did reach quite under us. Capt. Jam. page 6.


The like blew color in rocky pieces of ice, I remember I have somewhere
found, to have been taken notice of by a modern Navigator, or whether the words
of Virgil, concerning the frigid Zone, Caerulea glacie concretae, atque
imbribus atris, belong to this subject, I leave others to consider, nor shall I
stay to examine, whether this blewness, that has been observed in ice, be
always an inherent or permanent color, or else sometimes one of those that are
styled Emphatical.

It Is very considerable, if it be true, what is related by Olaus Magnus,
concerning the degenerating (if I may so speak) of ice, from its wonted
hardness in the Spring of the year. For in the same Chapter, where he gives us
the lately transcribed account of the strength of Ice in those Northern
Countries, after having interposed some other passages, he subjoyns these
words; Liquescente Olaus lib. 1. cap. 14.
tamen glacie ad principium Aprilis, nullus ejus spissitudini, minus
fortitudini, nisi in aurora, ambulando confidit, quia solis diurno aspectu tam
fragilis redditur, ut quae-equestres armatos paulo ante portaverat, vix hominem
nunc sufferre possit inermen.

This puts me in mind to add, that oftentimes in the writers of Journies and
Voyages, we meet with mention of great noises made by the breaking of ice, and
in this very Chapter our Archbishop taking notice of the clefts that sometimes
happen in Champions of ice, adds, That when the ice chances thus to open,
especially if it be in the night, the noise of it maybe heard a far off, like
the loud and horrid noise of thunder, and of earthquakes. And on this occasion
may be subjoyned a couple of passages extant in different places of the
formerly mentioned James Hall's Voyages: The first is thus delivered; When we
met with a huge and high Island of ice, we steering hard to board the same, and
being shota little too Northwards of it, there fell from the top thereof, some
quantity of ice, which in the fall did make such a noise, as though it had been
the report of five Canons. But the next passage is more directly pertinent to
our present subject, and is couched in these words; About twelve of the clock
this night, it being still calm, we found our selves suddenly compassed round
about with great Islands of ice, which made such a hideous noise, as was most
wonderful, so that by no means we could double the same to the westward,
wherefore, etc.

Of these kind of icy thunders (as some travelers call them) there are diverse
instances to be met with, mentioned in the several Voyages of the Hollanders,
and particularly in those to Nova Zembla: But many of those noises seem to be
made by the dashing of the great pieces of ice against one another: But if it
happen, when the ice (as sometimes it is said to do) seems to cleave, as it
were, of its own accord; to us that live in a temperate Climate, it may be a
matter of some dispute, whence these loud ruptures of ice may proceed. For
Olaus Magnus, in the Chapter above cited, does not improbably ascribe them to
the warm exhalations, that in some places ascend out of the ground. And I
remember, in favor of this opinion, that I once caused diverse pieces of thick
ice to be brought out of a cool place into a somewhat warm room, and listening,
observed a noise to come from them, as if it had been produced by store of
little cracks made in them, but somewhat or other prevented me from repeating
the Experiment, and satisfying my self about the Conjecture. But having lately
inquired of an intelligent Polander, that has traveled much upon these icy
plains, he agreed with our Author, and others, as to the frightful noise, that
are produced by these cracks of ice, but affirmed upon his own observation (for
that I particularly inquired after) that these great clefts were often made,
not by thawing heat, but by excessive cold, and that he had taken notice of
them in extremely sharp weather. Indeed we sometimes observe, that in very
bitter frosts the frozen ground will cleave, as we elsewhere have occasion to
take notice. But whether that be not a different case from this, or whether the
Polonian Gentleman were not mistaken, or whether both these mentioned accounts
of the cleaving of ice, may on different conjunctures of circumstances take
place, we leave to farther inquiry.

There is a tradition concerning ice, about the famous Volcan-Hecla, in Island,
which, though verily believed among the superstitious vulgar of Olaus Magnus
(...). 11. and Blefkenius in Purch. lib. 3. cap. 22.
those parts, is spoken of so slightly by Blefkenius, who being upon that
coast, had the curiosity to sail purposely thither, that I think it not worth
while to take any farther notice of it. But 'twere too tedious to set down in
this Section, (which the strangeness and variety of the Theme has made so
prolix already) the other things, that may be mentioned without impertinency
concerning ice; and therefore we shall here desist from so laborious a task, as
also omit the handling of snow and hail: For though they are reducible to ice,
yet I shall at least suspend the treating of them, partly because Bartholinus
and Meteorologists have saved much of my labor, and partly for the reason
newly intimated, so that we shall conclude this Section as soon as we have
taken notice, that there is yet somewhat relating to ice, which, being in
itself considerable, and whereof hitherto no experimental account appears to
have been given, what we our selves have tried about it, may challenge to be
treated of apart.

Title XVI. Experiments and Observations touching the duration of Ice and Snow,
and the destroying of them by the Air and several Liquors.
1. IT may be an Experiment, as well instructive as new, to determine, what
liquor dissolves ice sooner then others, and in what proportion of quickness
the solutions in the several liquors are made. For Men have hitherto contented
themselves to suspect in general, that there are other liquors potentially hot,
wherein ice will sooner dissolve, then it will in water. But this opinion
either being grounded upon no Experience at all, or taken up upon the sight of
what happens to pieces of ice, which no care was taken (...) reduce to the same
bulk and figure, no more then to measure attentively how long one outlasted the
other; we thought fit to try, if we could not bring this matter to Experiment,
and make a determination in it, though not exactly true, yet less remote from
exactness then had been yet, for ought I know, so much as attempted.

2. In order to this we procured some bullet moulds, and having first carefully
stopped the little Crevice, that is wont to remain betwixt the two halfs of the
mould, with a good close Cement, we afterward filled them with water, and
carefully closed up the orifice of the hole, at which the water was poured in,
and then setting the mould to freez in ice and salt, we found it difficult
enough to keep the water (more or less of it) from running away through some
unperceived passage, before the cold could have time by congealing it to arrest
it. But after a while, when we had thus made a bullet of ice, we found it a new
and greater difficulty to get it whole out of the moulds, without warming them,
for by that way we could indeed loosen the ice, but then we could not avoid
thawing it too, and that most times not uniformly: wherefore we tried by
greasing the inside of the moulds to keep the ice from sticking so close to
them, (notwithstanding the distention the water suffered by its being frozen)
but that we might pick out the bullet entire, and this succeeding well enough,
we hoped by this way to obtain our end, which was to have a competent number of
pieces of ice of equal bulk, and of the same figure to be put at once to thaw
in several liquors; but we could by no means procure moulds, which had any
number of distinct cells of the same bigness, those long pairs of moulds that
were to be met with in shops, having their distinct cells generally made on
purpose of very different bignesses, which rendered them altogether useless for
our design. Wherefore we were fain, for want of an exacter way, to take a glass
pipe of the most even and Cylindrical that we had, and of a bore capable to
admit a big man's little finger, this glass being stopped at one end, and kept
open at the other, was filled to the height of about half a foot or more of
fair water; and ice, and salt, being heaped up about it, that the cold might
reach as far as the (...) did, it was quickly frozen. In the mean while, I had
caused several wide mouthed glasses to be brought into my Chamber (wherein, by
reason of some indisposition, that hindered me from going abroad, I kept some
fire) and having poured several liquors into these glasses, which had been
placed all on a row, we suffered them to rest there a while, that the ambient
Air might have time to reduce them, as far as it could, to its temper, and
consequently to the same temper as to heat and cold, and then with the warmth
of ones hand, the included ice being loosened from the glass, as it was taken
out, and a ruler divided into inches and eights, being laid along it, with a
knife a little warmed, the ice was soon, and yet not carelessly, divided into
several small Cylinders of three quarters of an inch, a piece; and these
Cylinders thus reduced to as sensible an equality as we could, were nimbly and
carefully put into the several liquors hereafter to be mentioned, and whilst
we our selves watched very attentively, till each of these icy Cylinders was
quite, and yet but just dissolved, we caused others to keep time by the help of
a Pendulum, whose Vibrations were each a second minute (or 60. part of a Common
Minute, whereof 60. go to make an hour) and it was easy for those we
appointed, to watch the Vibrations of the Pendulum, notwithstanding the
Quickness of its Motion, because it was fitted to a little Instrument purposely
contrived for such nice observations, wherein a long Index moving upon a
divided Dyal plate, did very manifestly point out the number of the Diadromes
made by the Pendulum.

3. This Experiment was afterward repeated twice with Cylinders of ice, each
of them an inch long, and though the successes of these trials were various
enough, yet we shall subjoyn both the last, (as being made with more advantage
then the first) that the more light may be gathered from them, and that at
least we may discover how difficult it is to make such Experiments in this
matter, as that all the nice circumstances of them may safely be relied on.

I. Trial.
1. Oil of Vitriol, where a Cylinder of Ice, of an iuch long, being put into,
lasted 5. minutes. 2. Spirit of Wine, (in which the ice sunk) lasted 12.
minutes. 3. Aqua fortis lasted 12 minutes. 4. Water lasted about 12. minutes.
5. Oil of Turpentine lasted (not good) 44. minutes. 6. Air lasted 64. minutes.
II. Trial.
1. In Oil of Vitriol, where an inch of Cylindrical ice lasted 3. minutes. 2.
In Spirit of Wine, lasted 13. minutes. 3. In Water, lasted 26. minutes. 4. In
Oil of Turpentine, lasted 47. minutes. 5. In Sallet Oil, lasted 52. minutes. 6.
In the Air, lasted 152. minutes.
4. We likewise thought it worth trying, whether there would be any difference,
and how much difference there would be in the Duration of pieces of ice of the
same bulk and figure, some of them made of common water, and others of frozen
Wine, Milk, Oil, Urine, and other spirituous liquors; these several pieces
being exposed to be thawed in the same Air, or other ambient liquor.

5. We also tried whether Motion would impart a heat to ice, by nimbly rubbing
a strong piece of ice upon a plate of ice, and though this seemed to hasten the
dissolution in that part of the icy plate, where the Altrition had been made,
yet we were unwilling to determine the matter, till further and exacter trial
have been made.

6. And this brings into my mind an Experiment, that has by some been thought
very strange. The occasion I remember was, that I received the last Winter the
honor of a visit from a Nobleman of great eminency and learning, who chancing
to come in, while I was making some trials with ice, would needs know what I
was doing with it, but the presence of a very fair Lady, in whom Hymen had made
him happy, and of some other Company of that Sex, that he brought along with
him, inviting me to give him the answer, that I thought would be most suited
and acceptable to his Company, I merrily told him, that I was trying, how to
heat a Cold liquor with ice, and to satisfy him, that was no impossibility, I
held out an open mouthed glass, full of a certain liquor (which for some just
reasons I do not describe, but do plainly teach it in an opportuner place) and
desired them to feel, whether it were not actually Cold, and when they were
satisfied, it was so, I chose among the pieces ofice, that lay by me, that I
judged by the eye to be fit for my purpose, (for every piece was not so, for a
reason I elsewhere show,) and throwing it into this liquor, it did not only in
a trice vanish in it, but the Lady, I was mentioning, seeing the liquor smoke,
and advancing hastily to try, whether it were really warm, found it so hot,
that she was quickly fain to let it alone, and had almost burnt her tender
hand, with which she had, in spite of my (...) wasion, taken hold of the
glass, which Her Lord himself could (...) endure to hold in his. But this
Experiment, which for the main I have repeated before competent witnesses,
though it be not impertinent to the History of Cold, yet I shall not build much
upon it, because, how strange soever many have been pleased to think it, I
shall elsewhere show, that I made use of a certain unperceivable slight, which,
in my opinion, did as well, as the nature of the liquor and the texture of the
ice, contribute to the suddenness and surprizingness of the Effect.

7. But to return to the duration of the effects of Cold, I think those much
mistaken, who imagine, that the effects of Cold do continually depend upon the
actual presence and influence of the manifest efficients, as the light of the
Air depends upon the Sun, or Fire, or other luminous body, upon whose removal
it immediately ceases. For when cold agents have actually brought a disposed
subject to a state of congelation, though the manifest efficient cause cease
from acting, or perhaps from being, the effect may yet continue. For in most
cases, if a certain texture be once produced in a body, it is agreeable to the
constancy of nature, that it persevere in that state, till it be forceably put
out of it, by some agent capable to overpower it, and though we usually see ice
and snow, as it were of their own accord to melt away, when the frosty
constitution of the Air ceases; yet the cause of that may be not barely the
cessation of frosty weather, but that those easily dissoluble bodies are
exposed to the free Air, which being heated by the Sun beams, and perhaps by
calorifick expirations from the earth, is furnished with an actual cause, upon
whose account it destroys the texture of the ice and snow; but even here above
ground, if snow be well compacted into great masses, in which by reason of the
closeness of the little icickles, but little Air is allowed to get between
them, I have seen such masses of snow last so long, not only in thawing, but in
rainy weather, as to be wondered at, and if such snow (or ice) be kept in a
place where it may be fenced from the Sun, and other external enemies, though
the place, it is lodged in, be not any thing near cold enough to produce ice,
yet it will, as some trial has taught me, preserve ice and snow for a very
long time.

Appendix to the XVI. Title.
AN eminent instance to confirm what is delivered at the close of the foregoing
Section, is afforded us by the conservatories, wherein snow and ice are kept
all the Summer long. Of these I have seen in Italy, and elsewhere; but
supposing I had the command of some Italian, and other books, wherein I should
meet with the dimensions, and other circumstances that belong to them, my
finding my expectation disappointed by those books, makes me think it very well
worth while to subjoyn somewhat about things, that may give us opportunity of
making a multitude of Experiments about Cold. And therefore meeting the other
day (by good chance) with my ingenious friend Mr. J. Evelyn, his inquisitive
travels, and his insight into the more polite kinds of knowledge, and
particularly Architecture, made me desire and expect of him that account of the
Italian way of making conservatories of snow, that I had missed of, in several
Authors; and having readily obtained my desire of him, I shall not injure so
justly esteemed a style as his, to deliver his description in any other words,
then those ensuing ones, wherein I received it from him.

[The snow Pits in Italy, etc. are sunk in the most solitary and cooled places,
commonly at the foot of some mountain or elevated ground, which may best
protect them from the Meridional and Occidental Sun, 25. foot wide at the
orifice, and about 50. in depth, is esteemed a competent Proportion. And though
this be excavated in a Conical form, yet it is made flat at the bottom or
point. The sides of the Pit are so joyc'd, that boards may be nailed upon them
very closely joynted. (His Majesty's at Greenwich newly made on the side of the
Castle-hill, is, as I remember, steen'd with Brick, and hardly so wide at the
mouth.) I have seen also the sides lined with reeds (...), instead of boarding
or steening.
About a yard from the bottom is fixed a strong Frame or Tressle, upon which
lies a kind of wooden grate; the top or cover is double thatched, with Reed or
Straw, upon a copped frame or roof, in one of the sides whereof is a narrow
door-case, hipped on like the top of a Dormer, and thatched, and so it is
complete.

To conserve Snow.

They lay clean Straw upon the grate or wattle, so as to keep the Snow from
running through, whilst they beat it to a hard cake of an icy consistence,
which is near one foot thick, upon this they make a layer of straw, and on that
snow, beaten as before, and so continue a bed of straw, and a bed of snow, S.
S. S. till the pit be full to the brim. Finally, they lay Straw or Reed (for I
remember to have seen both) a competent thickness over all, and keep the door
locked. This grate is contrived, that the snow melting by any accident in
laying, or extraordinary season of weather, may drain away from the mass, and
sink without stagnating upon it, which would accelerate the Dissolution, and
therefore the very bottom is but slightly steen'd. Those who are most
circumspect and curious, preserve a tall Circle of shady trees about the pit,
which may rather shade, then drip upon it.]

Thus far this learned Gentleman's account of Conservatories of Snow. And on
this occasion I might add what the Dutch in their Nova Zembla Voyage relate,
namely, that the three and twentieth of June, though it were fair Sunshiny
weather, yet the heat was not so strong as to melt the Snow, to afford them
water to drink, and that in spite of their being reduced to put Snow into
their mouths, to melt it down into their throats, they were compelled to endure
great thirst. But because it was in so cold a Climate, that this duration of
the Snow was observed, I shall rather take notice, that in the Alps, and other
high mountains, even of warmer Climates, though the snow does partly melt
toward the end of Summer; yet in some places, where the reflection of the Sun
beams is less considerable, the tops will even then remain covered with snow,
as we among many others have in those Countries observed. And for further
confirmation of the Doctrine delivered at the end of this 16. Title, I shall
subjoyn a Passage, which having unexspectedly met with in an unlikely place of
Captain James's Voyage, I think not fit to leave unmention'd here, not only
because it is the sole artificial observation that I yet met with, concerning
the lasting of ice, and so may recommend to us the Ingenuity of an Author,
whose Testimony we somewhat frequently make use of, but because the observation
is in it self remarkable, and notwithstanding the difference of places may
serve for the purpose we allege it: Our Navigators Page 101.
words are these; I have in July, and in the beginning of August taken some of
the Ice into the ship, and cut it square two foot, and put it into the Boat,
where the Sun did shine on it with a very strong reflex about it. And
notwithstanding the warmth of the Ship (for we kept a good fire) and our
breathings, and motions it would not melt in eight or ten days. And it is also
considerable to our present purpose, what the same Author elsewhere has about
the durableness of the Congelation of the ground not yet thawed at the
beginning Page (...).
of June. For the ground (says he) was yet frozen, and thus much we found by
experience in the burying of our men, in setting up the Kings Standard toward
the latter end of June, and by our Well at our coming away, in the beginning of
July, at which time upon the land, for some other reasons, it was very hot
weather.

Title XVII. Considerations and Experiments touching the Primum Frigidum.
1. THe dispute, which is the Primum Frigidum, is very well known among
Naturalists; some contending for the Earth, others for the Water, others for
the Air, and some of the Moderns for Nitre: But all seeming to agree, that
there is some Body or other, that is of its own nature supremely Cold, and by
participation of which, all other cold Bodies obtain that quality.

2. But for my part, I think, that, before men had so hotly disputed, which is
the Primum Frigidum, they would have done well to enquire, whether there be any
such thing or no (in the sense newly expressed.) For though I make some
scruple, resolutely to contradict such several Sects of Philosophers, as agree
in taking It for granted, yet I think it may be not irrationally Questioned,
and that upon two or three accounts.

3. For (first) it is disputable enough, as we shall hereafter see, whether
cold be (as they speak) a positive quality, or a bare privation of heat, and
till this question be determined, it will be somewhat improper to wrangle
sollicitously, which may be the Primum Frigidum. For if a Bodies being cold,
signify no more, then its not having its insensible parts so much agitated, as
those of our Sensories, by which we are wont to judge of tactile qualities;
there will be no cause to bring in a Primum Frigidum, upon whose account
particular Bodies must be cold, since to make this or that Body so, it suffices
that the Sun or the Fire, or some other agent, whatever it were, that agitated
more vehemently its parts before, does now either cease to agitate them, or
agitate them but very remisly: So that, till it be determined, whether cold be
a positive quality, or but a privative; it will be needless to contend, what
particular Body ought to be esteemed the primum frigidum (in the sense above
specified.)

4. Secondly, Though it be taken for granted, not only by the Schools, but by
their Adversaries the Chemists, that heat and moisture, dryness and gravity,
and I know not how many other qualities, must have each of them a (...), or a
principal subject to reside in, upon whose account, and by participation of
which, that Quality belongs to the other Bodies, wherein it is to be met with;
though this be so, I say, yet we have In the Skeptical Chemist.
elsewhere fully enough manifested, that this fundamental Notion, upon which
much of the Doctrine of Qualities, is both by Aristotelians, and vulgar
Chemists, superstructed, is but an unwarrantable conceit, and therefore not
sufficient for a wary Naturalist to build the Notion of a primum frigidum upon;
there being indeed many qualities, as gravity, and figure, and motion, and
color, and sound, etc. of which no true and genuine (...) can (for ought I
could ever yet discover) be assigned: and because heat and cold are looked upon
as Diametrically opposite Qualities, we may consider, that it will be very hard
to show, that there is a (...) of heat; since stones, and metals, and plants,
and animals, and (very few excepted) all consistent Bodies, we are conversant
with, may by motion be brought to heat, which to attribute to the participation
of some portion or other of the imaginary Element of fire, is not only
precarious (being affirmed by many, and The Dialogues about heat and flame.
proved by none) but erroneous, or at least needless, as we have more at large
declared in other papers.

5. A third thing, that induces me to question, whether there be a primum
frigidum, is, that among those Bodies, that the chiefest Sects of Philosophers,
whether Ancient or Modern, have pitched upon, there is not any, that seems
clearly to deserve the title of the primum frigidum. But to make this appear,
we must distinctly (though as briefly as our design will permit) consider those
four several Bodies, which we have (at the Beginning of this Section) taken
notice of, to stand in competition, in the Opinions of Philosophers, for the
title of primum frigidum.

6. First, then Plutarch and others contend, that it is the Earth; but, to omit
other Arguments, we see, that the Earth is frozen not by its own cold, but by
its vicinity to the Air, as may be argued by this, viz. that the congealing
cold even in the midst of Winter affects but the surface of the Earth, where it
borders on the Air, and seldom pierces above a few feet, or, at most, yards,
beneath that part wherein the Earth is exposed, and immediately contiguous, to
the Air, as may appear by what we have formerly delivered concerning the small
depth, to which frosts reach in the ground. And therefore if the Earth be
protected from the Air (though by so cold a Body as water) it may be kept
unfrozen all the Winter long, as may be gathered from that remarkable practice
in the great Salt-marshes of the French Islands of Xaintonge, where, as a
diligent Writer of that Country, very well versed in the making of the French
Salt, informs us, when once the season of Coagulating Salt by the heat of the
Sun is quite past, the Owners are careful by opening certain Sluices to overflow
all the Banks, and Dams, that make and divide the Salt-ponds, and serve for the
Workmen to pass to (...) Bernard de Palissey au Traitte du Sell commum.
and fro: for (says my Author in his own language) if they left those Marshes
(or Salt-works) uncovered, the frost would make such havoc amongst them, that
it would be necessary to make them up again every year, but by means of the
water, they are preserved (or kept in repair) from year to year: which practice
I the rather mention, because the hint, it affords, as it is considerable to
our present purpose, so it may on some occasions be applicable to practices
useful to humane society.

7. Besides, the Earth being (according to those we reason with) the coldest,
heaviest, and solidest of Elements, it is not so probable, as to excuse them
from the need of proving it, that those excessively cold Agents, that freez the
Clouds into Snow and Hail, should be (...) Exhalations carried up to the middle
Region of the Air, especially since it must be done by Agents, either hard to
be guessed at, or considerably hot. And it is not easy to give a reason, why,
if Elementary Corpuscles steaming from the Earth, have such a congealing cold,
where they are disunited, and but interspersed among the particles of Air, the
Mass of the Earth it self, whence those exhalations are supposed to proceed,
should not be able also to congeal water, since the Terrestrial Corpuscles
being more thick set, and united in a Clod of Earth, then in an equal portion
of the Atmosphere, it seems, that where the frigorifick matter is more dense,
the cold should be more vehement, as Philosophers observe, that heat is more
intense in a glowing bar of Iron, then an equal portion of the flame of kindled
Straw.

8. But (not to repeat what we formerly mentioned about Colds being a
Privation) there is another Argument against the Earths being the primum
frigidum, and that is taken from the Subterraneal fires, which breaking forth
in many places of the Earth, as in Aetna, Vesuvius, Hecla, the Pico of
Tenariffe, etc. seem to argue a Subterraneal fire, upon whose existence not
only many Chemists build great matters, but even diverse Philosophers have
adopted it, and the learned Gassendus himself seems so far to countenance it,
as to employ it as one Argument of the Earths being naturally neither hot nor
cold. The mention of this Subterraneal fire brings into my mind some things
that I have met with amongst good, though not Classick, Authors, and amongst
men that have been either diggers of (or conversant in) Mines, not improper to
be here taken notice of. For though I do not now intend to declare my opinion
about the Central fire, either of the Chemists, or Cartesians, and though the
Examples newly mentioned, and such other seem to me but very inconsiderable, in
reference to the whole Earth, yet it is observable to our present purpose, that
there should be so much Subterraneal heat or warmth, at least generally to be
met with: For even where there appear no manifest signs of Subterraneal fires,
I have known those, that were wont to go to the Bottom of deep Mines, complain,
that a very little Exercise would put them into a great sweat; and a learned
and experienced French Doctor, that has written in his own Language of Stones
and Jewels, affirms, that in such Mines the Subterraneal Vapors and
Exhalations, are visibly so abundant, and likewise so hot, that the Mine-men
are constrained (which a person I spoke with affirmed to me, touching himself)
to work in their shirts, by reason of the great heat they there felt, and
though I would have been glad to know, whether those deep places would have
appeared as hot, when judged of by a sealed Weather-glass, as they did to the
Minemens Sensories, because of some little doubt I harbored, whether much of
that copious sweating, and seeming heat, might not proceed from the thickness
of the dampish Air, and its De Claves au second Livre das pierres and
pierreris, Cap. 2.
unfitness for Respiration; yet, because a Virtuoso, that had a LeadMine of his
own, in which he wrought himself for curiosity, answered me, that he was not
wont to find any difficulty of breathing in the place, where he was so apt to
sweat; and since I find not, that others have complained of having their
respiration incommodated in such places, unless by Accidental Damps, my scruple
was much abated, and the rather, because the Author lately mentioned, Ibid.
expressly affirms, that the Sudorifick heat (if I may so speak) is to be found
in the Bowels of the Earth, as well in Summer (...) in Winter, which prevents
the ascribing of it to Antiperistasis. And in other places then Mines it is
generally observed, that Wells and Springs freez not, if the place, whence the
water is drawn, be very deep, but, as we have observed elsewhere, that it often
comes up smoking, and, as it were, reaking, which argues, that at the least
the Earth, wherein it was harbored, or through which it passed, was, if not
warm, free from such a degree of Cold, as might be exspected in the Earth, if
it were the primum frigidum. Nor can it be reasonably pretended, that the
Subterraneal heat comes from the Beams of the Sun, since learned Men have
observed, that (...) de (...) livre 11. cap. 2.
those heat not the Earth above six or seven foot deep even in Southern
Countries, and though we should allow them to pierce three times as far, yet
that would not be considerable to the depth of the Mines above mentioned, and
if the lower part of the Earth were of its own nature cold, and received the
heat, it discloses only from the Sun and Stars; the deeper men dig, the lesser
of heat and steams they would meet with, whereas the above cited French
Minerallist affirms, that the lower they go, the more vapors, exhalations, and
heat they find.

9. But because this learned man delivers this circumstance in a dogmatical,
rather then an historical way, I will add somewhat out of a relation (whence I
have In the Discourses about Antiperistasis, the following passages are taken,
out of a (...) narrative, consisting of about two sheets of paper of Joh.
Baptista Morinus, published in the year 1619. and titled, Relatio de locis
Subterraneis, annexed to a discourse (too much built on Astrological and
Aristotelian grounds) of the threefold Region, that he conceives to be as well
in the Earth as in the Air.
elsewhere taken other particulars) made by a (...) likewise, that had (...)
curiosity to descend himself into the deep Mines of Hungary, some of which,
that he went down into, may be collected by his Narrative, to have three or
four (...) fathom, that is eighteen, or twenty four hundred foot of
perpendicular depth. This Author then relates, that after he had descended
about 180. or a hundred fathoms, he came into a very warm Region of the Earth,
which lasted to the bottom of the Mine, and is so (...) both Winter and Summer,
that the Laborors are wont to work in it without their clothes, and he was
scarce able to endure the heat of it, although the external Air were very hot:
the weather being very fair, and the month July, Vnde calor ille procederet
petii a praefecto. Respondit, ex partibus inferioribus, inferius enim perpetuo
calet. Quod responsum magis adhuc miratus, quaesivi anres ita sese haberet in
fodinis omnibus. Respondit ita se habere in omnibus, saltem profundis, ut post
profundum Terrae frigidae tractum, in locum calidum descendatur. Et quod,
ubicunque terra foditur post similem profunditatem, nullum amplius sentitur
frigus, sed semper calor, quantumcunque profunde fodiatur.
He adds, that he having demanded of the Overseer of the Mine, whence this heat
came, he was answered, to that and several other questions, That it came from
the lower parts of the earth; that in all deep Mines, after one is past the
Colder crust of the earth, one comes into a region, that is perpetually warm,
and that where ever they dig the ground, after they are come to such a depth
(which he elsewhere mentions to be about 80. or a hundred fathom) they feel no
more any cold, but a perpetual heat, how deep soever they dig, ( --
Percunctatus sum an quo magis acceditur ad terrae centrum, calor ille major
perciperetur. Respondit, id nunquam fuisse animadversum, nisi interdum dum
fodiendo (...) venae calidorum Mineralium. -- (...) Responsa non in unica
fodina, and ab unico praefecto (...); sed, etc.
yet without observing, that after they are once into that warm region, they
find the heat sensibly increase, the nearer they approach to the center of the
earth, unless by accident they happen to dig through vains of hotter Minerals.)
And these answers (subjoyns my Author) I received not in one Mine alone, or
from a single overseer, but in all the Mines, and from all the Masters of them;
so that if these were not mistaken, we may safely conclude, that as far as
experience can inform us, the body of the earth in its lowermost parts, where
it is presumed to be coldest, is every where, and that considerably, hot. I
said, if these Mine-men were not mistaken, because having been in the bottom of
some Mines my self, though I find it acknowledged, that it is still warm in the
bottom of deep ones, yet I confess, I somewhat suspect by what I have observed,
that this degree of heat, which our French Physician found in the Hungarian
Mines, might be rather in great part from the peculiar nature of those places,
or of the Minerals generated there, then barely (as he and those that informed
him suppose) from the greatness of their depth beneath the surface of the
earth; for I know several mixtures, besides those that are common, of bodies
neither of them actually hot, which will produce a considerable degree of heat.
And very credible eye witnesses affirm, that in some parts of England, they dig
up good store of a kind of Mineral, which is thought to be of a Vitriolate
nature, which by the bare addition of common water, will grow hot, almost to
ignition. So that the Hungarian Mines being deep, and as appears by our Authors
Narrative, being not (...) of water enough to make a Subterraneal Spring in the
Mine its self, besides what water may plentifully ascend in the forms of
vapors, and moisten the Oar, it may be suspected, that either the water, or
some appropriated Mineral spirit or juice (of which the bowels of the earth may
contain diverse, that we know nothing of) may produce together with the Mineral
a warm steam, which for want of sufficient vent in those narrow, and close
places, may heat them considerably, which conjecture may be countenanced by
these three circumstances, that I took notice of in our Authors Narrative; one,
That the smoke that copiously ascended out of the Mine by the perpendicular
grove, was not barely hot, but consisted of stinking exhalations, which were so
saline, and fretting, as oftentimes to corrode and spoil both the wooden
ladders or stairs, and the iron instruments of the diggers. The other, that the
overseers themselves of the Mines, told Morinus (as we lately saw) that they in
some places met with veins of hot Minerals, which made it hotter, then the bare
vicinity of those places to the center of the earth would have done. And
lastly, Cum descendendo (...) illum magis ac magis augeri sentirem: hujus
rationem petii a praefecto, quod in nulla adhuc (...) similem (...) intensionem
percipissem. (...), Mineram Vitrioli paulo inferius existere, (...) calorem
multiplicaret.
as our Author was descending into the golden Mine at Cremnitz, he found in one
place, the heat to increase as he descended more and more, (which seems not to
agree with a passage we lately mentioned out of him) and to exceed any he had
met with in any other Mine; and afterward the overseer bringing him into a
room, that abounded with smaragdine Vitriol, (the Mineral whence this heat
proceeded) though the room were spacious, he found there, besides a sharp
spirit very offensive to his throat, so troublesome a heat, that he was ready
to faint away with sweating, and very much wondered how the diggers were able
to work there. And elsewhere the Author himself notes, that such hot Mines of
Vitriol, or Sulphur, may be found even in the first region of the earth, (as he
calls that which is somewhat near the surface, and which he thinks (...) to
name the cold region) and within a large sphere of activity make it perpetually
hot. But this, as I was intimating, I mention but as a suspicion, or a
conjecture, and notwithstanding that the degree of heat may be much increased
in these Mines, by the concurrance of accidental causes, in case the conjecture
be admitted; yet since the frequency of a sensible degree of heat in very deep
places does very little favor their opinion, that will allow the earth to have
no other heat, but what it receives from the Sun beams, or by the manifest fire
of burning hills, as Aetna and Vesuvius. And if it should be objected, that
this Subterraneal heat is adventitious to the Earth, which is supremely cold of
its own nature; Gassendus might reply, that it is as likely, that the coldness
of it near the superficies may be adventitious too, and that it appears at
least as manifestly, that the one proceeds from the contiguous Air, as it does,
that the other proceeds from some included fire; and if I misremember not, he
has this consideration, that it is somewhat strange, that Nature should have
intended the Earth for its summum frigidum, and yet that a great part (and for
ought we know the greatest) should be constantly kept warm, either by the Sun,
as under the Torrid Zone, or by the Subterraneal fires. But the objection
mentioned against Gassendus, opposes but one of the Arguments we have alleged
against the Earths being the primum frigidum, and would leave the others in
their force, though it did more convincingly answer, that, against which it is
framed, then it seems to do.

10. And if the Patrons of the Earths coldness, to evade the Arguments I have
alleged, should pretend, that when they affirm the Earth to be the primum
frigidum, they mean not the Elementary Earth, but some Body that is mingled
with it; I shall desire to know, which it is they mean of the many other Bodies,
that make up the Terrestrial Globe, that we may examine what right it has to
that Title; and in the mean time I shall conclude against them, that the Earth
it self has none, since they grant a colder Body then it, and such a one as the
earth must be beholding to, for the greatest degrees of coldness it chances to
possess.

11. But though I presume, enough has been said to make it appear unlikely,
that the Earth should be the primum frigidum, yet I must in this dissent from
the learned Gassendus, that he thinks the Earth, not only not to be the primum
frigidum, but not to be naturally cold any more then hot. For the insensible
parts of the Earth, like those of other firm Bodies, being heavy, and perhaps
gross, and either having no constant motion at all, or at least a far more
remiss agitation, then that of our Sensories; it seems to follow, that the
Earth must seem cold to us, unless it be by the communicated heat, or motion of
some extrinsick Agent, put into a degree of agitation, that belongs not to its
nature; and for the like reason I think it not improbable, that pure Earth
should in its own Nature be colder, then either pure Water or pure Air, since
the Earth being a consistent Body, its component particles are at rest among
themselves, or at least moved with an almost infinite slowness, whereas Water
and Air being fluids, their component particles must be in a restless and
various motion, and consequently be less remote from heat, which is a state
wherein the various agitation of the minute particles is more vehement.

12. And if those, that plead for the Earth, had declared, that they meant not
the pure or Elementary Earth, but that part of the Terrestrial Globe, that is
distinct from the Sea, and other Waters, that make it up, and would have Earth
in that sense not to be the primum frigidum, but only the summum frigidum,
perhaps they might have a better plea for their Opinion, then they can urge for
theirs, who contend for the Water or the Air, especially, if to countenance
their Opinion, this memorable observation be added, which I have met with It
was not the Sea, nor the nearness unto the Pole, but the Ice about the land,
that let and hindered us (as I said before) for that as soon as we made from the
land, and put more into the Sea, although it was much further northward,
presently we felt more warmth, and in that opinion our Pilot William Barents
dyed, who notwithstanding the fearful and intolerable Cold that he endured,
yet he was not discouraged, but offered to lay wagers with diverse of us, that
by Gods help he would bring that pretended Voyage to an end, if he held his
course Northeast from the North Cape. Gerat de Veer in Purchase, page 474.
among those Navigators, that have had the greatest Experience of the Frigid
Zone; for the Dutch, that sailed thrice to Nova (...), and once wintered there,
affirm in their first voyage, that the highest degrees of Cold are not to be
met with in the main Sea, where yet men are most exposed to the Operations of
the Air, and of the Water, but either upon the Land or near it. That accurate
Geometrician and Hydrographer Fournier tells us, that in 1595. the Hollanders
being intercepted by Icy Schools in the strait of Weigats, and meeting with
certain Muscovites, demanded of them, whether those Seas were always frozen,
and were answered, that neither the Northern Sea, nor that of Tartary did ever
freez, and that 'twas only that strait with the Sea contiguous to the shores of
some Bays and Gulphs, that were frozen; and our judicious Author, not only
adds, that in effect all those that sail into those parts relate, That all
those Lumps of Ice are such as have been loosened, and severed from the
Islands, and the Rivers of the Samojeds and Tartars, but adventures to affirm
in general terms, that it is certain, the main Seas never freez, and that it is
but the confines, and shores of some of them, that are frozen.

13. That the water is the primum frigidum, the Opinion of Aristotle has made
it to be, that of the schools, and of the generality of Philosophers. But I can
as little acquiesce in this opinion, as in the former, not finding it agreeable
to what experience teaches us.

14. For not to mention, that it would be very difficult to prove, that diverse
very cold Bodies, as Gold and Silver, and Crystal, and several other fusible
stones have in them any water at all, to which their coldness may with any
degree of probability be ascribed; nor to urge the Arguments, that some Modern
contenders for the supreme coldness of the Air are wont to employ; not (I say)
to insist on such things, I shall content my self to make use of this obvious
(...) of Cold, that in Rivers, Ponds, and other receptacles of water, the
congelation begins at the Top where the liquor is exposed to the immediate
contact of the Air, which sufficiently argues, that the Air is colder then the
Water, since it is able not only sensibly to refrigerate it, but to deprive it
of its fluidity, and congeal it into Ice, whereas if the water it self were the
primum frigidum, either it ought to be, at least as to the major part of it,
always congealed, or we may justly demand a reason, why, when it does freez,
the glaciation should not begin in the middle, or at the bottom, as soon as at
the Top, if not sooner. And our Arguments against the precedence of the water
in point of coldness, may be strengthened by this, That frosts are wont to be
hardest, when the Air is very clear, and freest from Aqueous vapors, whereas in
rainy weather, wherein such vapors most abound, the cold is wont to be far more
remiss: To which we may add, what we lately delivered from the observation of
Navigators, that even in the frigid Zone the main Sea, where yet the water is
in the greatest mass, and so most likely, as well as advantaged to disclose its
nature, never freezes, though the Straits, and Bays, and Gulphs be frozen over,
which argues, that the greatest degrees of Cold are rather to be assigned to
the Air, or to the Earth, then to the Water, which by the practice formerly
mentioned of the Masters of the French Salt Marshes appears to be (when it is
of a considerable depth) fitter to preserve Bodies from congelation, then to
congeal them, which instance I the rather repeat, because it seems to argue,
that the water is not so much as disposed to receive any very intense degree of
cold at a remote distance from the Air: for though Navigators tell us of
exceeding thick pieces of Ice, yet, as we have already elsewhere noted, we are
not bound to believe, that the congealing cold has pierced any thing near so
much as that thickness amounts to from the superficies of the Sea directly
downwards; for though it were no great matter if it did, in comparison of that
depth of the Sea, which, though the water be naturally cold, the sharpest Air
is unable to congeal, yet we have elsewhere proved, that those thick masses of
Ice, are not solid and entire pieces, but rather heaps of many (...), and other
fragments of Ice, which running upon one another, or sliding under one another,
are by the congelation of the intercepted water (and perchance half thawed
snow) as it were, cemented together into misshapen and unweildy masses; which
conjecture agrees very well with that observation of the Ingenious Captain
James, which he delivers in these words.

It seldom rains after the middle of September, but snows, and that snow will
not melt on the lands, nor sands: At low water, when it snows (which it does
very often) the sands are all covered over with it, which the half tide carries
(...) ously (twice in twenty four hours) into the great Bay, which is the
common Rendezvous of it. Every low water, are the sands left clear to gather
more to the increase of it. Thus does it daily gather in this manner, till the
latter end of October. and by that time has it brought the Sea to that coldness,
that as it snows, the snow will lie upon the water in flakes, without changing
its color, but with the wind is wrought together, and as the Winter goes
forward, it begins to freez on the surface of it, two or three inches, or more
in one night, which being carried with the half tide, meets with some obstacle
(as it soon does) and then it crumples, and so runs upon it self, that in few
hours it will be five or six foot thick; the half tide still flowing, carries
it so fast away, that by December it is grown to an infinite multiplication of
Ice. Thus far this Navigator, to which I shall add another passage out of one
of his Countrymen (Mr. Hudson) ( famous for the Northern Discoveries, that
bare his name) by which, added to what has been elsewhere delivered to the same
purpose, we may be invited to believe, that the vast Hills and Islands of Ice,
that are to be met with about the Straits of Weigats and elsewhere, are not
generated of the Sea it self. Furchas. lib. 3. cap. 15. page (...).
Its no marvel ( says he) that there is so much Ice in the Sea toward the
Pole, so many Sounds and Rivers being in the Lands of Nova Zembla, and Newland
to engender it, besides the coasts of Pechora, Russia, and Greenland, with
Lappia, as by proof I find by my Travel in these parts.

15. But for all this, I think not fit, as does the Ingenious Gassendus, and
some others, to make the water indifferent, as to heat and cold. For, as I
formerly noted concerning the Earth; so I must now represent touching the
water, that, setting aside the (...) of the Sun, which is but adventitious,
where it does operate, and (...) many vast portions of that Element, which it
(...) not (...) reach, the insensible parts of water are much less agitated,
then those of our Sensories temperately disposed, and consequently may in
regard of us be judged cold. For though water being a Liquor, I readily allow
it a various Motion of its component Corpuscles, (that being requisite to make
a Body fluid,) yet such an agitation, which is sufficient for fluidity, may be,
and often is, far more remiss, then that of the spirits, Blood, and other
liquors of so hot a Sanguineous animal as Man, as we see, that Urine, though
after it has been long omitted, it continues a fluid Body, yet its parts are
far less agitated, then they were, when it came hot, and reeking out of the
Bladder.

16. And upon this occasion, I shall add, what by inquiry I have learned, that
(except the parts somewhat near the superficies of the water, which the heat of
the Sun, or the warmth of the neighboring lower Region of the Air may give
some warmth to) the whole Body of the Sea is very cold; for being very well
acquainted with one, that for some time got a livelihood, by going down into
the Bottom of the Sea, to fetch up what could be recovered out of shipwrackt
vessels, I purposely inquired of him, what cold he felt under water, and he
more then once told me, that though near the Top of the water the cold were
very moderate, yet when he was necessitated to descend a great depth, he found
it so great, that he could not very long support it; and particularly he told
me, that having occasion to descend about twelve or fourteen fathom deep (which
is nothing in comparison of the depth of many Seas) to fasten ropes to the
Ordinance of a great ship, that was some years since cast away, near the coast
of one of the Northern Countries, though the Engine that was let down with him
supplied him so well with Air, that he was not incommodated in point of
Respiration, and though he felt no other inconveniences, that might dissuade
his tarrying longer, yet the cold was so great, and troublesome, that he was
not able to endure it above two or three hours, but was constrained to remount
to a milder, as well as a higher Region. I wished several times he had had with
him a sealed Weather-glass (for ordinary Thermometers would on that occasion
have been unserviceable) to prevent some little doubt, that might be made,
whether the intense Cold he felt might not be only and chiefly in reference to
his Body, which might be so altered, and disposed by this new Briny Ambient, as
to make such a disturbance in the course or texture of his Blood, as that which
makes Aguish persons so cold at the beginning of the fit, though the
temperature of the Ambient Body continue the same. But this is not the only
person, that found the Sea Exceeding cold, for I remember Beguinus in Tyrocinio
Chymico, lib. 2. cap. 1.
Beguinus relates from the mouth of a Marseillian Knight, that was overseer of
the Coral-fishing in the Kingdom of Tunis, that having upon that coast let down
a young man, to feel, whether Coral were hard or soft, as it grew in the water,
when this man was come about eight fathom, near the Bottom of the Sea, he felt
it exceeding cold. To which we shall add the testimony of a sober Traveller,
Josephus Acosta, who tells Josephus Acosta lib. 2. cap. 11.
us, That it is a thing remarkable, that in the depth of the Ocean, the water
cannot be made hot by the violence of the Sun, as in Rivers: Finally (he
subjoyns) even as Saltpeter (though it be of the nature of Salt) has the
property to cool water, even so we see by experience, that in some parts and
havens, the salt water does refresh, the which we have observed in that of
Callao, where they put the water or wine which they drink, into the Sea in
Flaggons to be refreshed, whereby we may undoubtedly find, that the Ocean has
this property to temper and moderate the excessive heat. For this cause we feel
greater heat at Land then at Sea, caeteris paribus, and commonly Countries
lying near the Sea, are cooler then those that are farther off. By all these
testimonies, it seems to appear, that both in very cold Regions, and very hot,
the deep parts of the Sea seem to be very Cold, the Sun beams being not able to
penetrate the Sea to any great depth; for I remember, that having enquired of
the Diver I lately mentioned, whether he could discern the light of the Sun at
any great distance from the surface of the water, he answered me, that he could
not, but as he went down deeper and deeper, so he found it darker and darker,
and that to a degree, that would scarce have been expected in so Diaphanous a
Body as water is.

17. But this submarine cold (if I may so call it) though it be great and
considerable, is not so intense, as to entitle water to be the primum frigidum,
since as cold as our Diverse found it at the bottom of the Sea, they did not
find it cold enough to freez the water there, as the Air often does at the Top.

18. The next Opinion we are to consider, is that of the Stoics of old, and
adopted by the generality of Modern Philosophers, that are not Peripateticks,
who assert the Air to be the primum frigidum: But being ere long more
particularly to treat of the Temperature of the Air, we will reserve till then
to examine, whether it be cold of its own nature or not; but in the mean time,
we shall here take leave to question, whether it ought to be esteemed the
primum frigidum. For not to mention, that Aristotle, and the Schools, with many
other learned men, think the Air so far from being the coldest of the Elements,
that they reckon it among the hot ones, because I confels their opinion is not
mine, not to represent the heat of the Air in the Torrid Zone, nor that by the
generality of Philosophers, the upper Region of the Air, which is believed to
make incomparably the greatest part of it, is always hot, and the lower Region
is so too, in comparison of the middle, though the coldness even of this is not
perhaps unquestionable, not to urge any of these things, I say, I shall in this
place mention only two observations.

19. The one is that, which I lately recited, touching the great coldness of
the water in the deeper parts of the Sea, for'tis not easy to show, how this
great cold proceeds from that of the Air, whose operation seems not (as may be
judged by that little way that frosts pierce into the moist Earth) to reach
very far beneath the surface of the water, (insomuch that Captain James, who
had very good opportunity to try, allows not, in case the Ice be not made by
accumulation, that the Frost pierces above two yards perpendicularly downwards
from the surface of the water, even in the coldest habitable Regions.) And this
will seem the more rational, if we consider, that in case the coldness of the
Sea proceeded constantly from the Air, as such, the cold would be greater near
the surface, where it is contiguous to the Air, then in the parts remoter from
it, and yet the contrary may appear by the passages lately recited.

20. But if it be objected, that this at best can prove no more, then that the
Air is not the primum frigidum, notwithstanding which, it may be the summum
frigidum. For answer, I must proceed to my second Argument, which will perhaps
evince, that it is not that neither, for by the same way of arguing, by which
those I am now dealing with endeavor to prove the Air to be the coldest Body
in the World, I shall endeavor to prove, that it is not so: For their grand,
and (as far as I remember) their only considerable Argument is drawn from
Experience, which shows, that water begins to freez at the Top, where it is
exposed to the Air; but to this vulgar Experiment I oppose that of mine, which
I have often mentioned already to other purposes, that by an application of
salt and snow, I can make water, that would else freez at the Top, begin to
freez at the Bottom, or at any side I please, and that much sooner then the
common Air, even in a sharp frosty night, would be able to congeal it; and when
in exceeding cold weather the Ambient Nocturnal Air had reduced a parcel of Air
purposely included in a convenient glass, to as great a degree of condensation
as it could: I have more then once by the External application of other things,
been able to condense it much farther, which argues, that it is not the Air as
such, but some adventitious frigorifick Corpuscles (taking that term as I do in
this Treatise in a large sense) that may sometimes be mingled with it, which
produce the notablest degrees of cold, or upon whose Account the Air produces
them. And if these be duly applied, water will be congealed, whether Air comes
to touch the surface of it or no; nay, though Bodies, which the Air can never
penetrte nor congeal any of their parts, be interposed, as may appear by the
Experiments formerly mentioned of freezing water included in glass bubbles, and
suspended in oil of Turpentine, and other uncongealed Liquors; and it is worth
taking notice of, by them that conclude the Airs being the primum frigidum,
from the waters beginning to freez at the Top, where it is contiguous to the
Air, that it is there also where the Ice begins to thaw.

21. Besides the three Opinions we have hitherto examined, there is a fourth,
that justly deserves to be seriously considered; for the learned and ingenious
Gassendus is supposed, though I doubt how truly, to be the Author of it, and
though according to his custom, he speaks warily, and not so confidently of it,
yet in his last writings he much countenances it; yet some eminently learned
men, as well of our own, as of other Nations, have resolutely enough embraced
it. According then to these, the congelation of Liquors, and the cold we meet
with in the Air, Water, and other Bodies, proceeds from the admixture of
Nitrous exhalations, or Corpuscles introduced into them: And as I have a great
respect for diverse of these men's persons, so I like very well in their opinion,
that they do not ascribe the supreme degree of frigefactive Virtue to the Air
it self, but to some adventitious thing, that is mingled with it; but whereas
they pitch upon Nitre, as the grand Universal efficient of cold, I confess I
cannot yet fully acquiesce in that Tenent. For though I am not averse from
allowing Saltpeter to be one of those Bodies, that are endued with a
refrigerating power, and to be copiously enough dispersed through several
portions of the Earth, yet for ought I know, there may be not only diverse other
causes of cold, but diverse other Bodies qualified to be Efficients of cold, as
well as SaltPetre.

22. And first, if cold be not a positive quality, but the absence of heat, the
removing of calorifick Agents will in many cases suffice to produce cold
without the introduction of any Nitrous particles into the Body to be
refrigerated. But because it is disputable, whether cold be a positive quality
or no, we will urge this Argument no further, till the Controversy be decided,
and till then, as it will remain not improbable, we propose it as no other, but
proceed to the next.

23. In the second place, I see not as yet any proof, that the great cold, we
have formerly mentioned to be met with in the depths of that vast Body the Sea,
especially when it is greater elsewhere, then nearer the Top, where the Air may
better communicate its coldness to it, must be the effect of Nitrous Atoms,
which must certainly swarm in prodigious multitudes to be able to refrigerate
every drop and sensible particle of so stupendiously vast a Body as the Ocean.
Besides that I remember not to have found or known it observed, that Nitre,
especially in vast quantities reaches near so deep in the Earth, as those parts
of the Sea, that are found exceeding cold. And as the halituous part of Nitre
is more disposed to fly up into the Air, then dive down into the Sea, so we
find no great documents of its having its grosser and sensible parts abounding
in the Seawater, since the evaporations of that leaves not behind it
Saltpeter, but common Salt. But these, though no light considerations, are not
those, that most weigh with me.

24. For (in the next place) I am not satisfied with the Experiences I find
alleged to prove, that it is by Nitre, that the Air and the neighboring parts
of the Earth, and Water (not to repeat the objections I lately borrowed from
the Sea) receive their highest degrees of Cold. For when Gassendus and others
tell us, that it is Nitre resolved into exhalations, that make the gelid Wind,
which refrigerates all things it touches, and penetrating into the water,
congeals it, this, I say, to me will seem precarious, until Gassendus (or some
other for him) tell us, what Experiments they are (which he seems in one place
to intimate) that this new Doctrine depends on; for, I, confess, that for my
part, I who have perhaps had more opportunity to resolve Nitre, have seen no
great feats, that the steams of it have done, more then those of other saline
Bodies in the production of cold; and the spirit of Nitre, which is a liquor
consisting of the volatile parts of that resolved salt, not only does not (that
I have observed) appear to the touch to have considerably, if at all, a greater
actual cold, then that of diverse other Liquors, but seems to have a potential
heat. For whether or no the Exhalations of Nitre be able to congeal water into
Ice, I have formerly observed, served, that the spirit of Nitre or Aqua fortis
will dissolve Ice into water, very near, if not altogether as soon as the
spirit of (...) it self, which inflamable Liquor is generally acknowledged to
be in a high degree potentially hot. If Gassenaus did not mean such steams of
(...) as these which I have been (...) of, it had not been amiss to have
signified what other kind of Corpuscles of resolved Nitre he meant, without
leaving his Reader to divine it; and if we may judge of other Experiments,
which we lately Gassendi Phy. Lib. 6. Sect. 1. page 399. De qualitatibus rerum
-- ac addi quidem fortassis potest, (...) frigoris semina, si quae constant,
potissimum ex frigorificis Atomis abire in halinitrum corpor aque ipsis
affinia, quando experimur non exsolvi halini trum, quin and penetrando in
aquam, ipsam (...) and universa a se contacta refrigeret, and abeundo in
halitum (...) gelidum seu frigidum ventum, sed res pendet ex variis, quae non
possunt hoc loco commemorari, Experimentis.
took notice, that Gassendus seems to intimate, by that which he sets down a
little after, compared with that he had mentioned a little before: I am not
likely much to be convinced by them, but shall rather be tempted to suspect,
that learned man might be imposed upon by others to write that, as matter of
fact, which he never had tried, and yet own not the having it only by report.
For whereas he seems to (...), that dissolved Nitre mingling it self with
water, freezes it, and that in Summer, yet I must freely (...), that although
(...) other Learned Moderns teach the same thing (but without any man's
avouching it, that I know, upon his own experience) I, who am no (...) to
Nitrous Experiments, have never been able to produce, or so fortunate, as to
see any such effect, and (...) somewhat strange to me, that Chemists, who make
such frequent solutions of Nitre, and ofrentimes with less water, then is
sufficient to dissolve it all, so that by consequence the proportion of the
Nitre to the Water, must have run through almost all the possible measures of
proportion, should never so much, as by chance (as I can hear) have observed
any such matter: and that which makes me thus interpret Gassendus his meaning,
(though in one of the two passages, wherein he sets down this Experiment, he
mentions also snow, or ice to be added to the Nitre) is, that in the first of
those two passages, he ascribes the congelation to Nitre alone, without
speaking of either ice or snow; and in the other place, not only his words seem
to import, that Ib. page 400. Quomodo possunt corpuscula Nitri in aquam infusi
illam praeter modum adeo frigidam reddere imo, and per aestatem etiam
congelare, dum nitrum nivi glaceive detritae commistum lagenae circumponitur,
ipsaque praeter corpus Lagenae penetrant in (...) contentam.
notwithstanding the addition of the other ingredients, the Corpuscles of the
Nitre expiring out of the mixture, and penetrating into the water, are they
that make it freez, but the Exigence of his discourse seems to require such an
interpretation: for to say it is the Corpuscles of the Nitre, that were
harbored in the ice or snow, that freez the water they invade, is no better
then to beg the Question. For besides that, he ought to prove, that there are
multitudes of the Corpuscles of Nitre, lodged in snow and ice: Besides this, I
say, since these two Bodies are said to be water before they were congealed, to
grant what his Explication supposes about ice and snow, is to grant in effect,
that Nitre alone (without ice or snow) can turn water into ice, which is the
thing that Experience warranted us lately to deny; and if this be all, that is
meant by the Experiment, the mixing of Nitre with the ice, or the snow, will
signify very little, to evince what should be proved. For, if instead of Nitre
you take Sea Salt, or the spirit of Salt, nay, the inflamable part of Wine, the
Experiment will succeed; and yet I think Gassendus would not have the
Corpuscles of these Bodies to be frigorifick, like those of Nitre, which yet
they may be proved to be by the same Argument, which is employed to show, that
the Corpuscles of the Nitre, which is added as a distinct ingredient to the
ice, or to the snow, are the Efficients of the Congelation.

25. Having thus examined Gassendus his Experiments, we will now, as our next
and last Argument touching this subject, subjoyn our own, as far as we can find
any of them among our notes, some of which follow in these words.

26. [As cold as they think Saltpetre to be, who teach its spirituous parts to
be the Grand and Catholic efficients of cold, yet we found, that it would
dissolve ice readily enough, as well as Sea Salt, etc. are wont to do, as we
collected from this, That roch'd Petre mingled with ice, would freez the vapors
wandering in the Air, to the outside of the single Vial, wherein we made the
Experiment, which the ice alone would not have done; and having placed some
(...), sie beaten Nitre (of the same parcel) in little heaps here and there
upon plates of ice, we manifestly found them to sink into the ice, which argued
their dissolving it; and having put some of it upon a thick and smooth piece of
ice, we found, that it had (...) a hole quite through it, whilst the
surrounding part of the ice remained of a good thickness.]

27. [We took a large single Vial, almost full of water, and put it into as
much roch'd Petre, as by keeping it a good while by the fires side, we could
dissolve in it, of which one mark was, that there remained a pretty deal of
Salt entire (...) the Bottom of the liquor, this being exposed to the Air,
during an extremely sharp night, and a good part of the day, the solution was
(...) so hard to the very Top of the liquor, that having broken the glass, we
could hardly break the included mass. But at the Bottom there (...) pear'd some
liquor, with Crystals of Nitre well figured, that seemed to have shot in it,
and argued the Water to be sufficiently impreguated with the Salt.]

28. [As for the spirituous parts of Nitre, so far forth as their temper, as to
heat or cold, can be judged by distillation, and by Weather-glasses, they are
not actually more cold then some other Liquors, and appear rather to be
potentially (...), then cold, at least they seem indisposed to turn water into
ice, since we have (...); that the spirit of Nitre will readily enough turn ice
into water.]

29. These three foregoing (...) show, that Saltpeter is no such (...)
derfully cold Body, but that (...) are others colder, as being able to freez
water, which Nitre could not congeal. Nay, they manifest, that Nitre, which is
said to be the efficient of ice, does thaw and dissolve it, and so seems at
least in reference to It, to be rather hot then cold.

30. I shall now add one note more, to show it does not always make water so
much as equally cold with the common Air; the Experiment I find thus recorded.

31. [We took a sealed Weatherglass, Aug. 1.
and by a little pulley fastened to a frame, suspended it in a solution of
roch'd-Petre, as strong as we could make it, without heat, as appeared by a
pretty Quantity of Nitre, that had continued some days undissolved in the
vessel, which was a Beer-glass, with a flat Bottom. After the Ball of the
Weather-glass had been suspended in this liquor, to try, whether the Ambient
Air were not at this time colder then the Liquor, (it being a cloudy and windy
day, and betwixt the hours of 11. and 12.) though both the Weather-glass and
it, had stood some days in the same place. I lifted up the glass out of the
water by the string it hung by, that I might not touch it with my warm hands,
and found the Liquor in the glass to descend by degrees, about two divisions
(which were eights of an inch) and then by the string lifting up the
Weather-glass, and putting again the solution of Nitre under it, the included
Liquor was impelled up again two divisions, and sometimes two divisions and a
half, for to satisfy my self the more fully, I repeated the Experiment several
times, and observed, that the included liquor usually ascended the first
division, so fast, that the eye could perceive its progress, and that the
ascent upon the immersion in the dissolved Nitre was discernably quicker, then
the descent upon the removal of the Weather-glass into the open Air, though the
space both of the one and of the other were about, either two divisions, or two
divisions and a half.]

32. If it be here demanded, what then I think of the frigifactive Virtue of
Nitre, I must answer, that I have not yet fully satisfied my self concerning
it, but thus much I am not willing to deny, That among diverse other Bodies,
that upon several occasions exhale from the Terrestrial Globe, those Corpuscles
that are of a Nitrous Nature, may be for the most part well qualified to
refrigerate the Air, and I am not indisposed to think, that there may be store
of little saline Bodies of kin to Nitre, that (especially at certain times)
(...) in great multitudes to and fro, in some parts of the Atmosphere; but that
this aerial salt, which some moderns call volatile Nitre, should be true and
perfect Saltpeter is more then I am sure of, and that this Salt alone should
be the summum frigidum, is more then as yet I am convinced of; especially,
since, for ought I know, there may be in the bowels of the Earth, (whence I
have seen many concretes dug out, whose very names and outsides are for the
most part unknown, even to Chemists themselves) diverse other Bodies besides
Saltpeter, whose steams may have a power of refrigerating the Air, as great in
proportion to their Quantity, as those of Saltpeter; and since common salt in
artificial glaciations, is found to cooperate as powerfully, as Saltpeter it
self, and since it is undeniably a Body, of which there is a vast quantity in
the Terrestrial Globe, and which by reason of the Sea, where it abounds, is
exceedingly diffused, I see no great reason, why we may not as well esteem that
kind of Salt among the Catholic efficients of Cold, and the rather, because
that the smallest Corpuscles, our eye discerns of Seasalt, are wont to be,
(though not exactly) of a Cubical figure, which is that figure, Philoponus
informs us, the great Democritus of old (justly admired by Gassendus) assigned
to the Atoms of cold, whereas, according to Gassendus himself, the Corpuscles
of Nitre, at least as far as sense has informed us, are not the most
conveniently shaped to produce cold, since he labors to show, that the figure
of frigorifick Atoms is to be Tetrahedrical or Pyramidal, whereas the Crystals,
or Grains, great or small, into which good Saltpeter shoots, are wont to be
Prismatical having their base Sexangular; but to return to what I was saying,
concerning the congealing of water, with ice, I shall subjoyn, that the same
Experiment countenances my conjecturing, that oftentimes it may not be
emanations of one Salt, or other Body, but a peculiar and lucky conjunction of
those of two or more sorts of them, that produces the intense degree of cold,
as we see, that ice and snow themselves have their coldness advanced (as to its
effects) by the mixture either of Sea Salt or Nitre, or spirit of Wine, or any
other appropriated additaments. Nay, I may elsewhere have occasion to show,
that actual Cold, may be manifestly promoted, if not generated, by the addition
of a Body that is not actually Cold. But to all this I must add, that I doubt
whether any of those saline or Terrestrial expirations, either single or
conjoined, be the adequate causes of cold, since, for ought I know, there may
be other ways of producing it, besides the introduction of frigorifick, whether
Atoms or Corpuscles, of which we may have occasion to take some notice
hereafter. In the mean time, having discoursed thus long against the admitting
a primum frigidum, I think it not amiss to take notice once more, that my
design in playing the Sceptick on this subject, is not so much to reject other
men's probable opinions, of a primum frigidum, as absolutely false, as it is to
give an account, why I look upon them, as doubtful.

Title XVIII. Experiments and Observations touching the Coldness and
Temperature of the Air.
1. I Have shown in the former Section, that the Air is not the Primum
Frigidum, but yet I cannot readily yield my assent to the Opinion of the
learned Gassendus, and some others, (who have written before, and since him)
that the Air is of it self indifferent, that is, neither cold, nor hot, but as
it happens to be made, either the one or the other by external Agents. For if
we take Cold in the obvious and received Acception of the word, that is, for a
Quality relative to the senses of a Man, whose Organs are in a good or middle
Temper, in reference to Cold and Heat, (...) am hitherto inclinable to think,
that we may rather attribute Coldness to the Air, then either Heat, or a
perfect Neutrality as to Heat and Cold. For to make a Body cold as to sense, it
seems to be sufficient, that its minute Corpuscles do less agitate the small
parts of our Organs of Feeling, then they are wont to be agitated by the Blood,
and other fluid parts of the Body; and consequently, if supposing the Air
devoid of those calorifick and frigorifick Atoms, to which the learned Men, I
was naming, ascribe its heat and cold, it would constitute a fluid, which
either by reason of the minuteness of its parts, or their want of a
sufficiently vehement motion, would less affect the sensory of Feeling, then
the internal liquors, and spirits of the body are wont to do, and so it would
appear actually cold. Nor is it necessary, that all liquors, much less all
fluids, should be as much agitated as the blood and vital humors of a humane
body, as we see (to omit what in the last Section is mentioned about newly
emitted Urine, and to skip other obvious instances) in those Fishes and other
Animals, whose Blood and analogous Juices are always, and that in the state,
which passes for their natural state, actually Cold to our Touch. And I see no
sufficient reason, why we should not conceive the Air even in its natural
state, (at least as far forth as it can be said to have a natural state) to be
one of the number of cold Fluids. For as to the main, if not only, Argument of
Gassendus, and others, namely, That, as we see the Air to be easily heated by
the Action of the Sun, or the fire, so we see it as easily refrigerated by ice,
and snow, and Northerly winds, and other Efficients of Cold, and that heat and
cold reign in it by turns in Summer and in Winter: This only proves, what I
readily grant, that the Air is easily susceptible at several times of both
these contrary Qualities, but it does not show, that one is not more connatural
to it, then the other, as we see, that the water may be easily deprived of its
fluidity by the circumposition of snow and salt, and reduced to be fluid again
by the Sun, or the Fire; and yet according to them, as well as others,
fluidity, not Firmness, is the natural quality of water. But this is not that,
which I lay most weight upon, for I considered, that it is manifest and
acknowledged by these learned Men themselves, that the heat of the Air is
adventitious to it, and communicated by the beams of the Sun, or of the Fire,
or by some other Agents naturally productive of heat, as well in other Bodies
as the Air: And it is also evident, that upon the bare absence, (for ought else
that appears) of the Sun, or Extinction of the Fire, or removal of the other
causes of heat, the Air will, as it were of its own accord, be reduced to
Coldness. Whereas, that there are swarms of frigorifick Atoms diffused through
the Air, from which all its coldness proceeds, is but an Hypothesis of their
own, far from being manifest in it self, and not hitherto, that I know of,
proved by any fit Experiment or cogent reason. And though in some cases I am
not adverse to the admitting such Corpuscles, as may in a sense, be styled
frigorifick, yet I see not why we should have recourse to them in cases where
such a bare cessation, or lessening of former motion, as may easily be ascribed
to manifest causes, may serve the turn, as to a Sensible (for I now consider
not the causes of the Intenser) Coldness in the Air, without taking them in.
And the opinion, I incline to, has at least this advantage, that the Air seems
to be as rightfully termed cold, as Iron, Marble, Mercury, Crystal, Saltpetre,
and such other Bodies, which men unanimously look upon as such, there being
none of these to which the Argument employed against the coldness of the Air,
is not applicable, save that the Air being a fluid of a looser and finer
Texture does sooner receive, and lose the impressions of heat and cold. And yet
if a Block of Marble, for instance, or an Iron Bullet were removed into one of
those empty spaces, that Gassendus and some others supposed to be beyond the
bounds of this world, I see not why it should not be rather cold, then either
warm, or in a state of perfect Neutrality: Since when the Corpuscles of Heat,
and those of Cold had extricated themselves, and were flown away into the
neighboring Vacuum, the component Particles of the stone or metal, whose
implicated Texture would hinder their Dissilition, remaining much less agitated
then our Organs of feeling are by the warm blood and spirits, that vivifie
them, must, if applied to those sensories, appear Cold.

2. But I shall not upon this subject spend any farther discourse, since
perhaps the dispute, either may be, or at least may easily be made Verbal: For
in case those I argue with, should so explain their opinion, as not to deny,
that in its own nature the Air, left to its self, may be reputed Cold in
reference to the sensories of men, who are warm animals: But say, that
nevertheless, comparing it indefinitely to other then humane bodies here below,
it is so easily susceptable of both the contrary qualities, that neither of
them seems predominant in it; and that when it is considerably either cold or
hot, it is made so by adventitious agents: I shall not much contend with them,
especially if it can clearly be made our, that there are great quantities of
such cold spirits, as Cabaeus and Gassendus supposed to be universally
productive of cold (more or less) in all bodies, where they get admission; but
of these cold spirits more perhaps elsewhere. Our principal business in this
Section being to deliver Experiments and Observations, and because we shall
mention but few of the former sort, we will dispatch them first.

3. [ November the 20. 1662. we took a Weather-glass filled to a convenient
height with well rectified spirit of Wine, and Hermetically sealed, this we
enclosed in a glass Receiver of a Cylindrical form, of about two inches
Diameter, and about a foot and a half high, and having cemented on the
Receiver, we let it alone for some hours, that it might perfectly cool. Then
drawing out the Air, and watching it narrowly, we observed, that the liquor in
the Weather-glass descended a little, though but a very little upon the first
Exuction of the Air, and a little, though it seemed somewhat less, upon the
second, but afterward we did not find it sensibly to descend. This subsidence
of the liquor in all amounting to about the length of a Barley corn, we
attributed to the stretching of the glass by the spring of the included Air,
when the ambient was withdrawn, and accordingly upon our allowing a Regress to
the excluded Air, we saw the spirit in the Thermometer, rise about half a
Barley-corns length to the place whence it began to subside. Afterward we
sucked out, and let in the Air of the Receiver, as before, with like success,
as to the descent and remounting of the liquor.

4. N. B. We tried with a very hot Handkerchief applied in a convenient place
to the outside of the Receiver, whether the included Weather-glass would
receive impressions from it, the Air, that was wont to be intermediate, being
removed; but we did not find the liquor in the Weather-glass sensibly to swell,
either by this way, or by casting upon it the concentrated beams of a candle
trajected through a double unequal glass. But when the Air was readmitted into
the Cavity of the Receiver, then the same Handkerchief, heated a fresh, and
applied, made the spirit of Wine sensibly, though but little more, to ascend:
Of which yet it seemed something difficult by reason of the Nicety of the
Experiment to estimate with any thing of certainty the Cause.] So that upon the
whole matter, till the Experiment be repeated in Airs of differing tempers, to
verify, whether 'twas the withdrawing of the wonted pressure, or the recess of
the substance of the Air, that made the liquor included in the Thermoscope
subside, and till the Experiment be repeated with the further observation of
other circumstances (which reiteration of the Trial we intended, but were by
intervening accidents hindered) the recited Experiment will not afford much more
then good hints toward the Discovery of the Temperature of the Air.

5. I have In the third Preliminary Discourse.
elsewhere taken notice, that air included in Vessels sufficiently strong and
well closed, was not sensibly, or at least not considerably condensed by Cold,
but when the Air was not so included, as not to be in some part or other
exposed to the pressure of the outward Air or Atmosphere, it would then by a
degree of Cold, capable to freez water, be manifestly reduced into a less room.
But how much this Contraction or Condensation of the air may amount to, I did
not there subjoyn, nor has the measuring of it been, that I know of, attempted
by any man. Wherefore we thought fit to endeavor something in this kind, of
which we shall annex a brief account, whereby it will appear upon the whole
matter, that in the Climate, we live in, the Cold does not so considerably
condense the Air, as most men seem to have hitherto imagined.

6. And first, it will not be amiss to intimate, that among other ways we tried
to measure the shrinking of the Air by sealing it up in glasses furnished with
long and very slender stems, that by breaking off the tips of those glasses
immersed under water, when by the Cold Air of a frosty night, or the
Circumposition of snow and salt, the included air was highly refrigerated, the
water might (by the pressure of the Atmosphere upon it) be impelled into the
Cylindrical cavity of the broken glass, and by its greater or lesser Ascent
therein show, how much the internal Air had been made to shrink upon the
account of the Cold. But this way, for reasons too long to be here deduced, we
found it troublesome and difficult to practice with any thing of certainty. Nor
did we ever, that I remember, by this way bring the refrigerated air to lose
above a 30. part of its former dimensions.

7. We would have tried also to measure the Condensation of the air by the
ascent of water into the stem of a Bolthead, so inverted, that the orifice of
the stem might be under the surface of the water, and the Bolthead kept
erected. But this way we disapproved, because it was likely (and indeed we
found it so by experience) that the external air would first freez the
uppermost part of the water contained in the stem, and thereby hinder its
ascent, and perhaps occasion the bursting of the lower part of the said stem.

8. Wherefore though for want of a sufficient Quantity of some liquor, that
would neither freez like water, and aqueous Bodies, nor congeal like common
oil, and the like unctuous Juices, we found it for a while somewhat difficult
to practice the Experiment, yet bethinking our selves of the indisposition that
Brine has to Congelation, we made so strong a Brine with common salt, that with
it (and as I remember, with oil of Turpentine also, of which we chanced to have
some quantity by us) we made diverse Trials, of which I had two among our
Collections, which we shall here subjoyn, whereof the one informs us, that an
Egg being inverted into salt water, the Cold of a frosty night made the air
shrink in the Pipe near five inches; and the other (which is the accuratest I
meet with among my Collections) gives me this account, That January the 29. the
Air extended into 2057. spaces, was by the cold of the sharp and frosty night
contracted into 1965. spaces, so that in extraordinarily cold weather, the most
we could make the Air lose of its former dimensions by the additional Cold of
the Atmosphere, was a 22. part, and a little more then a third: And this was
the greatest condensation of the Air, that we remember our selves to have
observed, though we were so careful, as after we had placed marks, where the
incongealable liquor reached in the pipe, that when the internal air was
exposed abroad to the cold, we caused servants to watch, and from time to time
to take notice (by placing marks) of the various ascents of the liquor,
especially early in the morning, least we should omit taking notice of the
greatest contraction of the air, which omission (by reason that the Coldness of
the ambient air does oftentimes begin to be remitted before we can feel it to
be so) is not easily avoided without watchfulness.

9. But having thus observed the Condensation of included air by the natural
and unassisted Cold of the external air, we thought fit to prosecute the trial
somewhat further, and in regard we conceived the Cold of a mixture of snow and
salt to be far more intense, then that of the mere ambient air alone, we
endeavored to measure, as near as we could, how much the one exceeded the
other: And though we found, that by prosecuting the lately mentioned Trial in
the glass-Egg by the application of ice and salt to the Elliptical part of the
vessel, the liquor rise by our Estimate near four inches more (then those five
which it had risen already, upon the account of the Refrigeration of the included
air by the bare cold of the external:) Yet by prosecuting the other Experiment
(made the 29. of January) at the same time, when we were making it, we did
somewhat more accurately determine the matter. For by applying ice and salt to
the outside of the vessel, we found, that the included air was contracted from
1965. spaces, to which the Cold of the ambient air had reduced it, into 1860.
spaces, so that the Circumposition of ice and salt did as much, nay somewhat
more condense it, after the mere Cold of the external air had contracted it as
far as it could, then the bare, though intense, Cold of the ambient air could
condense it at first, and the greatest degree of adventitious Cold we were able
to give by the help of nature or of art, did not make the air exposed to it,
lose a full tenth part of its former Dimensions: on which occasion it may not
be unworthy observation, That there is no greater Disparity betwixt the
proportion in which the Cold was able to condense the Air, and that wherein the
Cold was able to expand water.

10. This is all that at present I think fit to say concerning the interest
that Winds may have in the Temperature of the Air. And therefore I will now
proceed to those other particulars, wherewith I not long since said, that I
intended to close up this Section; and I might on this occasion subjoyn many
things, but partly haste, and partly other considerations will confine me to
those, that relate to the effects of Cold upon the Air in a more general way.

11. And first, we will observe, that Cold may hinder in an almost incredible
measure, the warming operation of the Sun upon the Air, not only in the hottest
part of the Day (for that may sometimes happen, even in our Climate) but at
several times of the Day, even in the heat of Summer.

12. I remember I once accidentally met with an intelligent and sober
Gentleman, who had several times sailed upon the frigid Zone, and though an
intervening accident separated us so suddenly, that I had not opportunity to
obtain from him the resolution of above two or three questions; yet this I
learned of him belonging to our present purpose, That by the help of a Journal
he kept, he called to mind, that upon the coast of Greenland he had observed it
to snow all Midsummer night, which affirmation of so credible a person,
imboldens me to add some other relations, which I should else have scrupled at.

13. Mr. Logan an English Merchant, that Wintered at Pecora, one of the
Northern Towns of Muscovy, relates, that being there at a great Salmonfishing,
there happened about the close of August (which in many Countries is wont to be
the hottest time of all the year) so strong a Frost, which lasted till the
fourth day, That the Purchase lib. 4. page 542.
Ozera was frozen over, and the Ice driving in the River to and again, broke
all the Nets, so that they got no Salmon, no not so much as for their own
Victuals.

14. Captain G. Weymouth mentions, that in July, though he was not near the
Latitude of Nova Zembla, much less of Greenland, yet sailing in a thick fog,
when by reason of the darkness, it occasioned, he thought good to take Purchase
page 811.
in some of his sails, when his men came to hand them, they found their Sails,
Ropes, and Tacklings so hard frozen, that it did (says he) seem very strange
unto us, being in the chiefest time of Summer. These voyages are extant in
Purchase lib. 1. cap. 13. and this passage is in page 560.


15. In the fifth Voyage of the English to Cherry Island, which lies betwixt
74. and 75. degrees of Latitude, they observed, that the wind being at
North-east upon the 24. of July, It freez'd so hard, that the Ice did hang on
their (...). And in the seventh Voyage (which was made three years after) to
the same Island, they mention, that on the 14. of July the wind being Purchase
page 564.
Northerly, they had both snow and frost.

16. The next thing that we shall take notice of, is the degree of Cold, which
the Efficient causes of that Quality, whatever they be, are able to produce in
the air; but of this we must not here treat indefinitely, the strange effects
of cold upon other bodies being most of them produced by the intervention of
the cold first diffused in the Air, and those are treated of in a distinct
Section, wherefore we shall now give two or three instances of the sudden
operations of the Cold harbored in the Air.

The formerly mentioned English Ambassador into Russia, Dr. Fletcher, gives us
two instances very memorable to our present purpose. When Purchase page 415.
you pass (says he) out of a warm Room into a Cold, you will sensibly feel your
breath to wax stark, and even stifling with the cold, as you draw it in and
out. So powerfully and nimbly does the intensely refrigerated Air work upon the
Organs of respiration.

[And whereas a very credible person, now chief Physician to the Russian
Emperor, being asked by me concerning the truth of what is reported, sometimes
to happen at Musco, and is reputed the eminentest proof that is readily
observable of the extreme coldness of the air, assured me, that he himself saw
the water thrown up into the air, fall down actually congealed into ice: Dr.
Fletcher confirms this Report. For] our Ambassador also says, That the
sharpness of the Air you may judge of by this, for Purchase page 414.
that water dropped down, or cast up into the Air, congealed into Ice before it
come to ground. And I remember, that inquiring about the probability of such
Relations, he answered me, That being at the famous Seige of Smolensko in
Russia, he observed it to be so extremely cold in the fields, that his Spittle
would freez in falling betwixt his mouth and the ground, and that if he spit
against a Tree, or a piece of wood, it would not stick, but fall to the foot of
it.

17. Among the Phenomenon of Cold, relating to the air, I endeavored to
observe, whether upon the change of the Weather, from warm or mild, to cold and
frosty, there would appear any difference of the weight of the Atmosphere by
its being plentifully furnished with a new stock of such frigorifick Corpuscles
as several of the modern Philosophers ascribe its coldness to, but though I
several times observed by comparing a good Barometer (and sometimes also
unsealed Weather-glasses furnished one with a tincted Liquor, and the other
with Quicksilver) with a good sealed Weather-glass, furnished with pure spirit
of Wine, that upon the coming in of clear and frosty weather, the Atmosphere
would very early appear sensibly heavier then before, and continue so, as long
as the cold and clear weather lasted; yet by reason of some considerations and
Trials, that breed some scruple in me, I refer the matter to more frequent and
lasting observations, then I yet have been able to make, in which it will
concern those that have a mind to prosecute such Trials, not only to consider,
whether or no the increased gravity of the Atmosphere may not proceed from some
other Cause, then the coming of frigorifick Atoms into the Air; but to have a
special care, that their Barascopes be more carefully freed from the Air, that
is wont to lurk in Quick silver it self, as well as other Liquors, then those
in the making of the Torricellian Experiment Tubes usually are, least that Air
getting up into the deserted part of the Tube, do by its expansion and
contraction, obtain an unsuspected interest in the rising and falling of the
subjacent Mercurial Cylinder, and so impose upon them.

18. Another Effect that the Cold especially in Northern Countries has
oftentimes upon the Atmosphere, is, the making the Air more or less clear then
usually it is. For in the Northern Voyages, the Seamen frequently complain of
thick and lasting Fogs, whose causes I shall not now consider, but some help to
guess at them may be given by what we are about to add, namely, that it very
frequently happens on the contrary, That when the cold is very intense, the air
grows much clearer then at other times, probably because the Cold by condensing
precipitates the vapors, that thicken the air, and by freezing the surface of
the earth, keeps in the steams, that would else arise to thicken the air. Not
to dispute, (...) it may not also somewhat repress the vapors, that would be
afforded by the water it self, since some of our Navigators observe, that even
when it was not cold enough to freez the surface of the Sea, it would so far
chill and infrigidate it, that the snow would lie on it without melting.

19. I remember a Swedish extraordinary Ambassador, and a very knowing person,
whom I had the honor to be particularly acquainted with, would say, when he
saw a frosty day accompanied with great clearness, that it then looked like a
Swedish winter, where when once the frosty weather is settled, the sky is wont
for a very long time to be very serene and (...), and here in England we
usually observe the sharpest frosty nights to be the clearest. But to confirm
our Observation by a very remarkable instance, I shall borrow it (...) a
Navigator very curious of Celestial Observations, which circumstance I mention
to bring the greater credit to the following observation of Captain James,
which in his Journal is thus delivered: The thirtieth and one Page 62.
and thirtieth of January, there appeared in the beginning of the night more
Stars in the Firmanent, then ever I had before seen by two thirds. I could see
the Cloud in Cancer full of small Stars.

20. To determine what effect the coldness of the air may have upon the
Refractions of the Luminaries and other Stars, I look upon as a work of no
small difficulty, and that would require much consideration as well as time,
wherefore I shall only add two or three narratives, supplied me by Navigators,
without adding at present any thing to the matters of fact.

21. The first is that famous Observation of the Dutch in Nova Zembla, who take
great pains to evince by several circumstances, some of them highly probable,
that they were not mistaken in their account of time, according to which they
concluded, that they saw the Sun, whom they had lost sight of eleven weeks
before, about fourteen days sooner then he ought to have appeared to them,
which difference has been, for ought I know to the contrary, by all that have
taken notice of it, ascribed to the strangely great Refraction in that Gelid
and Northern air.

22. And as for that other extremely cold Country, where Captain James
wintered, it appears by his Journal, that he there made diverse Celestial, and
other observations, which gave him opportunity to take notice of the
Refraction, and he seems to complain, that he found it very great, though among
the particulars he takes notice of, there are some that seem not very strange,
nor are there any that are near so wonderful, as that newly mentioned of the
Hollanders in Nova Zembla, however in regard of the extreme coldness of the
Winter air in Charleton Island, it may be worth while to take notice of the
following passages out of his Journal, since they may at least help us to
conjecture what is not to be expected in reference to Refractions from the
coldness of the air as such. The 21. Page 61.
of January (says he) I observed the (...) what exactness I could ( it being
very clear Sunshine weather) which I found to be 51. 52. This difference is by
reason that here is a great Refraction. Which last clause is very obscure,
unless it refers, as one may guess it does, to what he had elsewhere said, That
his first coming to the Island, he took the Latitude with two Quadrants, Page
46.
and found it to be inst 52. degrees, without any minutes. Elsewhere; my (...)
Page 64.
(says he) by these glasses I compared to the Stars coming to the Meridian. By
this means we found the Sun to rise twenty minutes before it should, and in the
evening to remain above the horizon twenty minutes (or thereabouts) longer then
it should. And all this by reason of the Refraction.

And in another place, March the 15. This evening (says he) the moon Page 66.
rose in a very long oval along the Horizon.

I shall add one passage more out of our Author, concerning Refractions, not
only because it may bear Testimony to some relations of the like kind, that I
have mentioned in another Treatise; but because it is concluded with an
observation, that (if there be nothing of mistake in it) is odd enough. I had
often (says he) observed Page 69.
the difference betwixt clear weather, and misty Refractious weather in this
manner. From a little Hill, which was near adjoining to our house, in the
clearest weather, when the Sun shone, with all the purity of Air that I could
conceive, we could not see a little Istand, which bare of us south south-east
some four leagues of; but if the weather were misty ( as aforesaid) then we
could often see it from the lowest place.

23. Hitherto I have treated of the Temperature of the Air in general, and
though the past Discourse have been prolix enough, yet possibly I may have no
fewer things to say, if I would at present fall upon the particular
consideration of the three Regions into which the Air is wont to be
distinguished. For I confess I am not altogether without scruples, both as to
the Number, and as to the Limits, and as to the Qualities assigned to these
Aerial Regions. But (as I have partly declared in another A Skeptical
Disquisition of Antiperistasis.
Tract) though I had time to enter upon so intricate a Disquisition, yet till I
have an opportunity to consult some other papers, I know not whether what I
have noted touching these difficulties, may not more properly belong to another
Treatise, then this of Cold.

24. Having thus dispatched the few Experiments I can meet with among my
papers, concerning the Coldness of the Air, I now proceed to subjoyn some
observations, that have occurred to me in the writings or verbal Relations of
Navigators and Travelers about that subject. But in regard, that the greatest
part of the Phenomenon of Cold, which nature of her own accord presents us
with, seem to be produced, either mediately or immediately by the Air, we
intend not here to treat of the coldness of the air in the largest sense, but
only to take notice of some of the choicer instances, that seem to belong to
our present Argument. And these we shall annex, either as Promiscuous
Observations at the Close of this Section, or as Illustrations or proofs of the
three following Observations.

I. The first I shall propose in these terms, that the greater or lesser
coldness of the Air in several Climates and Countries, is nothing near so
regularly proportionate to their respective distances from the Pole, or their
vicinity to the Equator, as men are wont to presume.

This puts me in mind of what I have formerly, either heard from a skilful man,
or observed my self about the difference betwixt places of the same latitude in
the Northern and Southern Hemisphere; namely, That of places equally distant
the one from the Northern, the other from the Southern Pole, the latter are
generally much colder then the former. And as I remember, I long since noted
some things to this purpose; but being not at present able to recover them, I
shall propose this only, as that which may deserve an inquiry, being not yet
satisfied, but that in the Examples I had taken notice of, some accidental and
concurrent causes may have occasioned the greater coldness observed in the
places seated on the other side of the Line; as on this side of it, the like
causes may much vary the coldness of differing places of equal latitudes, as we
are now going to show by the following testimonies.

1. How excessive a Cold reigns at Musco and thereabouts in the Winter time,
when many men lose their noses or their toes, and some their lives by the
extremity of the cold, we have several times occasion to take notice of in this
Treatise. And yet at Edinburgh, which I find some of our modern Navigators to
place more Northerly by above a degree, there, I say, and in the neighboring
places, the air is known to be temperate enough, and the cold very tolerable:
And it is affirmed, that the snow very rarely lies any long time on the ground
after it is fallen.

2. In the Voyage made for discoveries northward, by Mr. Poole, in the year
1610. I find this passage, I was Page 702.
certifi'd, that all the Ponds and Lakes were unfrozen, they being fresh water,
which puts me in hope of a mild Summer here, after so sharp a beginning, as
I have had, and my opinion is such ( and I assure my self it is so) that a
passage may be as soon attained this way by the Pole, as any unknown way
whatsoever, by reason the Sun does give a great heat in this Climate; and the
Ice ( near the 79. degree) I mean that that freezeth here, is nothing so huge
as I have seen in 73. degrees.

To this agrees the testimony of the Hollanders in their first Voyage to Nova
Zembla, in which the writer of it, Gerat de Veer, speaks thus, We have Page
473. 474.
assuredly found, that the only and most hinderance to our Voyage, was the Ice,
that we found about Nova Zembla, under 73, 74, 75, and 76. degrees, and not so
much upon the Sea, between both the lands, whereby it appears, that not the
nearness of the North Pole, but the Ice that comes in and out from the
Tartarian Sea about Nova Zembla, caused (...) to feel the greatest cold.
Therefore in regard, that the nearness of the Pole was not the cause of the
great cold that we felt, etc. And a little after, -- It is true (says he) that
in the Country lying under 80. degrees (which we esteem to be Greenland) there
is both leaves and grass to be seen, wherein such beasts, as feed of leaves and
grass, as Hearts, Hinds, and such like beasts, live, whereas to the contrary in
Nova Zembla, there grows neither leaves nor grass, and there are no beasts
there, but such as eat flesh, as Bears and Foxes, etc. although Nova Zembla
lies 4, 5, and 6. degrees more Southerly from the Pole, then the other land
aforesaid.

And to this purpose I remember what is related by the learned Josephus Acosta
lib. 2. cap. 9. page 101.
Acosta, concerning the Heats and Colds in the Torrid Zone, and elsewhere: When
I passed (says he) to the Indies, I will tell what chanced unto me, having read
what Poets and Philosophers write of the burning Zone, I persuaded myself, that
coming to the Aequinoctial, I should not endure the violent heat, but it fell
out otherwise, for when I passed, which was when the (...) was there for
Zenith, being entered into Aries, in the month of March I felt so great a
cold, as I was forced to go into the Sun to warm me: what could I else do then
but laugh at Aristotle's Meteors, and his Philosophy, seeing that in that place,
and at that season, when as all should be scorched with heat, according to his
rules, (...) and all my companions were a cold? in truth there is no Region in
the world more pleasant and temperate, then under the Equinoctial, although it
be not in all parts of an equal temperature, but have great diversities. The
burning Zone in some parts is very temperate, as in Quitto, and on the plains
of Peru, in some parts very cold, as at Potosi, and in some veryhot, as in
Ethiopia, Brasile, and the Molucques. And within two Chapters after, he
discourses more largely of some of these Particulars. And again Chapter the 12.
You may continually (says he) see upon the tops of these Page 109.
mountains snow, hail, and frozen waters, and the cold so bitter, as the grass
is all withered, so as the men and beasts, which pass that way, are benumbed
with cold. This, as I have said, is in the burning Zone, and it happens most
commonly when they have the Sun for Zenith.

These Testimonies of a learned man, that writes upon his own knowledge, I
thought it worth producing, to make it probable, that as in several Countries
the heat does not always answer to the nearness of places to the Line, so in
Northern Regions the cold may not always be proportionate to their vicinity to
the Pole. In Mr. Hudsons second voyage written by himself, he mentions that
above 71. degrees, though they were much pestered with ice, about the end of
June, that day (when this Purchase page 578.
happened) was calm, clear, and hot weather, adding of the next day also, that it
was calm, hot, and fair weather. And Acosta tells us, that we see these
differences, not only on the land, but also on the Sea: there are some Seas
where they feel great heat, as the report of that of Mazambigus, and Ormus in
the east, and of the Sea of Panama in the west. There are other Seas in the
same degree of height very cold, as that of Peru, in the which we were a cold,
when we first sailed it, which was in March, when the Sun was directly over us.
In truth on this continent, (...) the Land and Sea are of one sort, we cannot
imagine any other cause of this so great a (...), but the quality of the wind
that (...) refresh them.

But to multiply no more instances, we shall conclude with this one, That
Charleton Island, where Captain James wintered (and of which we so often have
occasion to make mention in our History) though it seems by the effects to be a
colder Region, then even the Country about Musco, and perhaps as cold as Nova
Zembla it See James voyage, page 61. and 81. and elsewhere.
self; yet Captain James, who had several times occasion to take the latitude
of it, and assigns it the same Elevation, and consequently, the same Distance
from the Pole with Cambridge, whose latitude he reckons to be 51. degrees
besides minutes, and whose air is very well known to be very temperate. And it
is remarkable, that though this place, whose latitude is short of 52. degrees,
was found uninhabitable by reason of Purchase page 569.
the cold, yet not only in Mr. Hudsons Voyage, the writers admonish the Readers
to take notice, That although they ran along near the shore, they found
Josephus Acosta lib. 2. page 111, 112.
no great cold, which made them think, that if they had been on shore the place
is temperate: And yet in this place they reckon themselves to have reached the
78. degree of latitude: And our recenter Navigations inform us, that several
parts of Greenland, to which this newly mentioned coast belonged, are well
enough inhabited: And one of our English Navigators assures us, that the true
height of Pustozera in Russia is no less then 68. degrees and a half, if not
more, and yet that is a town not only well inhabited, but of great trade; but
in Hudsons voyage I find what is more strange, That under the 81. degree of
latitude, beyond which they discovered land very far off, but (beyond which
none is thought to have actually sailed toward the Pole) they found it during
the whole day clear weather, with little wind, Purchase page 571.
and reasonable warm. And beyond 80. degrees, they not only found a stream or
two of fresh water, but found it hot on the shore, and drank water to cool
their thirst, which they also commended.

II. The next observable I am to propose about the coldness of the Air, is
this, That the degrees both of Heat and Cold in the air may be much greater in
the same climate, and the same place, at several seasons of the year, or even
at several times of the same day, then most men would believe.

For the proof of this Proposition, we shall subjoyn two sorts of Testimonies,
of Travelers, and Navigators, the former showing, that in Countries, where it
is very cold in Winter, it may (...) be hot in Summer; and the latter
manifesting, that even on the same day, as well as in the same place, the heat
and cold, that succeed one another, may be one of them sensible, though the
other were extreme, or may perhaps be both of them considerable.

To make this good, we shall produce the following Testimonies.

1. Dr. Giles Fletcher, English Ambassador to the Muscovian Emperor, in his
Treatise of Russia, and the adjoining Regions, has this memorable passage to
our present purpose. The whole Country (says he) differs very much from it
self, by reason of the year, so that a man would (...) to see the great Page
414.
alteration, and difference betwixt the Winters and Summers in Russia. The
whole Country in the Winter lies under snow, which falls continually, and
is sometime of a yard or two thick, but greater toward the North; the Rivers,
and other waters are all frozen up, a yard or more thick, how swift or broad
soever they be, and this continues commonly for five months, to wit, from the
beginning of November, till toward the end of March; what time the snow
begins to melt, so that it would breed a frost in a man to look abroad at
that time, and see the Winters face of that Country. And a little after he
adds: And yet in the Summer time you shall see such a new hew Purchase page 415.
and face of a Country, the woods (which for the most part are all of Fir and
Birch) so fresh, and so sweet; the Pastures and Meadows so green, and well
grown (and that upon the sudden) such variety of flowers, such noise of Birds
(especially of Nightingals, that seem to be more loud, and of a more variable
note, then in other Countries) that a man shall not lightly travel in a more
pleasant Country. And some lines after, As the Winter exceeds in cold, so
the Summer inclines to (...) much heat, especially in the (...) of June, July,
and August, being much warmer (...) the Summer Air in England.

Almost like things have been much more recently affirmed by the learned
Olearius, Secretary to the Voyage de Moscovie and de Perse, (...) 3. p m. 117,
118, 119.
Duke of Holstein's Embassy into Russia, and now Bibliothecarius to the present
Prince of Holstein. And an ac quaintance of mine, who, after having lived in
Italy, passed a Summer in Russia, assured me, that he scarce in Italy did ever
eat better Melons, then some which he had eaten at Musco, of a strange bigness,
which bears witness to that almost incredible Relation of Olearius, who (after
having much praised their goodness at Musco) affirms, that he there met with
Melons of 40. pound weight, of (...) he there teaches Page 119.
the Culture.

At the royal City of China, Pequin.
which scarce exceeding the 42. degrees of latitude, one would expect, that as
the Summer is very warm, so the Winter should be very mild, as it is observed
to be in diverse places of Spain, Italy, and Greece, that have the same, or a
more Northern latitude: and yet the learned Jesuit Martinius, who lived many
years in China, assures us, that usually for four whole months together, all
the Rivers are so hard frozen, that not only all Ships are closed, and kept
immovable by the Ice, but that also horses, wagons, and even the heaviest
carriages do securely pass over the Ice. Concerning which, he adds this strange
circumstance, that it is usually made in one day, though to its dissolution it
require many.

Prosper Alpinus in his learned Lib. 1. cap. 6.
Treatise de medicina Aegyptiorum, tells us, that at Grand Cayro, where he
practiced Physic, though that famous Metropolis of Egypt be distant but six
degrees from the Tropic of Cancer, yet the Air, which in Summer is almost
insupportably hot, in Winter is sometimes very considerably cold; adding, that
there is not any sort of Diseases that proceed (as he is pleased to speak) from
distillations from the head, to which the people are not there subject: To
these instances we shall annex but two more, but those remarkable ones.

The first is mentioned by Purchase, as communicated to him by an eye witness,
in these words. This I thought good at our parting to advertise thee, That Mr.
Hebey has affirmed to me, touching the diversity of weather in Greenland, that
one day it has been so cold (the wind blowing out of some quarter) that they
could scarce handle the frozen Sails; another day so hot, that the pitch melted
of the Ship, so that hardly they could keep their Clothes from pollution: yea,
he has seen at midnight Tobacco lighted or fired by the Sun beams with a
glass. The other example I am to produce, is no less remarkable; namely, that
in the often mentioned Charleton Island, where that winter was as sharp,
perhaps as any known place of the habitable world, Captain James his Journal
gives us this account of the weather: In June the sixteenth (says Page 81.
he) was wondrous hot, with some thunder and lightning, so that our men did go
into the Ponds ashore to swim, and cool themselves, yet was the water very cold
still. Here had lately appeared diverse sorts of Flies, as Butterflies,
Butchersflies, Horse-flies, and such an infinite abundance of blood-thirsty
Muskitoes, thatwewere more tormented with them, then ever we were with the cold
weather. These (I think) lie dead in the old rotten wood all the Winter, and in
Summer they revive again. Here be likewise infinite companies of Ants, and
Frogs in the Ponds upon the land.

Thus we see, what difference there may be in the same place, betwixt the
temperature of the Air in Winter, and Summer. We shall now add what may appear
more strange, that there may be very great disparities in the heat and coldness
of the air, not only in the same place, but within the compass of the same day.

The lately mentioned Alpinus, affords me an example to this purpose, in Egypt
its self, where one would expect a much more uniform heat. Hyeme (says he)
nocturnus aer admodum frigidus observatur, qui ob orto Page 9.
sole paulo post, parum incalescit, in meridieque plurimum: adveniente vere
nocte rursum infrigidum permutatur, ita, ut aer ille valde inaequalis sit
dicendus, ab ipsiusque illa inaequalitate plurimi morbi originem ducunt atque
generantur, qui eo tempore per urbem vagantur.

The learned Olearius relating how he traveled with the Ambassadors, whose
Secretary he was, over a branch of mount Taurus, takes notice, that it being
after the middle of June, the air of that hot region of Persia obliged them
only to travel by night, and yet the nocturnal cold was so great, that they
were all benumbed with it, insomuch, that they were hardly able to alight from
their Horses; adding, that the sudden change from an extreme cold, to the
excessive heat, they were again exposed to the next day, cast no less then 15.
of their company into strong burning fevers at once. (Which brought into my
mind the complaint of good Jacob, who, though he lived in an Eastern Country,
when he had said, that in the day the drought consumed him, adds, and the frost
by night.)

And the same curious traveller mentions, that in another Country in Persia,
called Faclu, notwithstanding the heat of the region (at the end of March, at
which time they passed that way) they saw and felt in one night, which they
were forced to pass without their tents, both lightning, and thunders, and
winds, and rain, and snow, and ice.

We will conclude with a remarkable instance, afforded us by the Journal of the
English that wintred at Charleton Island. The season here in this Climate (says
the often quoted Author of the voyage) is most unnatural; for in the day time
it will be extreme hot, yea, not indurable in the Sun, which is, by reason that
it is a sandy Country. In the night again, it will freez an inch thick in the
Ponds, and in the Tubs about, and in our house, and all this toward the latter
end of June.

III. The third observable I intended to take notice of, about the Coldness of
the Air, may be comprised in this Proposition, That in many places the
Temperature of the Air, as to Cold and Heat, seems not to depend so much upon
the Elevation of the Pole, as upon the Nature and Circumstances of the winds
that blow there.

It would require a very long Discourse, to treat in this place of Winds in
general, and much more to examine the several causes of winds, that are
assigned by several Authors, and therefore when I have once given this
intimation, that diverse of these opinions may be more easily reconciled, then
the maintainers of them seem to have thought, to the Truth, if not to one
another: The causes that may produce wind, being so various, that many of those
proposed, may each of them in some cases be true, though none of them in all
cases be sufficient: having hinted this, I say, it may suffice on this
occasion, to subjoyn three or four observations, to prove and illustrate the
matter of fact delivered in the Proposition.

And first, it is a known Observation in these parts of the world, that
Northerly and Northeasterly winds, do at all times of the year bring cold along
with them, and commonly if it be Winter, Frost. And here in England I have
sometimes wondered at the power of the winds, to bring not only sudden Frosts,
but sudden Thaws, when the frost was expected to be settled, and durable, which
yet seems to hold commonly, but not without exception. For during one of the
considerablest Fits of Frost and Snow, that I have taken notice of in England,
I remember, that I observed (not without some The weather was snowy and foggy,
freezing our rigging, and making every thing so slippery, that a man can scarce
stand. And all this with the wind Southerly, says Captain James (page 104.) in
his Journal 26. of August.
wonder) that the Wind was many days Southerly, unless it may be said, That
this Southerly Wind was but the Return of a stream of Northerly Wind, which had
blown for many days before, and might by some obstacles, and agents, not here
to be inquired after, be made to wheel about, or recoyl hither, before it had
lost the greatest portion of the refrigerating Corpuscles it consisted of
before.

The formerly mentioned Prosper Alpinus, attributes strange things to the
Northerly wind, that blows in Egypt, as to the cooling and refreshing the Air,
in spite of the violent (...), that would otherwise be (...). (And many in
Egypt Ab his ventis aerem alteratum, esse causam (...) pestis illa dissolvatur,
multi illorum Affirmant. Quod etiam non videtur penitus a veritate alienu^,
quando id multis etiam rationibus nobis persuaderi possit, in primisque, etc.
Prosp. Alpin. lib. 1. De medicina Egypt. cap. 18.
ascribe to the Aetesian Winds, that almost miraculous ceasing of the Plague at
Grand Cairo, of which we elsewhere speak.) Dominatur autem aer Ibid. lib. 1.
cap. 6.
(says he) sum calidus, ipsius caeli, ut dictum est, ratione, quod haec
civitas (...) Tropico Cancri tantum 6. gradibus distet. Qua brevi
inter-capedine dum sol ad illum accedit Tropicum, and illorum Zenith fit
propinquior, aer ille valde incalescit, and nisi Aetesiae venti tunc a
septentrione spirarent, vehementissimus, and qui vix a nostris perferri possit,
caloris aestus sentiretur.

Advenae nostri iis provenientibus ad Ibid. lib. 1. cap. 7. page 11.
subterranea loca confugiunt, in quibus morantur quousque ille ventorum ardor
residerit atque cessaverit. Conjunxit haec incommoda Deus Optimus, cum aliis
quibusdam bonis, nam ubi calidissimi illi venti conticuere, statim a
Septentrione flare alii incipiunt, qui subitaneum inflammatis atque laxatis
corporibus solatium praestant. Si enim illi diu perseveraverint, nemo in ea
regione vivere possit.

Whence winds should have this power to change the Constitution of the Air, and
especially to bring cold along with them, is not so easy to be determined.
Indeed the other Qualities, and even the heat, that is observable in winds, may
for the most part be probably enough derived from the Qualities of the places,
by which they pass. Of this we have already given an example or two in the
passages lately mentioned. And it may be further confirmed by what Acosta says,
that he himself saw in some parts of the Indies: namely, That the Iron Grates
were so rusted and Josephus Acosta, lib. 3. cap. 9.
consumed by a peculiar wind, that pressing the metal between your fingers, it
would be dissolved, and crumbled, as if it had been Hay or (...) Straw. And
this Learned Traveller, who seems to have taken peculiar notice of the winds,
affords us in diverse places of his Book several Examples to confirm what we
were saying (though he take not the nature of the regions, along which the wind
blows, to be alone in all cases a sufficient Cause of their Qualities) of which
yet we shall now mention but these two memorable passages. In a small distance
Lib. 3. cap. 2. p. 120.
(says he) you shall see in one wind many diversities. For example, the Solanus
or Eastern wind is commonly hot and troublesome in Spain; and in Murria, it is
the coldest and healthfullest that is, for that it passes by the Orchards, and
that large Champiane which we see very fresh. In Carthagene, which is not far
from thence, the same wind is troublesome, and unwholesome. The Meridi^nal
(which they of the Ocean call South, and those of the Mediterranean Sea, Mezo
Giorno) commonly is rainy, and boisterous, and in the same City, whereof I
speak, it is wholesome and pleasant. And in his Description of Peru, speaking of
the South and South-west, Lib. 3. cap.
he affirms, that this wind yet in this region is mavelous pleasing.

But though, as we were saying, many other Qualities of winds may be deduced
from the Nature and Condition of the places, by which they pass: And though the
heat also, which Prosper Alpinus (as we lately took notice) attributes to the
Southerly winds, that blow in Egypt, may be probably ascribed to the heated
Exhalations and vapors they bring from the Southern and parched Regions they
blow over; yet whence the great coldness of Northern and Easterly winds should
come, may be scrupled at by many of the modern Philosophers, who with diverse
Cartesians will not admit, that there are any Corpuscles of Cold.

And possibly I could, about these matters, propose some other difficulties,
not so easy to be resolved. But not being now to discuss the Hypothesis about
Cold, I think it will be more proper in this place, instead of entering upon
disputes and Speculations, to subjoyn an Experiment that I made, to give some
light about this matter.

Considering then that I had not met with any Trial of the Nature of that I am
about to mention, and that such a Trial might possibly prove Luciferous, I
caused a pretty large pair of ordinary Bellows to be kept a good while in the
Room, where the Experiment was to be made, that it might receive the
Temperature of the Air in that Chamber, then placing upon a board, one of those
flat Bottomed Weather-glasses, that I elsewhere describe to contain a movable
drop of pendulous water, by blowing at several times with intermissions upon
the bubble or lower end of the Weather-glass, though the wind blown against my
hand, were, as to sense, very manifestly cold, yet it did not cool the air
included in the Bubble, but rather a little warmed it, as appeared by a small,
but sensible, ascension of the pendulous drop each time, that, after some
interposed rest, the lower part of the glass was blown upon, which seemed to
proceed from some small alteration toward warmth, that the air received by its
stay (though short) in the Bellows, as seemed deducible from hence, that if by
closely covering the Clack, the matter were so ordered, that the Air, that
should come into the Bellows, must come in all at the nose; if this nose being
held very near the bubble of the Weather-glass, the Air were, by opening the
Bellows, suddenly drawn in, that stream of air or wind coming from a part of
the window, where the air was a little cooler, then that which was wont to come
out of the Bellows, would not, as the other, make the pendulous drop rise, but
rather the contrary.

This done, we proceeded to show by Experiment, That though a wind were
nothing, but a stream of Air, yet in its passage it might acquire a
considerable coldness distinct from that which it has by virtue of its motion,
though upon the score of that, we see that air moved by a fan, (or as in our
newly mentioned Trial) by a pair of Bellows, might to our touch, feel Cold, nor
did we forbear to expect a good event of our Trial, upon the doubt that may be
raised, whether there be frigorifick Corpuscles or no: For whatever become of
that question, I thought I might expect, that whether or no Ice emit
Corpuscles, that are universally frigorifick, yet the air being, either by
them, or upon what account soever, highly refrigerated, the Corpuscles that
compose this cold Air, being most of them driven on before it, by the wind that
meets them in its way, will, in a sense, prove frigorifick, in regard of a less
cold body, which they shall happen to be blown upon, and accordingly, having
provided a ridge Tyle inverted, and half filled the Cavity, which looked
upwards, with a mixture of ice and salt, and having likewise put the Iron pipe
of the Bellows upon that mixture, and then covered it with more of the same,
that so the Pipe being surrounded, as far as conveniently it could be, with ice
and salt, the air contained in it, might thereby be highly refrigerated, I
found, that blowing wind out of the Bellows upon my hand, that wind felt much
more cold, then that which had been before blown upon myhand, out of the same
Bellows, before the frigefactive mixture was applied to it. But for fear my
sense of feeling should deceive me, I caused a Weather-glass, made after the
common manner, but with a more slender pipe, to be so placed, that the nose of
the Bellows (which together with the Tyle and Ice, was upheld with a frame) lay
in a level with the bubble of the Thermometer, and then blowing the
refrigerated air of the Bellows npon the globular part of the glass, I saw the
water in the Cylindrical part and shank, manifestly ascend, as it was wont to
do upon the refrigeration of the included air: And as this Ascension of the
liquor continued, during three or four blasts of the Bellows, so upon the
cessation of the artificial wind, the water subsided by degrees again, till by
fresh blasts it was made to ascend. Lastly, having repeated this Experiment, we
thought fit to try, how much the air, refrigerated immediately by the
frigorisick mixture, would produce a colder wind then the former, and
accordingly, drawing back the nose of the Bellows, that the air, that should be
blown out, might pass along the Cavity left in the frigorisick mixture by the
Iron pipe (of the Bellows) which we had withdrawn, the wind was manifestly more
cold, then before, and had a greater operation on the Weather-glass, it was
blown upon.

This Experiment, if carried on, and prosecuted, may possibly prove more
Luciferous; but I will not take upon me here to determine, whether all cold
winds must be necessarily made so, by frigorifick Corpuscles properly so
called, since I have sometimes suspected, that some winds may be cold, only by
consisting of, or driving before them, those higher parts of the Air, that, by
reason of the languid Reflection of the Sun beams, in that upper (or perhaps
Arctick) region of the Air, are for the most part very cold. For it may be
observed, that Rains oftentimes very much and suddenly refrigerate the lower
Air, when no wind, but what the clouds and rain make, accompanies them, as if
they brought down store of cold air with them from that uper Region; which
Acosta, and one I conversed with, that visited far higher mountains, then the
Alps, affirm to be in some places (for I am not satisfied, that it is so every
where) exceedingly cold, both in hot Climates, and in hot seasons of the year.
And I observe, that the Hollanders do, in more places then one or two, mention
the Northerly and North-easterly winds, to be those, that brought them the
prodigious colds they met with, though Nova Zembla, where they were exposed to
them, be so Northwards, that it lies within 16. or 17. degrees of the Pole it
self. This being a bare suspicion, it may suffice to have touched it. But I
shall subjoyn two or three instances on the occasion of our proposition,
concerning the influence of the winds upon the air, and to show more
particularly, That even cold winds receive not always their Qualities, so much
from the Quarter whence they blow, as from the Regions over which they blow: I
shall therefore begin with what is delivered by Mr. Wood, in his New Englands
prospect. Whereas in England Part 1. cap. 2.
(says he) most of the cold winds and weathers come from the Sea; and those
situations, are counted most unwholesome, that are near the Seacoast, in that
Country it is not so, but otherwise. And having added, as his reason, that the
North-east wind, coming from the Sea, produces warm weather, melting the snow,
and thawing the ground; he subjoyns, only the North-west wind coming over the
Land, is the cause of extreme cold weather, being always accompanied with deep
snows, and bitter frosts, etc. To which passages we shall add only one out of
Captain James, as being considerable to our present purpose. The winds (says
he) since we came hither, Captain James's voyage, page 52, 53.
have been very variable and unconstant; and till within this fortnight, the
Southerly wind was coldest. The reason I conceive to be, for that it did blow
from the main Land, which was all covered with snow, and for that the North
winds came out of the great Bay, which hitherto was open.

Title XIX. Of the strange Effects of Cold.
1. TO enumerate and prosecute all the several Effects of Cold, being the chief
work of the whole Book, it is not to be expected, that they should be
particularly treated of in this one Section of it, wherein I shall therefore
confine my self to mention only those Effects of Cold, that are not familiar,
but seem to have in them something of wonderful; nor must I take notice of All
them neither, least I should be guilty of useless Repetitions, but only of
them, which either are not at all, or are but incidentally or transiently
delivered in the foregoing Sections. Nor is it to be expected, that I should
(...) credit for the truth of every (...) the Relations I am about to (...).
For if they had not something of extraordinary, and consequently, that may
beget some Diffidence in wary men, they would not be proper for the title of
this Section, and most of them, that they may be fit to be placed here, must be
the Effects of such extreme degrees of Cold, that I cannot in this temperate
Climate of ours, examine the truth of them by my own Trials, so that all I can
do, is, to make choice of such Relations, as are almost all of them delivered
by the Relators, as upon their own Knowledge. And even this may perchance, not
only gratify and excite the Curiosity of some, who are pleased with no things
so much, as with those, that have somewhat in them of Prodigy, and (which is
more considerable) their Narratives may afford the Ingenious such strange
Phenomenon, that the Explication of them may serve, both to exercise their
wits, and try their Hypothesis.

2. It seems not necessary, in the marshalling these observations, to be
scrupulous about method, but yet to avoid confusion, we shall first mention the
Effects of Cold, as to those four great Bodies, of that part of the Sublunary
World we live in, that are commonly reputed Elements, and thence we will
proceed to take notice of the Effects of Cold upon some other inanimate Bodies,
and, for an instance of its operation on living Creatures, upon men.

3. Of the power of Cold, either to straiten the sphere of activity of fire, or
to hinder its wonted effects, the chief examples I have met with are recorded,
partly by the Dutch in Nova Zembla, and partly by Captain James, when he
wintered in Charleton Island. These Hollanders in one place speak thus; The
twentieth it was fair and still weather, the wind Easterly, then Purchase lib.
3. cap. 5. Sect. 2. page 495.
we washed our Sheets, but it was so cold, that when we had washed and wrung
them, they presently froze so stiff, that although we laid them by a great
fire, the side that laid next the fire thawed, but the other side was hard
frozen, etc. Elsewhere thus, We were in great fear, that if the extremity of
the Cold grew to be more and more, we should all dye there, with cold, for what
fire soever we made, it would not warm us. And because it were tedious to
transcribe all that their Journals afford us to our present purpose we will
conclude with this passage, Hereby we were so fast shut up into the House, as
if we had been prisoners, and it was so extreme Cold, that the fire almost cast
no heat, for as we put our feet to the fire, we burnt our hose before we could
feel the heat, so that we had work enough to do to patch our hose, and which is
more, if we had not sooner smelt then felt them, we should have burnt them ere
we had known it. Though Captain James wintred in a Country many degrees
remoter from the Pole, then Nova Zembla, yet in one place he gives us this
account of the colds power to restrain or oppose the action of fire. The Cooks
Tubs, wherein he did water Captain James 65.
his meat, standing about a yard from the fire, and which he did all day ply
with melted snow water, yet in the night season, while he slept but one watch,
would they be firm frozen to the very Bottom. And therefore was he fain to
water his meat in a Brass Kettle, close adjoining to the fire; and I have many
times both seen and felt, by putting my hand into it; that side which was next
the fire was very warm, and the other an inch frozen. I leave the rest to our
Cook, who will almost speak miracles of the Cold.

3. Thus far our Enlish Navigator, whose relation compared with those of the
Hollanders, make me not so much wonder, as I once did, that men should relate
to Marcus Polus, that there is a certain Plain in Tartary, situated between
some of the highest mountains in the World, where if fire Purchase lib 1. cap.
4. page 74.
be kindled, it is not so bright, nor so effectual to boil any thing, as in
other places. For so Purchase renders that passage; whence occasion has been
taken to impute to Marcus Polus, a writer not always half so fabulous, as many
think him, that he affirmed, that there was a Country in Tartary, where fire
could not be kindled.

4. And as for the other newly mentioned relations of Seamen and Travelers,
though to us, that live in England, they cannot but seem very strange; yet I am
kept from rejecting them as utterly incredible, by considering, that ice and
snow having before their Congelation been water, must in probability owe their
Coldness, to that which reigned in the Air: So that if in any place Nature has,
either so plentifully stocked the Air it self with frigorisick exspirations, or
other Corpuscles (if we will admit any such) or have upon any other account
rendered it as cold as it can make ice and snow to be even here amongst us, I
know not why the Northerness of the climate, and perhaps some saline
expirations from the Earth and Sea, may not there diffuse through the air a
cold superior to that, which by small Quantities of ice (or snow) and salt, can
at a small distance be produced here. And this cold is so intense, that by
pouring some water on a Joynt-stool, and placing on it a silver Tankard, or
other convenient vessel, we may, as experience has assured me, with beaten ice
(or snow) and salt, and a little water (which is added to hasten the solution
of the other) nimbly stirred together in the pot, make the mixture freez the
external water quite through the Tankard; and they may be by this way so hard
frozen together, as that by lifting up the pot, you may lift up the Joynt-stool
too, and that (which is the circumstance, for which I mention this) just by the
fire, which in this case is unable to hinder so difficult an operation of the
Cold.

5. Thus much of the effects of cold, in reference to fire. What the same
quality may perform upon Air, we shall say but little of in this place, because
we treat of those Phenomenon, partly in the foregoing Section of the coldness
of the Air, and partly in other places. Only we shall not here pretermit a
testimony of the learned Olearius, who, as an eye witness, confirms what we
elsewhere deliver of the high degree of cold, to which the Air may be brought.
For he tells us, That in Muscovy he experimentally found, that Olear. lib. 3. p
m. 117
which others left recorded in their writings, That ones spittle would be
congealed before it reached the ground, and that water would freez as it was
dropping down.

6. Of the effects of cold upon water, we shall not need to say much in this
place, since the two notablest of them being, the power cold has to congeal
water suddenly, and the force it has to turn vast quantities of it into sollid
ice. Of the former I have newly given, out of Olearius, an example as eminent
as almost any that is to be met with, and of the latter also, I have given
several instances in the Section, that treats of ice: Yet two or three notable
instances, which we do not elsewhere mention, 'twill not be improper to deliver
in this place.

7. The first declares, that notwithstanding the warmth of the inside of a man's
mouth, his spittle may be frozen even there. The 27. of September (they are the
words of Gerat Purchase page 491.
de Veer) it blew hard Northeast, and it froze so hard, that as we put a nail
into our mouths (as when men work Carpenters work they use to do) there would
Ice hang thereon, when we took it out again, and make the blood follow. The
like relation (if I misremember not) I have met with in a modern English
Navigator, and it is very little, if at all more strange, then what is affirmed
by Queen Elizabeth's Ambassador to the Russian Emperor: In the extremity of
winter (says Doctor Fletcher, speaking of Muscovia) if you hold a pewter Dish,
or Pot in your hand, or any other metal, except in some chamber, where their
warm Stoves be, your fingers will stick fast to it, and draw off the skin at
the parting.

8. The other instance I intended to mention, is this, that though Macrobius,
and other learned men, both ancient and modern, will not allow salt water to be
congealable; yet the Dutch at Nova Zembla relate, that even in the midst of
September (and a the Marginal note says, in a night) It froze two inches thick
in the salt water. Purchase page 491.


9. As to the effects of violent colds upon the Earth, what they would prove
upon pure and Elementary Earth (if any such there be) I can but conjecture; but
as for that impure or mingled Earth, which we commonly tread on, the effects of
extreme cold upon that, may be very notable. For Olearius relates, that in the
year 1634. the cold was so bitter at Musco, that in the great marketplace, he
saw the ground opened by it so, that there was made a cleft of many yards long,
and a foot broad. [And the present great Duke of Muscovies Physician being
asked by me concerning the truth of such relations, answered me, that he
himself had in those parts seen the ground reduced by the cold, to gape so
wide, that a child's head might well have been put into the cleft.]

10. It Is somewhat strange, that the violent heat of Summer, and the extreme
cold of Winter should both of them be able to produce in the ground the like
effects; but whether to make these gaping chinks, that we have been speaking
of, the surface of the ground exposed to the air, being first frozen, is
afterward broken by the expansive force of the moist earth underneath, to
which the cold at length pierces, and congealing it, makes it swell, and heave,
and so burst or cleave the hard and frozen crust of the ground, which cannot
sufficiently yield to it, whether this (I say) may produce the clefts we were
speaking of, or whether they must be derived from some other cause, not having
yet made the experiments, I thought upon, to clear the matter one way or other,
I do not as yet pretend to determine, but will rather subjoyn the second
observation I purposed to mention of a strange operation of Cold upon the
ground, and it is afforded us by the Dutch in their often quoted third voyage
to Nova Zembla: In one place of which they tell us, That when they had built
them a wooden house, and were going to Purchase. page 491.
shut themselves up in it, for the winter, they made a great fire, without the
house, therewith to thaw the ground, that they might so lay it, viz. the wood
about the house, that it might be the closer, but it was all lost labor, for
the earth was so hard, and frozen so deep into the ground, that they could not
thaw it, and it would have cost them too much wood, and therefore they were
forced to leave off that labor.

11. After what we have said about the strange effects of cold, in reference to
fire, air, water, and earth, we will now proceed to take notice of its effects
upon confessedly compounded Bodies, whether inanimate or living; but of the
former sort of mixed Bodies (I mean those that have not Life) it will not be
necessary to say much in this Section, in regard that we have in many other
places, upon several occasions had opportunities to mention already most of the
particulars that belong to that head. For we elsewhere take notice, that
violent Colds will freez Beer, Ale, Vinegre, Oil, common Wine, and even Sack
and Alegant themselves. We have likewise noted, that the Cold may have a
notable operation, upon Wood, Bricks, Stone, vessels of Glass, Earth, and even
Pewter, and Iron themselves, to which Bartholinus out of Janus Muncks Voyage to
Greenland, allows us to add vessels of Brass (though these are not immediately
broken by the Cold, but by the included Liquors which it dilates) and diverse
strange effects of Cold upon inanimate Bodies, which 'twere here troublesome to
recapitulate, may be met with dispersed in several places of the present
History. Wherefore having only intimated in general, that, though many plants
are preserved by a moderate cold, yet it has been observed, that most
Gardenplants are destroyed by excessive degrees of it, we will pass on to
consider the effects of Cold upon animals, and of the many observations, that
we have met with among Travelers, concerning this subject, we shall, to avoid
prolixity, deliver only the considerablest, and those that we find attested by
very credible Writers.

12. Captain James speaking of the last of the three differences he makes of
Cold (namely, that which he and his company felt in the woods) gives this
account of it; As for the last, it Captain James's voyage, 64.
would be so extreme, that it was not endurable; no clothes were proof against
it, no motion could resist it. It would moreover so freez the hair of our
Eyelids, that we could not see; and I verily believe, that it would have
stifled a man in a very few hours.

13. Olearius giving an account of the Air of Muscovy, and especially the
Capital City of it, The Cold (says he) is there so violent, that no Livre 3. p.
m. 117.
Furs can hinder it, but sometimes men's Noses, and Ears, Feet and Hands will be
frozen, and all fall off. He adds, that, in the year 1634. when he was there,
they could not go 50. paces without being benumbed with cold, and in danger of
losing some of their Limbs. And yet to add, that remarkable observation upon
the by, the same Author, near the same place, speaking of Musco, and the
neighboring Provinces distinguished from the rest of that vast Empire, says,
That the Air Livre 3. 116.
is good and healthy, so that there one scarce ever hears of the Plague, or any
other Epidemical diseases. And he adds, that for that reason, when in the year
1654. the Plague made havoc in that great City, the thing was very surprising,
nothing like it having been seen there in the memory of men.

14. Our already diverse times mentioned English Ambassador Dr. Fletcher,
speaking of the cold that sometimes happens in Russia, witnesses thus much of
it. Diverse (says he) not only that travel abroad, but in the very Purchase. lib.
3. page 415.
markets and streets of their Towns are mortally pinched, and killed with all;
so that you shall see many drop down in the streets, many Travelers brought
into the Towns sitting dead, and stiff in their sleds. Diverse lose their Noses,
the Tips of their Ears, and the Balls of their Cheeks, their Toes, Feet, etc.
Many times when the winter is very hard and extreme, the Bears and Wolves issue
by troops out of the woods, driven by hunger, and enter the Villages, tearing
and ravening all they can find, so that the inhabitants are fain to flee for
the safeguard of their Lives.

15. To descend now to observations, that do some what more punctually set
forth the more particular Phenomenon of Cold, in reference to men's Bodies, take
the following Observation. The 15. of March some of their men, that had been
abroad to kill Deer, returned so disabled with cold, which did rise up in
blisters under the soals of their feet, and upon their legs, to the bigness of
Walnuts, that they could not recover their former estate ( which was not very
well) in a fortnight after. This may be confirmed by that passage of the
Hollanders, where speaking of their preparing springes to take Foxes, they add,
Purchase. page 497.
that they did it with no small trouble; for that if they stayed long without
doors, there arose Blisters upon their Faces and Ears. We did daily find by
experience (says Captain James) that the cold in Page 64.
the woods would freez our faces, or any part of our (...), that was bare; but
it was not so mortifying, etc.

16. The Dutch speaking of the pains they were fain to take to dig away the
snow, that covered the house, and choked up their door, adds, that in that
laborious work, Page 497.
they were forced to use great speed, for they could not long endure without
the house, because of the extreme cold, although they wore Foxes skins about
their heads, and double apparel upon their backs.

17. The lately mentioned Captain James relates, that in Charleton Island he
was fain to cut the hair of his head short, and shave away all the hair of his
face, because the Isicles, that Page 56.
would be fastened to it, made it, as he speaks, become intolerable.

18. And he elsewhere relates, that once he and his Companions, having been for
a little while parted into two companies, had their faces, hair and clothes so
frozen over, that they could not know each other by their habits, nor Page 52.
(which is a considerable circumstance, for whose sake chiefly I mention this
passage) by their voices.

19. And the same Author gives this account of the death of the Gunner of his
Ship, whom he calls a strong hearted Man, and who died before the end of
November. He had (says our Author) a close boarded Cabin in the Gun-room,
which was very close indeed, and as many clothes on him as was convenient, (
for we wanted no clothes) and a pan with coals of fire continually in his
Cabin, for all which warmth his plaster would freez at his wound, and his
bottle of Sack at his head.

20. The 11. of December (says Gerard Purchase. lib. 3. cap. 5. page 496
de Veer) it was fair weather, and a clear Air, but very cold, which he that
felt not would not believe, for our shoes froze as hard as horns upon our
feet, and within they were white, so that we could not wear our shoes, but
were forced to make great pattents, the upper part being sheep skins, which we
put on over three or four pair of socks, and so went in them to keep our feet
warm, yea, and the clothes upon our backs were white over with frost.

21. Which may be somewhat confirmed by this passage of Captain James. The
clothes on our Beds would be Page 65.
covered with hoar frost, which in this little habitacle was not far from the
fire. We might add to all these, this other passage of the often mentioned
Gerard de Veer. The 26. of December, Purchase. page 497.
it was foul weather, the wind North-west, and it was so cold, that we could
not warm us, although we used all the means we could with great fires, good
store of clothes, and with hot stones and Billets laid upon our feet, and upon
our Bodies, as we lay in our Cabbins, but notwithstanding all this, in the
morning our Cabbins were (...) zen, etc. But we shall not insist on such
passages, as this last recited, because that of the force of cold to repress
and withstand the fire, we have already delivered as remarkable things, as will
be easily met with, in approved Writers, in the former part of this present
Section.

22. I have my self met with a knowing and very credible person, that related
to me of the cold of Russia, where he traveled, little less strange things,
then those I have mentioned of it out of Books; and if I did not want the
Historians name, I should make small difficulty to add, That since I made a
good progress in this present Section, a very learned Traveller (though not
into cold Countries) related to me, upon the occasion of what I was treating,
what he affirmed to have met with in an approved History of the strange
operation of the inclemency of the Air upon multitudes of men at once, namely,
that about the year (if he rightly remember it) 1498. an Army of the Turks
making an incursion into Poland, upon their return was surprised with such an
extremity of Cold and of Snow, that though it were but (if he mistake not) in
November, forty thousand of them (the whole Army consisting of seventy
thousand) perished through the extremity upon the place.

23. Amongst the many Relations I have met with of the fatal Effects of Cold in
the Northern Countries, I took notice not without a little wonder, as well as
trouble, that I could not find, that any of the Relators had the curiosity to
see what change was made in the internal parts of the Bodies so destroyed,
which yet were an inquiry very proper to have been made, but at length the
other day an ingenious Person having showed me a Book newly published in
French, containing the Description of a (...) Province he calls (...), as I was
skimming it over, with hope to find some observations about Cold, I lighted on
a relation, which though not such as I desired, is more then I have any where
else found, and I take the more notice of it, because, that though the very
name of this Province is scarce hitherto known to us in England, yet having a
while after by good chance met with an intelligent Polonian Lord, and having
inquired of him, whether he had ever been in that Country, he both told me,
that he had been quartered there, and by his Answers and Relations did
countenance diverse particularities of it, mentioned by this French officer
(named Monsieur de Beauplan) who lived long there. This Author then after
having taken notice, that this fertile Province, though but situated in the
same height of the Pole with Normandy, is oftentimes subject to excessive colds
(which circumstance I mention as a further confirmation of something of the
same nature delivered in the former Section) gives an Account of two differing
Effects of this Cold upon the Bodies of men: The one being a peculiar kind of
sickness, the other Death.

24. The first which I remember not to have elsewhere met with, is, that
sometimes when the natural heat proves strong enough to protect the Toes, and
Cheeks, and Ears, and other parts, that are either more remote from the heart,
or more tender from a sudden mortification; yet unless nature be assisted,
either by good Precautions, or Remedies, she cannot hinder the cold from
producing in these parts Cancers, as painful as those which are caused by a
scalding and malignant humor, and which let me see (says my Author) when I was
in those Countries, that cold was not less cutting nor powerful to destroy
things, then the fire to consume them: He adds, that the beginning of these
Cancerous sores is so small, that what produces the pain scarce equals the
bigness of a Pea, and yet in few days, nay sometimes in few hours it spreads
so, as to destroy the whole part it invades, which he confirms by the Example
of two persons of his acquaintance, who in a trice lost by Congelation the
badges of their Sex.

25. As to those that are killed with Cold, our Author informs us, that they
perished by two differing kinds of death. For some being not sufficiently
fortified against the cold by their own internal heat, nor competently armed
against it by Furs, Inunctions, and other external means, after having had
their hands and feet first seized by the cold, till they grow past feeling it,
there the rest of their Bodies are so invaded, that they are taken with a (kind
of Lethargick) Drowziness, that gives them extreme Propensity to sleep, which
if indulged to, they can no more awake out of, but dye insensibly. And from
this kind of Death our Author adds, that he was several times snatched by his
servants, who were more accustomed to the cold, and seasonably forced him to
awake out of those drowzinesses, which they knew to be most dangerous. And that
sometimes the death by cold is indolent enough, the Relations of some
intelligent acquaintances of mine, who have been in exceeding cold Countries,
do confirm.

26. But the other way whereby cold destroys men, is that, which is the most
remarkable in our Author, and though less sudden is more cruel. For he tells
us, that sometimes the cold seizes men's Bodies in the reins, and all about the
Wast (and especially horsemen underneath the Armor of the Back and Breast) and
straitens, as he speaks, those parts so forcibly, that it freezes all the parts
of the Belly, especially the Guts, so that though they have keen appetites,
they cannot digest, or so much as retain the lightest and easiest Aliments,
without excepting Broths themselves, but presently reject them by vomit, with
unspeakable gripings and pains, and so continually complaining of their
condition, and sometimes crying out, as if some body were tearing out their
bowels, they end their miserable life's, being often brought by the violence of
their torments to the brink of madness and despair, before they come to that of
the grave. And our Author having seen some of these departed wretches opened,
says, that they found the greatest part of their guts black, burned up, and as
it were glew'd together, whence he thinks it probable, that, as their bowels
came to be spoiled and gangrenated, they were forced to those complaints and
exclamations; and we may add, That probably upon the same cause depended those
continual vomits of what they eat or drunk; the Gangrene of the guts hindering
the descent of Excrements downwards, as it often falls out, in the true Iliaca
Passio, and the Peristaltick, or the usual motion of the parts being inverted,
as it also frequently happens in the same disease. There is no doubt but
Anatomists and Physicians will think this account very imperfect, but yet I
think my self beholden to the Author for it, because it is not the best, but the
only, that I have hitherto yet met with of this matter, though I could wish it
had been much more full and particular, and that he had also opened those
Animals, and especially their brains, that he mentions to have been killed
suddenly, and without pain, by cold. For such informations (whose want, as far
as our Climate will permit, I have had thoughts of supplying by Experiments
upon other animals) would perhaps satisfy me one way or other about a
conjecture I have had, and been able to countenance by several trials upon
Vegetables and dead Animals, about the cause of mortifications produced by
excessive cold.

27. What effects a violent Cold may have upon the bodies of other animals then
men, I scarce find at all taken notice of by the Writers I have met with, and
what I remember upon that subject amounts to but few particulars: The French
Author lately quoted, takes notice in general, that the cold in Ukrain, as the
Polanders call it, is sometimes so great, as to be scarce supportable by
horses, and some other tame beasts.

28. This same Author also mentions a certain fourfooted Animal called Bohack,
which is said to be peculiar to those parts, and hides himself under ground in
the Winter; and having inquired of the lately mentioned Polish Nobleman
concerning this beast, he told me, that being in that Province he had one
presented him as a rarity, upon an occasion proper enough to be mentioned here:
For some of the Poles chancing to dig (for some purpose that I remember not) in
a certain retired place, were surpised to find under ground, an Animal not
familiar to them, and though this creature was so frozen and stiff, that they
thought it to be stark dead, yet when they came to flea it for its skin, being
awakened by pain, it recovered life again, as was brought as a rarity to the
Commander, from whom I have the relation.

29. That some other animals may be frozen till they are stiff, and yet
recover, I shall (ere long) have occasion to observe at the close of the 21.
Section. And therefore I shall now add but this, That whereas it is a Tradition
among Travelers into Northern Climates, that both Birds and wild Beasts are in
icy and snowy Countries ordinarily turned white, if not at all times, yet at
least in the Winter by the coldness of those gelid Climates, I dare neither
admit the position as a thing that is true universally, nor reject it as a
thing that is never so. For not now to enquire, whether whiteness proceeds from
the coldness of the Country, or from some settled seminary impression, or from
the imagination of the females affected by the vivid whiteness of the snow,
that almost all the year long is the constant object of their sight: I find by
the Voyages I have perused, that Navigators often mention their meeting with
'store of white Bears and Foxes in Nova Zembla, and other very Northern
Regions, as also their meeting sometimes with herds of white Deer: And in the
Alps, always covered with snow, good Authors mention their having met with
white Partridges; to which purpose I remember, that when I was in Savoy, and
the neighboring Countries, which have mountains almost perpetually cap'd with
snow, I heard them often talk of a certain white kind of Pheasants to be met
with in the upper parts of the mountains, which for the excellency of their
taste were accounted very great delicacies. But on the other side, the same
Navigators treating even of the coldest Climates, seem to distinguish the white
Bears from others of those parts. And it is from very Northern Countries, that
we usually receive very dark colored Furs, and the skins as well of black
Foxes as of white ones.
And as for a herd of white Deer, their color may proceed from seminal
impressions, since here in England I have seen several Deer of that color, and
though Greenland be by some degrees nearer to the Pole then Nova Zembla, yet I
have seen a live Deer brought thence somewhat differingly shaped from ours,
whose skin was not white, but rather a kind of dun: And to add That upon the
by, I took notice, that provident Nature to arm them against the cold, had
afforded him a Coat, that might have passed for a Fur.

30. Yet these two things seem remarkable in favor of the efficacy of cold,
the one, that in several cold Countries, as particularly Greenland, and
Livonia, even Modern describers of them affirm, that Hares will grow white in
Winter, Lepores coloris and pellis mutatione anni tempestates sequuntur, ac
hiberno tempore albis pilis vestiti, aestivis mensibus eosdem cinereos habent.
Livoniae nova discriptio, Page 303.
and return to their native color in Summer. And the other, that though
Charleton Island differ not one degree in Latitude from London; yet (as the
cold is there prodigious, so) I remember, that Captain James some where takes
notice of his having Page 46. and Page 89.
seen there, both diverse Foxes, that were pied black and white, and white
Partridges, though he could not catch them. But of the whiteness of Animals I
elsewhere treat among other subjects, that belong to the History of Colors.
And having already been more prolix then I intended in setting down the
observations of others, I think it now time for me to resume the mention of my
own Experiments, diverse of which, though made before others, that have been
already mentioned, X or XII. Sections of, I thought fit for to reserve for this
place, both for other reasons, and because, this place seems proper for
Experiments, that have a nearer tendency to the hinting or the examining the
more general Hypothesis about Cold.

Title XX. Experiments touching the weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen.
1. SInce diverse of those ingenious men, that have of late revived, and
embraced the Doctrine of the old Atomists, teach us, that water is turned into
ice by the introduction of frigorifick Corpuscles, which Democritus of old is
said to have believed to be cubical (and to which other Philosophers of late
have assigned other shapes indeed, but yet determinate ones) we thought fit not
so much for our own satisfaction, as for that of others, to try, whether or no
a Liquor by its increase of weight, when frozen, would betray any substantial
accession of the Corpuscles of Cold, which according to the Epicurean
Principles, may, by reason of their smallness, pass in freely, and in vast
multitudes, at the pores of other Bodies, and even of glass, and which by
reason of the same smallness, must be supposed exceedingly numerous to be able
to arrest the motions of such multitudes of minute Corpuscles, as must go to
the making up of any considerable quantity of water.

2. And first we made a trial with Eggs, of which our Notes give us the
following account.

3. [We took a good pair of Scales and placing them upon a frame (purposely
made for such Experiments, as required, that the things to be weighed should
remain long in the balance) we put into one of these a couple of Eggs, and
having counterpoised them with brass weights, we suffered them to continue all
night in a Turret (built as it had been made for an observatory) that the
breaking of the Eggs, or any such other accidents might not hinder the success
of our endeavors (which were to try, whether the Corpuscles of Cold, which
diverse Philosophers suppose to be the Efficients of Congelation, would make
them any whit heavier,) but we were somewhat surprised, when the next morning,
after a very sharp night, going up to the Turret, we found (the scales and
frame being in good plight) the Eggs to be grown lighter by very near four
grains.]

Thus far the Note.

4. But though we afterward repeated the Experiment once or twice (if not
oftener) yet having been by intervening avocations diverted from registring the
circumstances of the events; I dare not now trust my memory for any more, then
that some of the circumstances seemed odd enough, but uncertain, and that I
desisted from prosecuting the Experiment, chiefly for this reason, that an
increase of weight in exposed Eggs was scarcely to be hoped for, because (...)
seemed probable, that part of the more subtle and spirituous Corpuscles
contained in the Egg do continually, by little and little, get away through the
pores of the skin and shell; that, seeming to be the reason why Eggs long kept
have usually within the shell, a manifest, and sometimes very considerable
cavity unfilled with either yelk or white, which Cavity seems to have been left
by the recess of the subtle parts we have been mentioning, so that although
the frigorifick Atoms should by their ingress add some, not altogether
insensible weight to the Egg, yet that would not, unless perhaps in the very
nick of time, when the Congelation is first actually made, be taken notice of,
by reason of the greater decrement of weight, that proceeds from the Avolation
of the more subtle parts of the Egg it self.

5. And to satisfy our selves about this matter, we took four hen Eggs, and
counterpoised them carefully in a good pair of Scales, which were suspended at
a frame, that the balance might be kept unstirr'd in a quiet room, wherein we
had placed it, and suffering it to continue there for a pretty while, we
observed, that though it were Winter, and though the room wherein it stood were
destitute of a Chimney, yet that Scale wherein the Eggs lay, did almost daily
grow manifestly lighter, so that it was requisite, from time to time, to take a
grain out of the opposite scale, to reduce the balance to an Equilibrium. And
by this means we found the Eggs after some time to have lost eight grains of
their former weight, but how much more they would have lost, if we had
continued the Experiment, the need we had of the Scales kept us from
discovering.

6. Upon this occasion I will add, that I used some endeavors to satisfy my
self about this inquiry, viz. whether Eggs being once actually frozen (for
those mentioned in the former Note, might lose their weight before they were
so) and kept in a pair of good Scales fastened to a frame in some quiet place,
well fenced from the Sun, would by the cold of the Air in freezing weather, be
kept for any considerable time, without a sensible diminution of weight, but an
unexpected thaw hindered us from seeing the success of what we designed of this
nature, both as to Eggs, and also some other Bodies: For if the Experiment were
very carefully tried upon a competent variety of them, it might possibly assist
us to guess, especially in Camphire, and some other easily exhalible bodies,
what interest Cold may have in suppressing or diminishing the expiration of
their Effluvia.

7. But to return to the weight of Bodies frozen and unfrozen, we attempted to
discover somewhat about it by several ways, according as the differing
accommodations, we were furnished with, permitted. And of these trials I will
mention four or five, as well of the less, as of the more accurate, as my
memory or Notes supply me with them.

8. One of the less Accurate ways we employed to try, whether ice, in which
according to the Atomists, great store of these frigorifick Corpuscles must be
wedged, would not upon their expulsion or recess, leave the water lighter then
was the ice, was that which follows, wherein to hasten the Experiment, we
mingled a little salt. And though we foresaw there would be a difficulty from
the Adhaesion of the vapors of the external Air, to the outside of the glass we
were to employ, we thought, that inconvenience might be remedied by well wiping
off the frost, or dew from the outside of the glass, till it were clean and
dry: The event of the trial we find succinctly set down among our Notes as
follows. [A single vial sealed up with ice and salt, being wiped dry, and
weighed, was found to weigh four ounces four drachms and a half, when it was
quite thawed, it was found to weigh somewhat more then a grain less then its
former counterpoise.]

But more accurate and satisfactory Trials about this matter, I find thus set
down in one of my papers.

9. [We took a vial more thin then those that are commonly used, that, of the
Aggregate of that and the Liquor, the glass might make so much the lesser part:
This vial was furnished with a somewhat long neck, which at the flame of a Lamp
was drawn by degrees slenderer and slenderer, that being very narrow at the
Top, it might the more readily and conveniently be sealed, notwithstanding the
waters being in it; then we almost filled it with that Liquor, I say almost,
because a competent space ought to be left unfill'd, to allow the water,
swelled by glaciation, room to expand it self: This vial with the liquor in it,
was placed in a mixture of snow and salt after our usual manner, and when the
glass appeared almost full of ice, it was taken out, and nimbly closed with
Hermes's seal, presently after this was weighed in a pair of very good Scales,
and the vial together with the contained liquor, amounted to (...). 38. gr. ss,
which yet was not all ice, because these things could not be done so nimbly,
but that some of the ice began to thaw, before we were able to dispatch them
quite, the vial thus sealed being removed, and suffered for two or three hours
to thaw, when the ice was vanished, we weighed again the sealed glass in the
same Scales, and found, that it weighed, as before, at least, if there were any
difference, it seemed to weigh a little more.] But this Increment that amounted
not quite to a grain, might easily be attributed to some difference in the
weights and grains themselves, wherein it is not easy to find a perfect
exactness, or to some little unheeded moisture, that might adhere to some part
of the vial.

10. And because it may be wished, that as this Experiment shows the weight of
Ice resolved into water, to be the same with that of the solid ice, so we had
tried, whether the weight of water congealed into ice, would be the same with
that of the former fluid water, we will subjoyn what immediately follows in the
same paper in these words.

11. [We took a sealed vial, very thin, that it might be lighter, but not so
large as the other, by about a third, as amounting in the lately mentioned
Scales but to (...). (...). gr. 41. when we had sealed it up with the water in
it. This vial we placed as we had done the other, in a mixture of snow and
salt, freezing it warily, lest being sealed, it should break, then we removed
it into the same Scales, to try, whether it had got any weight by the supposed
subingression of the Atoms of Cold, which many learned men take to be the
efficients of Congelation; but it either weighed just as before, or if there
were any difference, it seemed to have lost of a grain. Being suffered to thaw,
and put into the same Scales again, it weighed just as much as it did, when
frozen, though the weights were numerically the same, and about would sway the
Scales, or at least be sensible upon them. But note, that I was careful this
last time to wipe the outside of the glass with a linen cloth, because I have
observed, according to what I elsewhere deliver, that, in case ice be any thing
hastily thawed, it may produce a dew on the outside of the glass, as I
suspected, that even the warm Air might in some measure do in this, and if it
had not been for this suspicion, some adhering dew, that I was thereby enabled
to detect and wipe off, before I put the vial into the Scales, might easily
have imposed upon us.

12. These Trials I presume may give some satisfaction about the inquiry, for
the resolving whereof, I thought fit to make them.

13. But I was also desirous to see, whether any difference, as to weight,
would be produced by freezing and thawing (if I may use those expressions in
this case) Iron, Stone, Wood, or the like solid and permanent Bodies, which I
intended to have exactly weighed, before and after their being exposed to the
Air, and also after the frost was gone, (and all this against Counterpoizes not
exposed to so great a Cold) would discover any sensible alteration, as to
weight, that might safely be ascribed to the Cold. And though Avocations, and
the negligence of one that we employed, kept us from bringing the matter to
such an issue as was desired, yet the Trials seemed not altogether irrational,
since we have formerly made it probable (and have since met with fresh
instances to confirm it) that even Stones, and Metals, may resent some change
of Texture by the operation of some degrees of Cold. And indeed induced by such
considerations of that kind, as seemed the least doubtful, I remember I
sometime made several experiments of the weight of some metals, and stones,
both before and after they had been much exposed to a more vehement Cold, then
would have sufficed to turn water into ice, and also after they had been, if I
may so speak, thawed in a warm Air. But the paper in which we registered the
events of these trials having been mislay'd, I dare not charge my memory with
the particulars. Only, if I mistake not, one or two of the stones seemed to
have increased in weight, after having been buried in our frigorifick mixture,
which I was apt to impute to some particles of the ice resolved into water by
the salt, that was mingled with it, and (being perhaps made more piercing by
the saline particles associated with them) imbibed into the pores of the stone.
For I remember, that having procured an Experiment, that I then wanted
convenience to try my self, to be made by an ingenions person, upon a stone
hard enough to bear a good polish, I was by him informed, that the stone by
having been kept a while in water, did, though it were afterward wiped dry,
discover a manifest increase of weight: and in confirmation of my conjecture, I
shall add, that from a sort of stones, that are of a texture close enough to be
usually polisht; I did, as I expected, obtain by distillation (and that without
a naked fire) a considerable quantity of an almost insipid liquor, which I
suspected to be in good part but water soaked into the stone, for reasons, that
it is not worth while here to discourse of; the cause of my mentioning these
particulars being, that (I hope) they may make those, that shall hereafter try
such Experiments, cautious how they draw inferences from them, and may invite
them to expose the bodies, they would make trial of, rather to the cold of the
free Air in very sharp weather, (for want of which, we our selves could not do
what we advise) then to artificial glaciations at least, unless they be so
ordered, that nothing that is moist come to touch the bodies to be wrought upon.

14. But such Trials as these newly mentioned, and others of the like kind, we
must leave to be prosecuted by those, that are furnished with accurate Scales,
and leisure; for want of the latter of which, and sometimes too of the former,
we were fain to give over the pursuit of them, which troubled us the less,
because those made with the sealed Vials were diligently made; and as for
diverse others, we made them, as we were saying, more to be able to gratify
others, then to satisfy our selves, because though in case there should
unquestionably appear some sensible increase or decrement of weight, upon that
which the Atomists would call the Accession or Expiration of frigorifick
Corpuscles; it would afford a plausible Argument in favor of the Epicurean
Doctrine, about the generation of ice; yet if no such change of weight should
be found upon the freezing or the thawing of water, or any other Body, I doubt
whether it may, on the contrary, be safely concluded, that the Atomists Theory
of Cold is false. For possibly they may pretend, that the Atoms of Cold may not
have either gravity or levity, any more then the steams of Electrical Bodies,
or the Effluvia of the Loadstone. Nay, though we should admit the frigorifick
Corpuscles not to be altogether devoid of gravity, it may yet be said, that
when they invade the Body, they freez, they expel thence some other preexistent
Atoms, that may also have some little weight, and that the frigorifick
Corpuscles, that fly, or are driven away, may be succeeded by some such, when
bodies come to be thawed. But of this no more at present.

Appendix to the XX. Title.
THe Experiments recorded in the foregoing Section, may perchance in this
regard prove more useful then I was aware of, that they may keep men from being
misled by the contrary accounts, that I find to have been given of the weight
of ice, and water, by no obscure writers. For (to spare one of the famousest of
the Ancients) Helmont in the Treatise he calls Gas Aquae, where he gives an
account of the congelation of water, which I confess to be unintelligible
enough to me, and where he is pleased to ascribe to I know not what extenuation
of part of the sulphur he supposes to be in water, that levity of ice, which
the bubbles, it contains, afford us an intelligible and ready account of,
delivers very positively this Experiment. Imple (says he) lagenam Number. 35.
vitream and magnam frustis Glaciei, collum vero claudatur sigillo Hermetis, id
est, per vitri ibidem liquationem: ponatur haectum lagena in bilance adjecto
pondere in oppositum, and videbis quod propemodum octava sui part aqua post
resolutam glaciem erit ponderosiior seipsa glacie. Quod cum millesies ex eadem
aqua fieri possit, etc. Thus far Helmont, who in case he take lagena vitrea in
the ordinary acception of the word, would have made us some amends for this
erroneous account, if he had taught us the way how he could seal such a broad
vessel, as a glass flagon, Hermetically. But what has been delivered in the
foregoing Section, will sufficiently show, what is to be thought of this
Experiment of Helmonts. And for further confirmation, we have several times
weighed ice frozen, and reduced to water, without finding any cause to doubt,
but that Helmont was mistaken. And particularly upon the last Trial I made of
this kind, having filled a wide mouthed glass with solid fragments of ice,
together with it amounting to a pound (of which the glass alone weighed
somewhat above five ounces) I whelmed over the mouth of it another flat bottom
glass, that if any vapors should ascend, they might be condensed into drops,
as in the like case I had formerly observed them to do. And this ice being
thawed in a warm room, as no drops were seen to stick to the inside of the
inverted glass, so the other glass being again put into the same Scales,
appeared almost exactly of the same weight as formerly, whereas the ice alone,
that had been resolved, amounting to much above eight ounces, according to
Helmonts proportion, the weights should have been augmented by a whole ounce at
least: And I make little doubt, but that if the Experiment had been tried in
greater quantities of ice, the event would have been very little, if at all,
different. But I purposely chose in the (...) Experiments about cold, to make
my I rials in no greater quantities of matter then I have done, because it is
very difficult to get scales strong enough to weigh, without being injured,
much greater weights, and yet be accurate enough to discover truly such small
differences, as are fit to be taken notice of in such Experiments. But to
return to Helmont, notwithstanding all that we have said against what he
delivers about the weight of ice, yet because I take this inquisitive Chemist
to have been, in spite of all his extravagancies, a Benefactor to experimental
learning, I am willing to suggest on his behalf, that possibly much of the
additional weight he ascribes to the resolved ice, may have proceeded from that
which would not have been taken notice of by an ordinary Experimenter. For (as
I not long since intimated) I have (sometimes purposely, and sometimes by
chance) by thawing ice in closed vessels somewhat hastily, produced a copious
dew on the outside of the vessels, which dew, as being made by the condensed
vapors of the ambient Air, ought to be wiped off, before the vessel be put
into the scales to weigh the melted ice: And it is possible also, that Helmont
may have erred in the manner of weighing his Lagena, whatever he mean by it, it
being usual even for learned men, that are not versed in Statick's, to mistake
in Experiments, which require, that things be skilfully and nicely weighed: How
far this excuse may be -- Hinc gelidam congelatamque aquam graviorem esse non
congelata expertus est Jo. Manelphus, Com. in 4. Meteor. Aristot. Inquit Tho.
Bartholinus de Nivis usu cap. 12.
applied to a late Commentator upon Aristotle's Meteors, who says, he tried,
that water frozen is heavier then unfrozen, being a stranger to that Authors
writings, I shall not consider: only whereas Helmont and He seem to agree very
little in their Affirmations, it will be perhaps more difficult to accord them,
then to determine, by the help of our formerly registered Experiments, what may
be thought of both their Relations.

Yet I shall add on this occasion, That if I had not devised the above
mentioned way of freezing water by Art in Hermetically sealed glasses, I should
have found it difficult to reduce, what is affirmed by Manelphus, which I then
dreamt not of, to an accurate Experiment; for though I had employed a sealed
glass, (which I have not heard, that he or any other has yet made use of to
that purpose) yet if I had in that vessel exposed the water to be frozen the
common way, it is odds (though it be not absolutely certain) that the water
beginning, as it is wont to congeal at the Top, the Expansion of the
subsequently freezing water would break the glass, and so spoil the Experiment:
And for the same reason I have sometimes in vain attempted, to examine the
weight of water frozen, by nature, according to her wonted method in open
vials. And if instead of glasses, you make use of strong earthen vessels, there
is danger, that something may be imbibed, or adhere to the porous vessel, and
increase the weight, and by some such way, or by some mistake in weighing, it is
very probable Manelphus may have been deceived, which I am the more inclined to
think, if we suppose him a sincere writer, not only because of some things I
have taken notice of about congelations made in earthen vessels, but because,
when I have instead of an earthen, made use of a metalline pottinger (both
which sorts of vessels have in common this inconvenience, that their
ponderousness makes them less fit for accurate Scales) there appeared cause to
suspect, either that our Author did not use metalline vessels, or, which I
rather suspect, that he wanted skill or diligence in weighing. For as I find no
intimation of his having employed any peculiar or artificial sort of vessels,
so, if he used such as we have newly been speaking of, and had weighed them
carefully, I cannot but think, that instead of finding the ice heavier then the
water 'twas made of, he would have rather found it lighter. For I remember,
that having once exposed all night a pottinger almost full of common water, to
an exceeding sharp Air, and having caused it the next morning to be brought me,
when the liquor was thoroughly frozen, I found it to have lost about 50. grains
(if I misremember not) of its former weight, and though this event were
consonant enough to my conjectures, yet for greater certainty I repeated the
Experiments another (...) night with this new caution; that the pottinger and
water, together with the counterpoise, were kept suspended in the Scales, to be
sure that no effusion of any part of the water in carrying it abroad to the
open Air, should be made without being taken notice of; but the next morning
(somewhat late) the vessel with the contained water now congealed, appeared to
have lost about 60. grains: and with the like success the Trial was reiterated
once more, and that in weather so sharp, that I am not apt to think, the water
exposed by Manelphus, began to freez sooner then ours. But the event was not
unexpected, for besides that I considered, that in these kind of Experiments,
part of the water, notwithstanding the exceeding coldness of the Air, must in
all likelihood fly away before the surface of it began to be congealed, I judge
it not improbable, that not only the fluid part, but even that, which was
already congealed, might continually lose some of its Corpuscles, and by their
recess lose also somewhat of its weight. And least these conjectures should
seem too too unlikely, 'twill not be amiss to add in favor of the first of
them, that having purposely provided a large Pewter Box, with a cover to screw
on it, and having filled it almost full of water, (I say almost, because if the
vessel had been quite full, the congealing cold might have burst it) and
carefully weighed the Aggregate of both (which amounted to (...). (...). gr.
11. whereof the vessel weighed (...). (...). and gr. 8.) we exposed the water
after the Top of the pot was screwed on, to hinder the Avolation of it, to the
freezing Air all night, and the next morning found it frozen from the top to
the bottom, though not uniformly and perfectly, but found not one grain
difference betwixt its present and its former weight: And as for the second
conjecture newly proposed, though it may seem somewhat strange, yet it is
confirmable by this Experiment; that having placed diverse lumps of solid ice in
a Pottinger, which together with them weighed a pound, consisting of 16 (...),
and having exposed these things in the same scales, wherein they were weighed,
to the free Air on a very frosty night, we found the ice to have lost the next
morning 24. grains of its weight, and the weather continuing so cold, that it
froze hard all day long in the shade, I gave order to have it kept out of the
Sun in the same scales, during all that time, and a good part of the following
night, and then weighing it the second time, found, that the whole decrement of
weight, did now amount to five grains above two drachms, though the weight of
the ice without the pottinger were but about seven ounces; and when we had kept
about 13. ounces of ice in a very frosty night exposed to the cold Air, it had
lost as early as the next morning a good deal above two drachms of its former
weight: But these Statical observations have perhaps already but too much
swelled this Appendix.

Title XXI. Promiscuous Experiments and Observations concerning Cold.
1. I Hope it will not be imagined, that I have such narrow thoughts of the
subject I treat of, Cold, as to believe, that I have comprised under those few
Titles, prefixed to the Sections of this Historical Treatise, all the
Particulars that I knew to belong to so comprehensive a Theme, as would readily
appear, if I thought it convenient to insert here the Scheme of Articles of
inquiry, that I drew up to direct my self, what inquiries and Experiments to
make. But though there were diverse of those Heads, to which I could say so
little, that I judged it improper to assign them distinct Titles, because as to
some of them, I had not time and opportunity to make those Trials, which if I
had not wanted those Requisites, might have been made even here in England: and
because also, as to more of them, I conceived my self unable to produce in this
temperate Climate, so strong and durable a Cold, as seemed necessary to make
the trials, that might be referred to them, succeed so far, as to satisfy my
doubts, either affirmatively, or negatively: Though, I say, these, and some
other Considerations kept me from increasing the Number of the Titles, among
which I have distributed the Experiments and Observations, that make up the
foregoing part of this Treatise, yet since diverse particulars have occurred to
me, which though they seem not properly reducible to the foregoing Titles, do
yet belong to the subject and design of this Treatise, I think it fit to annex
them in this place, and without any other order then that, wherein they shall
happen to occur to me, throw them into this one Section, together with some
loose Experiments, and diverse Relations, that I have met with among Navigators
and Authors, that have traveled into the Northern Climates, touching Cold, not
forbearing to insert promiscuously among them, some few Paralipomena, which if
they had seasonably come to my hands, or into my mind, might have had a more
proper place among the foregoing Sections, or have composed a Title by
themselves. Wherefore though the Observations will not be altogether
unaccompanied with Experiments, yet for the reasons above intimated, much the
greater part of what is to be delivered under this Title, will consist of
Collections out of Voyages, in which the strange things mentioned, being such
as we cannot examine by our own Trials, I can equitably be thought answerable
for the Truth of nothing, but the Citations.

2. I remember I tried at several times diverse Experiments, to discover,
whether or no congelation would by constriction of the pores of Bodies, or
vitiating their Texture, or arresting the motion of their parts, hinder them
from emitting those Effluvia, that we call odors, but the Register of these
Observations, being unhappily lost in one of my late removes, I dare add but
these few, wherein I have no cause to distrust my memory.

3. I did in the Months of December and January, at several times gather
differing sorts of flowers in frosty weather, but in most when they were
freshly gathered, and hastily smelt to, I could scarce perceive any sensible
smell, whether it were, that the causes above hinted, hindered the expiration
of the odoriferous steams, or that the cold had some undiscerned influence upon
the Organ of smelling, which made the sense more dull, or that the same cold
kept the Alimental juice of the flowers from rising in such plenty, and
abounding so much with spirituous parts, as was usual at the more friendly
seasons of the year: and this seemed the more likely to be one reason of the
Phenomenon, because most of the flowers were flaggy, and as it were ready to
wither, and because also a Primrose, that was vigorous and fresh in its kind,
had an odor, that was manifestly (and 'twill easily be believed, that it was
not strongly) sweet, and genuine.

4. I took also about an ounce by guess of Rose Water, and putting it into a
small vial, after I had smelt to it, it was exposed to freez in the open Air,
and when it began to have ice in it, I then smelt to it again, but found not
the perfume considerably, if so much as manifesty abated, and lastly, having
suffered it to continue in the Air, that was then very sharp, till 'twas quite
frozen, and discovered no liquor, when the vial was turned upside down, the ice
notwithstanding was not distitute of a graceful and genuine sent, though it
seemed somewhat faint; but after the ice was reduced to water again, the
fragrancy appeared considerable. But on this occasion 'twill not be improper to
subjoyn this Caution, That care must be had in Trials of this Nature, to make
ones estimate betimes, for if a man should stay too long about it, there is
danger, that the warmth of ones breath and face may relax the pores, or thaw
the surface of the ice, that is held near his Nose, and both free and excite
the Corpuscles of smell, that are imprisoned there, that so instead of ice he
may smell a liquor. The reasonableness of which advertisment may be justified
by an Experiment that I am about to annex. For being pretty well confirmed by
the casual and unwilling Observations of one of my friends, curious in making
sweet water, That even Liquors, more easy to be spoilt then Rose Water, would
not have their fragrancy destroyed, though perhaps impaired, nor so much as
their odors for the time quite imprisoned and suppressed by congelation, and
this appearing congruous to what I formerly noted of the Effluviums, that may
by the Decrement of weight be gathered to issue from ice it self, I thought it
worth while to try, whether stinking Liquors would not be more altered by
congelation, then odoriferous ones: and accordingly having procured some rain
water, that had been kept in a Tub, till it stunck so strongly, that I could
hardly endure it near my nose, I caused a pottinger (...) of it to be exposed
all night to a very sharp Air, and examining it the next morning, when it was
all turned into ice, neither I nor some others, to whom it was offered, could
perceive any stinck at all in it: and having in another place, but with as
stinking water, repeated the Experiment, when the pottinger was the next
morning brought to my beds side, I found it to smell abominably, whereupon
guessing, that this difference proceeded from some thaw made by the warmth of
the room in the superficial parts of the ice, I found it to be so indeed,
partly by the help of the light, which discovered a little liquor upon the ice,
and partly by exposing the vessel with that liquor in it to the cold Air again,
by whose operations an ice was produced, that was perfectly inodorous; and I
remember, that one of these parcels of ice being thawed, seemed to be less
stinking then before If it had not been for the negligence or mistake of one,
that I ordered in my absence to freez and thaw the same water, diverse times one
after (...), I might have added the success of that Experiment, which I was
sorry to miss of, because it might possibly have afforded an useful hint about
a way to correct stinking water in some Climates or seasons.
it had been frozen, and if I had not been diverted, I should have tried,
whether this ice, that did not emit odors, would emit like other ice, Effluvia,
discoverable by the Scales: for whether the ice would lose of its weight, which
seemed the more probable, or would not, the event may afford a not
inconsiderable hint.

5. It is a thing not only remarkable, but scarce credible, that though the
Cold has such strange and Tragical effects at Musco, and elsewhere in Cold
Countries, as we have formerly mentioned, especially a little after the
beginning of this 18. and somewhere in the 19. Section, yet this happens to the
Russians and Livonians themselves, who not only by living in such a Country,
must be accustomed to bitter Colds, but, who to harden themselves to the Cold,
have used themselves, and thereby brought themselves to be able to pass to a
great degree of Cold, from no less a degree of heat, without any visible
prejudice to their healths. For I remember, that having inquired of a Virtuoso
of unquestionable credit, whether the report of our Merchants, concerning this
strange custom of the Muscovites and Livonians were certainly true, he assured
me, that it was so, at least as to the Livonians, among whom being in their
Country, he had known it practiced. And the same was affirmed to me by an
ingenious person, a Doctor of Divinity, that had occasion some years since to
make a journey to Musco. And the Tradition is abundantly confirmed by Olearius,
whose Testimony we shall subjoyn, because this seems one of the eminentest, and
least credible instances, that we have yet met with of the strange power that
custom may have, even upon the Bodies of men. ' It Is a wonderful thing, says he,
to see how far Olearius, livre 3. page 168.
those Bodies (speaking of the Russians, that are accustomed and hardened to the
Cold) can endure heat, and how when it makes them ready to faint, they go out
of their Stoves stark naked, both men and women, and cast themselves into cold
water, or cause it to be poured upon their Bodies, and even in Winter wallow in
the Snow. To which passage our Author adds from his own observation particular
Examples of the Truth of what he delivers.

6. I had several years since, the curiosity to try, whether there were any
truth in that tradition, which is confidently affirmed, (and experience by some
is pretended for it) that the Beams of the Moon are cold, but though I were not
able to find any such matter, either by the ununited beams of the Moon, or by
the same beams concentred by such Burningglasses as I then had; yet having some
years after furnished my self with (...) large and extraordinary good
mettalline Concave, I resolved to try, whether those beams were not only devoid
of cold, but also somewhat warmish, since they are the Sunbeams, though
reflected from the Moon. And we see, that his beams, though reflected from
glasses not shaped for Burning, may yet produce some not insensible degree of
warmth. But notwithstanding my care to make my Trials in clear weather, when
the Moon was about the full, and, if I misremember not, with a Weather-glass, I
could not perceive by any concentration of the Lunar beams, no not upon a black
object, that her light did produce any sensible degree, either of cold or heat;
but perhaps others with very large glasses may be more succesful in their
Trials.

7. On this occasion I shall add, that meeting the other day in a Booksellers
shop, with the works of the Learned Physician Sanctorius (whom I look upon as
an inquisitive man, considering when and where he lived) a Picture drew my eyes
to take off an Experiment, whereby he thinks to evince the light of the Moon to
be considerably hot, which he says, he tried by a Burning-glass, through which
the Moons light being cast upon the Ball of a common Weatherglass, the water
was thereby depressed a good way, as appeared to many of his disciples, amidst
whom the observation was made. But though this may invite me, when opportunity
shall serve, to repeat my Trials, yet I must till then suspend my assent to his
Conclusion. For my Burning-glass was much better, then by the Narrative his
seems to have been, and my Trials were perhaps at least as carefully and
impartially made, as his Experiment in which this may probably have imposed
upon him; That performing the Experiment, a company of his Scholars, whilst
they stood round about his Thermoscope, and stooped (as in likelihood their
curiosity made them to do) to see by so dim a light the event of the
Experiment, the unheeded warmth of their breath and bodies might, unawares to
Sanctorius, somewhat affect the Air included in the Weatherglass, and by (...)
it, cause that depression of the water, which he ascribed to the Moon beams.
But because this is a conjecture, I intend, if God permit, to repeat the
Experiment, when I shall have opportunity to do with a more tender
Weatherglass, then I had by me, when I made my former Observations.

To the XI. Title.
BY the unsuccesfulness of the former attempts made with an Iron instrument, I
was invited, especially being at another place, where I was unfurnished with
such hollow Iron balls, as are mentioned Number. the 10. to substitute the
following Experiment. I caused a skilful Smith to take a Pistol barrel, guessed
to be of about two foot in length, and of a proportionable bore, and when he
had by riveting in a piece of Iron, exactly stopped the touchhole, I caused
him to fit to the nose of the barrel a screw, to go as close as well he could
make it, and then having filled it to the very top with water, I caused the
screw to be thrust in (which could not be done without the Effusion of some of
the water) as forcibly as the Party I employed was able to do it, that the
water, dilated by Congelation, might not either drive out the screw, or get
between it and the top of the Barrel, and having then suspended this barrel in
a perpendicular posture in the free Air, in a very cold (...), which then
unexpectedly happened, and gave me the (...) of making the trial, I found the
next morning, that the (...) water had thrust out a great part of the screw,
notwithstanding, that to fill up intervals, I had oiled it before, and was got
out betwixt the remaining part of it, and the barrel, as appeared by some ice,
that was got out, and stuck round about the screw; wherefore the bitter cold
continuing one day longer, I did the next night cause the intervals, that might
be left betwixt the male and female screws, to be filled up with melted Bees
wax, which I presumed would keep the screw from being turned by the water: and
having in other points proceeded as formerly, I found the next morning, that
the screw held, as I desired, and the preceding night having been exceeding
bitter, the cold had so forcibly congealed and expanded the water, that it
burst the Iron barrel somewhat near the top, and made a considerable and
oblique crack in it, about which a pretty quantity of ice appeared to stick,
besides that there were three or four other flaws, at some of which smaller
quantities of water appeared to have got out. At the same time, that I bespoke
this Iron Barrel of the Smith, I ordered him to get me a brass one filled up
after the same manner, to make the Experiment the more satisfactory. But though
he could not procure it, yet the success was not unwelcome, because it was
manifest, that there were cracks in the Iron in one place conspicuous, and in
others easily discoverable, by blowing into the barrel, and putting on the
outside of the suspected parts, either spittle, or some fit liquor, whose
agitation plainly disclosed the egress of the wind, and there appeared small
cause to doubt, but that these cracks were produced by the operation of the
cold, since not only the Smith was a skilful man in his trade, and one that I
used to employ about Instruments, and also the barrel had been sometimes kept
many hours filled with water, without appearing other then very stanch: but
which is the considerablest circumstance the night before, the frost as I
lately noted, was not able to make the water break out at any of these clefts,
though it were able to force it self a way out at the screw, in spite of all
the care we had taken to make it go close. I have only this circumstance to add
about this matter, that when by thawing one part of the ice, some pieces of the
rest were got out of the barrel, all I took notice of appeared to be full
enough of Bubbles, but yet such as seemed lesser then ordinary, whether they
were so by chance, or were determined to be so, by the resistance or
compression, which the freezing water found upon its endeavoring to expand it
self in the barrel.

Appendix to the XVII. Title.
LOng since the writing of the foregoing Section, meeting with a passage in
Bartholinus, where he vouches Cabaeus for the Experiment of congealing water
(without limiting it to any season of the year) by putting Salt (...) into it
and shaking it strongly, I was thereby confirmed, that I was not mistaken, in
supposing, that Gassendus (mentioned in the former Section) did not exclude
that corporal and visible Nitre out of the number of the grand efficients of
congelation. For Cabaeus having published his comment upon Aristotle's Meteors
(whence this experiment is taken by Bartholinus) before Gassendus published his
Book, it is probable, that he as well as others borrowed the Experiment from
him, and Cabaeus, as Bartholinus quotes him, prescribes the putting the
Saltpeter its self into water, which being a while put into a brisk motion,
will after some agitation, not only refrigerate that water, but bring it to a
true and proper congelation.

Wherefore suspecting, that this relation, wherein Bartholinus says, he will
believe him without an oath, may have given rise to the opinions and
affirmations of those ingenious writers, that have since ascribed such
wonderful coldness to Nitre, and finding in Bartholinus, that Cabaeus's
proportion betwixt the Nitre and the water, was that of 35. to a 100. that is
almost as one to three, I thought it very well worth while to make Trial of an
Experiment, which seemed to me little less unlikely then considerable.

I took then a pound of good Saltpetre, and near 3. pound of common water (to
observe the more narrowly Cabaeus's proportion) these being put into a large
new Pipkin, were kept constantly and nimbly stirred about, sometimes by me,
sometimes by one or other of my Domestics relieving one another, when they
were weary, but though the mixture was with a kind of broad glass spattle kept
in a brisk motion, that for the most part was (...) the manner of a
whirle-pool, and sometimes a more confused agitation, and though we kept it
thus stirring for almost an hour and a half, till we saw no likelihood of
effecting any thing by trying our selves any further, yet not only we could not
perceive, that any Atom of true ice was produced, whereas according to our
Authors we might have expected a true and perfect congelation of all or the
greatest part of the water, but we did not find, that there was so much as any
freezing of the vapors on the outside of the vessel; and for this reason we
thought (...), about the same time, to try the Experiments by another kind of
Agitation, and mixing two ounces of Saltpeter with about six of water, in a
conveniently sized vial, we did several of us successively vehemently shake the
vial too and fro, till we were almost tired; but neither this way was there
produced the least ice within the glass, or the least congelation of the
vapors of the Air on the outside of it. It Is true, that when so great a
proportion of Saltpeter began to be dissolved in the Pipkin, the water had a
sensible increase of coldness, which afterward seemed to diminish, when once
the Nitre was dissolved; but not to mention, that (if I much mistake not) we
have observed the water to be refrigerated, when upon the dissolution of common
salt, multitudes of actually cold and solid Corpuscles came to be every way
dispersed through it; this coldness produced by the Nitre, was very far short
of the degree requisite to congelation: for to satisfy my self, that my sense
did not misinform me, I took a good sealed Weather-glass of about ten or twelve
inches long, and immersing it into the cold mixture of Nitre and Water, I
observed the tincted spirit of Wine in the stem to descend not inconsiderably,
and when I perceived that degree of cold to have wrought its effect, I removed
the Thermoscope into a vial filled with common water, about which I had caused
to be placed a mixture of beaten ice and salt, to (...) the contained water, in
which the ball of the Instrument being placed, the spirit of Wine hastily
descended two or three inches below that place at which it stood, when 'twas
removed out of the Nitrous solution: And for further satisfaction removing the
Thermoscope once again into that solution, the spirit of Wine in the stem was
hastily impelled up, as if the bubble had been put into warm water. And once
more the Weather-glass being removed into the formerly mentioned (...) water,
the tincted liquor began to fall down hastily again, and within a while
subsided almost into the bubble, whereupon to avoid injuring the instrument, we
thought fit to take it out; so that upon the whole matter, if the learned
Cabaeus were not deluded by mistaking some Crystals of Nitre (which I have
observed easily to shoot again in water, that has been (...) with it) for true
and proper ice, I cannot but wonder at his assertion, and must take the liberty
to think my self warranted by so many Harmonious Trials, as I have found
unfavourable to the supposed supremeness of Cold in Saltpeter, to retain my
former opinion about it, till more succesful Experiments withdraw me from it.

It Is a received Tradition among the Watermen and many others, that the
Rivers, if not Ponds also, are frozen first at the bottom, and begin to thaw
there. But though I find this opinion to be in request, not only among English
Watermen, but among the French too, yet I think it may be very warrantably
questioned: For it is evident in waters we expose to freez in large vessels,
that the congelations begin at the surface, where the liquor is (...) to the
Air, and thence as the cold continues to prevail, the ice increases and
thickens downwards, and therefore we see, that Frogs retire themselves in
frosty weather to the bottom of ditches, whence I have had many of them taken
out very brisk and vigorous, from under the thick ice that covered the water.
And I have been informed by an observing person, that at least in some places,
it is usual in Winter for shoals of Fishes to retire to those depths of the Sea,
if not of Rivers also, where they are not to be found in Summer. Besides if
Rivers were frozen at the (...), we must very frequently meet in the emergent
pieces of ice, the shapes of those irregular Cavities and Protuberances, that
are often to be found in the uneven soils, over which Rivers take their course,
whereas generally those emergent pieces of ice are flat, as those flakes, that
are generated on the surface of the water. Moreover if even deep rivers freez
first at the bottom, why should not very many Springs and Wells (...) first at
the bottom too, the contrary of which nevertheless is obvious to be observed.
In confirmation of all which we may make use of what we formerly noted (in the
Section of the Primum Frigidum) about the (...) of the Masters of the French
Salt-works, who by overflowing the Banks and Causeways all the winter, keep
them from being spoiled by the srost, which could not be done, if the waters
they stand under froze as well at the bottom, as at the Top.

But I find, that that, which deceives our Watermen, is, that they often
observe flakes of ice to ascend from the bottom of Rivers, to the Top, and
indeed it often happens, that after the hard frost has continued a while, these
emergent pieces of ice, do very much contribute to the freezing over of Rivers.
For, coming, in some of the narrower parts of them, to be stopped by the
superficial ice, that reaches on each side of the River a good way from the
Banks toward the middle, those flat icy bodies are easily cemented by the
violence of the cold, and by the help of the contiguous water, to one another,
and by degrees straitning, and at length choking up the passage, they give a
stop to the other flakes of ice, that either emerging from the bottom, or
loosened from the banks of the River, or carried down the stream toward them,
and these being also by the same Cold cemented to the rest, the River is at
length quite frozen over. And the reason why so many flakes of ice come from
the bottom of the River, seems to be, that after the water has been frozen all
along near the banks, either the warmth of the Sun by day, or some of those
many casualties, that may perform such a thing, does by thawing the ground, or
otherwise loosen many pieces of that ice together with the earth, stones, etc.
that they adhered to, from the more stable parts of the banks, and these heavy
bodies do by their weight carry down with them the ice they are fastened to; but
then the water at the bottom of the river being warm in comparison of the Air
in frosty weather (since that even common water is so, we have In the Section
touching the duration of Ice.
manifested by experience, where we show how much sooner ice will be dissolved
in water, then thawed in Air) the dispersed ice is by degrees so wrought upon,
that those parts by which it held to the stones, earth, or other heavy bodies
being resolved, the remaining ice being much lighter bulk for bulk, then water,
gets loose, and straightway emerges, and may perhaps carry up with it diverse
stones and clods of earth, that may yet happen to stick to it, or be enclosed
in it, the sight of which persuades the Water-man, that the flakes of ice were
generated at the bottom of the river, whereas a large piece of ice may carry up
and support bodies of that kind of a great (...), in case the ice it self be
proportionably great, so that the Aggregate of the ice, and heavy bodies, (...)
not the weight of an equal bulk of water. On which occasion I remember, that
Captain James Hall in a voyage, extant in Purchase, relates, that upon a large
piece of ice in the Sea they found a great stone, which they judged to be three
hundred pound weight. But of the Tradition of the Watermen we shall say no
more, then that this has been discoursed, but upon no great information,
though the best we could procure; so that for further satisfaction, it were to
be desired, that either by sending down a Diver, or by letting down some
instrument fit to feel (if I may so speak) the bottom of Rivers with, and to
try, whether ice, if it met with any, be loose from, or uniformly coherent to
the ground, and also bring up parcels of whatever stuff it meets with there,
the matter were by Competent Experiments put out of doubt.

We took a sealed Weather-glass furnished with spirit of Wine, and though not
above 10. inches long in all, yet sensible enough, and having caused a hole to
be made in the Cover of a Box, just wide enough for the smaller end of the
Glass to be thrust in at, we inverted the Thermometer, so that the ball of it
rested upon the cover of a Box, and the pipe pointed directly downwards, then
we placed about the ball a little beaten ice and salt, and observed, whether,
according to our expectation, the tincted spirit, that reached to the middle of
the pipe, or thereabouts, would be retracted upon the refrigeration of the
liquor in the ball, and accordingly the spirit did in very few minutes ascend
in that short pipe above an inch higher, then a mark whereby we took notice of
its former station, and would perhaps have ascended much more, if the
application of the frigorifick mixture had been continued, by which, and
another succeeding Experiment to the same purpose, it seems, that the
condensation of liquors by cold, is not always effected by their proper gravity
only, which ordinarily may be sufficient to make the parts fall closer
together: but whether in our case the contraction be assisted by some little
tenacity in the liquor, or by the spring of some little aerial, or other
spirituous and Elastick particles, from which the instrument was not perfectly
freed, when it was sealed up, or which happened to be generated within it
afterward, will be among orher things more properly inquired into in another
place, where we may have occasion to make use of this Experiment.

There is a famous Tradition, that in Muscovy, and some other cold Countries,
it is usual out of Ponds and Rivers to take up good numbers of Swallows enclosed
in pieces of ice, and that the benumbed birds upon the thawing of the ice in a
warm room, will come to themselves again, and fly about amazedly for a while,
but not long survive so great and sudden a change. I have in another Treatise
already said somewhat about this Tradition, and therefore shall now say no more
of it, then these two things. First, that I since was assured by a person of
honor, that is very curious, and was commanded by (a many ways) great Prince
to inquire out the truth of it, when he was in some of those Countries, where
the thing is said to be familiar enough, and that the (...) and soberest
persons he could ask affirmed the thing to be true: But (secondly) having
lately inquired about this matter of a knowing person of quality, that was born
and bred in Poland, he answered me, That in the parts where he lived, it was a
very general and unquestioned opinion, that Swallows often hid themselves all
the Winter under water in Ponds and Lakes, and Seggy places, and that the
Fishermen, when having broken the ice, they cast their Nets for Fish, do draw
them up benumbed, but not dead, so that they quickly in Stoves recover their
wings, but seldom after that prolong their lives: But as for their being taken
up in ice, he told me, he had not heard of it, though I see not why in case
they commit themselves to shallow waters, as those of Ponds and Seggy places,
often are a sharp lasting frost may not sometimes reach them. And therefore
that which left me the greatest scruple about this Tradition, is, That this
Gentleman, notwithstanding his curiosity, could not affirm, that ever he
himself had seen any example of the thing he related.

But I will take this occasion to add, that having a mind in frosty weather to
try some Anatomical Experiments about Frogs, one that I employed breaking in a
Ditch some ice that was very thick, and of which he was to bring me a quantity,
found in the water, that was under the ice, good store of Frogs (besides some
Toads) which I found to be very lively, and diverse of which I kept for certain
uses a good while after.

To confirm, and to add some Paralipomena unto what I have delivered in the
Second, and in the Twentieth Titles, about the frosts getting into hard and
solid bodies, I shall here subjoyn some particulars there omitted, which I have
learned partly from Experiments, and partly from persons worthy of credit, whom
I purposely consulted about this matter.

And first as to the freezing of Wood, we have sometimes tried it by purposely
exposing partly other Wood, and partly branches cut off from growing Trees, to
an intense degree of Cold, by which the wood seemed in one night to be for some
little depth manifestly enough invaded by the frost. But a domestic of mine
having a little while since had occasion to fell an old Apple Tree, on a day
that had been preceded by a fortnights bitter frost, came and informed me, That
he found, that the frost had evidently pierced into the very middle of it,
though it were about a foot in Diameter. And an Experienced Artificer, whose
head and hand were much employed about the building of great men's houses, told
me, that he had often seen here in England pieces of Timber it self manifestly
frozen, and rendered exceeding difficult to be sawed, the frost also appearing
by evident signs to continue in the saw-dust. And therefore it will be the less
strange, if in Poland the effects of Cold upon wood be more conspicuous. For a
learned native assured me, that in his Country 'twas usual to have wood frozen
so hard, that the Hatchets would not cut it, but rebound from it, and that
'twas very usual to hear in the night a great many loud cracks, almost like the
reports of Pistols, of the shingles or wooden tyles, wherewith in many places
they cover their houses instead of Slate, and this (as I purposely asked) when
the weather was dry, and excessively cold. When I likewise inquired about the
thawing of wood, he told me, he had several times seen pieces of Timber, which
having been thoroughly frozen in the Air, did, when brought into rooms made warm
by Stoves, become covered with a kind of hoar frost, and made them look white,
and that though his Bow (which he showed me) were very strong and tough, as
being made not of wood, but horn, and other close materials, it would be so
changed by the frost, that unless special care were had in the thawing of it,
it would break.

That Marle and Chalk, and other less solid terrestrial Concretions will be
shattered by strong and durable frosts, is observed by Husbandmen, who thereby
find it the better fitted to manure their land, the Texture of those bodies,
during whose intireness, the parts most proper to feed grass and corn, are more
locked up, being by congelation in great part dissolved, but that true and
solid stones wont to be employed in noble and durable Buildings, should be
spoiled by the frost, will perhaps to most readers seem very improbable. And
therefore I shall here add what I have learned by inquiry of the ingeniousest
and most experienced Mason I have met with, because it may not only surprise
most readers, but prove an useful observation to him. Having then inquired of
this Tradesman, whether he did not find, that some free stone, a name vulgarly
known, would not be spoiled by the frost, he told me, that he had often
observed both free stone and harder stones then that, to be exceedingly spoiled
by the frost, and reduced to crack or scale off, to the blemishing and
prejudice of the houses, that are built of them. But because it may be objected
against this, that experience shows us, that diverse of the stateliest Fabrics
in England have these stones for their chief materials, and yet endure very
well the inclemencies of the Air, the reply may be, that the difference may not
consist in the peculiar natures of the stones employed, but in the several
seasons in which the same kind of stones are dug out of the Quarry. For if
they be dug up, when the cold weather is already come in, and employed in
building the same Winter, they will, upon very hard frosts, be apt to be
shattered or scale, but if they be dug early in the Summer, and suffered to
lie exposed to the Sun and Air, during all the heat of the Summer, these
seasoned stones, if I may so call them, may outlast many sharp Winters
unimpair'd. It seems to me worth trying, whether during their insolation, if
that term may be allowed me, there do not by the operation of the heat and air
upon them, exhale a certain unripe mineral, sap, or moisture (whose recess may
perhaps be discovered by weight) which if it remain in the stone, may by very
piercing frosts be congealed almost like the sap in Timber Trees, and shatter
the Texture of the stone, which agrees well with what was told me by an
understanding person, that is Master of a great Glass-house, of whom having
purposely inquired, whether he did not find, that his great earthen pots, which
are made up with as little water as is possible, and are deservedly famous for
their durable Texture, had not that Texture altered and impaired by very
piercing frosts; he assured me, that if he did not take care to keep the frost
(as they speak) from getting into them, those great and solid vessels, wherein
he used to keep his glass in fusion, would in the fire scale or crack (and
perhaps fly) and become unserviceable no less then some weeks sooner, then if
they had never been impaired by the frost. And when I inquired, whether also
glass it self would not be much prejudiced thereby, he affirmed to me, that
oftentimes in very hard frosts many glasses, that had continued entire for many
weeks (for that circumstance I was sollicitous to ask about) would as it were
of their own own accord crack with loud noises. But whatever prove to be the
issue of such Trials, it will not be amiss to confirm the Phenomenon it self,
by the testimony of an illiterate, but very experienced French Aurhor, who on a
certain occasion tells us, (as I also take notice in another Of the imper
fection of Physics.
Treatise) That he knows the stones of the mountains of Ardenne (famous enough
in France) are harder then Marble, and yet the inhabitants of that Maistre
Bernard Palissy.
Country do not draw them out of the Quarry in winter, because they are
subject to the frost. And it has been diverse times seen, that upon thaws, the
rocks without being cut, have fallen down, and killed many.

But it may yet seem far more unlikely, that frosts should get into metals
themselves, and yet having asked the newly mentioned Polonian, whether he had
observed any thing of that kind, he answered, that he had often by drawing out
his sword and pulling out his pistols, when he had been long in the field, and
came into a hot room, found them quickly almost whitened over, by a kind of
small hoar frost. But whether this were, as he conceived any thing, that was
drawn out of the Steel, and settled on the surface of it, I want circumstances
enough to make me willing to determine. But if we will credit Olaus Magnus, it
must be confessed, that considerably thick pieces of Iron and Steel it self,
will in the Northern Regions be rendered so brittle by the extreme frost, that
they are fain to temper their instruments after a peculiar manner: his words,
which being remarkable, I forbear Lib. 1. page mihi 23.
to alter, are these, Videntur praeterea ferrei ligones certa ratione
fabricati, quia his spissa atque indurata glacies caeteris instrumentis ferreis
non cedens facilius infringitur dum aliae secures chalybe permixtae, in
vehementi frigore ad solum glaciei vel virentis arboris ictum instar vitri
rumpuntur, ubi ligones praedicti sive ferreae hastae fortissimi manent. Which
testimony, notwithstanding what some have written to this Authors
disparagement, does not seem to me at all incredible. For I remember, that even
here in England I have had the curiosity to cause trials to be made in very
frosty weather, whereby, if an expert Smith I then used to employ, did not
gratis deceive me in the Irons I employed, that (...) may by such degrees of
cold, as even our Climate is capable of, be rendered exceeding brittle, as he
several times affirmed to me, that there are some kinds of iron which he could
hammer, and turn, as they phrase it, cold in open weather, which yet in very
hard frosts would become so brittle, as by the same way of working easily to
break, if not to fly asunder. And this he affirmed both of Iron and Steel, of
which latter metal another very skilful workman, whom I also consulted,
certifi'd the like: but though this disagreed not with trials purposely made on
Iron rods had informed me, yet presuming, that in such a nice piece of work as
a spring, some further satisfaction about this matter might be obtained, I
inquired of a very dexterous Artificer, that was skilled in making springs for
others, whether or no he found a necessity of giving springs another temper in
very frosty weather, then at other seasons, and he answered me, that in such
(...) if he gave his springs the same temper, that he did in mild and open
weather, they would be very apt to break. And therefore in very sharp seasons
he used to take them down lower, as they speak, that is, give them a softer
temper then at other times, which as it makes it probable, that the cold may
have a considerable operation upon bodies, upon which most men would not
suspect it to have one, so that discovery may afford a hint, that may possibly
reach further then we are yet aware of, touching the interest that cold may
have in many of the Phenomenon of nature.

I should here subjoyn, that in prosecution of what is delivered in the XX.
Section about the weight of solid bodies, that I there wished might be exposed
to a congealing Air, I did cause some Trials of that kind to be made in a very
frosty night, especially with Bricks, but something that happened to the only
Scales I then had fit for such an Experiment, made me doubt, whether some
little increase of weight, that seemed to be gained by congelation, were to be
reli'd upon, though there did not appear any hoar frost, or other thing
outwardly adhering, to which the effect could be ascribed.

It is a Tradition, which the Schools and others have received with great
veneration from their Master Aristotle, that hot water will sooner freez then
cold; but I do not much wonder, that the learned (...), as I find him quoted by
Bartholinus, should contradict this Tradition, though he be himself a
commentator upon that Book of Aristotle, wherein it is delivered. For I could
never satisfy my self, that there is (at least with our water, and in our
Climate) any truth in the Assertion, though I have made trial of it more ways
then one, but it may very well suffice to mention a few of the plainest and
easiest Trials, with whose success I am well satisfied as to the main, as the
Reader also will, I doubt not, be; though not having, for want of health, been
able to have so immediate an inspection of these, as of the rest of my
Experiments, I was sometimes fain to trust the watchfulness of my servants
(whom I was careful to send out often) to bring me word how long after the
first freezing of the cold water, it was before the other began to be congealed.

We took then three pottingers, as near of a size as we could, and the one we
filled almost to the top with cold water, the other with water, that had been
boiled before, and was moderately cooled again, and the third with hot water;
these three vessels were exposed together in the same place to the freezing Air.

In the Entry of one of the Trials, I find, that being all three put out at
half an hour after eight of the clock. That the pottinger that contained the
cold liquor began to freez at after ten.

That which contained the water heated and cooled again, began to freez past
ten.

And that which contained the hot water, at half an hour after eleven, and
somewhat better. So that though all froze within the compass of two hours, yet
the cold water began this time to freez an hour and a sooner then the hot.

These pottingers were earthen, but I elsewhere made the Trial in others of
metal, and there also the cold water began to freez, both before that which
had been heated and cooled again, and long before the hot.

Another time I measured out the water by spoonfuls into pottingers (not having
then by me any fit Scales to weigh it) to be the more sure, that the quantities
of water should not be considerably unequal, and then also the cold water froze
a considerable while before the hot.

But my usual jealousy in the making nice Experiments, tempting me to inquire,
whether the water in some of the former Trials had not been heated in a stone
Bottle, not a Skillet, it was confessed, that it was so, but that the bottle
used to contain nothing but Beer, and had been washed beforehand: And though I
did not think, that the bottle could have any considerable influence on the
Experiment; yet least it should be suspected, that the scalding water, mighr
have imbibed some spirituous parts remaining yet among the minute dregs of Beer
in the pores of the bottle, for the greater security I caused the water to be
heated in a Skillet, and because in one of the Trials made in a Village, where
we had not choice of pottingers, the cold water chanced to be put into one,
that afterward seemed less, then that wherein the hot was exposed, I did this
very day repeat the Experiment, by putting cold water into a somewhat larger
pottinger, heating the other water in a Skillet, and the event of the Trials is
this,

That the cold water being put out with the rest at after 6. began to freez
somewhat before after 7.

The water heated and cooled again, began to freez after 7. And having these
frozen waters a pretty while by me, I sent in for my own further satisfaction,
for the hot water, and found it not to be, in the least, frozen at half a
quarter after 8. So that supposing it to continue half a quarter of an hour
longer before the beginning of its congelation, As it afterward did at the
least.
it was twice as long ere it began to freez, as the cold water had been.

By which we may see how well bestowed their labor has been, that have puzzled
themselves and others, to give the reason of a Phenomenon, which perhaps with
half the pains they might have found to be but Chymaerical.

I have been the more circumstantial in setting down these Trials, that I may
express a civility to so famous a Philosopher as Aristotle, and also because
Artificial Congelations, which we can commonly best command, and which we have
the oftenest used about our other Experiments, are not so proper for this. For
having formerly had the curiosity to take two pipes of glass made of the same
Cylinder, that they might be of equal bore, and having sealed each of them at
one end, and having filled both to the same height, and then stirred them too
and fro together in a mixture of beaten ice, water and salt, (which mixture I
make use of for the effecting sudden Congelations) I found both waters to freez
too quickly to make a notable disparity in the length of times, that they
remained uncongeal'd: And we will not on this occasion omit one Phenomenon
afforded us by these Trials, because it may admonish men, how cautious they
ought to be in making nice Experiments. For having once made the formerly
mentioned Trial, with glass pipes, that were but (...) (as not exceeding the
(...) of a man's forefinger) and having for greater caution put the hot water
first into one glass, and then into another, we found one time, that the hot
water froze first, and wondering at it, we examined the glasses, and perceiving
one of them to be more Conical or acuminated, where it had been sealed up then
the other, it seemed probable, and afterward appeared true, that the water in
this acuminated part, being suddenly frozen by reason of the slenderness of the
glass there, promoted and accelerated the Congelation of the rest, so that
whether it were the cold or the hot water, that was put into that pipe, it
would thereby gain a manifest advantage.

In the foregoing Experiments (made in pottingers) I made use not only of cold
and hot water, but of water that had been heated and cooled again, though not
reduced to its full pristine coldness, to prevent the Objections of some, that
might pretend, that such water would have frozen sooner then Cold, which yet
would not salve the common opinion which specifies not such water.

Postscript.
ANd it seems, that such Cautions as I have been mentioning, are not altogether
useless. For accidentally casting my eye upon the Circulus Pisanus of
Berigardus upon Aristotle's Meteors, I somewhat wondered to find, that an
Author, who is looked upon to be a great adversary of Aristotle, except in his
dangerous and illgrounded conceit of the eternity of the world, and some other
erroneous opinions, does yet endeavor to justify Aristotle by affirming, that
his Experiment will succeed, if by heated water we understand, that which
having been heated, is suffered to cool again, till it be reduced to the temper
of other water which was not heated. For this refrigerated water he says, he
has found to congeal much sooner then the other water, but this I confess I am
very unapt to believe. For having diverse times caused cold water to be exposed
to the Air in frosty weather, with that which had been heated and cooled again,
and having set sometimes one of my Domestics, sometimes another, to watch
them, the events did very much disfavour the assertion of our Author, though
care was had of the circumstances most considerable in such an Experiment, as
the matter, size and shape of the vessels; the equal degree of cold in the two
several parcels of water (into both which I sometimes dipped my finger to judge
of them before they were exposed) and the place, in which they were put both
together to be frozen. But for further satisfaction, we elsewhere took two
pottingers, bought purposely for the making of Experiments, of the same size
and shape, and in the same shop; one of these we almost filled with cold water
out of a glass, wherein we marked how high that water reached, that by filling
the same glass to the same height with the refrigerated water, we might be able
to measure out the same quantity into the other pottinger. This done, I
appointed one, whose care I had no reason to distrust, to examine the tempers
of the several waters, with a more then ordinarily sensible Weather-glass, as a
far safer Criterion then the bare touch, to judge of the coldness of liquors;
these being reduced to the same temper, were exposed to a very sharp Air, and
there watched by the person, whom (being not well, and unable to support such
weather my self) I appointed to attend the Experiment, and he according to
direction finding them begin to freez, as 'twere at the very same time, brought
me in the two pottingers, in each of which I saw the beginnings, and but the
beginnings of congelation, where the upper surfaces of the waters were
contiguous to the containing vessels: so that having made this Experiment with
much greater exactness then probably Berigardus did, or, for want of such
instruments as I used, could make it, I cannot but suspect, supposing the
common waters, he and I used, to be of the same nature, that he was either
negligent or over-seen in affirming, that heated and refrigerated water, will
cool so much sooner, as he would persuade us, then other. Quare ferventem aquam
adhibuisse oportet qui asserit eam esse minus gelabilem, praecipue salsam. Page
571.
And as I am not convinced by experience, that it will freez sooner at all, so
till he have better made out the reason he seems to give of the Phenomenon, I
must question whether he rightly ascribe after Cabaeus (if I much misremember
not) the congelation of water to a certain Coagulum, distinct from the cold
spirits, that plentifully mingle with the water, which Coagulum it seems (for
his style is not wont to be very perspicuous) that he would have to consist of
certain dry Corpuscles, no less necessary to conglaciate water, then Runnet to
curdle Milk: And for what this Author says, Tam cito illa congelabat, ut
eximerem ex eo crustam unam aut alteram antequam non calefacta vet levissime
concrevisset. Page 572.
that he must have employed boiling or scalding water, who affirms it to be
less congealable then other, that mistake may be sufficiently disproved by the
several above recited Trials, wherein we found water, moderately refrigerated,
to freez much later then cold, and whereas Berigardus intimates, that the
person whoever he be, that he dissents from, does unskilfully suppose warm
salt water to be the less disposed to congelation for being salt, our Author is
therein also mistaken; for though it be true what he alleges, that salt
outwardly applied promotes the congelation of water, yet, that dissolved in
water, it has a contrary effect, may appear by the familiar observation, that
Seawater is much more difficult to be congealed then fresh water: and to show,
that it is not a property of Seawater, but a water impregnated with common
Salt, I have several times tried, that a strong solution of such salt in
ordinary water, will not at all be congealed by the being exposed to the Air,
even in very sharp frosts, as may be easily collected from some of the
Experiments mentioned in the former part of this Book. Another particular there
is (about the use of Allume in reference to freezing) in this often cited
passage of Berigardus, which I might here examine, if my have and my
indisposedness to engage in a controversy of small moment, did not enjoin me
to defer it till a fitter Here the Postscript ends.
occasion.

To confirm the power ascribed in the VI. Section to cold, as to the long
preservation of bodies from corruption, 'twill not be amiss to add these two
remarkable passages, the latter of which affords a good instance of the
improvement, that may be made of some degrees of cold to the uses of humane
life.

The first observation is afforded us by some of our Contrymen, in a Voyage
extant in Purchase, where the writer of it speaks thus: Of the Samojeds, whose
Country he visited, Purchase lib. 4. cap. 19. page 844.
Their Dead they bury on the side of the hills, where they live (which is
commonly on some small Islands) making a pile of stones over them, yet not so
close, but that we might see the dead Body, the Air being so piercing, that it
keeps them from much stinking savor: so likewise I have seen their Dogs
buried in the same manner.

The other observation is given us in the description of Iceland (made by one
that visited it) to be met with in the same Purchas's Collections, where among
other things he gives us this Account, which if I mistake not, I have had
confirmed by others, of their strange way of ordering and preserving their
Fish. Having taken Lib. 3. cap. 22.
them, they pluck out the bones, and lay up their bowels, and make Fat or Oil
of them: They heap up their Fish in the open Air, and the purity of the Air is
such there, that they are hardened only with the Wind and Sun, without Salt,
better surely then if they were corned with Salt. And if they kill any Beast,
they preserve the flesh without stinck or putrefaction, without Salt, hardened
only with the Wind.

I know not whether 'twill be worth while to add to the fifth and sixth Numbers
of the VII. Title, that, for further confirmation of our opinion, that it is not
Natures abhorrencie of a Vacuum, but the distension of the water, that breaks
glasses, when the contained liquors come to be congealed, I did on set purpose
fill several vials (some at one time, and some at another) to the lower parts
of their necks (most of which were purposely made long) with common water, and
though they were all left unstopp'd, that the external Air might come in freely
to them; yet not only one of them, that I stirred up and down in a mixture of
beaten ice, salt, and water, was hastily broken upon the congelation of the
contained water, but several others, that were exposed to be frozen more
leisurely by the cold Air only, were likewise broken to pieces, by the
expansion of the freezing water, as appeared both by the gaping cracks, and
also by this, that the ice was considerably risen in the necks above the waters
former stations, which had been noted by marks before; and if it had been more
easy for the included water to make it self room, either by stretching the
glass, or (rather) leaving the superficial ice congealed at first in the neck,
or by both those ways together, then to break the vessel, the vial would
probably have remained entire.

I say probably, because I am not sure, that there may not sometimes intervene
in these Experiments somewhat that may need further observation and inquiring.
For as it seems, that what I have been lately saying may be confirmed by an
unstopp'd vial, which was exposed at the same time to congelation, with this
success, that without breaking the vial the water was frozen, and the ice in
the neck impelled up a good way above the height, at which the liquor rested
before it began to congeal; so on the other side I remember, that I have
sometimes had a good store of liquor frozen in a vial, without breaking the
glass, though a vial were stopped: as if the difference, that I have on other
occasions observed betwixt glasses, whereof some are very brittle, and others
more apt to yield, might have an influence on such Experiments, or that some
peculiar softness, or other property of the ice, that afforded me my
observation, or else some other thing not yet taken notice of, were able to
vary their success.

In confirmation of what is delivered in the VII. Section, about the expansion
of water by freezing, I shall add, that having caused some strong glass-Bottles
of a not inconsiderable bigness to be filled with a congealable liquor,
excepting the necks, which were filled with Sallet oil, I observed, that in a
somewhat long, and very sharp frost the contained water was so far expanded by
congelation, that it not only thrust up the corks, but the cold having taken
away the defluency of the oil, that liquor together with the water, that could
no longer be contained in the Cavities of the glasses, being as it seemed,
frozen as fast as it was thrust out of the neck, there appeared quite above the
upper part of the Bottles, Cylinders of diverse inches in height, consisting
partly of concreted oil, and partly of congealed water, having on their tops
the corks that had been raised by them.

It is a Tradition very current among us, that when Ponds or Rivers are frozen
over, unless the ice be seasonably broken in several places, the Fishes will
dye for want of Air. And I find this Tradition to be Volentes igitur piscari
sub glacie duo magna for amina latitudine 8. vel 10. pedum, centum and
quinquaginta vel 200. passibus a se invicem directa distantia, aperiunt,
interquae 30. vel 40. minor a for amina, latitudine unius pedis and semis, ab
utroque latere distantia 30. pedum intermedia constituunt, tum per ea, etc.
Olai Mag. lib. 20.
more general, then, before I made particular inquiry into it, I knew of. For
Olaus Magnus mentions it more then once, without at all questioning the truth
of it, but rather, as if the general practice of the Northern Nations to break
in diverse places their frozen Ponds and Rivers, were grounded upon the
certainty of it. In the twentieth Book (which treats of Fishes) after having
spoke of the reasons, why the Northern Fishermen employ so much pains and
industry to fish under the ice, and having said among other things, that the
nature of the Fish exacts it, he adds this reason, that, Nisi glacie perforata
respiracula Olaus Mag. Titulo, De cursu glaciali, pro piscibus. Quae
(Anguillae) si totaliter glacie constrictae fuerint simul omnes respiraculum ab
aere nou habentes pariter suffocatae moriuntur.
susciperent, quotquot in flumine vel stagno versantur, subito morerentur.
Another passage of the same Author, and taken likewise out of the same (20.)
Book you may meet with in the Margent, though in another place he seems to
intimate another, and not an absurd, reason of the death of Fishes in Winter,
where advertising the Reader, that Ponds and Lakes did generally begin to freez
in Praemittendum est quod generaliter omnes lacus, and stagnales Aquae in mense
Octobri incipiunt congelari, glaciesque aucto frigore in plerisque locis tantum
condensari, ut ubi venae lacus and stagna viventis aquae non intrant, pisces
suffocati tempore resolutionis glaciei inspiciantur, verum ne haec (...) tam
dispendiosa fiat, diligentia (...) continue glacies ipsa perfringitur ne
congeletur. Olai Magni lib. 1. Titulo de transitu glaciali, etc.
October, he adds, that Fishes are usually found suffocated, when the Thaw
comes, where veins (or springs) of living water do not enter: by which passage
he seems to make the want of shifted water cooperate to the suffocation of the
Fishes. And to the same purpose I shall now add, that having inquired of a
learned Native, that had had about Cracovia, (whose Territory is said to abound
much in Ponds) whether the Polanders also used the same custom, he answered
me, that they did, and that sometimes in larger Ponds they were careful to
break the ice in eight or ten several places, to make so many, either vents or
Air-holes, for the preservation (as they supposed) of the Fish. And when I
inquired of the often mentioned Russian Emperors Physician, whether in Muscovy
the frost killed the Fishes in the Ponds, in case the ice were not broken to
give them Air, he answered, that in ordinary Ponds it were not to be doubted,
but that in great Lakes he could not tell, because the Fishermen use to break
many great holes in the ice for the taking of the Fish. For at each of these
holes they thrust in a Net, and all these Nets are drawn up together in one
great breach made insome convenient place near the middle of the rest.

It appears then, that the Tradition is general enough, but whether it be well
grounded, I dare not determine, either affirmatively or negatively, till trial
have been made in Ponds with more of design or of curiosity, and watchfulness,
then I have known hitherto done, men seeming to have acquiesc'd in the
Tradition without examining it, and to have been more careful, not to omit what
is generally believed necessary to the preservation of their Fish, then to try,
whether they would escape without it: Wherefore, though for ought I know the
Tradition may prove true, yet to induce men not to think it certain, till
experience has duly convinced them of it, I shall represent, That as much as I
have in other Treatises manifested, how necessary Air is to Animals; yet
whether Fishes may not live, either without Air, or without any more of it,
then they may find interspersed in the water they swim in, has not yet, that I
know of, been sufficiently proved. For what we have attempted of that nature in
our Pneumatical Engine, whether it be satisfactory or not, is not yet divulged.
And I remember not to have hitherto met with any writer, (except Olaus be
construed to intimate so much) that affirms upon his own observation, that the
want of breaking ice in Ponds has destroyed all the Fish. Besides, that
possibly in frozen Ponds, there may be other reasons of the death of the
Fishes, that are killed (if any store of them be so) by very sharp frosts. For
who knows what the locking up of some kinds of subterraneal steams, that are
wont freely to ascend through water unfrozen, may do to vitiate and infect the
unventulated water, and make it noxious to the Fishes, that live in it: perhaps
also the excrementitious steams, that insensibly issue out of the bodies of the
Fishes themselves, may by being penned up by the ice, contribute in some cases
to the vitiating of the water, at least in reference to some sort of Fishes.
For being desirous to learn from a person curious of the ways of preserving and
transporting Fish, whether some Fishes would not quickly languish, grow sick,
and sometimes die outright, if the water they swam in were not often shifted,
he assured me, that some kinds of them would: and it has not yet, that I hear
of, been tried, whether or no, though Ponds seldom freez to the bottom, yet the
water that remains under the ice (in which it self some Fishes may be now and
then intercepted) may not, even whilst it continues uncongeal'd, admit a
degree of cold, that though not great enough to turn water into ice, may yet be
great enough, when it continues very long, to destroy Fishes, though not
immediately, yet within a less space of time, then that, during which the
surface of the Pond continues frozen. But it is not worth while to be
sollicitous about conjectures of causes, till we are sure of the Truth of the
Phenomenon; and these things are proposed not so much to confute the
Tradition, we have been speaking of, as to bring it to a Trial, which, having
no opportunity to make in Ponds, I endeavored as well this Winter as formerly,
to obtain what information I could from Trials made in small vessels, with the
few Fishes I was able to procure. And I shall subjoyn most of these Trials, not
because I think them very considerable, but because they are, for ought I know,
the only attempts of the kind, that have yet been made.

To satisfy my self, whether the ices denying access to the Air, was that
which destroyed Fishes in frozen Ponds, I thought upon this Epedient, I
procured a glass vessel with a large belly, and a long neck, but so slender,
that it was only wide enough for the body of the Fishes to pass through, and
then having filled the vessel with some live Gudgeons, and a good Quantity of
water, the neck of it was made to pass through a hole that was left, or made
for it in the midst of a metalline plate, or wooden Trencher, which could
descend no lower then the neck, because of the inferior part of the glass that
would not suffer it, and which served to support a mixture of Ice (or Snow) and
Salt, which was applied round about the extant neck of the glass. By this
contrivance I proposed to my self a double advantage: the first, that, whereas
in broad vessels it is not always so easy, as one would think to be sure, that
the surface of the water is quite frozen over in every part, by this way I
could easily satisfy my self, by inverting the glass, and observing, that the
ice had so exactly choked up and stopped the neck, that no drop of water could
get out, not any bubble of Air get in, and yet the Fishes had liberty enough to
play in the subjacent water. The other convenience was, that, the frigorifick
mixture being applied to the neck, no water was congealed, or extremely
refrigerated, but that which was contained in the neck, so that there seemed no
cause to suspect, that in case the Fishes, thus debarred of Air, should not be
able to live in the water, it was rather Cold, then want of Air that killed
them. But though not having then been able, by reason of a remove, to prosecute
these Trials to the utmost, nor to register all the circumstances, I shall not
lay much weight upon it, yet I remember, that the included Fishes continued
long enough alive, to make me shrowdly suspect the Truth of the vulgar
Tradition.

Another time being destitute of the convenience of such glasses, I caused some
of the same kind of Fishes to be put into a broad and flat earthen vessel, with
not much more water, then sufficed perfectly to cover them, and having exposed
them all night to a very intense degree of cold, I found the next morning, that
some hours after day, they were alive, and seemed not to have been much
prejudiced by the cold, or exclusion of Air. It Is true, that there was a very
large moveable bubble under the ice, but that seemed to have been generated by
the Air, or some Analogous substance, emitted out of the Gills or bodies of the
Fishes themselves: for, that the surface of the water was exactly frozen over
(which does not in such Trials happen so often, as one would think) I found, by
being able to hold the vessel quite inverted, without losing one drop of water.
And that this large bubble might possibly proceed from the Fishes themselves, I
was induced to suspect, because having at different seasons of the year, for
diverse purposes kept several sorts of Fishes, and particularly Gudgeons, for
many days in glass vessels, to satisfy my self about some Phenomenon I had a
mind to observe, I have often by watching them, seen them lift up their mouths
above the surface of the water, and seem to gape and take in Air, and
afterward let go under water out of their mouths and gills diverse bubbles,
which seemed to be portions of the Air they had taken in, perhaps a little
altered in their bodies. And particularly in Lampries (of which odd sort of
Fishes I elsewhere make mention) I have with pleasure, both observed and showed
to ingenious men, that being taken out of the water into the Air, and then held
under water again, they very manifestly appeared to squeez out, and that not
without some force, at those several little holes, which are commonly mistaken
for their eyes, numerous and conspicuous bubbles of Air, which they seemed to
have taken in at their mouths, if not also at those holes. But of these
matters a fitter occasion may perhaps invite me to say more. To return now to
our Gudgeons, I shall add, that to satisfy my self further, what cold and want
of Air they may be brought to support, I exposed a couple of them in a basin,
to an exceeding bitter night, and though the next day I found the ice frozen in
the vessel to a great thickness, and one of the Fishes frozen up in it, there
remaining a little water unfrozen, the other Fish appeared through the ice to
move to and fro, and the ice being afterward partly thawed, and partly broken,
not only that Fish was found lively enough, but the other, which I alone judged
not to be quite dead, though, when the ice was broke, it lay moveless, did in a
few minutes so far recover, as to tow after it (if I may so speak) a good
piece, into which his tail remained yet inserted; and though one of these, and
some other Gudgeons, that had been already weakened by long keeping, were once
more exposed in the Basin to the frost, and suffered to lie there, till they
were frozen up, yet the ice being broken, in which they were enclosed, though
their bodies were stiff and crooked, and seemed to be stark dead, lying in the
water with their bellies upwards, yet one of them quickly recovered, and the
other not very long after began to show manifest signs of life, though he could
not in many hours after so far recover, as to swim with his back upwards. It Is
true, that these Fishes did not long survive, but of that, two or three, not
improbable reasons, might be given, if it were worth while to name here any
other then this, that the ice, they had been frozen up in, or the violence that
was offered them by the fragments of it, when it was broken, had wounded them,
as was manifest enough by some hurts, that appeared upon their bodies; yet some
other Gudgeons were irrecoverably frozen to death, by being kept enclosed in
ice, during (if I misremember not the time) three days. And as for other
Animals, I caused a couple of Frogs to be artificially frozen in a wide mouthed
glass, furnished with a convenient quantity of water, but though they seemed at
first enclosed in ice, yet looking nearer, I found, that about each of them
there remained a little turbid liquor unfrozen, as if it had been kept so by
some expirations from their bodies. Wherefore causing either the same, or two
others, (for I do not punctually remember that circumstance) to be carefully
frozen, and for a considerable while, I found, that notwithstanding the ice,
into which most part of the water was reduced, not only one of them before the
ice was broken appeared to be perfectly alive, but the other that was moveless
and stiff, and lying with the belly upwards in a Basin of cold water, whereinto
it was cast, did in a very few minutes begin to swim about in it. I should have
made more Trials at least, if not also more satisfactory ones, if I could have
had Fishes and vessels, and cold weather at command: But upon the whole matter,
though the Tradition, we have been examining, may perhaps have some thing of
truth in it, yet it seems to deserve to be further inquired into, both in
reference to the truth of the matter of fact, the death of Fishes in frozen
Ponds and Rivers, and in reference to the cause, whereto that effect is imputed.

I met with an odd passage in Captain James's voyage, which if it had been
circumstantially enough set down, might prove of moment in reference to the
weight of bodies frozen and unfrozen, and therefore though I would not build
any thing on it, yet I shall not omit it. The Page 82.
ninth (says he) we hoisted out our Beer and Cydar, and made a Raft of it,
fastening it to our shore-Anchor. The Beer and Cydar sunck presently to the
ground, which was nothing strange to us, for that any wood or pipe-staves, that
had layen under the ice all Winter, would also sinck down so soon, as ever it
was heaved over board.

About the duration of ice I forgot, through have, to add a relation of Capt.
James, whereby it may appear, That though Wine abounds with very spirituous and
nimble parts, whence it resists congelation far more then water, yet if even
this liquor came once to be congealed, the ice made of it may be very durable.
For he sets down in his Journal, that when he came to his Ship again, he found
a But of Wine, that had been all the Winter in the upper deck, to continue as
yet all firm frozen, though Page 47.
it were then the month of May.

When I treated of the great proportion in some pieces of ice, that were
aground, instead of taking notice of the great piece of ice mentioned by Gerard
de Veer, to be 52. fathom deep, the passage that was to be transcribed, was
this other, hard by, which contains two examples of towers of ice, where the
extant part reached upwards more then half as much as the immersed part reached
downwards. We saw (says he) another Purchase lib. 3. cap. 5. page 487
great piece of ice not far from us, lying fast in the Sea, that was as sharp
above, as if it had been a Tower, whereunto we rowed, and casting out our lead,
we found that it lay 20. fathom fast on the ground under the water, and 12.
fathom above the water. -- We rowed to another piece of ice, and cast out our
Lead, and found that it lay 18. fathom deep, fast on the ground under the
water, and 10. fathom above the water.

That snow lying long, and too long on the ground, does much conduce to the
fertilizing of it, is a common observation of our Husbandmen. And Bartholinus
in his Treatise of the use of snow, brings several passages out of Authors to
make it good: to which I shall add the testimony of our learned English
Ambassador, Dr. Fletcher, who speaking of the fruitfulness of the soil, and
hasty growth of many things in the great Empire of Russia, gives this account
of it.

This fresh and speedy growth of the Purchase lib. 3. cap. 1. page 415.
Spring there, seems to proceed from the benefit of the snow, which all the
Winter time being spread over the whole Country, as a white robe, and keeping
it warm from the rigor of the frost, in the Spring time (when the Sun waxes
warm, and dissolveth it into water) does so thoroughly drench and soak the
ground, that it is somewhat of a slight and sandymold, and then shines so
hotly upon it again, that it draws the herbs and plants forth in great
plenty, and variety, in a very short time.

As we made some Trials to discover, whether congelation would destroy or
considerably alter the odors of bodies, so we had the like curiosity in
reference to diverse other qualities, not only those that are reputed manifest,
as colors and tastes, the latter of which we sometimes found to be notably
changed for the worse in flesh congealed, but also those that are wont to be
called occult, and among the qualities of this sort, I had particularly a mind
to try, whether the purging faculty of Catharticks would be advanced or
impaired, or destroyed by congelation, and for this purpose I caused to be
exposed thereunto diverse purging liquors, some of a more benign, and some of a
brisker nature, and that in differing forms, as of syrup, decoction, infusion,
etc. But for want of opportunity, to try upon the bodies of animals, what
change the cold had made in the purging liquors, it had congealed, I was unable
to give my self an account of the success of such Experiments; only since, in
some of these Trials I had a care to make use of Cathartick liquors prepared by
fermentation, (which way of preparing them, is it self a thing, I elsewhere
take notice of, as not unworthy to be prosecuted.) I shall add on this
occasion, that fermentation is so noble and important a subject, that the
influence of cold upon it may deserve a particular inquiry. And I am invited to
think, that that influence may be very considerable, partly by my having
observed (upon a Trial purposely made) both that Raisins and water, (with which
I was used to make Artificial Wines) did not in many days, whilst the weather
was very frosty, so much as manifestly begin to ferment, though the water were
kept fluid; and partly by my having observed, that Beer will continue as it
were new, and be kept from being, as they call it, ready to drink much longer
then one would readily suspect, if very frosty weather supervene, before it
have quite finished its fermentation, insomuch, that an experienced person, of
whom I afterward inquired about this matter, assured me, that Beer not duly
ripe, would not sometimes in five or six weeks of very frosty weather, be
brought to be as ripe as in one week of warm and friendly weather. But we have
a nobler instance to our present purpose, if that be true which I learned from
an intelligent Frenchman, whom I consulted about this matter. For according to
this experienced person, the way to keep Wine in the Must (in which state its
sweetness makes it desired by many) is to take newly expressed juice of Grapes,
and having turned it up before it begins to work, to let down the vessels
(which ought to be very carefully closed) to the bottom of some deep Well or
River, for six or eight weeks, during which time the liquor will be so well
settled (if I may so speak) in the constitution, it has so long obtained, that
afterward it may be kept in almost the same state, and for diverse months
continue a sweet, and not yet fermented liquor, which some, in imitation of the
French and Latins, call in one word, Must. And how by the help of Cold well
applied, some other juices, that are wont to work early, and to be thereby soon
spoiled, may be long kept from working, the Reader may perchance learn in
another Treatise, to which such matters more properly belong.

It Is known, that the Schools define cold by the property, they ascribe to it,
of congregating both Heterogeneous and Homogeneous things. I thought it not
amiss to attempt the making some separations in bodies by the force of Cold.
For if that hold true in this climate, which has been observed by Travelers
and Navigators in Northern Regions; that men may obtain from Beer and Wine a
very strong spirit, and a phlegm by congelation, it seems probable, that in
diverse other liquors the waterish part will begin to freez before the more
spirituous and saline, and if so, we may be assisted to make diverse
separations, as well by cold, as by heat, and dephlegme, if I may so speak,
some liquors, as well by congelation as by distillation: but I doubt, whether
the ordinary frosts of this Country can produce a degree of cold great enough
to make such divisions and separations in bodies, as have been observed in the
more Northern Climates. For though having purposely hung out a glass-bottle
with a quart of Beer in it, in an extraordinarily sharp night, I found the next
morning, that much the greatest part of the Beer being turned into ice, there
remained somewhat nearer the middle, but nearer the bottom, an uncongeal'd
liquor, which to me and others seemed stronger then the Beer, and was at least
manifestly stronger then the thawed ice, which made but a spiritless, and, as
it were, but a dead drink; yet in some other Trials my success was not so
considerable as some would have expected. For having put one part of high
rectified spirit of Wine, to about five or six parts, if I misremember not, of
common water, and having put them into a round glass, and placed that in beaten
ice and salt, though the mixture were in great part turned into ice; yet I
could not perceive, that even two liquors so slightly mingled, were any thing
accurately severed from one another, although once, to enable my self the
better to judge of it, the spirit of Wine I employed was beforehand deeply
tincted with Cochinele, and therefore I the less wonder, that in Claret Wine I
could not make any exact separation of the red and the colorless parts:
However I thought it not amiss to try, how far in some other liquors this way
of separating the waterish, and more easily congealable part from the rest,
would or would not succeed. And I remember, that a large glass vessel, wherein
spirit of Vinegre was exposed to the cold, a considerable part was turned into
ice, whose swimming argued it to be lighter then the rest of the liquor: but
though I put some of this ice in a glass by it self, to examine by its weight
and taste, when thawed, how much it differed from the uncongeal'd part of the
spirit, my hopes were disappointed by a misfortune, which was not repaired by
my exposing afterward a smaller quantity of spirit of Vinegre to the Nocturnal
Air, for that proved so cold, that the whole was turned into ice, wherefore I
must reserve for another opportunity the prosecuting that Experiment, as also
the trying, whether a separation of the Serous or the Oleaginous parts of Milk
may be effected. For though once the frost seemed to have promoted a separation
of Creme, notwithstanding that heat also may do it, and though another time
there seemed to be another kind of divulsion of parts made by congelation; yet
for want of leisure to prosecute such Trials, they proved not satisfactory, no
more then did some attempts of the like nature, that I made upon blood by
freezing it. But notwithstanding these discouragements, I resolved to try, what
I could do upon Brine. For calling to mind the Relations mentioned in the XV.
Title, and elsewhere, which seem to argue, that in some cases the ice of the
Seawater may, being thawed, yield fresh water, and being the more inclined to
think it worth Trial, by a Physician, I since happened to discourse with about
this matter, who affirmed to me, that sailing along the coast of Germany, he
had taken out of the Sea ice, that being thawed, he found to afford good fresh
water, I began to consider, whether we might not by cold, free salt water at
some seasons of the year, from a great deal of the phlegm, which it is wont to
cost much to free them from by fire, and other means. For a little help toward
the diminution of the fresh water, is looked upon as so useful an Experiment,
by many that boil salt out of the salt springs, that in some Countries, that
are thought the skilfullest in that trade, they make their salt water fall upon
great bundles of small brushwood, that being thereby divided, and reduced to a
far greater superficies, there may, in falling through, some of the purely
Aqueous parts exhale away; wherefore dissolving one part of common salt in 44.
times its weight of common water, that it might be reduced, either exactly, or
near, to the degree of saltness, that has been by several writers observed in
the water of our neighboring Seas, and having likewise caused another and much
stronger Brine to be made, by putting in to the water a far greater proportion
of salt, (for so there is in many of our salt springs) we exposed these several
solutions to the congealing cold of the Air in frosty weather, where the last
mentioned solution being too strongly impregnated with the salt, continued some
days and nights altogether uncongeal'd; but that weaker solution, which
emulated Sea water, being exposed in a shallow and wide mouthed vessel (that
shape being judged the most proper we could procure for our design) the large
superficies, that was exposed to the Air, did, as we expected, afford us a cake
of ice, which being taken off, and the rest of the liquor exposed again to the
Air in the same vessel, we obtained a second cake of ice, and taking the
remaining, which seemed to be indisposed enough to congelation, we found, that
by comparing it with that, which was afforded us by the first cake of ice
permitted to thaw, there appeared a very manifest difference betwixt the water,
whereinto the ice was resolved, scarce tasting so much as brackish, whereas the
liquor, that had continued uncongeal'd, was considerably salt in taste. And if
I had had the convenience of examining my self these two liquors
Hydrostatically, as I was fain to have them examined by another, I doubt not
but by their weight, I should have discovered precisely enough the difference
between them (which the person I employed found to be considerable) and
consequently should have been assisted to make an estimate of the advantage,
that might be afforded by the operation of the cold toward the freezing of the
Brine from its superfluous water. But though I had not a quantity of ice great
enough to satisfy me, whether that little brackishness of taste, I have
mentioned, proceeded from some saline Corpuscles, that concurred to the
constituting of the ice it self, or did only adhere to the lower part of it,
among other particles of the liquor, that remained uncongeal'd, yet perhaps
'twere not amiss to try, whether in very large, though not deep vessels, this
Experiment, especially promoted by some expedients, that practice may suggest,
may not in some seasons and places, be brought to be of some advantage.

Whilst I was endeavoring by some of the above recited Experiments, to make
some separations in liquors by congelation, I thought fit to try by the same
means, what separations I could make in some bodies, betwixt liquors, and those
more stable parts among which they were engaged, hoping, upon considerations,
which 'twere too long to enumerate, that, if such attempts should succeed, they
might afford hints of a Luciferous nature. I took then diverse vegetable
substances of differing kinds, as Turnips, Carrets, Beets, Apples, and tender
wood, freshly cut off from growing trees, as also diverse Animal substances, as
Musculous flesh, Livers, Brains, Eyes, Tongues, and other parts, and exposed
them to a very sharp cold, that they might be thoroughly frozen. Now one of the
chief things, that I proposed to my self in this attempt, was, to try how far I
could by congelation make discovery of any thing about the Texture of Animals
and Plants, that had not been taken notice of by Anatomists themselves, and
would scarce otherwise be rendered visible. And I easily found, that I had not
groundlesly imagined, that in diverse Succulent bodies, both vegetable and
animal, the sap or the juice, that was so dispersed among the other parts, and
divided into such minute portions, as not to be manifestly enough
discriminated, might by congelation be both discerned and separated from the
rest. For in diverse Plants, I found the Alimental juice to be congealed into
vast multitudes of distinct Corpuscles of ice; some of which, when the bodies
were tranversly cut with a sharp knife, and left a while in the Air, might be
wiped or scraped off from the superficies of the body, upon which 'twould after
a while appear in the form of an Efflorescence, almost like meal: but in others
I took a better and quicker course, for by warily compressing the frozen
bodies, I could presently make the icy Corpuscles start in vast numbers out of
their little holes, and though some of these were so minute as to invite me to
use a Microscope, that magnified a little, (not having then any of my best at
hand) yet in some bodies, and especially in Carrets and Beets, the icy
Corpuscles were big enough to be distinctly or apart conspicuous, insomuch,
that I was not mistaken in hoping, that the figures, as well as sizes (for as
to the Color it was scarce discernible in the ice, produced in so deeply
crimson a Root, as the Beet it self) of these little pieces of ice, might be
guessed at by the bigness and shape of the Pores, that were left in the more
stable part, or (if I may so call it) the Parenchyma of the root, though in
making an estimate of these Cavities, as well as in discovering the order,
wherein they are ranged, I found it useful to cut the frozen roots, sometimes
according to their length, and sometimes quite cross. For by that means there
would appear in Carrets, for example, of the larger sort, a great disparity in
the order of the Pores, which, when the root was divided by a plain parallel to
the Basis, appeared placed in lines almost straight, tending almost like the
spoaks of a wheel, from the middle to the circumference. But if the Carret were
slit from one end toward the other, the icy Corpuscles and pores would seem
ranged in an order, that would appear very differing, but which I have not now
the leisure to describe, no more then what I observed with a Microscope, about
the ice and pores of Apples, the Tongues of Animals, Chips of green and sappy
wood, and c. exposed to congelation: only this I shall not pretermit, That as I
many years since made (and, as I now find, too freely communicated) an
Experiment, (menon'd Of the usefulness of Experimental Philosophy.
long after in other papers; of freezing the eyes of Oxen, and other Animals,
whereby the soft and the fluid humors of that admirable organ may be so
hardened, as to become tractable, even to unskilful Dissectors: So I did on this
occasion apply that Experiment to the brains of Animals, which though too soft
to be easily dissected, especially by those that are not dexterous, may by
congelation be made very manageable by them: And besides, that in dissecting
the hardened brain, it sometimes seemed, that the knife did cut through
multitudes of icy Corpuscles, (as when one cuts a frozen Apple) the substance
of the brain seemed also to the eye to be stuffed with them, and the Ventricles
of it did at least conspicuously harbor pieces of ice, if it were not filled
up with them; and the manifest difference of Texture, that there is between the
white and yelk of a througly frozen Egg, and also betwixt the Crystalline and
the Aqueous, and the Vitreous humors of the eye, wherein by congelation the
Crystalline alone loses its transparency, but acquires no conspicuous ice,
whilst the others are full of ice, and that diaphanous, these and such like
disparities, I say, may invite one to hope, that some things may by congealing
of bodies, be discovered about their Texture, that may afford sagacious
Anatomists improvable hints.

I know not, whether it will be thought worth while to take notice, That
neither an Eye, nor a Liver, nor a lean piece of flesh, nor a live Fish, nor a
living Frog, being frozen and put into cold water, was observed to be upon its
thawing cased with ice, as frozen Eggs and Apples are wont to be: because
having forgot to make the Experiment above once, I dare not much rely on it;
but whereas we have formerly observed, that congelation does most commonly
spoil, or at least impair Eggs, and Apples, and Flesh, and many other bodies, I
think it may not be unworthy to be considered, how far, and in what cases we
may give a Mechanical account of this Phenomenon. For though the immersion of
frozen bodies in cold water be allowed to thaw them, with less prejudice, then
if they were thawed hastily by the sire, or suffered to thaw themselves in the
Air: yet there have been complaints made; That notwithstanding this expedient,
several bodies have been much the worse for having been thoroughly frozen, now
since I have lately shown, that in many stable bodies, the Alimental juice is
by congelation turned into ice, and have formerly evinced, that water and
aqueous liquors are expanded by congelation, I see not why we may not suspect,
that the innumerable icy Corpuscles, into which the Alimental juice is turned
by the frost, being each of them expanded proportionably to their respective
bignesses, may not only prejudice the whole, by having their own constitution
impaired, as has been formerly observed in Aligant, and other Vinous liquors,
but may upon their expansion crush in some places, and distend in others, the
more stable parts, in whose Cavities they were harbored, and thereby so
vitiate their Texture, as to impair some of their qualities, and dispose the
Compositum to corruption. How much Contusion may prejudice tender bodies, and
accelerate putrefaction, is evident in many fruits, especially the more tender
ones, which having been bruised, quickly begin to rot in those parts, that have
been injured. And it is agreeable to what has been formerly shown, to conceive,
that in congelation there seems to happen an almost innumerable multitude of
little contusions, made by the fluid parts hardened and expanded by frost, of
the formerly more stable parts every where intercepted between them: And though
these icy Corpusces be but small, yet the sides of that stable matter, that
separates them, and which they endeavor to stretch or crush, are oftentimes
proportionably thin.

And we have formerly noted, That, besides that Eggs will be burst by having
their Alimental juice frozen, both shingles and stones themselves may have
their Texture spoiled by the congelation of the Mineral sap, that is in
exceeding minute and insensible particles dispersed through those bodies: and
the violation of the Texture of Plants, Herbs, and Animals, by the expansion of
the aqueous and juicy particles, which, though they be not congregated, do
abound in them, will be the less wondered at, if it be remembered, that our
former Trials manifest, that a few ounces of water congealed, did not only
burst Glass and Pewter vessels, but even the Iron barrel of a Gun.

Whilst I was upon these Trials, I had also a curiosity to know, whether by
freezing Animals to death, I could discover any such change in the qualities or
structure of their parts, as might help us to discover, by what means it is,
that excessive colds kill men in Northern Countries, since such a discovery
might probably be of good use to the People that live in those gelid Regions:
But having taken a young Rabbet, as the tenderest and fittest beast, I could
then procure for such a Trial, and having exposed him all night to an
extraordinarily bitter frost, without finding him otherwise mischiefed by it,
then that one of his legs was swelled and grown stiff, I was more inclined to
resign over to others, then to repeat my self what seemed to be an ill natured
Experiment, though perhaps it may have much less of cruelty, then one would
think, since some of our former observations have made it probable, that
oftentimes the extinction of life by cold is a more indolent kind of death,
then almost any other. But in a Rabbet purposely strangled, and presently
exposed entire to a bitter cold, we found ice produced in such parts, as would
have made us prosecute the Trial, had the want of such Animals and of leisure
not hindered us.

It is affirmed by diverse eminent writers, and those modern ones too, that
water impregnated with the saline parts of Plants, and afterward frozen, will
exhibit in the ice, the shape of the same Plant: And the learned, but I fear,
too credulous, Gaffarel tells us, that this is no Rarity, being daily shown by
one Monsieur de la Clave. But to what we have already published in another
Treatise, Of the Unsuccesfulness of Experiments.
to show, that this Experiment as it is wont to be delivered, is either untrue,
or very contingent; we shall need but to add, that, since the Experiments there
mentioned, we did again lately try, what could be done with Decoctions, that
were richly imbued, and highly tinged with the spirituous parts of the
Vegetables; but this ice was by no means so figured as the Patrons of the
Tradition promise: And I remember, that having also made, for curiosity sake, a
Lixivium with 16. parts of water, and but one of salt of Potashes, that the
mixture might be sure to freez, and having exposed the liquor in a thin glass
vial to an exceeding cold Air, we found the copious ice produced, to lie on the
top in little sticks, not unlike those Prismatical bodies, wherein Saltpeter
is wont to roch, and those parts of this ice, that were beneath the water, were
shot in thin parallel plates, exceeding numerous, but (as one of our notes
expressly informs us) no way in the shape of Trees, by whose Incineration
nevertheless Polonian Potashes, (as eye witnesses, that deal in them, inform
me) are made.

Long after the making of the newly recited Experiment, I chanced to find, that
the learned Bartholinus in the Treatise, we have often had occasion to take
notice of, says, That the water, wherein Rem vero adeo obscuram exemplis
similibus illustrabo Brassicae: aqua congelata Brassicam representat,
spiritibus vegetalibus a frigore (...) atis. Tho. Bartholinus de usu Nivis,
page 17.
Cabbage has been decocted, will, when frozen, represent a Cabbage, the
vegetable spirits being, as he supposes, concentrated by the cold. How well
this Experiment may succeed, when made in a cold Country like his, I do not
know: but not having my self, when I first took notice of it, the opportunity
to try it satisfactorily by help of a frosty night, all I could do, was, to
take a good decoction of Cabbage, and filtrate it through Cap paper, that it
might be, though yellow, yet clear, and then by the circumposition of our
frigorifick mixture, we froze this liquor in a thin glass vial, but the ice did
not, either to me or others, appear to have any thing in it like a Cabbage, or
remarkably differing from other ice. And being afterward befriended with two
or three frosty nights, we exposed a decoction of Cabbage, to be congealed by
the Nocturnal Air alone, without the help of Art; but neither this way did the
Experiment succeed well. And though once a few ounces of the decoction being
lightly frozen in a vial, there appeared in the thin ice, that adhered to the
inside of the glass, a figure not so very unlike that of a Cabbage leaf, but
that some such accident may have invited our learned Author to think, that the
representations of Cabbages would constantly appear in their frozen decoctions,
yet I was inclined to think this figuration rather casual, by the curiosity I
have had to freez the decoctions of several Herbs, some of them spirituous
enough, as Rosemary, and Pennyroyal, without being able to find in the ice, I
obtained from them, any conviction of the truth of the Tradition we are
examining. And I have lately had more then once, by freezing fair water alone,
after a certain manner, ice, that seemed much more to exhibit the shapes of
vegetables, then any decoctions of them, that I have made. And particularly I
found more then once, that by putting hot water into a somewhat slender
Cylinder of glass, and agitating it in a frigorifick mixture, consisting of
beaten ice, salt, and water, so that it was very speedily frozen thereby, it
was congealed into an ice much more regularly and prettily figured, then I have
seen it in diverse of the waters impregnated with the fixed salts of Plants,
though of these we are told such wonders.

Such particulars as these joined with what I have elsewhere observed to the
same purpose, make me, I confess, somewhat surpised to meet in Berigardus's
forecited discourse upon Aristotle's Meteors, such a passage as this; Paucis
notum est, cur intra glaciem Page 573.
cernuntur interdum multiformes stirpium imagines in Ampullis vitreis, aquae
superficie tenus congelatae plenis. Hoc autem fit injecto in Phialas sale
diversarum stirpium, nam ubi erit sal alicujus plantae and Artemisiae, in suo
Lixivio glacies adhaerens vitro, refert ejus folia laciniosa: similiter in alia
Phiala videbuntur folia Plantae, cujus sal in suam aquam fuerit injectus. Et ne
quis hoc fortuito cadere putet, in aqua saepius soluta, and congelata eaedem
imagines semper occurrent, ut vel ex eo dixeris multiplicem spiritum salis in
principiis nature alibus esse ponendum. Thus far this Author, who would have
done well, if he had been so much more lucky, then other men, as to have
performed these things, to assure expressly of his having done so, those many
ingenious men, that much distrust the relations of those Chemists, that are not
of the best sort: and it is of such suspicious Authors, that I here declare once
for all, that I would have the Reader understand all the passages of this Book,
wherein I may seem to say any thing (for avoiding of tediousness) indefinitely
to the disparagement of Chemists. And in case he had not tried them, he should,
in gratitude to the Authors of them, have told us, he had, what he delivers of
them, but from others, and not have authorized the untri'd reports of writers,
not always too veracious by his building Theories upon them. And as for what he
immediately subjoyns, and seems to rely on, out of Quercitan, (and other
Spagyrical writers, who possibly had it themselves from him) about the seminal
virtues surviving in the Ashes of burnt plants; though I will not here examine,
or absolutely reject the opinion, because the discussion of it belongs to
another place, yet as to the Experiment whereon Berigardus and others rely,
namely, that the Lixiviums made of the Ashes of Plants, will exhibit, being
congealed, the figures of the pristine vegetables; besides that a general
conclusion, as to other Plants, seems to be inferred from what happened in
Netles only, I much doubt, whether that famous Experiment it self of the frozen
Lixivium of Netles, were more then casual, if it were not also assisted by an
indulgent fancy. For having, after diverse Experiments made with other fixed
salts, purposely repaired, for greater security, to the notedst Chemist in
England, to obtain from him some fixed salts, very faithfully prepared, and
intimating withal, that 'twas to try such an Experiment (which he was a
favourer of) I did by mingling these salts each in a distinct vial, sometimes
with one, and sometimes with another proportion of water, and afterward
exposing them to the cold Air, obtain indeed diverse portions of ice, but
without any such figurations, as the learned Berigardus would have expected;
though some of these Trials were made more then once, as well with the Lixivium
of Netles, as with the Lees of other Plants: so that I doubt this Author is
more scrupulous in admitting some important truths, in which the best
Philosophers, as well Heathen as Christian, agree, then in examining the
uncertain Traditions of the Chemists, whose unsatisfactory way of setting down
matters of fact, I am induced to take notice of his imitating, by finding, that
in the very same page (that I have newly cited) he relates another Chemical
Experiment in these terms. Velim porro ostendere mirabili Experientia, quam
sint penetrabiles aliqui spiritus Corporei: Exarentur in charta literae, aceto
albo, quarum nullum vestigium deprehendatur, claudaturque primis foliis
Crassissimi alicujus Libri. Paretur alia Charta, quae inficiatur aqua illa
faetida, ubi dilutum fuerit Auripigmentum, and exsiccata claudatur postremis
foliis ejusdem Libri leviter compressi, statim videbis in priori charta literas
conspicuas, perinde ac si atramento (...) fuissent. Now, though some thing like
what is here proposed to be done, may be performed, and other Phenomenon of the
Experiment, such as he seems not to have been acquainted with, may be also
exhibited, after the manner I have In the unpublish. ed Section of the
usefulness of Experimental Philosophy.
elsewhere particularly set down, yet he must have good luck, that performs it
only by the directions here given by our Author, who by omitting one of the
chief ingredients, and some requisite circumstances, appears indeed manifestly
enough to have heard of such an Experiment, but without seeming to have
sufficiently known, what he pretends to teach (at least as far as his bringing
this Experiment as a proof, and the obscure style, he is wont to employ in the
little I have yet read of his Book, permits me to judge.)

But to return to the figurations of ice, notwithstanding such unsuccesful
Trials about them, as I have been mentioning, I will not deny it to be
possible, that a prepossessed and favorable spectator may think himself to
have discerned in the ice, the figures he looked for there. For Of the
unsuccesfulness of Experiments.
since the writing of the Essay not long since quoted, we have found, that
several Bodies, and even Sea Salt, and Allume, to whom Nature has given their
own determinate figures, have, when dissolved in water, concurred with it to
exhibit an ice very oddly, as well as prettily figured (nor will I presume to
determine the utmost, that a lucky observer may sometimes meet with in this
kind) but to name at present no other Arguments, the figures this way produced,
were too various and extravagant not to be referred to chance, and not to
afford instances how much That can perform in the exhibiting of such Aparitions.

On which occasion I shall add, that I remember, I once showed at the Royal
Society, a glass head, whose inside was lined with a certain substance, that
passed for saline, fashioned into the figures of Trees, as curious, as if they
had been drawn by a Limner; and yet as I produced these figures only by
rectifying common oil of Turpentine, from Sea Salt (which salt I elsewhere show
not to be necessary) in a certain degree of heat: so by varying that degree of
heat, I could make the ascending steams settle in other figures; and I can
easily produce very pretty shapes of Trees, by distillation of that, which
belongs not to the vegetable, but the animal Kingdom. And to these I could add
diverse other instances of the like tendency, to make it still the more
probable, that though oftentimes one may happen to find pretty Idaeas's, or
Apparitions in ice; yet the like, or as fine, may be produced by chance. And I
have sometimes obtained by freezing Infusions, Decoctions, Spirits, Solutions,
and other Liquors, as Vinegre (and particularly) Milk, and even common water,
figures, that were so pretty, but withal so unconstantly produced, and so
easily variable by circumstances, that as it would fill a Book particularly to
describe them (which for that reason I hope to be excused for declining) so
they would much delude him, that should expect to find them every time the
same, that he had found them once.

And to intimate That by the by, to make several Trials in a short time, and
thereby produce variety of figures, it is not an ill expedient to expose the
liquor, one would have congealed, in very shallow vessels, or if it be put into
other vessles, to leave it, but of very little depth. And if the vessel it self
be highly refrigerated, either by the cold Air, or by having salt and ice
applied to the outside of it, the congelation may succeed much the more nimbly;
so that within a short while the same liquor, being diverse times thawed and
frozen again, may possibly exhibit variety of figures. And the production of
ice may be also much accelerated, by dipping into the liquor, one would have
congealed, the unequal surface of some glass or other smooth body, that will not
imbibe water; for thereby the depth of the liquor will be exceedingly
extenuated, and how much such a thinness or want of depth, may dispose a liquor
to be speedily penetrated and congealed by the cold, may be guessed, by what is
above delivered in the Section out of Olearius, of the way of multiplying ice
in Persia, by making water thinly diffuse it self over a plate of ice, or some
other aptly figured, and very cold body: In confirmation whereof I will add on
this occasion, that I have seen a pair of Stairs, on which, though they were
situated near to three Chimneys, commonly furnished with fire, almost all the
day long, the water that was employed to wash them, being thinly spread with a
Mop, would presently congeal (though they assured me it was hot, when 'twas
begun to be laid (...)) and cover the Stairs with glossy filmes of ice. And I
have likewise observed in a very sharp night, that the water which dropped down
from the nose of a Pump, was so well congealed, as 'twas sliding away, that the
ice thus arrested in its passage (in which 'twill easily be granted that it
spreads it self very thinly) had raised a kind of icy pyramid of a considerable
bigness and height.

I forgot to mention in due places (and therefore think fit to take notice of
it here) that when I was considering of the ways, whereby it might be
manifested, to those that want nice (...), or distrust their skill to use them,
whence that ice comes, that appears on the outside of frozen Eggs put to thaw
in cold water, I found it somewhat difficult to pitch upon such a liquor as I
desired. For if common water be the liquor employed, it may be said, that it
affords the matter, whereof the ice in question is made: and if I employed
liquors, that were spirituous or saline, it might be pretended, that the frost
(as they speak) did indeed come out of the frozen Egg, though the shell did not
appear cased with ice, because as fast as the frost came to the outside of the
Egg, it was resolved by the spirituous or saline Corpuscles of the liquor:
wherefore as an expedient, I resolved to make use of oil of Turpentine, as a
liquor, which I had found incongealable by the greatest cold, I had observed in
our Climate, and which yet (as may appear by the third Paragraph of the XVI.
Title) was more indisposed, then common water it self, to thaw any icy
Efflorescence, that might be emitted by the Egg. But the Experiment was tried,
without uniformity in the successes. For the first time I put a frozen Egg into
oil of Turpentine, I did not observe, that any ice was produced on the outside:
neither was the event differing, when another time I put two frozen Eggs
together into a small vessel full of that oil, though to refrigerate the
liquor, the vessel was for a while placed upon a mixture of salt and ice, and
though also the Eggshells at their gaping cracks (produced by congelation)
discovered, that the contained liquor was well frozen. I intended to prosecute
the Experiment another time (wanting ice to do it then) because that once, when
during the Trial I was hindered from watching it, one of my Domestics, whom I
ordered to look after it, assured me, that the Egg, that was put to thaw in the
oil of Turpentine, had there obtained ice on the outside of it, which I should
readily have believed, upon the score of a like observation, I had made my
self, in two Eggs that were frozen to the bottom of the vessel, wherein they
had been put to thaw, were it not, that one or both of them had been, by a
mistake, dipped in water, before they were put into the above mentioned oil.

Some Readers may have expected to find among the examples recited of the
influence of cold upon the Air, that strange story, which is related by the
learned Josephus Acosta, of the mountains of Pariacaca (which he several times
traversed) Where a wonderfully piercing, though not sensibly violent cold, does
sometimes suddenly kill men, and yet preserve their Bodies untainted whole
years together.
but besides that I have delivered a great part of it already in another
Treatise, I was loath to say more, till I had leisure (which I have not now) to
discuss the scruples, that I have, not so much about the matter of fact, as
about the cause, which perhaps may be something besides cold. But since I have
mentioned this XVIII. Section, I will here take notice of what I then intended,
but forgot to set down, namely, That to the instances alleged to show, the
coldness of regions not to be always proportionate to their greater and less
vicinity to the Pole, we may add a memorable one afforded us by a Country so
well known to many of us, as New England, where, though the Winters are so long
and bitter, as we have formerly related out of Mr. Woods's Prospect of that
Country (which has been confirmed to me by an American Physician, that lived
there) yet that Region, which is so very much colder then ours, is in many
places no less then a 10. or 11. degrees remoter from the Pole.

I shall add to the same XVIII. Section, that as to the Experiment I there
mentioned concerning Winds, and which I associate with the testimony of the
newly named Mr. Wood; I find that the season of the year, and some other
circumstances may vary it more, then one would easily have suspected. For
though I faithfully recited the Phenomenon, as I then (and that sometimes with
witness) took notice of them, yet some months after, and in other weather,
having occasion to repeat the former part of that Experiment, I was somewhat
surpised at the success. For coming to blow upon the Ball of a sealed
Weather-glass, which though in its kind very tender, might be probably presumed
to be less so, then a Thermoscope made with a pendulous drop of water (such as
that, mentioned in the forecited Paragraph) I found, that if I continued to
blow any thing long and briskly, the highly rectified spirit of Wine (which
circumstance I therefore name, because possibly the nature of That may somewhat
alter the case) would sometimes manifestly enough subside. And in that
Paragraph of the 18. Title, where I recited the Experiment of the infrigidating
Winds, I should more expressly have taken notice of this circumstance, that, to
satisfy my self, that 'twas not the bare Wind, as such, whose operation upon
the Air included in the Ball of a Weather-glass, made the liquor to ascend, we
put a mark upon the height it stood at, when we had a pretty while blown upon
it, and then without removing the Bellows, put ice and salt about the Iron pipe
of it. By which mixture the Air, that was afterward blown through that pipe,
was so cooled in its passage, as to make the liquor very manifestly to ascend,
even in a Weather-glass, where I did employ (as I have elsewhere declared, that
I often do) Quicksilver instead of water, or spirit of Wine. And least the
vicinity of the frigorifick mixture should be suspected to have caused this
contraction of the included Air, we did sometimes purposely intermit the moving
of the Bellows, without removing the Weather-glass; and though notwithstanding
that vicinity, the liquor would begin a little to subside; yet when ever the
cold spirits or the Corpuscles of the highly refrigerated Air, were by the
playing of the Bellows anew, approached to, or rather brought to touch in
swarms the globular part of the instrument, the Mercury would manifestly
ascend. And since we are speaking of Weather-glasses, I shall on this occasion
subjoyn, That certain circumstances may also vary the success of another
Experiment (somewhat of kin to that lately repeated, about the pendulous Drop)
which is briefly mentioned not far from the beginning of the first Praeliminary
Discourse. For though the common Thermometers, that are here wont to be sold in
shops, have usually the Pipe of the Bolthead very large in proportion to the
Ball, and therefore are in that place said to be Weather-glasses not nice, and
though on such instruments in certain Temperatures of the Air (intimated by the
word sometimes, employed in that passage) the Air blown out of a pair of
Bellows against some part of the included Air, would not, especially at the
beginning, make the Air sensibly contract it self, and the liquor ascend;
though at the very first and second blast, the coldness of this artificial
Wind, might be very sensible to the touch ( which was the thing intended to be
taught in that passage) yet having the curiosity with other Bellows, at another
season of the year, to blow long upon the Ball of a not common, but nice
Weather-glass of my own making, furnished with a pipe, that was very slender, I
diverse times (but not always) found the tincted liquor manifestly enough to
ascend, as if the Wind, consisting of a more compressed Air, did by containing
a greater number of cold particles in the same room, more affect the internal
Air, then the contact of the calm and lax outward Air did before; which
disparity of events has given me the design of making further Trials with
differing Thermoscopes, at other seasons of the year, to see if I can bring the
matter to some certainty, by discovering the cause of this contingency, in
which I afterward suspected, that some light degree of warmth or coolness in
the Bellows themselves, which, as being unmanifest to the sense, escaped
unheeded, might have an interest. When I was about some of the former
Experiments, I would willingly have had an opportunity of trying, with a good
sealed Weather-glass, what difference there would be, betwixt the cold of the
nocturnal Air in a frosty night, in places where the Air was kept calm, by
being sheltered from the wind, not by inhabited buildings, but by some Wall, or
other body, whence any warm Effluviums were least to be expected, and betwixt
the cold of the same Air, in places where cold winds, especially Northerly or
Easterly did freely and strongly blow. But my occasions then confining me to a
Town, I had not convenience to make any secure observations of that nature; and
even in a more commodious place, unless it were determined, whether there be
Corpuscles properly and constantly frigorifick, upon whose account some winds
are so much colder then others, there may arise more scruples about this
matter, then I must now stay to discuss.

There is one thing more, that, it may be, is not impertinent to mention,
before I take leave of the XVIII. Title; for in confirmation of what is there
delivered, concerning the Vicissitudes of these troublesome degrees of cold and
heat, within the the compass of the same Natural day, complained of by the
Patriarch Jacob, and by Olearius, I shall add, that having since had
opportunity to inquire about such matters, of a learned Physician, lately come
from the Indies, he assured me, that notwithstanding the violent heats of the
day, he usually observed the nights to be so very cold, that he was persuaded
some positively frigorifick steams, did in the night ascend out of the Earth,
and make it very expedient, if not necessary, for those English, that live in
the warmer parts of America, to imitate the Natives, in keeping fires under
their Hammacks, or hanging Beds.

I thought it might be a Luciferous Experiment, in relation to an Hypothesis,
that might be proposed about cold, to try, whether, if two such liquors were
provided, as by being mixed together, would so far forth lose their fluidity,
as to obtain at least the consistence of an Unguent, this impediment put to the
former confused and greater agitation of their parts, would produce any
sensible degree of cold; this I thought fit to try, by immersing for a
competent time, the Ball of a tender sealed Weather-glass, into each of the
liquors apart, and then into the soft mixture, their coalition would compose.
To produce such a mixture more ways then one, it was not difficult for me, by
the help of some Experiments, I had provided to add to my History of fluidity
and sirmness. But though a strong solution of Minium (or calcined Lead) in
spirit of Vinegar, or a very strong infusion of good Quicklime in water, will
either of them (and one of them I did make use of, though I have forgotten
which) coagulate a just proportion of good Sallet Oil (to name no other made by
expression) into such a consistence as I have been speaking of; yet for want of
a sealed Thermoscope, tender enough, I cannot now repeat the Experiment, and
till I do, I dare not draw any conclusion from it, though, if I much
misremember not, when I showed it an ingenious person, neither he nor I could
perceive, that the liquors, by being deprived of their fluidity, had acquired
any thing of coldness discoverable by the sealed Weather-glass.

It is much controverted among the Curious, whether water be capable of
Compression, and diverse have of late inclined to the negative, upon observing a
want of cogency in the Experiments, that have been brought to evince the
affirmative. What Trials and Observations we long since made about this matter,
may be met with in some of our other Treatises, wherefore I shall now subjoyn,
that having imagined, that Cold might afford a hopefuller way, then (for ought
I know) any man has used, of bringing this controversy to the dicision of an
Experiment, I made that attempt, that is mentioned in the XII. Title; in
prosecution of which, as soon as I could procure some, though but some of the
accommodations, which I long wanted; I made an Experiment, which I shall
subjoyn, because, though it be not so considerable, as with better implements I
could have made it, yet the way, I chose, has (as I partly intimated elsewhere)
these two advantages; that the force employed to compress the Air, is both very
great, and very gradually, and slowly applied; and that the vessel will not,
like those that have been hitherto made use of, give any passage through its
pores to water, though violently compressed.

We took then a Round Ball of glass, furnished with a moderately long Pipe, and
having filled it with water, till the liquor reached within some inches of the
top, it was Hermetically sealed up, and then the water by a mixture of beaten
ice and salt, was made to freez from the bottom upwards, that without breaking
the glass, the unfrozen water, by the expansive endeavor of that which was
freezing, might be impelled upwards, and so at once, both compress the Air, and
be pressed upon by it, having by this means condensed the Air, as far as we
thought safe to do in a glass, that was not strong, we cropped of the small Apex
of the glass, and immediately the compressed Air flew out with a great noise,
and that part of the Pipe which was unfill'd with water, was filled with smoke,
that made it look white, and great store of little bubbles hastily ascended
from the lower parts of the water, to the upper (where most of them quickly
broke) in such a way, as put me in mind of what usually happens upon the
opening of vessels that contained bottled Beer. But that which was principally
to be noted, was this, that besides the bubbles or froth, the water it self (at
least supposing, that no little unheeded bubbles that did not quite emerge,
could sensibly contribute to its height) immediately ascended in the Pipe about
of an inch, which (having carefully marked the first and second stations, with
a Diamond on the outside of the glass) 'twas easy for us to measure.

I have elsewhere proposed a suspicion, that in the attempts, that had been
till then made, to compress water, the condensation (in case there were really
any) might perchance proceed from the compression of the Aerial particles, that
I have shown to be wont to ly dispersed in the pores of common water. But
though the considerable expansion of water, notwithstanding the breaking of the
bubbles in our present Experiment, seems manifestly to argue, that this could
be but a concurrent cause (if it had any sensible effect at all) of our
Phenomenon, yet I dare not absolutely rely, even upon an Experiment, that seems
so cogent, till I have satisfied my self, that no springiness, which I have
sometimes suspected, might be in the ice, had any interest in the produced
effect; and that the great pressure of the forcibly condensed Air, did not make
the glass it self stretch or yield. For if it were able to do so, then the
parts of the violently distended glass, upon the removal of the forcible
pressure of the Air (which must cease upon the breaking of the Hermetical seal)
returning to their former straitness below, will make the water ascend somewhat
higher in the pipe. But though I could not procure glasses, as well very thick,
as conveniently shaped, wherewith to examine this suspicion, which I would
likewise have tried by the bulk of the glass in water, before and after the
letting out of the compressed Air; yet because most Readers will probably think
so much caution more then necessary, I shall add, that if I had not wanted
conveniences, and had not had mischances, the Experiment would in likelihood
have been advanced, especially care being taken, that the Air left in the pipe
should be well refrigerated before its being sealed up (as we sometimes did by
ice and salt, applied in a perforated Box to the outside) lest part of its
spring should depend upon an evanid degree of heat, upon which account the pipe
ought beforehand to be drawn so slender, that the glass may be melted together
in a trice. For though for want of strong glasses, and the best sort of
instruments to seal up such with, the success was not still so considerable as
I hoped for; yet as 4. or 5. other Trials, made, as well with another liquor,
as with water, did exhibit a manifest intumescence of the liquors (without
computing the froth produced at the top;) so in the Experiment lately
mentioned, if we had judged them strong enough to endure such a compression of
the included Air, as we have often made on other occasions, the effect would
probably have been much more considerable: For though the difference betwixt
the length of the same water compressed and uncompress'd, amounted to an
Aqueous Cylinder of of an inch in height, yet the Air, that made this
compression of the water, was it self reduced but from 8. inches to 5. so that
it took up almost half its former room, whereas we have sometimes reduced it to
an 18. or 20. part thereof. If I had been accommodated with one of my
Pneumatical Engines, I should have tried, whether water being first carefully
freed from the latitant Air in the exhausted Receiver, and then compressed
after the manner hitherto recited, the event of the Trial would have been
considerably varied.

I might add as other Phenomenon of our Experiment, that when we broke off the
sealed Apex of the glass, before the included Air was much compressed, there
neither (...) be any great noise made, nor any considerable froth produced, at
the top of the water, and that having had the curiosity to repeat the
Experiment in one of the same glasses, (...) had been (...) used, and with the
same (...), that had been already compressed in it, we found, that upon the
breaking off the Hermetical seal the second time, the water did nevertheless
ascend in the Pipe betwixt and part of an inch. And to these particulars I
could both add other circumstances, that I took notice of in the same
Experiment, and subjoyn many other Experiments and Observations, but that I am
already tired. And though I have not found Cold to be a subject over-fruitful
in Experiments Pleasing and Curious, yet now I am grown somewhat acquainted
with it, I find it may suggest so many other new ones, that since the
Barrenness of my Theme, will not easily put a period to this Treatise, it is fit
that now at length I should let my Weariness and want of Leisure do it.

FINIS.
AN Examen of Antiperistasis, AS It is wont to be Taught and Proved.
Themistius, Carneades, Eleutherius. Themistius.
1. AS for Antiperistasis, the Truth of it is a thing so conspicuous, and so
generally acknowledged, that I cannot imagine what should make some men deny
it, except it be, that they find all others to confess it. For though in other
cases they are wont to pretend Experience for their quitting the received
Opinions, yet here they quit Experience it self for singularity, and choose
rather to depart from the Testimony of their senses, then not to depart from
the Generality of Men.

2. And to evince, that this is not said gratis, I might observe to you, That
there are no less then three grand inducements, that have lead both the Vulgar
and Philosophers (two sorts of men, that seldom agree in other things) to
consent in the acknowledgment of Antiperistasis; Authority, Reason, and
Experience. But though I think fit to name them all three, yet since the first
of them, by having, as I just now noted, invited our Adversaries to dissent
from the Truth, is a somewhat unlikely Medium to prevail on them to acknowledge
it, I shall insist only on the two latter, having once declared, that I lay
aside the first not as worthless in it self, but needless to my cause.

3. To begin then with the Arguments afforded us by Reason.

What can there be more agreeable to the wisdom and goodness of Nature, who
designing the Preservation of things, is wont to be careful of fitting them
with requisites for that preservation; then to furnish cold and heat, with that
self invigorating power, which each of them may put forth, when it is environed
with its contrary. For the order of the universe requiring, that cold and heat
should reside in those Bodies, that often happen to be mingled with one
another, those two noble and necessary Qualities, would be too often destroyed
in the particular subjects that harbored them, if provident Nature had not so
ordered the matter, that when a Body, wherein either of them resides, happens
to be surrounded by other Bodies, wherein the contrary Quality is predominant,
the besieged Quality by retiring to the innermost parts of that which it
possesses, and there by recollecting its forces, and as it were, animating it
self to a vigorous defense, is intended or increased in its degree, and so
becomes able to resist an Adversary, that would otherwise easily destroy it.

4. To illustrate as well as supply this Argument drawn from Reason, we shall
need but to subjoyn the other afforded us by Experience, which does almost
every day give us not only opportunity to observe, but cause to admire the
effects of this self invigorating power, which, when occasionally exerted, we
call Antiperistasis: And these Phenomenon ought the more to be acquiesced in,
because they may safely be looked upon as genuine Declarations, which Nature
makes of Her own accord, and not as confessions extorted from Her by Artificial
and compulsory Experiments, when being tortured by Instruments and Engines, as
upon so many Racks, she is forced to seem to confess whatever the Tormentors
please.

5. To proceed then to the spontaneous Phenomenon of Nature I was recommending,
we see, that whereas in Summer the lowest and highest Regions of the Air are
made almost unsufferable to us by their heat, the cold expelled from the earth
and water by the Suns scorching beams, retires to the middle Region of the Air,
and there defends it self against the heat of the other two, though in the one
that Quality be assisted by the almost perpendicular reflection of the
Sunbeams, and in the other it (...) rendered very confiderable by the vastness
of the upper Region of the Air, and its Vicinity to the Element of fire.

And as the cold maintains it self in the middle Region, by virtue of the
intensness, which it acquires upon the account of Antiperistasis; so the
Lightning that flashes out of the Clouds, is but a fire produced in that middle
Region by the hot Exhalations penned up, and intended in point of heat by the
ambient Cold, to a degree that amounts to ascension.

6. But though these be unquestionably the effects of that excessive coldness;
yet we need not go so far as the tops of mountains to fetch proofs of our
doctrine, since we may find them at the bottom of our Wells. For though
Carneades perhaps will not, yet the earth as well as the Air does readily
acknowledge the power of Antiperistasis. And if the reason above alleged did
not evince it, our very senses would. For as in Summer, when the Air about us
is sultry hot, we find, to our great refreshment, that the Air in Cellars and
Vaults, to which the cold then retreats, is eminent for the opposite Quality;
so in Winter when the outward Air freezes the very Lakes and Rivers, where
their surfaces are exposed to it, the internal Air in Vaults and Cellars in
Winter, which becomes the sanctuary of heat, as in Summer it was of Cold, is
able not only to keep our Bodies from freezing, but to put them into sweats.
And not only Wells and Springs upon the account of their resting in, or coming
out of the deepest parts of the earth, continue fluid, whilst all the waters,
that are contiguous to the Air, are by the excessive cold hardened into ice;
but the water freshly drawn from such Wells, feels warm, or at least tepid to a
man's hand put into it. And as if Nature designed men should not be able to
contradict the doctrine of Antiperistasis, without contradicting more then one
of their own senses, she has taken care, that oftentimes the water, that is
freshly drawn out of the deeper sorts of Wells and Springs, should manifestly,
as I have seen it, smoke, as if it had been but lately taken off the fire. And
this may be said, without a Metaphor, to demonstrate ad ocnlum, the reality of
Antiperistasis, there being no other cause to which this warmth can be
attributed, then the retiring of the heat from the cold external Air, to the
lower parts of the earth and water: since both these Elements themselves being
naturally cold, and one of them in the supreme degree, the heat we are
mentioning is so far from being likely to be generated in so unfit a place,
that if it were not very great, it must be extinguished there, by the coldness
of the superior Air, and that of the inferior parts of the Earth.

Eleutherius.

7. That Carneades may have but one trouble to answer the Allegations to be
made in favor of Antiperistasis, I hope he will give me leave (according to my
custom of siding with either party, as occasion invites me) to add to the
familiar Observations mentioned by Themistius, some others that are less
obvious. For I franckly confess to you, that when I consider what interest, the
unheeded dipositions of our own Bodies may have in the estimates we make of the
degrees of cold and heat, in other Bodies; I should not lay much weight upon
the Phenomenon, that are wont to be urged as proofs of Antiperistasis, if some
instances somewhat less liable to suspicion, did not countenance the doctrine
they are urged for. I know that Carneades being wont so to propose his opinion
about Antiperistasis, as only to deny, that it is clearly made out by the
reasons or Experiments, that are commonly produced to evince it, it were
somewhat improper to urge him with observations, that are not familiar, and
wont to be employed; but I know too, that he is not so rigid an Adversary, as
not to allow me to mention some uncommon relations, that I learned from men of
good credit. I shall tell you then, that having purposely inquired of ingenious
men, that had been very deep under ground, some in Coal-pits, and some in
Mines. One of them affirmed, that at the (...) of the Grove (as they call it)
or Pit, he found it very hot in September. And another, that he often found it
hot enough to be troublesome in Winter. And a third (who is himself a great
seeker for Mines, and a Master of considerable ones) that he found it to be hot
all the year long. And to manifest, that such Observations will hold even in
gelid Regions, I shall repeat to you, what I remember I read in the voyage of
that ingenious Navigator, Captain James, who giving an account of Charleton
Island, which by his relation seems to be as cold as Iceland itself, says, That
his men found Page 36.
it more mortifying cold to wade through the water in the beginning of June,
when the Sea was all full of ice, then in December, when it was increasing. And
he adds, that which makes more to our present purpose, and proves the other
part of the doctrine of Antiperistasis; That from their Well, out of which they
had water in December, they had none in July. And to strengthen the observation
yet further, I will acquaint you with a relation to this purpose not unworthy
your notice. For hearing of an ingenious Physician, that lived some years in,
and about Musco, I applied my self to him (as possibly you may have done, for
if I mistake not, I have seen you together) to know, whether in that frozen
Region he observed the Cellars to be hot in Winter. And his answer to That, and
some other Questions of the like nature I put to him, amounted in short to
this, That when I enquired, whether their Springs and Wells were not all frozen
in the Winter, he told me, that he saw some Springs, whose warers froze not at
all near the Springhead, but, at a good distance from thence, it began to be
thinly cased over with ice. He added, That his own Well was about six fathoms
deep, between the surface of the earth, and that of the water, and that the
water in it, was, as I remember, about three or four fathoms deep, and that not
only this Well froze not all the Winter, but that the Well of his neighbor,
which was but one fathom deep to the superficies of the water, did not freez
neither. And to satisfy my curiosity about the steams of this water, he told
me, that when a Bucket of water was newly drawn, if it were agitated, it would
smoke. But that from the Well it self, when the water in it was left quiet and
unstirred, he did not perceive any smoke to arise.

8. To all this I shall add this further circumstance, that having purposely
inquired, whether in the Winter he found it as hot in Cellars at Musco, as it
is wont to be in that season in ours? He answered me, that when the doors and
windows were carefully shut, to hinder the immediate commerce betwixt the
included and external Air, he often found, if he stayed long in his Cellar, it
would not only defend him from the sharpness of the Russian cold, as bitter as
that is wont to be in Winter, but keep him warm enough, to be ready to sweat,
though he laid by his Furs. So that if we may rely, either upon the Testimony
of our senses, we must necessarily admit Cellars to be warmer in Winter, then
in Summer, and consequently allow an Antiperistasis.

9. Carneades. Though I were not in haste, I should not think it necessary to
reply any thing else to the first part of what was said by Themistius, then
that, what he alleges of the Universality of the Opinion he maintains, may
serve to recommend that which he opposes. For the vulgar Doctrine about
Antiperistasis, being, as he urges, received, and taught in all the Schools,
the Innovators he declaims against, must have learned it there among the other
Peripatetick tenants, that youth is wont to be imbued with in those places; so
that it may rather seem the love of truth, then of singularity, that engages
them against an opinion, which before was their own, as well as that of the
generality of Scholars, and consequently against which they cannot maintain a
Paradox, that does not imply a Retractation. But I shall not prosecute my
Answer to Themistius's preamble, since Eleutherius, whom I am chiefly to speak
to, is too much a Philosopher to think Truth less her self, for being slenderly
attended; or to think any men the less like to be Her followers, because they
are but few. To come then directly to the controversy it self, I think I need
not tell one of you, that the other mistakes my opinion about it. For I
perceive, Eleutherius has not quite forgotten, that I have not been wont to
deny an Antiperistasis, as it may be, but only as it is wont to be explicated.
But since Themistius seems to be willing to have me his Antagonist in this
controversy, and since Eleutherius himself seems to conspire with him, I am
content to act for a while the part, you Gentlemen would have me take upon me,
and will propose to you part of what I would say, for the opinion you impute to
me, in case I were really of it.

10. To come then to the controversy it self, though Themistius has drawn his
proofs for the Antiperistasis of the Schools, partly from Reason, and partly
from Experience; yet the very same two Topics seem to me to afford
considerations, that may justly warrant our calling it in question.

11. And first, if we look upon the reason of the thing considered abstractedly
from the Experiments, that are pretended to evince an Antiperistasis, we cannot
but think it may be very rational, I say not, to doubt of it, but to reject it.
For in the first place, according to the course of Nature, one contrary, ought
to destroy, not to corroborate, the other. And next, it is a maxim among the
Peripateticks themselves, That natural causes always act as much as they can.
And certainly as to our case, wherein we treat not of living creatures, I
cannot but think the Axiom physically demonstrative. For inanimate Agents act
not by choice, but by a necessary impulse, and not being endowed with
Understanding and Will, cannot of themselves be able to moderate or to suspend
their actions. And as for what Themistius alleges, that it was necessary for
the Preservation of Cold and Heat, that they should be endowed with such a
power of intending themselves, I must freely (...), that though in living
creatures, and especially in the bodies of the perfecter sorts of Animals, I do
in diverse cases allow arguments drawn from final causes; yet where only
inanimate bodies are concerned, I do not easily suffer my self to be prevailed
upon by such Arguments. Nor is there any danger, that Cold and Heat, whose
causes are so radicated in Nature, should be lost out of the World, in case
each parcel of matter, that happens to be surrounded with bodies, wherein a
contrary quality is predominant, were not endowed with an incomprehensible
faculty of self invigoration. And Nature either does not need the help of this
imaginary power, or oftentimes has recourse unto it to very little purpose;
since we see, that these Qualities subsist in the world, and yet de facto the
bottles of Water, Wine, and other Liquors, that are carried up and down in the
Summer, are regularly warmed by the Ambient Air. And in Muscovy and other cold
Northern Countries, Men, and other Animals have oftentimes their Vital Heat
destroyed by the cold that surrounds them, being thereby actually frozen to
death. And I somewhat wonder, that the followers of Aristotle should not take
notice of that famous Experiment, which he himself delivers, where he teaches,
that hot water will sooner congeal then cold. For if the matter of fact were
true, it would sufficiently manifest, that the heat harbored in the water, is
destroyed, not invigorated by the coldness of the Air that surrounds it; so
that Themistius must, I fear, on this occasion, take sanctuary in my
observation, and to keep Aristotle from destroying his own opinion, with his
own Experiment, had best say, as I do, that it is not true. And though it is
not to be denied, that white surrounded with black, or black with white,
becomes thereby the more conspicuous; yet it is acknowledged, that there is no
real increase, or intension of either quality, but only a comparative one in
reference to our senses obtained by this Collation. Nor does a Pumice-stone
grow more dry, then it was in the fire or earth, by being transferred into the
Air or Water, and consequently environed with either of those two fluids, which
Themistius and his Schools teach us to be moist Elements: neither will you
expect to find a piece of dim glass become really more transparent, though one
should set it in a frame of Ebony, though that wood be so opacous as to be
black. And whereas it is commonly alleged, as a proof of the power, Nature has
given Bodies of flying their contraries, that drops of water falling upon a
Table, will gather themselves into little globes, to avoid the contrary quality
in the Table, and keep themselves from being swallowed up by the dry wood; the
cause pretended has no interest in the effect, but little drops of water, where
the gravity is not great enough to surmount the action of the ambient fluid, if
they meet with small dust upon a Table, they do as they roll along, gather it
up, and their surfaces being covered with it, do not immediately touch the
board, which else they would stick to. And to show you, that the Globular
figure, which the drops of water, and other Liquors, sometimes acquire,
proceeds not from their flying of dryness, but either from their being every
way pressed, at least almost equally (for in some cases also they are not
exactly round) by some ambient fluid, of a disagreeing Nature, or from some
other cause differing from that the Schools would give, I shall desire you to
take notice, that the drops of water, that swim in Oil, so as to be surrounded
with it, will likewise be Globular; and yet Oil is a true and moistening
liquor, as well as water. And the drops of Quicksilver, though upon a Table
they are more disposed, then water, to gather themselves into a round figure;
yet that they do it not as humid Bodies, is evident, because Quicksilver broken
into drops, will have most of them Globular, not only in Oil, but in Water. And
to show you, that it is from the incongruity, it has to certain bodies, that its
drops will not stick upon a Table, nor upon some other bodies, but gather
themselves into little sphaeres, as if they designed to touch the wooden Plain
but in a Point: To manifest this I say, we need but take notice, that though
the same drops will retain the same figure on Stone or Iron, yet they will
readily adhere to Gold, and lose their Globulousness See the History of
fluidity, Sect. 19.
upon it, though Gold be a far drier body then Wood, which, as far as
distillation can manifest, must have in it store of humid parts of several
kinds, (I mean both watery and unctuous.) But this may relish of a digression;
my task being only to examine the Antiperistasis of cold and heat, concerning
which I think I had very just cause to pronounce the vulgar conceit very
unconsonant to the nature of inanimate beings. For the Peripateticks talk of
Cold and Heat surrounded by the opposite quality, as if both of them had an
understanding, and foresight, that in case it did not gather up its spirits,
and stoutly play its part against the opposite that distresses it, it must
infallibly perish: and as if being conscious to its self, of having a power of
self invigoration, at the presence of its Adversary, it were able to encourage
it self like the Hero in the Poet, that said, Nunc animis opus est, Aenea nunc
pectore firmo, which indeed is to transform Physical agents into Moral ones.

12. Eleuth. The validity of the Peripatetick Argument, drawn from Reason,
considered abstractedly from Experience, I shall leave Themistius to dispute
out with you, at more leisure. And since you well know, that the only Arguments
I allege to countenance Antiperistasis, were built upon Experience, as judging
them either the best or the only good ones, I long to hear what you will say to
the Examples that have been produced of that which you deny.

13. Carneades. That, Eleutherius, which I have to answer to the examples that
are urged, either by the Schools, or by you in favor of Antiperistasis,
consists of two parts. For first I might show, that as reason declares openly
against the common Opinion, so there are Experiments which favor mine, and
which may be opposed to those you have alleged for the contrary doctrine. And
secondly, I might represent, that of those examples, some are false, others
doubtful; and those that are neither of these two, are insufficient, or capable
of being otherwise explicated, without the help of your Hypothesis. But for
brevities sake, I shall not manage these two replies apart, but mention, as
occasion shall serve, the Experiments, that favor my opinion, among my other
answers, to what you have been pleased to urge on the behalf of Aristotle.

14. To begin then with that grand Experiment, which I remember a late Champion
for Antiperistasis, makes his leading Argument to establish it, and which is so
generally urged on that occasion, I mean the heating of Quicklime in cold
water. I confess I cannot but admire the Laziness and Credulity of Mankind,
which have so long, and generally acquiesc'd in what they might so easily have
found to be false. This I say, because I was possibly the first, that has had
both the curiosity and boldness to examine so general and constant a Tradition;
yet I doubt not, that you will soon be brought to take it as well as I, for as
great as popular an error. For to let you manifestly see, how little the
Incalescence of the Quicklime needs be allowed to proceed from the coldness of
the ambient water, if instead of cold water, you quench it with hot water, the
Ebullition of the liquor, will not only be as great, as if the water were cold,
but oftentimes far greater. As I have sometimes for curiosity removed boiling
water from the fire, and when the liquor had left of boiling, but was yet
scalding hot, I put into it a convenient quantity of quickLime, and after a
while, the water, which, as I said, had ceased from boiling, began to boil
afresh, with so much vehemence, and such large and copious bubbles, that it
threatened to run over the Pot, of which, before the effervescence, a
considerable part was left unfill'd. And this was no more then what I might
well look for, hot water being much fitter then cold to pervade nimbly the body
of the Lime, and hastily dissolve, and set at liberty the igneous and saline
parts, wherewith it abounds. And how much a greater interest salts may have in
such incalescencies, then Cold, I have also taken pleasure to try, by pouring
Acid spirits, and particularly spirit of salt upon good Quicklime. For by this
means there would be a far greater degree of heat excited, then if I had
instead of spirit of Salt used common water: And this, whether I employed the
spirit cold or hot. For in either case, so small a portion as about the bigness
of a Walnut of Lime put into a small glass, would by the addition of a little
spirit of Salt put to it by degrees, both hiss, and smoke, and boil very
surprizingly, and notwithstanding the small quantity of the matter, would
conceive so great a heat, that I was not able to hold the glass in my hand. And
to show some friends, how little, heat excited in Quicklime by cold water,
proceeds barely from the coldness of that liquor; I caused a parcel of good
Lime to be beaten small, and putting one part of it into a glass vessel, I
drenched it plentifully with oil of Turpentine, more then it would imbibe, and
the other portion of the Lime I likewise drenched with common water: both these
liquors having stood in the same room, that they might be reduced by the same
Ambient Air, to a like degree of coldness, the event of this Trial was (what I
looked for) that the oil of Turpentine, notwithstanding its actual coldness,
and the great subtilty and piercingness of parts, which it has in common with
other Chemical oils, being of an incongruous Texture seemed not to make any
dissolution of the powdered Lime, and did not, for several hours, that I kept
it, produce, that I perceived, any sensible heat in the Lime. Whereas to show,
that 'twas not the fault of the Lime, that part of it, on which common water
had been poured, did after a little while conceive so strong a heat, that it
broke a large openmouth'd-glass, into whose bottom it was put, and not only
grew so hot, that I could not endure to hold it in my hand, but sent out at the
mouth of the glass, though that were considerably distant from the Lime, a
copious white fume, so hot, that I could not well suffer the holding of my hand
over it. And to prevent a possible, though invalid, objection, which I foresaw
might be drawn against the Experiment made with oil of Turpentine, from the
Oleaginous Nature of that liquor; I covered a piece of the same sort of
Quicklime, I have been speaking of, with highly rectified spirit of Wine: but
though I left them together all night, yet I perceived not, that the liquor had
at all slack'd the Lime, which continued in an entire lump, till upon the
substituting of common water, it did, as I remember, quickly appear to be
slack'd, since it fell assunder into a kind of minute white powder, which was
(bating the color) almost like mud, and would easily by a little shaking be
dispersed, like it, through the water.

15. Eleutherius. I ingeniously confess to you, Carneades, that what you say
surprises me, for I thought it superfluous to try my self, so acknowledged an
Experiment, being not able to imagine, that so many learned men for so many
Ages, should so unanimously and confidently deliver a matter of fact, of which,
if it were not true, the falsity could be so easily discovered.

16. Carneades. For my part, Eleutherius, I confess I am wont to doubt of what
they teach, that seldom or never doubt. And I hope you will forgive me, if
having found an assertion so general and uncontrolled of a falsity so easy to
be disproved, I be inclinable to suspect the Truth of their other inferior
Traditions about Antiperistasis; and of these I will mention the two chiefest I
have met with among the moderns (for being contrived Experiments, I presume you
will easily believe they came not from Aristotle, nor the Ancienter Schoolmen
that commented upon Him.)

17. The first of these is the freezing a Pot to a Joynt-stool, by a mixture of
snow and salt, by the fires side: in which case it is pretended, that the fire
does so intend the cold, as to enable it to congeal the water, that stagnated
upon the surface of the stool, betwixt That and the bottom of the Pot. But how
little need there is of Antiperistasis in this Experiment, you may guess by
this, that I have purposely made it with good success, in a place in which
there neither was, nor ever probably had been a fire, the room being destitute
of a Chimney. And this Trial of mine I could confirm by diverse other
Experiments of the like nature, but that this one is sufficient.

18. I proceed therefore to the other Experiment, which is delivered by very
learned men, and for whom I have a great respect: according to these, if you
take a somewhat large Pot, and having filled it almost with snow, place in the
middle of the snow a Vial full of water; this Pot being put over the fire, the
coldness of the snow will be so intended by the heat, from which it flies into
the water, that it will turn that liquor into ice. But though I several times
tried this Experiment, yet neither in earthen, nor in silver vessels, could I
ever produce the promised ice. And I remember, that an eminently learned man,
that wondered to find me so diffident of what he said, he knew to be true,
readily undertook to convince me by an Ocular proof, but with no better success
then I had had before. So that the Argument may be plausibly enough retorted
upon them that urge it.

19. And in case the Trial should succeed sometime or other (for that it does
not ordinarily, I have shown already) yet will there be no necessity of
deriving the effects from Antiperistasis. For though in such cases the fire
would contribute to the production of the effect, by hastening the dissolution
of the snow, yet the heat of the fire does but remotely, and by accident cause
the production of ice, since other Agents will do the same thing, that are
qualified to make a quick dissolution of the snow, whether they be hot or no;
as I have tried that spirit and crude salt of Nitre, will either of them by a
due application, bring snow, by dissolving it, to congeal water, though the
Spirit and the Nitre be generally agreed upon to actually cold, and one, if not
both of them, to be potentially cold too.

20. Having thus dispatched the Experiments pretended to evince an
Antiperistasis, I must now examine the Observations, that are alleged to that
purpose, of which the principal, if not the only, are these. The coldness of
the middle Region of the Air. The increase of men's stomachs in Winter. The
generation of Hail; and the heat and cold in Cellars, and other Subterraneal
places, when the contrary Quality reigns in the Air.

21. To begin with the first of these: I will not now dispute, whether the
second Region of the Air, have really that coldness that is wont to be ascribed
to it: Though our Friend Mr. Boil seems to doubt, whether that Regions being
always, and every where cold, have been as strongly proved, as asserted. But
passing over that Question, I see no need of imploring the help of
Antiperistasis, to keep the second Region of the Air for the most part cool.
For without at all taking in the cause imagined by the Schools, an obvious and
sufficient one may be easily assigned. For the Air being, as to sense, cold of
its own nature, so that when we feel it hot, it is made so by some adventitious
agent, and that agent being for the most part the Sun, who heats the Air
chiefly, though not only, by its reflected beams; their heat is so languid, by
that time they arrive, dispersed, at the second Region of the Air, that they
are not able to overpower its Natural coldness, increased perchance by some
frigorifick spirits, that may find a more commodious harbor there, then in
other parts of the Atmosphere. And whatever be the true cause of the coldness
in the middle region of the Air, I cannot but admire to find, that Coldness so
(...) ascribed to Antiperistasis, by Themistius and his Friends the
Aristotelians: For according to them, it is the Nature of the Element of Air to
be as well hot as moist, and according to the same Peripateticks, both the
upper Region of the Air always, and the lower in Summer is hot, the former by
the neighborhood of the imaginary Element of fire, and the latter by the
reflection of the Sunbeams from the Earth: which two Positions being laid
together, I would fain learn of any Aristotelian, how Antiperistasis comes to
take place here? For, according to them, those Bodies have their cold and heat
increased by Antiperistasis, that are on both hands assailed by Bodies of a
contrary Quality, to that which is natural to the surrounded Body, whereas the
whole Element of Air, and consequently the middle Region, being, as they would
persuade us, hot, of its own Nature; what shadow of probability is there, that
the highest and lowest Regions, by being hot, should make the middle Region,
which is also naturally hot, intensly and durably cold. But though the
objection is so clear, that it needs not to be insisted on; yet because it is
but an Argument ad hominem, I shall add this for their sakes, that are not in
this point Peripateticks, That it does not appear to me, that if the Air be
naturally rather cold, then hot, the second Region must owe the Intensness of
that Quality to Antiperistasis. For the ground of the opinion, I oppose, being
this, That both the first and the third Regions are considerably hot, I would
gladly find it proved as to the upper Region. I confess I have not found the
assertion contradicted, but that, as little convinces me, as the
uncontrouledness of the Tradition about Quicklime, that I lately confuted.
It Is true, there are two reasons alleged, to evince the heat of the supreme
Region of the Air, but neither of them to me seems cogent. For the first is,
that the Vicinity of this Region to the Element of fire makes it partake a high
degree of Heat. But if we consider the distance of that Element, which they
place contiguous to the Orb of the Moon, and how little nearer to it the
concave part of the upper Region is, then the Unequal of the middle, we may
easily conceive, that in two distances, that are both of them so immense, so
small a disparity cannot be much (if at all) more considerable, then the
greater nearness of one side of a sheet of paper held at three yards distance
from an ordinary fire, in comparison of the distance of the other side of the
same paper; or then the distances of a small Wart, and of the neighboring
parts of the face, when a man comes within 2. or 3. yards of the fire. But it is
not worth while to prosecute this Consideration, because the Argument against
which it is alleged, is built upon the groundless supposition of the Element of
fire, a figment which many of themselves do daily grow ashamed of, as indeed
its existence is as little to be discovered by reason, as perceived by sense.

22. The other Argument for the heat of the third Region of the Air, is, that
fiery Meteors are kindled by it. But not now to question, whether all Meteors
that shine, and therefore pass for fiery, are really kindled exhalations; we
see, that in the lower Region of the Air, and in Winter, those fires that are
called either Helena, or Castor and Pollux, are generated in great storms, and
hang about the sails and shrouds of Ships. Nay, do not we much more frequently
see, that Lightning is produced at all seasons of the year (for in warmer
Countries thousands have observed it to thunder (and so have I) in Winter) in
the middle region of the Air. And since it is not the heat of the inferior part
of the Air, that kindles those Exhalations; and if notwithstanding the Coldness
of the second Region, fiery Meteors may be frequently generated there; I see no
reason why the Production of such Meteors should argue the heat of the third
Region of the Air. And if that Region be not hot, then it will, I presume, be
easily granted, that the coldness of the second must very improperly be
attributed to such an Antiperistasis, as it is generally ascribed to.

23. I come next to consider that Aphoristical saying of Hypocrates, Ventres
hyeme esse calidiores, together with the Observation whereon it seems to have
been grounded. I will not now examine, whether any arguments for the contrary
may be drawn from the heat and thirst men feel in Summer, and the refreshment
they then find by Drinks and Fruits, and other Aliments that are actually cold.
For that which I principally intended to say, is this, That I much more doubt
the matter of fact delivered in the Aphorism, then that, in case it be true, it
may be made out without the help of Antiperistasis in the vulgar and
Scholastic notion of that Term.

24. I consider then first, that the proof, that is wont to be brought of the
greater heat of men's stomachs in Winter, is, that men are wont to have then a
greater appetite to their meat. But though I pay so much respect to the great
Hypocrates, as to allow the Aphorism in a sense; yet I admit it to be true but
upon an Hypothesis, that I do not admit to be so. For the Aphorism supposes,
that the digestion of meat in the stomach is made by heat, and consequently,
that the stronger digestion, that is wont to be made in Winter, is an argument
of the stomachs being then hotter, then at other seasons of the year. But the
Erroniousness of this supposition, I think, I need not solemnly prove to
Eleutherius, who I doubt not has taken notice of several things in Nature, that
agree not with it, and particularly of the strong concoction, that is made in
the stomachs of diverse ravenous fishes, whose stomachs and blood are yet, as I
have purposely observed, sensibly cold: but if it should in some cases prove
true, that there is really in men's bodies a far greater heat in Winter then in
Summer; yet this would not infer an Antiperistasis in the sense, wherein I
oppose it. For the vital heat lodged in the heart, always generating out of the
blood and juices, that continually circulate through that part, great store of
spirits and warm exhalations, which are wont to transpire through the pores of
the skin in much greater quantities, then, notwithstanding the affirmations of
Sanctorius, any thing but my own Trials could have persuaded me, these warm
steams finding the pores of the skin straightened and shut up, grow more and more
copious in the body, and thereby heat the stomach, as well as the other
internal parts of it: And perhaps also the same frigorifick Corpuscles or
Temperature of the Air, that produce cold in Winter, may by shutting in certain
kinds of Effluvia, or perhaps altering the motion or Texture of the blood,
reduce it to such a disposition, as that the appetite shall be increased, as
well as the concoction in the stomach promoted by the Stomachical menstruum, or
ferment, which either is newly generated in Winter, or more copiously supplied
(by the circulating of the blood to the stomach) in that season then in others.
And to show, that a good appetite may be procured by agents endowed with very
distinct and contrary qualities: do not we see, that spicy Sauces, Wine and
Vinegar do all of them, in most men, beget an appetite, though the two former
be confessedly hot, and the latter cold. And so Wormwood, and juice of Lemmons
have both of them frequently reliv'd dull and weak stomachs, though the one be
confessedly a hot simple, and the other a cold. And in some cases, either the
frigorifick Corpuscles themselves, and perhaps some other unknown to us, that
they may bring along with them, may so solicit the stomach, as to breed an
eager appetite, not precisely by their being cold or hot, but by their peculiar
nature; as we have instances of some, that in these parts by walking on the
snow, procure to themselves a Bulimus. And the learned Fromundus relating, how
he himself by walking long on the snow, was surpised with such a (...), takes
notice, that the chief cause of the fainting was in the stomach: And that he
found by his own experience, that that part was discomposed, convell'd, and
provoked to cast. To which he adds, (what makes much for my present purpose)
that he now thinks the chief cause of the Bulimia to consist in certain steams,
that do peculiarly affect the stomach, which they gnaw and distend. And just
before he observes, that straining to fetch deep coughs is a present remedy in
this distemper, by discharging the stomach and Lungs of those snowy spirits,
which were either attracted in respiration, or had some other way insinuated
themselves into those parts: So that besides the cold abstractedly considered,
the stomach may be peculiarly affected by other, either attributes or
concomitants, of the frigorifick Corpuscles, that grow powerful in frosty
weather; with which it well agrees, that diverse have been observed to be
subject to Bulimias's in these parts of the world, though in our warmer
Climates such men endure nothing near so great a cold, nor are so much
inconvenienced by it, as multitudes of others, that in Nova Zembla, and other
gelid Regions never complained of having contracted even in the midst of
Winter, any such disease.

25. Another argument that is specious enough, urged in favor of
Antiperistasis, is borrowed from the production of Hail, which is presumed to
be generated in Summer only, not in Winter, and, according to Aristotle and the
Schools, is made in the lowest Region of the Air, by the cold of the falling
drops of rain so highly intended by the warmth it meets with in the Air near
the Earth, as to congeal the water wherein it is harbored. But though I freely
confess to you, that I think the generation of Hail difficult enough to be
solidly explicated; yet I scruple not to reject the received doctrine about it,
for several reasons, of which I will now name four.

26. For in the first place, it is not universally true, as is supposed, and the
Aristotelian doctrine requires, that Hail falls not but in Summer, or very hot
weather. For I have my self observed it within this twelve month, to Hail at
the latter end of November, and that, when some frosty days have preceded, and
when the coldness of the weather was complained of. Nay, the longest shower of
Hail, that either I, or some others remember our selves to have ever known, I
observed to fall about a week before the end of January, on a night preceded by
a very frosty day, which it self was preceded by a sharp fit of frosty weather.
And here I must notpreter mit this circumstance, that when the tedious shower
was over, there came to the house, where I then was, a maid, that is servant to
one of my Domestics, and related to her Master, and others, how she was for a
good while misled out of the beaten way, where the storm found her by an Ignis
fatuus, which she followed, till by its passing over a place, where she found
an unpassable hedge, it both showed her, that she was out of her way, and that
it was no candle, though she had so confidently thought it one, that she called
out to the party, she presumed it to be carried by. I will leave Themistius to
unriddle, how the Nocturnal Air could kindle a fiery Meteor by its coldness,
and at the same time congeal the falling drops of water into ice by its warmth,
and shall only add, that I doubt not but other observations of the like kind
have been often made, though perhaps seldom recorded. For within the compass of
a very few weeks of the storm, some servants of mine affirmed themselves to
have observed it to Hail two or three times besides that already mentioned.

27. Next, if Aristotle have rightly assigned the cause of Hail, it is somewhat
strange it should not fall far more frequently in Summer, and especially in hot
Climates, then it does, considering how often in all probability the drops of
rain fall cold out of the second Region into the warm Air of the first. And
more strange it is, That even in those parts of Egypt, where it rains
frequently enough and plentifully (for so Prosper Alpinus, that lived long
there, assures us it does) though not about Grand Cairo, yet about Alexandria
and (...), sium, it should never Hail no more then Snow, as the same learned
Physician (a witness above exception) affirms. Besides, whereas it is
pretended, that Snow is generated in the upper Region of the Air, and Hail
always in the lower, my own observation has afforded me many instances, that
seem to contradict the Tradition. For I have observed in I know not how many
great grains of Hail, that besides a hard transparent icy shell, there was as
'twere a snowy Pith of a soft and white substance, and this snowy part was most
commonly in the middle of the icy, which made me call it Pith, but sometimes
otherwise. And lastly, whereas the favorers of Antiperistasis would have the
Drops of rain in their descent, to be congealed apart in the ambient Air; not
to urge, how little the irregular and Angular figures we often meet with in
Hail does countenance this doctrine; Hail often falls in grains, too great by
odds to be fit to comply with Aristotle's conceit. For not to mention the grains
of Hail I have observed my self to be of a bigness unsuitable to this opinion,
diverse learned eyewitnesses have informed me of their having observed much
greater then those I have done: and particularly an eminent Virtuoso of
unquestionable credit, affirmed both to me and to an Assembly of Virtuosi, that
he had some years ago at Lions in France observed a shower of Hail, many of
whose grains were as big as ordinary Tennis-balls, and which did the Windows
and Tyles a mischief answerable to that unusual bulk. And Bartholinus affirms,
that he himself observed, in another shower of Hail, grains of a more unwonted
size; a single grain weighing no less then a whole pound. But though this it
self is little in comparison of what I remember I have somewhere met with in
learned Authors, yet it may abundantly suffice to disprove the vulgar conceit
about the generation of Hail, till we meet in these Countries with showers of
rain, whose single drops prove to be of such a bigness; which I presume those
that ascribe Hail to Antiperistasis will not easily show us.

28. I come now to consider the last and indeed the chiefest example, that is
given of Antiperistasis, namely the coldness of Cellars, and other subterraneal
Vaults in Summer, and their heat in Winter. And as the Argument, wont to be
drawn from hence, consists of two parts, I will examine each of them by its
self.

29. And first, as to the refreshing coldness, that subterraneal places are
wont to afford us in Summer, I both deny, that they are then colder than in
Winter; and I say, that though they were, that coldness would not necessarily
infer an Antiperistasis.

30. We must consider then, that in Summer our Bodies having for many days, if
not some weeks, or perhaps months, been constantly environed with an Air,
which, at that season of the year, is much hotter, then it is wont to be in
Winter, or in other seasons, our senses may easily impose upon us, and we may
be much mistaken, by concluding upon their Testimony, that the subterraneal Air
we then find so cool, is really colder, then it was in Winter, or at the
Spring; as they that come out of hot Baths think the Air of the adjoining rooms
very fresh and cool, which they found to be very warm, when coming out of the
open Air, they went through those warm rooms to the Bath, and the deepness and
retiredness of these subterraneal Caves keep the Air, they harbored, from
being any thing near so much affected with the changes of the season, as the
outward Air that is freely exposed to the Suns warming beams, which pierces
with any sensible force so little a way into the ground, that Diggers are not
wont to observe the Earth to be dried and discolored by them beyond the depth
of a very few feet. And I have found, that in very shallow Mines not exceeding
six or seven yards in depth, though the mouth were wide, and the descent
perpendicular enough, the Air was cool in the heat of Summer; so that the free
Air and our Bodies that are always immersed in it, being much warmer in Summer
then at other times, and the subterraneal Air by reason of its remoteness from
those causes of alteration, continuing still the same, or but very little
changed, it is no wonder, there should appear a difference as to sense, when our
bodies pass from one of them to another.

31. And supposing, but not yielding, that the Air of Cellars and Vaults were
really colder in Summer then in Winter, that is, were discovered to have a
greater coldness, not only as to our sense of feeling, but as to
Weather-glasses; yet why should we for all that have recourse for the solution
of the difficulty to an Antiperistasis, which it is much harder to understand,
then to find out the cause of the Phenomenon, which seems in short to be this,
That whereas (which I shall soon have occasion to manifest) there are warm
Exhalations, that in all seasons are plentifully sent up by the subterraneal
heat, from the lower to the superficial parts of the Earth, these steams, that
in Winter are in great part repressed, or checked in their ascent, by the cold
frost or snow, that constipates the surface of the Earth, and choaks up its
pores, these Exhalations, I say, that being detained in the ground would temper
the Native coldness of the Earth and Water, and consequently that of Springs,
and of the subterraneal Air, are by the heat that reigns in the outward Air,
called out at the many pores and chinks, which that heat opens on the surface
of the ground, by which means the water of deep Springs and Wells, and the
subterraneal Air, being deprived of that, which is wont to allay their Native
or wonted coldness, are left to disclose a higher degree of it, and seem to
have that quality increased, when indeed it is but freed from the mixture of
its contrary that weakened it.

32. As for the heat, we find in Cellars and Vaults in Winter, the solutions
already given will be applicable to that Phenomenon also, which by this way is
yet more easy to be accounted for then the other. For having first questioned
the matter of fact, 'twill not be difficult to show, that though it were true,
it need not be ascribed to Antiperistasis.

33. I think then, that it may be justly questioned, whether Cellars in general
are hotter in Winter then they are in Summer. For as for the Testimony of our
senses, upon which alone men are wont to conclude the affirmative, it may in
this case easily and much delude us. For those places being sheltered from the
winds, and kept from a free communication with the outward Air, are much less
exposed then others to the action of those agents, whatever they be, that
produce cold in the Air. So that our bodies being constantly immersed in the
Air refrigerated by the Winter, and consequently brought nearer to the temper
of that Air, when we bring those bodies into Cellars the subterraneal air must
seem warm to us, though in it self it were really invaried as to its temper.

34. Now that many Cellars are indeed colder in the midst of Winter, then in
the heat of Summer, though not in respect of our senses, yet in respect of
other bodies that have not the same predispositions, I am induced to believe by
some Experiments of mine own, purposely made. And first in a frosty evening
having hung out in a Garden two sealed Weatherglasses, that they might be
reduced as near as could be to the temper of the ambient Air, I brought one of
them into a Cellar, and it soon began manifestly to rise, and in two or three
hours ascended five or six divisions, whilst the water in another sealed
Weather-glass, that continued suspended in the same part of the Garden, did
rather a little subside, then at all rise, which is agreeable to the first part
of what I was saying; namely, that the Air, harbored in Cellars, is not so
powerfully affected by the ordinary efficients of cold, as the free and
external air. And now as to the second part of what I was saying, that the
subterraneal Air, though it be less affected by the outward cold, may be
somewhat affected by it, instead of growing hotter by Antiperistasis; I shall
add, that early in the morning in frosty Weather the liquor in the same
Weatherglass appeared more subsided, then overnight, which shows, that the
external air did lessen, not increase the warmth of the air in the Cellar. And
having there placed a wide mouthed glass of oil, which in thawing weather
remained all night fluid as before, the same liquor, the very next night, which
was a bitter frost, was so far frozen and congealed, as to sink in other oil,
and keep its surface exactly, though the glass were inclined and turned upside
down. And prosecuting my Trial, I found, that in a sharp frost, and great snow,
the liquor, that on the Thursday night was beneath the fourth knub or mark of
division, a sudden thaw coming with a South wind, the next morning in the same
Cellar the liquor was ascended to the eighth mark. And continuing the
Weather-glass in the same Cellar for a good while, to watch its alterations
every night and morning, I remember I met with, and registered more
observations, that confirmed me in my opinion, though it is so long ago, that I
have forgot the particular circumstances. And after these Trials meeting with a
learned Polander, I did without declaring my opinion, inquire of him, whether
in his Country he had at any time observed Beer to freez in Cellars in frosty
weather, to which he answered, that in the coldest Winters, if the Beer were
small, the Barrels would oftentimes be frozen, but not if it were strong. But I
need not have recourse to foreign Testimony, having my self observed here in
England more then one Barrel of Beer to be frozen in the Cellar in exceeding
cold weather. Insomuch that one of the Barrels being full, and the liquor
expanded by freezing, was forced out at certain chinks, which seem to have been
made by that expansive force, and the liquor so ejected, adhered in a
considerable lump to the outside of the vessel; and yet this Cellar had its
Windows carefully shut, and not only was near a Kitchen, where fire was
constantly kept, but, which was more considerable, it had this principal mark
of being a good Cellar, that in the heat of Summer it used to afford me drink
sufficiently cool. And now to requite Eleutherius with the Testimony of that
very person, Physician to the Russian Emperor, whose authority he lately
alleged against me, I shall confess, that as he suspects, I had conference
with this Doctor, and when I diligently enquired of him, whether their Cellars
at Musco were really very cold in Summer, he answered me, that they were not,
and that they had distinct Cellars for Summer and for Winter, that their small
Beer would quickly grow sour in their Cellars in Summer, if their vessels were
not kept in Snow, that therefore their way was to make at the bottom of their
Summer Cellars (to which belonged a Well to receive the water dropping from the
melted Snow) a deep layer of snow, on which they afterward cast a convenient
quantity of water, that the whole mass might be turned into a kind of ice. In
this snow they keep their Casks, making sometimes a layer of Snow, and a layer
of Cask, and digging out their vessels, as they had occasion to use them.] By
all which it may appear how groundlesly it is universally affirmed of Cellars,
that as they seem to the sense, so they really are hotter in Winter then in
Summer.

35. But if it should happen, (as in some places it is not impossible, but that
it may) that some Vaults and Cellars are really warmer in Summer then in
Winter; yet I see not why this should reduce us to the acknowledgment of an
Antiperistasis; for neither could the effect be made out by that, nor would
there be any necessity to have recourse to it.

36. And first I might content my self to repeat, what I have formerly said, to
show the incongruity of Antiperistasis in general to Natures ways of acting.
And I might add, that to imagine with some late Peripateticks, (whom all their
reverence to Aristotle has not so far blinded, as not to let them see the
unreasonableness of his conceit) that in Winter the warmth of the ambient air
retreats into Cellars and Vaults to shun its contrary, is to make mere
accidents, or at best inanimate agents, act with knowledge and design. But I
will rather represent, that, though Antiperistasis were intelligible, it were
improper to allege it in our case. For to invigorate the warmth of the air by
the Cold, the air must according to them be environed with other cold bodies,
and the heat must retire it self as far as it can from them. And accordingly
it is observed, that in Winter the deepest Cellars are warmest; but in the case
before us the subterraneal air, though above, it have the cold that reigns in
Winter; yet beneath, the subterraneal heat makes the Earth very warm. This I
shall not wonder, if you look upon, as new and Paradoxical. And therefore I
shall apply my self to the proof of it, and to convince you, I shall not employ
the observations of Chemists and Mineralists, for fear you should suspect them
of ignorance or design, but I will use only the authority of a learned
Physician, who I think was also a professor of Mathematics, who in but too
many points is a stout Peripatetick, and who above all this professes himself
to be an eyewitness of what he relates. This Author then informs us, that
about the year 1615. he had a curiosity to visit the Mines of Hungary, and
particularly to go down into the deep Goden Mine at Cremnitz, and that after he
had descended fourscore or a hundred fathom, he found it excessively hot,
though he had but a slight linen garment on, and though he be a maintainer of
Antiperistasis, yet he affirms that not only the Overseer and workmen of that
Mine, but also those of diverse other Mines unanimously assured him, That that
lower Region of the Earth was all the year long very hot, and as well in Winter
as he found it in Summer; so that it seems in Winter the heat of the
subterraneal parts less remote from the superficies, cannot be intended by the
coldness of the more internal parts of the Earth, those parts being themselves
not always cold, but always hot.

37. Eleutherius. -- Coepimus in hanc fodinam per gradus valde strictos
profunde admodum descendere, per regionem certe frigidissimam, quam solis
vestibus metallicis opertus, multo frigidiorem sensi, etc. p. m. 130.
But you may, Carneades, remember, that this very Author tells you, that he
found the supreme region of the Earth, as he calls it, which is that next the
air, exceedingly cold, both as he went down into the Mine, and as he came up
again, and that he ascribes that coldness to Antiperistasis.

38. Carneades. Right, but you -- Inquam descendi mense Julio, quo anni
tempestas vigebat calidissima, siccissimaque. p. m. 130.
may remember too, that he relates, that 'twas in July, and in very hot
weather, that he went down into the Mine, and that to avoid fouling his
clothes, he put them off, and exchanged them for a light loose Linen garment,
such as the Diggers wore, and this himself mentions, as that which much
increased the coldness he felt: So that if besides this, we consider, that he
descended into a cooler place, with a Body already affected with the great
heat, which he elsewhere takes notice, that that season had given the outward
air, and perhaps much heated by riding or walking to the Mine, we shall not
wonder, that he found the change very sensible as he went down; and we shall
less wonder, that he found the upper Region of the Earth, as he calls it, more
cold when he came up again: since besides the toil of going to and fro, and
ascending through narrow, low, and difficult passages, he came out of a place
excessively hot; insomuch that he tells us, that the Overseer of the Mine would
not go back with him the same way he came, but took a far shorter, though Page
142, and 143.
it were a more dangerous way, causing himself to be drawn up in a
perpendicular Groove, and rendering this reason, that 'twas very unhealthy, when
one comes out of a place where the Diggers work naked, and where one is even
melting into sweat, to make any long stay in the superior Region of the Earth.
So that besides that this Author, although he maintains Antiperistasis, yet he
allows this upper Region to be hot in Winter, as well as cold in Summer, and
consequently, that in Winter it has not a cold region beneath, as well as above
it, which is enough to vindicate the thing for which I first alleged his
Testimony: Besides this, I say, to me, who, though I willingly thank him for
his Narrative, am much more swayed by what he relates, then by what he thinks;
the matter of fact seems very favorable to my opinion; for you see, that I can
justly refer the cold he felt near the surface of the Earth, to the deception
of his sense, but the heat he felt within the bowels of the Earth cannot be
referred to the same cause, since he tells us, that at the top of that great
and perpendicular Groove, by which the Mine-master was drawn up, there ascended
a plentiful smoke, that was, even above the mouth of it, felt actually hot; and
besides his Page 125.
own confession, that the deep parts of the Mine, were more then seemingly hot,
I can draw further proofs from these two circumstances, that I have elsewhere
met with in his Narrative: The one, that on the surface of the Earth, it was
then excessively hot; another, that the smoke, which, notwithstanding Exhalatio
aere levior per ipsum puteum ascendit magno impetu, in ejus sumitate adhuc
sensibiliter calida ipsa aestate, licet supremam terrae regionem tunc
frigidissimam permeat. Page 128. see also page 125.
this heat appeared hot, had in its ascent passed through four or five hundred
foot of a cold region of the Earth, whereby it may well be supposed, to have
been much infrigidated. To these relations of the learned Morinus, I will add,
that the Archbishop of Upsal affirms, that in the year 1528. being in Poland,
he went to visit those deep mountains (as he terms In Polonia vero montes
profundissimi salis sunt, praesertim in Vielisca and Bochna ubi videndi causa
transcensis scalis, vidi in profundioribus locis laboratores nudes ob calorem,
ferreis instrumentis eruere opulentissimum The saurum salis, veluti Aurum and
Argentum ex Mineris inexhaustis. Olaus Mag. lib. 13. p. 382.
them) whence they dig solid salt, and having descended fifty Ladders, found in
the deeper places, that the workmen were naked, because of the heat: so that
supposing the time of the year not to be considerable in this case, it seems by
this relation, that, provided a man descends low enough into the bowels of the
Earth, he will find it very hot, even in places that want those Metals, or
Marchisites, or other like Mineral substances, by the action of saline liquors,
or exhalations, upon which, you, Eleutherius, have, I remember, sometimes
suspected, that the heat observed in Mines may be produced.

39. I have hitherto shown, that the heat of Cellars and Vaults in Winter, has
been very improperly, and now I come to show, that it has been as unnecessarily
ascribed to Antiperistasis. For as the air of those places is protected from
the greatest part of the adventitious Coldness that reigns in the outward Air:
so the subterraneal air has a positive cause of heat in Winter, that it has not
in Summer. For as I formerly took notice, in Summer the pores of the Earth,
being dilated and opened by heat, the warm exhalations, that were wont to be
mingled with moist vapors in the bowels of the Earth, are called out, and
exhaled away. For as in the Winter the surface of the Earth being hardened by
frost, or the pores of it choked up, or at least much obstructed, the hot
steams, that, as I lately proved by our French Authors Testimony (to which I
could add, that of eminent Chemists and Mineralists) do continually, and
copiously enough ascend from the warm Region, or lower parts of the Earth, are
in great part detained and imprisoned in Cellars, and other subterraneal
cavities, where consequently they produce such a heat, as to those that come
out of the cold air, may be very sensible. And the rather, because whilst men,
by the coldness of the season, are more then ordinarily careful, to stop up the
passages, at which the external air may get in, they do, though designlesly,
stop up the vents, at which the subterraneous exhalations might get out. And to
show you, that this last circumstance is not impertinently taken notice of, I
shall tell you, that a very grave Author having occasion to mention Cellars,
relates it, as a practice in diverse houses of a Town, where he had been, to
keep vents in their deep Cellars, which in the Summer, were from time to time
opened, partly to keep the places sweet and wholesome, and partly to let out the
warm Exhalations, that would else hinder their liquors from keeping so fresh,
and well. And these steams were affirmed to have been several times taken
notice of to ascend visibly into the free air like a smoke, which several
Phenomenon, and particularly what I formerly related of the hot fumes, that
manifestly ascended out of the great Groove in the Hungarian Mine, may keep us
from thinking incredible.

40. And now by what I have hitherto discoursed, I have made way for the
solution of a Phenomenon, that is wont to be much urged in favor of
Antiperistasis, namely, the smoking of water, that is drawn in frosty weather,
out of deep Wells and Springs.

41. But first I must advertise you, that it is improperly enough, that some
urge for Antiperistasis, such examples as the strange Spring near the Temple of
Jupiter Ammon, which Lucretius and others have observed to have been exceeding
cold in the day time, and as hot at night; for, not now to examine, whether
this story be not fabulous, or might not be ascribed to some crafty trick of
the Idolatrous Priests, that had a mind to impose upon Alexander, as well as
others, and procure an admiration to the place; I consider, that this, and
other the like cases, such as are the Springs mentioned in the Islands of
Maldiviae, by Pyrard (a French Author, that was shipwrack'd, and lived long in
those parts) must be referred to the peculiar Nature of the Springs, or some
other hidden cause, since, if the water of them were but ordinary, and the
Phenomenon were the effects of Antiperistasis, it might justly be expected,
that the like should happen in all Springs, or at least in very many, which,
that it does not, common experience shows us. And I would say, that this might
be the case of the Spring, you mention out of Captain James's Voyage, but that
besides, that he does not say Page 63.
expressly, that it was frozen in July, but only that then it afforded him no
water, which might happen upon diverse other accounts: And besides, that it is
manifest, that in far hotter Countries, where the excessive heat of the Air
might more intend the subterraneal cold, if Antiperistasis could do it, there
is no talk of any such degree of cold in Summer, as to freez the Springs;
besides this, I say, there seems to be, through some mistake or other, a
contradiction in the relation it self, since in the same Voyage, speaking of
the same month of December, he expressly says, that their Well was then frozen
up, so, that dig Page 58.
as deep as they could, they could come by no water. And he complains on that
occasion, of the unwholsomness of melted snow-water. It Is true, that he soon
after mentions a Spring, that he found under a hills side, which Page 59.
did not so freez, but that he could break the ice and come to it, but by his
very sending far from his house to that Spring, it appears to have been a
Consequence, and therefore a Proof, of the uselesness of his Well in December;
as his affirmation, that it continued all the year so, as to be serviceable,
when the ice was broken, shows, that the Antiperistasis did not freez it up in
Summer. And having cleared my self of such a Testimony of this ingenious
Navigator, as would appear very illustrious, if there had been no mistake about
it, I shall not scruple to add, that the late publisher of the Latin
Description of Denmark and Norway informs us, that in or near that little
Danish Island (...), wherein the famous Tycho built his Urani-Burgum, there is
one Spring among many ordinary ones, that even in the coldest Winter is never
frozen, which, subjoyns my Author, does in these regions exceeding rarely
happen to be found. Olaus Magnus also relates, Hancque naturam, lacum similem,
prope Metropolin Nidrosiensem Regni Norvegiae, habere compertum est, eo
praecipue Argumento, quod in mediis frigoribus nunquam congelatur. Lib. 2.
that in another part of the King of Denmarks Dominions, namely, near Nidrosia,
one of the chief Cities of Norway, there is a Lake, that even in that Northern
Region never freezes. And the learned Josephus Acosta mentions, that among
Joseph.
a very great number of hot Springs Acost.
Hist. Ind. page 174.
to be met with in Peru, At the Baths, which they call the Baths of Ingua,
there is a course of water, which comes forth all hot and boiling, and joining
unto it, there is another, whose water is as cold as ice. He adds, That the
Ingua (or the Peruvian Emperor) was accustomed to temper the one with the
other, and that it is a wonderful thing to see Springs of so contrary
qualities, so near one to another. These relations as I was saying, I scruple
not to mention, though at first sight they may seem to disfavour my cause. For
by these and some others it may appear, that Springs may obtain very peculiar
and strange qualities from the nature of the places whence they come, or
through which they pass, or from some other causes, that are as hidden from us,
as the originals of these rare waters. And this being once proved, who knows
what interest, such causes, as we are strangers to, may have in some
Phenomenon, that are wont to be wholly ascribed to the heat and cold of the
superficial part of the ground, and what influence they have upon many other
Springs (besides those above mentioned) some of which that are very deep, may
rise from the warm region of the Earth, where they may be affected by the
place, as both these and others may be by Mineral juices and steams ( such,
perhaps, as we know nothing of) though we well know, that some of them that are
saline, without being at all sensibly hot, will powerfully resist congelation.

42. But having hinted thus much on this occasion, I shall now proceed to
consider, The smoking of waters drawn from deep places in frosty weather, and
show, that it does not necessarily conclude, such water to be warmer in Winter,
since that effect may proceed not from the greater warmth of the water in such
weather, but from the greater coldness of the Air. For we may take notice, that
a man's breath in Summer, or in mild Winter weather, becomes very visible, the
cold ambient Air nimbly condensing the fuliginous steams, which are discharged
by the Lungs, and which in warmer weather are readily diffused in imperceptible
particles through the air. And I have observed upon the opening of issues in
some men's arms, that though no smoke be visible in Summer, it will be very
conspicuous in exceeding sharp weather, though men's arms, at least the external
parts of them, seem to have less heat in frosty weather, then in Summer; since
in the former of those seasons, they are wont to be manifestly more slender,
the fleshy parts and juices being condensed by the coldness of the Air. And
though the insensible Transpirations, that continually exhale from all the
parts of our bodies, are not wont to be visible here, even in Winter; yet in
extremely cold Countries, as Nova Zembla, or Charleton Island, those Effluvia
have been observed, not only to be thickened, but to be turned into ice it self,
sometimes within the Sea-mens shoes. And here in England, having not long
since employed a laboring man to dig a deep hole in very frosty weather, two
Servants of mine, that stood by to see him work, did both of them assure me,
when they returned, that the steams of his heated body, were frozen upon the
outside of his Wastcoat, which, one of them, whilst the other was about to
give me notice of it, inconsiderately wiped off.

43. And since we see how fast the water in Ponds and Ditches, wastes and
decreases in Summer, there is no cause to doubt, but that it does then
continually emit Exhalations as well, if not much more (...), then in Winter,
which may be manifestly confirmed by this, that in the Summer, one shall often
see in the mornings or evenings, the face of the water covered with a mist or
smoke, that rises out of it. And I have sometimes taken pleasure to see this
aggregate of Exhalations, hover over the water, and make, as it were, another
River of a lighter liquor, that conformed it self, for a considerable way, to
the breadth and windings of the stream, whence it proceeded. And I think it
will be easily granted, that the water in Summer time is at least as warm at
noon, when such Exhalations are not visible, as in the morning when they are,
though the Air be colder at this part of the day, then at that; which
observation gives us the true reason of the Phenomenon.

44. And though notwithstanding all this, it were made to appear, that in some
cases, the smoking water of Springs may be really warmer in Winter then in
Summer; yet a sufficient reason of the Phenomenon may be fetched from what I
have already delivered about the detention of the warm subterraneal vapors by
the frost, and snow, and rain, that make the earth less perspirable in Winter.

45. And because I know Themistius will look upon a thing so disagreeable to
the vulgar opinion, Of the Coldness of the whole Element of Earth, as a
Paradox; I will take this opportunity to add a further confirmation, to what I
have been saying.

46. And first, that there arise copious and warm steams from the lower parts
of the Earth, may be proved, not only by what I have already mentioned,
touching the Hangarian Mines, but by the common complaint of Diggers in most,
though not in all deep Mines, That they are oftentimes troubled, and sometimes
endangered by sudden damps, which do frequently so stuff up and thicken the
subterraneal Air, that they make it not only unfit for respiration, but able to
extinguish the Lamps and Candles, that the Miners use, to give them light to
work by. And I remember, that I have visited Mines, where having inquired of
the diggers, whether those hot exhalations, that compose their damps, did not
sometimes actually take fire within the bowels of the Earth, I was answered,
that in some of their Pits (and particularly in one, that they showed me)
though not in all, they did, insomuch that the exhalation suddenly kindling,
would make a report at the mouth of the Pit like a Musket, or a small piece of
Ordinance, and the flame would actually burn off the hair, and scorch the skins
of (...) workmen, that did not seasonably get out of the Pit, when the
exhalation appeared to be near an ascension, or did not nimbly fall down flat
with their faces to the ground, till the flame was gone out. And one of these
workmen that I asked, affirmed himself to have been several times, to his no
small trouble, so burned, and that (if I much misremember not) twice in one
day. And it seems to me as well as to Morinus very probable, that those great
quantities of rain and snow, and storms, and (perhaps) some other Meteors, that
are taken notice of in Winter, may rather consist of these subterraneal steams,
then the vapors and exhalations attracted by the Sun (or at least may as much
consist of the former, as the latter.) For his heat is then very languid, and
acts upon the ground but during the day time, which is very short (whereas
those Meteors are generated indifferently at all hours of the day and night)
and the sky is oftentimes, for many days together, quite overcast with clouds,
and the surface of the ground so constipated with frost, that it will sometimes
freez even in the Sunshine: So that it is not near so likely, that the heat of
the Sun, in the midst of all these disadvantages, should be able to elevate so
great a plenty of exhalations and vapors, as are requisite to compose the
rain, and snow, and storms, that sometimes last almost all the Winter, as that
they should be supplied by subterraneal steams copiously sent up from the heat
that continually reigns in the lower parts of the Earth, and by traversing the
Sea, and at other vents, get up into the Air.

47. To make out this, my formerly quoted French Author relates a P. m. 136.
very memorable thing, that was told him by the Masters of those Mines in
Hungary (which are at least as deep as any that I remember I have seen or read
of;) namely, that the Miners were able certainly to foretell sooner then any
other mortals, the Tempests and sudden mutations, that were to happen in the
Air. For when they perceived by the burning blew of their Lights, and by other
manifest signs, that they could easily take notice of in their Grooves, that
store of the Tempestuous Damp (if I may so call it) was ascending from the
lower parts of the Earth, though the sky above were clear, and the Air calm;
yet they conld assuredly foretell the approach of a storm, or some other great
alteration in the Air, which would accordingly ensue within no very long time
aster. And to confirm this Narrative, I shall add, not only that it is agreeable
to what I lately told you was affirmed to me by other Mine-men, but that having
inquired of a very ingenious Physician, who lived many years in Cornwall, (a
Country you know famous for Tin-Mines, some of which are infamous for the damps
that infest them) he told me, that diverse of the experienced Fishermen assured
him, that oftentimes they did perceive fires shining in the night, sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, which were supposed to be kindled by the
sulphurous and other subterraneous exhalations, and that, when they perceived
those fires, (especially if any number appeared in several places) those that
were well acquainted with the coast, would not continue long out at Sea, but
rather quit an opportunity of catching Fish, then not make seasonably to the
shore, having often observed, and particularly this last year, that bold and
unexperienced Mariners, by slighting these forerunners of storms, were in few
hours shipwrack'd by them.

48. To this I shall add, what happened some years since, upon the Irish coast,
near a strong Fortress, called Duncannon, where diverse of the ships Royal of
England lying at anchor, in a place where they apprehended no danger from the
wind, there seemed suddenly to ascend out of the water, not far from them, a
black cloud, in shape and bigness not much unlike a Barrel, which mounting
upwards, was not long after followed, as the most experienced Pilot foretold,
so hideous a storm, as forced those ships to go to Sea again, and had like to
have cast them away in it. And this account was both written by the principal
officers of the Squadron, to their superiors in England, and given soon after
it happened, by the chief of those eyewitnesses (and particularly by the Pilot)
to a very near kinsman of mine (well versed in Maritine affairs) that commanded
the land forces in those parts, as a truth no less known then memorable.

49. And on occasion of what I was saying, about the eruption of hot steams, in
several parts of the Earth, I now call to mind something that I have met with
in a very small, but curious Dissertation, De admirandis Hungariae aquis, whose
Anonymous Author I gather from some passages in the Tract it self, to have been
a Nobleman, Governor of Saros, and some other places in Hungary, and to have
written this Quia vero in Comitatum Zoliensem, dum aquas persequimur, ventum
est, non possum praeterire hiatum terrae iisdem in locis famosum ob pestilentes
expirationes, quibus Aves supervolantes, and quaevis alia animantia extingui
constat, manifesto eorum experimento, qui, etc. Page 74.
discourse, both for, and to that inquisitive German, Baron Sigis mundus Liber,
famous for the account he gave the world of the Ambassy, whereon he was sent by
the German to the Russian Emperor. This Anonymous, but noble writer, tells us
then, that in that part of Hungary, which he calls Comitatus Zoliensis, there
is a gaping piece of ground, which does emit such mortal exspirations, that
they suffocate, not only Cats and Dogs, purposely held at the end of long poles
over the cleft, but kill even Birds, that attempt to fly over it. And in other
places of the same Tract, I have met with many other relations, which if I had
time to make a particular mention of, would much countenance what I have been
lately saying: but though I pretermit several other instances, I cannot but
take especial notice of one, which (together with what I lately mentioned to
have happened near Duncannon) may make it probable, that not only under the
surface of the dry ground, but in that part of the Terrestrial Globe, that is
covered with water, there may arise streams (and consequently Exhalations)
actually, and that considerably, hot. For in one place he Ibidem est sub dio
fons calidarum caeteris (...), quem Purgatorium vocavere, ea nimirum ratione,
quod, quamadmodum proditum est in purgatorio poenas nocentium pro noxarum modo,
alias acerbiores alias mitiores, ita quaedam insunt Aquae hoc in font
discrimina, namqua in eum a Danubii ripa aditus est, subfrigida primum, mox
tepida, and quo in eum penetraris altius hoc magis calet. In recessu vero
interiore tam est calida, ut ferri non possit. Est etiam is calor haud dubie
aquae hujus proprius; nam alia, quae dixi, temperamenta verisimile est a
Danubio accedere, qui crepidinem hujus fontis lambit, and cum vel modice
excrescit, totum inundat, neque tamen ita restinguit, quin caleat. Quin intra
ipsam ripam, qua Danubio perennis cursus est, calidae ebulliunt, ubi qui altius
mergi volunt lavare consueverunt. Page 57.
takes notice, that, not far from the well known City of Buda, there is a hot
Spring (which they call Purgatory) which the waters of Danubius it self are not
able to keep from being hot; nay, within the very Banks, betwixt which that
great River runs, there boil up hot Srings, where those that will go deep
enough into the water, may commodiously bath themselves. And elsewhere speaking
of the River Istrogranum, in the same County, he adds, That not only the Banks
of Neque in ripa tantum eruuntur Calidae, sed etiam intra amnem, si fundum ejus
pedibus suffodias. Calet autem immodice, nec sunt Idoneae balneis, (...)
temperentur, quod Admistione frigidae de proximo haustae in proclivi est. Page
65.
it, but within the very River it self, one may discover hot Springs, by
removing the Sand at the bottom with ones feet. To this I shall add, That
having heard of a Ditch in the North of England (in some regards more strange,
though less famous then the sulphurous Grotta near Naples) whence not only
subterraneal steams, but those so sulphurous, as to be easily Inflamable, did
constantly and plentifully ascend into the Air, I had the curiosity to make
inquiry about it, of the Minister of the place, (a very learned Man, and
conversant in Mines) who then happened to be my neighbor, and he attested the
truth of the relation upon his own knowledge. And it was confirmed to me by a
very ingenious Gentleman, who went purposely to visit this place, and found it
true, That a lighted Candle, or some such actually burning body being held
where this Exhalation issued out of the Earth, would kindle it, and make it
actually flame for a good while, and (if I misremember not) as long as one
pleased. And as this place was but few years since taken notice of, so there
may be probably very many others, yet undiscovered, that may supply the Air
with store of Mineral exhalations, proper to generate fiery Meteors and Winds;
I remember, that having lately asked an inquisitive Gentleman, that is a great
searcher after Mines, whether he did not observe some meteors near those
places, where he is most conversant, he told me, that it is very usual in some
of them, to see certain great fires moving in the Air, which in those places,
diggers, because of some resemblance (real or imaginary) are wont to call
Draggons. [And the Russian Emperors Physician, you were speaking of, informed
me a while since, that he had, not long ago, observed in Winter a River in
Muscovy, where though the rest of the surface was frozen, there was a part of
it near a mile long, that remained uncovered with ice, which probably was kept
from being generated there by those subterraneous Exhalations, since he says he
saw them ascend up all the way like the smoke of an Oven.] And in case the
matter of fact delivered by Nec praetereundum hic puto Lacum esse LX. milliarum
in longitudine, and XX. in latitudine Italicorum, (...) appellatum in Regno
Ostrogothorum, quae talis est naturae, quod cum tempestuoso vento congelatus
fuerit, and tempus resolutionis immineat, vehementissimo strepitu incipit fundo
ebullire and commoveri, magna violentia perumpere in parvas rimas, vel
scissuras, quae fiunt in glacie, and has in modico temporis spatio faciens
valde latas, licet pro tunc glacies in spissitudine habuerit, plusquam unum,
vel duo brachia. Lib. primo, page 23.
Olaus Magnus be true, concerning the strange thaws that sometimes happen, with
terrible noises, in the great Lake Veter, those wonderful Phenomenon, may not
improbably be ascribed to the ascent of great store of hot subterraneal steams,
which suddenly cracking the thick and solid ice in many places at once, produce
the hideous Noises, and the hasty Thaw that he speaks of. And this suspicion
may be countenanced partly by this circumstance, that before these sudden
thaws, the Lake begins with great noise to boil at the bottom, and partly by
what is related by a more Authentic writer, I mean, that learned Traveller the
Jesuit Martinius, who witnesses, that at Peking, the royal City of China, it is
very usual, that after the Rivers and Ponds have continued hard frozen over,
during the Winter, the Thaw is made in one day; which, since the freezing of
the waters (as he tells us) required many, makes it very probable, That the
sudden thaw is effected (as he also inclines to think) by subterraneal steams,
which I may well suppose to be exceeding copious, and to diffuse themselves
every way to a very great extent, since they are able so soon to thaw the
Rivers and Ponds of a large Territory, and that (which makes mainly for my
present purpose) beginning contrary to vulgar thaws, from the bottom upwards.

50. And having thus manifested, that the lower parts of the Earth do send up
great store of Exhalations and Vapors to the upper parts, it will be obvious
to conceive, that as in diverse places of the Terrestrial Globe, these steams
get into the Air, either by the advantage of finding vents, such as those I
have already mentioned, or by growing copious enough to force themselves a
passage: So in most other places, where the ascending steams find no commodious
vents, or are too faintly driven up to gain themselves a passage, they must be
repressed or detained beneath the surface of the Earth, which has its pores in
Winter usually choked up with snow or rain, or its surface constipated and
hardened with ice or frost, so that these exhalations being pent up, and
receiving fresh supplies, from time to time, from beneath, 'twere no wonder, if
they should somewhat warm deep Cellars and Wells, where they are thus detained;
and therefore our Husbandmen do not speak altogether so improperly, when they
say, that the snow keeps the ground warm. And I remember, that Dr. Smith, the
learned English (...) into Musco, makes it to be one of the principal reasons
of the great fertility, he justly ascribes to the Country there about, that
during almost all the Winter, the ground is to a great height covered with
snow, which does not only enrich it by the fertilizing salt, which the Earth
gains from the snow, when that comes to be melted, but does also contribute to
its improvement, by choking up, or obstructing the pores, at which the
Nitro-sulphureous, and other useful Corpuscles, that are sent up by the (...)
heat, would easily get away. And least (Gentlemen) you should think, that it is
only by the Ratiocination, that I conclude, that there is really great store of
warm steams detained under ground in the Winter: I shall add this sensible
observation, received from the Russian Emperors Physician already often
mentioned, by whom I have been assured, that about Musco, where the surface of
the ground is far more constipated in Winter, this it is in these parts, and
where they are wont to keep their Cellars much closer, the subterraneous
Exhalations being hindered to fly abroad, will in time multiply so fast, that
he assures me, that upon the unwary opening of the doors of Cellars, that have
been long kept shut, there would sally out a warm smoke, and very thick, almost
like that of a furnace, and sometimes the steam that issues out will be so
gross and plentiful, that it has brought men into danger of being suffocated by
it.

51. And now, Gentlemen, having shown, that though Experience be so confidently
appealed to, by the maintainers of Antiperistasis, yet she has not hitherto
afforded them any thing, that much favors their Cause, it remains, that I
show, that she bears witness against it. For besides that some passages of my
late Discourses do really contain Phenomenon, that not only do not favor
Antiperistasis, but may justly be employed as Experiments against it, I shall
ex abundanti (as they speak) present you with something, which I necessitated
Experience to supply me with, that seems expressly to overthrow it.

52. I might urge against those, who, though they begin to be ashamed of the
Doctrine of the Schools, would establish an Antiperistasis upon the account of
what they call a fuga Contrarii, that the very instance they are wont to bring
for their opinion, may be retorted upon them. For when they tell us, that in
Winter, the heat, to fly the cold of the external Air, retires it self into the
lower parts of the Earth, and there harbors in Cellars and Wells, as may be
proved by the smoking of water drawn from deep Wells, which argues its heat,
the vapors which fly away, being, as vapors, hot in comparison of the outward
Air; we may easily answer, by demanding, why, if the heat, that was harbored
in a smoking Bucket of water, have the wit or instinct to fly from its
Contrary, it does not in the Bucket, as it is said to do in the Well, retire it
self as far as it can from the surrounding cold of the ambient Air, but instead
of retiring to the innermost parts of the water (those being remotest from
that) it needlessly flies abroad, with the vapors it excites, and does, as it
were, of its own accord cast it self into the arms of the enemies it should
shun. And indeed what I just now mentioned to you, as related to me by the
great Duke of Muscovies Physician, Dr. Sam. Collins.
does sufficiently manifest, that the cause, why the Corpuscles, that keep
Cellars warm, abide beneath the surface of the Earth in Winter, is not that
they fly the cold as their enemy, but that they are pent up beneath the ground,
since, when vent is given them, they immediately rush into the open Air,
without fearing the cold even of Russia in the very midst of Winter.

53. But I shall press this no further, but rather add, that the doctrine of
Antiperistasis is as little beholding to the following Experiment, which I
sometimes tried, in order to the disabusing some Abetters of Themistius. I took
then an Iron-rod, of about the bigness of a man's finger, having at one end of
it a very broad and thick piece of Iron (shaped almost like a spattule) that
the quantity of the matter, might upon the ignition of the Iron, make the heat
very considerable: then having caused this thick end to be made red hot in the
fire, and having suddenly quenched it in cold water, I could not perceive, that
the other end of the rod, by which it was wont to be held, did at all grow
sensibly hot, as a favourer of Antiperistasis would have expected it should do
to a very high degree, as presuming, that the innumerable particles of heat,
that swarmed in the compact body of the red hot part of the Iron, must, to fly
the cold of the water, retire in throngs toward the other extreme of the Iron,
and make it exceedingly hot. And least any preexistent warmth should hinder me
from perceiving an increase of heat, in case any were produced in the handle of
the Iron, I caused it the next time the Trial was made, to be kept in cold
water, and yet even then the immersion of the broad and candent end into the
cold water, brought as little of sensible heat to the other end, that I held in
my hand, as it had done the time before, and having caused the Experiment to be
tried by another, the account I received was, that it succeeded with him, as it
had done with me.

54. But this is not the main thing (Gentlemen) that I intended to acquaint you
with, there being an Expedient, that I purposely devised to make one
Experiment, more considerable against Antiperistasis, then are the several
mistaken observations of the Peripetaticks to establish it.

55. I took then a good sealed Weather-glass, 12. or 14. inches long, furnished
with good spirit of Wine, and having provided an open mouthed glass of a
convenient shape and size, and filled it but to a due height (that it might not
afterward run over) with common water, I so ordered the matter, that the stem
of the Thermoscope being supported by the cork, into which by a perforation or
slit it was inserted, when the glass was stopped by the cork, the whole ball of
the Thermometer was immersed in the water, that filled the wide mouthed glass,
and did no where touch either the bottom or the sides of the glass, so that the
ball or bubble was every way surrounded with water. The instrument being thus
prepared, we observed at what station the ambient cold water had made the
tincted spirit rest in the stem of the Thermoscope, and then having provided a
fit proportion of warm water in a commodiously shaped vessel, I removed the
instrument into it, and placed it so, as that the external warm water reached
to a convenient height on the outside of the open mouthed glass: But though I
carefully watched, whether the heat of the external water, would increase or
strike inwards the cold of that water, which did immediately incompass the ball
of the Weatherglass; yet I perceived no such matter, the tincted spirit in the
stem keeping its station (without sinking beneath it) till the heat, after a
while, having by degrees been diffused through the formerly cold water, by the
intervention of that now warmed, the tincted spirit in the Thermometer began to
ascend.

56. And to reduce the other part too, of the doctrine of Antiperistasis, to
the determination of an Experiment, the same Thermoscope was placed in the same
wide mouthed glass just after the former manner, only instead of the cold
water, that, which immediately surrounded the glass, was warm, and when the
warmth had impelled up the tincted spirit, till its ascent began to be very
slow, I immersed the instrument to a convenient depth in a vessel, that
contained highly refrigerated water, mingled with diverse pieces of ice. But
notwitstanding my watchfulness, it did not appear to me, that the warmth of the
water, that did immediately encompass the ball of the Weather-glass, was at all
increased or intended, by that Liquors being besieged by water exceeding cold;
for the languid motion of the tincted spirit upwards, was not hereby so much as
sensibly accelerated (as it must have been considerably, if the heat of the
internal water had been so augmented, or struck inwards by the cold of the
external, as the Schools Doctrine would have made one expect) but rather the
ascent was by the chillingness of the contiguous water quickly checked, and the
formerly ascending spirit was soon brought to subside again. And to give my
self the fuller satisfaction about some of the chief Phenomenon of this, and
the former Experiment, I had the curiosity to observe them more then once.

POSTSCRIPT.
A Skeptical Consideration of the Heat of Cellars in Winter, and their Coldness
in Summer.
THe foregoing Discourses of Carneades seem to have sufficiently shaken the
Foundations of the Vulgar Doctrine of Antiperistasis, so far forth as it is
superstructed upon the Vulgar Observations and Phenomenon, whereon men are wont
to build it; and it seems to have also made it highly Probable, that in case
some of the Examples wont to be produced in favor of Antiperistasis, should
prove Historically true, yet those Phenomenon may more congruously, to the
wonted proceedings of Nature, be explicated by the detention of calorifick or
frigorifick Corpuscles, by the operation of the external cold or heat, then to
a cerain inexplicable self invigoration, which is commonly proposed in such a
way as invests inanimate bodies with the prerogatives of free Agents. But
though Carneades his Adversaries seem not to have well made out the Historical
part of the received Doctrine concerning cold, yet upon an impartial survey of
what has been alleged on both sides, I freely confess, that to me some of the
matters of fact themselves seem not yet so clearly determined as I could wish:
for as to the obvious Phenomenon, that nature does, as it were, of Her own
accord present us, they seem to have been but perfunctorily considered, and our
senses only being the judges of them, we may easily, as Carneades argues, be
imposed upon by the unheeded predispositions of our Organs. And as for
contrived and Artificial Experiments, there scarce seem to have been any made
fit to clear the difficulties, that invite me to suspend my judgment as to the
grand Question (of fact) whether Cellars, and other subterraneous places be
really hotter in Winter then in Summer.

It Is true, that I have scarce met with any point, wherein the modern Schoolmen
seem to have so much consulted Nature, as in this of Antiperistasis. For
inquiring what has been written of that subject, that may either confirm or
oppose what has in the precedent Dialogue been delivered about Antiperistasis;
I found that the curiousness and importance of the subject have made two or
three of those writers less negligent then I suspected. But though I have
lately met with in them an Experiment or two, that seem cogently to evince, I
do not say an Antiperistasis in the sense of the Schools, but, that
subterraneal places are really hotter in Winter then in Summer, yet I must for
a while longer continue my suspension of judgment, which, that even such
persons as are circumspect themselves, may not think unreasonable, I will
briefly subjoyn the grounds of my Skepticism about this matter.

First then the learned Jesuit Zucchius, who is wont to be far more
industrious then other Aristotelians (and on some subjects is careful to
propose Experiments, though he be not so clear and happy in expressing his
thoughts) assures us somewhere, that having kept a good sealed Weather-glass,
for three years together in a good Cellar, he found the water to rise by the
Coldness of the ambient Air in the Summer, and to be depressed by the
rarefaction of it in the winter; which seems undeniably to infer, that whatever
be the reason of it, the heat in subterraneal places is indeed greater in
Winter then in Summer. And another recent Schoolman, who, as I am told, is of
the same order, though the learned Man published his little Book under one of
his Disciples Names, affirms, that he found by a Weather-glass, that a Well at
the place where he lived, was colder in Summer and hotter in Winter. And these
assertions of Zucchius, and the other Jesuit, do I confess restrain me for a
while from yielding a full assent to what Carneades has delivered, as to the
matter of subterraneal Cold and Heat. But on the other side, I am not hitherto
reduced by these Experiments, to declare with his Adversaries against him,
because of the following scruples.

First then I consider, that it is not universally true, which is wont to be
indefinitely affirmed, and believed, that Cellars and other subterraneal places
are hotter in Winter then in Summer. For the instances produced by Carneades,
seem plainly enough to manifest the contrary, and my own observations made in a
Cellar with a sealed Weather glass, do keep me from dissenting from Carneades
as to that point. I would therefore make a distinction of subterraneal places;
for some are deep, as the best sort of Cellars, other deeper yet, as the
Hungarian Mines, mentioned by Carneades out of Morinus; and some again are but
shallow, as many ordinary Cellars and Vaults: of these three sorts of
subterraneal Places, the deepest of all do not, as far as the Authority of
Mineralists above alleged may be reli'd on (for I am yet inquiring further)
grow hot and cold, according to the several seasons of the year, as the vulgar
doctrine of Antiperistasis requires, but are continually hot: The shallower
sort of subterraneal places, though by reason of their being fenced from the
outward Air, they are not so subject to the alterations of it, whether to heat
or cold, as open places are, yet by reason of their vicinity to the surface of
the Earth, they are so far affected with the mutations, which the outward Air
is liable to in several seasons of the year, that in Winter, though they be
warm in respect of the colder Air abroad, yet they are really (at least some of
them) as far as I have tried, colder in very cold weather, and less cold in
warm weather. And in this opinion, I am confirmed by two things; the one, that
having purposely inquired of the Polonian Nobleman mentioned by Carneades,
whether he had observed in his Country, that in sharp Winters small Beer would
freez in Cellars, that were not very deep, but would continue fluid in those
that were, he assured me he had taken notice of it: The other thing is the
Confession of the Anonymous Jesuit lately mentioned, who acknowledges, that he
found but little difference between the Temperature of the water in the Well he
examined in Summer and in Winter, though it were a considerably deep one, and
adds a while after, that at Florence, where the subterraneal Vaults are
shallower, the Air is observed to be colder in Winter then in Summer, though at
Rome in their deep Cellars the contrary has been found. So that the lower-most
sort of subterraneal cavities being, for ought appears, perpetually hot, and
the upper or shallower sort of them, being colder, not hotter in cold weather
then it is in warm, it is about the Temperature of the middle sorts of them, such
as are the deeper and better Cellars, that the question remains to be
determined. And thus much of my first consideration.

The next thing I shall offer to be considered is this, That it is not so easy
a matter, as even Philosophers and Mathematicians may think it, to make with
the weather-glasses hitherto in use, an Experiment to our present purpose, that
shall not be liable to some exception, especially if the Cellars or Wells,
where the observations are to be made, be very deep. For the gravity of that
thick and vapid subterraneal Air, and the greater pressure, which the Air may
there have, by reason of its pressing, according to an Atmospherical Pillar
lengthened by the depth of the Cellar or Well, may in very deep Cavities, as
well alter the height of the water in common Weather-glasses, as heat and cold
do, and so make it uncertain, when the mutation is to be ascribed to the one,
and when to the other, or at least very difficult to determine distinctly, what
share is due to the pressure, and what to the temperature of the Air. And this
uncertainty may be much increased by this more important Consideration, that
not only in places where the heights of the Atmospherical Cylinders are
differing, the pressures of the Air upon the stagnant water in the
Weather-glasses may be so too, but even in the self same place the instrument
remaining unmoved, the pressure of the Atmosphere may, as I have often
observed, hastily and considerably alter, and that without any constant and
manifest cause (at least that I could hitherto discover,) so that the erroneous
estimate, that may be hereby suggested of the temperature of the Air can scarce
possibly be avoided, without the help of a sealed Weather-glass, where the
included liquor is subject to be wrought upon by the heat and cold, not
pressure of the Air. So that to apply this to Zucchius his Experiment, unless
he had been aware of this, and unless I knew, that he had diverse times made his
observations, with the assistance of a sealed Weather-glass, it may be
suspected, that he might accidentally find the water in his common
Weather-glass (for such a one it appears he used, as probably knowing no other)
to be higher, when he looked on it in Summer, then when he looked on it in
Winter, not because really the subterraneal Air was colder in the former
season, then in the latter, but because the Atmosphere chanced then to be
heavier: and when I remember in how few hours I have sometimes, and that not
long since, observed the Quicksilver, both in a good Barometer, and even in an
unsealed Weatherglass furnished with Quicksilver, to rise almost an inch
perpendicularly, without any manifest Cause proceeding from cold, I cannot
think it impossible, that in long Weather glasses furnished only with water, or
some such liquor, the undiscerned alterations of the Atmospheres pressure, See
the second Preliminary discourse, that accompanies the History of Cold.
may produce very notable ones in the height of the water in such instruments.
But this is not all, that a jealous man might suspect. For Zucchius having, for
ought appears, made his Observations but in one place, we are not sure, but
that may be one of those, whereof there may be many, on which the subterraneal
Exhalations have a peculiar, and not languid influence; as Carneades has
toward the close of his Discourse made probable, out of the Relations of Olaus
Magnus, and Martinius, touching the great and sudden thaws, that sometimes
begin from the bottom; and thereby argue their being produced by copious
steams, that ascend from the lower parts of the Terrestrial Globe, which may be
further confirmed, by what he formerly noted of the sudden Damps, that happen
in many Mines. But that which is of the most importance about our present
inquiry, remains yet to be mentioned, which is, that having had the curiosity
to inquire, whether no body else had made Experiments of the same kind; I find,
that the learned Maignan had the same curiosity that Zucchius had, but with
very differing success; and therefore, though this inquisitive person do admit
in his Disputation about Antiperistasis, a Notion, that I confess My
backwardness to admit a fuga Contrarii, may be somewhat confirmed by what I
lately learned from the English Extraordinary Ambassador ( the Earl of
Carlisle) into Russia, newly returned thence. For meeting the other day with an
opportunity of asking his Lordship a few Questions ( which he was pleased to
answer with his wonted civility) about the Cold in Muscovy: I was informed by
one of his answers, That his Excellency had there the curiosity to observe some
Bottles of choice and strong Wine, that were vehemently frozen, and the
opportunity to take notice, that the liquor was quite congealed throughout, and
turned into solid ice, whence he rationally inferred, that the (...) parts of
the Wine did not in these Bottles ( for ought he acknowledged, that in greater
vessels, that may sometimes hold true, which is said of the production of
spirit of Wine by congelation) retire to the Center, and remain there unfrozen;
and his Lordship ingeniously persued the Experiment, and confirmed the
conjecture, by causing the ice taken out of the broken Bottles to be thawed by
degrees into several vessels, by which means he found, that the liquor afforded
by the exterior parts of the resolved ice, was very little, if at all less
strong, then that which was obtained from the internal parts of the same ice;
from which Observation Carneades would argue, That at least it is not
universal, but in particular cases, and therefore probably by accident, or
upon particular accounts, that the Concentration of the spirits of Liquors is
consequent upon being exposed to Cold.
I cannot approve, (since to ascribe, as he does, a fuga Contrarii to Cold and
Hot spirits, is in my apprehension to turn inanimate Bodies into intelligent
and designing Beings;) yet he does justly and rationally reject with Carneades,
the vulgar doctrine of Antiperistasis, and confirms his rejection of it by two
Experiments. For first, he says, that he found with a Thermometer, that when in
Winter a cold Northerly wind froze the water without doors, it was not less
cold in WineCellars, then 'twas at the same season, and at the same hour of the
day in his Study only the Paper-shuts of his window, that regarded likewise the
North, being put to. And though, if he had said nothing else. I should have
suspected, that this might have proceeded from the shallowness of the Cellars
he made his Trial in, yet he prevents that suspicion, by taking notice in one
clause of his Relation, that the Cellars were of the very best of their kind,
in which in Summer the greatest Cold was wont to be felt. But his next
Experiment is yet more considerable, which I shall therefore deliver in his own
words that follow. Expertus ego sum (says he) Thermometro fidelissimo, and a
praecedente hyeme in sequentem I presume he means Cornelius Drebell.
aestatem prorsus invariato, instructo etiam tali aqua, nempe in hoc ipsum ex
praescripto Trebellii, it a comparata ut non exhaletur, neque minuatur,
expertus ( inquam) sum in supradictis optimis Cellis Vinariis maximum, quod
ardentissima aestate fuit, frigus, non adaequasse illud quod ibidem erat
brumali tempore, ut dixi in superiori Experimento, siquidem in Tubo Vitrei
Thermometri quatuor circiter palmos longo, and in octo gradus Graduumque minuta
diviso, aqua byeme ascendit ad gradus 7. cum semisse, aestate autem vix gradum
Sextum super avit, cum tamen ad sensum multo magis vigeret frigus istud (...).

Thus far this learned, as well as resolute Author, who seeming by the
Mathematical part of his Perspectiva Horaria, to be an accurate and industrious
maker of observations, we may oppose his newly recited Experiment to that of
Zucchius, which it flatly contradicts; and therefore since the depth of the
Cellars is of great moment in Experiments of this Nature; since also the
particular Nature of the place or soil, where the Cellar or other Cavities
happen to be, may in some cases not be inconsiderable; and since lastly,
neither Zucchius nor Maignan seem to have been aware of the differing weights
of the Atmosphere, in the self same place, (as not having seen the XVIII. of
our Physico-mechanical Experiments, before which I never saw nor heard of any
thing published, or otherwise written to that purpose) I hope I shall be
excused, if I retain some scruples about the Historical Question I have been
considering, till the Experiment have been carefully made, for a competent
space of time in several places, and that not with common Weather glasses (like
those used by my two learned Authors) wherein the liquor may be made to rise
and fall by the differing gravities of the Air, but with sealed Thermoscopes,
wherein the alterations may more safely be supposed to proceed only from its
heat and cold.

And to conclude, since Carneades has speciously enough answered the other
Observations, that are wont to be produced in favor of the Aristotelian
Antiperistasis, if Maignans relation be better warranted by future Experiments,
then that of Zucchius, it will very much disfavour the whole Doctrine it self,
which seeming to have been devised, but to give an account of the Phenomenon,
to which it is wont to be applied, considering men will be but little invited to
embrace it, if the matter of fact be as little Certain as what is proposed in
the Hypothesis is Intelligible.

FINIS.
AN EXAMEN OF Mr. Hobs's Doctrine, touching Cold.
1. Mr. Hobs's Theory concerning Cold, does to me, I confess, appear so
inconsiderately pitched upon, and so slightly made out, that I should not
think, it merited, especially in an Historical Treatise, a particular or
sollicitous Examination, but that in proposing it, he scruples not to talk to
his Readers of his Demonstrations; and the preferrence, he is wont to give
himself above the Eminentest, as well of Modern as of Ancient Writers, has had
no small effect upon many, who not knowing how indulgent some writers are wont
to be, to the issues of their own brain, as such are apt to mistake Confidence
for Evidence, and may be modest enough to think, that their not discerning a
clearness in his Explications and Reasonings, is rather the fault of their
Understandings, then of his Doctrine. Mr. Hobs delivers his Theory in the seven
first Articles of the 28. Chapter of the fourth part of his Elements. But
because the whole discourse is too long to be here transcribed, and because in
the 2, 3, and 4. Sections, that which he treats of, is the generation of winds,
and that which he handles in the fifth, is the notion of a hard body; we may
safely leave out those four Sections, especially since, though there be in them
diverse things about the motion of the Sun, and other matters, that are more
strongly asserted then proved, yet his doctrine tending but to show how the
winds are generated, though it were granted, would make but very little, if any
thing at all, toward the evincing of his Theory about cold.

2. And that we may not be suspected to injure his opinion or his arguments, we
will, though the Citation will be somewhat prolix, first recite them as himself
delivers them in those three Sections, that treat immediately of Cold, and then
we will subjoyn our Animadversions on them.

3. [These things (says he) being Artic. 6.
premised, I shall show a possible cause, why there is greater cold near the
Poles of the Earth, then further from them. The motion of the Sun between the
Tropicks, driving the Air toward that part of the Earths superficies, which is
perpendicular under it, makes it spread it self every way; and the velocity of
this expansion of the Air grows greater and greater, as the superficies of the
Earth comes more and more to be straightened; that is to say, as the Circles which
are parallel to the Equator come to be less and less. Wherefore this expansive
motion of the air, drives before it the parts of the air, which are in its way
continually toward the Poles more and more strongly, as its force comes to be
more and more united, that is to say, as the Circles which are parallel to the
Equator are less and less; that is so much the more, by how much they are
nearer to the Poles of the Earth. In those places therefore which are nearer to
the Poles, there is greater cold, then in those which are more remote from
them. Now this expansion of the air upon the superficies of the Earth from East
to West, does by reason of the Suns perpetual accession to the places which are
successively under it, make it cold at the time of the Suns rising and setting,
but as the Sun comes to be more and more perpendicular to those cooled places,
so by the heat, which is generated by the supervening simple motion of the Sun,
that cold is again remitted, and can never be great, because the action by
which it was generated was not permanent. Wherefore I have rendered a possible
cause of cold in those places, that are near the Pole, or where the obliquity
of the Sun is great.

4. How water may be congealed by Artic. 7.
Cold, may be explained in this manner. Let A. (in the first figure) represent
the Sun, and B. the Earth; A. will therefore be much greater then B. Let E. F.
be in the plain of the Aequinoctial, to which let G. H. I. K. and L. C. be
parallel. Lastly, let C. and D. be the Poles of the Earth. The air therefore by
its action in those parallels will rake the superficies of the Earth; and that
with a motion so much the stronger, by how much the parallel Circles toward
the Poles grew less and less. From whence must arise a wind which will force
together the uppermost parts of the water, and withal raise them a little,
weakening their endeavor toward the Center of the Earth. And from their
endeavor toward the Center of the Earth, joined with the endeavor of the
said wind, the uppermost parts of the water will be pressed together and
coagulated, that is to say, the top of the water will be skinned over and
hardened, and so again the water next the Top will be hardened in the same
manner, till at length the ice be thick. And this ice being now compacted of
little hard Bodies, must also contain many particles of air received into it.
As Rivers and Seas, so also in the like manner may the Clouds be frozen: For
when by the ascending and discendding of several clouds at the same time, the
air intercepted between them is by compression forced out, it rakes, and by
little and little hardens them. And though those small drops (which usually
make clouds) be not yet united into greater bodies, yet the same wind will be
made, and by it, as water is congealed into ice, so will vapors in the same
manner be congealed into snow. From the same cause it is, that ice may be made
by art, and that not far from the fire: for it is done by the mingling snow and
salt together, and by burying in it a small vessel full of water. Now when the
snow and salt (which have in them a great deal of air) are melting, the air
which is (...) out every way in wind, rakes the sides of the vessel; and as the
wind by its motion rakes the vessel, so the vessel by the same motion and
action congeals the water within it.

5. We find by Experience, that cold is always more remiss in places where it
rains, and where the weather is cloudy (things being alike in all other
respects) then where the air is clear. And this agrees very well with what I
said before; for in clear weather the course of the wind, which (as I said even
now) raked the superficies of the Earth, as it is free from all interruption,
so also it is very strong. But when small drops of water are either rising or
falling, that wind is repelled, broken and dissipated by them; and the less the
wind is, the less is the cold.

6. We find also by experience, that in deep Wells the water freezeth not so
much, at it does upon the superficies of the Earth. For the wind by which ice
is made, entering into the Earth (by reason of the laxity of its parts) more or
less loses some of its force, though not much. So that if the Well be not
deep, it will freez, whereas if it be so deep, as that the wind, which causes
cold, cannot reach it, it will not freez.

7. We find moreover by experience, that ice is lighter then water, the cause
whereof is manifest from that which I have already shown, namely, that the air
is received in, and mingled with the particles of the water, whilst it is
congealing.]

8. To examine now Mr. Hobs's Theory concerning Cold, we may in the first place
take notice, that his very Notion of Cold is not so accurately, nor warily
delivered. I will not here urge, that it may well be Questioned, whether the
tending outward of the spirits and fluid parts of the Bodies of animals, do
necessarily proceed from, and argue heat. Since in our Pneumatical Engine, when
the air is withdrawn from about an included viper (to mention no other Animals)
there is a great intumescence, and consequently a greater endeavor outward of
the fluid parts of the body, then we see made by any degree of heat of the
ambient Air, wont to be produced by the Sun. This, I say, I will not insist on,
but rather take notice, that though Mr. Hobs tells us, that to cool, is to make
the exterior parts of the body endeavor inwards: yet our Experiments tell us,
that when a very high degree of Cold is introdnc'd, not only into water, but
into Wine, and diverse other partly Aqueous liquors, there is a plain
intumescence, and consequently endeavor outward of the parts of the
refrigerated Body. And certainly Cold having an operation upon a great
multitude and variety of bodies, as well as upon our Sensories, he that would
give a satisfactory definition of it, must take into his consideration diverse
other effects, besides those it produces on humane bodies. And even in these,
he will not easily prove, that in every case any such endeavor inwards from
the Ambient Aetherial substance, as his Doctrine seems to suppose, is necessary
to the perception of Cold, since as the mind perceives diverse other qualities,
by various motions in the Nervous or Membranous parts of the sentient; so Cold
may be perceived, either by the Decrement of the agitation of the parts of the
Object, in reference to those of the Sensory; or else by some differing impulse
of the sensitive parts occasioned by some change made in the motion of the
blood or spirits, upon the deadning of that motion; or by the turbulent motion
of those excrementitious steams, that are wont, when the blood circulates as
nimbly, and the pores are kept as open as before, to be dissipated by
insensible transpiration.

9. It may afford some illustration to this matter to add, That having inquired
of some Hysterical Women, who complained to me of their distempers, whether
they did not sometimes find a very great coldness in some parts of their heads,
especially at the Top, I was answered, that they did so, and one of them
complained, that she felt in the upper part of her head such a Coldness, as if
some body were pouring cold water upon it. And having inquired of a couple of
eminent Physicians, of great practice, about this matter, they both assured me,
that many of their Hysterical patients had made complaints to them, of such
great Coldness in the upper part of the head, and some also along the
Vertebra's of the Neck and Back. And one of these Experienced Doctors added,
that this happened to some of his Patients, when they seemed to him and to
themselves to be otherwise Hot. The noble Quoted by Paul. Neworantz. De
Purpura, Cap. 12.
Avicen also some where takes notice, that the envenomed Bitings of some kinds
of Serpents; (creatures too well known in the Hot Countries where he lived)
made those that were bitten by them, either become or think themselves very
cold. But that will perhaps seem more remarkable, which I shall further add,
namely, that I know a Nobleman, who followed the Wars in several Countries, and
has signalized his Valor in them; and yet though his stature be proportionate
to his courage; yet when this person falls (as frequently he has done) in a fit
of the stone, he feels an universal cold over his whole body, just like that
which begins the fit of an Ague. And though he assures me, that the stones,
that torment him, and which he usually voids, are but very small; yet whilst
the fit continues, which oftentimes lasts many hours, he does not only feel an
extraordinary Coldness, but which is more strange, and which I particularly
inquired after, cannot by clothes, or almost any other means, keep himself warm.

10. I elsewhere take notice of some other Observations, agreeable to these, by
some of which we may be persuaded, that there may be other ways, besides those
already mentioned, of perceiving cold, though the outward parts of our bodies
were not pressed inwards. And whereas Mr. Hobs infers, that He, who would know
the cause of cold, must find by what motion or motions the exterior parts of
any body endeavor to retire inwards, that seems but an inconsiderate
direction. For in compressions, that are made by surrounding bodies, there is
produced an endeavor inward of the parts of the comprest body, though no Cold,
but sometimes rather Heat be thereby generated. And I hope Mr. Hobs will not
object, that in this case the parts do not retire, but are thrust inwards,
since according to him no body at all can be moved, but by a body contiguous
and moved. But what I have hitherto taken notice of, being chiefly designed to
show, that the notion of cold in general is not so obvious a thing to be
rightly pitched upon, as many think, and that therefore it needs be no wonder,
that it has notbeen accurately and warily proposed by Mr. Hobs: I shall not
any further prosecute that discourse, but proceed to what remains. Next then,
the Cause he assigns, why a man can blow hot or cold with the same breath, is
very questionable; partly because he supposes in part of the breath such a
simple motion, as he calls it, of the small particles of the same breath, as he
will not easily Prove, and as Doctor S. Ward (now the worthy Bishop of Exeter)
and Dr. J. Wallis (the learned Savilian Professor of Geometry.)
eminent Astronomers and Mathematicians have Rejected; and partly because that
without the suspected supposition, I could (by putting together the Conjectures
of two learned Writers, and what I have elsewhere added of my own) give a more
probable account of the Phenomenon, if I had not lome scruples about the
matter of Fact it self: which last clause I add, because, though I am not sure,
that further Trials may not satisfy me, That the Wind or Breath, that is blown
out at the middle of the compressed Lips, has in it such a real coldness, as
men have generally ascribed to it; yet hitherto some Trials, that my jealousy
led me to make, incline me to suspect, there may be a mistake about this
matter, and that, in estimating the Temper of the produced Wind, our senses may
impose upon us. For having taken a very good and tender sealed Weatherglass,
and blown upon it through a glass-Pipe (of about half a yard long) that was
chosen slender, to be sure that my breath should issue out in a small stream;
by this wind beating upon the ball of the Weather-glass, I could not make the
included spirit of Wine subside, but manifestly, though not much, ascend,
though the Wind, that I presently blew through the same Pipe, seemed sensibly
cold, both to the hand of bystanders, and to my own, and yet mine was then more
then ordinarily cold. So that having no great enencouragement to enter into a
dispute about the cause of a Phenomenon, whose Historical circnmstances are
not yet sufficiently known and cleared, I will now proceed to add, that
whatever be the cause of the effect, there are diverse things that make Mr.
Hobs's Hypothesis of the Cause of Cold unfit to be acquiesc'd in. For we see
that the grand cause, he assigns of cold and its effects, is wind, which
according to him is Air moved in a considerable quantity, and that either
forwards only, or in an undulating motion: and he tells us too, that when the
breath is more strongly blown out of the mouth, then is the direct motion
prevalent (over the simple motion) which, says he, makes us feel cold; for,
says he, the direct motion of the breath or air is wind, and all wind cools or
diminishes former heat. To which words Chap. 28. Sect. 2. at the beginning.
in the very next line he subjoyns, that not only great, but almost any
ventilation, and stirring of the Air does refrigerate. But against this
doctrine I have several things to object.

11. For first, we see there are very hard frosts, not only continued, but
(...) begun, when the Air is calm and free from winds, and high and boisterous
Southerly winds are not here wont to be near so cold as far weaker winds, that
blow from the North-east.

12. Next, if Mr. Hobs teach us, that it is the direct motion of the stream of
breath, that is more strongly blown out, that makes us feel Cold, he is obliged
to render a reason, why in an Aeolipile with a long neck, the stream that
issues out, though oftentimes far stronger then that, which is wont to be made
by compressing the Lips, at a pretty distance from the hole, it issues out of,
is not cold, but hot.

13. Thirdly, Mr. Hobs elsewhere teaches, that when in our Engine the pump has
been long employed to exhaust (as we say) the Receiver, there must be a
vehement wind produced in that Receiver, and yet by one of our other
Experiments, it appeared, that for all this in a good sealed Weather-glass
placed there, before the included Air begins to be (as we say) emptied, there
appeared no sign of any intense degree of cold produced by this supposed wind,
so that either the wind is but imaginary, or else Mr. Hobs ascribes to winds as
such, an infrigidating efficacy, that does not belong to them.

14. Fourthly, we find by experience, that in hard frosts water will freez, not
only though there be no wind stirring in the ambient Air, but though the liquor
be kept in a close room, where, though the wind were high abroad, it could not
get admittance; and some of our Experiments carefully made have assured us,
that water sealed up in one glass, and that glass kept suspended in another
glass carefully stopped, to keep out not only all wind, but all Adventitious Air,
may nevertheless be not only much cooled, but turned into ice.

15. Fifthly, we found by other Experiments, See the VI. Section of the History
of Cold.
that a frozen Egg, though suspended in, and perfectedly surrounded with water,
where no wind can come at it, will be every way crusted over with ice, in which
case there is no probability, that the ice should be generated according to the
way proposed by Mr. Hobs. For he will scarce prove, nor is there any
likelihood, that a wind pierced the shell and closer coats of the Egg to get
into the contained liquors, and freez them; and a more unlikely assertion it
would be, to pretend, (as he that maintains Mr. Hobs's doctrine, must) that so
very little Air, if there be any, as is mingled with the juices of the Egg, is,
by the Cold, which is not wont to expand Air (nor water, till it be ready to
make it freez) turned into a wind subtle enough, freely to penetrate the shell
and coats of the Egg, and great enough to diffuse it self every way, and turn
on every side the neighboring water into ice; and all this notwithstanding,
that not only it appeared not by bubbles breaking through the water, that there
is any Adventitious Air, that comes out of the Egg at all; but that also,
supposing there were some such contained in the Egg, yet what shadow of reason
is there to conceive, that the Air which was engaged in, and surrounded with
the substances of the white, and the yelk of the Egg, must needs be a wind,
since, according to Mr. Hobs, that requires a considerable motion of most of
the parts of the moved Air the same way, and according to him also a body
cannot be put into motion, but by another body contiguous and moved.

16. Sixthly, Mr. Hobs does indeed affirm, that all wind cools, but is so far
from proving, that the highest degrees of Cold must needs proceed from wind,
that he does not well evince, that all winds refrigerate. Nor are we bound to
believe it without proof, since wind being, according to him, but Air moved in
a considerable quantity, either in a direct or undulating motion, it does not
appear how Motion should, rather then Rest, make Air grow cold. For though it
be true, that usually winds seem Cold to us; yet (in the first place) it is not
universally true, since some, that have traveled into hot Countries, and
particularly the learned Alpinus, Euri, Austrique venti a Meridie loca Arenosa
summoque calore inflammata transeuntes atque Aegyptum spirantes tantum caloris
aestus, pulverumque and inflammatarum Arenarum evehunt ut ignitas fornacis
flammas, nec non pulveribus obscurissimas nubes eo asportasse videatur. And
elsewhere, -- Prima aestatis part calidissima inaequalissimaque ob
vehementissimum Meridionalium Ventorum calorem, etc. Prosper Alpinus de
Medicina Aegyptiorum.
have complained, that the winds coming to them in the Summer, from more torrid
Regions, have appeared to them almost like the steam that comes out at the open
mouth of a heated From 9. till noon, there blows a wind with such extreme heat
from the sands, that it swallows up a man's breath, and stifleth him. -- The
King of Chermain sent an Army of sixteen hundred horse, and five thousand foot,
against the Lord of Ormus, for not paying his Tribute, which were all surprised
and stifled with that wind. Marcus Polus in Purchas's Pilgrims, lib. 111. p. m.
71.
Oven. And if Marcus Polus Venetus be to be credited, (for I mention his
Testimony but ex abundanti) the Southern winds near Ormus, have been sometimes
so hot, as to destroy an Army it self at once. And secondly, even when the wind
does feel cold to us, it may oftentimes do so but by accident; for, as we
elsewhere likewise teach, the steams that issue out of our bodies being usually
warmer then the ambient Air, (whence in great Assemblies, even those that are
not thronged, find it exceeding hot, and I have several times observed a hot
wind to come from those throngs, and beat upon my face:) and the more inward
parts of our bodies themselves, being very much hotter then the ambient Air,
especially that which is not yet full of warm steams; the same causes that turn
the Air into a wind, put it into a motion, that both displaces the more
neighboring and more See this difficulty more largely handled in the first
Preliminary discourse.
heated Air, and also makes it pierce far deeper into the pores of the skin,
whereby coming to be sensible to those parts, that are somewhat more inward
then the Cuticula, and far more hot, the Air turned into wind seems to us more
cold, then the restagnant Air (if I may so speak,) upon such another account,
as that, upon which, if a man has one of his hands hot, and another not, the
same body that will appear lukewarm to this, will appear cold to the other;
because, though the felt body be the same, yet the Organs of feeling are
differingly disposed. And to confirm this doctrine by an Experiment (which has
succeeded Often enough, and need not succeed Always to serve our present
purpose,) we will add, that though Air blown through a pair of Bellows upon
ones hand, when it is in a moderate temper, will seem very cold; yet, that the
ambient Air by being thus turned into wind, does indeed acquire a relative
coldness, so as to seem cold to our senses, but yet without acquiring such a
cold as is presumed, may appear by this, that by blowing the same air with the
same Bellows upon Weather-glasses, though made more then ordinarily long, and
by an Artist eminent at making them, we could not observe, that this winds
beating upon them did sensibly refrigerate either the Air or the liquor. Though
it is not impossible, but that in some cases the wind may cool even inanimate
bodies, by driving away a parcel of ambient air, impregnated with exhalations
less cold, then the air that composes the wind. But this is not much, if at
all, more then would be effected, if, without a wind, some other body should
precipitate out of the air near the Weather-glass, the warmer Effluvia we have
been mentioning, especially if the Precipitating Body introduce in the room of
the displaced Particles, such as may in a safe sense be termed Frigorifick.

17. Seventhly, Nor can we admit without a favorable construction, Mr. Hobs
his way of expressing himself, where he says, as we have lately seen, that All
wind cools or deminishes former heat. For if we take heat in the most common
sense, wherein the word is used, not only by other writers, but also by
Philosophers, to make wind the adequate cause of cold, it must in many cases do
more then diminish former heat. For water, for instance, that is ready to
freez, is already actually cold in a high degree, and yet the wind (if Mr. Hobs
will needs have that to be the efficient of freezing) must make this not hot,
but already very cold liquor, more cold yet, before it can quite turn it into
ice.

18. These things thus established, it will not be difficult to dispatch the
remaining part of Mr. Hobs his Theory of Cold; for to proceed to his sixth
Section, we shall pass by what a Cosmographer would perhaps except against in
his doctrine, about the generation and motion of the wind upon the surface of
the Earth, and shall only take notice in the remaining part of that Section of
thus much; That the most of what Mr. Hobs here shows us, is but, that there is
an expansion of the air, or a wind generated by the motion and action of the
Sun; but why this wind thus generated must produce cold, I do not see that he
shows; nor does his affirming, that it moves toward the Poles, help the
matter, for besides that we have shown, that wind as such, is not sufficient to
produce far less degrees of cold, then those that are felt in many Northern
Regions, there must be some other cause, then the motion of the air or steams
driven away by the Sun, to make bodies not in themselves cold, (for so they
were supposed not to be, when the Sun began to put them in motion) become
vehemently cold in their passage. For Mr. Hobs cannot, as other Naturalists,
derive the coldness of freezing winds from the cold steams they meet with, and
carry along with them in their passage through cold Regions, since then those
steams rather then the wind would be the cause of that vehement coldness; and
so it might justly be demanded, whence the coldness of those cold exhalations
proceeds. Besides that, it is very precarious and unconsonant to observation, to
imagine such a wind, as he talks of, to blow, whenever great frosts happen,
since, as we noted before, very vehement glaciations may be observed,
especially in Northern Regions, when the air is calm and free from winds.

19. The account he gives in his seventh Section of turning water into ice, is
the most unsatisfactory I have ever yet met with: for a good part of that
Section is so written, as if he were affear'd to be understood: But whereas he
supposes, that by the endeavor of the wind to raise the parts of the water,
joined with the endeavor of the parts of the water toward the Center of the
Earth, the uppermost parts of the water will be pressed together and coagulated,
he says that, which is very far from satisfactory. For first, ice is often
produced, where no wind can come to beat upon the uppermost parts of the water,
and to raise them: and in vessels Hermetically sealed, which exactly keep out
air and wind, ice may be generated, as many of our Experiments evince. And this
alone were a sufficient answer, since the whole explication is built upon the
action of the wind. But this is not all we have to object; for not to urge,
that he should have proved, that the uppermost parts of the water must be
raised in congelation, especially since oil and diverse other liquors are
contracted by it, not to urge this, I say, what show of probability is there,
that by the bare endeavor of the wind, and the gravity of the superficiate
parts of the water, there should be any such forcible compression made, as he
is pleased to take for granted. And yet this it self is less improbable, then
that supposing the upermost parts of the water to be pressed together, that
pressure is sufficient to coagulate, as he speaks, or rather congeal them into
ice. So bold and unlikely an assertion should at least have been countenanced
by some plausible reason, or an example in some measure parallel. For I
remember not any one instance, wherein any degree of compression, that has been
employed, much less so slight a one as this must be, considering the causes
whence it is said to proceed, can harden any liquor into ice, or any other hard
body. And in the In the new Experiments touching the Spring of the Air.
Experiment, we have elsewhere mentioned of filling a Pewter vessel with water,
and when it is exactly closed, compressing it by the knocks of a Hammer, till
the water be reduced to penetrate the very Pewter, we found not that so violent
a compression did give the water the least disposition to turn a hard body. And
as for the way Mr. Hobs assigns of Increasing the thickness of ice, it is very
difficult to conceive, how a cake of ice on the top of the water being hard
frozen to the sides of the containing vessel, and thereby severing betwixt the
included water and the external air; the wind that cannot come to touch the
water, because of the interposition of the hard and rigid ice, should yet be
able, sometimes at the depth of nine or ten foot, or much further, to beat upon
the subjacent water, and turn it into ice. And it is yet more difficult to
conceive, how the wind must do all this, when, as was lately noted, the water
does very often freez more and more downwards, to a great depth, in places
where the wind cannot come to beat upon it at all. And as to what Mr. Hobs
further teaches, that the ice must contain many particles of air received See
the IX. Title of the History of Cold.
into it, we have elsewhere occasion to show, how (...) he discourses about
those Icy Bubbles.

20. The reason he assigns of the freezing of water with Snow and (...), does
as little satisfy as the rest of his Theory of Cold. For not to mention, that
he affirms without proving it, that Snow and Salt have in them a great deal of
air; it is very precarious to assert, that this air must be pressed out every way
in wind, which must rake the sides of the vessel, for it is strange, that far
more diligent observers then Mr. Hobs should take no notice of any such wind,
if any such wind there were; but this is yet less strange, then that which
follows; namely, that this wind must so rake the sides of the vessel, as to
make the vessel by the same motion and action congeal the water within it. For
what affinity is there between a wind, passing along the outside of a glass,
altogether impervious to it, and the turning a fluid body, included in that
glass, into a hard and brittle body. The wind indeed may perhaps, if it be
strong, a little shake or agitate the particles that compose the glass, and
those may communicate some of their motion to the contiguous parts of the
water; but why all this must amount to the turning of that water into ice, is
more, I confess, by far then I can apprehend. Especially seeing, that though
you long blow upon a glass of water with a pair of Bellows, where there is not
an Imaginary wind, as Mr. Hobs's, but a Real and manifest one; yet the water
will be so far from being frozen, that our formerly mentioned Experiments (of
blowing upon Thermometers) make it probable, that it will scarce be cooled. And
if Seasalt do contain so much air, by virtue of which, it, as well as the Snow,
produces so intense a degree of Cold, how chance that being resolved in a
little water without Snow, it does not produce at least a far greater degree of
cold then we find it to do? Besides, in the Experiment we made See the IV.
Section of the History of Cold.
(and elsewhere mention) of freezing water sealed up in Bubbles, though the
Bubbles were suspended in other glasses, whose sides no where touched them, and
the remaining part of whose cavities were filled some with air, and some with
unfreezing liquors; what likelihood is there, that Mr. Hobs's insensible Wind
should be able to occasion so many successive Rakings through differing Bodies,
as there must be, to propagate the congelative motion (if I may so call it) of
the wind, through the first glass, to the included Air or Liquor, and through
that new Medium to the glass containing immediately the water, and through that
to the innermost parts of the sealed up water. And it might be further
objected, if it were worth while, that Mr. Hobs does not so much as offer at a
reason, why spirit of Wine, Aqua fortis, or even Brine, if it be of the
strongest sort, are not either by this mixture, or (here in England) by the
Wind in the open Air turned into Ice, as well as many other Liquors are.

21. The reason why Cold is wont to be more remiss in rainy or cloudy weather,
then in that which is more clear, is not better given by Mr. Hobs, then by some
others that have written before him: for not to mention, that I have seen great
frosts, and lasting enough in cloudy, and sometimes very dark weather; that
which he talks of the winds being more strong in clear weather, then in cloudy,
is of no great importance, since common Experience shows, that in clear weather
the Air may be very cold, and the frost very great, where no wind is felt to
rake, as he would have it, the superficies of the Earth. Nor does experience
bear witness to what he not warily enough pronounces, that the less the wind
is, the less is the Cold. There are but two Phenomenon more, which in this
Section Mr. Hobs pretends to explicate; The one is, that in deep Wells the
water does not freez so much, as it does upon the superficies of the Earth. But
the reason of this we elsewhere See the Examen of Antiperistasis.
take occasion to consider, and therefore in this place we need only note, that
Mr. Hobs has not rightly assigned it by ascribing it to the winds entering more
or less into the Earth, by reason of the laxity of its parts; since besides
that it is very improbable, that the wind should not, as he says it does not,
lose much of its force by entering into the Earth at its pores, and other lesser
cavities (for that seems to be his meaning by the laxity of the Earths parts)
to so great a depth as water lies in several Wells subject to freezing: besides
this, I say, Experience teaches us, that Wells may be frozen, though their
Orifices be well covered, and the wind be thereby kept from approaching the
included water by diverse yards; and very many Wells, that are subject to freez,
when Northerly and Eastwardly winds reign, will likewise be frozen in very cold
Winters, whether any wind blows, or not.

22. The other and last Phenomenon, Mr. Hobs attempts to explicate, is, That
ice is lighter then water; the cause whereof, says he, is manifest from what I
have already shown; namely, That air is received in, and mingled with the
particles of the water whilst it is in congealing. But that this is not the
true reason, may be argued from hence, that if a conveniently shaped
glass-vessel be filled top full with water, and exposed either unsealed or
sealed to congelation, the ice will have store of bubbles, which, at least in
the sealed vessel, cannot by Mr. Hobs, who will not affirm glass to be pervious
to the Air, be pretended to proceed from bubbles, that got from without into
See the IX. Title of the History of Cold.
the water, whilst it was in congealing. And we have sometimes had occasion to
manifest by particular Experiments purposely made, how little of Air there is
even in those bubbles that are generated in ice, made in vessels, where the Air
was not kept from being contiguous to the water.

23. And thus have we gone through Mr. Hobs's Theory of Cold. In his Proposing
of which, we wished he had in Diverse places been more Clear; and in our cursory
Examination of which, we have seen that most of the particulars are either
precarious or erroneous, and were they neither, yet the whole Theory would, I
fear, prove very insufficient. Since an attentive Reader cannot but have
marked, that this learned Author has past by far the greatest part even of the
more obvious Phenomenon of Cold, without attempting to Explicate them, or so
much as showing in a general way, that he had Considered them, and thought them
explicable by his Hypothesis: By which he that will fairly explain all the
Phenomenon recited in the Notes we have been drawing together, and which yet
contain but a Beginning of the History of Cold, shall give me a very good
opinion of his Sagacity.

A Postscript.
THough the have, I am obliged to comply with, keep me from annexing the
Historical Papers, wherewith I had thoughts to Conclude this Book, concerning
Cold; yet since the Nature of the past Examen gave me but little Opportunity to
teach the Reader any thing more considerable, then that Mr. Hobs's Doctrine is
Erroneous; I am very inclinable to make him here some such little amends, as
the Time will permit, for that Paucity of Experiments. And therefore since in
the last Section of the foregoing History, Page 673.
upon occasion of an Experiment very Imperfectly, and not intelligibly
delivered by Berigardus, I intimate my having elsewhere Plainly set down,
either the same he meant, or one of that Nature; and that with considerable
Phenomenon unmention'd by him: I choose rather to borrow some Account of it from
another Treatise, to which it belongs, then not gratify some of the Curious,
to whom the Phenomenon I showed them of it, seemed no less pretty then
surprising.

The way then that I used in making this Experiment, may be gathered from the
following directions.

Take of good unslak'd Lime three parts (or thereabouts According to the
goodness of the Lim, of which, if it be very strong, (...) may serve the turn,
and which, if it be too weak, may make the Experiment miscarry.
) of (yellow) Orpiment one part, of fair water 15. or 16. parts; beat the Lime
grossly, and powder the Orpiment (with care to avoid the noxious Dust that may
fly up To prevent which, I usually cause the Orpiment to be beaten, wrapped up
in diverse papers, or some other way secured from Avolation, and from harming
the vessel wherein it is pounded.
) and having put these two ingredients into the water, let them remain there
for two or three hours, or longer, if needs be, remembering to shake or stir the
mixture from time to time. By this means you will obtain a somewhat faetid
Liquor, whereof by warily Decanting, or by Filtrating it, the Clear part must
be severed from the rest.

In the mean time take a piece of Cork, and having lighted it so, that it is
kindled throughout, remove it from the fire, whilst it is yet burning, and by a
quick immersion, quench it in fair water. And having by this means reduced it
to a coal, you may (in case you have not erred in the Operation) by grinding it
with a convenient Quantity of Gum-water Which for this use 'twill suffice to
make by dissolving Gum-Arabick in a little fair water.
, bring it to the color and consistence of a good black Ink, that you may use
with an ordinary Pen.

Whilst these things are doing, you may take what quantity you think fit of
common This is known in the shops by the name of Red-Lead, and is here
specified, as being cheap and easy to be (...), though I suppose that other
Calxes or powders of the same metal, if they be not sophisticated, may serve
the turn.
Minium, and two or three times its weight of spirit of Vinegar (which needs
not be for this purpose much stronger then phlegm, and to which even
undistill'd Vinegar may be a succedaneum) and putting the powder and liquor
into a glass. Vial, or any other convenient vessel, let them infuse over hot
Embers, or in some considerably warm place for two or three hours more or less,
till the liquor have acquired a very sweet taste.

All things being thus prepared, take a new, (...) at least a clean Pen, and
write with it some such thing, as you either desire or need not fear to have
read, between (if you please) or, which is safer, If you write first with the
black Ink, and then with the solution, the Lines must be made somewhat distant,
that those which express your secret may have room between the others, and
therefore the better to avoid suspicion, I chose rather to write first with the
invisible Ink, and then over that with the black, as if I had writ on an
ordinary piece of white paper, by which means I could write the black Lines as
close as I pleased.
Over the Lines, which contain your secret, and which are to be traced with the
solution of (...); for this Liquor, if it be either well decanted or filtred,
will be so clear, that what is written with it by a new Pen, will not be seen
upon the Paper when it is dry.

Lastly, when you would show the Experiment, dip a small (...) of Sponge, or a
Linnen-rag (or for a need, a little paper wreathed) in the water, that was made
with Lime and Auripigmentum, and with this liquor, which, though it smell ill,
will look limpid and clear, wiping over the Paper, it will presently at once,
both wipe out or obliterate what was written with the black Ink, and make all
that was written with the invisible Ink, though perhaps in the self-same Lines,
appear black, so as to be very easily and plainly legible.

This is the way, to which many years ago my Trials led me, of making this odd
Experiment. For the performing whereof, if any can propose a more Easy and
Better way (for I find by an Inquisitive That learned Gentleman Mr. H.
Oldenburg, Secretary to the Royal Society.
Traveller, that there are more ways then one) I shall willingly learn it. In
the mean time the Reader may perceive, that I did not causlesly intimate, That
the learned Berigardus, though he would manifest a great thing in Philosophy by
this Experiment, did yet either not Understand himself that part of it, he
pretends to Teach, or has omitted one of the main Ingredients of the water of
Orpiment he speaks of. For I did not find, that even by a long Infusion, nor by
some Decoction of the Orpiment alone (without the Quicklime) there would be
produced a Liquor, either obviously faetid, or that would perform so much as a
Less matter, then what that, which he mentions, should. And whereas he seems to
commend this way (though but between Lines written with common Ink) for the
writing of things one would not have to be discovered, and though I have yet
met with no body, that having seen the Experiment, is not of his mind; yet I
remember, that, when many years ago, I was making Trials concerning the several
ways of making invisible Inks, my Conjectures led me to discover, that I could
very readily bring, what was written with a solution of Minium, to be Legible,
by the help of the fire; as well as I could also detect by the same way several
invisible Inks, which are believed to require appropriated Liquors to make them
Confess their secrets. But I must reserve the Reflections, and other
particulars that relate to this Experiment, for the Treatise to which it
belonged. Only I will now add, That besides the above-specified motives to
communicate what I have at present witten of it, I was the rather induced to do
so, because I had mentioned, but not taught this Experiment, in the History of
Whiteness and Blackness; and because also Berigardus is not the only Author of
Note I have met with, that having made particular mention of the Experiment,
has given the Curious but a Lame and unsatisfactory Account of it.

FINIS.
Philosophical Writings For those that concern Divinity belong not to this
Catalogue.
already published by this Author.
NEw Experiments Physico-mechanical, touching the Air, 1660. published about
Midsummer.

Certain Physiological Essays, written on several occasions, 1661. in March.

The Skeptical Chemist, 1661. in August.

A defense of the Doctrine touching the Spring and Weight of the Air, against
the Objections of Franciscus Linus, 1662. in the Spring.

The usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, 1663. in June.

Experiments and Considerations touching Colors, 1664. in May.

Such Philosophical Writings of the same Author, as being occasionally
mentioned (here and there) in the above-named Books, are not yet published, but
(though not absolutely promised) by diverse of the Curious expected.
THe second Section of the second part of the usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy.

Two Essays concerning the Concealments and Disguises of the Seeds of Living
Creatures.

Some Additional notes designed by way of Appendix to the Physico-Mechanical
Treatise.

Two Historical Dialogues, one concerning Flame, the other concerning Heat.

Hydrostatical Paradoxes made out by Physico-Mechanical Experiments.

An Essay of the Origin of Forms and Qualities.

Of the Production of Qualities (manifest and occult) by Art.

The Skeptical Naturalist, being a Letter about the Imperfections of Natural
Philosophy, as we yet have it.

A Discourse of Improbable Truths.

AN ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Author of the following Discourse intending it should make a part of
certain Considerations upon the four famousest Hypotheses, or Opinions, of the
Nature and Cause of Cold; which (Considerations) he thought fit to reserve for
the latter end of the History of that Quality, was invited to suppress it ever
since the former part of the year, that preceded the last. And though this
Discourse, (both for other Reasons, and because he found it more ready and
finished, then some other Papers, that belonged to the same part of the newly
mentioned History) comes abroad unaccompanied; yet he judged it not amiss, to
intimate thus much, That the Reader may be informed, upon what Account Mr.
Hobs's Opinions come to be examined in a Historical Treatise; and may not
wonder, either to find, that diverse passages of It are omitted, that are
unfavourable enough to Mr. Hobs's Doctrine, or to meet with in a Discourse
postpon'd to the History of Cold, some Experiments, that seem to argue it to
have been written before they were (...) into the Order, wherein they now
appear. To this I have nothing to add, but that whereas through haste the
Scheme referred to in the long citation out of Mr. Hobs's, has not been added
to the others, that belong to this Book, I am not much troubled at the
Omission, (as also that in other Quotations the place is not always as well
mentioned as the words,) because, if any shall be found, that after having
considered, what I urge against the (Great, but Imaginary) Interest, Mr. Hobs
would ascribe to Winds (whether he explicate their causes rightly or not) in
the Production of lesser degrees of Cold, but, (how improbably soever) of
congelation it self, shall think the sight of that Scheme of any Importance:
this Learned Man's Book De Corpore, is in so many hands, that any Reader that
shall desire it, may very easily have an opportunity to consult the Scheme in
the particularly cited place.

An Account of Freezing made in December and January, 1662.
SInce the business of Freezing is obnoxious to many various contingencies, I
must necessarily premise these following circumstances, that these experiments
were made in very hard weather, yet with some alternate relaxations, the frost
continuing above six weeks. And the place I chose was in stone-windows, exposed
to the North, and North-east winds, and some upon the ground. The vessels were
Glass-canes of several bores, earthen and pewter, small pans and porringers,
spoons of pewter, and silver, glasses of various figures, as Vials,
Cylindrical, round, and square, flasques, recipients, boltsheads and some
Conical ones. Most whereof by the diversity of their figure, their openness or
closeness produce various effects in freezing, as the following observations
will show. The quantity also of the liquor exposed is to be considered, for
what will show a small thin plate of ice in a small parcel of some liquors,
will show none in a greater.

The method I shall follow in delivering my observations shall be, first to run
over the various liquors or bodies, whether fluid or consistent, simple or
compound, etc. used in this work. Secondly, what figures observable in those
ices. Thirdly, some effects arising (...). Fourthly, some properties and
qualities. Fifthly, some lets or helps both to freezing and thawing. Sixthly,
some uses (...) ice.

In pursuance of which particulars, I had recourse to those ingenious (...) of
Mr. (...), registered in your Cimelia, and then to Bartholinus his late Book De
Nive, and to my own collected notes from various Authors, adding whatsoever
trials I thought meet. And in all these I have barely set down matter of fact,
neither mentioning the Authors nor their errors, which would have been both
nauseous and tedious, nor (...) I endeavor to render a reason of the various
(...) (which cannot be done without a volume) but shall leave that province to
an Honorable person of this Society, who has had much experience and
reflections on this subject. And now to my task. As to my first head of things
used, I shall begin with common water, which I exposed in a triple (...), in
like quantities, and in open (...), viz. first cold, secondly, boiling hot,
thirdly, an equal mixture of both the former. The effect was this, the cold was
frozen in one hour, the boiling hot in two hours, and the mixed in hour 1 and;
but with this difference, that the cold did freez first at the top, and sides,
and had a large thick crust before there was any show of ice in the boiling
hot; but the mixed and boiling hot began to freez first at the bottom of the
vessels, and when the top was cold then it freezed there also, leaving betwixt
the bottom and top of the vessel a cavity for the water, which in time was
wholly converted to ice. The same succeeded most manifestly in these waters
powered on a smooth table, where the cold water was presently frozen before the
boiling hot water could become cold at the bottom.

Water exhausted of air in Mr. Boyles engine was frozen almost as soon as a
like quantity exposed in an open pan. The ice whereof appeared white, and to
consist purely of bubbles. The glass used was a four ounce round vial, and a
small Tube one foot long half filled with water.

Fair water wherein Arsnick had been infused eight months, congealed much
sooner then a like quantity of water, into very white ice.

Solutions of all the sorts of Vitriols freezed sooner in pans and Tubes, then
water or any other solution of the other salts by much, though that of Alume
came very little short of it. The ice kept both color and taste upon the least
touch of the tongue, in all of them.

A solution of Alume did freez into an ice whiter then milk, and stuck so close
to the sides of the pan, that it could hardly be separated from it: this was
the firmest ice offered to me in all my trials, next to which in both these
qualities were the Vitriols, especially the Roman.

Sandever quickly freezeth, Frit sooner then it, and Kelp then them both, all
of them into lumps very white, and consequently not Diaphanous.

Sal Ammoniac showed some variety in point of time, for in the same pan,
quantity, and place with the other salted waters 'twould for the most part
freez long after the former, though once it did freez before them.

Common salt two drachms dissolved in four ounces of common water (for that
proportion I observed in all my solutions) did in 30. hours space in the
hardest season turn to pretty hard and white ice, whereas the former solutions
became so in two or three hours at the most.

A beer-glass was filled with stinking Seawater full of salt, which within 26.
hours acquired at the top a plate of ice of the thickness of an a Crown piece,
with few bubbles in it. This tasted salt and stinking as before, but being
dissolved at the fire, or thawed of its self, the stinking taste was gone, but
the saltish continued. The residue in the glass within four days (the season
continuing) and plates taken off (once in 24. hours) was frozen throughout, but
that at the bottom of the glass seemed to have a much brisker taste then that
at the top, neither was it so firm and friable as that. I tried another beer
glass with the same water, which froze most part of it, but the season
continued not so constantly sharp so long together, as in the former
experiment, and therefore I could conclude nothing therefrom. But in small
broad earthen-pans set in ice in 36. hours the same water became ice
throughout, and with the addition of a parcel of ice or snow much sooner.

Some water was impregnated with as much bay salt, some with as much Salt
Petre, some with as much Sal Ammoniac as the water was capable to receive, and
neither of these did congeal with the highest degree of cold, continued six
days together.

A solution of salt of Tartar soon converted into ice, but in much longer time
then common water. I observed that it began to freez in a Tube at the top,
bottom, and sides first, leaving the liquor in the middle unfrozen, whereas
other solutions and liquors congealed uniformly, by descending, or ascending,
or both at the same time, from side to side through the middle: of this I made
but one Trial.

Salt Peter required 28. hours in a very cold season, and in that time became
in the open pan a most pure white ice perfectly like Sal Prunellae, which an
Apothecary mistook it for. This ice thrown into the fire (after the aqueous
humidity was evaporated) did sparkle as that salt uses to do. A strong
Lixivium made hereof with an addition of Copperas or Alume singly, or mixed, set
in snow and salt, or snow alone, was froze in one night.

Sal Gem alone of all the salts, though snow and ice were mixed with it in
great proportion, and though the pan was set in salt and snow, could not all
that time be brought to congelation: an odd experiment. Phlegm of Vitriol did
freez sooner then the solutions before mentioned.

Oil of Vitriol begins congelation (or coagulation rather) near as soon as fair
water. A pretty large Tube was filled full with this oil, and about thereof was
frozen, the rest remaining at the bottom uncongealed. This Tube was broken in
the presence, and by the command of this Honorable society, the coagulated
part whereof was tasted by many then present, and concluded by all those, that
it was a strong Vitriolate taste. This coagulated part was of a paler color
then the other, and both these mixed and powered into a vial-glass heated it so
hot, that none there could hold it. This coagulated part kept so in the air a
week after all my other liquors had been thawed, and would in probability have
continued so much longer had not the glass been broken. I exposed another
lesser Tube with the same oil, which became frozen throughout, and required
very much relaxation in the air to return to its former fluidity.

I had set a mark on these Tubes (as on all the rest, to observe their several
risings) and the oil of Vitriol, when coagulated, sunk more then half an inch
below it, and being dissolved at the fire returned to its first station, as you
also saw. And this (...) is peculiar to this oil alone, all other liquors
rising higher then the mark.

I now come to my stronger liquors of Beer, Ale and Wines.

I exposed at the same time a flask of small Beer, and another of strong Ale,
the former whereof was frozen throughout in 38. hours, but three pints of the
Ale continued unfrozen after six days continuance of very hard weather. And the
air then disposed to thawing, I broke the flask, and with the unfrozen liquor
made an excellent mornings draught at four in the morning. This Ale in color,
strength, and quickness seemed to me and the other three tasters that sat up
with me, much better then when 'twas first put into the flask, and by comparing
it with some other in the house of the same barrel, we plainly found the said
difference. After this I took the icy part of the Ale and thawed it at a fire,
which was in all a pint of liquor (though the flagon containing three pints of
liquor, was filled with that ice) very pale, and of a quick and alish taste,
very much resembling that drink which the brewers call blew John. This ice was
not so firm as that of water, but fuller of bubbles.

I assayed the same a second time, but could not by reason of the changableness
of the Weather attain so great a thickness of ice as in the former. And in this
also I found the same changes as before.

A beer-glass of Hull Ale in 24. hours contracted a crust of ice as thick as an
Crown, and proceeding as in Sea Salt water, the (...) were the very same, all
the Laminae taken off, appeared of the same color and taste, and the lowest
ice was the most tender. Another glass of the same Ale exposed did not freez
throughout (no crust being taken off) in five days, when my own Ale did in a
like glass, both being set out together. Now the taste and color appeared the
same, or at least had no sensible difference, when they had been thawed of
themselves, and when first exposed. Hull Ale has a brackish taste.

Claret very strong exposed in a spoon in 35. hours hard freezing became an ice
all of it, it was soft, kept its former color and taste, soon discovering to
the tongue of one who knew not whence it was, its nature, quality and kind.

Canary at the same time in a spoon exposed in 38. hours acquired on its
surface an exceeding thin plate of ice as thin as the finest paper, and
proceeded no farther in four days following.

Neither Claret nor Canary would show the least sign of congelation in Tubes,
much less in Bottles.

Two ounces of the best spirit of Wine exposed in an earthen pan did all
evaporate in less then 12. hours, but the same quantity of Brandee left near a
spoonful of insipid ice without any taste of the spirit, which cast into the
fire flamed not at all. I could discern no bubbles in this phlegmatic ice, but
having (...) it betwixt mine eye and a candle, it manifested many bubbles by
its shadows. Quaere, whether this may not turn to profit in colder Countries in
rectifying spirits of Wine.

We now come to consistent bodies, and shall begin with animals and their parts.

Two eyes, the one of an Ox, the other of a Sheep in one night were both
totally frozen, the three humors very hard, not separable one from another,
neither of them Diaphanous, as naturally they are, and the Chrystalline was as
white as that of a whitings boiled. The Tunicles, Fat and Muscles were also
frozen, as appeared by their stifness, and by putting them into cold water. The
ice of the waterish and glassy humors seemed to be made of flakes.

A pint of Sheeps blood did freez at the top, and all the sides of the dish
wherein 'twas put, and was nothing else but the serum of the blood. This ice
being separated from the blood, and thawed at the fire, and then again exposed
congealed into a seeming membranous substance, and was taken for such by some
that saw it, and so continued in a warm season, and appeared in all respects a
membrane. This also was seen and registered in the Journal. The blood remaining
gave me no signs that frost had taken it.

I dissected a Dog and a Cat, having lain dead in the open air, and found their
entrails, nay the very heart stiff, and some little ice in the Ventricles of
their hearts, and their Vena Cava.

Milk soon freezeth into most white flakes of ice, retaining the proper taste
of Milk: these flakes are soft and manifest not many bubbles.

Several Eggs were exposed, and both yolk and white in one night were hard
frozen. They require a longer time to freez then Apples do. The best way to
thaw them both is to lay them on Newcastle-coal, or in a deep Cellar. Whether
Eggs once frozen will produce Chicken or no, I cannot say, but have been told
by good house-wives they will. Some affirm that Eggs and Apples put into water,
the ice will be thawed within them, and the ice appear on the shell and skin.
It Is true, if you hold either of them near the surface of the water, they will
soon gather a very thick crust upon their outsides, but if you then break the
one or cut the other, you shall see them full of ice, and the Eggs then poched
will taste very tough. So that this ice seems to be gathered from without, and
not to come from within. And besides if it did so, they must needs lose their
weight, the contrary whereof will anon appear. But for the more surety I
proceeded to this farther experiment. I immersed in my Cistern an Egg and an
Apple two foot deep into water, and there suspended them with strings tied
about them to keep them from sinking for the space of 24. hours, and then took
them out and opened them. I could never observe in that time, though I often
looked at them, any ice on their outsides, and the one being broken, and the
other cut, were found both of them full within of ice.

The next order shall be Vegetables, and of them a (...) instances, (...) of
those which are of a biting or sour taste. Now for the first I employed the
roots of horseraddish and Onions (for other edible roots and plants every one
knows will freez) which (...) the frost had taken them by their taste, and ice
was found betwixt each of the skins of the Onions (...) the taste of the root;
yet I have observed Beer wherein Horse-raddish and (...) have been infused,
will not (...) so soon as other stronger Beer without them.

Oranges and Limons frozen have a tough and hard rind, their icy juices lose
much of their genuine taste; they were both frozen hard in 26. hours or a
little more, having a thick rind. They as other fruits, when thawed, soon
become rotten, and therefore the Fruiterers keeps them under ground in low
Cellars, and cover them with straw, as they do their Apples.

Which did exposed in one night freez throughout. If you cut one of them
through the middle, 'twill have on both the plains a most pure thin ice hardly
discernable by the eye, but easily by the touch, or by scraping it off with a
knife. The cores of these Apples soon turn brown, and begin their corruption
there.

Oil exposed did acquire the consistency of butter melted and cooled again; but
in Caves and Cellars I could never see it more then candy.

Strong White Wind Vinegre did all soon freez in a Tube, and without any
apparent bubbles.

And to conclude without mentioning Nuts, Bread, Butter, Cheese, Soap, and many
other things which came under my trial, it is most certain, that whatsoever has
any waterish humidity in it, is capable of congelation: what are not you have
in the next Paragraph.

Having now done with what will freez, I shall briefly recount some things
whereon the cold has no such effect.

We mentioned before spirit of Wine, add to it such strong waters as are made
of it, viz. Aqua Mariae, Caelestis, etc. and Canary Wines in larger vessels.
Secondly, the strong Lees of Soap-boylers, and others made of other salts, to
which refer the spirits extracted from salt; Vitriol, Salt Petre, Aquafortis,
and spirit of Sulphur, which last precipitated to the bottom of the Tube, a
small quantity of powder very like in color to Sulphur Vivum, which being
separated from the spirit (for nothing of that evaporated) cracked between my
teeth, and tasted like Brimstone, and being put into water, made it as white as
Lac Sulphuris does, but 'twould not flame, perhaps because too much of its
strong acid spirit was mixed with it. Spirit of Soot afforded also a
precipitation or sediment (the spirit not congealing) at the bottom of the Tube
of a yellowish color, but much bitterer then the spirit its self, and
inflamable also.

But here it is to be observed that the said spirits that would not freez alone,
yet with the mixture of about 12. parts of water, or less of ice, or snow, did
freez throughout; except the spirits of Salt, of Nitre, and Aqua fortis, which
would not freez with those quantities of water, ice, and snow. I intended to
have tried them with a greater quantity of the said ingredients, but the
weather failed me.

Whether the salt water freez in the Sea, I cannot experimentally determine,
but shall add what was told me by one that said he had dissolved ice in the
Northern Seas, and found it very salt.

The next proposed was the figure of liquors frozen; wherein I shall observe in
general, that most of the liquors differed one from another in their figures,
and being permitted to freez, and thaw often, they still returned to the same
figure, most whereof were branched. Alume appeared in lumps, Salt Petre,
Tartar, milk, Ale, Wine, and Sal Ammoniac in plates, and other liquors
mentioned to freez into a very soft ice, seeming to be made up of small globuli
adhering each to other. Fair water kelp and the frits resembled an oaken leaf,
the leafie parts being taken away, and the fibers only remaining, the
interstitia being filled up with smoother ice. The middle rib (if I may so say)
as in plants was much bigger then the lateral ones, all which seemed but
different (...), whose points extended toward the outside of the vessel
containing the water, and made acute angles with the middle rib toward the
lesser end of the said leaf.

Concerning the figures of frozen Urine I shall say nothing, the accurate
description of curious Mr. Hook having so fully and truly performed that part
of my task.

Now as to the famous experiment of Quercetan, and affirmed by many other
Chemists, I made experiments in these following Vegetables, Rosemary, Rue,
Scurvigrass, Mints, and Plantane, wherewith I thus proceeded, I mixed with a
pint of their distilled waters or of an ounce of their own salts, the Rosemary
and Rue were calcined, and their salts extracted with their own waters, and
then were added to their salts their own distilled waters in the above
mentioned proportions. The glasses wherein the Rue and Plantane were put, being
sealed with Hermes seal, and the other glasses left open. The effect was, that
neither of them showed the least resemblance of the plants, from which they
were extracted, neither figure nor show of roots, stalks, branches nor leaves,
(but only a lump or heap of small globuli) much less of flour or seed. Besides
the kelp frozen has many fibers, which is made the most of it of Alga Marina,
whose leaf is long and smooth without fibers in it. This one thing I cannot
pretermit, that the sented waters seemed upon their thawing to have acquired,
and advanced much in their sents, and especially the Rosemary, whose salt has
no smell, and its water but little; yet thawed, they (...) as strong almost as
fresh leaves rubbed and smelt too.

A large recipient was filled with water, which being frozen throughout, and
the upper crust of the ice broken, there appeared in the middle of it a
multitude of thin laminae of ice, some more some less wide, from which
proceeded stiriae, or teeth pointing inwards, and set at pretty equal
distances, so that the laminae and stiriae resembled very much so many combs
placed in no order, some lying directly, others obliquely, none transversly,
having intervals betwixt each of them; betwixt some of them I could put my
finger without breaking the points of the stiriae: these combs were placed
round about a cavity in the middle of the receiver, sufficient to receive two
of my fingers.

In a flask filled competently with water, when 'twas frozen there appeared
throughout the ice infinite silver-coloured bubbles, very like unto tailed
hail-shot of several sizes, the largest about of an inch long, where thickest,
of the bigness of a great pins-head, others much less in all dimensions. The
points of them all looked outward, and the bigger part inwards toward the
Center, where also were the largest. For there they would easily admit a little
pin into all their cavity, without the least resistance. The figures of them
were pretty regular, first a small thread, and then a head as big as a shot,
and thence gradually ended in a point. Some of these were straight, most a
little crooked. There was a cavity in the center of this ice filled with
unfrozen water, from which I could find multitudes of cavities of bubbles, not
fully formed. And in the more solid parts of the ice cut, you may discern them
by a black spot where the hole enters into the cavity. All the same Phenomenon
appeared in a second trial, but that the bubbles were shorter and larger, and
not so sharp pointed. The like I also observed in a Conical glass sealed up.

The next thing to be treated of, is the effects of freezing, viz. the
expansion of liquors frozen, and consequently thereunto the breaking of bodies
wherein they are enclosed. All the liquors tried did sensibly in glass Tubes
rise beyond my mark, before the liquors could sensibly be discerned to freez,
and after rose somewhat higher with freezing. The height of the rising I shall
here set of a few experiments, instead of many made (having troubled your
patience too long in the former Paragraphs) in several processes. Vinegre and
Urine rose about half an inch, and Lees made with salts of Rosemary kelp the
frits about of an inch. Solutions of Alume and Copperas somewhat less, and in
general the saline liquors less then water, which rose a full inch, and small
Beer in a very narrow Tube four inches, but water in the small capillary Tubes
could not be perceived, either to expand its self, and certainly not to freez
at all. Oil of Vitriol alone (as has been said) sinks below the mark. Hot
water put into a Tube first sinketh till'tis cold, and then rises before it
freez.

Open-mouthed glasses, such as Beer-glasses, etc. filled with water up to the
brim, when frozen, the ice will manifestly rise above the superficies, and make
a solid triangle there. But narrow necked glasses more plainly show this
rising. In a flask filled with water four inches below the mouth, the ice rose
above the mouth, and hung two inches without it. And once in a Bolthead the ice
rose five inches above the watermark. And here I shall briefly add two things,
first, that if glasses be filled about full they seldom break, but if more they
will for the most part break. Secondly, that round figured or spherical glasses
for the most part break in an uniform manner. I filled a Bolthead full to the
neck, and stopped it at the top, which was 12. inches distant from the body, with
a piece of melted candle. The ice rose above three inches in the neck, and the
glass brake in the thinnest part of the body, from the point of breaking, as
from a pole, the cracks run as so many meridians, but unequally distant each
from other, and consequently concurred not in an opposite pole on the other
side, besides there was great difference in the length of those cracks, none
whereof went round the glass. In a flask thus cracked, in many places the cracks
were very irregular in all the places, for some of them ran from their centres
upwards, others downwards, some somewhat parallel, but most obliquely, and few
of them were considerably straight. Glass-bottles, and especially stone Jugs
keep very little, and the last no method in their breaking; the same also (...)
square glasses: woods follow their grain, and metals no order at all.

And now I come to some remarks proceeding (as I said) from this expansion,
viz. the breaking of the vessels, or force of freezing, wherein also you may
take notice of that quality of cold, mentioned by the Poet, penetrabile frigus,
piercing where light comes not.

Two Oval Boxes, the one of Box, the other of Maple (both firm woods)
containing each above two ounces of water, were filled full, and with screws
closed very fast, both these Boxes were rended from the bottom to the top in
one night, with gaps big enough to receive a barley corn into them; these woods
stretch but little, and therefore break more surely, and with larger rents then
softer wood will do.

Secondly, a Pepper Box of Laton made of Iron, covered with Tin, had the neck
broken off, and holes made in the top near the neck; and the bottom, where
'twas souldred, was so dissevered that water would easily run out there.

Leaden pipes laid above ground were broken in many places. One I saw 20. yards
long broken in seven places, and another in my Cellar six yards long broken in
two places. I saw likewise in many places of this City Leaden pipes, above a
foot deep under ground, broken in several parts.

Cocks of Cisterns, and other brass Cocks, and also the barrels in pumps made
of brass or lead, usually break with the frost.

I exposed a Copper Box of a pear fashion, which did bear three several
freezings, by reason of the great extensibility of that metal, but at the
fourth assay it cracked all along one side of it, almost to the screw.

Next I tried a Cylindrical silver Inkhorn, but that did bear five trials, and
therein I could perceive neither crack, nor dilatation of its superficies. I
intended to have tried it in a small bottle, but the weather failed me. I
exposed also a round silver ball of the bigness of a large Nut, the silver
became very sensibly extended to a larger superficies, but did not suffer any
solution of its continuity.

Tobacco-pipes, and all earthen ware taking any frost in their drying (before
they are burnt) become very brittle, and being put into a strong fire will
certainly break into many pieces. Tyles of houses, and hard stones in
buildings, scale and break off upon thawing, and thence it is that the Northern
sides of stone-buildings first decay, and moulder away, as it is most manifest
in ancient magnificent structures.

Alablaster and Marble having any chinks in them, frequently break with frost,
and the Statuaries tell me, they never saw any solid Marble break: as for
Flints, Paving-stones, precious stones, and such as will receive a polish, the
bitumens, as Amber, Kennel-coal, etc. I could never see any effect on them.

The next effect shall be that of adhaesion, concerning which take the
following experiments.

A smooth piece of ice was laid on a smooth Table, and common salt throwed upon
it, the effect was, that the ice stuck so firmly to it, that it could not be
severed from the table, without breaking the ice into many small pieces; and
'twill continue in this close cohaesion till the salt has corroded through the
ice to the very table (making many holes in the ice) and has melted it to the
very bottom. But if you lay salt first upon the table, and ice upon it, then
the ice sticks not, but thaweth. These following salts applied (as before
common salt was) cause adhaesion to the table, but not so firm as it, viz.
Kelp, Sandever, Sal Indus, Gem. Prunellae and Ammoniac, and Potashes, but not
Alume or Vitriol.

The next experiment of adhaesion was this; I held a nail betwixt my lips in
the open air a very little space, which stuck so firmly to them, that I could
not pull it thence without difficulty and pain.

Another effect is concentration of spirits and colors. Concerning the former
you have already as much as I know, especially in the Paragraph of freezing
Beer and Ale. Concerning the latter take these following trials. Cochanele was
boiled in water to a very high tincture, and frozen, and to twice four ounces
of this decoction was added in one glass a little spoonful of spirit of Wine,
and in another as much Sea salt water. All these were frozen throughout, and
every part of this ice seemed to me of an equal color. though the edges, as
thinner and nearer the light appeared of a brighter color (as they do
unfrozen) but the glasses being broken, showed no discernable difference in any
of them, neither as to color nor taste. The like trials were made with Maddes
weed and Indico, and the success was the same.

Secondly, I exposed a pint Porringer full of the decoction of soot, which (the
air relaxing) did only freez an inch thick, this continued above a week
consistent (in a thawing season) and very solid. Some that saw it judged it to
be brown Sugar Candy, the taste whereof was near, if not altogether as strong
as the uncongealed liquor remaining at the bottom. And in another trial, when
the whole was frozen, no concentration was seen. But though it was not my hap
to find this effect, my trials having been made in Vials, square, Cylindrical
or round, yet Mr. Hauk a worthy fellow of this Society happily lighted on it,
as you may perceive by his relation, and Schemes of his Glasses hereunto
annexed.

Some affirm as an effect of freezing, an addition of weight made in the bodies
frozen, but this affirmation answers not my trials. For in four Eggs and four
Apples fully frozen, I found the weight of them the same when frozen, and
thawed, as they had before they were exposed, each of the Eggs and Apples being
weighed in this triple state both severally and jointly, with the particular
weights I shall not trouble you. Besides that freezing adds no weight, it is
apparent in sealed Glasses, from whence nothing can expire, and by exact
ponderation of them, I could not perceive any the least difference in weight in
the said triple state. This I tried several times with as much exactness as
possibly I could, and still found the same event.

Another property of freezing is to render many bodies more friable and
brittle, as most woods, as also Iron and Steel, as every one knows that has
used Crosbows in frosty seasons, and so likewise the bones of animals, and it is
commonly observed by Chirurgions, that more men break their legs and arms in
such seasons, then at any other time of the year, especially such who have been
tainted with the Lues venerea, as Hildanus somewhere notes.

I shall now conclude the effects of freezing by ranging them into good and
bad. The good are the long preserving bodies most subject to putrefaction,
healthiness, and confirming the tone of all animals, and thickning the hairs
and furs of such as have them, fatten some. Besides it exceedingly clears the
air, and other bodies, as it is manifest by the stinking Seasalt-water before
mentioned, as also by this that follows, namely, I took six of the most musty
stone-Bottles I could procure, and competently filled them with water, which
after freezing and thawing again, became as sweet as ever they were before.

Bad effects are the killing and destroying animals, and vegetables by
congealing and stopping their vital and nourishing juices, rendering them
totally immovable. It Is observable that in Greenland and Nova Zembla nothing
but grass grows, as also what was told me by Dr. Collins the present Physician
of the Emperor of Russia, that no thorny plant nor thistles grow in that
Country. And this present year most of the Rosemary and Sage about London was
wholly destroyed, besides most of the more tender Plants.

My fourth proposal was the properties and qualities of ice, some whereof my
task engages me to enumerate only, such are its slipperiness, smoothness,
hardness, whereby and by its bulk and motion it breaks down bridges, etc. its
firmness and strength to bear carriages, and burdens; its diaphaneity, which is
much less then the liquor of which it is made. For I could never discern any
object, though but confusedly, a foot beyond the clearest piece of ice, by
reason of the many bubbles and luminous parts within it. Which bubbles show
only shadows, but the ice its self interposed betwixt your eye and a candle,
appears in many round circles, from which proceeds many rays of light, four or
five or more, in the form of a Star of about a of an inch in diameter, which so
glase your eyes, you can scarcely see any thing, but bright light and shadow.

As for its penetration and thickness something has been said above, to which
I shall add, that I have seen the Thames ice of the thickness of eight inches,
or more near the middle of the River, and on the sides much more. And in Garden
walks the earth frozen near two foot deep, whereas on the sides of the same
walks, on a richer mould, the frost did not reach much above one foot and, and
Pipes of Lead have been broken above a foot under the surface of the ground. I
shall not mention the huge mountains of ice found in the most Northerly Seas,
but proceed to its weight.

It Is generally known, that ice swims upon the water. But I have seen
snow-balls moistened only with water, and then compressed with a strong force,
and afterward frozen, to sink: besides the congealed oil of Vitriol descends
in water, and common ice is frequently observed under water; whether the
solutions of salts frozen will sink, was by me forgotten to observe, and
whether coagulated oil will sink in unfrozen, as Bartholine affirms. Some
affirm that snow-balls hard pressed, without addition of water, will sink, but
experience teaches me the contrary.

As for its tactile qualities, every one knows it is colder then water, which
you may increase by adding salt unto it, or rather snow.

Smell it has none, but it binds up that quality in all, but most spirituous
bodies, which it also in some degrees refracts in them.

Lastly, ice yields both reflection and refraction, whereof I shall speak when
I come to its uses.

My fifth head was lets and helps in freezing, which I shall (...) dispatch.
Those besides the North and North-east winds, the absence of the Sun, and the
highest parts of houses or mountains, are the mixture of snow and salt (then
which there is nothing more painfully and unsufferably cold to my feeling) as is
apparent by the trick of freezing with snow and salt by the fire side, as also
by the ingenious way of making cups of ice, invented by an incomparable person.

Add hereunto, that water falling or thrown upon ice or snow, soon becomes
congealed. A mixture also of ice beaten into powder, and mixed with common
Sea Salt (which is best) or with Kelp, Alume, Vitriol or Nitre. And here note,
that vessels filled with water, and set in these mixtures, begin their freezing
at the bottom of the liquor, and consequently are not so subject to be broken,
as those are which are not set in these mixtures, and that the water rises
higher with, then without them. I find also, that oil of Vitriol alone, mixed
with snow or ice have the same effect, though not so powerful.

One affirms, that Saltpeter dissolved in water, and put into a Bolthead, and
long agitated, not only cools the hand exceedingly (which is very true) but
also converts it to ice, yea, in the very Summer month, which answers not my
trial, though kept a whole hour in that agitation in the hardest season.

This following Experiment also I add, proposed to me.

I filled a Bolt-head containing a quart of water, and set it in an Iron pan,
surrounding it on every side with snow, which covered also part of the neck,
and then set the Kettle over the fire, and took now and then the Bolt-head from
the fire, whilst the snow was thawing, but not the least sign of freezing
appeared in the water put into the Bolt-head.

As for the helps of thawing, take this Experiment. I set in the same Cellar
three pans full of ice, one on Newcastle coal, a second on sand, a third on the
earthen floor, they thawed in the same order they are mentioned, which was
thrice repeated, and once that placed on the coal did thaw, when the other
continued their ice. Sealed glasses seem neither to promote or hinder this act
of freezing. The same success I had with Eggs and Apples in my Cellar.

The last thing I shall speak to is the use of ice, you may therewith make a
siphon, being fashioned and applied as usually siphons are, and this will
happen, whether you make it one continued piece of ice, or two contiguous ones,
for in both the water will run exceeding fast, and this siphon soon empties all
the water out.

A second use is for refraction, whereof Mr. Hook has given you already a
learned demonstration. And I having formed some smooth ice into various
figures, like most of those mentioned by the Dioptrick writers, the (...) were
the very same as in the like figured glasses; but how Descartes made Dioptrick
glasses of it I know not, especially to make use of them: and lastly you may
make a speculum of it, especially if a piece of blacked paper be placed behind
it, and if you hold a candle at a convenient distance, there will appear very
many speculums to your eye, according to the number of the bubbles contained in
the ice. But I could not observe any heat proceed from ice, though cut in the
true figure for burning-glasses, and exposed in naked ice, but frozen in
spherical glasses 'twill heat a little.

I shall here subjoyn some propositions of learned Bartholinus, taken from his
book De Nive, being near to the former Argument, who affirms.

1. That the more subtle distilled spirits gain a clear splendour and elegancy
from snow placed about them.

2. That the rays from snow newly fallen glitter, and excel in a kind of
splendour wherewith the eyes are dazzled. Both these are true, and have but one
common cause, vsz. the multitude of reflections caused by the infinite globuli,
whereof every flake of snow consists.

3. That he saw Cabbage growing in his garden, putrify on that part, which was
above the snow. It Is certain, that frost alone, with or without snow, has this
effect on Cabbage, being of the tribe of succulent plants, and I observed, that
this year 1644. our great Houseleek or American Aloes (usually hung up in
houses) kept in an upper room, was totally destroyed by the cold. And that
Apples will (...) I have said before, and Houswifes to prevent the rotting of
Onions, commonly hang them up in their Kitchins, or keep them in Ovens, or some
close place. And this present year 1662. I saw at Mr. Boxes, the eminent
Druggists house, abundance of Squils or SeaOnions quite rotten they were laid
not in an open, but close Garret.

4. When snow melts by the Suns heat, copious vapors from the Earth cloud the
Sun. He should rather have said vapors from the melted snow, and it is no
wonder, that vapors cloud the Sun.

5. Snow melts and falls off from Ivy. I have observed all the sorts of Ivies,
and ever-greens with us, and some biting plants too, but find in them all the
contrary to what is here asserted. Nay, no difference has been observed even
in hoar frosts, which fall equally, and continues on all sorts of Plants.

6. He excludes not a small portion of earth from snow, though pure, which,
says he, is manifest from distillation. This experiment I have found true by
evaporation, which is tantamount to distillation, and indeed all melted snow
leaves an earthy and foul settling behind it.

7. Viscosity with softness is greater in new, then in old snow, and therefore
it is brought into a mass. Viscosity in it I understand not, its softness indeed
is manifest too, by the tracks of beasts, which appear more fair, the snow not
rising on the sides of the impression made by their feet (as it does in old)
but retains their perfect character.

8. Watercresses and Scurvigrass grow under the snow in Gardens. I apprehend
not that any Plant whatsoever grows at all in hard seasons, my meaning is, that
no Plant acquires any greater bulk of quantity, but keeps at a stand only, and
this Countrymen affirm of grass and corn, and Gardiners of other Plants. It Is
true many Plants will upon thawing show a finer verdure, and if warm weather
presently follow, all vegetables will thrive exceedingly. For how they should
thus grow when their nourishing liquor is congealed, and consequently become
immovable, I understand not.

9. Air is included in Snow, Which this way of mine to make snow, fully
convinces. I took the whites of Eggs and beat them in the open air with a
spoon, into a frothy consistence, as women do to make their snow possets, and
then taking a little of this substance, and laying it on a trencher, it soon
became plain flakes of snow, so that none that saw them could judge otherwise.
Another accidental Experiment proves the same, for having put water into a
Tube, and having long and strongly agitated it, there arose many bubbles at the
top, which soon freezing (my agitation ceasing) became perfect snow. And now
having here set down the way of counterfeiting, at least, if not of making
snow, I will add how a pruina or hoar frost also may be imitated. I took a Pail
filled with warm water, and hung over it Hair, Moss, and a piece of Rosemary,
now the atomical vapors rising from the water, fixing themselves on the Moss,
Hair and Rosemary, became on them a perfect hoar frost. The like is daily seen
on the Beards and Hair of men and horses, traveling in cold Winter nights or
mornings, proceeding from their breaths, steams of their bodies, or moist atoms
of the Air. I tried also to make hail with drops of water, but could not hit
on it, for they would never become white: Whence it is manifest, that hail is not
drops of rain suffering glaciation in the falling, as the received opinion of
Philosophers asserts.

10. Snow abounds with fat. This I understand not.

11. Snow with ice swims on water. This is a clear consequence from the seventh
assertion.

12. Snow-water boils meat sooner, and makes the flesh whiter. I tried this in
flesh and fish, but could find no manifest difference, either to their sooner
boiling or whiteness.

13. Snow newly fallen has no taste, but lying long on the ground, or frozen,
somewhat bites the tongue. My taste was not so acute, as to distinguish the
biting of one from the other. It Is true indeed, that snow frozen does more
affect the tongue with its coldness, then snow alone.

14. Worms are sometimes found in snow. This neither my own observation, nor
relation from others can make out.

15. From snow by a peculiar art, a salt of wonderful strength is drawn. He
says not this of his own observation, nor teaches the way to extract it.

16. After much snow plenty of Nuts. This frequently suits with the
Country-mans observation, but many times fails, such years also commonly
produce plenty of Wheat, other seasons concurring.

I shall here also insert two remarks out of the same Authors concerning
freezing. The one is, that the great Duke of Tuscany distilled spirit from
Wine, only by putting snow upon the Alembick, without help of fire. The second,
that the Duke of Mantua had a powder which soon congealed water into ice, even
in the Summer.

And to conclude, take these general observations made by the command of the
Royal Society, with Weather-glasses framed after the Italian mode, and filled
in part with tinged spirit of Wine. Which I shall deliver briefly and in gross,
and not each days alteration apart; I took then two of the said glasses of
equal dimensions, as near as might be, and filled them with the same spirit of
Wine, one of them I placed in my Study-window, standing North-west, the other
in Mr. Pulleyns Warehouse under St. PaulsChurch, and chose there a small recess
or room, which was most remote from the entrance, and the warmest in the whole
Warehouse; both the glasses were settled in their stations the 15. of October
1662. the spirit in both having the altitude of three inches just. When the
glass in my Study was depressed, by the cold, an inch, I went and observed that
in the Warehouse to have received no manifest change in its station. And at a
second visit the spirit was depressed of an inch below, when that above-ground
was depressed near two inches. And during the long continuance of all that hard
Winter, it never descended above of an inch, and never was higher there then
three inches and in a mild season in April following, by which time the papers
fixed to the glass, and whereon were fixed the degrees, was quite rotten, and
the characters scarcely legible. And at the same time, that in my Study was
raised to four inches. By which it appears, that the said Warehouse was in the
coldest season as warm as in a mild March, for at that station the glass in my
Study stood, commonly betwixt two inches and 2. and. And so indeed this place
appeared to one that went into it at the coldest season. And to this purpose I
several times sent in at night my hardest frozen liquors, which were constantly
thawed in the morning, though it freezed exceeding hard above ground.

The glass in my Study, after two days hard freezing, was sunk below my marks,
into the very ball, so that I could make no farther observations concerning the
cold above ground.

From the former observations, that popular error is manifestly refuted, viz.
that Cellars and Subterraneous places are hotter in the Winter then in the
Summer, which though they appear so to us, because they warm us in the Winter,
and cool us in the Summer, yet they are not so in themselves, for it appears by
the former Experiment, that in the coldest season the spirit was depressed to
two inches and, and rose in April to 3, and no doubt would have risen about of
an inch higher, had it continued there till the hottest season of the year.

One thing more I observed, viz. that the tinged spirit of Wine had in this
subterraneous Vault totally lost its color, whereas that in my Study (two
years after) still retains its former tincture.

Since the printing of the foregoing Papers, viz. 1664. (there being no frosts
in England 1663.) I made these following Experiments.

Finding the third of January the season disposed to freezing, I exposed a Pint
bottle of Claret, and a glassCane filled with Canary, a solution of Sal Gem,
Train-oyl, and the Oil of Fructus musae, and on the fourth of the same month,
the night being the coldest and sharpest that I ever felt, (which all I spoke
with the next day confirmed) the wind then blowing hard at South-west, I found
in the morning all the liquors frozen, except the Sal Gem exposed in an earthen
pan, which showed at the bottom of the dish some seemingly Crystallized salt,
the oil of the said fruit became very friable, and of a milky white color, but
the Train-oyl only lost its fluidity, and became of the consistence of soft
greese. And the same night a bottle of the Rhenish Wine, called Backrag, and
another of lusty White Wind, standing in a room a story high, exposed to the
said wind, had most of the Wine frozen in them, the ices whereof being taken
out, tasted somewhat weaker then the Wine it self. All the same things happened
the sixth night of the same month. It is to be observed, that the pint of
Claret, and the Sack in the tube, were both frozen throughout these two nights,
and after their double freezing and thawing, they lost nothing of their spirit,
color, and taste; nay, the Claret being a strong Burgundy Wine, though it
often suffered glaciation and thawing for three weeks together, yet in all that
time suffered no manifest alteration, but appeared the same to sense, as when
it was exposed, in color, taste, and strength.

As to the concentration of colored liquors, Mr. Haak showed me an Oval glass,
having at one end a narrow Cane above an inch long, almost filled with water,
tinged with Cochineel, frozen throughout, the ice round about, toward the
sides of the glass, showed wholly colorless, but that in the midst was of an
exceeding high dye, but the ice that was raised to the neck of the glass, was
lightly tinged with a scarlet hue. Hereupon having some flasks by me, I put
into one a strong decoction of Cochineel, and into another a like decoction of
Soot, which being exposed to the air, and encompassed in a vessel with snow and
salt, they did freez to the thickness of an inch or more, and the air then
beginning to relax, I broke the flasks, and the desolved ice yielded a water
totally colorless. I made also an Experiment with a very strong decoction of
Gentian roots, which being exposed in a four ounce vial, the ice thereof had a
far deeper color, and bitterer taste in the middle, and toward the bottom,
then toward the outsides of it.

And whereas Barclay relates, that King James being in Denmark to fetch his
Queen thence, in the Winter season had his nose and ears in danger of
Gangreening, which being timely perceived by some of the King of Denmarks
Nobility, they caused the parts to be rubbed with snow, and so the danger was
avoided; the same travelers affirm, that in the Northern parts, where men
become stiff with cold, and almost frozen to death, that they rub the frozen
parts with snow, or else cast the whole body into water, by which means the
whole body is crusted over with ice, as Eggs and Apples are, as if the freezing
Atoms did pass from the body frozen into the water or snow; and this way of
curing Gangreens from cold, Sennertus does prescribe. To make some Experiment
hereof, I exposed flesh and fish, and found, that by immersing them into water,
they soon became more limber and flexible, and more easily yielding to the
knife, and compassed with a crust of ice of the thickness of about half a
crown, manifest tokens of their thawing, and being cut, they discovered nothing
of ice in them. This for more certainty, I often reiterated, as also in Eggs
and Apples, above a dozen times, and never failed of unthawing them by this
way. It Is to be noted, if you immerse the flesh, fish, eggs, or apples deep
into the water, no ice will appear on their outsides, but only when you hold
them near the surface of the water.

As to the Persian Experiment mentioned by Olearius, of making huge heaps of
ice to be preserved for cooling of their drinks, I observed, that by pouring
water into an open Pan, or into a Flask gradually, some at one time, some at
another, I could quickly freez by this way a whole Flaskfull, when near half of
a Flask filled at one, though helped by art, was unfrozen. I observed also,
that the ditches betwixt Southwark and Redderiff had acquired an exceeding
thickness of ice, caused by the flowing of the water in them at full Tide, for
new water being brought in by the Tide, was there congealed to the thickness of
some inches every ebbing and flowing. I observed also the ice on the banks of
Thames above two yards thick; the inhabitants told me they had seen it three or
four yards thick, which thus came to pass; the Tide flowing in, and meeting
with great flakes of ice, drove them to the banks, and lodged them on the ice
there frozen, which flakes uniting there with the former ice, raised it to that
excessive height or thickness. Besides every one may observe in London Streets,
and elsewhere, in Channels where no constant current is, that water coming from
the houses, soon fill the Channels with thick ice, for running but a little at a
time, it freezeth almost as fast as it comes thither. Nay, I have seen ice of
some yards thickness in such places, where a small rill or stream of water
gently falls on the side of a hill.

Amongst those things that will freez, Mortar and Plaster of Paris were
omitted, and thence it is that Plaisterers and Bricklayers play all the Winter.

My Lord Verulam in his natural History (and some from him have affirmed to me)
that Apples and Eggs covered with a wet cloth, will not freez, but I find no
difference in those that are thus covered, and them that are not.

Add to those that sink upon congelation, all oils from Animals, and from
Vegetables, that are extracted by expression or boiling.

Add to those that freez not water and Sugar boiled to the consistence of a
Syrup, and also all other Syrups, none whereof I could ever take notice, or
learn by others, that they would freez. It Is true, that water having an equal
quantity of Sugar dissolved in it will freez, but with a little more mixed
therewith, freezeth not.

To try the effect of cold upon Loadstones, I exposed several of them in the
open Air, and also within rooms in the most severe weather, the needle being
kept in a warm place. At other times I exposed the needle to the cold air,
keeping the stones warm, at other times both were exposed, but in none of my
Experiments could I conclude any thing certain to their attractive faculty, for
the sphere of their activity was found to be sometimes greater, and sometimes
less, to a considerable difference, in ten several good stones employed for
this purpose.

I essayed also to find out a standard of cold, whereby to fit the tinged
spirit of Wine for the Weather-glasses, and to that end made use of Conduit
water, and the distilled waters of Plantane, Poppies, BlackCherry, Nightshade,
Scurvigrass, and Horse-raddish; all which were first placed in the same room
where a fire was kept, and then removed, and measured out into spoons in equal
quantities, and also a drop of them dropped on the same bench, but though this
was often tried, I could not make any sure inference from them, only I observed
that the black-Cherry water did for the most part freez first, but the other
with very great uncertainty. The Horse-raddish and Scurvigrass waters were for
the most part froze last. The best way to discover the very beginning of
freezing of liquors, is to move a Pin or Needle through the liquors, whereby
the ice will be raised, and become discernable, when the naked eye can discover
none at all.

FINIS.


Figure 1. Page 9, 10, 11, ^ 98.

A the Ball or Egg.

B C the Stem.

D the little Aqueous Cylinder.



Figure 2. the open Weather glass mentioned page 24, and 43



Figure 3. the sealed Weather-glass or Thermoscop^mentioned page 24, 55, 56.



Figure 4. the Barometer o^ Mercurial Standard placed in Frame B B mentioned
page 25



Figure 5. an Instrumen^ mentioned page 93.

A the Vial.

B C the Pipe cemented int the neck of the Vial, open at ^ and sealed at B.



Figure 6. page 97.

A the Bolt-head.

B the small Stem.

B C the Cylinder of wate^ enclosed.



Figure 7. page 101.




