Vox Populi: Or, the SENSE of the SOBER LAYMEN OF THE Church of England.
Concerning the HEADS Proposed in his MAJESTY'S COMMISSION TO THE CONVOCATION.

LONDON, Printed for Randall Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1690.

The Bookseller to the Reader
THese Papers were sent to me before the late Prorogation of the Parliament;
but yet I have thought fit to publish them, hoping they may be useful to the
Public.

THE PREFACE.
WE pay too great a Deference to so venerable an Assembly as our Convocation,
to come before them, tho with a Petition in our hands, without making some
Apology for this seeming Rudeness, as tho we presumed to instruct our Teachers,
and fancied our selves wiser than our Spiritual Guides. We might plead by way
of Excuse, that a former Convocation not only allowed, but desired more on our
behalf than we do pretend to: Burnet 's Hist. of the Reform. Vol. 1. p. 147*
For they addressed to King Henry the 8th, That an equal number of Laymen
might be joined to some of their own Body, with a full power to abrogate or
confirm Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws, as to them should seem most expedient:
whereas we do neither presume nor desire to sit among the Clergy as
Counselors, but only to be permitted to stand as Supplicants at their door.

We might further alledg in our own behalf, that when we lately ventured with
our Pens to defend the Doctrines of our Church against the Papists, in which
Controversy our Learned Clergy gained such immortal Trophies of Honor, our
Papers were not only kindly received, but protected too: Even Dr. Sherlock
himself condescending to cover a Protestant Footman with his mighty Shield, who
like a small Squire had ventured to strike a blow or two for the Giant. We are
therefore apt to believe, that what we now propose for the further advantage of
our Church, will be as favorably entertained. And we are the rather encouraged
to such a Persuasion, because the Master of the Temple, notwithstanding the
Canon in this case (which shall be observed in its proper Place under that
Head) has lately revoked that Letter of Attourny which the Clergy seemed to
pretend to, for the warranting them alone to act in our Names, while we sat
still and held our Peace. For, says he, Tho the Clergy have of late in a great
measure monopoliz'd the Name of the Church to themselves, yet in propriety of
Speech they do not belong to the Definition of it; Dr. Sherlock's Disc. of the
Nature, Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church, p. 32. 34.
they are indeed the Governors of the Church, as they have received Authority
from Christ the supreme Lord and Bishop of the Church, but they are no more the
Church, than the King is his Kingdom, or the Shepherd his Flock; the Bishops
and Pastors of the Church, considered as such, represent the Head and not the
Body, etc.

But that which we shall insist on, and stand by as the main Reason of our
willing and publishing the following Papers, and which we conceive will fully
silence those that are most likely to raise a Clamor against us, is to clear
our selv^s from the inj^^ious Misrepresentation that Vox Cleri Vox Cleri p. 11
gives of us, as tho we were as perverse Enemies to his Majesty's excellent
Design in his Commission to the Convocation as he himself is, and those whose
Judgment he pretends to express: For one of the main Reasons he urges against
all Alterations, is that which he cites out of Dr. Burnet in Judge Hales's Life,
That as some might come in, so others that were in our Communion might take
offense by the Alterations, and desert it; and seeing our frequent Changes in
some things, might suppose there is nothing certain among us; and from the many
Disputes about our Liturgy, proceed to question our Articles, and at last fall
off to the Church of Rome, which they saw more constant to their Principles.
And as we shall not repeat what has been already replied, so we shall take the
more effectual way of confuting him, by declaring the common Sense of the
wisest and best among our selves that we have conversed with about these
matters. For tho we pay that Respect even to the violent Bigots of our Clergy,
which the great Learning of many of them does deserve, yet we must beg their
Pardon if we are unwilling all the blame of their unaccountable Stiffness and
Rigor should lie at our door. We should think our selves very unhappy, if any
unreasonable Sowrness or Humor of ours should be the great Obstacle to the
Churches Reformation and Peace: If we should any way contribute to the keeping
open those bleeding Wounds which our Spiritual Physicians are called together
to heal and close. We that have been so well instructed by our Ministers, have
learnt to distinguish between the Substance of our Religion, and the separable
Appendages of it; and shall not suspect a change of our Food every time the
mode of garnishing the Dish is altered; and have more of that Divine Charity
they have preached to us than to stand at an irreconcilable Distance from
Dissenting Protestants, and to run both out of the Church and our Wits too, if
the Convocation should think fit to let them in on an honorable Accommodation
of our Differences. We have therefore thought fit to descend to the particular
Heads mentioned in his Majesty's Commission, and under each of them to propose
such Alterations as would not only not be offensive to us, but are highly
desirable, because we suppose them equally conducive to the Beauty and Safety,
the Strength and Glory of our Church.

Of the Liturgy and Ceremonies.
TO begin with the Calendar; we shall not insist on the Rule to find out
Easter, which has been sometimes found not to be true, because that does more
concern the Clergy to look after, than any of us: But as to some of the Lessons
appointed in it, they being designed for our Edification, we hope we may have
^ib^^ty to speak. What a smutty Story is that in the 6th, 7th, and 8th Chapters
of Tobit, appointed for the Lessons on the last day of September, and the first
of August, which is enough to make a Man laugh till he burst, as certainly as
the lumps of Pitch, Fat, and Hair, did the Dragon (Another precious Story,
which not being appointed formerly by our Church, was by the New Reformers on
the late Kings Restoration, ordered to be read to us on the 23d of November).
The business in short, is this, Tobias luckily caught a certain Fish, that
greedily snapt at him, Tobit c. 6.
Roasted it, and Eat it; but by the Direction of the Angel, very carefully lays
up the Heart, the Liver, and the Gall. Now an Ointment made of this Gall, was a
notable Remedy against Whiteness in the Eyes. If it were as good against
Dimness of Sight too, we could wish for the sake of the Author of Vox Cleri, we
knew what sort of Fish this was. Tobit c. 7.
But a far greater Virtue lay in the Liver, and the heart as Tobias afterward
found, when he came to the House of Raguel. For this Raguel had a Bonny Girl to
his Daughter, called Sarah, on whom it seems a certain spiteful Devil had clapped
a sort of a Venetian Pad-lock; so that tho seven young Fellows had successively
Married her, yet none of them had been able to Consummate the Business, but
lost their own Lives the very first Night they made any offers that way. Tobias
was deeply smitten with her, and not discouraged for all this, in short, makes
up the Bargain and Marries her. Tobit c. 8.
And just before he Beds her, takes the aforesaid Heart and Liver of the Fish,
and burns them upon the Coals, which made such a perfume, that away scours the
Devil into the utmost parts of Egypt; and so Tobias and Sarah very comfortably
enjoy each other. The Author of Vox Cleri has a peculiar Crotchet of his own,
of reading some Portions out of (...) in the Church, for the further
enlightening our Understanding. And why not the Arcadian Prayer in the same Book
for the furthering of our Devotions? To carry on the Humor, we humbly move,
that we may be in^tructed out of another Royal Paper; That the same day, on
which this Story out of Tobit is read to us, the other Lesson to make them both
of a piece, may be the late Depositions about the pretended Prince of Wales.

The Gloria The frequent Repetition of this, is one of those things which A. B.
Usher, Bp. Williams, Prideaux, and Brownrig, Dr. Ward, Featly, and Hacket took
notice of, and would have considered, whether it were not fit to be amended.
See the Copy of the Proceedings of these Divines touching Innovations, etc. and
Considerations on the Common Prayer Book, p. 7.
Patri is sometimes said, for Instance on the first day of the Month, five
times at the end of the Psalms read for the Morning-Service; again, at the end
of the the Lords Prayer after the Absolution; again, at the end of the 95th
Psalm. O come let us Sing, etc. again, at the end of the Benedicite; again, at
the end of Benedictus; and again, in the Litany; that is ten times in the
ordinary Morning-Service.

The Lords Prayer is said once at the end of the Absolution; again, after the
Apostles Creed; again, in the Litany; and again, in the beginning of the
Communion-Service; and again, in the second part of the Communion-Service; and
again, in the Pulpit before Sermon; so that it is repeated five times every
Sunday Morning constantly, and six if there be a Communion.

Not to speak of the Kyrie Eleesons, nor of all the Congregations, even Women
too, saying after the Minister with a loud Voice, nor of their alternate
reading the Verses of the Psalms, for which later, we don't find any Rubric;
all which seem to make such a confused Babbling, that we can hardly reconcile it
to the Apostles Discouse in the first Epistle to Corinth. and 14th Chapter; and
make a Man think he were in Dover-Court, rather than a Christian Assembly.

Good Lord deliver us, is repeated eight times in the Litany; and We beseech
thee to hear us good Lord, no less than two and twenty times in the same.

We cannot but on this Occasion sometimes reflect on that wise Doctor at Oxford,
who when he met with a little good way, was wont after he had once traveled
over it, to turn about his Horse, and say, It Is so good, let us go this over
again.

This has a semblance of those vain Repetitions forbidden by our Savior; and
when we reproach the Fanatics for their Tautologies in Prayer, they
immediately flap us in the mouth with this; and we profess sincerely we are not
able to reply upon them.

Most of the Coll^cts have but one Petition in them. Were several of our short
Prayers well digested into one, we humbly conceive it would be like the uniting
of the little Sparkles of Heaven into a constellation that renders them the
more conspicuous. And were the whole Service somewhat shortened, and so room
left for Free-Prayer, and encouragement given to it, we question not but our
Learned Clergy would immediately exceed any of the Dissenters in that way, and
greatly edify us. For not to examine what has been urged on both sides, we
will take the Learned Dr. Stillingfleet's Opinion for true, That this was an
Invention of the Jesuits: yet we know they are cunning Fellows; it is a very
popular thing; it takes wonderfully; and fas est and ab host doceri.

We are of that Gentleman's mind, who said, Character of a Trimmer, by Sir W.
C. a Lay Gentleman of our Church, p 20.
There may be too great a restraint put on Men whom God and Nature has
distinguished from their Fellow Laborers, by blessing them with a happier
Talent; and by giving them not only good Sense, but a powerful Utterance too,
has enabled them to gush out on the Attentive Auditory with a mighty stream of
devout and unaffected Eloquence; when a Man qualified, endued with Learning
too, and above that, adorned with a good Life, breaks out into a warm and
well-deliver'd Prayer before his Sermon, it has the appearance of a Divine
Rapture, he raises and leads the hearts of the Assembly in another manner
than the most composed or best studied form of set words can ever do; and the
Pray-wees would look like so many Statues, or Men of Straw, in the Pulpit,
compared with those who speak with such a powerful Zeal, that men are tempted
at the moment to believe Heaven it self has directed their words to them.

Herein we confess we don't expect the concurrence of the Author of Vox Cleri,
who has an aching Tooth at Lectures and Sermons too, as well as, no doubt, a
mighty spleen at this Free-prayer, and would have all the public Ministrations
to consist in reading Liturgies and Homilies; And then if God Almighty would
but send a man a good pair of Eyes, or in case he don't do that, a Fescue, and
a pair of Spectacles, he might even keep ^he Gifts of his Spirit to himself,
for any n^ed that a Clergyman may have of them.

We could wish for the sake of the Greek Churches, that the severe Clauses in
the Athanasian Creed were expunged; for tho we believe all the Articles of
Faith contained in it, yet we think it no more becomes us to damn Folks in the
Church, and at Divine Service, than in the Streets, and in common Discourse.

We think it very odd, that Te Deum, Benedicite, the Psalms in Prose, and the
Three Creeds, should be appointed to be SUNG or said. The Lessons in the Old
Common Prayer Book were ordered to be Sung in a plain Tune. That is reformed,
and they are now appointed to be read distinctly with an audible voice. And is
there not the same reason for the other two? Were this canting way laid aside,
we might then have the Psalms in the New Translation; for it is for the sake of
their being point^d to be SUNG or said, that though in some places it be
corrupt, and in others has several Verses that are not in the Original, but
the Septuagint only, the old one is still retained.

We have known some Men that have risen from the Dunghill to a great fortune;
who have hung up their Leathern Breeches as a Monument of their former low
Circumstances; but not that they used to santer and trudg up and down in them
as Ornaments, when they had a Pair of fresh Silk ones lying by them.

We could wish those two Rubricks in the Communion Service were reviewed; the
first of which directs the Curate to stand at the North-side of the Table, when
he says the Collect and the Lord's Prayer; and the seccond immediately after
directs him to turn to the People, and rehearse distinctly all the Ten
Commandments. We humbly conceive, did the Curate look the same way when he
reads the Collect and Lord's Prayer, as he does when he reads the Commandments;
or rather, were both of them read in the Desk where the other Prayers are,
especially in great Churches, we might then be able to hear him, which now many
times we cannot, and consequently are no more edified than by the Music of the
Spheres. See the Rubric about reading the Lessons.
When the Lessons are read, the Curate is ordered so to stand and turn himself,
as he may be best heard of all such as are present. The reason is the same in
both Cases. This we find reckoned by those great Lights of our Church, formerly
mentioned, among the Innovations, Id. ut supr. p. 5.
the reading some part of the Morning Prayer at the H. Table when there is no
Communion. Nor can we be satisfied with what is usually said in defense of this
Practice, That it is to put the people in mind that they should celebrate the
Communion every Sunday. In the Name of God, what need is there of such dumb
signs to instruct us in our Duty, which are so contrary to Edification, when we
have so many Excellent and Learned Men, who can and ought to do it to much
better purpose in their frequent, Eloquent and Pious Sermons out of the Pulpit?
Must such Motions, as well as Pictures, be Laymens Books?

For our Childrens sake, we could wish that the Order of Confirmation were not
made a matter of mere Form and Ceremony; that it were carefully looked to, not
only that they be able to say the Creed, Lord's Prayer, and Ten Commandments,
and to answer the Questions in the Catechism, but that they understand them
too; to this end, that the Rubric, which so rarely well enjoins the Curate
diligently to catechize the younger sort, and then either to bring them, or at
least send in Writing* with his hand subscribed thereunto, the Names of all
such persons in his Parish as he shall think it to be presented to the Bishop
to be Confirmed, may be reinforced and observed, that so those that are
notoriously scandalous, or grossly ignorant what their Godfathers and Godmothers
promised for them in Baptism, and which now with their own Mouth and Consent
they are openly before the Church to ratify and confirm, may not be admitted
to it.

It Is certainly no fault in our Constitution, but there is a great one in those
who do not act according to it that admit many who have as little understanding
of the Baptism^l Covenant when Hands are laid, as when Water was poured upon
them. And we could wish some of our Spiritual Fathers would show us by what
warrant these words are used in the Collect for that Service. -- On whom, after
the example of thy holy Apostles, we have now laid our hands, to certify them
by this sign of thy Favor, and Gracious Goodness toward them. And that they
may be diligently compared with our Churches Definition of a Sacrament.

We could wish those passages in the Burial of the Dead were reviewed, viz.
Forasmuch as it has pleased Almighty God, to take to himself the Soul of our
dear Brother here Departed, etc. We give thee hearty thanks for that it has
pleased thee to deliver this our Brother out of the miseries of this sinful
World. -- That we may rest in him (viz. Christ) as our hope is this our Brother
does. We do not enquire how the Clergy can read this over all Dead men that are
not either Excommunicated, Unbaptized, or have not laid violent hands on
themselves. Tho we could wish men that are so charitable to the dead, would be
so to the living too. But we too often accompany the Corpse of a drunken,
debaucht neighbor of ours; who lived all his days in the habitual practice of
many deadly sins, and gave no signs of Repentance that we could ever hear of;
it may be the fatal arrow struck through him while he was in the very act of
some foul sin. The Grave cannot strike a colder damp on our bodies, than the
thoughts of this does on our Devotions; and we can no more say Amen on such
occasions, than the dead man himself, on whose Funeral we attend. It Is true
indeed, we are told that these words do suppose the strict exercise of
Discipline. But as long as we see no such thing, it is an Hypothesis that gives
us no relief at all.

And seeing we are fallen on the Discipline of the Church, we do most humbly
and earnestly beseech our Spiritual Fathers and Guides, that they would at last
try their utmost for the setting of it up, that we may not be told from year to
year, as we are in our Ashwednesday Service, that there WAS anciently in the
Church a godly Discipline of putting notorious Sinners to open Penance, which
we only wish were restored, but confess it is not. And we think that which our
Church has set up in the room of it, deserves a little Consideration; viz. the
reading the general Sentences of God's Cursing against impenitent Sinners, out
of Deuteronomy. 27. and other places of Scripture, to which we are all required to
answer and say Amen.

Now suppose any man has a near relation that is unmerciful, a Fornicator, an
Adulterer, a Covetous person, an Idolater, Slanderer, Drunkard, for the Curse
is pronounced against all these: Or suppose our King should be guilty of any of
these crimes, as some of them were within the memory of man, we should be loath
to say Amen, or So be it, to such a Curse. We have often heard the men of the
Scotch Kirk reproached severely for the Excommunicating of Kings. A David may
take another man's Ewe-Lamb; and it would be well if a Nathan would bring him
to a sense of that horrible sin by a parable, and by a particular application
of a Thou art the man. But for every one of us of the Laity to pronounce an
Amen to a solemn Curse denounced against all such Offenders, and them among the
rest, tho in the self-same Service we style them our most Religious and
Gracious ones, and that in the Church too, don't look like that Reverence we
have been taught to bear toward Crowned Heads. True indeed, the Israelites
once did pronounce several of these Curses on Mount Ebal, with an Amen; but
this was by virtue of an express Command from God; and this might be suitable
enough to a Legal Spirit, to the rough and sour dispensation of the Law, but
not to the calm, kind, and peaceable Institution of the Gospel, which is soft
and gentle, as the wings of that Dove that lighted on the head of him who was
the Author of it.

Having considered the Liturgy, we proceed to take notice of those Rites and
Ceremonies of our Worship, which His Majesty has joined with it, and
concerning which, he says, That being things in their own nature indifferent,
and alterable, and so acknowledged, it is but reasonable, that upon weighty and
important Considerations, etc.

Now it being confessed on all hands, that they are things alterable and
indifferent in their own nature, we are all of us of the mind, that many
unanswerable Reasons may be urged for their utter removal, and their being
totally laid aside; such as are the dangers and hazards to which they have
already exposed our Church, the fatal Divisions, the unnatural and implacable
animosities they have occasioned, and continue to foment; the obligations that
we lie under from the Commands and Examples of Christ and his Apostles, to
yield in things of so small moment to the invincible scruples, and the earnest
importunities of our weaker Brethren, as well as many others that have been
alleged and enforced by many Learned Pens. We cannot tell how to excuse the
conduct of those persons, who, notwithstanding all the respect they owe to a
Gracious Prince, their Duties to God and their scrupulous Fellow Christians,
will evidently lay open both the Church and State to an unavoidable Ruin,
rather than depart from the Imposition and Use of such Rites, no more than we
could have justified St. John the Baptist, if he had fallen a Sacrifice to the
fury of Herod, merely because he would not administer Baptism without his
Raiment of Camel^ h^ir and his leathern Girdle. We cannot blame the Piety and
Wisdom of our first Reformers, who introduced and continued these, to avoid
throwing the Nation, that was then overrun with Superstition, into great and
deadly Convulsions: but since these reasons are now ceased, and very dismal
inconveniences do attend their present use, we do think it better to throw them
by, than retain them.

It was necessary, that when our Church first rose out of the Superstition,
Darkness and Idolatry, in which she had been so long buried, she should like
Lazarus have some of the Grave-cloaths about her; but if out of some odd Humor
she should resolve still to wear them, she would appear not only unlovely, but
ridiculous. But lest we should seem to push this matter too far, we shall only
say, That it is highly requisite that the use of them should be left
indifferent; that a strict Uniformity in these Rites is no longer necessary,
provided there be an Agreement in all the Essentials of her Doctrine and
Worship; and there are many Grounds that move us to insist on this; viz. that
they are but trivial things, and of no moment; that they neither add any real
Decency and Beauty to our Worship, nor render it more acceptable and pleasing
to God; besides, there are many Persons in our Communion, who are weary of
them; and many others who frequent our Churches, that do either despise or
smile at our rigorous insisting upon them; P. 20. 22.
for as the Letter concerning the Convocation well says, The number of those
who are addicted to them, is not very great; and the greatest part of the
Nation, are such as are not over-zealous, and fond of them, but might by the
Method we offer, be more firmly fixed to us. There is a Body of Men who are
still among us, and attend in our Churches, and at our Sacraments, who do think
our present Contests about these matters, to be much like that, which we about
London saw managed between the Ladies and the Mobile about Top-knots; the
Rabble designed to force them to lay them aside by Ballads, Pictures, and
insolent Jeers; but that S^x which uses to conquer by their Charms, got the
Victory now by Obstinacy and Resolution, and the poor Top-knots have outlived
their fury. While we saw no prejudices arise to the Nation, this afforded us a
pleasant diversion; but had the dispute run so high as to endanger an universal
Mutiny and Insurrection, we should have commended that Sex, if they had
prudently thrown them off, and quitted the Field.

We do therefore judge, That such things as these should no longer be imposed
as terms of our Communion, and such as will not submit to them may be esteemed
as genuine Sons of our Church, as those that do; that this is a Season wherein
these latter should be allowed as free an access to our Altars and Fonts as the
other; and that it is a condescension which we owe not only to our Blessed
Savior, and those weak Disciples which he has so tender a concern for but to
the Safety and Honor of our Church, as well as her present Constitution.

Of the Canons.
SInce the consideration of the greatest part of 'em will fall under the
following Heads in His Majesty's Commission, we shall confine these Remarks to
a few of 'em that cannot be so conveniently ranged under those Particulars.

The first Canon enjoins the maintaining the King's Supremacy over the Church
of England in Causes Ecclesiastical, Can. 1.


And as that Canon declares all Foreign Power (forasmuch as the same has no
establishment by the Law of God) to be justly taken away and abolished; so that
Doctrine should in all reason be disowned and censured, which so many Divines
of our Church have endeavored to def^nd and propagate in their public
Writings, viz. That the Church Universal ought to be governed by the Decrees of
General Councils; and during the interval of such Councils, the only way of
Concord is to obey the Governing Part of the Universal Church, viz. All the
Bishops in one Regent College, governing the whole Christian World, per literas
formatas. Especially when, on pretense of the easier Execution of these
Universal Laws, some of 'em have been so liberal to his Holiness, as to assign
that Province to him of Patriarch of the West, and the Center of Unity to this
part of the Catholic Church. And how much all the fierceness of Archbishops
Laud and Bramhall, Dr. Heylin, Bishops Morley, Gunning, and Sparrow, Dr.
Saywell, Mr. Dodwell, etc. against all Dissenters at home, and their strange
chilness to the Reformed Churches abroad, is owing to a miserable fondness for
this Notion, as the hopeful ground of a Reconciliation between the Church of
England and the French Church that has cast off the Papal Infallibility, it
were no difficult Task to show, and were worthy the Observation of any
Historian that would give a true Account of the continuance and increase of our
deplorable Divisions. And as we dislike this Notion the more when we consider
the purposes and designs for which it is calculated, so we have this Argument to
urge why it should be disowned, viz. Because it plainly sets up a Foreign
Jurisdiction, against which the Nation is solemnly sworn.

The second Canon excommunicates ipso facto all Impugners of the King's
Supremacy.

Against which we think there is nothing can be objected but the fault common
to it with the 10 following Canons, viz. Excommunicating ipso facto. -- Of
which more under these following Canons.

Can. 3. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Church of England by Law
established under the King's Majesty, is not a true and Apostolical Church,
teaching and maintaining the Doctrine of the Apostles; Let him be
excommunicated ipso facto, and not restored but only by the Archbishop, after
his Repentance, and public Revocation of such his wicked Error.

Can. 4. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Form of God's Worship in
the Church of England established by Law, and contained in the Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, is a corrupt, superstitious, or
unlawful Worship of God, or contains any thing in it repugnant to the
Scriptures; Let him be excommunicated ipso facto.

Can. 5. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That any of the 39 Articles agreed
upon by the Archbishops and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy, in
the Convocation holden at London 1562, etc. are in any part superstitious or
erroneous, or such as he may not with a good Conscience subscribe unto; Let him
be excommunicate ipso facto.

Can. 6. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Rites and Ceremonies of the
Church of England by Law established, are Wicked, Antichristian, or
Superstitious; or such as being commanded by lawful Authority, men who are
zealously and godly affected, may not with any good Conscience approve 'em, use
'em, or, as occasion requires, subscribe to 'em; Let him be excommunicate ipso
facto.

Can. 7. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Government of the Church of
England under His Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, and the
rest that bear Office in the same, is Antichristian, or repugnant to the Word
of God; Let him be excommunicate, etc.

Can. 8. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or teach, That the form and manner of
making and consecrating Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, contains any thing in it
repugnant to the Word of God; or that they who are made Bishops, etc. Let him
be excommunicate ipso facto.

Can. 9. Whosoever shall hereafter separate themselves from the Communion of
Saints, as it is approved by the Apostles Rules in the Church of England, and
combine themselves together in a new Brotherhood, etc. Let him be excommunicate
ipso facto.

Can. 10. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That such Ministers as refuse to
subscribe to the form and manner of God's Worship in the Church of England,
prescribed in the Communion-book, may truly take to 'em the Name of another
Church not established by Law, and dare presum^ to publish it, That this their
pretended Church has of long time groaned under the burden of certain
grievances imposed upon it, and upon the Members thereof before mentioned, by
the Church of England, and the Orders and Constitutions therein by Law
established; Let him be excommunicate ipso facto.

Can. 11. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm or maintain, That there are within
this Realm other Meetings, Assemblies, or Congregations, of the King's born
Subjects, than such as by the Laws of this Land are held and allowed, which may
rightly challenge to themselves the Name of true and lawful Churches; Let him
be excommunicate, etc.

Can. 12. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That it is lawful for any sort of
Ministers or Lay-persons, or either of them, to join together, and make Rules,
Orders, or Constitutions in Causes Ecclesiastical, without the King's
Authority, and shall submit themselves to be ruled and governed by them; Let
him be excommunicate ipso facto.

To these may be added,

Can. 139. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Sacred Synod of this
Nation, in the Name of Christ, and by the King's Authority assembled, is not
the true Church of England by representation,; Let him be excommunicate, etc.

Can. 140. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That no manner of person either of
the Clergy or Laity, not being themselves particularly assembled in the said
Sacred Synod, are to be subject to the Decrees thereof, in Causes
Ecclesiastical (made and ratified by the King's Majesty's Supreme Authority) as
not having given their voices to them; Let him be excommunicate, etc.

Can. 141. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, That the Sacred Synod assembled as
aforesaid, was a Company of such persons as did conspire together against godly
and religious Professors of the Gospel; and that therefore both They, and their
Proceedings in making of Canons and Constitutions in Causes Ecclesiastical, by
the King's Authority as aforesaid, ought to be despised and contemned, the same
being ratified by the same Regal Power; Let him be excommunicate, etc.

We have often heard our Clergy mention among many other Excellencies of our
Church, her admirable Charity toward those that differ from her; and we have
hitherto taken it for one of her just Characters. For tho those that dissent
from us, would frequently object the Severity of the Penal Laws, and the rigor
with which they have sometimes been Executed, as if such heavy Fines, and long
Imprisonments, looked but like a cold and frozen sort of Charity, yet we
thought it a sufficient Answer, That our Church did not Countenance any of
these Severities by her Doctrine. And therefore, how active soever some of our
fiery Zealots (who were the Tools of another Party) might be in urging the
Execution of them, this was their personal Fault, and nor justly imputable to
the Church her self. Tho, by the way, we cannot think it so ingenuous in some
of our Clergy, to throw all the blame of those severe Laws on the Parliament
that Enacted them, which many of themselves were but too earnest and
importunate Sollicitors of. But we are extremely surprised to read the
foregoing Canons, and when we hear them objected as an Evidence of the
Uncharitableness of our Doctrine it self; We are at a great loss, what to say
in defense of it; for we plainly perceive by them, that the Practice of our
most violent Bigots in the Execution of the Penal Laws, has been as much more
Charitable than these Canons of our Church; as it is more merciful to send the
Bodies of Men into the Custody of the Jailor, than to consign their Souls into
the Paws of the Devil. Nay, it is well that Writs de Excom. Cap. have not been
issued out against all whom these Canons Excommunicate. For if they had, the
whole Race of Dissenters had long since been both the Jaylors and the Devils
Prisoners; and we are very much afraid, a great part of our own Clergy and
Laity must have born them Company. So that we can foresee no better Apology for
the Convocation that framed these Canons, than this, That they seem only to
have designed them for the old rusty Armor of our Church, to be hung up for
Terror, rather than to be used for Execution. For it cannot be denied, that how
little Charity soever those had that made them; our Bishops have generally
since had more Christian Tenderness, than to Prosecute all in their Courts,
whom these Canons make so heinous Criminals. And therefore, were we of the
Laity worthy to offer our humble Advice to the present Convocation, we should
recommend it to them, as a pi^ce of necessary Prudence, as well as Charity, to
Cashier these ill-natured Canons: For they do but frighten the silly Dissenters
the more from our Communion, and are a standing R^proach to our Church her self
on these two Accounts.

1. Were the Assertions here censur^d, never so dangerous Heresies, an ipso
facto Excommunication is an unreasonable thing

It Is no better than passing Sentence on an Offender, before any Attempts are
used to reclaim him, which is a gross Absurdity in Ecclesiastical ^auses, wh^re
it is not the bare Offense subjects Men to that Censure of the Church, but
Obstinacy in it. For these Canons, quite contrary to our Savior and his
Apostles Rule, make a Heathen, and a Publican of our Brother, before he is ever
told of his fault; they reject him before he be admonished. Whereas Divine
Justice it self does not subject Men to the Sentence of Condemnation, merely
for their Sins themselves, but for their Impenitency in them. And sure the
Church should not use greater Severity; and therefore should not in those
C^nsures (which Tertullian calls Summum futuri judicii praejudicium) exclude
Men from her Communion, ipso facto, upon their having run into Errors or
Crimes* but upon their persisting incorrigibly in them. And what Lindwood
observes concerning such Canons as these, does not wholly excuse them; nam^ly,
That a d^claratory Sentence of the Judge is necessary, notwithstanding the
ipso-facto- Excommunication, to a Man's being avoided, as an Excommunicate
Person by others. For all that this can amount to, is no more than to say, That
tho a Man's Mittimus to the Devil is drawn up by these Canons, yet his
Neighbors are not to take notice of it, till it be published; but for all
that, the Man is truly Excommunicated, and that without any other precedent
Admonition, than what the Canons themselves give him, which few of us ever read
or see; No personal Admonition being used to prevent his Excommunication, but
only to restore him by Absolution. And if these Canons be just, all whom they
Excommunicate, are bound in Conscience to forbear the Churches Communion; and
therefore we cannot in consistency with our selves, invite the Dissenters into
it, unless we could either change their Minds, or at least put Gags into their
Mouths. But were this all the Fault of these Canons, the matter were more
tolerable. But

2. The Assertions themselves mentioned in the Canons can by no means des^rve
so heavy a Censure.

For as Excommunication is the highest Censure of the Church (which according
to the Form used in our own, excludes the Person excommunicated from all
Christian Society, and cuts him off as a dead Member from the Body of Christ)
so it should never be used against any but those who are guilty of such
pernicious Errors, or heinous Crimes, as give all imaginable ground to believe
them in a state of damnation. Such as those mentioned 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5
19, 20. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, etc. For otherwis^ we might shut those out of our
Communion, whom our bl^ssed Savior receives into his; and dangerously cut off
the living instead of the dead Members of his Mysti^al Body. Besides, Nothing
will sooner bring that sacred part of the Church's Discipline into contempt,
than the using it ^n slight and frivolous Occasions; as we shall further show
afterward, when we come to speak of Ecclesiastical Courts. Sess. 25. Decr. de
Reform. cap. 3.
'Twas a grave and wise Caution of the Council of Trent, though they had not
the grace to follow it themselves, That though the Sword of Excommunication be
the very sinews of Ecclesiastical Discipline, and very wholesome to keep the
People in obedience, yet it should be warily used* lest if it be drawn out
rashly on every slight cause, the People should rather despise than dread it.
For if Clergymen will so far trifle with those solemn Censures, as to thunder
out Excommunications against all that keep Easter the wrong day, or maintain
Antipodes, or wear Beards of a wrong cut, etc. as some Wise and Learned Popes
have formerly done; It Is no wonder if Men come to look upon them as
Ecclesiastical Scarecrows; and provided they can escape the Jailer, set the
Bishop at defiance. And though the Assertions censured in these Canons be not
altogether such Trifles, yet they are some of them things too dubious to Men o^
mean Capacities, that have a fatal biass of an unhappy Education clapped on their
Understandings; and of too small consequence to bear the weight of so heavy a
doom. For what tho the Dissenters should arraign the Offic of Burial read over
the Graves of all the notorious Villains that have the good fortune to escape,
or buy off an Excommunication; or censure the use of our God-fa^^ers as
exclusive of the Parents public undertaking for the religious Education of his
own Child? What though they foolishly mistake the Sign of the Cross for a New
Sacrament; what tho they dispute against that Passage in the Book of
Ordination, that asserts the divine right of three distinct Offices, Bishops,
Priests and Deacons? What tho they be more peevish and untoward, and censure
the very Office of our Bishops, as they are by the late Alterations in the Book
of Ordination, made the sole Pastors of all the Churches in their several
Dioceses. Nay, what though they affirm their own Congregations to be true and
lawful Churches: shall we on the score of their declaring their mistaken
Opinion in any one of these disputable matters, treat them as if they had
denied all the Articles of the Apostle's Creed, or broken all the Ten
Commandments? Nor are the Dissenters the only Persons concerned in these
Canons. There are few of our Latitudinarian Clergy (as some are pleased to call
all that have not as narrow Souls as their own) but will freely in their
Discourses censure some things in the Government of our Church, particularly
the Lay-chancellors Power of decreeing Excommunications. And all these must
expect no quarter from the 7th Canon. So that these Canons will quickly
retrench the corpulency of our Church, and reduce it to the small number of
Bigots, who it seems are not so ridiculous as they seemed to be, in
monopolizing the Character of her True Sons to thems^lve^. And yet even of the
Bigots there are so many that frequently arraign some of our Articles in the
Pulpit it self (particularly the 17th, about the Doctrine of Election) that we
see not how they will escape the 5th Canon. And if we were not afraid of being
sent to the Devil for company, by virtue of the 139. Can. we would make bold to
question the Convocations being the Church of England by Representation. See
the Pref.
It Is strange how they should Represent us of the Laity, who never Chose or
Deputed 'em. It Is much stranger how they should Represent the K. and
Parliament; (who I hope are a very Exc^llent part of our Church) for if they
do, we see not what occasion there can be to interpose their Authority anew to
give force to their Canons. They can at the most, only Represent the Clergy of
our Church, and are indeed no more than the King's and ^^rliament's
Ecclesiastical Council, to advi^e 'em what Laws relating to the Church, they
shall enact by their Authority circa Sacra. For all their Canons would never
bind one Consciences as the Laws of the Church, if the Civil Authority made 'em
not the Laws of the Land. To sum up this Head; Why should we think our
Convocation so infallible, and the Constitutions of our Church so absolut^ly
perfect, that a man cannot find the least fault with any one of them under a
less penalty, than being cut off as a dead member from the Body of Christ? This
is as inexcus^ble a rigor, as if our Parliament should make it no less than
Banishment for any Subject to dispute the Equity of the least Clause in the
whole Book of Statutes: So that if the Convocation think fit to keep up these
Canons still, it were very great Charity to clap Padlocks on the Tongues of the
People, to prevent their running into the Devils Clutches, by prating too
freely against the Orders of our Church. And perhaps it was the sagacious
foresight of such Complaints as these, made that wise Conv^c^tion by way of
prevention, excommunicate among the rest* all that should affirm 'em to be, A
Company of m^n that conspired against godly and religious Professors of the
G^spel; or assert, That their Canons should be despised or rejected: Only they
were careful to twist in the Kings Authority with their own, that he who
slighted the Convocation, might be thought to trample on the Crown.

Of Corruptions in the Ecclesiastical Courts.
AND here we do most humbly desire that the Reverend Guides of our Church will
patiently hear us; and especially those of that Venerable and truly Apostolical
Order; and if any expressions should drop from us that may seem inconsistent
with that filial duty we owe to 'em, we desire it may be imputed to our great
zeal for 'em; and we shall as submissively fall on our Knees to beg their
Pardon, as we would do on any other occasion to implore their Blessing. Many of
the old Corruptions (says one of our Reverend Fathers in God) do yet remain
among us in practice, Dr. Barnet's Thanksg. Ser. before the H. of Commons, Jan
31. p. 33
and the administration of the Ecclesiastical Authority is liable to great
Obj^ctions. I will not run out in farther particulars, for it will be easy to
find them; and if you once set ab^ut it, you will soon see wh^t work is before
you.

We shall confine our Discourse chiefly to the high and dreadful Sentence of
Excommu^ication, for so it is in its self, and was always so esteem^d by devout
Souls, till the great and scandalous Abuses and Corruptions of it in these
latter days has made it contemptible to that degree, that sinners do no more
value (...), than men do the threatening predictions of a common Almana^k maker
concerning Thunder and Lightning. We have many things here to offer, under
these following Heads.

1. The Persons that manage it. 2. The Causes for which it is inflicted. 3. The
manner of proceeding in our Ecclesiastical Courts. 4. The things that ensue on
the sentence of Excommunication.
1. The Persons that manage it. And into whose hands would a man rationally
expect the Keys should be put, but theirs to whom Christ and his Apostles have
given them, and where the Primitive Church left them? Who should judge Spiritual
Matters, but Spiritual Men? Who should correct the children, but their Fathers;
and discipline Souls, but they that have the Care of them, and watch over them,
as those that must give an account? They that so justly claim the Power of
Ordination, why should they not have that of Excommunication; and deliver up to
Satan, as well as give the Holy Ghost? What is it that can reasonably be
supposed to hinder our Reverend Bi^hops from minding so great and necessary a
part of their Off^ce? Is it their great diligence in Preaching? It Is true, this
^ur Church does strictly tie them unto. The 1 Timothy 3. apt to teach.
Epi^^le, or that Acts 20 17. -- have taught you publicly, and from house to
house; take heed therefore to your s^lves, and to all the stock over which the
H. Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the church of God, etc.
which is appointed for it, and the St. John 21. J^s^^ ^^ith to Peter, love
thou me more than these? -- Fe^d my lambs. -- Feed my s^^^^ etc. M^^. 28.18. Go
and tea^h all naon^, etc.
Gospel read at their Consecration, puts them in ^ind of it: Nay they formally
promise it: For these are Two of the Questions propounded to them (...) the
Archbishop. -- See the form of the Consecration of Bis^^ps.
Are you determined out of ^^e Holy Scriptures, to instruct the people
^ommitted to your ^harge? -- Will you then faithfully ex^rcise your self (...)
the same Holy Scriptures, and call upon God by Pray^ for the true understanding
^f the same, so as ye may be ^ble by them to teach and exhort by whol^some
Doctrine, ^d to withstand and convince the gainsayers? To which ^^e Bishop
answers, See to ^he same ^ur^^se, the Collect immediately following V^ni
creator spiritus; and the (...) of the ^^ch-Bishop to the Bishop, when he
delivers him the Bible; and the first of the three (...) Prayers said for the
last Collect immediately before the Benediction.
I am so determined by Gods ^^^ce: and, I will so do by the h^lp of God. And
the ^ractice of some of our Reverend Fathers, does convincingly show they are
no strangers to Gods grace or help, See the first Collect in the Consecration
of Bishops. See the Collect in the Consecrat. said next after the Litany. See
the Collect after Veni Creator.
in this particular. But will diligence in one duty, excuse the neglect of
another? Does not our Church pray Almighty God to give to all Bishops the
Past^rs of his Church, that they may duly administer godly Discipline, as well
as diligently preach the Word? and, That they may faithfully serve Almighty God
in this Office, to the glory of his name, and the edifying and well-governing
of his Church. And further, That they may be not only evermore ready to spread
abroad the Gospel, but also use the Authority given them, not to destruction,
but to salvation?

And does not the Bishop solemnly promise to correct and punish according to
such Authority as he has by Gods Word, as well as to such as shall be
committed to him by the Ordinance of this Realm? And the Archbishop charges
him, when he delivers him the Bible, not only to take heed to Doctrine, but how
he ministers Discipline too.

We cannot think, after all this, that they do voluntarily neglect so essential
a Branch of their Episcopal Office, as Governing the Church. Ruling and
Discipline is their Duty according to Gods Word; and if any Ordinance of this
Realm hinder them from the discharge of a Duty Gods Word has laid on them, we
think, if they should patiently bear it, they would give but a sad Account in
that day, when the Great Bishop shall appear, when Pulton's or Keeble's
Statutes are none of those Books that shall then be opened.

We are sure, that this Work is a thing of the highest Trust and Authority, and
wherein the greatest skill and tenderness is requisite; and therefore we think
it should be p^rsonally discharged, and cannot lawfully be deputed to another.
For, as the Lord Bacon has observed, we s^^ ^n all Laws in the world, Offices
of Confidence and Skill cannot be put (...), or exercised by Deputy, exce^t it
be especially contained in the Original Grant; Considerat. for the better
Establish of the Chapter of Engl. p. 10.
never did any Chancellor of England, or Judge in any Court, make a Deputy. --
Surely ab initio non fuit ita; but it is probable that Bishops, when they gave
themselves too much to the Glory of the World, and became Grandees in Ki^gdoms,
and Great Counselors to Princes, th^n did they deleagu^ their prop^r
Jurisdiction, as things of too inferior a Nature for their Greatness, and then
after the Similitude and Imitation of Kings and Counts Palatine, they would
have their Chancellors and Judges.

His Life, p 92.
It Is, says Bishop Bedel in his D^fence, one of the most essential parts of a
Bishop's Duty, to govern his Flock, and (...) i^flict the Spiritual Censures on
obstinate Offenders. A Bishop can no more delegate this Power to a Layman,
than he can delegate a Power to Baptize or Ordain, since Excommunication and
other Censures are a suspendi^g the Rights of Baptism and Orders; and therefore
the judging of these things can belong only to him that had the Power to give
them; and the delegating that Power is a thing null of it s^l^ It was ever
looked on as a necessary part of the Bishop's Duty ^o Ex^mine and Censure the
Scandals of his Clergy a^^ ^aity, in Ancient and Modern Times. And much more
may b^ found to the same purpose in hi^ Life.

But if this Sacr d Work must be put off to others, P. 93.
were it committed to the hands of any of our Clergy, though never so mean, we
could bear it, out of that profound Reverence we have for th^i^ Gown and
Character, as we d'off our Hats in a mean Countrey-Church, that looks little
better than a Pigeon-house, as w^ll as in a Cathedral, for the sake of that GOD
to whom the One is Consecrated as well as the other. But we have hardly any
patience left us, when we consider, That the Clergy both Superior and
Inferior, stand for Ciphers, and the whole Power of Excommunication is lodged
in Laymens hands; for such are their Chancellors, Officials, Commiss^^ies,
etc. It Is a greater piece of Sacrilege for these Thieves to steal and run away
with the Keys of the Church, than for any to carry off the Communion-Plate;
Godly Discipline being a much richer Treasure than a Golden Chalic^. We justly
deride the Presbyteri^ns, for their compound Assemblies, where the Minister and
the Lay-Elder sit Cheek by Joul, intermingled, like a Man and a Woman at a
Dutch Feast: But that H^tch-potch-Miscellany is more tolerable than this
Constitution of Ours, whereby the whole Clergy being excluded, the
Lay-Chancellor alone sits to remit sins, or retain them, Men that we are sure
have no Commission from the Blessed Jesus, or his Holy Apostles, and have no
Power to deliver any Souls up to Satan, unless it be their own. It Is true
indeed, They have a Patent for it, and that sometimes given to gratify a
Friend, sometimes perhaps purchas^d with a round Sum of Money, whereby the
present Bishops pass away this their Power from Themselves and their Successors
too, and so they are rendered incapable of correcting their Extravagancies and
Corruptions, even though they are committed in their Names, and by virtue of an
Authority derived from them; whereupon our Reverend Fathers bear the blame, and
these Varlets reap the advantage of their unjust Proceedings. Nay, to that
degree of insolence do they proceed, as sometimes to hector them if they offer
but to interpose to stop or to rectify any of their Illegal and Oppressive
Acts. Of this we have an instance given us by the Author of the Naked Truth; I
don't mean the blustering Hickeringill, but, as is commonly beli^ved, P. 64.
a grave and excellent Prelate of our Church. I remember (says he) when the
Bishop of Wells hearing of a Cause corruptly managed, and coming into the Court
to rectify it, the Chancellor, Dr. Duke, fairly and mannerly bid him be gone,
for he had no Power there to act any thing; and therewithal pulls out his
Patent, sealed by the Bishop's Pred^cessor, which, like Perseus's Shield with
the Gorgon's Head, frighted the poor Bishop out of the Court.

Bishop Bedel's Life by Doctor Burnet, p. 88, 89.
Another remarkable Story of this nature we have in the Life of Bishop Bedel: He
saw, and his Soul was grieved at, the barefaced Extortions, and Briberies, and
Commutations of Penance, and Vexatious Suits, etc. in the Chancellor, that had
bought his Place from his Predecessor; and the prostitution of Excommunications
in a sordid and base manner. To correct these abuses, he goes, and with a
competent number of his Clergy sits and hears Causes, and gives Sentence. But
his Lay-Chancellor brought a Suit against him in Chancery for invading his
Office; and tho the other Bishops stood by him, saying, They were but half
Bishops, till they recovered their Authority out of the hands of their
Chancellors; and though his Chancellor's Patent were a formless Chaos of
Authority conferred on him against all reason and equity, wherein was false
Latin, nons^nse, injustice, prejudice to the Chapter, contrariety to it self
and the King's Grant to the Bishop, P. 102.
and the Seal hanging to it none of the Bishop his Predecessor's Seal; yet the
Chancellor's Right was confirmed; and there was given him an Hundred Pound
costs of the Bishop; and great endeavors were used to possess Archbishop Usher
himself against him, which went so far as to procure an Inhibi^ion and Citation
against him out of his Court. P. 97.
All his Brethren forsook him, even the Primate himself, though the las^ that
did so; yet at length Almighty God so remarkably prosper'd the zeal of this
holy Man, that he was connived at, and held on undisturbed i^ personally
attending his Episcopal Court; God give to our English B^^hops the like Courage
and Success.

Thus the Rooks give check to the King, and the Lay-chancellor in the Court
proves too hard for the Bishop, as the Devil in the Sign of a Tavern does for
the Saint, Dunstan we mean.

But as though this were not enough, matters are yet a great deal worse. For
not only does an Appeal lie to the C^urt of Delegates, of which we shall say
nothing, because it is his Majesty's; But there is also the Archbishops Court of
Chamber^ain's Present State of England, part 2. p. 33.
Arches, where any Ecclesiastical Suits between any Persons within the Province
of Canterbury, except some peculiar Consets Practice of Eccl Courts.
Jurisdictions belonging to the King'^ Majesty, may, waving all Inferior
Courts, be decided. The Official may take cognizance of all Ecclesiastical
Causes whatsoever, not only at the instance of Parties, but also of his mere
Office, or when they are promoted; as also all manner of Appeals (except as
before excepted) from any Bishops, Deans and Chapters, etc. Archdeacons, their
Officia^s and Commissaries, or other Ecclesiastical Judges whatsoever; as also
all Commissaries of the Archbishop of Canterbury, whether particular or
special, within all or any Diocese of his Province.

This Court is kept in the Archbishop's name by his Official, who is the Judge
of it, called also Dean of the Arches, a perf^ct Layman, usually a Knight, and
Doctor of Laws. But he being for the most part absent, substitutes a Surrogate
in his place (who is the Archbishop's Man's man) viz. the Dean of the Deanery of
the Arches.

And there does this Judge Perkin sit in state, Chamberlain's Pres. ^^^te of
England, part 2. page 273.
and according to the old Mumpsimus of the Pope's Canon Law alone, without any
Assessors, hears and determins all Causes, without any Jury of 12 men, as is
necessary in Common Law-Courts; and presumes to sentence not only us Laymen,
but the Clergymen also, and even Bishops themselves, for any Delinquency.

And as the Official treats our Superio^s in the Arches, so does the
Lay-chancellor handle us, and the Inferior Clergy in the Bishop's Court, held
in the Cathedral of his Diocese. Only when any do not appear, being legally
cited, and propounded contumacious, and decreed excommunicate, then the
Plaintiff's Proctor offers a Schedule of Excommunication to the Judge, H.
Conset. Prac^ice of the Spirit^ C^ (...)
who reads it if he be in h^ly Orders (for you must know a special care must be
taken of that) and if not, then it is given to one who is in Holy Orders, who
is constituted to this purpose by the Judge. Good God! says the forementioned
Author of Naked Truth, (...)
what a horrid abuse is this of the Divine Authority! This notorious Trans^r
^^^^n is excused, as they think by this, that a Minister called the Bishop's
Surrogate* but is indeed the Chancellor's Servant, chosen, called and placed
there (...) him to be his Crier in the Court, (no better) when he has
examined, heard, and s^nt ne'd the Cause, then the Minister, forsooth,
pronounces the sentence. Then the Judges Seal being clapped to them, away the
Letters of Excommunication are posted to the Rector, Vicar, or Curate of the
Parish, with Orders to publish the same in time of Divine Service on some
Sunday, or Holy Day; always provided these Letters of Excommunication be
delivered to the Rector, etc. at least that same day on which they are to ^e
read before Morning or Evening Prayers, that they may be sure to have timely
notice of it, says our H. Conset. Practice of Eccl. Courts, p. 38.
Author; which they are to publish without delay, unless they are willing to
undergo the Fate of the Miller's Man, who was hanged for his Master: for if
they neglect so to do, they are to be punished by Suspension from their Office.
For unless at his own peril, the Parish Minister must no more examine the
equity and justice of the Sentence, than a Hangman dares, but must do his
Office, though to the best liver in his Parish, be the Cause what it will, how
unjust soever the Sentence is, or how illegally soever obtained. He must give
fire when the word of Command is given; though he, good man! know nothing of
the matter, yet denounce the Ecommunication he must, and give the rest of the
People warning, that they avoid the company of such a one; just as the two
nimble Iron Sparks on the outside of St. Dunstan's Church, when moved by the
Wires within, briskly turn about, and give a Thump on the Bell, that all may
know what quarter of the hour it is.

2. But to proceed from Persons to things. This we suppose no sober man will
deny, that Excommunication being a punishment of an immediate Divine Original,
men should have a Divine Warrant in what cases to inflict it. And being so
severe a Punishment, no less than cutting off from the Body of Christ, and
shutting out of the Kingdom of Heaven, as well as the Society of Christians on
Earth, it should not be inflicted but for those black Crimes, and deadly Sins,
and those obstinately persisted in too, for which the Holy Jesus has declared,
that men do deserve that amputation and exclusion from Heaven, that so what is
bound here below, may be bound above. And this being the Church's expulsive
faculty for the casting out of noxious Hum^rs, her weapon for the cutting off
rotten and scandalous Members, should be used to that end only, as we find in
the New Testament, and many Centuries after it was, in the case of Heresy or
detestable Enormities, accompanied with Contumacy. Now such Sinners swarm among
us; we have such crowds of Adulterers, Drunkards, Swearers, Blasphemers, etc.
that some of the Sons of our Church say, by way of excuse for the neglect of
Discipline, it would not be prudent, or safe, to attack them. How few of these
do our Ecclesiastical Courts take notice of? In David's time the Sparrows were
allowed a place near God's Altar; in our days whole herds of Swine have the
same privilege, and no one will, or dare to drive them out. But if a man trip
in a Ceremony, if an honest, but simple Dissenter, will not come to the
Sacrament, because though weakly, yet it may be conscienciously, he scruples
Kneeling, or will not trhough obstinacy pray the Parson his Dues, or if the
Governors of the State have a Political Design to carry on, out comes the
sacred two-edged Sword immediately, and they are cut off by dozens. We might
refer the Reader to Dr. Pinfold as to this Point, who a very few years ago
sweetly feathered his Nest by this means, as those barbarous Wretches in some
places that live by the Seaside, rejoice at the sight of a Storm, and enrich
themselves with the Wrecks of those that are unfortunately cast away. We our
selves have known a Minister of our Church suspended for not burying a Corpse
in his Surplice, when the Surrogate bid him do it at the Grave: and a
well-meaning, but stubborn Fanatic, sent to the Devil as an Easter Offering,
because he would not give his Parson one of two pence halfpenny, and the
obstinate fool lay by it on a Capias in the Jayl f^r several years.

But it were well, if the Ecclesiastical Courts did let fly only on these
Occasions. For the neglect of a Religious Ceremony, may by some be called a
mortal Sin, and not paying the Ministers dues, is a Fundamental Point, and a
piece of Sacrilege.

But the M^tter does not stop here. The Spiritu^l Courts have got to themselves
the Cognizance of a multitude of Temporal Causes, viz. all Testamentary
Matters, See Cosins Apology, p. 18, 19.
Matrimonial Causes* (and these are numerous, for the Subject is Fruitful)
Jactitation of Matrimony, Divorces, Bastardy, etc. Defamations, Violence to a
Clergyman, Rights of Patron^ge, Double Quereles, Wages for a Curate or Clerk,
Interest and Title to a Benefice, Maintenance in it, such as Tithes of all
kinds, Oblations, Obventions, Pensions, Mortuaries, Churchyard, etc. The Dues
of a Parishioner to the Church, as to Reparations, Seats, Bells, buying of
Books, Utensils, or other Orn^ments. Not building a Church enjoined by a
Testator, not keeping a Church in a comely sort; or when a Churchwarden
refuses to yi^ld an Account of the Church-Stock, violating a Sequestration for
Tithes not paid, hindering to gather or carry Tithes, Money promised for
redeeming corporal Penance, and detained; Fighting or Brawling in a
Churchyard, (I suppose, least the Dead should be disturbed, and hindered of
their rest). And then all Duties arising at first, on the Exercise of Voluntary
Jurisdiction, and yet by denial made Litigious; such be real Compositions
sought by some Party to be Disannulled, Procurations, Pensions, Synodals,
Pentecostals, Indempnities, Fees for Probates, etc. Or (which they to be sure
will not forget, and therefore neither will we) Fees growing due, only upon
Exercise of Litigious Jurisdiction, and these either due to the Judge himself,
as Fees of Citation, Fees of Sentences, etc. or due to other Attendants in the
Court, as Fees of Advocates, Proctors, Registers, Apparitors, etc. Lord! what a
blessed Regiment of Causes is here, like that of the Black-guard, for Spiritual
Courts! Well, but tho most of these one would think were Civil Causes, and fit
therefore for Civil Courts; yet let them come before the Spiritual Ones, if
they please, as long as a Layman is the Judge of them. All that we stand on, is
this, they Summon People to Answer in all these Cases, and make Decrees; and if
any one do not Appear, or do not Obey their Decrees, or not Answer their
Interrogatories, they are judged Contumacious to the Church, and then there is
Death in the Pot, and they have no other way to Punish, but by Excommunication.
So that an honest Man is frequently Smitten with the Churches Thunder, for
matters of mere civil Right, or trivial Occasions, or it may be through the
Tricks and Quirks of inferior Officers, or sometimes through the Ignorance of a
blundering Surrogate, for the sake of a little Money. Let us hear my Lord
Bacon's Opinion of this Matter. Excommunication is the greatest Judgment on
Earth, Considerat. for the better Establish of the Chapter of Engl.
etc. and therefore, for this to be used Irreverently, and to be made an
ordinary Proc^ss to Lacquey up and down for Fees, how can it be without
Derogation from Gods Honor, and making the Power of the Keys contemptible? I
know very well the d^fence thereof, which has no great force, That it issues
forth not for the thing it self, but the C^ntumacy. -- But the Contumacy must
be such as the Party, as far as the Eye and Wisdom of the Church can discern,
stands in st^t^ of Reprobation and Damnation, as one that for that time
seems given over to final Impenitence.

To this I think we may add their device of excommunicating whole Communities
of Men, as a Dean and Chapter, or a Master Fellows and Scholars of a College,
the Mayor and Aldermen of a Town, etc. Hereby they have in some measure that
Emperor's Wish, that the People had but one Neck, that he might chop it off at
one blow. By this Interdict are prohibited all Divine Offices, Chamberlain's
Present State of England, part 2. p. 39.
as Divine Service, Christian Burial, Administration of Sacraments, etc. in
such a Place or to such a People; and if it be against a People, it follows
them wheresoever they go; if against a Place only, then the People of that
Place may go to Divine Offices elsewhere. Only the Pope's Canon Law adds,
Decret. Greg. l. 5. Tit. 40. de Verb. signif. c. 17.
That some who are in a special manner privileged by the Roman Church, when a
whole Country is interdicted, may celebrate Divine Offices with a low Voice,
but then the Doors must be shut, the Bells must not be rung, and all the
excommunicated and interdicted Persons must be excluded.

By this Contrivance whole Communities of Men may be broken off from the Body
of Christ, as whole Countries have been, and some say Britain in particular,
from the Continent by the Fury and Violence of the Ocean. But it will be hard
to reconcile this to the common notion of Excommunication, Lord Bacon co^sid.
p. 21.
that it is a precursory and prelusory Judgment of Christ in the End of the
World; when we have been so often told from the Pulpit and Press, that then
Societies shall not be punished as Societies, but every Man shall personally
answer for himself.

3. We pass on to the manner of proceeding in Excommunications, which we shall
find exactly suitable to the Causes for which they are inflicted, and the Tools
that manage this Weapon. For here is no pains taken with Men to bring them to
Repentance by Scripture and Reason, convincing them of the heinous nature of
their Offenses, and beseeching of them in the Bowels of Christ. Only a bare
pronouncing the words, I admonish you, three times in a breath; like the Jews
whipping St. Paul with a triple Cord, and giving three Lashes in one. We had
thought this had been a mere Corruption in the Officers; but we find one of
their own Tribe tell us for Law, That a Man may be admonished, a first, H.
Cons^t. Practice of Ecclesiastical Courts, p. 383, 4.
a second and a third time, all at one and the same moment. Things are managed
at these Spiritual Tribunals, just as they are at Civil ones; If you will not
buckle, there is no other means used to induce you to it, but the Charges of the
Court, the Trouble of dancing Attendance on it; and by and by out comes the
two-handled Rod and Blood-Pail to fright the stubborn Children into Obedience.

And these Fees of the Court sometimes are very terrible things, and touch a
Man to the quick. As the Reckoning is enflamed by a roguish Vintner, when his
Guests are so with liberal drinking, by scoring up two Bottles for one at the
Bar; so they know how to take the advantage of the Ignorance of those they have
got into their Clutches, and top upon them double the Rates of what is by Law
allowed. I find one of themselves confessing this in sundry Instances in the
Courts of the Archbishop of York, as to Testamentary Matters, and
acknowledging the same in general as to other Fees, for Copies of Acts,
Depositions of Witnesses, Fees to Apparitors, H. Conset. Practice of
Ecclesiastical Courts, p. 422, 3.
etc. Take one Instance: To a Judge for an Administration, where the Estate is
above 40 l. 7. s. 6 d. which advance from 2 s. and 6 d. (for that was the old
Price according to the Table allowed of in 13 Eliz.) 'was, as I have heard,
says he, in compassion to one of the Commissioners of the late Archbishop's,
his necessitous Condition, agreed by all the Proctors, and other Officers to be
imposed on the Country. Whether this Commissary be dead or no I know not, but
till the Year 1685. this way of raising Money on the Country, without Act of
Parliament, did continue in this, and in many other Instances there enumerated
by him, and I suppose does so still: By the same reason that the French King
imposes Taxes on his Slaves, because he had Authority given him once to do it
in Cases of Necessity, while the Kingdom was in a Flame. And tho he had a Law
to do so for the present, which these Harpies never had, yet the forementioned
Author gives a substantial Reason for the thing that may supply the place of
it: For, Id. ibid.
says he, speaking of the Registers, the Reason of Augmentation to them, is,
because they pay great Fines to the Archbishops for their Places, (and he that
buys the Devil, must sell him) and do again let them for Term of Years to
Deputies for great Fines, which Deputies have no way to raise their Moneys but
by this manner of advance or exaction upon the Country. Now I think the same
Argument is altogether as strong for the Surrogate, who is the Chancellor's
Deputy; for Chancellors and Officials have learnt the Art of making their
Places Sine-Cures, committing them to the management of those Journy-men who
are many times wretchedly ignorant, and so are often imposed on by the
inferior Officers, by whose direction all Matters are dispatched, (as the
Clerk manages the Justice) and they to be sure will turn the Water into such a
Channel, that it may most effectually drive their own Mills.

But supposing none of these Blunders or Knaveries be committed, let us a little
examine the regular and ordinary Proceedings. And in order thereunto, we must
consider there are two sorts of Causes, Plenary, i. e. such as require a solemn
Order and Method; and Summary, where that being waved, a Proceeding by a
shorter Cut will serve the turn. Now what Causes in particular fall under each
of these Heads, is kept very dubious for a very profitable Reason, Conset. p.
22, 3.
viz. this, Tho the Cause be summary, yet you may proceed plenarily, and it is
the more valid, and the Officers of the Court can the better lick their
Fingers. But if the Cause should be judged to be a plenary one, and you should
proceed summarily, then all the Proceedings are immediately null, you lose your
Charges, and the Proctor gets; and the Pidgeon-House of Cards being pulled
down, the Child must begin all again.

Now in plenary Causes out goes a Citation either general or special, obtained
by the Plaintiff, his Solicitor or Proctor, drawn by the Proctor, Solicitor
or Apparitor, in writing, and sealed by the Judge. Then the Mandatory, or the
Plaintiff, certifies the manner in which the Defendant was cited, that so the
Plaintiff's Proctor may draw an Authentical Certificate thereupon, to which an
Authentic Seal is put, at the special instigation and request of the Mandatory.

Then you must have a Proctor, either general or special, to manage the Cause.
For no Citation, tho executed, can be brought into Court but by him; he must be
constituted by a Proxy, i. e. by a Power or Mandate given to the Proctor by his
Client to appear and transact for him, or before a Notary public with
Witnesses, and this authentically sealed too: And the Election of your Proctor
must be inserted in the Acts of the Court; if he die after the Suit is
contested, the Mandate is absolutely revoked. Then supposing they have not got
you on the hip for some Error as yet, however there be abundance of Blots yet
to be hit. Many Exceptions may be brought in, peremptory ones, either simply
such, or defensive; or dilatory ones, and these are twofold, Dilatoria
Solutionis, where perhaps the Party alleges the payment or satisfaction of
what is sued for; and Declinatoria Judicii, for declining the Cause, either by
excepting against the Judge by Recusation, Provocation, etc. or by reason of the
Plaintiff, or the Arbitrators, or Proctor, Advocate, Libel, Witnesses,
Interrogatories, Public Instruments, Positions, Sentence, etc. Besides these,
there are two Squadrons more of Exceptions, Mediae, or mixed Ones; and Anomalae,
or irregular Ones; each of which have their proper Seasons of being urged. And
these must be drawn in writing, and some Body must pay for all this. For it is
Money makes these Beasts to go, without which they will not stir a soot.

What we have hitherto spoken of, is common to all Causes, whether Plenary or
Summary. What we shall further add (and there is much behind) agrees in its
whole Latitude to the former sort of them. Suppose then that hitherto we be
clear of all Rocks; then comes the Libel, but it must be subscribed by an
Advocate, and possibly you may wait a little for it, till next Court-day. This
being at last given into Court, it often happens that it must be amended or
altered, in many Cases too tedious to reckon up. And you cannot have any thing
done to an old pair of Clothes, but you shall find an Item for it in a Taylor's
Bill. Then follows the contesting the Suit. By this time the Defendant is
called upon to put in his Answer; and unless he confess the Fact, either in
part, or in the whole, as it is laid, and so casts himself on the Mercy of the
Court, which is contesting Suit Affirmatively, he must protest by his Proctor
against the generality, ineptitude, obscurity, or undue specification of the
Libel, and that the things contained in it are not true, and therefore what is
contained in it ought not to be granted: And this is contesting Negatively.

Then the Plaintiff alleges, that his Libel is in Articles, and he desires the
Judge may repeat it in full Force of the Positions and Articles, which
accordingly is done, and the Libel admitted with a Salvo Jure Impertinentium
and non admittendorum, etc. On this the Plaintiff desires an Answer to the
Positions of this Libel; whereupon the Defendants Proctor replies, He don't
believe the Positions to be true. Then the Plaintiff, by his Advocate, desires
the Defendant may be decreed to be cited to answer Personally to the Positions
of the Libel, before the Judge, or some Commissioners. The Defendant's Proctor
dissents from this, and requests a Term to be assigned to prove the Libel. And
here both sides may squabble and brawl about it, but it must be by their
Seconds (the Officers I mean) in Mood and Figure, about the time, that it is too
short, or too long; and either of them for that reason may appeal.

The Suit being contested, from Words the Proctors fall to Oaths, and either
Side may lend his client a Swear; the one, that he believes the Contents of the
Libel are faithfully propounded; the other, that he will give a faithful
Answer. Then the two Principals must take the Oaths of Calumny, the general
one, and this is taken but once, and that either here, or in any part of the
Proceedings; and the particular one, called the Oath of Malice, to this
purpose, that both of them believe their Cause to be good, that they will
manage it honestly, and not protract the Suit, and give no Bribes, only the
Fees are excepted to such Persons to whom the Laws and Canons do allow them.
After this, their Proctors help them to keep these Oaths by staving off the
Business, upon impertinent Quirks, for six Court-days, nay sometimes for two or
three Terms; so that, says our Author, Men complain exceedingly of these
Abuses, Conset. p. 92.
that they never knew any End of their Business after it comes into these
Courts.

Well, the Citation, though long first, at last is gotten out for the Defendant
to appear and answer the Libel before the Judge, or the Commissioners; which
Commission must be certified into Court that it has been executed, and is
sometimes paid for jointly, sometimes by one of the Parties only. The Defendant
then puts in his Answer, which is either Categorical, Hypothetical, Modal,
affirming or denying, finitely or infinitely; True, necessarily or
contingently; False, or in equipollent Terms. Then the Defendant appearing
Personally, is sworn to make a faithful Answer to the Positions of the Libel,
only his Proctor protests he don't intend to answer to any Criminal or Captious
Position; or if he do, it shall be accounted Null. The next Court-day he is
ordered to appear to be examined. But it may be he has answered too little,
and then he is summoned again to answer more fully; it may be too much, and
then his Proctor may subduct and revoke it.

When this is settled, If the Witnesses will not come voluntarily on an offer of
bearing their Charges, then come Letters Compulsory for them to appear before
the Judge, or Commissioners; and a Commission is then granted to hear their
Depositions within the Term Probatory. These Letters are returned into the
Court, and it may be the Witnesses cannot be found, none of them, or but some of
them do appear, and the Absenters are to be excommunicated; and this is often
contrived on purpose, that hereby the Term Probatory may be prorogued, and so
the Suit may be protracted, and the Charges increased.

The Witnesses at last being got all together before the Judge, they are sworn;
Then the Proctor protests against them, and any thing they shall say against
the intention of his Client, and desires a Day to be assigned for propounding
Interrogatories, which are to be given in by him into the Hands of the
Register, or Examiner. Then the Witnesses are privately examined, their
Depositions put into writing by the Register, and signed by the Witnesses, and
after repeated before the Judge, who examins them, Whether on their Oath it be
all right and true? and whether they would have any thing altered? But their
Positions are taken in Latin, because we suppose that is a Language that is
like the Universal Character, which all, even the Country Jobbers themselves do
understand.

Now after this it may be, the Proctor on one side objects, that the Witnesses
han't answered to some Interrogatories which they ought to do, or not fully,
but he on the other side gives him the Lie, and so a Day is appointed for the
Judge to enquire into this.

It may be the Witnesses are to be produced, not before the Judge, but the
Commissioners; and then there is more ado in that Case than in this, which, to
avoid tediousness, we omit.

For the same Reason we shall (though we are yet come hardly half way) proceed
no further, nor speak particularly to the publishing the Depositions of the
Witnesses, producing more Witnesses, Exceptions which are numerous, and
Replications which are as many, and answer the other, just as one Tally does
another; nor of Duplications and Triplications, and Quadruplications. For by
all these ways is the Cause banged about between the Parties, and beaten to and
fro like a Shittle-cock between two Battledores. Nor of dead Proofs, which are
Instruments, either Public or Private, and both of them of many sorts. Nor of
the Assignation of the Term to hear Sentence, nor of the Suppletory Oath, given
sometimes to one side, sometimes to the other, to supply and piece out the defect
of Proof.

Besides and after all this, there is another long pair of Stairs, and it is the
Third in order, that would break a Man's wind to get up, and that is, the
giving of Sentence. And then when you think the matter is issued and ended, all
is undone again by an Appeal, which if we should fully speak of, there are so
many deep steps that we should be utterly tired, as to be sure the Plaintiffs
and Defendants have been long ere this, by being carried up, and led down so
many dark and winding Stairs in these enchanted Castles.

From what has been offered, we plainly see, there is no difficulty in
believing that to be a very great Truth that Dr. Burnet tells us, of Bp Bedel's
Bp Bedel 's Life, page 89.
observation, That the Officers of his Spiritual Court drew People into trouble
by vexatious Suits, and held them so long in it, that for three pennyworth of
the Tithe of Turf, they would be put to five pounds Charges.

We have only one thing to add on this Head, and we leave it, That one half of
the manner of their Proceedings has not been told in Plenary Causes; and
though many cramp Words have been used by us in what we have written, they are
the proper Terms of Art; and there is a very large Vocabulary of them, necessary
to be mentioned by us, if we should tell out the remainder of this Tale; which
we forbear, lest Men should think we have a Design upon them to send them to
him whom the Officers of this Court deal so much with, and to whom Hermolaus
Barbarus was fain to resort to understand the meaning of (...).

4. We should proceed to the Things that ensue upon Excommunication. And here
it were easy to be very large in discoursing on the Significavit into the Court
of Chancery in the Bishop's name, that the Person has stood excommunicate
forty Days, for the getting a Writ, de Excommunicato capiendo, that he may be
sent to Prison. Of the forfeitures of ten Pounds on every Capias; afterward
for not yielding ones self up a Prisoner on the Proclamation of the Capias's.
It is a liberty peculiar to the Chapter of England, Dr. Consin'^ Apology, p. 8, 9,
10.
(says the learned Advocate of these Courts) above all the Realms in
Christendom that I read of, that if a Man stand wilfully forty days together
Excommunicate, and be accordingly certified by the Bishop into the Chancery,
that then he is to be committed to Prison without Bail or Main-prise; quod
potestas regia Sacrosanctae Ecclesiae in suis querelis deesse non debet,
because the Royal Power ought not to be wanting to Holy Church in her Quarrels.
Yet we must confess we don't see how this can be justified, unless that Axiom
be owned for truth, that Dominion is founded in Grace; and when a Man is made
as a Publican and Heathen, he loses all his Civil Rights.

We might further speak of the several ways of Absolution from this Sentence,
and that upon several little mistakes in the Form of Proceedings, and by Orders
sent down from Civil Courts. For when a Man is fast bound one would think,
there are many of these ways of unloosing him; as we have seen Children, that
by the dextrous pulling of the right String, have immediately whipped off the
Pack-thread from another's thumbs in a most surprising manner.

Bp. Bedel's Life, p. 89.
We might further speak also of the commuting of Penance for Money, Which, as
Dr. Burnet well says, is the worst sort of Simony, being in effect the very
same abuse that gave the World such a Scandal, when it was so indecently
practiced in the Church of Rome, and opened the way to the Reformation. For the
selling of Indulgences is really but a commutation of Penance. Of this that
good Bp Bedel had so many, and such notorious Instances in his Diocese, that be
bitterly bewailed it, and to which he was able to reply nothing but that he had
read in Mantuan of another place in the World, ( Rome he means) where Heaven
and God himself were set to sale. Id. p. 90.


Now from that little that has been said, we may see how truly he spoke, Id.
p. 93.
when he said that a plain and simple thing is by these Men made very
intricate. And that amongst all the Impediments to the Work of God among us,
Id. p. 103.
there is not any one greater than the Abuse of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.
This is not only the Opinion of the most Godly, Judicious, Learned Men, that I
have known, but the cause of it is plain.

Blessed Jesus! who alone works great Marvels, send down thy Spirit on our
Bishops, that they may boldly whip these Buyers and Sellers out of thy Temple,
that sit there only to dishonor thy Name, and sponge on thy People, and turn
thy House of Discipline into a Den of Thieves. Amen.

And we beseech God to incline their Hearts, and those of our Governors to do
it, and not to suffer these Lay-Chancellors to meddle but in Civil Causes only,
and there to endeavor to regulate their enormous Abuses; and in the Lord
Bacon's Words, That in lieu of Excommunication, Consid. p. 21, 22.
there be given to them some ordinary Process with such Force and Coercion as
appertains, and that this Censure be restored to the true Dignity and Use
thereof, which is, that it proceed not but in cases of great Weight, and that
it be decreed not by any Deputy or Substitute, but by the Bishop in Person, and
not by him alone, but assisted by some others of his grave Clergy, according to
the excellent Model of that incomparably learned and pious A B. Usher.

Then will Discipline recover its ancient Vigor and Splendour; then will
Sinners no longer slight this Spiritual Sword in the Church, as Atheists do
God's fiery flaming one that sometimes appears in the Heavens, as if it were a
mere Meteor hanging in the Air, and made of fiery Vapors only; but will find
it is a solid substantial thing, has a real Point and a sharp Edg piercing into
the very Depths of the Soul, and that it needs not corporal Penalties to set
one upon it to that end.

Of removing scandalous Ministers.
AND sure none that regard the Glory of Almighty God, or the Honor of our
Church, or the Reputation of our Clergy themselves, can ever oppose so
reasonable a Motion as this; for nothing has more exposed our Holy Religion to
Contempt, or encouraged the Laity in their Vices, or sunk the Credit of our
Clergy (not to say, of our Church it self) than the scandalous Lives of some of
that Function; and since Examples have a more powerful Influence on the People
than mere Precepts; it is no Wonder that the Lives of flagitious Clergymen
bring in more Proselytes to Wickedness and Vice, than ever their preaching will
make Votaries to Religion and Virtue; for how should the best Advices and
Counsel they can deliver from the Pulpit, make any great Impression on their
Hearers, which they never follow themselves when out of it? They may long
enough commend Virtue, and declaim against Vice, and urge what they say with
Arguments drawn from the Rewards and Punishments of another World; but how
should the People believe them, when they do ^ot live as if they believed
themselves? And while so many of ^ur Clergy make no great Scruple of Conscience
to drink and whore, and swear and game, and droll on the Bible, and pro^ane the
Sunday, and neglect the most important Duties of their ^astoral Charge; it is no
Wonder if the Laity think themselves ^^thorized to take the same Liberty which
they see used by those whom they look on not only as their Instructors, but
their Pat^erns too. It was a just Observation of the late E. of Rochester, that
that one particular Vice, viz. the base Arts of some Clergymen in aspiring to
the high Preferments of the Church, had possessed many of the best Quality in
the Nation with that wretched Idea of Religion that greatly disposed them to
Atheism: For they looked on that sacred Profession, as a Holy Cheat, a Trade of
talking well, and living ill. It Is high time then to redress this Corruption,
to rid our Pulpits and our Altars of such as stain them with their profane
Breath and unhallowed Hands, 1 Samuel 2.17.
and like the wicked Sons of Eli, make the very Offerings of the Lord to be
abhorred. And we are sure our Church may as well spare them as a beautiful Face
may those Blotches and Scabs that serve only to disfigure it. And yet in all
the Book of Canons, we find not one that expressly orders the deposing a
scandalous Clergyman. There is indeed a Canon against such Ministers as omit
the use of any Form of Prayer, Can. 38.
or any Rite or Ceremony whatever prescribed in the Service Book, to suspend
them for the first Fault; if they persist a Month in it, to excommunicate them;
if another to depose them; Can. 54.
and another, to make void the Licenses of all such Ministers as refuse to
conform to the Laws, Institutes, and Rites of our Church. So that we cannot
blame her for not taking sufficient Care to purge out of all her Sons, that
scandalous Sin of Nonconformity. Can. 68.
For there is another Canon to seclude from the Ministry for three Months, every
Minister that shall refuse to baptize any Child that is brought to him (be the
Parents Christian, Mohammedan, or Pagan) or bury any (except the Excommunicate,
etc.) according to the form prescribed in the Liturgy. Another Canon forbids
Ministers either to appoint or keep Fasts either in public or Private Houses,
Can. 72.
without the Leave of the Bishop, threatening them with Suspension for the first
time, Excommunication for the second, and Deposition for the third. A Canon
which we think might very well be spared: For People need very little to be
dissuaded from that sort of Mortification; and the Ministers will be very loath
to attempt it, when they are obliged to double Penance, to go on Pilgrimage to
the Bishop one Day, and fast the next. Can. 73.
Another Canon there is against all Meetings or Clubs of the Clergy to plot any
thing against the Doctrine of the Church, or to the Prejudice of the
Common Prayer Book, threatening them with Excommunication. A very provident
Canon indeed, that seems to have been made by a Spirit of Prophecy against
Smectymnuus and the Latitudinarians: And it is very probable those of our Clergy
who were so f^ll of Indignation against the late Commissioners, mistook them
for such a plotting Conventicle. We need not insist on the 74th Canon which
prescribes the Clergy their several Habits, and very prudently cautions them
against wearing light-coloured Stockings, and charitably allows short Gowns to
the poor Curates that have not Money to buy long ones. But setting aside these
heinous Crimes; we find only this one Canon against other Immoralities. viz.
75. No Ecclesiastical Persons shall at any time other than for their honest
Necessities resort to any Taverns or Alehouses, neither shall they board or
lodge in any such Places: Furthermore they shall not give themselves to any base
or servile Labor, or to drinking or Riot, spending their time idly by Day or
by Night, playing at Dice, Cards, or Tables, or any other unlawful Game. But at
all times convenient they shall hear or read somewhat of the Holy Scriptur^s,
or shall occupy themselves with some other honest Study or Exercise, always
doing the things that shall appertain to Honesty, and endeavoring to profit
the Church of God, having always in Mind that they ought to excel all others in
Purity of Life, and should be Examples to the People to live well and
Christianly, under Pain of Ecclesiastical Censures to be inflicted with
Severity according to the Qualities of their Offenses.

This Canon indeed speaks something to the Purpose, and yet we would beg leave
to suggest two things relating to it.

1. We suppose this Canon only threatens the scandalous Clergy with
Excommunication; for it does not as the 38, 72, etc. threaten them with
Deposition on their persisting incorrigible. Whereas that too is highly
necessary, there being all the Reason in the World that obstinate
Nonconformity to the Laws of God, should at least be equally punished with
stubborn Nonconformity to the Laws of the Church; for it would look but very
odd to treat a Minister more severely for omitting a Collect in the
Service Book, or keeping a private Fast, than for being drunk, or lying with
his Neighbor's Wife.

2. We wish that this good Canon it self, may not stand for a Cipher for want
of Execution. And yet hitherto all the good Effects that might have been
expected from it to free our Churches from such leprous and unclean Priests,
have been in a great Measure frustrated. For we do not see that one in twenty,
of such whose notorious Vices make too public a noise to be unobserved, was
ever excommunicated, much less deposed for them. We speak within Compass, and
heartily lament the intolerable Mischiefs that from this fatal Source overflow
our Church. And therefore we would humbly recommend it to the Wisdom of the
Convocation, to take the most effectual Methods for the obviating of them, and
(if it might be no Offense) would take the Liberty to suggest that if the Rural
Deaneries in Archbishop Usher's Model were restored, they might first receive
Complaints against such, and suspend them till the Matter come before the
Diocesan Synod. Were this done, and were all our Clergy such excellent
Ornaments of their Profession, as (God be thanked) a great many of them are,
the Dissenters would not so easil^ gain ground upon us, as they have hitherto
done by the pretended Strictness of Life in their Ministers, and their great
Laboriousness in the Duties of their Function.

Of the Reformation of Manners both in Ministers and People.
IN the Ministers.] What relates to such as are chargeable with scandalous
Immoralities was considered under the former Head; but under this Head, we
would humbly recommend to the present Convocation, the reforming two very gross
Corruptions retained in our Church, notwithstanding all the loud Complaints
that have been made against them, Pluralities and Non-Residence, two Diseases
that have hitherto defied all Remedies, and have been rather cherished by our
spiritual Physicians, than any thing effectual attempted toward the Cure of
them; and no wonder when many of the same Men were the Patients that should
have been the Physicians; so hard it is to redress these grand Evils in a Synod
where the greatest Pluralists and Non-Residents do commonly make up the major
Vote; and yet these are so notorious Blemishes in a Church, that even the
Council of Trent could not for very Shame but take notice of them. And the
Truth is, though they have in their best Decrees of Reformation left a Hole to
creep out by Virtue of Dispensations, yet their Canons are far more strict than
ours: for in their Decree of Reformation, Sess. the 7th. cap. 2d. they forbid
any Prelate, having more Metropolitan or Cathedral Churches than one in
Commendam, accounting him happy that can govern one well. And cap. 3d. They
enjoin the Collation of inferior Ecclesiastical Benefices that have Cure of
Souls, on worthy and able Persons who may reside on the Place, and take care of
the Flock themselves; and by the 3. deprive that Clergyman of all his
Benefices that retains more than one, whether by way of Union for Life, or
perpetual Commendam, or any other Title, etc. only all these good Canons are
spoiled, and by the wretched Art of Dispensations made only a more subtle Trick
of drawing Money into the Pockets of those that grant them. And Sess. 23d. cap.
1. Their Decree of Reformation against Non-Residents begins thus: Since all to
whom the care of Souls is committed, are enjoined by Divine Precept to know
their Sheep, to offer Sacrifice for them, and to feed them with the Preaching
of the Word of God, the Administration of Sacraments, and the Example of their
good Works, to take a Fatherly Care of the Poor and all other miserable People,
and discharge other pastoral Duties, all which can never be performed by those
that do not watch over and assist their Flock, but like Hirelings forsake them,
etc. See also Sess. 6. Cap. 1st, and 2d. and what they say is far more
applicable to Parish-Churches than to Metropolitan or Cathedral.

But to return to our own Church: For Pluralities I find only this one Canon
bout them, viz. 41.

No License or Dispensation for the keeping of more Benefices with Cure than
one, shall be granted to any, but such only as shall be thought very well
worthy for his Learning, and very well able and sufficient to discharge his
Duty, i. e. Who shall ^ave taken his Degree of a Master of Arts at least, in
one of the Universities of ^^is Realm, and be a public and sufficient Preacher
lice^c'd; Provided always that he be, by a good and suffi^i nt Caution, bound
to make his personal Residence (...) of his said Benefices, for some reasonable
time in every Year; and that the ^^id Benefices be not more than 30 Miles
distant a su^der. And lastly, That he have ^^der him, in the Benefice where he
does not reside, a Preacher lawfully allowed, t^at's able sufficiently to teach
and instruct the People.

A Canon that rather approves and strengthens, than corrects so shameful an
Abuse. For what restraint can it be imagined to lay upon it? A Man needs to
higher Qualifications to capacitate him for being a Pluralist, than that ^e be
a Master of Arts, and a lawfully approved Preacher. Here are no Bounds set to
the Num^er of the Benefices he may enjoy, but that they should not stand above
30 Miles from one another; so that a Man may enjoy the same Number of
Benefices, provided he can bring them within that com^ass of Miles. And I wish
that the Avarice of some could be held within those wide Bounds too.

Nor is the reasonable Time in which he must reside yearly in every one of ^^em
determined, but left to his own discretion.

And now what Apology can be made for so unreasonable a practice? Let ^s
suppose a Pluralist to engross four or five good Livings to his own Share. ^he
best Restriction laid on him by this Canon is, That he keep in every living,
where he resides not, an approved Preacher that may profitably each and
instruct the People But if these four Preache^s that supply his ^^ace in four
of the Parishes, be Men of those Abilities that fit them for ^^scharging all
the Duties of their Function to the People, what tolerable ^eason can be given
why they should not enjoy all the encouragement to ^^eir Labor which the
Parish-Tyths were designed to give them? Why should the main part of the
Profits of four Parishes be swept away by an ^^e Drone of a Pluralist, that
saunters about in his Coach, and swims in ^^xury and Ease, but never took the
least care of them, unless perhaps ^^ce in a Year to give them a kind of
Visitation-Sermon; while the poor Ministers that reside among them, and bestow
all their pains and time upon ^^em, scarce earn their Bread with the sweat of
their Brows, but struggle ^^der those Discouragements of a stingy Allowance
that starve their Parts, ^d sink their Spirits, and too often put them on doing
those things which ^^nder them mean and contemptible. For by that time a poor
Curate has pro^^ded Bread for his Family, and perhaps a Gown and Cassock for
himself, ^^t of his 20 or 30 l. per. Annum, he will find very little left for the
increase of ^^s slender Library, and much less for those Works of Charity,
whereby he should keep up that Esteem and Interest in the Hearts of the People,
that is (...) highly conducive to the success of his Instructions upon them. So
that ^hile the Number of Pluralists is so great, and their Covetousness far
grea^^r, it cannot be expected where the Salary they allow is so despicable,
that ^^ey should ever provide for some of their Cures any better Priests than
those of Jeroboam, made of the meanest of the People; such as may thank God
that our Church has furnished them with a Liturgy, and some of our ^earned
Clergy with Sermons for every Sunday of the Year. And what Account will such
mercenary Pastors (as the Council of Trent it self calls them) give to the
universal Bishop and Shepherd of those Flocks whom they have starved to fill
their own Purses? Or whence can the greedy Humor of heaping up so many
Steeples spring, but from that wretched insatiable Love of Money, which is so
unbecoming a Clergyman, who pretends a Concern for the Salvation of Souls, and
therefore should not gratify his filthy Lucre at the price of their Blood?

We are so far from speaking this, as grudging the Clergy the just
Encouragement of their Labors, that if a more fair and just distribution of
the legal Maintenance would not sufficiently provide for all, we should think
it worthy the pious Zeal of his Majesty, and the Parliament, to find out way^
of supplying that Defect. But in the mean time, as the Difference of the Value
of Benefices will have room enough to reward the different Abilities of the
Clergy, so we cannot but regret it, that the greatest Load of excessive
Preferments is usually heapt, not on those that deserve, but on those that seek
them. The importunate Ambition of the latter putting them on those base Methods
to compass their Design, which the Probity, as well as the Modesty, of the
former debar them from.

Having said so much about Pluralities, we shall be more brief on the other
Head of Non-residence. We shall not insist on the 42, 43, 44. Canons which
relate to the Deans, Prebends and Canons in the several Cathedrals and
Collegiate Churches, because those concern the Clergy more than us. Only we
cannot but commend the great Care of our Church in its injunction to the Deans,
who must providently see that the Petty-Canons, Vicars-choral, and other
Ministers of the Church, have a Latin as well as English Testament. We suppose
this Caution was, lest the lazy Fellows should forget all they had learned at
School; and Greek, it seems is as little expected from them as Syriack or
Arabic.

The 45 enjoins the Resident Clergy one Sermon every Sunday, when they have not
just Impediment. The 46 and 47 runs thus.

46, Every Beneficed Man, not allowed to be a Preacher, shall procure Sermons
to be preached in his Cure once in every Month at the least, by Preachers
lawfully licensed, if his Living in the Judgment of the Ordinary will be able
to bear it. And upon every Sunday when there shall not be a Sermon preached in
his Cure, he, or his Curate, shall read some one of the Homilies prescribed, or
to be prescribed by Authority, to the Intents aforesaid.

47, Every Beneficed Man licensed by the Laws of this Realm, upon urgent
occasions of other Service not to reside upon his Benefice, shall cause his
Cure to be supplied by a Curat, that is a sufficient and licensed Preacher, if
the Worth of the Benefice will bear it. But whoever has two Benefices, shall
maintain a Preacher licensed in the Benefice where he does not reside, except
he preach himself at both of them usually.

These Canons, especially the former, do so evidently expose themselves, that
they save us the labor of any long Remarks upon them. We cannot but think it
strange, that a Man may be the Incumbent of a Cure, and consequently enjoy both
the Name and the Revenues of a Minister to that People, who is not so much as
licensed to preach; nay, is so mere a Layman, that according to Can. 49. he
must not take on him to expound, in his own Cure, or elsewhere, any Scripture
or Matter of Doctrine: and the highest Privilege allowed him is, That he study
to read plainly and aptly, (without glozing or adding) the Homilies already set
forth, etc. I perceive there may be Ignoramus Ministers, as well as Lawyers or
Jurymen; and if our Church do not wrong them, by the severe restraints this
Canon lays on them, they are more fit to be sent to School to con their Lesson,
than into the Pulpit to instruct the People. But though we cannot admire the
Wisdom of our Church in allowing such Men Benefices, yet we must acknowledge her
great Charity toward them and their Curats, in providing so good a help as the
Book of Homili^s, for those whose Eyes are the only considerable Talents that
God almighty has thought fit to bless them withal.

We shall add no more under this Head, but that we wish the Simoniacal Oath,
were strong enough to keep out all secret Arts of purchasing Preferments. And
we think it highly advisable, that according to Archbishop Usher's model,
Artic. 2d. in every Rural Deanery, the Ministers of particular Parishes might
be censurable for Errors, or gross negligence in their Office, etc. with
Liberty of Appeals to a Diocesan Synod if need be.

But that the Clergy may not think us in these two Articles too severe on them,
and partial to our selves, we shall propose it to the Wisdom of this
Convocation, Whether the Power of Patrons in presenting to Livings, should not
be so far restrained, as not to impose a Minister on any Parish, without their
own consent? The very Learned Bishop of Salisbury, in his Regalia, as well as
others, has made it undeniably evident, that this was the practice of the
Universal Church for 600, if not 1000 Years after our Savior's Time. And
therefore tho we would have so much regard paid to the Charity of our
Ancestors, as not to exclude Patrons from a Privilege enjoyed on that score by
so long Prescription, yet we could be heartily glad that 'twere rendered
consistent with this Ancient Privilege of the People too, that the Primitive
Practice in this Particular might be revived. If indeed the Parson alone were
to be saved or damned, not only for himself but his Parishioners too, 'twere no
great matter to the People who he be; but if they must answer for their own
Souls, it is but reasonable they should be satisfied whom they trust with the
conduct of them.

And how liberally soever Patrons have endowed any Churches, 'twere but a hard
Bargain they make with the People, to require them, by implicit Faith, to
acquiesce in whatever Ministers they or their Heirs shall ever recommend to
them.

Nay, some would not have Patrons impose on our Clergy, any more than on the
People. There are several secret ways of purchasing a Benefice, which some
Patrons oblige the Clergy to, without making a downright Bargain: And we would
not have so much as the courting an Abigal to be the price of it.

Of Reforming Manners in the People.
LEST the Fear and Apprehension into which the words Alteration and Review have
cast the Author of Vox Cl^ri, should be fatal to him, we shall now labor to
recover him, by assuring him, that there are some of the old Canons we desire
may be reinforced, and that the Subjects to which they relate may be considered
and examined, viz. Such as order the Censures of the Church to be inflicted
upon all Persons notoriously wicked, that they may be hindered from coming to
the blessed Sacrament with such Frequency, and in such Numbers as they now
ordinarily do; particularly Can. 26. which runs thus. No Minister shall in any
wise admit to the receiving the Holy Communion any of his Cure or Flock, which
be opennly known to live in notorious Sin, without Repentance; nor any who have
maliciously and openly contended with their Neighbors, until they shall be
reconciled: Nor any Churchwarden or Side-man who having taken their Oaths to
present to their Ordinary all such public Offenses as they are particularly
charged to enquire of in their several Parishes, shall (notwithstanding their
said Oaths, and that their faithful Discharge of them, is the chief means
whereby public Sins and Offenses may be reformed and punished) wittingly and
willingly, desperately and irreligiously incur the horrible Crime of Perjury,
either in neglecting or in refusing to present such of the said Enormities and
public Offenses as they knew themselves to be committed in their said
Parishes, or are notoriously offensive to the Congregation there: although they
be urged by some of their Neighbors, or the Minister, or by their Ordinary
himself to discharge their Consciences by presenting them, and not to incur so
desperately the said horrible Sin of Perjury. We do now humbly request that
according to this Canon some effectual Provision may be made to hinder all such
wicked Persons from our Communion, which are a Scandal and Reproach to any
Church, much more to ours. That the Matter may be seriously debated and
weighed, and whether more proper Methods than those hitherto resolved on may
not be found out and settled. For to speak on the behalf of the Laity, as the
imposing such a Task on us or the Churchwardens, is very hard and severe, so
it has been unsuccessful to the Purpose for which it was intended, and is
likely always to prove so, though the Canon says that the Churchwardens and
Sidesmens faithful Discharge of their Oaths in presenting Offenders to the
Ordinary, is the chief means whereby Public Sins and Offenses may be reformed
and punished. For it cannot be probably expected that they should discharge
this Office with that Fidelity and Care which is requisite in a Business of
such Importance: If we consider either the manner of their present choice, the
Multiplicity of secular Affairs in which they are unavoidably engaged, the
Temptations to which they may be exposed either by Neighborhood, Acquaintance,
Friendship, or Dependence upon others; and not to mention the small Reverence
which is paid to Oaths by the Generality of Persons in this dissolute Age,
which ought to be considered; nor the Tricks of waving the taking them, which
the Corruption of our Spiritual Courts has supplied us with; it cannot be
imagined but that while Men are called to this Office by turns, and the worst
as well as the best Parishioners are chosen to it, and while Men are governed
by their worldly Interest, either no Presentations at all should be made, or
those that are should be Omnia B^ne. Besides, should these Lay-Officers be
Persons of Sobriety and Integrity, and out of Regard to their Oaths, the Peace
of their own Consciences, and the good Comfort of their Christian Neighbors,
make exact and just Presentations, yet according to our present Constitution
they are bound to carry them into the Spiritual Courts; and what becomes of
them when they are lodged there, all the World knows; instead of imposing
suitable Penances, Money shall be extorted by a Body of Men who have already
showed us, that they can set Indulgences to sale, and that they are willing Men
should ruin their own Souls, and go very quietly to Hell provided they will pay
them tole for their Passage. We are therefore of the opinion that the present
Convocation should consider whether the Inspection into the Manners of the
People should not be entrusted solely with the Ministers and Priests, and this
determined and judged to be one part of the pastoral Care; whether it be not
now absolutely necessary to authorize and empower all Ministers and Curates to
observe the Lives of their Parishioners to admonish them privately and
publicly, to pronounce the Censures of the Church, either of Suspension or
Excommunication, according to their several Lives and Offenses; they may be
appointed to do all this in Subordination to the Bishop or the Ordinary; though
we think it is requisite the^ should be exempted from the Jurisdiction of the
Spiritual Courts; they may ^e still a (...) to the Bishop, and be obliged to
acquaint him with the Reasons and manner of their Proceedings, and be liable to
be punished by him, if they either mis-beh^ve themselves, or neglect their
Duty. Let this Authority and Power be (...) sted in them in such a
Subordination, and let it be declared and esteemed as an ess^ntial Branch of
the Pastoral Office, and in our Apprehensions it will be a more effectual way
to redress this Disorder than the other. That which suggests and incourages
this Proposal is our Communion-Rubrick, which requires all Persons that intend
to communicate, to send in their Names to the Curate, and orders him to
admonish those that are unfit, that they should not presume to come. Now if
this were duly observed, and the Curates likewise empowered to reject such as
shall, notwithstanding their Admonition, dare to present themselves, and to
pronounce either a Sentence of Suspension or Excommunication against them; we
conceive that this will be a more proper and effectual Method to preserve our
Communions pure, than that other of committing it to the Churchwardens, who
are too often careless and unconcerned about a matter of such a Spiritual
Nature, or such as deserve to fall under the Censures of the Church themselves.
It will be no hard Matter for the Convocation to fix and settle this Authority
and Power, that the Curates should be invested with its just Bounds and Limits;
This we propose with all Humility to Persons, that by their Sagacity and Wisdom
may soon find out better Ways than we are able to do. But that which we
earnestly and importunately request is, that since his Majesty has put an
Opportunity into their Hands, of reviewing the old Canons and making new, that
they would resolve upon some course for the preventing Men of the most
profligate Lives and Principles from joining themselves to our Communion, and
partaking of the most Holy Sacrament; and we hope the Author of Vox Cleri and
others of the same stamp, will not charge us with a Design of pulling down the
House, since we only demand that these Spiders which have filled every Corner
of it with their Cobwebs and Venom, may be swept out, and are willing that the
Besom with which it is to be done should be put into the Hands of our Priests
and Clergy. The Reasons of our Request are such as these.

1. Because according to the Doctrine of our Church these Persons have no Right
at all to partake of the Sacrament, and to celebrate these Holy Mysteries;
R^bri^k (...).
for she appoints the Curate to advertise and admo^ish such as these t^^t in
any w^s^ they presum^ not to come: In her Exhortation she tells us that it is
to be admi^is^r^^ only to those who are devoutly and religiously disposed, and
that if any who do not repent of their Sins, and live in them without
Amendment, do come, the Communion does nothing else but increase their
Damnati^^: And we are told that Pers^^^ th^^ live in Variance and Contention,
or in any known Sin, Q. Elizab. (...).
must not be admit^^d ^^^^use it is contrary to the Communion of the Body and
Blood of Christ: So that th^se 'Men are really Intruder^, and thrust themselves
as Guests to our most ^oly Tables, contrary to the express Commands of the
Church; and when we desire that they may be cast out, it is no way injurious or
prejudicial to them, but tends to their Benefit and Advantage: it is ^s
charitable and just, as to snatch a Cup of Poison out of the Hands of a Mad
man, who is boldly going to drink it.

2. The admitting such Persons to the Sacrament is a very high Encouragement to
the Debauchery and Wickedness that now reigns among us: when these shall have
as free an Access to this Holy Table as Persons of the highest Sobriety and
Virtue, when they shall shelter themselves under our very Altars, and none have
any Power or Commission to pluck them from thence, what can be expected but
that Impiety and Profaness should overflow us as a mighty Stream? They have
already learned to stop the Mouths of their own Consciences and our Mouths too,
when we offer to rebuke them, by saying that they are good Christians, and
Members of the Church as well as we; they persuade themselves that their being
of our Church here does give them an undoubted Title to a Place among the
Assembly of the Firstborn, and while they have such Apprehensions as these, we
must expect they should indulge themselves in all manner of Immoralities; and
now shall the Holy Sacrament be prostituted to countenance and encourage such
fatal Presumptions as these, to strengthen the Hands of the Vile, and cause
them to commit Sin with all imaginable Boldness and without any Remorse? Shall
we turn the Cup of the Blood of Christ into the Cup of Devils, as the Apostle
expresses it in 1 Cor. 10.21. not only by permitting those who offer up
themselves as Sacrifices to the Devil to drink of it, but by making it as
effectual to the promoting the Interest of Satan, as though he himself had
really instituted it?

3. Because such a Practice as this tends to the increasing the Numbers of the
Dissenting Conventicles. For though they are not without faulty Members as well
as we, yet it must be confessed that they are very careful to keep or purge out
all that are openly scandalous in their Lives. We indeed excel them in our
Episcopal Government, the Decency and Order of our Worship, in the Numbers of
sober and learned Clergy; but in this particular we are more defective than
they, there is not so much of this unhappy Leaven among them, as there is among
us; so that many Persons of strict Piety, who are burdened and grieved with
this Disorder, will be tempted to desert us and join with them; and they being
not acquainted with the Distinctions of learned Men, will be more easily led
into such an Error; and if a speedy Reformation be not made in this Matter, we
must expect the Numbers of those who are the greatest Ornaments of our
Communion, out of a pretended Concern for their Edification, will leave us. For,

4. We must now ackowledg and declare that the Admission of such as these very
much hinders our Edification, and makes us take the Holy Sacrament with much
less Joy and Comfort than we might otherwise do. As we belong to a Church that
not only recommends the most enlarged Charity, but is celebrated for it, so we
hope we are not without some Measures of that Love to God and the Souls of Men,
which she requires in all her Communicants; and being influenced by this we
cannot with unconcerned Eyes and Hearts behold these Men at once profane the
Name of God, and eat and drink Damnation to themselves, i. e. as our Church
explains it, Diseases, Death, and the Wine of God's Wrath.

Exhort. bef. the Commun.
It Is with a great and sincere Sorrow that we observe Persons guilty of the
highest Impurities allowed to come to the Holy Communion, who ought to be
driven from it. Our Peace and Benefit would be much greater in our Approaches
to it, if we did not find there some who but a few Hours before were venturing
their Lives in the Quarrel of a Strumpet; others who spent the last Night in
Revelling and Drunkenness, and when they join themselves to us, seem to take us
for a Crew of merry Companions; others that just before the Communion were
belching out Oaths and Curses, and soon after the end of it will pour out whole
Vollies of them again, etc. And if there were none allowed to kneel there, but
such as were sober and virtuous, devoutly and religiously disposed. We must
therefore be excused, if after so long a silence we take the liberty to express
our Resentments in this Matter, and to declare that we do, with a very
passionate Grief, see the Holy Bread and Wine touched by such polluted Hands,
and unhallowed Mouths, especially when we sear and expect, that after the
taking of these, (according to the Threatening denounced by our Church) The
Devil should enter into them as he did into Judas, to fill them full of all
Iniquities, and bring them to destruction, both of Body and Soul; Exhort.
before the Communion.
And we would add, that while we have a warm and zealous regard to the Honor
of God Almighty and his Sacraments, and the Good of others, we shall have the
same sense and apprehensions.

But to conclude this Subject, that our present Convocation may be stirred up
to a more vigorous Zeal and Diligence in the framing new Penitentiary Canons,
or reforming the Old, we would with all modesty and submission remind our
Fathers and Guides, now assembled, of the Promises they made at their several
Ordinations, and of the solemn Charge they received from our Church; which is
in these words; Wherefore consider with your selves the End of your Ministry
toward the Children of God, toward the Spouse and Body of Christ, Form of
ordering of Priests. Sparrow. p. 125.
and see that you never cease your Labor, your Care and Diligence, until you
have done all that lies in you, according to your bounden Duty, to bring all
such as are, or shall be committed to your Charge, unto that agreement in Faith
and Knowledge of God, and to that ripeness and perfectness of Age in Christ,
that there be no place left among you, either of Error in Religion, or for
viciousness of Life. And since we shall not entertain a suspicion of their
readiness to discharge their Offices with the utmost fidelity, of their
willingness to pay a cheerful Obedience to the Commands of our common Mother,
we will not question their gratifying our Desires in this Particular.

Of the Examination of such Persons as desire to be admitted into Holy Orders,
both as to their Learning and Manners.
It Is the unhappy neglect of this, has not only over-stock'd our Church with a
shoal of supernumerary Clergy, but given too many the opportunity of crouding
into Holy Orders, whom their Parents only thrust on the Service of the Church,
because they know not how to dispose otherwise of them, And yet it must be
owned, that the Canons of our Church are not altogether chargeable with this
Neglect: For the 35th Canon enjoins the Bishop, before he admits any Person
into Holy Orders, to examine him, in the presence of those Ministers that shall
assist him in the Imposition of Hands; or at least take care that the foresaid
Ministers examine him if he have any lawful Impediment. We could heartily wish
the Bishop might accordingly do it more constantly himself, in the presence of
such as assist at the Ordination, and not leave it so generally to the
Archdeacon, or one of his Chaplains. And 'twere highly advisable that the
particular Trials which every Candidate for Sacred Orders must pass, in order
to give a good Specimen of his Proficiency in Humane Learning, and especially
in the study of Divinity, were prescribed. For it can by no means be thought a
sufficient Evidence of a Man's being qualified for that Sacred Function, that
he can construe a piece of the Latin Testament; and resolve that grand Question
of Quot sunt Symbola? etc. The admirable care of many Foreign Churches,
particularly the Reformed Churches in France, about the admission of their
Proposants, is a very commendable Pattern. And even in this Point, the
Directory (how idle a Book soever it may be in other things) has the advantage
of any thing prescribed in this Canon, which is too lax and general. And we
would surther offer it to consideration, Whether what the 34th Canon enjoins in
the Case of a Bishop's ordaining a Man that is not of his own Diocese, should
not hold also in his ordaining those that are? viz. That he ordain no Person
but such as shall exhibit Letters Tes^im^nial of his good Life and
Conversation, under the Seal of some College in Cambridg or Oxford, where
before he remained; or of three or four grave Ministers, togethe^ with the
Subscription and Testimony of other credible Persons, who have known his Life
and Behavior by the s^^c^ of three ^ears next before.

The CONCLUSION.
HAving thus pas^'d through the several Heads mentioned in his Majesty's
Commission, and wit^ the some ^^sign, viz. for the advancing the Honor and
Service of Almighty God, for the Good and Quiet of the Church, and for the
better government of it; we do not doubt but the Proposals we have made, if
attended to by the Convocati^^ will have such an Issue. And we hope we shall
not be censured for invading the Priest's Office in what we have done. A Man
needs not the indelible Character to do the Offi^e of a Sexton, sweep the Dust
and Filth out of the Church, and lash T bit's Dog out of the Sanctuary; and
that is what we have designed. And if in so doing, we have chanced here and
there to give some late Authors a lick or two, they are only such as have
officiously sheltred him under their Legs. For tho we will allow him to be as
good a Moral Cur as his late zealous Apologist can desire, and to have l^arned
the 5th Commandment, ( for, says he, Remarks on the two Letters to the
Convocation, p. 12.
he was faithful, and loved his Master) yet we would not have the Fanatics
think, he is a Member of our Church, or that our Congregations are so thin,
even on a Weekday, (when, says he, he only appears there) that we should need
his Company to increase them. We have, in our own Apprehensions, consulted the
Honor and Service of Almighty God, since what we desire tends to the more pure
and orderly celebrating of his Worship, to the removal of those abuses which
are as provoking to him, as they are displeasing to us; and may incline him who
has hitherto, by many Mira^les of Mercy and Power, defended and preserved us,
to give us yet more signal testimonies of his Favor and Bounty. And that we
have aimed at the Good and Quiet of the Church is likewise as evident; since
what we propose will render her Offices less liable to the Exceptions of our
Adversaries, and more profitable to us, will increase her Purity and Splendour,
will add to the number of her sober and pious Members, will make her Government
more conformable to the Primitive Pattern, and establish it on more lasting and
solid Foundations, and free her Children from many of the pressing Grievances
they groan under. And therefore we hope that so favorable an Opportunity which
his Majesty presents the Convocation with, will not be neglected, a Prince, who
by his great Virtues is the Glory of our Church as well as the Head an^
Defender of it, and whose excellent Wisdom and Judgment should be alone a
suffi^ient Argument to weigh with us, tho there were no other, as there are
many more to induce us to make our Reformation more perfect and complete.

To sum up ^ll; If his Majesty's Desires, and ours, be now complied with, the
Church of England may stand and flourish as the Envy and Glory of all the
Reformed Churches, impregnable to the feeble Attacks of her Enemies, and be
adorned with a very great Purity and Brightness; but if they be scorned and
denied, we may justly expect to fall under an indelible Infamy and Reproach, to
have our Strength an^ Numbers l^ssen'd and abated, to be crushed by the
Artifices and Designs of our strong and numerous Adversaries, and to have our
Church, and all the Abus^s which remain in her taken away together, by some
Revolution that we loo^ed not for.

FINIS.

