OF THE CAUSE OF ATTRACTION BY Suction, A PARADOX.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

PREFACE.
HAving about twelve years ago summarily expressed and published my Opinion of
the Cause of Suction, and a while before or after brought to the Royal Society
the Glass Instrument I employed to make it out; I desisted for some time to add
any thing about a Problem, that I had but occasionally handled: Only, because
the Instrument I mentioned in my Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Opinion, and afterward
used at Gresham-College, was difficult enough to be well made, and not to be
procured ready made, I did for the sake of some Virtuosi, that were curious of
such things, devise a slight and easily made Instrument, described in the
following Tract, Chap. 4th, in which the chief Phenomenon, I showed before the
Society, were easily producible. But afterward the mistakes and erroneous
Opinions, that, in Print as well as in Discourse, I met with, even among
Learned Men, about Suction, and the Curiosity of an Ingenious Person, engaged
me to resume that Subject and treat of it, as if I had never before meddled
with it, for the reason intimated in the beginning of the ensuing Paper. And
finding upon the review of my later Animadversions on Mr. Hobbes's Problemata
de Vacuo, that some passages of this Tract are referred to there; I saw my self
thereby little less than engaged to annex that Discourse to those
Animadversions. And this I the rather consented to, because it contains some
Experiments, that I have not elsewhere met with, which, together with some
other parts of that Essay, may, I hope, prove of some use to illustrate and
confirm our Doctrine about the Weight and Spring of the Air, and supply the
less experienced than ingenious Friends to our Hypothesis with more grounds of
answering the later Objections of some Learned Men, against whose endeavors I
perceive it will be useful to employ variety of Experiments and other Proofs to
evince the same Truth; that some or other of these may meet with those
Arguments or evasions with which they strive to elude the force of the rest.

The Title of the following Essay may sufficiently keep the Reader from
expecting to find any other kind of Attraction discoursed of, than that which
is made by Suction. But yet thus much I shall here intimate in general, that I
have found by Trials purposely made, that the Examples of Suction are not the
only noted ones of Attraction, that may be reduced to Pulsion.

OF THE CAUSE OF Attraction by SUCTION, A PARADOX.
CHAP. I.
I Might, Sir, save my self some trouble in giving you that account you desire
of me about Suction, by referring you to a passage in the Examen, I long since
writ, of Mr. Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Natura Aeris, if I knew, you had
those two Books lying by you. But because I suspect, that my Examen may not be
in your hands, since it is almost out of Print, and has not for some years been
in my own; and because I do not so well remember, after so long a time, the
particulars that I writ there, about Suction, as I do in general, that the
Hypothesis I proposed, was very incidentally and briefly discoursed of, upon an
occasion ministered by a wrong Explication given of Suction by Mr. Hobbes, I
shall here decline referring you to what I there writ; and proposing to you
those thoughts about Suction, that I remember I there pointed at, I shall annex
some things to illustrate and confirm them, that would not have been so proper
for me to have insisted on in a short and but occasional Excursion.

And I should immediately proceed to what you expect from me, but that Suction
being generally looked upon as a kind of Attraction, it will be requisite for
me to premise something about Attraction it self. For, besides that the Cause
of it, which I here dispute not of, is obscure, the very Nature and Notion of
it is wont by Naturalists to be either left untouched, or but very darkly
delivered, and therefore will not be unfit to be here somewhat explained.

How general and ancient soever the common Opinion may be, that Attraction is a
kind of Motion quite differing from Pulsion, if not also opposite to it; yet I
confess, I concur in opinion, though not altogether upon the same grounds, with
some modern Naturalists, that think Attraction a Species of Pulsion. And at
least among inanimate Bodies I have not yet observed any thing, that convinces
me, that Attraction cannot be reduced to Pulsion; for, these two seem to me to
be but extrinsical denominations of the same Local Motion, in which, if a moved
Body precede the Movent, or tend to acquire a greater distance from it, we call
it Pulsion; and if, upon the score of the Motion, the same Body follow the
Movent or approach to it, we call it Attraction. But this difference may
consist but in an accidental respect, which does not Physically alter the
nature of the Motion, but is founded upon the respect, which the Line, wherein
the Motion is made, happens to have to the situation of the Movent. And that
which seems to me to have been the chief cause of men's mistaking Attraction for
a motion opposite to Pulsion, is, that they have looked upon both the moving
and moved Bodies, in too popular and superficial a manner; and considered in
the Movent rather the situation of the conspicuous and more bulky part of the
Animal or other Agent, than the situation of that part of the Animal, or
Instrument, that does immediately impress that motion upon the Mobile.

For those that attentively heed this, may easily take notice, that some part
of that Body, or of the Instrument, which by reason of their conjunction in
this operation is to be looked on but as making one with it, is really placed
behind some part of the Body to be drawn, and therefore cannot move outward it
self without thrusting that Body forward. This will be easily understood, if we
consider, what happens when a Man draws a Chain after him; for, though his Body
do precede the Chain, yet his finger or some other part of the hand, wherewith
he draws it, has some part or other that reaches behind the fore part of the
first Link, and the hinder part of this Link comes behind the anteriour part of
the second Link; and so each Link has one of its parts placed behind some part
of the Link next after it, 'till you come to the last Link of all. And so, as
the finger, that is in the first Link, cannot move forwards but it must thrust
on that Link, by this Series of Trusions the whole Chain is moved forwards; and
if any other Body be drawn by that Chain, you may perceive, that some part of
the last Link comes behind some part of that Body, or of some intervening Body,
which, by its cohesion with it, ought in our present case to be considered as
part of it. And thus Attraction seems to be but a Species of Pulsion, and
usually belongs to that kind of it, which, for distinctions sake, is called
Trusion, by which we understand that kind of Pulsion, wherein the Movent goes
along with the moved Body without quitting it whilst the progress lasts; as it
happens, when a Gardener drives his Wheel-barrow before him without letting go
his hold of it.

But I must not here dissemble a difficulty, that I foresee may be speciously
urged against this account of Attraction. For it may be said, that there are
Attractions, where it cannot be pretended, that any part of the Attrahent comes
behind the Attracted Body; as in Magnetical and Electrical Attractions, and in
that which is made of Water, when it is drawn up into Springs and Pumps.

I need not tell you, that you know so well, as that partly the Cartesians, and
partly other Modern Philosophers, have recourse on this occasion either to
screwed Particles and other Magnetical Emissions, to explicate Phenomenon of
this kind. And, according to such Hypotheses, one may say, that many of these
Magnetical and Electrical Effluvia come behind some parts of the attracted
Bodies, or at least of the little solid Particles, that are as it were the
Walls of their Pores, or procure some discussion of the Air, that may make it
thrust the Moveable toward the Loadstone or Amber, etc. But if there were none
of these, nor any other subtle Agents that cause this Motion by a real, though
unperceived, Pulsion; I should make a distinction betwixt other Attractions and
these, which I should then style Attraction by Invisibles. But, whether there
be really any such in Nature, and why I scruple to admit things so hard to be
conceived, may be elsewhere considered. And you will, I presume, the freelier
allow me this liberty, if, (since in this place it is proper to do it,) I show
you, that in the last of the instances I formerly objected (that of the drawing
up of Water into the Barrel of a Syringe,) there is no true Attraction of the
Liquor made by the external Air. I say then, that by the ascending Rammer, as a
part of which I here consider the obtuse end, Plug, or Sucker, there is no
Attraction made of the contiguous and subjacent Water, but only there is room
made for it, to rise into, without being exposed to the pressure of the
supeiour Air. For, if we suppose the whole Rammer to be by Divine Omnipotence
annihilated, and consequently incapable of exercising any Attraction; yet,
provided the superior Air were kept off from the Water by any other way as
well as 'twas by the Rammer, the Liquor would as well ascend into the Cavity of
the Barrel; since, (as I have elsewhere abundantly proved,) the surface of the
Terraqueous Globe being continually pressed on by the incumbent Air or
Atmosphere, the Water must be by that pressure impelled into any cavity here
below, where there is no Air to resist it; as by our Supposition there is not
in the Barrel of our Syringe, when the Rammer, or whatever else was in it, had
been annihilated. Which Reasoning may be sufficiently confirmed by an
Experiment, whereby I have more than once shown some curious persons, that, if
the external Air, and consequently its pressure, be withdrawn from about the
Syringe, one may pull up the Sucker as much as he pleases, without drawing up
after it the subjacent Water. In short, let us suppose, that a Man standing in
an inner room does by his utmost resistance keep shut a Door, that is neither
locked nor latch'd, against another, who with equal force endeavors to thrust
it open: In this case, as if one should forcibly pull away the first Man, it
could not be said, that this Man, by his recess from the Door he endeavored to
press outward, did truly and properly draw in his Antagonist, though upon
that recess the coming in of his Antagonist would presently ensue; so it cannot
properly be said, that by the ascent of the Rammer, which displaces the
superior Air, either the Rammer it self, or the expelled Air, does properly
attract the subjacent Water, though the ingress of that Liquor into the Barrel
does thereupon necessarily ensue. And that, as the Comparison supposes, there
is a pressure of the superior Air against the upper part of the Sucker, you
may easily perceive, if having well stopped the lower orifice of the Syringe with
your finger, you forcibly draw up the Sucker to the top of the Barrel. For if
then you let go the Rammer, you will find it impelled downwards by the
incumbent Air with a notable force.

CHAP. II.
HAving thus premised something in general about the Nature of Attraction, as
far as it is necessary for my present design; it will be now seasonable to
proceed to the consideration of that kind of Attraction, that is employed to
raise Liquors, and is by a distinct Name called Suction.

About the Cause of this there is great contention between the New
Philosophers; as they are styled, and the Peripateticks. For the Followers of
Aristotle, and many Learned Men that in other things dissent from him, ascribe
the ascension of Liquors upon Suction to Natures abhorrence of a Vacuum. For,
say they, when a Man dips one end of a Straw or Reed into stagnant Water, and
sucks at the other end, the Air contained in the cavity of the Reed passes into
that of his Lungs, and consequently the Reed would be left empty, if no other
Body succeeded in the place it deserts; but there are only (that they take
notice of,) two Bodies that can succeed, the Air and the (grosser Liquor) the
Water; and the Air cannot do it, because of the interposition of the Water,
that denies it access to the immersed orifice of the Reed, and therefore it
must be the Water it self, which accordingly does ascend to prevent a Vacuum
detested by Nature.

But many of the Modern Philosophers, and generally all the Corpuscularians,
look upon this Fuga Vacui as but an imaginary Cause of Suction, though they do
it upon very differing grounds. For, the Atomists, that willingly admit of
Vacuities, properly so called, both within and without our World, cannot think
that Nature hates or fears a Vacuum, and declines her usual course to prevent
it: And the Cartesians, though they do, as well as the Peripateticks, deny that
there is a Vacuum, yet since they affirm not only, that there is none in rerum
Natura, but that there can be none, because what Others call an empty Space
having three Dimensions, has all that they think belonging to the Essence of a
Body, they will not grant Nature to be so indiscreet, as to strain her self to
prevent the making of a thing that is impossible to be made.

The Peripatetic Opinion about the Cause of Suction, though commonly defended
by the Schools, as well Modern as Ancient, supposes in Nature such an
abhorrence of a Vacuum, as neither has been well proved, nor does well agree
with the lately discovered Phenomenon of Suction. For, according to their
Hypothesis, Water and other Liquors should ascend upon Suction to any hight to
prevent a Vacuum, which yet is not agreeable to experience. For I have
carefully tried, that by pumping with a Pump far more stanch than those that
are usually made, and indeed as well closed as we could possibly bring it to
be, we could not by all our endeavors raise Water by Suction to above See
Cont. of Phys. Mech. Exp. the 15th Exp.
36 foot. The Torricellian Expt shows, that the weight of the Air is able to
sustain, and some of our Experimts show, it is able to raise a Mercurial
Cylinder equal in weight to as high a Cylinder of Water as we were able to
raise by pumping. For Mercury being near 14 times as heavy as Water of the same
bulk, if the weight of the Air be equivalent to that of a Mercurial Cylinder of
29 or 30 Inches, it must be able to counterpoise a Cylinder of Water near
fourteen times as long, that is, from thirty four to near thirty six foot. And
very disagreeable to the common Hypothesis, but consonant to ours, is the
Experiment that I have more than once tried, and I think elsewhere delivered,
namely, That, if you take a Glass Pipe of about three foot long, and, dipping
one end of it in Water, suck at the other, the Water will be suddenly made to
flow briskly into your mouth: But, if instead of Water you dip the lower end
into Quicksilver, though you suck as strongly as ever you can, provided that in
this case, as in the former, you hold the Pipe upright, you will never be able
to suck up the Quicksilver near so high as your mouth; so that if the Water
ascended upon Suction to the top of the same Pipe, because else there would
have been a Vacuum left in the cavity of it, why should not we conclude, that,
when we have sucked up the Quicksilver as strongly as we can, as much of the
upper part of the Tube as is deserted by the Air, and yet not filled by the
Mercury, admits, in part at least, a Vacuum, (as to Air) of which consequently
Nature cannot reasonably be supposed to have so great and unlimited an
abhorrency, as the Peripateticks and their Adherents presume. Yet I will not
determine, whether there be any more than many little Vacuities, or Spaces
devoid of Air, in the Cavity, so called, of the Pipe unfill'd by the Mercury;
(so that the whole Cavity is not one entire empty Space;) it being sufficient
for my purpose, that my Experiment affords a good Argument ad hominem against
the Peripateticks, and warrants us to seek for some other Cause than the fuga
Vacui, why a much stronger Suction than that, which made Water ascend with ease
into the Suckers mouth, will not also raise Quicksilver to the same height or
near it.

Those Modern Philosophers that admit not the fuga Vocui to be the Cause of the
raising of Liquors in Suction, do generally enough agree in referring it to the
action of the Suckers thorax. For, when a Man endeavors to suck up a Liquor,
he does by means of the Muscles enlarge the cavity of his Chest, which he
cannot do but at the same time he must thrust away those parts of the ambient
Air that were contiguous to his Chest, and the displaced Air does, according to
some Learned Men, (therein, if I mistake not, Followers of Gassendus,) compress
the contiguous Air, and that the next to it, and so outward, 'till the
pressure, successively passing from one part of the Air to the other, arrive at
the surface of the Liquor; and all other places being as to sense full, the
impelled Air cannot find place but by thrusting the Water into the room made
for it in the Pipe by the recess of the Air that passed into the Suckers lungs.
And they differed not much from this Explication, that, without taking in the
compression of the ambient Air made by the thorax, refer the Phenomenon to the
propagated motion or impulse, that is impressed on the Air displaced by the
thorax in its dilatation, and yet unable to move in a World perfectly filled,
as they suppose ours to be, unless the Liquor be impelled into as much of the
cavity of the Pipe, as fast as it is deserted by the Air that is said to be
sucked up. But though I readily confess this Explication to be ingenious, and
such as I wonder not they should acquiess in, who are acquainted but with the
long known and obvious Phenomenon of Suction; and though I am not sure, but
that in the most familiar cases the Causes assigned by them may contribute to
the Effect; yet, preserving for Cartesius and Gassendus the respect I willingly
pay such great Philosophers, I must take the liberty to tell you, that I cannot
acquiess in their Theory. For I think, that the Cause of Suction, they assign,
is in many cases not necessary, in others, not sufficient. And first, as to the
Condensation of the Air by the dilatation of the Suckers Chest; when I consider
the extent of the ambient Air, and how small a compression no greater an
expansion than that of the Thorax is like to make, I can scarce think, so
slight a condensation of the free Air can have so considerable an operation on
the surface of the Liquor to be raised, as the Hypothesis I examine requires:
And that this impulse of the Air by a Suckers dilated Thorax, though it be wont
to accompany the ascension of the water procured by Suction, yet is not of
absolute necessity to it, will, I presume, be easily granted, if it can be made
out, that even a propagated Pulsion, abstracted from any Condensation of Air,
is not so necessarily the Cause of it, but that the Effect may be produced
without it. For suppose, that by Divine Omnipotence so much Air as is displaced
by the Thorax were annihilated; yet I see not, why the Ascension of the Liquor
should not ensue. For, when a Man begins to suck, there is an Aequilibrium, or
rather Aequipollency between the pressure, which the Air, contained in the
Pipe, (which is shut up with the pressure of the Atmosphere upon it,) has, by
virtue of its Spring, upon that part of the surface of the water that is
environed by the sides of the Pipe, and the pressure which the Atmospherical
Air has, by virtue of its weight, upon all the rest of the surface of the
stagnant water; so that, when by the dilatation of the Suckers Thorax, the Air
within the cavity of the Pipe comes to be rarefied, and consequently loose of
its Spring, the weight of the external Air continuing in the mean time the
same, it must necessarily happen, that the Spring of the internal Air will be
too weak to compress any longer the gravitation of the external, and
consequently, that part of the surface of the stagnant water, that is included
in the Pipe, being less pressed upon, than all the other parts of the same
surfaces must necessarily give way, where it can least resist, and consequently
be impelled up into the Pipe, where the Air, having had its Spring weakened by
expansion, is no longer able to resist, as it did before. This may be
illustrated by somewhat varying an Instance already given, and conceiving, that
within a Chamber three Men thrust all together with their utmost force against
a Door, (which we suppose to have neither Bolt nor Latch) to keep it shut, at
the same time the three other Men have just equal strength, and employ their
force to thrust it open. For though, whilst their opposite endeavors are
equal, the Door will continue to be kept shut, yet if one of the three Men
within the Room should go away, there will need no new force, nor other
accession of strength to the three Men, to make them prevail and thrust open
the Door against the resistance of those that endeavored to keep it shut, who
are now but two.

And here (upon the by) you may take notice, that, to raise water in Suction,
there is no necessity of any rarefied and forcibly stretched Rope, as 'twere,
of the Air, to draw up the subjacent water into the Pipe, since the bare
debilitation of the Spring of the included Air may very well serve the turn.
And though, if we should suppose the Air within the Pipe to be quite
annihilated, it could not be pretended (since it would not have so much as
Existence) that it exercises an attractive Power; yet in this case the water
would ascend into the Pipe, without the assistance of Natures imaginary
Abhorrence of a Vacuum, but by a Mechanical Necessity, plainly arising from
this, that there would be a pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere upon the rest
of the surface of the stagnant water, and no pressure at all upon that part of
the surface that is within the Pipe, where consequently there could be no
resistance made to the ascension of the water, every where else strongly urged
by the weight of the incumbent Air.

I shall add on this occasion, that, to show some inquisitive Men, that the
weak resistance within a Vessel, that had but one orifice exposed to the water,
may much more contribute to the ascension of that Liquor into the Vessel, than
either the compression or the continued or reflected impulse of the external
Air; I thought fit to produce a Phenomenon, which by the Beholders was without
scruple judged an Effect of Suction, and yet could not be ascribed to the Cause
of Suction, assigned by either of the Sects of Philosophers I dissent from. The
Experiment was this: By a way, elsewhere delivered, the long neck of a
Glass-bubble was sealed up, and almost all the Air had been by Heat driven out
of the whole cavity of the Bubble or Vial, and then the Glass was laid aside
for some hours, or as long as we pleased; afterward the sealed apex of the
neck was broken off under water: I demand now of a Peripatetic, whether the
Liquor ought to be sucked or drawn into the cavity of the Glass, and why? if he
says, as questionless he will, that the water would be attracted to hinder a
Vacuum, he would thereby acknowledge, that, 'till the Glass was unstopt under
water, there was some empty space in it; for, 'till the sealed end was broken
off, the water could not get in, and therefore, if the fuga vacui had any thing
to do in the ascension, the Liquor must rise, not to prevent an empty space,
but to fill one that was made before. Nor does our Experiment much more favor
the other Philosophers, I dissent from: For in it there is no dilatation made
of the sides of the Glass, as in ordinary Suction there is made of the Thorax,
but only there is so much Air driven out of the cavity of the Bubble, into
whose room since neither common Air nor Water is permitted to succeed, it
appears not, how the propagated and returning impulse, or the Circle of Motion,
as to common Air and Water, does here take place. And then I demand, what
becomes of the Air, that has been by heat driven out, and is by the Hermetical
Seal kept out of the cavity of the Bubble? If it be said, that it diffuses it
self into the ambient Air, and mingles with it, that will be granted which I
contended for, that so little Air as is usually displaced in Suction cannot
make any considerable compression of the free ambient Air; for, what can one
Cubic Inch of Air, which is sometimes more than one of our Glasses contains,
do, to the condensation so much as of all the Air in the Chamber, when the
expelled Corpuscles are evenly distributed among those of the ambient. And how
comes this inconsiderable condensation to have so great an effect in every part
of the room, as to be able there to impel into the Glass as much water in
extent as the whole Air that was driven out of the cavity of it? But if it be
said, that the expelled Air condensed only the contiguous or very neighboring
Air, it is easy to answer, that it is no way probable, that the expelled
Particles of the Air should not by the differing motions of the ambient Air be
quickly made to mingle with it, but should rather wait (which if it did we
sometimes made it do for many hours) 'till the Vessels whence 'twas driven out
were unstopp'd again. But, though this could probably be pretended, it cannot
truly be asserted. For if you carry the sealed Glass quite out of the room or
house, and unstop it at some other place, though two or three miles distant;
the ascension of the water will, (as I found by trial) nevertheless ensue; in
which case I presume, it will not be said, that the Air, that was expelled out
of the Glass, and condensed the contiguous or near contiguous Air, attended the
Bubble in all its motions, and was ready at hand to impel-in the water, as soon
as the sealed apex of the Vial was broken off. But I doubt not, but most of the
Embracers of the Opinion I oppose, being Learned and Ingenuous Persons, if they
had been acquainted with these and the like Phenomenon, would rather have
changed their Opinion about Suction, than have gone about to defend it by such
Evasions, which I should not have thought worth proposing, if I had not met
with Objections of this nature publicly maintained by a Learned Writer, on
occasion of the Air's rushing into the exhausted Magdenburgic Engine. But as in
our Experiment these Objections have no place, so in our Hypothesis the
Explication is very easy, as will anon be intimated.

CHAP. III.
HAving thus shown, that the Ascension of Water upon Suction may be caused
otherwise than by the Condensation or the propagated Pulsion of Air contiguous
to the Suckers Thorax, and thrust out of place by it; it remains that I show,
(which was one of the two things I chiefly intended,) that there may be Cases
wherein the Cause, assigned in the Hypothesis I am examining, will not have
place. But this will be better understood, if, before I proceed to the proof of
it, I propose to you the thoughts, I had many years since, and do still retain,
about the Cause of the Ascension of Liquors in Suction.

To clear the way to the right understanding of the ensuing Discourse, it will
not be amiss here to premise a summary intimation of some things that are
supposed in our Hypothesis.

We suppose then first, without disputing either the Existence or the nature of
Elementary Air, that the Common Air we breath in, and which I often call
Atmospherical Air, abounds with Corpuscles not devoid of Weight, and endowed
with Elasticity or Springiness, whereby the lower parts, comprest by the weight
of the upper, incessantly endeavor to expand themselves, by which expansion,
and in proportion to it, the Spring of the Air is weakened, (as other Springs
are wont to be) the more they are permitted to stretch themselves.

Next, we suppose, that the Terraqueous Globe, being environed with this
gravitating and springy Air, has its surface and the Bodies placed on it pressed
by as much of the Atmosphere as either perpendicularly leans on them, or can
otherwise come to bear upon them. And this pressure is by the Turricellian and
other Experiments found to be equivalent to a perpendicularly erected Cylinder
of about twenty nine or thirty Inches of Quicksilver, (for the height is
differing, as the gravity of the Atmosphere happens to be various.)

Lastly, we suppose, that, Air being contained in a Pipe or other hollow Body
that has but one orifice open to the free Air, if this orifice be Hermetically
sealed, or otherwise (as with the mouth of one that sucks) closed, the now
included Air, whilst it continues without any farther expansion, will have an
elasticity equivalent to the weight of as much of the outward Air as did before
press against it. For, if the weight of the Atmosphere, to which it was then
exposed, had been able to compress it further, it would have done so, and then
the closing of the orifice, at which the internal and external Air
communicated, as it fenced the included Air from the pressure of the incumbent,
so it hindered the same included Air from expanding it self; so that, as it was
shut up with the pressure of the Atmosphere upon it, that is in a state of as
great compression as the weight of the Atmosphere could bring it to, so, being
shut up and thereby kept from weakening that pressure by expansion, it must
retain a Springiness equipollent to the pressure 'twas exposed to before, which
(as I just now noted) was as great as the weight of the incumbent Pillar of the
Atmosphere could make it. But if, as was said in the first Supposition, the
included Air should come to be dilated or expanded, the Spring being then
unbent, its Spring, like that of other elastical Bodies, would be debilitated
answerably to that expansion.

To me then it seems, that, speaking in general, Liquors are upon Suction
raised into the cavities of Pipes and other hollow Bodies, when, and so far as,
there is a less pressure on the surface of the Liquor in the cavity, than on
the surface of the external Liquor that surrounds the Pipe, whether that
pressure on those parts of the external Liquor, that are from time to time
impelled up into the orifice of the Pipe, proceed from the weight of the
Atmosphere, or the propagated compression or impulse of some parts of the Air,
or the Spring of the Air, or some other Cause, as the pressure of some other
Body quite distinct from Air.

Upon the general view of this Hypothesis, it seems very consonant to the
Mechanical Principles. For, if there be on the differing parts of the surface
of a fluid Body unequal pressures, it is plain, as well by the nature of the
thing, as by what has been demonstrated by Archimedes, and his Commentators,
that the greater force will prevail against the lesser, and that that part of
the waters surface must give way, where it is least pressed. So that that,
wherein the Hypothesis I venture to propose to you, differs from that which I
dissent from, is not, that mine is less Mechanical; but partly in this, that,
whereas the Hypothesis, I question, supposes a necessity of the protrusion or
impulse of the Air, mine does not require that supposition, but, being more
general, reaches to other ways of procuring the Ascension of Liquors, without
raising them by the impulse of the Air; and partly, and indeed chiefly, in that
the Hypothesis, I decline, makes the Cause of the Ascension of Liquors to be
only the increased pressure of the Air external to the pipe; and I chiefly make
it to depend upon the diminished pressure of the Air within the pipe, on the
score of the expansion it is brought to by Suction.

To proceed now to some Experiments that I made in favor of this Hypothesis, I
shall begin with that which follows:

We took a Glass-pipe bended like a Siphon, but so that the shorter leg was as
parallel to the longer as we could get it made, and was Hermetically sealed at
the end: Into this Siphon we made a shift (for it is not very easy) to convey
water, so that the crooked part being held downwards, the liquor reached to the
same height in both the legs, and yet there was about an Inch and half of
uncomprest Air shut up in the shorter leg. This little Instrument (for 'twas
but about fifteen Inches long) being thus prepared, it is plain, that according
to the Hypothesis I dissent from, there is no reason, why the water should
ascend upon Suction. For, though we should admit, that the external Air were
considerably comprest, or received a notable impulse, when the Suckers chest is
enlarged; yet in our case that compression or protrusion will not reach the
surface of the water in the shorter leg, because it is there fenced from the
action of the external Air by the sides of the Glass, and the Hermetical Seal
at the top. And yet, if one sucked strongly at the open orifice in the longer
leg, the water in the shorter would be deprest; and that in the longer
ascended at one suck about an Inch and half: Of which the reason is clear in
our Hypothesis. For, the Spring of the included Air, together with the weight
of the water in the shorter leg, and the pressure of the Atmospherical Air,
assisted by the weight of the liquor in the longer leg, counter-ballanced one
another before the Suction began: But, when afterward upon Suction the Air in
the longer leg came to be dilated and thereby weakened, 'twas rendered unable
to resist the undiminish'd pressure of the Air included in the shorter leg,
which consequently expanding it self by virtue of its Elasticity, deprest the
contiguous water, and made it proportionably rise in the opposite leg, 'till
by the expansion its Spring being more and more weakened, it arrived at an
equipollency with the gravitation or pressure of the Atmosphere. Which last
clause contains the Reason, why, when the person that sucked had raised the
water in the longer leg less than three Inches higher by repeated endeavors
to suck, and that without once suffering the water to fall back again, he was
not able to elevate the water in the longer, so much as three Inches above its
first station. And if in the shorter leg there was but an Inch and a quarter
of space left for the Air unfill'd by the water, by diverse skilfully reiterated
acts of Suction he could not raise the liquor in the longer leg above two
Inches; because by that time the Air included in the shorter leg had, by
expanding it self further and further, proportionably weakened its Spring,
'till at length it became as rarefied; as was the Air in the cavity of the
longer leg, and consequently was able to thrust away the water with no more
force than the Air in the long leg was able to resist. And by the recited
trial it appeared, that the rarefaction usually made of Air by Suction is not
near so great, as one would expect, problably because by the dilatation of the
Lungs the Air, being still shut up, is but moderately rarefied, and the Air in
the longer leg can by them be brought to no greater degree of rarity, than
that of the Air within the Chest. For, whereas the included Air in our
Instrument was not expanded, by my estimate, at one suck to above the double of
its former dimensions, and by diverse successive sucks was expanded but from one
Inch and an half to less than four Inches and an half, if the Suction could
have been conveniently made with a great and stanch Syringe, the rarefaction of
the Air would probably have been far greater; since in our Pneumatick Engine Air
may, without heat, and by a kind of Suction, be brought to possess many
hundreds of times the space it took up before. From this rarefaction of the Air
in both the legs of our Instrument proceeds another Phenomenon, readily
explicable by our Hypothesis. For if, when the water was impelled up as high as
the Suction could raise it, the Instrument were taken from the Suckers mouth,
the elevated water would with violence return to its wonted station. For, the
Air, in both the legs of the Instrument, having by the Suction lost much of
the Spring, and so of its power of pressing; when once the orifice of the
longer leg was left open, the Atmospherical Air came again to gravitate upon
the water in that leg, and the Air, included in the other leg, having its
Spring debilitated by the precedent expansion, was not able to hinder the
external Air from violently repelling the elevated water, 'till the included
Air was thrust into the space it possessed before the Suction; in which space
it had Density and Elasticity enough to resist the pressure, that the external
Air exercised against it through the interposed water.

But our Hypothesis about the Cause of Suction would not need to be
solicitously proved to you by other ways, if you had seen what I have sometimes
been able to do in our Pneumatick Engine. For, there we found by trials
purposely devised, and carefully made, that a good Syringe being so conveyed
into our Receiver, that the open orifice of the Pipe or lower part was kept
under water, if the Engine were exhausted, though the handle of the Syringe were
drawn up, the water would not follow it, which yet it would do if the external
Air were let in again. The Reason of which is plain in our Hypothesis. For, the
Air, that should have pressed upon the surface of the stagnant water, having been
pumpt out, there was nothing to impell up the water into the deserted cavity of
the Syringe, as there was when the Receiver was filled with Air.

CHAP. IV.
BUt because such a convenience as our Engine, and the apparatus necessary for
such Trials are not easily procurable, I shall endeavor to confirm our
Hypothesis about Suction by subjoining some Experiments, that may be tried
without the help of that Engine, for the making out these three things: I. That
a Liquor may be raised by Suction, when the pressure of the Air, neither as it
has Weight nor Elasticity, is the Cause of the Elevation. II. That the weight
of the Atmospherical Air is sufficient to raise up Liquors in Suction. III.
That in some cases Suction will not be made, as, according to the Hypothesis I
dissent from, it should, although there be a dilatation of the Suckers Thorax,
and no danger of a Vacuum though the Liquor should ascend.


And first, to show, how much the rising of Liquors in Suction depends upon the
weight or pressure of the impellent Body, and how little necessity there is,
where that pressure is not wanting, that, in the place deferted by the Liquor
that is sucked, there should succeed Air or some other visible Body, as the
Peripatetic Schools would have it; to show this, I say, I thought on the
following Experiments. We took a Glass-pipe fit to have the Torricellian
Experiment made with it, but a good deal longer than was necessary for that
use: This Pipe being Hermetically sealed at one end, the other end was so bent
as to be reflected upwards, and make as it were the shorter leg of the Siphon
as parallel as we could to the longer, so that the Tube now was shaped like an
inverted Siphon with legs of a very unequal length. This Tube, notwithstanding
its inconvenient figure, we made a shift, (for it is not easily done) to fill
with Mercury, when 'twas in an inclined posture, and then erecting it, the
Mercury subsided in the longer leg, as in the Torricellian Experiment, and
attained to between two foot and a quarter and two foot and an half above the
surface of the Mercury in the shorter leg, which in this Instrument answers to
the stagnant Mercury in an ordinary Barometer, from which to distinguish it I
have elsewhere called this Siphon, furnished with Mercury, a Traveling
Baroscope, because it may be safely carried from place to place. Out of the
shorter leg of this Tube we warily took as much Mercury as was thought
convenient for what we had further to do, and this we did by such a way as to
hinder any Air from getting into the deserted cavity of the longer leg, by
which means the Mercurial Cylinder, (estimated as I lately mentioned) retained
the same height above the stagnant Mercury in the shorter: The upper and closed
part of this Traveling Baroscope you will easily grant to have been free from
Common Air, not only for other Reasons that have been given elsewhere, but
particularly for this, that, if you gently incline the Instrument, the
Quicksilver will ascend to the top of the Tube; which you know it could not do,
if the place, formerly deserted by it, were possessed by the Air, which by its
Spring would hinder the ascension of the Mercury, (as is easy to be tried.)
The Instrument having been thus fitted, I caused one of the bystanders to suck
at the shorter leg, whereupon (as I expected) there presently ensued an
Ascension of four or five Inches of Mercury in that leg, and a proportionable
Subsidence of the Mercury in the longer, and yet in this case the raising of
the Mercury cannot be pretended to proceed from the pressure of the Air. For,
the weight of the Atmosphere is fenced off by that, which closes the upper end
of the longer Tube, and the Spring of the Air has here nothing to do, since, as
we have lately shown, the space deserted by the Mercury is not possessed by the
included Air, and the pulsion or condensation of the Air, supposed by diverse
modern Philosophers to be made by the dilatation of the Suckers Chest, and to
press upon the surface of the Liquors that are to be sucked up, this, I say,
cannot here be pretended in regard the surface of the Liquor in the longer leg
is every way fenced from the pressure of the ambient Air. So that it remains,
that the Cause, which raised the Quicksilver in the shorter leg upon the newly
recited Suction, was the weight of the collaterally superior Quicksilver in
the longer leg, which, being (at the beginning of the Suction) equivalent to
the weight of the Atmosphere, there is a plain reason, why the stagnant Mercury
in the shorter leg should be raised some Inches by Suction; as Mercury
stagnant in an open Vessel will be raised by the weight of the Atmosphere, when
the Suction is made in the open Air. For, in both cases there is a Pipe, that
reaches to the stagnant Mercury, and a competent weight to impel it into that
Pipe; when the Air in the cavity of the Pipe has its Spring weakened by the
dilatation that accompanied Suction.

The Second point formerly proposed, which is, That the weight of the Air is
sufficient to raise Liquors in Suction; may not be ill proved by Arguments
legitimately drawn from the Torricellian Experiment it self, and much more
clearly by the first and fifteenth of our Continued Physico-Mechanical
Experiments. And therefore I shall only here take notice of a Phenomenon, that
may be exhibited by the Traveling Baroscope, which, though it be much
inferior to the Experiments newly referred to, may be of some use on the
present occasion.

Having then provided an Instrument like the Traveling Baroscope, mentioned
under the former Head, but whose legs were not so unequally long, and having
in it made the Torricellian Experiment after the manner lately described; we
ordered the matter so, that there remained in the shorter leg the length of
diverse Inches unfill'd with stagnant Mercury. Then I caused one, versed in what
he was to do, so to raise the Quicksilver by Suction to the open orifice of the
shorter leg, that, the orifice being seasonably and dexterously closed, the
Mercury continued to fill that leg, as long as we thought fit; and then having
put a mark to the surface of the Mercury in the longer leg, we unstopp'd the
orifice of the shorter; whereupon the Mercury, that before filled it, was
depressed, 'till the same Liquor in the longer leg was raised five Inches or
more above the mark, and continued at that height. I said, that the Mercury
that had been raised by Suction, was depressed, rather than that it subsided,
because its own weight could not here make it fall, since a Mercurial Cylinder
of five Inches was far from being able to raise so tall a Cylinder of Mercury
as made a counterpoise in the longer leg; and therefore the depression we
speak of, is to be referred to the gravitation of the Atmospherical Air upon
the surface of the Mercury in the shorter leg: And I see no cause to doubt but
that, if we could have procured an Instrument, into whose shorter leg a
Mercurial Cylinder of many Inches higher could have been sucked up, it would by
this contrivance have appeared, that the pressure of the Atmosphere would
easily impel up a far taller Cylinder of Mercury than it did in our recited
Experiment.

That this is no groundless conjecture may appear probable by the Experiment
you will presently meet with. For if the gravity of an incumbent Pillar of the
Atmosphere be able to compress a parcel of included Air as much as a Mercurial
Cylinder, equivalent in weight to between thirty and five and thirty foot of
water, is able to condense it, it cannot well be denied that the same
Atmospherical Cylinder may be able by its weight to raise and counterballance
eight or nine and twenty Inches of Quicksilver, or an equivalent pillar of
water in Tubes, where the resistance of these two Liquors to be raised and
sustained by the Air, depends only upon their own unassisted gravity.

To confirm our Doctrine of the Gravitation of the Atmosphere upon the surface
of the Liquors exposed to it, I will subjoin an Experiment, that I devised to
show, that the incumbent Air, in its natural or usual state, would compress
other Air not rarefied, but in the like natural state, as much as a Cylinder of
eight or nine and twenty Inches of Mercury would condense or compress it.

In order to the making of this, I must put you in mind of what I have shown
elsewhere at large, See the Authors Defense of the Doctrine touching the Spring
and Weight of the Air, against Fr. Linus, chap 5.
and shall further confirm by one of the Experiments that follows the next;
namely, that about twenty nine or thirty Inches of Quicksilver will compress
Air, that being in its natural or usual state (as to rarity and density) has
been shut up in the shorter leg of our Traveling or Syphonlike Baroscope,
into half the room that included Air possessed before. This premised, I pass on
to my Experiment, which was this:

We provided a Traveling Baroscope, wherein the Mercury in the longer leg was
kept suspended by the counterpoise of the Air that gravitated on the surface of
the Mercury in the shorter leg, which we had so ordered, that it reached not
by about two Inches to the top of the shorter leg. Then making a mark at the
place where the stagnant Mercury rested, 'twas manifest according to our
Hypothesis, that the Air in the upper part of the shorter leg was in its
natural state, or of the same degree of density with the outward Air, with
which it freely communicated at the open orifice of the shorter leg; so that
this stagnant Air was equally pressed upon by the weight of the collaterally
superior Cylinder of Mercury in the longer leg, and the equivalent weight of
a directly incumbent pillar of the Atmosphere. Things being in this posture,
the upper part of the shorter leg, which had been before purposely drawn out
to an almost capillary smallness, was Hermetically sealed, which, though the
Instrument was kept erected, was so nimbly done by reason of the slenderness of
the Pipe, that the included Air did not appear to be sensibly heated, though
for greater caution we staid a while from proceeding, that, if any rarefaction
had been produced in the Air, it might have time to lose it again. This done,
we opened the lower end of the longer leg, (which had been so ordered before,
that we could easily do it, and without concussion of the Vessel,) by which
means the Atmospherical Air, gaining access to the Mercury included in the
longer leg, did, as I expected, by its gravitation upon it so compress the Air
included in the shorter leg, that, according to the estimate we made with the
help of a Ruler, (for by reason of the conical figure of the upper part of the
glass we could not take precise measures,) it was thrust into near half the
room it took up before, and consequently, according to what I put you lately in
mind of, endured a compression like that, which a Mercurial Cylinder of about
twenty nine Inches would have given it.

This Experiment, as to the main of it, was for greater caution made the second
time with much the like success; and though it had been more easy to measure
the Condensation of the Air, if, instead of drawing out and sealing up the
shorter leg of the Instrument, we had contented our selves to close it some
other way; yet we rather chose to employ Hermes's Seal, lest, if any other
course had been taken, it might be pretended, that some of the included Air,
when it began to be comprest, might escape out at the not perfectly and
strongly closed orifice of the leg wherein 'twas imprisoned.

To make it yet further appear, how much the Ascension of Liquors by Suction
depends upon Pressure, rather than upon Natures imaginary Abhorrence of a
Vacuum, or the propagated Pulsion of the Air; I will subjoin an Instance,
wherein that presumed Abhorrence cannot be pretended. The Experiment was thus
made:

A Glass-Syphon, like those lately described, with one leg far longer than the
other, was Hermetically sealed at the shorter leg, and then by degrees there
was put in, at the orifice of the longer leg, as much Quicksilver as by its
weight sufficed to compress the Air in the shorter leg into about half the
room it possessed before; so that, according to the Peripatetick Doctrine, the
Air must be in a state of preternatural Condensation, and that to a far greater
degree, than (as I have tried) it is usually brought to by Cold, intense enough
to freeze water. Then measuring the height of the Quicksilver in the longer
Tube above the superficies of that in the shorter, we found it not exceed
thirty Inches. Now, if Liquors did rise in Suction ob fugam vacui, there is no
reason, why this Quicksilver in the longer part of the Siphon should not easily
ascend upon Suction, at least 'till the Air in the shorter leg had regained
its former Dimensions, since it cannot in this place be pretended, that, if the
Mercury should ascend, there would be any danger of a Vacuum in the shorter
leg of the Tube, in regard that the contiguous included Air is ready at hand
to succeed as fast as the Mercury subsides in the shorter leg of the Siphon.
Nor can it be pretended, that, to fill the place deserted by the Quicksilver,
the included Air must suffer a preternatural rarefaction or discension; since
it is plain in our case, that on the contrary, as long as the Air continues in
the state whereto the weight of the Quicksilver has reduced it, it is kept in a
violent state of compression; since in the shorter leg it was in its natural
state, when the Mercury, poured into the longer leg, did by its weight thrust
it into about half the room it took up before. And yet, having caused several
persons, one of them versed in sucking, to suck diverse times as strongly as
they could, they were neither of them able, not so much as for a minute of an
hour, to raise the Mercury in the longer leg, and make it subside in the
shorter for more than about an Inch at most. And yet to show you, that the
Experiment was not favorably tried for me, the height of the Mercurial
Cylinder in the longer leg above the surface of that in the shorter leg was,
when the Suction was tried, an Inch or two shorter than thirty Inches, and the
comprest Air in the shorter leg was so far from having been by the exsuction
expanded beyond its natural and first dimensions, that it did not, when the
contiguous Mercury stood as low as we could make it subside, regain so much as
one half of the space it had lost by the precedent Compression, and
consequently was in a preternatural state of condensation, when it had been
freed from that state as far as Suction would do it. Whence it seems evident,
that 'twas not ob fugam vacui, that the Quicksilver did upon Suction ascend one
Inch; for, upon the same score it ought to have ascended two, or perhaps more
Inches, since there was no danger, that by such an ascension any Vacuum should
be produced or left in the shorter leg of the Siphon; whereas, according to
our Hypothesis, a clear cause of the Phenomenon is assignable. For, before the
Suction was begun, there was an Aequilibrium or equipollency between the weight
of the superior Quicksilver in the longer leg, and a Spring of the comprest
Air included in the shorter leg: But when the Experimentor began to suck, his
Chest being widen'd, part of the Air included in the upper part of the longer
leg passed into it, and that which remained had by that expansion its pressure
so weakened, that the Air in the shorter leg, finding no longer the former
resistance, was able by its own Spring to expand it self, and consequently to
depress the contiguous Mercury in the same shorter leg, and raise it as much
in the longer.

But here a Hydrostatician, that heedfully marks this Experiment, may discern a
difficulty, that may perhaps somewhat perplex him, and seems to overthrow our
Explication of the Phenomenon. For he may object, that if the comprest Air in
the shorter leg had a Spring equipollent to the weight of the Mercury in the
longer leg, it appears not, why the Mercury should not be sucked up in this
Instrument, as well as in the free Air; since, according to me, the pressure of
the included Air upon the subjacent Mercury must be equivalent to the weight of
the Atmosphere, and yet experience shows, that the weight of the Atmosphere
will, upon Suction, raise Quicksilver to the height of several Inches.

To clear this difficulty, and show, that, though it be considerable, it is not
at all insuperable, be pleased to consider with me, that I make indeed the
Spring of the comprest Air to be equipollent to the Weight of the compressing
Mercury, and I have a manifest reason to do it; because, if the Spring of the
Air were not equipollent to that Weight, the Mercury must necessarily compress
the Air farther, which it is granted de facto not to do. But then I consider,
that in our case there ought to be a great deal of difference between the
operation of the Spring of the included Air and the Weight of the Atmosphere,
after Suction has been once begun. For, the Weight of the Atmosphere, that
impels up Mercury and other Liquors, when the Suction is made in the open Air,
continues still the same, but the force or pressure of the included Air is
equal to the counterpressure of the Mercury no longer than the first moment of
the Suction; after which, the force of the imprisoned Air still decreases more
and more, since this comprest Air, being further and further expanded, must
needs have its Spring proportionably weakened; so that it need be no wonder,
that the Mercury was not sucked up any more than we have related; for there was
nothing to make it ascend to a greater height, than that, at which the
debilitated Spring of the (included but) expanded Air was brought to an
equipollency with the undiminish'd and indeed somewhat increased weight of the
Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg, and the pressure of the Aerial Cylinder
in the same leg, lessened by the action of him that sucked. For whereas, when
the orifice of this leg stood open, the Mercury was pressed on by a Cylinder of
the Atmospherical Air, equivalent to about thirty Inches of Quicksilver; by the
mouth and action of him that sucked the Tube was freed from the external Air,
and by the dilatation of his Thorax, the neighboring Air, that had a free
passage through his windpipe to it, was proportionably expanded, and had its
Spring and pressure weakened: By which means, the comprest Air in the shorter
leg of the Siphon was enabled to impel up the Mercury, 'till the lately
mentioned Equilibrium or equipollency was attained. And I must here take
notice, that, as the Quicksilver was raised by Suction but a little way, so the
Cylinder that was raised was a very long one; whereas, when Mercury is sucked
up in the free Air, it is seldom raised to half that length; though, as I noted
before, the impellent cause, which is the weight of the Atmosphere, continued
still the same, whereas in our Siphon, when the Mercury was sucked up but an
Inch, the comprest Air, possessing double the space it did before, had by this
expansion already lost a very considerable part of its former Spring and
Pressure.

I should here conclude this Discourse, but that I remember a Phenomenon of
our Pneumatic Engine, which to diverse Learned Men, especially Aristotelians,
seemed so much to argue, that Suction is made either by a Fuga Vacui, or some
internal Principle, that diverse years ago I thought fit to set down another
account of it, and lately meeting with that account among other papers, I shall
subjoin it just as I found it, by way of Appendix to the foregoing Tract.

Among the more familiar Phenomenon of the Machina Boyliana, (as they now call
it,) none leaves so much scruple in the Minds of some sorts of Men, as this,
That, when ones finger is laid close upon the orifice of the little Pipe, by
which the Air is wont to pass from the Receiver into the exhausted Cylinder,
the pulp of the finger is made to enter a good way into the cavity of the Pipe,
which does not happen without a considerable sense of pain in the lower part of
the finger. For most of those that are strangers to Hydrostaticks, especially
if they be prepossessed with the Opinions generally received both in the
Peripatetick and other Schools, persuade themselves, that they feel the newly
mentioned and painful protuberance of the pulp of the finger, to be effected
not by pressure, as we would have it, but distinctly by Attraction.

To this we are wont to answer, That common Air being a Body not devoid of
weight, the Phenomenon is clearly explicable by the pressure of it: For, when
the finger is first laid upon the orifice of the Pipe, no pain nor swelling is
produced, because the Air which is in the Pipe presses as well against that
part of the finger which covers the orifice, as the ambient Air does against
the other parts of the same finger. But when by pumping, the Air in the Pipe,
or the most part of it, is made to pass out of the Pipe into the exhausted
Cylinder, then there is nothing left in the Pipe, whose pressure can any thing
near countervail the undiminish'd pressure of the external Air on the other
parts of the finger; and consequently, that Air thrusts the most yielding and
fleshy part of the finger, which is the pulp, into that place where its
pressure is unresisted, that is, into the cavity of the Pipe, where this
forcible intrusion causes a pain in those tender parts of the finger.

To give some visible Illustration of what we have been saying, as well as for
other purposes, I thought on the following Experiment.

We took a Glass-pipe of a convenient length, and open at both ends, whose
cavity was near about an Inch in Diameter, (such a determinate breadth being
convenient, though not necessary:) To one of the ends of this Pipe we caused to
be firmly tied on a piece of very fine Bladder, that had been ruffled and
oiled, to make it both very limber and unapt to admit water; and care was
taken, that the piece of Bladder tied on should be large enough, not only to
cover the orifice, but to hang loose somewhat beneath it.

This done, we put the covered end of the Pipe into a Glass-body (or Cucurbit)
purposely made more than ordinarily tall, and the Pipe being held in such
manner, as that the end of it reached almost, but not quite, to the bottom of
the Glass-body, we caused water to be poured both into this Vessel and into the
Pipe (at its upper orifice, which was left open) that the water might ascend
equally enough, both without and within the Pipe. And when the Glass-body was
full of water, and the same liquor was level to it., or a little higher within
the Pipe, the Bladder at the lower orifice was kept plump, because the water
within the Pipe did by its weight press as forcibly downwards, as the external
water in the large Glass endeavored to press it inwards and upwards.

All this being done, we caused part of the water in the Pipe to be taken out
of it, (which may be done either by putting in and drawing out a piece of
Sponge or of Linen, or more expeditiously by sucking up part of the water with
a smaller Pipe to be immediately after laid aside;) upon which removal of part
of the internal water, that which remained in the Pipe being no longer able, by
reason of its want of weight, to press against the inside of the Bladder near
as forcibly as it did before, the external water, whose weight was not
lessened, pressed the sides and bottom of the Bladder, whereto it was
contiguous, into the cavity of the Pipe, and thrusted it up therein so
strongly, that the distended Bladder made a kind of either Thimble or
Hemisphere within the Pipe. So that here we have a protuberance, like that
abovementioned of the finger, effected by Pulsion, not Attraction; and in a
case where there can be no just pretense of having recourse to Natures
Abhorrence of a Vacuum, since, the upper orifice of the Pipe being left wide
open, the Air may pass in and out without resistance.

The like swelling of the Bladder in the Pipe we could procure without taking
out any of the internal liquor, by thrusting the Pipe deeper into the water;
for then the external liquor, having by reason of its increase of depth a
greater pressure on the outside of the Bladder, than the internal liquor had on
the inside of it, the Bladder must yield to the stronger pressure, and
consequently be impelled up.

If the Bladder lying loose at the lower end of the Pipe, the upper end were
carefully closed with ones thumb, that the upper Air might not get out until
the Experimentor thought fit, and if the thus closed Pipe were thrust almost to
the bottom of the water, the Bladder would not be protuberant inwards, as
formerly; because the included Air by virtue of its Spring, resisted from
within the pressure of the external water against the outside of the Bladder:
But if the thumb, that stopped the Pipes upper orifice, were removed, the
formerly compressed Air having liberty to expand it self, and its elasticity
being weakened thereby, the external water would with suddenness and noise
enough, not to be unpleasant to the Spectators, drive up the Bladder into the
cavity of the Pipe, and keep it there very protuberant.

To obviate an Objection, that I foresaw might be brought in by persons not
well versed in Hydrostaticks, I caused the Pipe forementioned, or such
another, to be so bent near the lower end, as that the orifice of it stood
quite on one side, and the parts of the Pipe made an angle as near to a right
one as he that blew it could bring it to. This lower orifice being fitted with
a Bladder, and the Pipe with its contained liquor being thrust under water
after the former manner, the lateral pressure of the water forced the Bladder
into the short and horizontal leg, and made it protuberate there, as it had
done when the Pipe was straight.

Lastly, that the Experiment might appear not to be confined to one liquor;
instead of Water we put into the unbent Pipe as much red Wine (whose color
would make it conspicuous) as was requisite to keep the Bladder somewhat
swelling outward, when it was somewhat near the bottom of the water; and then
'twas manifest, that, according as we had foreseen, the superficies of the red
liquor in the Pipe was a good deal higher than that of the external water, and
if the depth of both liquors were proportionably lessened, the difference of
height betwixt the two surfaces would indeed, as it ought to happen, decrease,
but still the surface of the wine would be the higher of the two, because being
lighter in specie than the common water, the Aequilibrium between the pressures
of the two liquors upon the Bladder would not be maintained, unless a greater
height of wine compensated its defect of specific gravity. And if the Pipe was
thrust deeper into the water, then the Bladder would be made protuberant
inwards, as when the Pipe had water in it. By which it appears, that these
Phenomenon, without recourse to attraction, may be explicated barely by the
Laws of the Aequilibrium of Liquors.

FINIS.

