TRACTS: CONTAINING I. SUSPICIONS about some Hidden Qualities of the AIR; with
an Appendix touching CELESTIAL MAGNETS, and some other Particulars. II.
ANIMADVERSIONS upon Mr. Hobbes's PROBLEMATA De VACUO. III. A DISCOURSE of the
CAUSE of Attraction by SUCTION.


By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by W.G. and are to be Sold by M. Pit, at the Angel against
the Little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

Preface.
AMong other Papers that I designed to contribute toward the Natural History
of the Air, I began some years ago to set down a Collection of some new or less
heeded Observations and Experiments relating to the Causes and Effects of
Changes in the Air, which I referred to several Heads, as to the Airs Heat,
Coldness, Moisture, Dryness, Diaphaneity, Opacity, Consistence, several
Saltnesses and other Titles; the last of which was of the Occult Qualities of
the Air, supposing there be any such. And though afterward I was, by Sickness
and other Impediments, diverted from proceeding in that Collection, and induced
to lay aside some of the Observations I had provided, and employ in other
Treatises such as were proper to them; yet as to the Title that contained
Suspicions about some Hidden Qualities of the Air, the possibility, if not
likelihood, that either the Matters of fact, or the Intimations delivered in
them, might afford hints not useless to the S^gacious and Inquisitive,
persuaded me to let it escape the Fate of its Companions, though possibly, if I
had more consulted my own Reputation, I should least of all have suffered this
Title to appear, there being none of the rest, that was not less conjectural.
But it being thought unfit, that any thing should perish, that related to so
considerable and uncommon a Subject, as that of this Title, I was content to
cast the collected Experiments into the following Essay for the Reasons
expressed at the beginning and close of the ensuing Paper. Which, 'twas hoped,
may be the better understood, and less liable to have its Design mistaken, by
being ushered in by this Advertisement about the occasion of it.

ERRATA.
IN the first Tract, page 41. l. 4. read Halicarnasseus.

In the Tract of the Cause of Suction, p. 14. l. 4. r. 33 for 36.

SVSPICIONS ABOUT Some Hidden QUALITIES in the AIR.
BEsides the four first Qualities of the Air, (Heat, Cold, Dryness and
Moisture) that are known even to the Vulgar; and those more unobvious, that
Philosophers and Chemists have discovered, such as Gravity, Springiness, the
power of Refracting the beams of Light; etc. I have often suspected, that there
may be in the Air some yet more latent Qualities or Powers differing enough
from all these, and principally due to the Substantial Parts or Ingredients,
whereof it consists. And to this conjecture I have been led, partly (though not
only or perhaps chiefly) by considering the Constitution of that Air we live
and breath in, which, to avoid ambiguities, I elsewhere call Atmospherical Air.
For this is not, as many imagine, a Simple and Elementary Body, but a confus^d
Aggregate of Effluviums from such differing Bodies, that, though they all agree
in constituting, by their minuteness and various motions, one great mass of
Fluid matter, yet perhaps there is scarce a more heterogeneous Body in the
world.

And as by Air I understand not (as the Peripateticks are wont to do) a mere
Elementary Body; so, when I speak of the Qualities of the Air, I would not be
thought to mean such naked and abstracted Beings (as the Schools often tell us
of,) but such as they call Qualities in concreto, namely Corpuscles endued with
Qualities, or capable of producing them in the Subjects they invade and abound
in.

I have elsewhere shown it to be highly probable, that, In a Paper above
Subterraneal Steams.
besides those vapors and exhalations which by the Heat of the Sun are
elevated into the Air, and there afford matter to some Meteors, as Clouds,
Rain, Parhelions and Rainbow^; there are, at least at some times, and in some
places, store of Effluviums emitted from the Subterraneal parts of the
Terrestrial Globe; and it is no less probable, (from what I have there and
elsewhere delivered,) that in the Subterraneal Regions there are many Bodies,
some fluid and some consistent, which, though of an operative nature, and like
upon occasion to emit steams, seldom or never appear upon the surface of the
Earth, so that many of them have not so much as names assigned them even by the
Mineralists. Now among this multitude and variety of Bodies, that lie buried
out of our sight, who can tell but that there may be some, if not many, of a
nature very differing from those we are hitherto familiarly acquainted with;
and that, as diverse wonderful and peculiar operations of the Loadstone, (though
a Mineral many Ages ago famous among Philosophers and Physicians,) were not
discovered 'till of later Ages, wherein its nobler Virtues have been disclosed;
so there may be other Subterraneous Bodies, that are endowed with considerable
powers, which to us are yet unknown, and would, if they were known, be found
very differing from those of the Fossiles we are wont to deal with?

I also further consider, that, (as I have elsewhere endeavored to make it
probable) the Sun and Planets (to say nothing of the Fixed Stars) may have
influences here below distinct from their Heat and Light. On which Supposition
it seems not absurd to me to suspect, that the Subtle, but Corporeal,
Emanations even of these Bodies may (sometimes at least) reach to our Air, and
mingle with those of our Globe in that great receptacle or rendevouz of
Celestial and Terrestrial Effluviums, the Atmosphere. And if this suspicion be
not groundless, the very small knowledge we have of the structure and
constitution of Globes so many thousands or hundred of thousands of miles
remote from us, and the great ignorance we must be in of the nature of the
particular Bodies that may be presumed to be contained in those Globes, (as
Minerals and other Bodies are in the Earth,) which in many things appear of kin
to those that we inhabit, (as with excellent Telescopes I have often with
attention and pleasure observed, particularly in the Moon,) this great
imperfection, I say, of our knowledge may keep it from being unreasonable to
imagine, that some, if not many, of those Bodies and their effluxions may be of
a nature quite differing from those we take notice of here about us, and
consequently may operate after a very differing and peculiar manner.

And though the chief of the Heteroclite Effluviums, that indow the Air with
hidden Qualities, may probably proceed from beneath the surface of the Earth,
and from the Celestial Bodies; yet I would not deny but that, especially at
some times and in some places, the Air may derive multitudes of efficacious
particles from its own operations, acting as a fluid Substance upon that vast
number and variety of Bodies that are immediately exposed to it. For, though by
reason of its great thinness, and of its being in its usual state devoid both
of taste and smell, it seems wholly unfit to be a Menstruum; yet I am not sure
but it may have a dissolving, or at least a consuming, power on many Bodies,
especially such as are peculiarly disposed to admit its operations.

For I consider, that the Air has a great advantage by the vast Quantity of it,
that may come to work in proportion to the Bodies that are exposed to it: And I
have long thought, that, in diverse cases, the Quantity of a Menstruum may much
more considerably compensate its want of strength, than Chemists are commonly
aware of, (as there may be occasion elsewhere to exemplify.) And there are
liquors, which pass for insipid, (and are therefore thought to be altogether
unfit to be Solvents,) which, though they have their active parts too thinly
dispersed to be able presently to make sensible Impressions upon our Organs of
Tasting, yet are not quite destitute of Corpuscles fit to act as a Solvent;
especially if they have time enough to make with the other parts of the Fluid
such numerous and various motions, as must bring, now some of them, and then
others, to hit against the Body exposed to them. Which may be illustrated by
the Rust like to Verdigrease, which we have observed in Copper that has been
long exposed to the Air, whose saline particles, little by little, do in tract
of time fasten themselves in such numbers to the surface of the Metal as to
corrode it, and produce that efflorescence colored like Verdigrease, which you
know is a factitious Body, wont to be made of the same Metal, corroded by the
sharp Corpuscles of Vinegar, or of the Husks of Grapes: Besides, that by the
power, which Mercury has to dissolve Gold and Silver, it appears, that it is
not always necessary for the making a Fluid fit to be a Dissolvent, that it
should affect the Taste. And as to those Bodies, on which the Aerial Menstruum
can, though but slowly, work, the greatest quantity of it may bring it this
advantage, that, whereas even the strongest Menstruums, if they bear no great
proportion in bulk to the Bodies they are to work on, are easily glutted, and
being unable to take up any more, are fain to leave the rest of the Body
undissolved, our Aerial Menstruum bears so vast a proportion to the Bodies
exposed to it, that when one portion of it has impregnated it self as much as
it is able, there may still come fresh and fresh to work further on the
remaining part of the exposed Body.

Besides the Saline and Sulphurous particles, that, at least in some places,
may (as I have elsewhere shown) impregnate the Air, and give it a greater
affinity to Chemical Menstruums more strictly so called; I am not averse from
thinking, that the Air, merely as a fluid Body, that consists of Corpuscles of
differing sizes and solidities restlesly and very variously moved, may upon the
account of these Corpuscles be still resolving, or preying upon, the particles
of the Bodies that are exposed to their action. For, many of those Aerial
Corpuscles, some hitting and some rubbing themselves every minute against those
particles of exposed Bodies that chance to lie in their way, may well, by those
numerous occursions and affrictions, strike off and carry along with them now
some and then others of those particles; as you see it happens in water, which,
as soft and fluid as it is, wears out such hard and solid Bodies as Stones
themselves, if it often enough meet them in its passage, according to the known
saying, Gutta cavat Lapidem non vi, sed saepe cadendo.
And though the Aerial Corpuscles be very minute, and the Bodies exposed to
them oftentimes large and seemingly solid; yet this needs not make you reject
our supposition, because it is not upon the whole Body at once, that, according
to us, the Aerial Corpuscles endeavor to work, but upon the Superficial
particles, which may often be more minute than those Corpuscles; as you will
the more easily believe, if you first observe with a good Microscope, how many
extant particles may be met with on the surface of Bodies, that to the naked
Eye seem very smooth, and even of those that are polished by Art with Tripoly
or Puttee; and then consider, that one of these protuberancies, being yet
manifestly visible, may well be presumed to consist of a multitude of lesser
particles, diverse of which may very well be as minute as those Aerial
Corpuscles, that successively hit against them, and endeavor to carry them
along with themselves. And this may be illustrated by a familiar instance. For,
if you take a lump of Loaf Sugar, or even of a much solider and harder Body,
Sal Gemmae, and cast it into common water, though this liquor be insipid, and
the motions of its corpuscles but very languid; yet these corpuscles are
capable to loosen and carry off the superficial particles of Sugar or Salt,
that chance to lie in their way, and fresh corpuscles of water still succeeding
to work upon the remaining particles of the exposed Body that stand in their
way, the whole lump is by little and little dissolved, and ceases to appear to
the Eye a thing distinct from the liquor.

Some things that have occurred to me have made me suspect, that it is not
impossible, but that some Bodies may receive a disposition to Volatility, and
consequently to pass into the Air by the action either of the Sunbeams, in the
form of the Sunbeams, or of some substance that once issued out of the Sun and
reached unto our Air. For, there may be certain Bodies for the most part in the
form of liquors, which, though they pass off from some peculiarly disposed
Bodies, may during their stay or contact produce in them a great and strange
aptness to be volatiliz'd. In favor of which conjecture, I might here allege
both the effects, which the Paracelsians and Helmontians ascribe to the
Alkahest of volatilizing even fixed and ponderous Bodies barely by being often
abstracted from them, and some other things, which I shall now leave
unmention'd, because you may find them in my Notes about Volatility and Fixity.

But, whatever become of this Conjecture, it is consonant to Experience, that,
either upon the above-recited accounts, or also some others, those parts of the
Atmosphere, which, in a stricter sense, may be called the Air, are, at least in
some places, so intermixed with particles of differing kinds, that among that
great number of various sorts of them, it is very likely that there should be
some kinds of an un-common and an unobserved nature. And I could countenance
what has been said by the wasting of Odorous Bodies, and especially Camphire,
and by representing, that I have observed some solid Bodies actually cold, when
their superficial parts were newly taken off, to emit, though invisibly, such
copious steams into the Air, as to grow continually and manifestly lighter upon
the balance, so as to suffer a notable decrement of weight in a minute of an
hour. But the mention I make of such things in an other paper, disswades me
from insisting on them here, where 'twill be seasonable to resume the
discourse, which the mention of the Dissolving power, that may be guessed to be
in the Air, has for some pages interrupted, and to tell you, that those
propounded, before I entered upon the digression, are the two main
Consideration a priori (as they speak) whereon I have grounded my surmize,
which being proposed but as a Suspicion, I presume it will not be expected,
that the Arguments a posteriori, which I shall bring to countenance it, should
be more than Conjectures, much less that they should be Demonstrations. And
therefore I shall venture to lay before you some few Phenomenon, which seem to
be at least as probably referable to some latent Quality in the Air, as to any
other cause I yet know. Upon which score such Phenomenon may be allowed to be
pleaded in favor of our Suspicion, 'till some other certain cause of them
shall be satisfactorily assigned.

Having premised thus much to keep you from looking for stronger proofs than I
think my task obliges me to give; the first Phenomenon, I shall propose, shall
be the appearing or growth of some Salts in certain Bodies, which we observed
to afford them either not at all, or at least nothing near in such plenty, or
so soon, unless they be exposed to the Air. Of such a Phenomenon as this, that
is not so much as mentioned by Vulgar Philosophers, and very rarely, if at all,
to be met with in the Laboratories of Chemists, you will not, I suppose,
wonder, that I do not present you many Examples, and some few I am able to
name. For I remember, that suspecting a solid Marchasite, hard as stone, to be
fit to be made an instance for my purpose, I caused it to be broken, that the
internal more shining parts might be exposed to the Air; but, though this were
done in a room, where a good fire was usually kept, so that the Marchasite was
not only sheltered from the rain, but kept in a dry Air, yet after a while I
discovered upon the glistering parts an efflorescence of a vitriolate nature.

And afterward meeting with a ponderous and dark colored Mineral, and which,
at the first breaking, discovered to the Eye no appearance of any Salt, nor so
much as any shining Marchasitical particles, we found nevertheless, that a good
quantity of these hard and heavy Bodies, being kept exposed to the Air, even in
a room that preserved them from the rain, though probably they had lain many
ages entire in the hill, wherein they were found under ground; yet in not many
months, by the operation of the Air upon them, they were, in great part,
crumbled to powder exceeding rich in Copperas. Nay, I remember, that having for
Curiosities sake, laid up some of these stones in a room, where I constantly
kept fire, and in the drawer of a Cabinet, which I did not often take out to
give them fresh Air, some, if not most of them, were notwithstanding ^over'd
with a copious efflorescence, which by its conspicuous color between blew and
green, by its taste, and by its fitness to make in a trice an inky mixture with
infusion of galls, sufficiently manifested it self to be Vitriol; whose growth
by the help of the contact of the Air is the more considerable, because it is
not a mere Acid Salt, but abounds in Sulphurous and Combustible parts, which I
have diverse times been able, by Methods elsewhere mentioned, actually to
separate or obtain from common Vitriol without the addition of any combustible
body, and sometimes without any additament at all. It was also uncommon, that
our blackish Minerals required no longer time, nor no rain, to make them afford
their Vitriolate Efflorescences: For I remember, I kept many of those
Marchasites, both glittering ones and others, of which they make and sell great
quantities of Vitriol at Deptford, without perceiving in them a change that
came any thing near to what I have recited. And I observed those, whose trade
it is to make Vitriol, to be often obliged to let their Vitriol-stones, as they
call them, lie half a year, or even eighteen months, or two years exposed, not
only to the open Air, but to the Rain and Sun, to be able to obtain from them
their Vitriolate parts.

That also the Earth or Ore of Alum, being robbed of its Salt, will in tract
of time recover it by being exposed to the Air, we are assured by the
experienced Agricola, where, having delivered the way of making Alum, he
subjoins this Advertisement: Terra Aluminosa, quae in castellis diluta,
postquam effluxit, superfuit egesta et coacervata quotidie, rursus magis and
magis fit aluminosa, non aliter atque terra ex qua halinitrum fuit confectum,
suo succo plenior fit; quare denuo in Castella conjicitur and aquae affusae ea
percolantur.

I have likewise observed, as you also perchance have done, that some kind of
Lime in old walls and moist places has gained in length of time a copious
efflorescence, very much of a Nitrous Nature; as I was convinced by having
obtained Saltpeter from it by barely dissolving it in common water, and
evaporating the filtrated Solution: And that in calcined Vitriol, whose saline
parts have been driven away by the violence of the fire, particles of fresh
Salt may be found after it has lain a competent time in the Air, I shall e're
long have occasion to inform you.

But in the mean time, (to deal ingenuously with you,) I shall freely confess
to you, that, though these and the like observations have satisfied Learned
men, without having been called in question, and consequently have, at least,
probability enough to ground our Suspicion upon; yet I, that am more concerned
for the Discovery of a Truth than the Reputation of a Paradox, propose the
Argument drawn from the foregoing Observations, but as a Probationer. For it
yet seems to me somewhat doubtful, whether the Salts, that appear in the
forementioned cases, are really produced by the operation of the Air working as
an Agent, or also concurring as an Ingredient; or whether these saline
substances be not the production of some internal thing that is analagous to a
Seminal Principle, which makes in these bodies a kind of maturation of some
parts, which being once ripened, and perhaps assisted by the moisture of the
Air, disclose themselves in the form of saline Concretions; as in the feculent
or Tartareous parts of many Wines there will in tract of time be generated or
produced store of Corpuscles of a saline nature, that produce the acid taste we
find in Tartar, especially that of Rhenish wine. It may also be suspected, that
the formerly mentioned Salts found in Marchasites, in Nitrous and Aluminous
Earths, etc. are made by the saline particles of the like nature, that among
multitudes of other kinds swim in the Air, and are attracted by the congenerous
particles, that yet remain in the Terrestrial bodies, that are, as it were, the
wombs of such Minerals, (as I have elsewhere shown, that Spirit of Nitre will,
with fixed Nitre and some other Alkalys, compose Saltpeter;) or else, that
these Aerial Salts, if I may so call them, assisted by the moisture of the Air,
do soften and open, and almost corrode or dissolve the more Terrestrial
Substance of these wombs, and thereby solicit out and somewhat extricate the
latent Saline particles, and, by their union with them, compose those Emerging
bodies that resemble Vitriol, Alum, etc.

But not only to suggest these scruples, as if I had a mind they should but
trouble you, and keep you irresolute, I shall propound something toward the
removal of them; namely, that a convenient quantity of Nitrous Earth, or that
other of those Substances, which you would examine, be kept in a close vessel
to which the Air has not access, for at least as long time as has been observed
to be sufficient to impregnate the like substance, or rather a portion of the
same parcel that was chosen to be included: For, if the body, that was kept
close, have either gained no Salt at all, or very much less in proportion to
its bulk than that which was kept exposed, we may thence estimate, what is to
be ascribed to the Air in the production of Nitre or other saline Concretions.
And, because I have observed none of these bodies, that would so soon, and so
manifestly, even to the eye, disclose a saline substance, as the blackish
Vitriol-Ore, I lately told you I kept in a drawer of my Cabinet; I judged that
a very fit subject, wherewith to try, what maturation or time, when the Air was
secluded, would perform toward the deciding of our Difficulty: And accordingly
having taken some fragments of it, which we had carefully freed from the
adhering Vitriolate efflorescence, by whose plenty we were assured that it was
very well disposed to be wrought on by the Air, we put of these fragments of
differing sizes into two conveniently shaped glasses, which being Hermetically
sealed were ordered to be carried away, and kept in fit places; by which means
'twas expected, that, even without opening the glasses, we should be able
easily to see by the changed color of the superficial parts, whether any
Vitriolate efflorescence were produced; but, through the negligence or mistake
of those, to whom the care was recommended, the experiment was never brought to
an issue; and though I afterward got more of the Mineral, and made a second
trial of the same, I have not yet been informed of the event.

But, Sir, though, 'till the success of some such trial be known, I dare not
too confidently pronounce about the Production or Regeneration of Salts in
bodies that have been robbed of them, and ascribe it wholly to the Air; yet,
when I consider the several and great effects of the Air upon diverse other
bodies, I think it not rash to conjecture in the mean time, that the operations
of the Air may have a considerable share in these Phenomenon, and so that there
may be latent Qualities in the Air, in the sense I declared above, where I told
you, that, when I speak of these Qualities, I look upon them in Concreto, (as
they phrase it,) together with the Substances or ^orporeal effluvia they reside
in: And of these Aerial Qualities, taken in this sense, I shall now proceed to
mention some other Instances.

The Difficulty we find of keeping Flame and Fire alive, though but for a
little time, without Air, makes me some times prone to suspect, that there may
be dispersed through the rest of the Atmosphere some odd substance, either of a
Solar, or Astral, or some other exotic, nature, on whose account the Air is so
necessary to the subsistence of Flame; which Necessity I have found to be
greater, and less dependent upon the manifest Attributes of the Air, than
Naturalists seem to have observed. For I have found by trials purposely made,
that a small flame of a Lamp, though fed perhaps with a subtle thin Oil, would
in a large capacious glass-Receiver expire, for want of Air, ^^in a far less
time than one would be^eve. And it will not much lessen the difficulty to
allege, that either the gross fuliginous Smoke did in a close Vessel stifle
the flame, or that the pressure of the Air is requisite to impel up the aliment
into the wieck: For, to obviate these objections, I have in a large Receiver
employed a very small wieck with such rectified Spirit of Wine, as would in the
free Air burn totally away; and yet, when a very small Lamp, furnished (as I
was saying) with a very slender wieck, was made to burn, and, filled with this
liquor, was put lighted into a large Receiver, that little flame, though it
emitted no visible smoke at all, would usually expire within about one minute
of an hour, and, not seldom, in a less time; and this, though the wieck was not
so much as singed by the flame: Nor indeed is a wieck necessary for the
experiment, since highly rectified Spirit of Wine will in the free Air flame
away well without it. And indeed it seems to ^^erve our wonder, what that
should be in the Air, which inabling it to keep flame alive, does yet, by being
consumed or depraved, so suddenly render the Air unfit to make flame subsist.
And it seems by the sudden wasting or spoiling of this fine Subject, whatever
it be, that the bulk of it is but very small in proportion to the Air it
impregnates with its virtue. For after the extinction of the flame, the Air in
the Receiver was not visibly altered, and, for ought I could perceive by the
ways of judging I had then at hand, the Air retained either All, or at least
far the greatest part of its Elasticity, which I take to be its most genuine
and distinguishing property.

And this undestroy'd springyness of the Air seems to make the necessity of
fresh Air to the Life of hot Animals, (few of which, as far as I can guess
after many trials, would be able to live two minutes of an hour, if they were
totally and all at once deprived of Air,) suggest a great suspicion of some
vital substance, if I may so call it, diffused through the Air, whether it be a
volatile Nitre, or (rather) some yet anonymous substance, Sydereal or
Subterraneal, but not improbably of kin to that, which I lately noted to be so
necessary to the maintenance of other flames.

I know not, whether you will think it pertinent to our present Discourse, that
I observe to you, that by keeping putrefying bodies in glasses, which by Hermes
his seal were secured from the contact of the external Air, I have not been
able to produce any Insect or other living Creature, though sometimes I have
kept Animal Substances and even Blood so included for many months, and one or
two of them for a longer time; and though also these Substances had a manifest
change made in their consistence whilst they remained sealed up.

On this occasion I shall add an odd Observation, that I met with in a little
Dissertation de admirandis Hungariae aquis, written by an Anonymous, but
Ingenious, Nobleman of that Country, where, speaking of the native Salt that
abounds in their Regions, he says, that in the chief Mine (by them called
Desiensis) of Transylvania, there was, a few years before he writ, a great Oak
like a huge beam dug out of the middle of the Salt; but, though it was so hard,
that it would not easily be wrought upon by Iron-tools, yet being exposed to
the Air out of the Mine, it became so rotten, as he expresses it, that in four
days it was easy to be broken and crumbled between ones fingers. And of that
corruptive or dissolutive Power of the Air near those Mines, the same Author
mentions other Instances.

Having found an Antimonial Preparation to procure Vomits, in a case where I
did not at all expect it, I was afterward curious to inquire of some
Physicians and Chemists, that were of my Acquaintance, whether they had not
taken notice, that Antimonium Diaphoreticum, which, as its name imports, is
wont to work by sweat or transpiration, would not become vomitive, if 'twere
not kept from the Air? To which one Physician, that was a Learned Man, assured
me, it would, as he had found by particular trials: And the like answer has
been given me by more than one. And I find, that the experienced Zwelfer
himself does somewhere give a caution against letting the Air have access to
these Antimonial Medicines, lest it should render them, as he says it will, in
tract of time, not only Emetic, but disposed to produce heart-burnings, (as
they call them,) faintings, and other bad Symptoms. And I learnt by inquiry
from a very Ingenious Doctor of Physic, that, having carefully prepared
Antimonium Diaphoreticum, he gave many doses of it whilst it was fresh and kept
stopped in a glass (without finding that in any Patient it procured so much as
one vomit,) but having kept a parcel of the self same Remedy for a pretty while
in a glass only covered loosely with a paper, the Medicine, vitiated by the
Air, proved emetic (strongly enough) to those, who neither by Constitution, or
foulness of stomach, or on any other discernable account, were more than others
that had taken it disposed to vomit. By which Observations, and from what I
formerly told you of the Saltpeter obtainable from Quicklime, a Man partial
to the Air would be made forward to tell you, that this looks, as if either
there were in the Air a substance disposed to be assimilated by all kinds of
bodies, or that the Air is so vast and rich a Rendevouz of innumerable seminal
Corpuscles and other Analogous particles, that almost any body long exposed to
it may there meet with particles of kin to it, and fit to repair its wrongs and
losses, and restore it to its natural Condition. But without taking any further
notice of this odd surmize, I will proceed to mention two or three other
Phenomenon of Nature, that seem to favor the Suspicion, that there may be
Secret Qualities in the Air in reference to some bodies.

The ingenious Monsieur de Rochefort, in the handsome account he gives of the
Apple or Fruit of the Tree Iunipa, whose juice is employed by the Indians to
black their skins, that they may look the more terrible to their Enemies,
observes, that, though the stain, or, as he speaks, the Tincture of this Fruit
cannot be washed out with Soap, yet within nine or ten days it will vanish of
it self; which would make one suspect, that there may be in the Air some secret
powerful substance, that makes it a Menstruum of more efficacy than Soap it
self to obliterate stains. I remember, I have seen this Fruit, but not whilst
it was succulent enough to have a trial made with it; which I was therefore
troubled at, because the Author does not clearly express, whether this
disappearing of the tincture happens indifferently to the bodies it chances to
stain, or only is observed on the skins of Men. For, as in the former Case
'twill afford an instance pertinent to our present purpose; so in the latter I
should suspect, that the vanishing of the tincture may be due not so much to
the operation of the Air upon it, as to the sweat and exhalations of a human
body, which abounding with volatile Salt, may either destroy or carry off with
them the colored particles they meet with in their passage.

I have sometimes, not altogether without wonder, observed the excellency of
the better sort of Damasco-steel, (for I speak not of all that goes under that
name,) in comparison of ordinary steel. And, besides what I have elsewhere
taken notice of concerning it, there is one Phenomenon, which though I am not
sure it belongs to the latent Qualities of the Air, yet because it may well do
so, and I am unwilling it should be lost, I will here tell you, that having
inquired of an eminent and experienced Artificer, (whom I long since employed
in some difficult Experiments,) about the properties of Damasco-steel, this
honest and sober Man averred to me, that when he made Instruments of it, and
gave them the true temper, which is somewhat differing from that of other
Steel, he generally observed, that though, when Rasors or other Instruments
made of it were newly forged, they would be sometimes no whit better, and
sometimes less good, than those made of other Steel; yet when they had been
kept a year or two or three in the Air, though nothing else were done to
improve them, they would be found much to surpass other Instruments of the same
kind, and what themselves were before; in so much; that some of them have been
laid aside at first, as no way answering the great expectation conceived of
them, which after two or three years were found to surpass it; of which also I
am now making a trial. I have several times made a substance that consists
chiefly of a Metalline body, and is of a texture close enough to lie for many
hours undissolv'd in a Corrosive Menstruum; and yet this substance, that was
fixed enough to endure the being melted by the Fire without losing its color,
would, when I had purposely exposed it to the Air, be discolored in a very
short time, and have its superficial parts turned almost black.

And this brings into my mind that very pretty Observation, that has been newly
made in Italy by an ingenious Man, who took notice, that, if after the opening
of a Vein the blood be kept 'till it be concreted, and have excluded the
superficial serum, though the lower part be usually of a dark and blackish
color in comparison of the superficial parts, and therefore be counted far
more feculent; yet, if the lump or clott of blood be broken, and the internal
and dark colored parts of the blood be exposed to the Air, it will after a
time (for it is not said how long) be so wrought on by the contact of the Air,
that the superficial part of the blood will appear as florid as the lately
mentioned upper part (supposed to be, as it were, the flower of the blood,) did
seem before. And this Observation I found to hold in the blood of some Beasts,
whereon I tried it, in which I found it to succeed in much fewer minutes, than
the Italian Virtuoso's Experiment on Human blood would make me expect.

On the other side I have often prepared a Substance, whose effect appears
quite contrary to this. For, though this factitious Concrete, whilst kept to
the Fire or very carefully preserved from the Air, be of a red color almost
like the common opacous Bloodstone of the shops; yet, if I broke it, and left
the lumps or fragments of it a little while in the Air, it would in a short
time (sometimes perhaps not amounting to a quarter of an hour) it would, I say,
have its superficial parts turned of a very dark color, very little, and
sometimes scarce at all, short of blackness.

A very inquisitive Person of my acquaintance, having occasion to make, by
Distillation, a Medicine of his own devising, chanced to observe this odd
property in it, That at that time of the year, if it were kept stopped, it would
be coagulated almost like Oil of Anniseeds in cold weather; yet, if the stopple
were taken out, and so access were for a while given to the Air, it would turn
to a liquor, and the vessel being again stopped, it would, though more slowly,
recoagulate. The hints, that I guessed might be given by such a Phenomenon,
making me desirous to know something of it more than barely by Relation, I
expressed rather a curiosity than a diffidence about it; and the Maker of it
telling me, he thought, he had in a small Vial about a spoonful of this
Medicine left in a neighboring Chamber, I desired his leave to consider it my
self, which Request being presently complied with, I found it, when he brought
it into the Room which I stayed in, not liquid but consistent, though of but a
slight and soft contexture. And having taken out the Cork, and set the Vial in
a window, which (if I well remember) was open, though the Season, which was
Winter, was cold, yet in a little time that I stayed talking with the Chemist,
I found, that the so lately coagulated substance was almost all become fluid.
And another time, when the Season was less cold, having occasion to be where
the Vial was kept well stopped, and casting my Eyes on it, I perceived the
included substance to be coagulated much like Oil of Anniseeds. And this
substance having, as the Maker assured me, nothing at all of Mineral in it, nor
any Chemical Salt, it consisting only of two simple bodies, the one of a
vegetable and the other of an animal substance, distilled together, I scarce
doubt but you will think with me, that these contrary operations of the Air,
which seems to have a power in some Circumstances to coagulate such a body, and
yet to dissolve and make it fluid when fresh and fresh parts are allowed access
to it, may deserve to be further reflected on, in reference (among other
things) to the opportune operations, the inspired Air may have on the
consistence and motion of the circulating blood, and to the discharge of the
fuliginous recrements to be separated from the blood in its passage through the
Lungs.

There are two other Phenomenon that seem favorable to our Suspicion, That
there are Anonymous Substances and Qualities in the Air, which ought not to be
altogether praetermitted on this occasion; though, because to speak fully of
them would require far more time than I can now spare, I shall speak of them
but succinctly.

The latter of these two Phenomenon is the growth or appearing production of
Metals or Minerals dug out of the Earth, and exposed to the Air. And this,
though it be the last of the two, I mention first, because it seems expedient,
lest it should prove too long an interruption to our Discourse, to postpone the
Observations and annex them to the end of this Paper; only intimating to you
now, that the caution I formerly interposed about the Regeneration of Salts in
Nitrous and other Earths, may, for greater security, be applied, mutatis
mutandis, to that production of Metalline and Mineral bodies we are speaking of.

The other of the two Phenomenon, I lately promised to mention, is afforded me
by those various and odd Diseases, that at some times and in some places happen
to invade and destroy numbers of Beasts, sometimes of one particular kind, and
sometimes of another. Of this we have many instances in the Books of approved
Authors; both Physicians and others; and I have my self observed some notable
Examples of it. But yet I should not mention it as a ground of Suspicion, that
there may be, in some times and places, unknown Effluvia and powers in the Air,
but that I distinguish these from those Diseases of Animals, that proceed, as
the Rot in Sheep often does, from the exorbitancy of the Seasons, the
immoderateness of Cold, Heat, or any other manifest Quality in the Air. And you
will easily perceive, that some of these Examples probably argue, that the
Subterraneal parts do sometimes (especially after Earthquakes or unusual
cleavings of the ground) send up into the Air peculiar kinds of venomous
Exhalations, that produce new and mortal Diseases in Animals of such a species,
and not in those of another, and in this or that particular place, and not
elsewhere: Of which we have an eminent Instance in that odd Plague or Murrain
of the year 1514, which Fernelius tells us invaded none but Cats. And even in
Animals of the same species, sometimes one sort have been incomparably more
obnoxious to the Plague than another; as Dionysius Halicarnaseus mentions a
Plague that attacked none but Maids; whereas the Pestilence that raged in the
time of Gentilis (a famed Physician) killed few Women, and scarce any but lusty
Men. And so Boterus mentions a great Plague, that assaulted almost only the
younger sort of persons, few past thirty years of age being attacked by it:
Which last Observation has been also made by several later Physicians. To which
may be added, what Learned Men of that Faculty have noted at several times
concerning Plagues, that particularly invaded those of this or that Nation,
though confusedly mingled with other People; as Cardan speaks of a Plague at
Basil, with which only the Switzers, and not the Italians, French, or Germans,
were infected. And Johannes Utenhovious takes notice of a cruel Plague at
Copenhagen, which, though it raged among the Danes, spared both the English,
Dutch, and Germans, though they freely entered infected houses, and were not
careful to shun the sick. In reciting of which Instances I would not be
understood, as if I imputed these effects merely to noxious Subterraneal fumes;
for I am far from denying, that the peculiar Constitutions of Men's Bodies are
likely to have a great interest in them: But yet it seems less probable, that
the pestilent venom diffused through the Air should owe its enormous and fatal
efficacy to the excess of the manifest Qualities of the Air, than to the
peculiar nature of the pestilential poison sent up into the Air from under
ground, which when it is by dilution or dissipation enervated, or by its
progress past beyond the Air we breath in, or rendered ineffectual by
subterraneal or other Corpuscles of a contrary Quality, the Plague, which it,
as a con-cause, produced, either quite ceases, or degenerates into somewhat
else. But I have not time to countenance this Conjecture, much less to
consider, whether some of those Diseases, that are wont to be called new, which
either did begin to appear, or at least to be rise, within these two or three
Centuries, as the Sudor Anglicus in the fifteenth Century, the Scurvy, and the
Morbus Hungaricus, the Lues Moraviae, Novus Morbus Luneburgensis, and some
others, in the last Century of all, may be in part caused by the exotic steams
this Discourse treats of. But this Consideration I willingly resign to
Physicians.

And now, if the two forementioned Suspicions, the one about Subterraneal, the
other about Sydereal, Effluviums, shall prove to be well grounded, they may
lead us to other Suspicions and further thoughts about things of no mean
Consequence; three of which I shall venture to make mention of in this place.

I. For we may hence be awakened to consider, whether diverse changes of
Temperature and Constitution in the Air, not only as to manifest Qualities, but
as to the more latent ones, may not sometimes in part, if not chiefly, be
derived from the paucity or plenty, and peculiar nature of one or both of these
sorts of Esfluviums. And in particular, we find in the most approved Writers
such strange Phenomenon to have several times happened in great Plagues and
contagious Diseases, fomented and communicated, nay (as many eminent Physicians
believed) begun, by some latent pestiferous, or other malignant, Diathesis or
Constitution of the Air, as have obliged many of the Learned of them to have
recourse to the immediate operation of the Angels, or of the Power and Wrath of
God himself, or at least to some unaccountable influence of the Stars; none of
the Solutions of which difficulties seems preferable to what may be gathered
from our Conjecture; since of Physical Agents of which we know nothing so much,
as that they are to us invisible and probably of a heteroclite nature, it need
be no great wonder, that the operation should also be abstruse, and the effects
uncommon. And on this occasion it may be considered, that there are clearer
inducements to persuade us, that another Quality of the Atmosphere, its
Gravity, may be altered by unseen Effluviums, ascending from the Subterraneous
Regions of our Globe; and we have often perceived by the Mercurial Baroscope
the Weight of the Air to be notably increased, when we could not perceive in
the Air nor surface of Earth any cause to which we could ascribe so notable a
change. And this gives me a rise to add, that I have sometimes allowed my self
to doubt, whether even the Sun it self may not now and then alter the Gravity
of the Atmosphere otherwise than by its Beams or Heat. And I remember, I
desired some Virtuosi of my acquaintance to assist me in the inquiry, whether
any of the Spots, that appear about the Sun, may not, upon their sudden
dissolution, have some of their discussed and dispersed matter thrown off, as
far as to our Atmosphere, and that copiously enough to produce some sensible
alterations in it, at least as to Gravity. II. Another thing, that our two
forementioned Suspicions, if allowed of, will suggest, is, that it may not seem
altogether improbable, that some bodies, we are conversant with, may have a
peculiar disposition and fitness to be wrought on by, or to be associated with,
some of those exotic Effluvia, that are emitted by unknown bodies lodged under
ground, or that proceed from this or that Planet. For what we call Sympathies
and Antipathies, depending indeed on the peculiar Textures and other
Modifications of the bodies, between whom these friendships and hostilities are
said to be exercised, I see not why it should be impossible, that there be a
Cognation betwixt a body of a congruous or convenient Texture, (especially as
to the shape and size of its Pores,) and the Effluviums of any other body,
whether Subterraneal or Sydereal. We see, that unequal Burning-glasses, by
virtue of their figure and the disposition of their pores, are fitted to be
pervaded by the beams of Light and to refract them, and thereby to kindle
combustible matter; and the same beams of the Sun will impart a lucidness to
the Bolonian stone. And as for Subterraneal bodies, I elsewhere mention two
Minerals, See the Experiment in the Discourse of the Determinate Nature of
Effluviums.
which being prepared, (as I there intimate,) the steams of the one, ascending
without adventitious Heat and wandering through the Air, will not sensibly work
on other bodies; but if they meet with that which we prepared, they will
immediately have an operation on it, whose effect will be both manifest and
lasting. III. I now pass on to the other thing, that the two formerly mentioned
Suspicions may suggest, which is, that if they be granted to be well founded,
we may be allowed to consider, whether among the bodies we are acquainted with
here below, there may not be found some, that may be Receptacles, if not also
Attractives, of the Sydereal, and other exotic Effluviums that rove up and down
in our Air.
Some of the Mysterious Writers about the Philosophers-stone, speak great
things of the excellency of what they call their Philosophical Magnet, which,
they seem to say, attracts and (in their phrase) corporifies the Universal
Spirit, or (as some speak) the Spirit of the World. But these things being
abstrusities, which the Writers of them professed to be written for, and to be
understood only by, the Sons of Art; I, who freely acknowledge I cannot clearly
apprehend them, shall leave them in their own worth as I found them, and only,
for brevity sake, make use of the received word of a Magnet, which I may do in
my own sense, without avowing the received Doctrine of Attraction. For by such
a Magnet, as I here purpose to speak of, I mean not a body that can properly
attract our foreign Effluviums; but such an one, as is fitted to detain and
join with them, when by virtue of the various motions, that belong to the Air
as a Fluid, they happened to accost the Magnet. Which may be illustrated by the
known way of making Oil of Tartar (as the Chemists call it) per Deliquium. For,
though the Spagyrists and others suppose, that the fiery Salt draws to it the
Aqueous Vapors, yet indeed it does but arrest, and imbody with, such of those
that wander through the Air, as chance in their passage to accost it.

And, without receding from the Corpuscularian Principles, we may allow some of
the bodies, we speak of, a greater resemblance to Magnets, than what I have
been mentioning. For not only such a Magnet may upon the bare account of
Adhesion by Iuxta-position or Contact, detain the Effluviums that would glide
along it, but these may be the more firmly arrested by a kind of precipitating
faculty, that the Magnet may have in reference to such Effluviums; which, if I
had time, I could illustrate by some Instances; nay I dare not deny it to be
possible, but that in some Circumstances of time or place one of our Magnets
may, as it were, fetch in such steams as would indeed pass near it, but would
not otherwise come to touch it. On which occasion I remember, I have in certain
cases been able to make some bodies, not all of them Electrical, attract (as
they speak) without being excited by rubbing, etc. far less light bodies, than
the Effluviums we are speaking of.

But this it may suffice to have glanced at, it not being here my purpose to
meddle with the mystical Theories of the Chemists; but rather to intimate,
that, without adopting or rejecting them, one may discourse like a Naturalist
about Magnets of Celestial and other Emanations, that appear not to have been
considered, not to say, thought of, either by the Scholastic, or even the
Mechanical, Philosophers.

OF CELESTIAL and AERIAL MAGNETS.
IF now, upon what I have granted in the close of the past Discourse, you
should urge the question further, and press me to declare, Whether, as I think
it no impossible thing, that Nature should make, so I think it no unpracticable
or hopeless thing, that Men should find, or Art should prepare, useful Magnets
of the exotic Effluviums of the lower region of the Earth, or the upper of the
World: It would much distress me to give any other answer, than that I think it
extremely difficult, and not absolutely impossible; and therefore I would not
discourage any curious or industrious Man from attempting to satisfy himself
by Experiments, because even a seemingly slight discovery in a thing of this
nature may be of no small use in the investigation of the nature of the Air,
especially in some particular places, and of the Correspondency, which, by the
intervention of the Air, the superficial part of the Terrestrial Globe may have
both with the Subterraneal Regions of the Earth, and the Celestial ones of the
Universe. Some of the things I have tried or seen relating to this discovery, I
must for certain reasons leave here unmentioned, and only advertise you, that
several bodies, which experience has assured us do imbibe or retain something
from the Air, as some calcined Minerals, some Marchasites, some Salts, as well
factitious as natural, etc. may be fit to be often exposed to it, and then
weighed again, and farther diligently examined, whether that which makes the
increment of weight, be a mere imbibed moisture or also somewhat else, and
likewise whether it be separable from the body or not, or however have endowed
it with any considerably Quality; and if you chance to meet with a good Magnet,
you may then vary Experiments with it, by exposing it long to the Air in
Regions differing much in Climat, or Soil, or both, by exposing it by day only,
or by night, at several Seasons of the Year, in several Temperatures of the
Air, at several considerable Aspects of the Stars and Planets, by making it
more or less frequently part with what it has gained from the Air; and in
short, by having regard to variety of Circumstances, which your Curiosity and
Sagacity may suggest. For, by thus diversifying the Experiment many ways, you
may perhaps, by one or other of them, make some unexpected and yet important
discovery of what Effluviums the Air, in particular places and times, abounds
with, or wants, and perchance too, of some correspondency between the
Terrestrial and Etherial Globes of the World.

I shall neither be surpised nor quarrel with you, if you tell me, that these
are extravagant thoughts; but if I had been fortunate in preserving all, that
Trial, Observation, or other productions of some Curiosity, I once had for such
Inquiries, procured me, you would not perhaps think me so very extravagant. But
though I must not here make any further mention of them, and shall only take
notice of one body, namely VITRIOL, whether crude, or unripe, and (as Chemists
speak) embrionated, or Spagyrically prepared; yet some Phenomenon of these
Vitriolate Substances may for the present, I hope, somewhat moderate your
censure for my putting you upon Observations that I fear you your self will
judge unpromising, and less favorable persons than you would think
fantastical. And to let you see by a pregnant Instance, that the Air may not
only have a Notable operation upon Vitriol, and that, after a strong fire could
work no farther on it, but that this operation was considerably diversified by
Circumstances; I shall begin what I have to allege, with what the experienced
Zwelfer occasionally observed, and relates to usher in a caution about a
Chemical Preparation of Vitriol: For, having informed his Reader, that the
Colcothar, that is made by a strong Distillation, is not corrosive, he denies,
that, (to use his own words) statim a Distillatione Sal ex eodem, affusa aqua,
elici queat; sed tum prius, (continues he) ubi aliquandiu aeri expositum
fuerit; tunc enim sal praebet quandoque candidum, quandoque purpureum, aspectu
pulcherrimum, quod aliquando in copia acquisivi, and penes me asservo,
quandoque etiam Nitrosum.

Which Testimony of this candid Spagyrist has much the more weight with me,
because I find, what he affirms of the Saltlesness of newly and strongly
calcined Vitriol to be very agreeable to some of my Experiments about Colcothar
of blew (v^nereal) Vitriol; which Salt or Mineral (I mean Vitriol) is so odd a
Concrete, that I have thought fit more than once to recommend the making
Experiments about it to several Curious Persons, that had better opportunity to
continue them than I, whose residence was not so fixed. And I remember, that one
of these, a Person industrious and versed in Chemical Operations, gave me this
account, that not only he had differing kinds of Salts from Colcothar exposed
to the Air for many months, and robbed at convenient times of what it had
acquired, but that in tract of time he found it so altered, that he obtained
from it a pretty quantity of true running Mercury.

And now, to resume and conclude what I was saying about Colcothar, there are
two or three things I would propose to be observed by you, or any Virtuoso that
would assist me in these trials about this odd Calcinatum, (for to call it
Terrae damnata, were to injure it.)

The first is, to take notice of ^ome Circumstances that most Observers would
overlook; such as (besides the Nature of the Soil) the Temperature of the Air,
the Month of the Year, and the Winds, the weight of the Atmosphere, the Spots
of the Sun, if any be, the Moons Age, and her Place in the Zodiac, and the
principal Aspects of the Planets, and the other chief Stars. For, though it be
a boldness to affirm, that any, or perhaps all of these together, will have any
interest in the production of the Salt or other Substance, to be made or
disclosed in the Colcothar; yet in things new and exorbitant, it may be
sometimes rash and peremptory to deny, even such things as cannot, without
rashness, be positively asserted; and in our case the small trouble of taking
notice of Circumstances will be richly paid by the least discovery made in
things so abstruse and considerable. And as we cannot yet knowingly pronounce,
so much as negatively, whether the Libration of the Moon and the Motion of the
Sun (and perhaps of some of the other Planets) about their own Centers, and
consequently their obverting several parts of their bodies to us, may have an
operation upon our Atmosphere; so, for ought I know, there may be in those vast
internal parts of the Earth, whose thin crust only has been here and there dug
into by Men, considerable Masses of Matter, that may have periodical
Revolutions, or Accensions, or Estuations, or Fermentations, or, in short, some
other notable Commotions, whose Effluvia and Effects may have operations, yet
unobserved, on the Atmosphere and on some particular bodies exposed to it;
though these periods may be perhaps either altogether irregular, or have some
kind of regularity differing from what one would expect. As we see, that the
Sea has those grand Intumescencies, we call Spring-tides, not every day, nor at
any constant day of the month or week, but about the Full and New Moon; and
these Spring-tides are most notably heightened, not every month, but twice a
year, at or about the Vernal and Autumnal Equinoxes; which Observations have
not been near so ancient and known, as the daily Ebbing and Flowing of the Sea.
The Etestans of the Ancients I shall not now insist on, nor the Observations
that I think I elsewhere mentioned of the Elder Inhabitants of the
Caribe-Islands, who, when the Europeans first resorted thither, were wont to
have Hurricanes but once in seven years; afterward they were molested with
them but once in three years; and of late they are troubled with them almost
every year. And a Physician that lived there told me, that he had scarce ever
observed them to come but within the compass of two months joining to one
another. In which Instances, and diverse others that may be noted of what
changes happened to great Quantities of Matter, Nature seems to affect
something of periodical, but not in a way that appears to us, regular.

One may add on this occasion that memorable passage related by the Learned
Varenius of those Hot Springs in Germany, Varenius. Lib. 1. Geograph. Universe.
Therm^ omnes fore qu^^ novimus fiu^ cess^tione f^uunt exceptis Piperini^
Germania, etc.
that he calls Thermae Peperinae, of which he affirms in more than one place,
that they have this peculiarity, that they annually begin and cease to flow at
certain times; the former about the third day of May, and the latter near the
middle of September, at which time they are wont to rest till the following
Spring. But though, for ought I know, our Geographers Observation will hold in
hot Springs; yet it must not be extended to all, at least, if we admit that
which is related by the accurate Johannes de Laet, Amer. Lib. V. cap. 7.
(I suppose out of Ximenes, or the famous Conqueror of Mexico, Cortes,) who
tells us, that in the Mexican Province, Xilotepec, Fons celebratur, qui quatuor
continuit annis scaturit, deinde quatuor sequentibu^ deficit, and rursus ad
priorem modum erumpit, and, quod mirabile, pluviis diebus, parcius, quum sudum
est tempus and aridum, copiosius, exuberat.

But this is not a place to enlarge upon the grounds of my suspecting, there
may be some periodical Motions and Commotions within the Terrestrial Globe;
what has been mentioned being only to invite you to take notice of
Circumstances in your Observations of Colcothar, some of which may, with the
more show of probability, be kept exposed for a long time, because that Bars of
Windows and other erected Irons I have found to acquire in tract of time from
the Effluvia of the Earth a settled Magnetism.

The other main thing I would recommend, is, that notice be taken not only of
the kind of Vitriol, the Colcothar is made of; (for I generally used blew
Danzig Vitriol) as Martial Vitriol, Hungarian Vitriol, Roman Vitriol, etc. to
which I have, for Curiosity, added Vitriol made by our selves of the Solution
of the more saline parts of Marchasites in water, without the usual additament
of Iron, or Copper; but also, to what degree the calcination is made, and how
far the calcined Matter is freed from the Salt by water. For these
Circumstances, at least in some places, may be of moment, and perhaps may
afford us good hints of the Constitution of the Atmosphere in particular parts,
as well as of the best preparation of Colcothar for detaining the exotic
Effluviums. And I would the rather have Experiments tried again in other places
with Colcothar not calcined to the utmost, nor yet so exquisitly edulcorated,
but that some saline particles should be left in it for future increase;
because I have more than once purposely tried in vain, that the Caput Mortuum
of blew Vitriol, whereof the Oil and other parts had been driven off with a
violent and lasting fire, would not, when fresh, impart any saltness to the
water; nor do I think, that out of some ounces purposely edulcorated I obtained
one grain of Salt. And this saltless Colcothar being exposed, some by me, and
some by a Friend that had convenience in another place not far off, to the Air,
some for many weeks and some for diverse months, we did not find it to have
manifestly increased in weight, or to have acquired any sensible saltness,
which, supposing the Vitriol to have nothing extraordinary, gave me the
stronger suspicion of some peculiarity in the Air of that part of London, where
the Trials had been made, at least during those times wherein we made them;
because not only former experience, made here in England, had assured me, that
some Colcothars will gain no despicable accession of weight by being exposed to
the Air; but accidentally complaining of my lately mentioned disappointment to
an ingenious Traveller, that had, in diverse Countries, been curious to examine
their Vitriols, he assured me, that, though he usually dulcified his Colcothar
very well, yet within four or five weeks he found it considerably impregnated
by the Air 'twas exposed to.

It remains, that I add one intimation more about Vitriol, which is, that I
have found it to have so great a correspondency with the Air, that it would not
be amiss to try, not only Colcothar of differing Vitriols (whether barely made
the common way, or without any Metalline addition to the Vitriol Stones or
Ore,) but other Preparations of Vitriol too, such as exposing Vitriol, only
calcined to whiteness by the Sunbeams, or further to an higher color by a
gentle Heat, or thoroughly calcined, and then impregnated with a little of its
own Oil. For such Vitriolate Substances as these, the Air may work upon, nay
even liquid Preparations of Vitriol may be peculiarly affected by the Air, and
thereby perhaps be useful to discover the present constitution, or foretell some
approaching changes of it. Of the use of which conjecture, namely the peculiar
action of the Air on some Vitriolate Liquors, I remember I showed some Virtuosi
a new Instance in an Experiment, whereof this was the Sum:

[I elsewhere mention a Composition that I devised, to make with Sublimate,
Copper, and Spirit of Salt, a Liquor of a Green exceeding lovely. But in the
description of it I mentioned not (having no need to do it there) a
circumstance as odd as the liquor it self was grateful. For the Air has so much
interest in the production of this green, that when you have made the Solution
of the Copper and Mercury with the Spirit of Salt, that Solution will not be
green, nor so much as greenish, as long as you keep it stopped in the bolt-head,
or such like glass wherein it is made. But if you pour it out into a Vial,
which, by not being stopped, leaves it exposed to the Air, it will after a while
sooner or later attain that delightful green that so much endears it to the
Beholders Eye. This appeared so odd an Experiment to the Virtuosi, to whom I
first related it, that those that could not guess by what means I attained it,
could scarce believe it. But that troubled not me, who, to satisfy my self not
only of the Truth of the Experiment, but that 'twas not so contingent as many
others, repeated it several times, and found the Solution, 'till the Air made
it flourish, to be of a muddy reddish color quite differing from green. So that
I remember, that having once kept some of the liquor in the same glass-egg,
wherein the Solution had been made, it looked like very dirty water, whilst the
other part of the same Solution, having been exposed to the Air, emulated the
color of an Emerald. In which change it is remarkable, that to clarify this
liquor and give it a transparent greeness, I perceived not, that any
precipitation of foul matter was made to which the alteration could be
ascribed; and yet to make it the more probable that this change proceeded not
from a subsidence made of some opacating matter effected by some days rest, I
kept some of the Solution sealed up in a fine Vial several months, without
finding it at the end of that time other than a dark or muddy liquor, which, in
short time, it ceased to be, when, the Hermetic Seal being broken off, the Air
was permitted to work upon it. And this I further observed in our various
Experiments on this liquor, that, according to the quality of the matter and
other Circumstances, the greeness was not attained to but at certain periods of
time, now and then disclosing it self within two or three days, and sometimes
not before nine or ten.]

With how little Confidence of success Trials, that have the aims of these I
have been speaking of, are to be attempted, not only consideration but
experience have made me sensible. But yet I would not discourage Men's Curiosity
from venturing even upon slight probabilities, where the Nobleness of the
Subjects and Scope may make even small seize very desirable. And 'till
trial have been made on occasions of great moment, it is not easy to be
satisfied, that Men have not been wanting to themselves; which I shall only
illustrate by proposing, what, I presume, will not need that I should make an
application of it. Those adventurous Navigators, that have made Voyages for
Discovery in unknown Seas, when they first discerned something obscure near the
Horizon at a great distance off, have often doubted, whether what they had so
imperfect a sight of, were a Cloud, or an Island, or a Mountain: But though
sometimes it were more likely to be the former, as that which more frequently
occurred, than the latter; yet they judged it advisable to steer toward it,
'till they had a clearer prospect of it: For if it were a deluding Meteor, they
would not however sustain so great a loss in that of a little labor, as, in
case it were a Country, they would in the loss of what might prove a rich
Discovery: And if they desisted too soon from their Curiosity, they could not
rationally satisfy themselves, whether they slighted a Cloud or neglected a
Country.

FINIS.
OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE GROWTH OF METALS in their ORE Exposed to the AIR.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

OBSERVATIONS OF THE GROWTH OF METALS.
IT is altogether unnecessary to my present purpose, to examine, whether Metals
and Minerals, as if they were a kind of subterraneal Plants, do properly grow
as Vegetables do. For this Inquiry belongs to another place, but not to this,
where the reference made in the 39th page of the foregoing Paper does not
oblige me to speak of the Growth of Metals in any other than a lax and popular
sense, in which a Metal may be said to grow, if a portion of Matter being
assigned, wherein as yet Men can find either no Metal, as Gold or Tin, or but
such a quantity of it; this being exposed to the Air, will after a time either
afford some Metal where there appeared none before, or a greater proportion of
Metal than it had before.

Observations of this kind requiring length of time, as well as residence near
places abounding with Minerals, I have little or no opportunity to make any of
them my self, at least with the wariness, that to me seems due to Observations
that I think not easy to be well made. And therefore I must content my self to
set down what I have been able to learn by conversing with Mineralists and
Travelers, and to add some particulars that I met with in Authors of good
Credit.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE Growth of TIN.
AN ancient Owner of Mines, being asked by me, Whether he could, otherwise than
upon the Conjectures of vulgar Tradition, prove, that Minerals grow even after
the Veins have been dug? Answered affirmatively; and being desired to let me
know his proofs, he gave me these that follow.

He told me, that not far from his House there was a Tin-Mine, which the old
Diggers affirmed to have been left off, some said eighty, some an hundred and
twenty years ago, because they had by their washing and vanning separated all
the Ore from the rest of the Earth, and yet of late years they found it so
richly impregnated with Metalline Particles, that it was wrought over again
with very good profit, and preferred to some other Mines that were actually
wrought, and had never been so robbed. And when I objected, that probably this
might proceed from the laziness and unskilfulness of Workmen in those times,
who left in the Earth the Tin that was lately separated, and might then have
been so; I was answered, that 'twas a known thing in the Country, that in those
times the Mine-men were more careful and laborious to separate the Metalline
part from the rest of the Ore, than now they are.

He also affirmed to me, that in his own time some Tenants and Neighbors of
his (employed by him) having got all the Ore they could out of a great quantity
of stuff, dug out of a Tin-Mine, they laid the remains in great heaps exposed
to the Air, and within twenty and thirty years after, found them so richly
impregnated, that they wrought them over again with good benefit.

And lastly he assured me, that, in a Work of his own, wherein he had exercised
his skill and experience, (which is said to be very great) to separate all the
particles of the Tin from the Terrestrial substances, that were dug up with it
out of the Vein, he caused Dams to be made to stop the Earthy Substance, which
the Stream washed away from the Ore, giving passage to the water after it had
let fall this Substance, which lying in heaps exposed to the Air, within ten or
twelve years, and sometimes much less, he examined this or that heap, and found
it to contain such store of Metalline particles, as invited him to work it
again and do it with profit. And yet this Gentleman was so dexterous at
separating the Metalline from the other parts of Tin-Ore, that I could (not
without wonder) see what small Corpuscles he would, to satisfy my Curiosity,
sever from vast quantities (in proportion) of Earthy and other Mineral stuff.

Relations agreeable to these, I received from another very ingenious Gentleman
that was conversant with Tin-Mines, and lived not far from more than one of
them.

I was the more solicitous to procure an information about the Growth of this
Metal, because the bulk of that, which is used in Europe, being found in
England, I have met with little or no mention of the Growth of it in Outlandish
Writers.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE Growth of LEAD.
AS for the Growth of Lead in the Ore exposed to the Air, I remember, I
inquired about it of a Person of Quality, who had a Patent for diverse Leaden
Mines that were supposed to contain Silver, and wrought some of them himself at
no small charge, yet not without profit; and, as I remember, he answered me,
that the Lead-Ore, that had been wrought and laid in heaps, did, in tract of
time, grow impregnated with Metal again, and, as experience manifested, became
worth working a second time. And indeed some Mineralists deliver it as a
general Observation, that the Growth and Renascence of Metals is more manifest
in Lead than in any other of them. Fessularum mons in Hetruria, says Boccatius
Certardus, who delivers it as a most approved Truth, Florentiae Civitati
imminens, lapiaes plumbarios habet, qui si excidantur brevi temporis spatio
novis Incrementis instaurantur. J. Gerhard. in Decade quaestionum, page m. 22.

Tu subtilius ne quaeras (says Agricola, speaking of the Growth of Mines in
general) sed tantummodo refer animum ad cuniculos, and considera, eos adeo
interdum memoria hominum in angustum venisse, ut aliqua sui part nullum aut
admodum difficilem praebeant transitum, cum eos satis late agere soleant
Fossores, ne transituros impediant. In tales autem angustias sunt adducti
propter accretionem materiae ex qua lapis est factus.

But whether this increment of Lead is observable in all Mines of that Metal, I
was induced to doubt by the answer given me by a Gentleman, whose House was
seated near several Lead-Mines, and who was himself Owner of one or two, which
he yet causes to be wrought: For this Gentleman, though a Chemist, assured me,
that in the Country where he lives, which is divided by the Sea from that of
the Person abovementioned, he never observed the Lead-Ore to increase, either
out of the Veins or in them; but that in some places, whence Ore had been dug
thirty or forty, if not fifty, years before, he perceived not on the sides of
the passages, whence the Ore had been dug, that any other had grown in its
place, or that the passages, though narrow before, were sensibly straighten'd,
much less blocked up.

And indeed, if there were no other Arguments in the cafe, the straightning of
the ancient passages in process of time would not convince me. For, when I
con^ider, that the Soils that abound with Metals do usually also abound with
waters, which are commonly imbibed by the neighboring Earth; and when I
consider too, that water is somewhat expanded by being turned into Ice, and
that this expansion is made, (as I have often tried) though slowly, yet with an
exceeding great force, by which it often stretches or breaks the Vessels that
contain it: When I consider these things, I say, I am apt to suspect, that
sometimes the increasing narrowness of the subterraneal passages in Mines may
proceed from this, that the Soil that invirons them, if they lie not deep, may
have the water, imbibed by them, frozen in sharp Winters. By which glaciation,
the moistened portion of the Soil must forcibly endeavor to expand it self,
and actually do so in the parts contiguous to the passage, since there it finds
no resistance: And though the expansion made in one year or two be but small,
and therefore not observed; yet, in a succession of many Winters, it may by
degrees grow to be very considerable. But this suspicion I suggest not, that I
would deny the Growth of Minerals, but to recommend this Argument for it to
further Consideration. And yet I take this to be a better proof, than what is
much relied on by some Writers of Metals, who urge, that in Churches, and other
magnificent Buildings, that are Leaded over, the Metalline Roofs, in a long
tract of years, grow far more ponderous, in so much that often times there is a
necessity to remove them, and exchange them for Brass ones. For though this
plausible Argument be urged by several Writers, and among them by the Learned
Io. Gerhardus, page m. 22; yet I fear they proceed upon a Mistake. For having
had some occasion to observe and inquire after this kind of Lead, I soon
suspected, that the increment of weight, (which sometimes may indeed be very
great) was no clear proof of the real Growth of the Metal it self. For in that
which I had occasion to consider, the additional weight as well as bulk seemed
to proceed from Acetous or other Saline Corpuscles of the Timber of those
Buildings, which by degrees exhaling and corroding that side of the Lead which
they fastened on, turned i^ with themselves into a kind of Cerusse: Which
suspicion I shall briefly make probable by noting, 1. That I have found by
trial purposely made, that Woods afford an acid, though not merely acid,
liquor, capable of corroding Lead. 2. That it is known, that Lead turned into
Cerusse increases notably in weight, some say, (for I had not opportunity to
try it) above six or seven in the hundred. 3. That from the Sheets of Lead that
have very long covered Churches and the like Buildings, there is often obtained
by scraping a good proportion of white Lead, which I have known much preferred
by an eminent Artist to common Cerusse, when a white Pigment was to be
employed. And, by the way, Men's finding this Cerusse not on that side of the
Lead that is exposed to the outward Air, (where I scarce ever observed any) but
on the inside that regards the Timber and other woods work, may disabuse those
that fancied this Cerusse to be a part of the Lead calcined by the Beams of the
Sun, that strike immediately upon the Metal. And if to this it be added, that
by Distillation and otherwise I have found cause to suspect, that Alabaster and
White Marble may emit Spirituous parts that will invade Lead; it may be
doubted, whether what Galen relates of the great Intumescence of Leaden bands
or fastenings, wherewith the Feet of Statues were fastened (to their
Pedestals,) be a sure Argument of the real Growth of that Metal in the Air.

But I begin to digress, and seemingly to the prejudice of the particular Scope
of this Paper; but yet not to that of one of the main Scopes of all my Physical
Writings, the Disquisition and Advancement of Truth.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE Growth of IRON.
I Did not find in one of our chief Mines of Iron, that there was any notice
taken of the Growth of that Metal; but in another place or two, some that deal
in Iron-Ore, informed me, that they believe it grows, and may be regenerated;
and upon that account one of them set up a Work, contiguous to some Land of
mine, to melt over again the remainder of Ore that had been already wrought (at
a great distance from that place) and had for some Ages lain in heaps exposed
to the free Air; but with what success this chargeable Attempt has been made, I
am not yet informed.

But of the Growth of Iron in the Island of Ilva or Elva, in the Tyrrhene Sea,
not far from the Coast of Tuscany, not only ancient Authors, as Pliny and
Strabo, take special notice, but modern Mineralists of very good credit, as
Falopius and Caesalpinus, particularly attest the same thing; of whom the
latter speaks thus: Lib. III. Cap. 6.
Vena ferri copiosissima est in Italia; ob eam nobilitata, Ilva; Tyrreni Maris
Insula, incredibili copia etiam nostris temporibus eam gignens: Nam terra; quae
eruitur dum vena effoditur, tota procedente tempore in venam convertitur.

And the experienced Agricola gives us the like account of a place in his
Country, Germany, Agric. de Vet. and Nov. Met. Lib. II. Cap. 15.
In Lygiis, says he, ad Sagam oppidum in pratis eruitur ferrum, fossis ad
altitudinem bipedaneam actis. Id decennio renatum denuo foditur, non aliter ac
Ilvaeferrum.

The Learned Johan. Gerhardus, out of a Book which he calls Conciones
Metallica; I suppose he means the High Dutch Sermons of Mathesius, (whose
Language I understand not) has this notable passage to our present purpose: J.
Gerhard. Professor Tubingensis, Decad. Quaest. Physico chymicarum, page m. 18.
Relatum mihi est a metallico fossore, ad Ferrarias, quae non long Amberga
distant, terram inanem cum ferri Minera erutam, quam vocant den Gummer, mixtam
cum recrementis ferri, quae appellater der Sinder, congestam in cumulos, instar
magni cujusdam valli, solibus pluviisque exponi, and decimo quinto anno denuo
excoqui, eliquarique ferrum tantae tenacitatis, ut sola laminae inde
procudantur.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE Growth of SILVER.
OF the Growth, as is supposed, of Silver in the form of Trees or Grass or
other Vegetables, I have met with some Instances among Mineralists, and I have
elsewhere mentioned, that an Acquaintance of mine showed me a Stone, wherein he
affirmed the Silver, I saw in it, to have increased since he had it. But for
certain Reasons, none of these Relations seem to me very proper to my present
purpose; in order to which I shall therefore set down only one Instance, which
I lately met with in a French Collection of Voyages, published by a Person of
great Curiosity and Industry, (from whose Civility I received the Book.) For
there, in an account given by a Gentleman of his Country of a late Voyage he
made to Peru, wherein he visited the famous Silver-Mines of Potosi, I found a
passage which speaks to this sense: Le meilleur Argent, etc. i.e. Voyage du
Sicur au Peru, page 15.
The best Silver in all the Indies and the purest is that of the Mines of
Potosi; the chief have been found in the Mountain of Aranzasse: And, (some
Lines being interposed) it is added, that they draw this Metal even from the
Mineral Earths that were in times past thrown aside, when the ground was open,
and the Groves and Shafts that are in the Mountains were made; it having been
observed that in these recrements Metal had been formed afresh since those
times, which sufficiently shows the propensity of the Soil to the production of
this Metal; yet it is true, that these impregnated Earths yield not so much as
the ordinary Ore which is found in Veins betwixt the Rocks.

OBSERVATIONS ABOUT THE Growth of GOLD.
AS for the Growth of Gold, the Enquiries I have yet made among Travelers give
me no great satisfaction about it, and though I have spoken with several that
have been at the Coast of Guiny, and in Congo, and other Parts of Afric, where
much Gold is to be had; yet I could not learn by them, that they, or any
Acquaintance of theirs among the Natives, had seen any Mines or Veins of Gold,
(which yet diverse Authors affirm to be found in more than one Kingdom in
Ethiopia, and in some other African Countries.) And having afterward met with
a Learned Traveller, that had carefully visited the famous Gold-Mine of
Cremnitz in Hungary, he answered me, That he did not learn from the Miners,
whether or no the Ores of Gold etc. did really grow or were regenerated in
tract of time, by being exposed to the Air, or upon any other account; but the
Grand Over^eer, who was Lord of part of the Soil, told him, that he thought the
whole Mountain to abound with particles of Gold, and therefore was wont, when
the Diggers had almost exhausted the Vein, to cast in store of Earth, and dig
up other neighboring places, which, being kept there as in a Conservatory,
would afterward afford Gold, as the Mine did before.

And, if a late German Professor of Physic do not misinform us, his Country
affords us an eminent Instance of the Growth or Regeneration of Gold. Nam
Corbachi, Johan. Gerhardus in Decade Quastion^^^ page ^^ 19.
says he, quae est Civitas westpha^iae sub ditione Comitis de Isenborg and
Waldeck, Au^um excoquitur ex cumulis congestis, ita ut ^^ngulis quadrienni^s
iterum elaboretur cumulus unus, semper se restaurante nature, etc.

POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the setting down of the foregoing Observations, I casually met with a
curious Book of Travels, lately made by the very Ingenious Dr. Edward Brown,
and finding in page 100. a couple of Relations, that seem pertinently
referable, the one, to a passage above cited out of Agricola, in the Notes
about the Growth of Lead, and the other to the present Title about the) Growth
of Gold; I thought fit to annex them in the Learned Authors own words, viz.

1. Some passages in this Mine cut through the Rock, and long ^isus'd, have
grown up again: And I observed the sides of some, which had been formerly wide
enough, to carry their Ore through, to approach each other, so as we passed
with difficulty. This happens most in moist places; the passages unite not from
the top to the bottom, but from one side to another.

2. The common yellow Earth of the Country near Cremnitz, especially of the
Hills toward the West, although not esteemed Ore, affords some Gold: And in
one place, I saw a great part of an Hill dug away, which has been cast into
the Works, washed and wrought in the same manner as pounded Ore, with
considerable profit.

THe foregoing Observations about the Growth of Gold and other Metals are not
all that I might, perhaps without being blamed for it, have referred to that
Title. But all my Papers, wherein other Observations of this kind were set
down, are not now at hand, and diverse other Instances, that I have met with
among Writers of the Growth of Metals, (taking that expression in the sense I
formerly declared) do not seem to me so pertinent in this place, because the
improving Ores were not exposed, nor perchance accessible, to the Air. And even
as to the Instances that I have now mentioned, 'till severer Observations have
been made, to determine whether it be partly the contact or the operation of the
Air, or some internal disposition, analogous to a Metalline Seed or Ferment,
that causes this Metalline Increment, I dare not be positive; though I thought
the Interest of the Air in this Effect might make it pardonable, to add on this
occasion to the History of Nature some particulars, of which the Cause
conjecturally proposed may be probable enough to countenance a Suspicion, 'till
further Experience have more clearly instructed us.

To what has been said of the Growth of Metals in the Air, I might add some
Instances of the Growth of Fossile Salts, and of some other Minerals: But,
besides that these belong to the Paper about the Saltnesses of the Air; what
has been already said may suffice for the present occasion.

POSTSCRIPT.
AFter what I writ in the 23th page of the foregoing Disoourse, having an
opportunity to look again upon the Marchasite there mentioned to have been
Hermetically sealed up after its surface had been freed from the grains of
Vitriolate Salt that adhered to it, I perceived, that, notwithstanding the
Glass had been so closely stopped, yet there plainly appeared from the outside
of the mass some grains of an Efflorescence, whose color, between blew and
green, argued it to be of a Vitriolate nature. If this be seconded with other
trials made with the like success, it may suggest new thoughts about the Growth
of Metals and Minerals, especially with reference to the Air.

FINIS.
SOME ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS Relating to the SUSPICIONS ABOUT THE HIDDEN
QUALITIES of the AIR.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

SOME ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS Relating to the SUSPICIONS ABOUT THE Hidden
Qualities of the AIR.
THe ESSAY about Suspicions of some hidden Qualities of the Air, having been
detained somewhat long at the Press, that it might come abroad accompanied with
the other Tracts designed to attend i^, whilst I was rumaging among several
Papers to look for some other things, I met now and then with an Experiment or
Observation, that seemed to relate to some of the things delivered in that
Tract; and though they be in themselves of no great moment, I am content to
annex them to the rest, because, as in that company they may signify somewhat,
so I am unwilling that any matter of fact, relating to such a Subject, should
perish to save the labor of transcribing.

EXPER. I.
Having occasion to dulcifie some Calx of Dantzig-Vitriol, from which the Oil
had been a good while before distilled; water was put upon two large portions
of it, that the liqour might be impregnated with the Vitriolate particles
remaining in the Calx; the water put upon one of these portions was, soon after
it was sufficiently impregnated, filtrated and gently abstracted, by which
means it afforded many drams of a kind of Salt of Vitriol that seemed to differ
very little from the Vitriol that had been calcined: But the water that was put
upon the other portion of calcined Vitriol, was in a wide-mouthed vessel left
in the Air for a month or six weeks; after which time, when it came to be
abstracted after the manner formerly recited, it afforded many drams of a Salt
that did not then, nor long after, look at all like common Vitriol, or like the
other, but shot white almost like Saltpeter, or some other untincted Salt.
Whether this Experiment will constantly succeed, and at other Seasons of the
Year than that 'twas made in, which was Summer, I had not the opportunity to
make a full trial, though I endeavored it. But that the Air may have a great
stroke in varying the Salts obtainable from cal^in'd Vitriol, seemed the more
probable, because we had some Colcothar that had lain many months, if not some
years, in the Air, but in a place sheltered from the Rain; and having caused a
lixivium to be made of it, to try what sort or plenty of Saline particles it
would yield, we found, when the superfluous moisture was exhaled, that they
began to shoot into Salt far more white than Vitriol, and very differing from
it in its figure and way of Concretion.

EXPER. II.
We took Colcothar of Venereal Vitriol carefully dulcified, and leaving it in
my Study in the Month of January and February, This was made at Oxford.
by weighing it carefully before an ounce of it was exposed to the Air, and
after it had continued there some weeks, we found it to have increased in
weight four grains and about a quarter, besides some little dust that stuck to
the Glass.

This sight Experiment is here mentioned, that, being compared with the next
ensuing Trial, it may appear, that the difference of Airs, Seasons, Calces of
Vitriol, or other Circumstances, may produce a notable disparity in the
Increment of weight, the exposed Bodies gain in the Air.

EXPER. III.
We put eight ounces of Outlandish Vitriol, calcined to a deep redness, into a
somewhat broad and flat Metalline vessel, and set it by upon a shelf, in a
Study that was seldom frequented; and at the same time, that we might observe
what increment would be gained by exposing to the Air a larger superficies of
the powder in reference to the bulk, we put into another Metalline vessel,
smaller than the other, only two ounces of Colcothar, and set it on the same
shelf with the other, this was done at the Vernal Equinox, (the Twelfth of
March;) on the twenty fifth of June we weighed these powders again, and found
the eight ounces to have gained one dram and seventeen grains; but the two
ounces had acquired the same weight within a grain: Then putting them back into
their former vessels, we left them in the same place as formerly, 'till the
twenty fourth of August; when we found cause to suppose, that the greater
parcel of Colcothar had met with some mischance, either by Mice or otherwise;
but the lesser parcel weighed Twenty six grains heavier than it did in June,
amounting now to two ounces, one dram, forty two grains, having increased, in
less than six months, above an hundred grains, and consequently above a tenth
part of its first weight.

No Trial was made to discover what this acquired Substance may be, that we
might not disturb the intended prosecution of the Experiment.

EXPER. IV.
Because in most of the Experiments of Substances exposed to be impregnated by
the Air, or detain its Saline or other exotic particles, we employed Bodies
prepared and much altered by the previous operation of the Fire; we thought fit
to make some Trials with Bodies unchanged by the Fire, and to this purpose we
took a Marchasite, which was partly of a shining and partly of a darkish
color, and which seemed well disposed to afford Vitriol; of this we took
several smaller Lumps, that amounted to two ounces; these were kept in a room,
where they were freely accessible to the Air, which, by reason that the House,
that was seated in the Country, stood high, was esteemed to be very pure. After
the Marchasites had been kept in this room somewhat less than seven weeks, we
weighed them again in the same Balance, and found the two ounces to have
gained above twelve grains in weight.

EXPER. V.
The Experiment used at the latter end of our Paper, about Celestial and Aerial
Magnets, seeming to some Vixtuess very strange, and the way that I employed in
making that Liquor, that turns green in the Air, being somewhat troublesome, I
remember I thought fit to try upon the same ground a way of producing the same
Phenomenon more easy and more expeditious. And though perhap^ this way will
not succeed so constantly, nor always so well as the other, yet for its
easiness and cheapness it will not probably be unwelcome to those that are
desirous to see the odd Phenomenon.

We took then, more than once, filings of clean crude Copper, and having put on
them a convenient quantity of good Spirit of Salt, we suffered the Menstruum in
Heat (which need not be very great) to work upon the Metal, which it usually
does slowly, and not like Aquafortis: When the Liquor had by this operation
acquired a thick and muddy color, we decanted it into a clean Glass with a
wide mouth, which being left for a competent time in the open Air, the exposed
Liquor came to be of a fair green, though it did not appear that any thing was
precipitated at the bottom, to make it clear.

EXPER. VI.
Perhaps it may not be impertinent to add, that I once or twice observed the
fumes of a sharp Liquor to work more quickly or manifestly on a certain Metal
sustained in the Air, than did the Menstruum it self that emitted those fumes
on those parts of the Metal that it covered: And this brings into my mind,
that, asking diverse Questions of a Chemist that had been in Hungary and other
parts, purposely to see the Mines; he answered me, among other things, that; as
to the Ladders and other wooden work employed in one or more of the deep
Hungarian Mines, those that were in the upper part of the Groves any thing near
the external Air, would by the fretting Exhalations be rendered unserviceable,
in not many months, whereas those Ladders and pieces of Timber, etc. that were
employed in the lower part of the Mine, would hold good for two or three times
as long.

EXPER. VII.
We took about the bigness of a Nutmeg of a certain soft but consistent Body,
that we had caused to be Chymically prepared, and which in the free Air would
continually emit a thick smoke: This being put into a Vial, and placed in a
middle sized Receiver in our Engine, continued for some time to afford manifest
fumes, whilst the exhaustion was making; 'till at length, the Air having been
more and more pumped out, the visible ascension of fumes out of the Vial quite
ceased, and the matter having remained some time in this state, the smoking
substance was so altered, that it would not emit fumes, not only when the Air
was let into the Receiver, but not in a pretty while after the Vial was taken
out of it, 'till it had been removed to the window, where the Wind blowing-in
fresh and fresh Air, it began to smoke as formerly.

The other Phenomenon of this Experiment belong not to this place; but there
are two, which will not be impertinent here, and the latter of them may deserve
a serious Reflection.

The first of them was, that the Substance hitherto mentioned had been kept in
a large Glass, whereinto it had been distilled at least five or six weeks, and
yet would smoke very plentifully upon the contact of the Air, and be kept from
smoking, though the Chemical Receiver were stopped but with a piece of paper.

The second was, that, when the Vial was put unstopp'd in the Receiver, and the
Receiver close luted on, though no exhaustion were made, yet the white fumes
did very quickly cease to ascend into the Receiver, as if this Smoke
participated of the nature of Flame, and presently glutted the Air, or
otherwise made it unfit (and yet without diminution of its gravity) to raise
the Body that should ascend.

FINIS.
ANIMADVERSIONS UPON MR. HOBBES'S PROBLEMATA DE VACUO.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

PREFACE.
UPON the coming abroad of Mr. Hobbes's Problemata Physica, finding them in the
hands of an Ingenious Person, that intended to write a Censure of them, which
several Employments private and public have, it seems; hindered him to do; I
began, as is usual on such occasions, to turn over the leaves of the Book, to
see what particular things it treated of. This I had not long done before I
found, by obvious passages in the third Chapter, or Dialogue, as well as by the
Title, which was Problemata de Vacuo, that I was particularly concerned in it;
upon which I desired the Possessor of the Book, who readily consented, to leave
me to examine that Dialogue, on which condition I would leave him to deal with
all the rest of the Book. Nor did I look upon the Reflections I meant to make
as repugnant to the Resolutions I had taken against writing Books of
Controversy, since the Explications, Mr. Hobbes gave of his Problems, seemed
to contain but some Variations of, or an Appendix to, his Tract De Natura
Aeris, which, being one of the two first pieces that were published against
what I had written, was one of those that I had expressly reserved my self the
liberty to answer. But the Animadversions I first made upon Mr. Hobbes's
Problems De Vacuo, having been casually mislaid e're they were finished; before
I had occasion to resume my task, there past time enough to let me perceive,
that his Doctrine, which 'twill easily be thought that the Vacuists
disapproved, was not much relished by most of the Plenists themselves, the
modernest Peripateticks and the Cartesians; each of them maintaining the
Fullness of the World, upon their own grounds, which are differing enough from
those of our Author, the natural Indisposition I have to Polemical Discourses,
easily persuaded me to let alone a Controversy, that did not appear needful:
And I had still persisted in my silence, if Mr. Hobbes had not as 'twere
summoned me to break it by publishing again his Explications, which in my
Examen of his Dialogue De Natura Aeris I had shown to be erroneous.

And I did not grow at all more satisfied, to find him so constant as well as
stiff an Adversary to interspersed Vacuities, by comparing what he maintains in
his Dialogue De Vacuo, with some things that he teaches, especially concerning
God, the Cause of Motion, and the Imperviousness of Glass, in some other of his
Writings that are published in the same Volume with it. For since he asserts
that there is a God, and owns Him to be the Creator of the World; and since on
the other side the Penetration of Dimensions is confessed to be impossible, and
he denies that there is any Vacuum in the Universe; it seems difficult to
conceive, how in a World that is already perfectly full of Body, a Corporeal
Deity, such as he maintains in his Append. ad Leviath. cap. 3, can have that
access even to the minute parts of the Mundane Matter, that seems requisite to
the Attributes and Operations that belong to the Deity, in reference to the
World. But I leave Divines to consider what Influence the conjunction of Mr.
Hobbes's two Opinions, the Corporeity of the Deity, and the perfect Plenitude
of the World, may have on Theology. And perhaps I should not in a Physical
Discourse have taken any notice of the proposed Difficulty, but that, to
prevent an Imputation on the Study of Natures Works, (as if it taught us rather
to degrade than admire their Author,) it seemed not amiss to hint ( in
transitu) that Mr. Hobbes's gross Conception of a Corporeal God, is not only
unwarranted by sound Philosophy, but ill befriended even by his own.

My Adversary having proposed his Problems by way of Dialogue between A. and B;
`twill not, I presume, be wondered at, that I have given the same form to my
Animadversions; which come forth no earlier, because I had diverse other
Treatises, that I was more concerned for, to publish before them.

But because it will probably be demanded, why on a Tract that is but short, my
Animadversions should take up so much room? It will be requisite, that I here
give an account of the bulk of this Treatise.

And first, having found that there was not any one Problem, in whose
Explication, as proposed by Mr. Hobbes, I saw cause to acquiesce, I was induced
for the Readers ease, and that I might be sure to do my Adversary no wrong, to
transcribe his whole Dialogue, bating some few Transitions, and other Clauses
not needful to be transferred hither.

Next, I was not willing to imitate Mr. Hobbes, Credo, De Not. Aeris, p. 13.
(says Mr. Hobbes in his Dialogus Physicus:) Nam motus hic Restitutionis,
Hobbii est, and ab illo primo and solo explicatus in Lib. de Corpore, cap. 21.
Art. 1. Sine qua Hypothesi, quantuscunque labor, ars, sumptus, ad rerum
Naturali^ invisibiles causas inveniendas adhibeatur, frustra erit. And speaking
of the Gentlemen (to whom it were not here proper for me to give Epith^tes)
that used to meet at Gresham-College, and are known by the Name of the Royal
Society, he thus treats them and their way of Inquiring into Nature:
Conveniant, studia conserant, Experimenta faciant quantum volunt, nisi and
Principiis utantur meis, nihil preficient.

A. Fateris ergo nihil hactenus a Collegis tuis promotam esse scientium
Causarum Naturalium, nisi quod Unus eorum Machinam ^nvenerit, qua motus
excitari Aeris possit talis, ut parts Sphaerae simul undiquaque tendant ad
Centrum, and ut Hypotheses Hobbianae, ante quidem satis probabiles, hinc
reddantur probabiliores.


B. Nec fateri pudet; nam est aliquid prodire tenus, si non datur ultra.


A. Quid tenus? quorsum autem tantus apparatus and sumptus Machinarum factu
difficilium, ut eatenus tantum prodiretis quantum ante prodierat Hobbius? Cur
n^n inde potius incepistis ubi ille defiit? Cur Principiis ab illo positis non
estis usi? Cumque Aristoteles recte dixit, ignorato motu ignorari Naturam, etc.


-- Ad Causas autem, propter quas proficere ne paululum quidem potu^stis, nec
poteritis, accedunt etiam aliae, ut odium Hobbii, etc.


who recites in the Dialogue we are considering the same Experiments that he
had already mentioned in his Tract De Natura Aeris, without adding as his own
(that I remember) any new one to them. But my unwillingness to tire the Reader
with bare Repetitions of the Arguments I employed in my Examen of that Tract,
invited me to endeavor to make him some amends for the exercise of his
patience by inserting, as occasion was offered, five or six new Experiments,
that will not perhaps be so easily made by every Reader that will be able (now
that I have perspicuously proposed them) to understand them.

And lastly, since Mr. Hobbes has not been content to magnify ^^mself and his
way of treating of Physical matters, but has been pleased to speak very
slightingly of Experimentarian Philosophers (as he styles them) in general,
and, which is worse, to disparage the making of elaborate Experiments; I judged
the thing, he seemed to aim at, so prejudicial to true and useful Philosophy,
that I thought, it might do some service to the less knowing, and less wary,
sort of Readers, if I tried to make his own Explications enervate his
Authority, and by a somewhat particular Examen of the Solutions he has given of
the Problems I am concerned in, show, that it is much more easy to undervalue a
frequent recourse to Experiments, than truly to explicate the Phenomenon of
Nature without them. And since our Author, speaking of his Problemata Physica,
(which is but a small Book) scruples not to tell His Majesty, to whom he
dedicates them, that he has therein comprised (to speak in his own terms) the
greatest and most probable part of his Physical Meditations; and since by the
alterations, he has made in what he formerly writ about the Phenomenon of my
Engine, he seems to have designed to give it a more advantageous form: I
conceive, that by these selected Solutions of his, one may, without doing him
the least injustice, make an estimate of his way of discoursing about Natural
things. And though I would not interess the credit of Experimentarian
Philosophers in no considerabler a Paper than this; yet if Mr. Hobbes's
Explications and mine be attentively compared, it will not, I hope, by them be
found, that the way of Philosophising he employs, is much to be preferred
before that which he undervalues.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON MR. HOBBES'S Problemata de VACUO.
A. MAy one, without too bold an inquisitiveness, ask, what Book you are
reading so attentively?


B. You will easily believe you may, when I shall have answered you, that 'twas
Mr. Hobbes's lately published Tract of Physical Problems, which I was perusing.


A. What progress have you made in it?


B. I was finishing the third Dialogue or Chapter when you came in, and finding
my self, though not named, yet particularly concerned, I was perusing it with
that attention which it seems you took notice of.


A. Diverse of your Experiments are so expressly mentioned there, that one need
not be skilled in decyphering to perceive that you are interessed in that
Chapter, and therefore seeing you have heedfully read it over, pray give me
leave to ask your Judgment, both of Mr. Hobbes's Opinion, and his Reasonings
about Vacuum.


B. Concerning his Opinion, I am sorry I cannot now satisfy your Curiosity,
having long since taken, and ever since kept, a Resolution to decline, at least
until a time that is not yet come, the declaring my self either for or against
the Plenists. But as to the other part of your Question, which is about Mr.
Hobbes's Arguments for the absolute Plenitude of the World, I shall not scruple
readily to answer, that his Ratiocinations seem to me far short of that
cogency, which the noise he would make in the world, and the way wherein he
treats both ancient and modern Philosophers that dissent from him, may warrant
us to expect.


A. You will allow me the freedom to tell you, That, to convince me, that your
resentment (...) his explicating diverse of the Phenomenon of your Pneumatic
Engine ot^erwise than you have been wont to do, (and perhaps in terms that
might well have been more civil,) has h(...) share in dictating this Judgment
of yours; the best way will be, that entering for a while into the party of the
Vacuists you answer the Arguments he alleges in this Chapter to confute them.


B. Having always, as you know, forborne to declare my self either way in this
Controversy, I shall not tie my self strictly to the Principles and Notions of
the Vacuists, nor, though but for a while, oppose my self to those of the
Plenists: But so far I shall comply with your Commands, as either upon the
Doctrine of the Vacuists, or upon other grounds, to consider, whether this
Dialogue of Mr. Hobbes have cogently proved his, and the Schools, Assertion,
Non dari Vacuum; and whether he has rightly explained some Phenomenon of Nature
which he undertakes to give an account of, and especially some produced in our
Engine, whereof he takes upon him to render the genuine Causes. And this last
inquiry is that which I chiefly design.


A. By this I perceive, that if you can make our your own Explications of your
Adversaries Problems de Vacuo, and show them to be preferable to his, you will
think you have done your work, and that it is but your secondary scope to show,
that in Mr. Hobbes his way of solving them, he gives the Vacuists an advantage
against Him, though not against the Plenists in general.


B. You do not mistake my meaning, and therefore without any further Preamble,
let us now proceed to the particular Phenomenon considered by Mr. Hobbes; the
first of which is an Experiment proposed by me in the one and thirtieth of the
Physico-Mechanical Experiments concerning the Adhesion of two flat and polished
Marbles, which I endeavored to solve by the pressure of the Air. And this
Experiment Mr. Hobbes thinks so convincing an one to prove the Plenitude of the
World, that, though he tells us he has many cogent Arguments to make it out,
yet he mentions but this one, because that, he says, suffices.


A. The Confidence he thereby expresses of the great force of this Argument
does the less move me, because, I remember, that formerly in his Elements of
Philosophy he thought it sufficient to employ one Argument to evince the
Plenitude of the World, and for that one he pitched upon the Vulgar Experiment
of a Gardeners Watering-Pot: But, whether he were wrought upon by the
Objections made to his Inference from that Phenomenon in your Examen of his
Dialogue De Natura Aeris, or by some other Considerations, I will not pretend
to divine. But I plainly perceive, he now prefers the Experiment of the
cohering Marbles.


B. Of which it will not be amiss, though the passage be somewhat long; to read
you his whole Discourse out of the Book I have in my hand.


A. It Is fit that you, who for my sake are content to take the pains of
answering what he says, should be eased of the trouble of reading it, which I
will therefore, with your leave, take upon me. His Discourse then about the
Marbles is this:


A. Ad probandam Universi Plenitudinem, nullum nostin Argumentum cogens?


B. Imo multa: Unum autem sufficit ex eo sumptum, Quod duo corpora plana, si se
mutuo secundum amborum planitiem communem tangant, non facile in instante
divelli possunt; successive vero facillime. Non dico, impossible esse duo
durissima Marmora ita cohaerentia divellere, sed difficile; and vim postulare
tantam, quanta sufficit ad duritiem lapidis superandam. Siquidem vero majore vi
ad separationem opus sit quam illae, qua moventur separata, id signum est non
dari Vacuum.


A. Assertiones illae demonstratione indigent. Primo autem ostende, quomodo ex
duorum durissimorum corporum, conjunctorum ad superficies exquisite laeves,
diremptione difficili, sequatur Plenitudo Mundi?


B. Si duo plana, dura, polita Corpora (ut Marmora) collocentur unum supra
alterum, ita ut eorum superficies se mutuo per omnia puncta exact, quantum
fieri potest, contingant, illa sine magna difficultate ita divelli non possunt,
ut eodem instante per omnia puncta dirimantur. Veruntamen Marmora eadem, si
communis eorum superficies ad Horizontem erigatur, aut non valde inclinetur,
alterum ab altero facillime (ut scis) etiam solo pondere dilabentur. Nonne
causa hujus rei haec est, Quod labenti Marmori succedit Aer, and relictum locum
semper implet?


A. Certissime. Quid ergo?


B. Quando vero eadem uno instante divellere conaris, nonne multo major vis
adhibenda est; Quam ob causam?


A. Ego, and mecum (puto) omnes causam statuunt, Quod spatium totum inter duo
illa Marmora divulsa, simul uno instante implere Aer non potest, quantacunque
celeritate fiat divulsio.


B. An qui spatia in Aere dari vacua contendunt, in illo Aere solo dari negant
qui Marmora illa conjuncta circumdat?


A. Minime, sed ubique interspersa.


B. Dum ergo illi, qui Marmor unum ab altero revellentes Aerem comprimunt, and
per consequens Vacuum exprimunt, Vacuum faciunt locum per revulsionem relictum;
nulla ergo separationis erit difficultas, saltem non major quam est difficultas
corpora eadem movendi in Aere postquam separata fuerint. Itaque quoniam,
concesso Vacuo, difficultas Marmora illa dirimendi nulla est, sequitur per
difficultatis experientiam, nullum esse Vacuum.


A. Recte quidem illud infers. Mundi autem Plenitudine suppos^ta, quomodo
demonstrabis possibile omnino esse ut divellantur?


B. Cogita primo Corpus aliquod ductile, nec nimis durum, ut ceram, in duas
parts distrahi, quae tamen parts ^on minus exact in communi plano se mutuo
tangunt quam laevissima Marmora. Iaem quo pacto distrahatur cera, consideremus.
Nonne perpetuo attenuatur donec in filum evadat tenuissimum, and omni dato
crasso tenuius, and sic tandem divellitur? Eodem modo etiam durissima columnae
in duas parts distrahetur, si vim tantam adhibeas, quanta sufficit ad
resistentiam duritiei superandam. Sicut enim in cera parts primo extimae
distrahuntur, in quarum locum succedit Aer; ita etiam in Corpore quantumlibet
duro Aer locum subit partium extimarum, quae primae Vulfionis viribus
dirumpuntur. Vis autem quae super at resistentiam partium extimarum Duri,
facile superabit resistentiam reliquarum. Nam resistentia prima est a Toto
Duro, reliquarum vero semper a Residuo.


A. Ita quidem videtur consideranti, quam Corpora quaedam, praesertim vero
duris^ima, fragilia sint.

Does this Ratiocination ^eem to you as cogent, as it did to the Proposer of it?


B. You will quickly think it does not, and perhaps you will think it should
not, if you please to consider with me some of the Reflections that the Reading
of it suggested to me.

And first, without declaring for the Vacuists Opinion, I must profess my self
unsatisfied with Mr. Hobbes's way of arguing against them: For, where he says,
Dum ergo illi qui Marmor unum ab altero revellentes Aerem comprimunt and per
consequens Vacuum exprimunt, Vacuum faciunt locum per revulsionem relictum;
nulla ergo separationis erit difficultas, saltem non major quam est difficultas
corpora eadem movendi in Aere postquam separata fuerint. Itaque quoniam,
concesso Vacuo, difficultas Marmora illa dirimendi nulla est, sequitur per
difficultatis experientiam, nullum esse Vacuum. Methinks he expresses himself
but obscurely, and leaves his Readers to ghess, what the word Dum refers to.
But that which seems to be his drift in this passage, is, that, since the
Vacuists allow interspersed Vacuities, not only in the Air that surrounds the
conjoined Marbles, but in the rest of the ambient Air, there is no reason, why
there should be any difficulty in separating the Marbles, or at least any
greater difficulty than in moving the Marbles in that Air after their
separation. But, not to consider, whether his Adversaries will not accuse his
phrase of squeezing out a Vacuum as if it were a Body, they will easily answer,
that notwithstanding the Vacuities they admit in the ambient Air, a manifest
reason may be given in their Hypothesis of our finding a difficulty in the
Divulsion of the Marbles. For, the Vacuities they admit being but interspersed,
and very small, and the Corpuscles of the Atmosphere being according to them
endowed with Gravity, there leans so many upon the upper surface of the
uppermost Marble, that that stone cannot be at once perpendicularly drawn up
from the lower Marble contiguous to it, without a force capable to surmount the
weight of the Aerial Corpuscles that lean upon it. And this weigh^ has already
so constipated the neigh^bouring parts of the ambient Air that he, that would
perpendicularl^ raise the upper Marble from the lower shall need a considerable
force to mak^ the Revulsion, and compel the al^ ready contiguous parts of the
incum^bent Air to a subingression into the pores or intervals intercepted
be^tween them. For the Conatus of him that endeavo^rs to remove the uppe^
Marble, whilst the lower surface o^ it is ^enc'd from the pressure of the
Atmosphere by the Contact of the lower Marble which suffers no Air to come in
between them, is not assisted by the weight or pressure of the At^mosphere,
which, when the Marble^ are once separated, pressing as strong^ly against the
undermost surface o^ the upper Marble, as the incumben^ Atmospherical Pillar
does against the upper surface of the same Marble^ the hand that endeavors to
raise i^ in the free Air has no other resistance than that small one of the
Marble own weight to surmount.


A. But what say you to the Reason that Mr. Hobbes, and, as he thinks, all
others give of the difficulty of the often mentioned Divulsion, namely, Quod
spatium totum inter duo illa Marmora divulsa simul uno instante implere Aer non
potest, quantacunque celeritate fiat divulsio.


B. I say, that, for ought I know, the Plenists may give a more plausible
account of this Experiment, than Mr. Hobbes has here done; and therefore
abstracting from the two opposite Hypotheses, I shall further say, That the
genuine Cause of the Phenomenon seems to be that which I have already
assigned; and that difficulty of raising the upper stone that accompanies the
Airs not being able to come in all at once, to possess the space left between
the surfaces of the two Marbles upon their separation, proceeds from hence,
that, 'till that space be filled with the Atmospherical Air, the hand of him
that would lift up the superior Marble cannot be fully assisted by the
pressure of the Air against the lower surface of that Marble.


A. This is a Paradox, and therefore I shall desire to know on what you ground
it?


B. Though I mention it but as a Conjecture proposed ex abundanti, yet I shall
on this occasion countenance it with two things; the first, that, since I
declare not for the Hypothesis of the Plenists as it is maintained by Mr.
Hobbes, I am not bound to allow, what the common Explication, adopted by my
Adversary, supposes; namely, that either Nature abhors a Vacuum (as the Schools
would have it,) or that there could be no Divulsion of the Marbles, unless at
the same time the Air were admitted into the room that Divulsion makes for i^.
And a Vacuist may tell you, that, provided the strength employed to draw up the
superior Marble be great enough to surmount the weight of the Aerial
Corpuscles accumulated upon it, the divulsion would ensue, though by Divine
Omnipotence no Air or other Body should be permitted to fill the room made for
it by the divulsion; and that the Air's rushing into that space does not
necessarily accompany, but in order of Nature and time follow upon, a
separation of the Marbles, the Air that surrounded their contiguous surfaces
being by the weight of the collaterally superior Air impelled into the room
newly made by the divulsion. But I shall rather countenance what you call my
Paradox by an Experiment I purposely made in our Pneumatical Receiver, where
having accommodated two flat and polished Marbles, so that the lower being
fixed, the upper might be laid upon it and drawn up again as there should be
occasion, I found, that if, when the Receiver was well exhausted, the upper
Marble was by a certain contrivance laid flat upon the lower, they would not
then cohere as formerly, but be with great ease separated, though it did not by
any Phenomenon appear, that any Air could come to rush in, to possess the
place given it by the recess of the upper Marble, whose very easy avulsion is
as ^asily explicable by our Hyphothesis, since the pressure of that little Air,
that remained in the Receiver, being too faint to make any at all con^iderable
resistance to the avulsion of the upper Marble, the hand that drew it up had
very little more than the single weight of the stone to surmount.


A. An Anti-plenist had expected, that you would have observed, that the
difficult separation of the Marbles in the open Air does rather prove, that
there may be a Vacuum, than that there can be none. For in case the Air can
succeed as fast at the sides as the divulsion is made, a Vacuist may demand,
whence comes the difficulty of the separation? And if the Air cannot fill the
whole room made for it by the separated Marbles at the fame instant they are
forced asunder, how is a Vacuum avoided for that time, how small soever, that
is necessary for the Air to pass from the edges to the middle of the room newly
made?


B. What the Plenists will say to your Argument I leave them to consider^ but I
presume, they will be able to give a more plausible account of the Phenomenon
we are treating of, than is given by Mr. Hobbes.


A. What induces you to dislike his Explication of it?


B. Two things, the one, that I think the Cause he assigns improbable; and the
other, that I think another, that is better, has been as^ign'd already.

And first, whereas Mr. Hobbes requires to the Divulsion of the Marbles a force
great enough to surmount the hardness of the stone, this is asserted gratis,
which it should not be; since it seems very unlikely, that the weight of so few
pounds as will suffice to separate two coherent Marbles of about an Inch, for
instance, in Diameter, should be able to surmount the hardness of such solid
stones as we usually employ in this Experiment. And though it be generally
judged more easy to bend, if it may be, or break a broader piece of Marble
caeteris paribus, than a much narrower; yet, whereas neither I, nor any else
that I know, nor I believe Mr. Hobbes, ever observed any difference in the
resistance of Marbles to separation from the greater or lesser thickness of the
stones; I find by constant experience, that, caeteris paribus, the broadness of
the coherent Marbles does exceedingly increase the difficulty of disjoyning
them: Insomuch that, whereas not many pounds, as I was saying, would separate
Marbles of an Inch, or a lesser, Diameter; when I increased their Diameter to
about four Inches, if I misremember not, there were several Men that
successively tried to pull them asunder without being able by their utmost
force to effect it.


A. But what say you to the Illustration, that Mr. Hobbes, upon the supposition
of the Worlds Plenitude, gives of our Phenomenon by drawing asunder the
opposite pa^^s of a piece of Wax?


B. To me it seems an Instance improper enough. For first, the parts that are
to be divided in the Wax are of a soft and yielding consistence, and according
to him of a ductile, or, if you please, of a tractile nature, and not, as the
parts of the coherent Marbles, very solid and hard. Next, the parts of the Wax
do not stick together barely by a superficial contact of two smooth Planes, as
do the Marbles we are speaking of; but have their parts implicated, and as it
were entangled with one another. And therefore they are far from a disposition
to slide off, like the Marbles; from one another, in how commodious a posture
soever you place them. Besides it is manifest, that the Air has opportunity to
succeed in the places successively deserted by the receding parts of the
attenuated Wax; but it is neither manifest, nor as yet well proved by Mr.
Hobbes, that the Air does after the same manner succeed between the two
Marbles, which, as I lately noted, are not forced asunder after such a way, but
are, as himself speaks, severed in all their points at the same instant.


A. I know, you forget not what he says of the dividing of a hard Column into
two parts by a force sufficient to overcome the resistance of its hardness.


B. He does not here either affirm, that he, or any he can trust, has seen the
thing done; nor does he give us any such account of the way wherein the Pillar
is to be broken; whether in an erected, inclined, or horizontal posture; nor
describe the particular circumstances that were fit to be mentioned in order to
the solution of the Phenomenon. Wherefore, 'till I be better informed of the
matter of fact, I can scarce look upon what Mr. Hobbes says of the Pillar, as
other than his Conjecture, which now I shall the rather pass by, not only
because the case is differing from that of our polished Marbles, which are
actually distinct Bodies, and only contiguous in one Commissure; but also,
because I would hasten to the second reason of my dislike of Mr. Hobbes's
Explication of our Phenomenon, which is, that a better has been given already,
from the pressure of the Atmosphere upon all the superficial parts of the upper
Marble save those that touch the Plane of the lower.


A. You would have put fair for convincing Mr. Hobbes himself, at least would
have put him to unusual shifts, if you had succeeded in the attempt you made,
among other of your Physico-Mechanical Experiments, to disjoyn two coherent
Marbles, by suspending them horizontally in your Pneumatical Receiver, and
pumping out the Air that environed them; for, from your failing in that
attempt, though you rendered a not improbable Reason of it, Mr. Hobbes took
occasion, in his Dialogue De Nat^^a Aeris, to speak in so high a strain as
this: Nihil isthic erat quod ageret pondus; Experimento hoc excogitari contra
opinionem eorum qui Vacuum asserunt aliud argumentum fortius aut evidentius non
potuit. Nam si duorum cohaerentium alterutrum secundum eam viam, in quae jacent
ipsae contiguae superficies, propulsum ^sset, facile separarentur, Aere praximo
in locum relictum successive semper influente; sed illa ita divellere, ut simul
totum amitterent contactum, impossible est, mundo pleno. Oporteret enim aut
motum fieri ab uno termino ad alium in instante, aut duo corporae eodem tempore
in eodem esse loco: Quorum utrumvis dicere, est absurdum.


B. You may remember, that where I relate that Experiment, I expressed a hope,
that, when I should be better accommodated than I then was, I might attempt the
Trial with prosperous success, and accordingly afterward, having got a lesser
Engine than that I used before, wherewith the Air might be better pumpt out and
longer kept out, I cheerfully repeated the Trial. To show then, that when two
coherent Marbles are sustained horizontally in the Air, the Cause, why they are
not to be forced asunder, if they have two or three Inches in Diameter, without
the help of a considerable weight, is the pressure I was lately mentioning of
the ambient Air; I caused two such coherent Marbles to be suspended in a large
Receiver, with a weight at the lowermost, that might help to keep them steady;
but was very inconsiderable to that which their Cohesion might have su^mounted;
then causing the Air to be pumpt by degrees out of the Receiver, for a good
while the Marbles stuck close together, because during that time the Air could
not be so far pumpt out, but that there remained enough to sustain the small
weight that endeavored their divulsion: But when the Air was further pumpt
out, at length the Spring of the little, but not a little expanded, Air, that
remained, being grown too weak to sustain the lower Marble and its small clog,
they did, as I expected, drop off.


A. This will not agree over-well with the confident and triumphant expressions
just now recited.


B. I never envied Mr. Hobbes's forwardness to triumph, and am content, his
Conjectures be recommended by the confidence that accompanies them, if mine be
by the success that follows them. But to confirm the Explication given by me of
our Phenomenon, I shall add, that as the last mentioned Trial, which I had
several times occasion to repeat, shows, that the cohesion of our two
contiguous Marbles would cease upon the withdrawing of the pressure of the
Atmosphere; so by another Experiment I made, it appears, that the supervening
of that pressure sufficed to cause that Cohesion. For, in prosecution of one of
the lately mentioned Trials, having found, that when the Receiver was well
exhausted, two Marbles, though considerably broad, being laid upon one another
after the requisite manner, their adhesion was, if any at all, so weak, that
the uppermost would be easily drawn up from off the other; we laid them again
one upon the other, and then letting the external Air flow into the Receiver,
we found, according to expectation, that the Marbles now cohered well, and we
could not raise the uppermost but accompanied with the lowermost. But I am
sensible, I have detained you too long upon the single Experiment of the
Marbles: And though I hope the stress Mr. Hobbes lays on it will plead my
excuse, yet to make your Patience some amends, I shall be the more brief in the
other particulars that remain to be considered in his Dialogue De Vacuo. And
'twill not be difficult for me to keep my promise without injuring my Cause,
since almost all these particulars being but the same which he has already
alleged in his Dialogue De Nature Aeris, and I soon after answered in my
Examen of that Dialogue, I shall need but to refer you to the passages where
you may find these Allegations examined, only subjoyning here some Reflections
upon those few and slight things, that he has added in his Problems De Vacuo.


A. I may then, I suppose, read to you the next passage to that long one, you
have hitherto been considering, and it is this: Ad Vacuum nunc revertor: Quas
causas sine suppositione Vacui redditurus es illorum effectuum, qui ostenduntur
per Machinam illam quae est in Collegio Greshamensi?


B. Machina illa --


B. Stop here, I beseech you, a little, that, before we go any further, I may
take notice to you of a couple of things that will concern our subsequent
Discourse.

Whereof the first is, that it appears by Mr. Hobbes's Dialogue about the Air,
that the Explications he there gave of some of the Phenomenon of the Machina
Boyliana, were directed partly against the Virtuosi, that have since been
honored with the Title of the Royal Society, and partly against the Author of
that Engine, as if the main thing therein designed were to prove a Vacuum. And
since he now repeats the same explications, I think it necessary to say again,
that if he either takes the Society or me for professed Vacuists, he mistakes,
and shoots beside the mark; for, neither they nor I have ever yet declared
either for or against a Vacuum.

And the other thing I would observe to you, is, that Mr. Hobbes seems not to
have rightly understood, or at least not to have sufficiently heeded in what
chiefly consists the advantage, which the Vacuists may make of our Engine
against him: For, whereas in diverse places he is very solicitous to prove, that
the cavity of our Pneumatical Receiver is not altogether empty, the Vacuists
may tell him, that since he asserts the absolute plenitude of the World, he
must, as indeed he does, reject not only great Vacuities, but also those very
small and interspersed ones, that they suppose to be intercepted between the
solid corpuscles of other bodies, particularly of the Air: So that it would not
confute them to prove, that in our Receiver, when most diligently exhausted,
there is not one great and absolute Vacuity, or, as they speak, a Vacuum
coacervatum, since smaller and disseminated Vacuities would serve their turn.
And therefore they may think their Pretensions highly favored, as by several
particular effects, so by this general Phenomenon of our Engine, that it
appears by several Circumstances, that the Common or Atmospherical Air, which,
before the pump is set a work, possessed the whole cavity of our Receiver, far
the greatest part is by the intervention of the pump made to pass out of the
cavity into the open Air, without being able, at least for a little while, to
get in again; and yet it does not appear by any thing alleged by Mr. Hobbes,
that any other body succeeds to fill adequately the places deserted by such a
multitude of Aerial corpuscles.


A. If I ghess aright, by those words, (viz. it appears not by any thing
alleged by Mr. Hobbes,) you design to intimate, that you would not in general
prejudice the Plenists.


B. Your conjecture was well founded: For I think diverse of them, and
particularly the Cartesians, who suppose a subtle Matter or Ether fine enough
to permeate glass, though our common Air cannot do it, have not near so
difficult a task to avoid the Arguments the Vacuifts may draw from our Engine,
as Mr. Hobbes, who, without having recourse to the porosity of glass, which
indeed is impervious to common Air, strives to solve the Phenomenon, and prove
our Receiver to be always perfectly full, and therefore as full at any one time
as at any other of common or Atmospherical Air, as far as we can judge of his
opinion by the tendency or import of his Explications.


A. Yet, if I were rightly informed of an Experiment of yours, Mr. Hobbes may
be thereby reduced either to pass over to the Va^uist's, or to acknowledge some
AEtherial or other matter more subtle than Air, and capable of passing through
the pores of glass; and therefore, to show your self impartial between the
Vacuists and their Adversaries in this Controversy, I hope you will not refuse
to gratify the Plenists by giving your friends a more particular account of
the Experiment.


B. I know which you mean, and remember it very well. For, though I long since
devised it, yet having but the other day had occasion to peruse the Relation I
writ down of one of the best Trials, I think I can repeat it, almost in the
very words, which, if I mistake not, were these:

There was taken a Bubble of thin white glass, about the bigness of a Nutmeg,
with a very slender stem, of about four or five Inches long, and of the bigness
of a Crows-quill. The end of the Quill being held in the flame of a Lamp blown
with a pair of Bellows, was readily and well sealed up, and presently the
globous part of the glass, being held by the stem, was kept turning in the
flame, 'till it was red hot and ready to melt; then being a little removed from
the flame, as the included Air began to lose of its agitation and spring, the
external Air manifestly and considerably pressed in one of the sides of the
Bubble. But the glass being again, before the cold could crack it, held as
before in the flame, the rarefied Air distended and plump'd up the Bubble;
which being the second time removed from the flame, was the second time
compressed; and, being the third time brought back to the flame, swelled as
before, and removed, was again compressed, (either this time or the last by two
distinct cavities;) 'till at length, having satisfied our selves, that the
included Air was capable of being condensed or dilated without the ingress or
egress of Air (properly so called) we held the Bubble so long in the flame,
strengthened by nimble blasts, that not only it had its sides plump'd up, but a
hole violently broken in it by the over-rarified Air, which, together with the
former watchfulness, we employed from time to time to discern if it were any
where cracked or perforated, satisfied us that it was till then entire.


A. I confess, I did not readily conceive before, how you could, (as I was told
you had,) make a solid Vessel, wherein there was no danger of the Aires getting
in or out, whose cavity should be still possessed with the same Air, and yet the
Vessel be made by turns bigger and lesser. And, though I presently thought upon
a well stopped bladder, yet I well foresaw, that a distrustful Adversary might
make some Objections, which are by your way of proceeding obviated, and the
Experiment agrees with your Doctrine in showing, how impervious we may well
think your thick Pneumatick Receivers are to common Air, since a thin glass
Bubble, when its pores were opened or relaxed by flame, would not give passage
to the Springy particles of the Air, though violently agitated; for if those
particles could have got out of the pores, they never would have broke the
Bubble, as at length a more violent degree of Heat made them do; nor probably
would the Compression, that afterward insued of the Bubble by the ambient Air,
be checked near so soon, if those Springy Corpuscles had not remained within to
make the resistance. Methinks, one may hence draw a new proof of what I
remember you elsewhere teach, that the Spring of the Air may be much
strengthened by Heat. For, in our case, the Spring of the Air was thereby
enabled to expand the comprest glass, it was imprisoned in, in spite of the
resisting pressure of the external Air; and yet, that this pressure was
considerable, appears by this, that the weight of so small a Column of
Atmospherical Air, as could bear upon the Bubble, was able to press in the
heated glass, in spite of the resistance of its tenacity and arched figure.


B. Yet that which I mainly designed in this Experiment was, (if I were able)
to show and prove at once, by an Instance not liable to the ordinary
exceptions, the true Nature of Rarefaction and Condensation, at least of the
Air. For, to say nothing of the Peripatetick Rarefaction and Condensation,
strictly so called, which I scruple not to declare, I think to be physically
inconceptible or impossible; it is plain by our Experiment, that, when the
Bubble, after the Glass had been first thrust in toward the Center, was
expanded again by heat, the included Air possessed more room than before, and
yet it could perfectly fill no more room than formerly, each Aerial Particle
taking up, both before and after the heating of the Bubble, a portion of space
adequate to its own bulk; so that in the Cavity of the expanded Bubble we must
admit either Vacuities interspersed between the Corpuscles of the Air, or that
some fine Particles of the Flame, or other subtle matter, came in to fill up
those Intervals, which matter must have entered the Cavity of the Glass at its
pores: And afterward, when the red-hot Bubble was removed from the flame, it
is evident, that, since the grosser particles of the Air could not get through
the Glass, which they were not able to do, even when vehemently agitated by an
ambient Flame, the Compression of the Bubble, and the Condensation of the Air,
which was necessarily consequent upon it, could not, supposing the Plenitude of
the World, be performed without squeezing out some of the subtle matter
contained in the cavity of the Bubble, whence it could not issue but at the
pores of the Glass. But I will no longer detain you from Mr. Hobbes his
Explications of the Machina Boyliana; to the first of which you may now, if you
please, advan^^.


A. The passage I was going to read, when you interrupted me, was this:


B. Machina illa eosdem effectus producit, quos produceret in loco non magno
magnus inclusus ventus.


A. Quomodo ingreditur istuc ventus? Machinam nosti Cylindrion esse cavum,
aeneum, in quem protruditur Cylindrus alius solidus ligneus, coriotectus, (quem
suctorem dicunt) ita exquisite congruens, ut ne minimus quidem Aer inter corium
and aes intrare (ut putant) possit.


B. Scio, and quo Suctor facilius intrudi possit, foramen quoddam est in
superiori part Cylindri, per quod Aer (qui suctoris ingressum alioqui impedire
possit) emittatur. Quod foramen aperire possunt and claudere quoties usus
postulat. Est etiam in Cylindri cavi recessu summo datus aditus Aeri in globum
concavum Vitreum, quem etiam aditum clavicula obturare and aperire possunt
quoties volunt. Denique in globo vitreo summo relinquitur foramen satis amplum,
(clavicula item claudendum and recludendum) ut in illum quae volunt immittere
possint, experiendi causa.


B. The imaginary wind to which Mr. Hobbes here ascribes the effects of our
Engine, he formerly had recourse to in the 13th page of his Dialogue, and I
have sufficiently answered that passage of it in the 45th and 46th pages of my
Examen, to which I therefore refer you.


A. I presume, you did not overlook the comparison Mr. Hobbes annexes to what I
last read out of his Problems, since he liked the conceit so well, that we meet
with it in this place again, though he had formerly printed it in his Dialogue
De Natura Aeris. The words (as you see) are these: Tota denique Machina non
multum differt, si naturam ejus spectes, a Sclopeto ex Sambuco, quo pueri se
delectant, imitantes Sclopetos militum, nisi quod major sit, and majori art
fabricatus, and pluris constet.


B. I could scarce, for the reason you give, avoid taking notice of it. And if
Mr. Hobbes intended it for a piece of Ralliery, I willingly let it pass, and
could easily forgive him a more considerable attempt than this, to be revenged
on an Engine that has destroyed several of his opinions: But, if he seriously
meant to make a Physical Comparison, I think he made a very improper one. For,
not to urge, that one may well doubt how he knows, that in the enclosed cavity
of his Pot-gun, there is a very vehement wind, (since that does not necessarily
follow from the compreffion of the included Air:) In Mr. Hobbes's Instrument,
the Air, being forcibly comprest, has an endeavor to expand it self, and when
it is able to surmount the resistance of its prison, that part that is first
disjoined is forcibly thrown outward; whereas in our Engine it appears by the
passage lately cited of our Examen, that the Air is not comprest but expanded
in our Receiver, and if an intercourse be opened, or the Vessel be not strong
enough, the outward Air violently rushes in: And if the Receiver chance to
break, the fragments of the glass are not thrown outward, but forced inwards.


A. So that, whether or no Mr. Hobbes could have pitched upon a Comparison more
suitable to his Intentions, he might easily have employed one more suitable to
the Phenomenon.


B. I presume, you will judge it the less agreeable to the Phenomenon, if I
here subjoyn an Experiment, that possibly you will not dislike; which I devised
to show, not only that in our exhausted Receivers there is no such strong
endeavor outward, as most of Mr. Hobbes's Explications of the things that
happen in them are built upon, but that the weight of the Atmospherical Air,
when it is not resisted by the counterpressure of any internal Air, is able to
perform what a weight of many pounds would not suffice to do.


A. I shall the more willingly learn an Experiment to this purpose, because in
your Receivers, the rigidity of the glass keeps us from seeing, by any manifest
change of its figure, whether, if it could yield without breaking, it would be
pressed in, as your Hypothesis requires.


B. The desires to obviate that very difficulty, for their satisfaction, that
had not yet penetrated the grounds of our Hypothesis, made me think of
employing, instead of a Receiver of Glass, one of a stiff and tough, but yet
somewhat flexible, Metal. And accordingly having provided a new Pewter
Porrenger, and whelmed it upside down upon an Iron plate fastened to (the upper
end of) our Pneumatical Pump, we carefully fastened by Cement the orifice to
the plate, and though the inverted Vessel, by reason of its stiffness and
thickness and the convexity of its superficies, were strong enough to have
supported a great weight without changing its figure; yet, as soon as by an
exsuction or two the remaining part of the included Air was brought to such a
degree of expansion, that its weakened Spring was able to afford but little
assistance to the tenacity and firmness of the Metal, the weight of the pillar
of the incumbent Atmosphere (which by reason of the breadth of the Vessel was
considerably wide also) did presently and notably depress the upper part of the
Porringer, both lessening its capacity and changing its figure; so that instead
of the Unequal surface, the Receiver had before, it came to a Concave one, which
new figure was somewhat, though not much, increased by the further withdrawing
of the included and already rarefied Air. The Experiment succeeded also with an
other common Porringer of the same Metal. But in such kind of Vessels, made
purposely of Iron plates, it will sometimes succeed and sometimes not,
according to the Diameter of the vessel and the thickness of the plate, which
was sometimes strong enough and sometimes too weak to resist the pressure of
the incumbent Air. And sometimes I found also, that the vessel would be thrust
in, not at the top but side-ways, in case that side were the only part that
were made too thin to resist the pressure of the Ambient; which Phenomenon I
therefore take notice of, that you may see, that that powerful pressure may be
exercised laterally as well as perpendicularly.

Perhaps this Experiment, and that I lately recited of an Hermetically sealed
Bubble, by their fitness to disprove Mr. Hobbes's Doctrine, may do somewhat
toward the letting him see, that he might have spared that not over-modest and
wary expression, where speaking of the Gentlemen that meet at Gresham-College,
(of whom I pretend not to be one of the chief) he is pleased to say,
Experimenta faciant quantum volunt, nisi Principiis utantur meis nihil
proficient. But let us, if you please, pass on to what he further alleges to
prove, that the space in the exhausted Receiver, which the Vacuists suppose to
be partly empty, is full of Air. ( Video (says A.) si suctor trudatur usque ad
fundum Cylindri AEnei, obturenturque for amina, Secuturum esse, dum suctor
retrahitur, locum in Cylindro cavo relictum fore vacuum. Nam ut in locum ejus
succedat Aer, est impossible. To which B. answers, Credo equidem, suctorem cum
Cylindri cavi superficie satis arcte cohaerere ad excludendum stramen and
plumam, non autem Aerem neque Aquam. Cogita enim, quod non ita accurate
congruerent, quin undiquaque interstitium relinqueretur, quantum tenuissimi
capilli capax esset. Retracto ergo suctore, tantum impelleretur Aeris, quantum
viribus illis conveniret quibus Aer propter suctoris Retractionem reprimitur,
idque sine omni difficultate sensibili. Quanto autem interstitium illud minus
esset, tantum ingrederetur Aer velocius: Vel si contactus sit, sed non per
omnia puncta, etiam tunc intrabit Aer, modo suctor ma^ore vi retrahatur.
Postremo, etsi con^actus ubique exactissimus sit, vi tamen ^atis auct^ per
cochleam ferream, tum ^orium cedet, tum ipsum es; atque it a quoque ingredietur
Aer. Credin' tu, ^osfibile esse duas superficies it a exact ^omponere, ut has
compositas esse suppo^unt illi; aut corium it a durum esse, ut Aeri, qui
Cochleae open incutitur, nihi omnino cedat? Corium quanquam optimum admittit
aquam, ut ipse scis, forte fecisti unquam iter vento and pluvi^ (...). Itaque
dubitare no^ potes, quin retractus Suctor tantum A^ ris in Cylindrum adeoque in
ipsum Rec^piens incutiat, quantum sufficit ad locu^ semper relictum perfect
implendu^ Effectus ergo, qui oritur a Retractio^ suctoris, alius non est quam
ventu^ ventus (inquam) vehementissimus^ q^ ingreditur undiquaque inter Suctoris
s^^ perficiem convexan, and Cylindri aen^ concavam, proceditque (versa
clavicul^^ in cavitatem globl Vitrei, sive (u^^^ocatur Recipientis.

The Substance of this Ratiocin^^tion having been already proposed ^^ Mr.
Hobbes in his Dialogue of the Air, the 11th page, I long since a^swer'd it in
the 30th and some of the following pages of my Examen; an^ therefore I shall
only now take noti^^ in transitu of some slight whether a^^ditions or
variations, that occur ^^ what you have been reading. And first, I see no
probability in what he gratis asserts, that so thick a Cylinder of Brass, as
made the chief part of the pump of our Engine, should yield to the Sucker, that
was moved up and down in it, though by the help of an Iron rack; and whereas he
adds, that the leather, that surrounds the more solid part of the Sucker, would
yield to such a force; it seems, that that compression of the leather should by
thrusting the solid parts into the pores make the leather rather less than more
fit to give passage to the Air; nor would it however follow, notwithstanding
Mr. Hobbes's Example, that, because a Body admits Water, it must be pervious to
Air: For I have several times, by ways elsewhere taught, made Water penetrate
the pores of Bladders, and yet Bladders resist the passage of the Air so well,
that even when Air included in them was sufficiently rarefied by Heat, or by
our Engine, it was necessary for the Air to break them before it could get out;
which would not have been, if it could have escaped through their pores. What
Mr. Hobbes inculcates here again concerning his ventus vehementissimus, you
will find answered in the place of my Examen I lately directed you to.


A. We may then proceed to Mr. Hobbes's next Explication, which he proposes in
these terms:


A. Causam video nunc unius ex Machinae mirabilibus, nimirum cur Suctor,
postquam est aliquatenus retractus and deinde amissus, subito recurrit ad
Cylindri summitatem. Nam Aer, qui vi magna fuit impulsus, rursus per
repercussionem ad externa vi eadem revertitur.


B. Atque hoc quidem Argumenti satis est etiam solum, quod locus a suctore
relictus non est Vacuus. Quid enim aut attrahere aut impellere suctorem potuit
ad locum illum unde retractus erat, si Cylindrus fuisset vacuus? Nam ut Aeris
pondus aliquod id efficere potuisset, falsum esse satis supra demonstravi ab eo
quod Aer in Aere gravitare non potest. Nosti etiam, quod cum e recipiente Aerem
omnem (ut illi loquuntur) exegerint, possunt tamen trans vitrum id quod intus
fit videre, and sonum, si quis ^iat, inde audire. Id quod solum, etsi nullum
aliud Argumentum esset (sunt autem multa,) ad probandum, nullum esse in
Recipiente Vacuum, abunde sufficit.


B. Here are several things joined together, which the Author had before
separately alleged in his often-mention'd Dialogue. The first is, the Cause he
assigns of the ascension of the Sucker forcibly deprest to the bottom of the
exhausted Cylinder, and then let alone by him that pumpt; to which might be
added; that this ascension succeeded, when the Sucker was clogged with an
hundred pound weight. This Explication of Mr. Hobbes you will find examined in
the 33th and 39th, and some ensuing pages of my Discourse. And as to his
denying, that the weight or pressure of the Air could drive up the Sucker in
that Phenomenon, because the Air does not weigh in Air, we may see the
contrary largely proved in diverse places of my Examen, and more particularly
and expressly in the four first pages of the third Chapter. And whereas he says
in the last place, that the visibility of Bodies included in our Receivers, and
the propagation of Sound, (which, by the way, is not to be understood of all
Sound that may be heard, though made in the exhausted Receiver,) are alone
sufficient Arguments to prove no Vacuum: I have considered that passage in the
answer I made to the like allegation in the 45th page of the Examen; and shall
only observe here, that, since the Vacuists can prove, that much of the Air is
pumpt out of the exhausted Receiver, and will pretend, that, notwithstanding
many interspersed Vacuities, there may be in the Receiver corporeal substance
enough to transmit Light and stronger Sounds, Mr. Hobbes has not performed what
he pretended, if he have but barely proved, that there may be Substances
capable of conveying Light and Sound in the cavity of our Receiver, since he
triumphantly asserts, Nullum esse in Recipienti Vacuum. But we may leave Mr.
Hobbes and his Adversaries to dispute out this point, and go on to the next
passage.


A. Which follows in these words: Ad illud autem, quod si Vesica aliquatenus
inflata in Recipiente includatur, paulo post per exuctionem aeris inflatur
vehementius and dirumpitur, quid respondes?


B. Motus partium Aeris undiquaque concurrentium velocissimus and per concursum
in spatiis brevissimis numeroque infinitis gyrationis velocissimae vesicam in
locis innumerabilibus simul and vi magna, instar totidem terebrarum, penetrat,
praesertim si vesica, antequam immittatur, quo magis resistat aliquatenus
inflata fit. Postquam autem Aer penetrans semel ingressus est, facile cogitare
potes, quo pacto deinceps vesicam tendet, and tandem rumpet. Verum si antequam
rumpatur, versa clavicula, Aer externus admittatur, videbis vesicam propter
vehementiam motus temperatam diminuta tensione rugosiorem. Nam id quoque
observatum est. Iam si haec, quam dixi, causa minus tibi vide atur verisimilis,
vide an tu aut alius quicunque imaginari potest, quo pacto vesica distendi and
rumpi possit a viribus Vacui, id est, Nihili.


B. This Explication Mr. Hobbes gave us in the 19th page of his Dialogue De
Natura Aeris, and you may find it at large confuted in the latter part of the
third Chapter of my Examen. Nor does, what he here says in the close about the
Vires Vacui or Nihili, deserve to detain us, since there is no reason at all,
that the Vacuists should ascribe to nothing a power of breaking a Bladder, of
whose rupture the Spring of the included Air supplies them so easily with a
sufficient Cause.

After what Mr. Hobbes has said of the breaking of a Bladder, he proceeds to an
Experiment which he judges of affinity with it, and his Academian having
proposed this Question: Unde fit ut animalia tam cito, nimirum spatio quatuor
minutorum horae, in recipiente interficiantur?

For answer to it our Author says:


B. Nonne animalia sic inclusa insugunt in Pulmones Aerem vehementissime motum?
Quo motu necesse est ut transitus sanguinis ab uno ad alterum cordis
ventriculum interceptus, non multo post sistatur. Cessatio autem sanguinis,
Mors est. Possunt tamen animalia cessante sanguine reviviscere, si Aer externus
satis mature intromittatur, vel ipsa in Aerem temperatum, antequam refrixerit
sanguis, extrahantur.

This Explication is not probable enough, to oblige me to add any thing about
it to what I have said in the 49th and the two following pages of my Examen;
especially the most vehement motion, ascribed to the Air in the Receiver,
having been before proved to be an Imaginary thing. You may therefore, if you
please, take notice of the next Explication.

[Idem Aer (says he) in Recipiente Carbones ardentes extinguit, sed and illi,
si, dum satis calidi sunt, eximantur, relucebunt. Notissimum est, quod in
fodinis Carbonum terreorum (cujus rei experimentum ipse vidi) saepissime e
lateribus foveae ventus quidam undiquaque exit, qui fossores interficit
ignemque extinguit, qui tamen reviviscunt si satis cito ad Aerem liberum
extrahantur.]

This Comparison which Mr. Hobbes here summarily makes, he more fully displayed
in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, and I considered, what he there alleged, in
the 52th page and the two next of my Examen. And, though I will not contradict
Mr. Hobbes in what he historically asserts in this passage; yet I cannot but
somewhat doubt, whether he mingles not his conjecture with the bare matter of
fact. For, though I have with some curiosity visited Mines in more places than
one, and proposed Questions to Men that have been conversant in other Mines,
both elsewhere and in England (and particularly in Derbysbire where Mr. Hobbes
lived long;) yet I could never find, that any such odd and vehement wind, as
Mr. Hobbes ascribes the Phenomenon to, had been by them observed to kill the
Diggers, and extinguish well-lighted Coals themselves: And indeed, it seems
more likely, that the damp, by its tenacity or some peculiarly malign quality,
did the mischief, than a wind, of which I found not any notice taken;
especially since we see, what vehement winds Men will be able to endure for a
long time, without being near-kill'd by them; and that it seems very odd, that
a wind, that Mr. Hobbes does not observe to have blown away the Coals, that
were let down, should be able (instead of kindling them more fiercely) to blow
them out.


A. The last Experiment of your Engine, that your Adversary mentions in these
Problems, is delivered in this passage:


A. Si phialam aqua in Recipiens dimiseris, exucto Aere bullire videbis aquam.
Quid ad hoc Respondebis?


B. Credo sane in tanta Aeris motitatione saltaturam esse aquam, sed ut
calefiat nondum audivi. Sed imaginabile non est, Saltationem illam a Vacuo
nasci posse.


B. This Phenomenon he likewise took notice of, and attempted to explicate in
his abovementioned Dialogue, which gave me occasion in the 46th and 47th pages
of my Examen, to show how unlikely it is, that the vehement motion of the Air
should be the cause of it; but he here tells us, that it is not imaginable, that
this dancing of the water (as he is pleased to call it) proceeds from a vacuum,
nor do I know any Man that ever pretended, that a vacuum was the efficient
cause of it. But the Vacuists perhaps will tell him, that, though the bubbling
of the water be not an effect of a vacuum, it may be a proof of it against him;
for they will tell him, that it has been formerly proved, that a great part of
the Atmospherical Air is by pumping removed out of our exhausted Receiver, and
consequently can no more, as formerly, press upon the surface of the water. Nor
does Mr. Hobbes show what succeeds in the room of it; and therefore it will be
allowable, for them to conclude against him (though not perhaps against the
Cartesians) that there are a great many interspersed Vacuities left in the
Receiver, which are the occasion, though not the proper efficient cause, of the
Phenomenon. For they will say, that the Springy Particles of the yet included
Air, having room to unbend themselves in the spaces deserted by the Air that
was pumpt out, the Aerial and Springy Corpuscles, that lay concealed in the
pores of the water, being now freed from the wonted pressure that kept them
coil'd up in the liquor, expanded themselves into numerous bubbles, which,
because of their comparative lightness, are extruded by the water, and many of
them appear to have risen from the bottom of it. And Mr. Hobbes's vehement
wind, to produce the several Circumstances of this Experiment, must be a
lasting one. For, after the agitation of the Pump has been quite left off,
provided the external Air be kept from getting in, the bubbles will sometimes
continue to rise for an hour after. And that which agrees very well with our
Explication and very ill with that of Mr Hobbes's, is, that, when by having
continued to pump a competent time, the water has been freed from the Aerial
particles that lurked in it before, though one continue to pump as lustily as
he did, yet the water will not at all be covered with bubbles as it was, the
Air that produced them being spent; though, according to Mr. Hobbes's
Explication, the wind in the Receiver continuing, the dance of the water should
continue too.


A. I easily ghess, by what you have said already, what you may say of that
Epiphonema wherewith Mr. Hobbes (in his 18th page) concludes the Explications
of the Phenomenon of your Engine. [ Spero jam te certum esse, says he, nullum
esse Machinae illius Phenomenon, quo demonstrari potest ullum in Universo
locum dari corpore omni vacuum.]


B. If you ghess'd aright, you ghess'd that I would say, that as to the
Phenomenon of my Engine, my business was to prove, that he had not substituted
good Explications of them in the place of mine, which he was pleased to reject.
And as for the proving a Vacuum by the Phenomenon of my Engine, though I
declared that was not the thing intended, yet I shall not wonder, that the
Vacuists should think those Phenomenon give them an advantage against Mr.
Hobbes. For, though in the passage recited by you he speak more cautiously than
he is wont to do, yet, by what you may have already observed in his
Argumentations, the way he takes to solve the Phenomenon of our Engine, is by
contending, that our Receiver, when we say it is almost exhausted, is as full
as ever (for he will have it perfectly full,) of common Air; which is a conceit
so contrary to I know not how many Phenomenon, that I do not remember I have
met with or heard of any Naturalist, whether Vacuist or Plenist, that having
read my Physico-Mechanical Experiments and his Dialogue, has embraced his
opinion.


A. After what you have said, I will not trouble you with what he subjoyns
about Vacuum in general, where having made his Academian say, [ Mundum scis
finitum esse, and per Consequens vacuum esse oportere totum illud Spatium quod
est extra mundum infinitum. Quid impedit quo minus vacuum illud cum Aere
mundano permisceatur?] He answers: De rebus transmundanis nihil scio. For I
know, that it concerns not you to take notice of it. But possibly the Vacuists
will think, he fathers upon them an Impropriety they would not be guilty of,
making them speak, as if they thought, the ultra-mundan Vacuum were a real
Substance that might be brought into this World and mingled with our Air. And
since, for ought I know, Mr. Hobbes might have spared this passage, if he had
not designed it should introduce the slighting answer he makes to it; I shall
add, that by the account Mr. Hobbes has given of several Phenomenon within the
World, it is possible, that the Vacuists may believe his Profession of knowing
nothing of things beyond it.

After the Experimenta Boyliana (as your other Adversary calls them;) Mr.
Hobbes proceeds to the Torricellian Experiment, of which he thus discourses:


A. Quid de experimento senses Torricelliano, probante Vacuum per Argentum
vivum hoc modo: est in seq. figura ad A, pelvis sive aliud vas, and in eo
Argentum vivum usque ad B; est autem C D tubus vitreus concavus repletus quoque
Argento vivo. Hunc tubum si digito obturaveris erexerisque in vase A, manumque
abstuleris, descendet Argentum vivum a C; verum non effundetur totum in pelvim,
sed sistetur in distantia quadam, puta in D. Nonne ergo necessarium est, ut
pars tubi inter C and D sit vacua? Non enim puto negabis quin superficies tubi
concava and Argenti vivi convexa se mutuo exquisitissim^ contingant.


B. Ego neque nego contactum, nequ^ vim Consequentiae intelligo.

By which passage it seems that he still persists in the solution of this
Experiment, which he gave in his Dialogue De Natura Aeris, and formerly did,
for the main, either propose, or adopt, in his Elements of Philosophy.


B. This opinion or explication o^ Mr. Hobbes I have, as far as concern^ me,
considered in the 36th, and some ensuing pages, of my Examen, to which it may
well suffice me to refer you. But yet let me take notice of what he now
alleges:


B. Si quis (says he) in Argentum vivum, quod in vase est, vesicam immerserit
inflatam, nonne illa amot a man^ emerget?


A. Ita certe, etsi esset vesica ferre^ vel ex materia quacunque praeter Aurum.


B. Vides igitur ab Aere penetran^ posse Argentum vivum.


A. Etiam, and quidem illa ipsa vi quam a pondere accipit Argenti vivi.

I confess this Allegation did a little surprise me: It concerned Mr. Hobbes to
prove, that as much Air, as was displaced by the descending Mercury, did at the
orifice of the Tube, immersed in stagnant Mercury, invisibly ascend to the
upper part of the pipe. To prove this he tells us, that a bladder full of Air
being depressed in Quicksilver, will, when the hand that depressed it is
removed, be squeezed up by the very weight of the Mercury, whence it follows,
that Air may penetrate Quicksilver. But I know not, who ever denied, that Air
environed with Quicksilver may thereby be squeezed upwards; but, since even
very small bubbles of Air may be seen to move in their passage through Mercury,
I see not, how this Example will at all help the Proposer of it. For it is by
mere accident, that the Air included in the bladder comes to be buoyed up,
because the bladder it self is so; and if it were filled with Water instead of
Air, or with Stone instead of Water, it would nevertheless emerge, as himself
confesses it would do, if it were made of Iron, or of any Matter besides Gold,
because all other Bodies are lighter in specie than Quicksilver. But since the
emersion of the bladder is manifest enough to the sight, I see not how it will
serve Mr. Hobbes's turn, who is to prove that the Air gets into the
Torricellian Tube invisibly; since it is plain, that even heedful observation
can make our Eyes discover no such trajection of the Air; which (to add that
inforcement of our Argument) must not only pass unseen through the sustained
Quicksilver, but must likewise unperceivedly dive, in spite of its comparative
lightness, beneath the surface of the ponderous stagnant Mercury, to get in at
the orifice of the erected Tube. But let us, if you please, hear the rest of
his Discourse about this Experiment.


A. Though it be somewhat prolix, yet, according to my custom hitherto, I will
give it you verbatim.


B. Simul atque Argentum vivum descenderit ad D, altius erit in vase A quam
ante, nimirum plus erit Argenti vivi in vase quam erat ante descensum, tanto
quantum capit pars tubi C, D. Tanto quoque minus erit Aeris extra tubum quam
ante erat. Ille autem Aer qui ab Argento vivo loco suo extrusus est, (supposita
universi plenitudine) quo abire potest nisi ad eum locum, qui in tubo inter C
and D a descensu Argenti vivi relinquebatur? sed qua, inquies, via in illum
locum successurus est? Qua, nisi per ipsum corpus Argenti vivi Aerem urgentis?
Sicut enim omne grave liquidum, sae ipsius pondere, Aerem, quem descendendo
premit, ascendere cogit (si via alia non detur) per suum ipsius corpus; ita
quoque Aerem quem premit ascendendo, (si viae alia non detur) per suum ipsius
corpus transire cogit. Manifestum igitur est, supposita mundi plenitudine posse
Aerem externum ab ipsa gravitate Argenti viv^ cogi in locum illum inter C and
D. Itaque Phenomenon illud necessitatem vacui non demonstrat. Quoniam autem
corpus Argenti vivi penetrationi, quae fit ab Aere, non nihil resistit, and
ascensioni Argenti vivi in vase A resistit Aer; quando illae duae resistentiae
aequales erunt, tunc in tubo sistetur alicubi Argentum vivum; atque ibi est D.


B. In answer to this Explication I have in my Examen proposed diverse things,
which you may there meet with: And indeed his Explication has appeared so
improbable to those that have written of this Experiment, that I have not found
it embraced by any of them, though, when diverse of them opposed it, the
Phenomenon of our Engine were not yet divulged. Not then needlessly to repeat
what has been said already, I shall on this occasion only add one Experiment,
that I afterward made, and it was this: Having made the Torricellian
Experiment (in a straight Tube) after the ordinary way, we took a little piece
of a fine Bladder, and raising the Pipe a little in the stagnant Mercury, but
not so high as the surface of it, the piece of Bladder was dexterously conveyed
in the Quicksilver, so as to be applied by ones finger to the immersed orifice
of the Pipe, without letting the Air get into the Cavity of it; then the
Bladder was tied very straight and carefully to the lower end of the Pipe,
whose orifice (as we said) it covered before, and then the Pipe being slowly
lifted out of the stagnant Mercury, the impendent Quicksilver appeared to lean
but very lightly upon the Bladder, being so near an exact AEquilibrium with the
Atmosperical Air, that, if the Tube were but a very little inclined, whereby
the gravitation of the Quicksilver, being not so perpendicular, came to be
somewhat lessened, the Bladder would immediately be driven into the orifice of
the Tube, and to the Eye, placed without, appear to have acquired a concave
superficies instead of the unequal it had before. And when the Tube was
re-erected, the Bladder would no longer appear sucked in, but be again somewhat
protuberant. And if, when the Mercury in the Pipe was made to descend a little
below its station into the stagnant Mercury, if, I say, at that nick of time
the piece of Bladder were nimbly and dexterously applied, as before, to the
immersed orifice, and fastened to the sides of the Pipe, upon the lifting the
Instrument out of the stagnant Mercury, the Cylinder of that Liquor being now
somewhat short of its due height, was no longer able fully to counterpoise the
weight of the Atmospherical Air, which consequently, though the Glass were held
in an erected posture, would press up the Bladder into the orifice of the Pipe,
and both make and maintain there a Cavity sensible both to the Touch and the
Eye.


A. What did you mainly drive at in this Experiment?


B. To satisfy some Ingenious Men, that were more diffident of, than skilful
in, Hydrostaticks, that the pressure of the external Air is capable of
sustaining a Cylinder of 29 or 30 Inches of Mercury, and upon a small lessening
of the gravitation of that ponderous liquor, to press it up higher into the
Tube. But a farther use may be made of it against Mr. Hobbes's pretention. For,
when the Tube is again erected, the Mercury will subside as low as at first,
and leave as great a space as formerly was left deserted at the top; into which
how the Air should get to fill it, will not appear easy to them, that, like
you and me, know by many trials, that a Bladder will rather be burst by Air
than grant it passage. And if it should be pretended, either that some Air from
without had yet got through the Bladder, or that the Air, that they may presume
to have been just before included between the Bladder and the Mercury, made its
way from the lower part of the Instrument to the upper; it is obvious to answer,
That it is no way likely, that it should pass all along the Cylinder unseen by
us; since, when there are really any Aerial Bubbles, though smaller than Pins
heads, they are easily discernible. And in our case, there is no such
resistance of the Air to the ascension of the stagnant Mercury, as Mr. Hobbes
pretends in the Torricellian Experiment made the usual way.


A. But, whatever becomes of Mr. Hobbes's Explication of the Phenomenon; yet
may not one still say, that it affords no advantage to the Vacuists against him?


B. Whether or no it do against other Plenists, I shall not now consider; but I
doubt, the Vacuists will tell Mr. Hobbes, that he is fain in two places of the
Explication, we have read, to suppose the Plenitude of the World, that is, to
beg the thing in question, which it is not to be presumed they will allow.


A. But may not Mr. Hobbes say, that it is as lawful for him to suppose a
Plenum, as for them to suppose a Vacuum.


B. I think he may justly say so; but it is like they will reply, that, in their
way of explicating the Torricellian Experiment, they do not suppose a Vacuum as
to Air, but prove it. For they show a great space, that having been just before
filled with Quicksilver, is now deserted by it, though it appeared not, that
any Air succeeded in its room; but rather, that the upper end of the Tube is
either totally or near totally so devoid of Air, that the Quicksilver may
without resistance, by barely inclining the Tube, be made to fill it to the
very top: Whereas Mr. Hobbes is fain to have recourse to that which he knows
they deny, the Plenitude of the World, not proving by any sensible Phenomenon,
that there did get in through the Quicksilver Air enough to fill the deserted
part of the Tube, but only concluding, that so much Air must have got in there,
because, the World being full, it could find no room any where else; which the
Vacuists will take for no proof at all, and the Cartesians, though Plenists,
who admit an Etherial matter capable of passing through the pores of Glass,
will, I doubt, look upon but as an improper Explication.


A. I remember on this occasion another Experiment of yours, that seems
unfavourable enough to Mr. Hobbes's Explication, and you will perhaps call it
to mind when I tell you, that 'twas made in a bended Pipe almost filled with
Quicksilver.


B. To see whether we understand one another, I will briefly describe the
Instrument I think you mean. We took a Cylindrical Pipe of Glass, closed at the
upper end, and of that length, that being dexterously bent at some Inches from
the bottom, the shorter leg was made as parallel as we could to the longer: In
this Glass we found an expedient, (for it is not easy to do,) to make the
Torricellian Experiment, the Quicksilver in the shorter leg serving instead of
the stagnant Quicksilver in the usual Baroscope, and the Quicksilver in the
longer leg reaching above that in the shorter about eight or nine and twenty
Inches. Then, by another artifice, the shorter leg, into which the Mercury did
not rise within an Inch of the top, was so ordered, that it could in a trice be
Hermetically sealed, without disordering the Quicksilver. And this is the
Instrument that I ghess you mean.


A. It is so, and I remember, that it is the same with that, which in the
Paradox about Suction you call, whilst the shorter leg remains unsealed, a
Traveling Baroscope. But when I saw you make the Experiment, that leg was
Hermetically sealed, an Inch of Air in its natural or usual consistence being
left in the upper part of it, to which Air you outwardly applied a pair of
heated Tongs.


B. Yet that, which I chiefly aimed at in the Trial, was not the Phenomenon I
perceive you mean; for, my design was, by breaking the Ice for them, to
encourage some, that may have more skill and accommodation than I then had, to
make an attempt that I did not find to have been made by any; namely, to reduce
the Expansive force of Heat in every way included Air, if not in some other
Bodies also, to some kind of measure, and, if 'twere possible, to determine it
by weight. And I presumed, that at least the event of my Trial would much
confirm several Explications of mine, by showing, that Heat is able, as long as
it lasts, very considerably to increase the Spring or pressing power of the
Air. And in this conjecture I was not mistaken; for, having shut up, after the
manner newly recited, a determinate quantity of uncomprest Air, which, (in the
Experiment you saw,) was about one Inch; we warily held a pair of heated Tongs
near the outside of the Glass, (without making it touch the Instrument, for
fear of breaking it,) whereby the Air being agitated was enabled to expand it
self to double its former Dimensions, and consequently had its Spring so
strengthened by Heat, that it was able to raise all the Quicksilver in the
longer leg, and keep up or sustain a Mercurial Cylinder of about nine and
twenty Inches high, when by its expansion it would, if it had not been for the
Heat, have lost half the force of its elasticity. But whatever I design in this
Experiment, pray tell me, what use you would make of it against Mr. Hobbes.


A. I believe, he will find it very difficult to show, what keeps the Mercury
suspended in the longer leg of the Traveling Baroscope, when the shorter leg
is unstopt, at which it may run out; since this Instrument may, as I have
tried, be carried to distant places, where it cannot with probability be
pretended, that any Air has been displaced by the fall of the Quicksilver in
the longer leg, which perhaps fell long before above a mile off. And when the
shorter leg is sealed, it will be very hard for Mr. Hobbes to show there the
odd motions of the Air, to which he ascribes the Torricellian Experiment. For,
if you warily incline the Instrument, the Quicksilver will rise to the top of
the longer leg, and immediately subside, when the Instrument is again erected,
and yet no Air appears to pass through the Quicksilver interposed between the
ends of the longer and the shorter leg. But that which I would chiefly take
notice of in the Experiment, is, that upon the external application of a hot
Body to the shorter leg of the Baroscope, when 'twas sealed up, the included
Air was expanded from one Inch to two, and so raised the whole Cylinder of
Mercury in the longer leg, and, whilst the heat continued undiminished, kept
it from subsiding again. For, if the Air were able to get unseen through the
body of the Quicksilver, why had it not been much more able, when rarefied by
Heat, to pass through the Quicksilver, than for want of doing so to raise and
sustain so weighty a Cylinder of Mercury? I shall not stay to inquire on this
occasion, how Mr. Hobbes will, according to his Hypothesis, explicate the
rarefaction of the Air to double its former dimensions, and the condensation of
it again; especially since, asserting that part of the upper leg, that is
unfill'd with the Quicksilver, to be perfectly full of Air, he affirms that,
which I doubt he cannot prove, and which may very probably be disproved by the
Experiment you mention in the Discourse about Suction, where you show, to
another purpose, that in a Traveling Baroscope, whose shorter leg is sealed,
if the end of the longer leg be opened, whereby it comes indeed to be filled
with Air, the pressure of that Air will enable the subjacent Mercury notably to
compress the Air included in the shorter leg.


B. I leave Mr. Hobbes to consider what you have objected against his
Explication of the Torricellian Experiment; to which I shall add nothing,
though perhaps I could add much, because I think it may be well spared, and our
Conference has lasted long already.


A. I will then proceed to the la^^ Experiment recited by Mr. Hobbes in his
Problemata de Vacuo.


A. Si Phialam, collum habent^^ longiusculum, ea^demque omni Corpor^ praeter
Aerem vacuam ore sugas, continuoque Phialae os aquae immergas, videbis aquam
aliquousque ascendere in Phialam. Qui fieri hoc potest nisi factum sit Vacuum
ab exuctione Aeris, in euj^^ locum possit Aqua illa ascendere?


B. Concesso Vacuo, oportet quaeda^ l^cae vacua fuisse in illo Aere, etiam qu^
erat intra Phialam ante suctionem. C^^ ergo non ascendebat Aqua ad ea imple^da
absque suctione? Is qui sagit Phi^lam, neque in ventrem quicquam, neq^^ in
pulmones, neque in os e Phialu ex^git. Quid ergo agit? Aerum comm^vet, and in
partibus ejus conatum sugen^^ efficit per os exeundi, and non admittendo,
conaetum redeundi. Ab his conatibus contrariis compo^^tur circumitio in^^^
Phialam, and conatus exeundi quaquaversum. Itaque Phialae ore aquae immerso,
Aer in subjectam aquam penetrat e Phiala egrediens, and tuntundem aquae in
Phialam cogit.

Praeterea vis illa magna suctionis facit, ut sugentis labra c^m collo Phialae
aliquando arctissime cohaereant propter contactum exqusitissimum.


B. As to the first Clause of Mr. Hobbes's account of our Phenomenon, the
Vacuists will easily answer his Question by acknowledging, that there were
indeed interspersed Vacuities in the Air contained in the Vial before the
suction; but they will add, there was no reason, why the Water should ascend to
fill them, because, being a heavy body, it cannot rise of it self, but must be
raised by some prevalent weight or pressure, which then was wanting. Besides,
that there being interspersed Vacuities as well in the rest of the Air that was
very near the Water, as in that contained in the Vial, there was no reason, why
the Water should ascend to fill the Vacuities of one portion of Air rather than
those of another. But when once by suction a great many of the Aerial
Corpuscles were made to pass out of the Vial, the Spring of the remaining Air
being weakened, whilst the pressure of the ambient Air, which depends upon its
constant Gravity, is undiminished, the Spring of the internal becomes unable to
resist the weight of the external Air, which is therefore able to impel the
interposed Water with some violence into the Cavity of the Glass, 'till the
Air, remaining in that Cavity, being reduced almost to its usual Density, is
able by its Spring, and the weight of the Water got up into the Vial, to hinder
any more Water from being impelled up. For, as to what Mr. Hobbes affirms,
that, Is qui sugit Phialam neque in ventrem quicquam, neque in pulmones, neque
in as quicquam exugit: How it will agree with what he elsewhere delivers about
Suction, I leave him to consider. But I confess, I cannot but wonder at his
confidence, that can positively assert a thing so repugnant to the common
sentiments of Men of all opinions, without offering any proof for it. But I
suppose, they that are by trial acquainted with Sucking, and have felt the Air
come in at their mouths, will prefer their own experience to his authority. And
as to what he adds, that the Person that sucks agitates the Air, and turns it
within the Vial into a kind of circulating wind, that endeavors every where to
get out; I wish, he had shown us by what means a Man that sucks makes this odd
Commotion of the Air; especially in such Vials as I use to employ about the
Experiment, the orifice of whose neck is sometimes less than a Pins head.


A. That there may be really Air extracted by Suction out of a Glass, me thinks
you might argue from an Experiment I saw you make with a Receiver which was
exhausted by your Pump, and consequently by Suction. For I remember, when you
had counterpois'd it with very good Scales, and afterward by turning a
stop-cock, let in the outward Air, there rushed in as much Air to fill the
space that had been deserted by the Air pump^ out, as weighed some scruples
(consisting of twenty grains a piece) though the Receiver were not of the
largest size.


B. You did well to add that Clause; for, the Magdeburgic Experiment, mentioned
by the industrious Schottus, having been made with a vast Receiver, the
readmitted Air amounted to a whole ounce and some drachms. But to return to Mr.
Hobbes, I fear not that he will persuade you, that have seen the Experiment he
recites, that as soon as the neck of the Vial is unstopt under water, the Air,
that whirled about before, makes a sally out, and forces in as much water. For,
if the orifice be any thing large, you will, instead of feeling an endeavor to
thrust away your finger that stopped it, find the pulp of your finger so thrust
inward, that a Peripatetick would affirm that he felt it sucked in. And that
Intrusion may be the Reason, why the lip of him that sucks is oftentimes
strongly fastened to the orifice of the Vials neck, which Mr. Hobbes ascribes
to a most exquisit contact, but without clearly telling us, how that
extraordinary contact is effected. And when your finger is removed, instead of
perceiving any Air go out of the Vial through the water, (which, if any such
thing happen, you will easily discover by the bubbles,) you shall see the water
briskly spring up in a slender stream to the top of the Vial, which it could
not do, if the Cavity were already full of Air. And to let you see, that, when
the Air does really pass in or out of the Vial immersed under water, it is very
easy to perceive its motions, if you dip the neck of the Vial in water, and
then apply to the globulous part of it either your warm hands or any other
competent Heat, the internal Air being rarefied; you shall see a portion of it,
answerable to the degree of Heat you applied, manifestly pass through the water
in successive bubbles, whilst yet you shall not see any water get into the Vial
to supply the place deserted by that Air. And if, when you have (as you may do
by the help of sucking) filled the neck and part of the belly of the Vial with
water, you immerse the orifice into stagnant water, and apply warm hands to the
globulous part as before, you will find the water in the Vial to be driven out,
before any bubbles pass out of the Vial into the surrounding water; which
shows, that the Air is not so forward to dive under the water, (and much less
under so ponderous a liquor as Quicksilver,) as Mr. Hobbes has supposed.


A. That it is the Pressure of the external Air, that (surmounting the Spring of
the internal) drives up the water into the Vial we have been speaking of, does,
I confess, follow upon your Hypothesis: But an Experimentarian Philosopher, as
Mr. Hobbes calls you among others, may possibly be furnished with an Experiment
to confirm this to the Eye.


B. You bring into my mind what I once devised to confirm my Hypothesis about
Suction, but found a while since that I had omitted it in my Discourse about
that Subject. And therefore I shall now repeat to you the substance at least of
the Memorial that was written of that Experiment, by which the great interest
of the weight of the Atmospherical Air in Suction will appear, and in which
also some things will occur, that will not well agree with Mr. Hobbes's
Explication, and prevent some of his Allegations against mine.


A. Having not yet met with an Experiment of this nature, such an one as you
speak of will be welcome to me.


B. We took a Glass Bubble, whose long stem was both very slender and very
Cylindrical; then by applying to the outside of the Ball or globulous part a
convenient heat, we expelled so much of the Air, as that, when the end of the
pipe was dipped in water, and the inward Air had time to recover its former
coolness, the water ascended either to the top of the pipe or very near it.
This done, we gently and warily rarefied the Air in the Cavity of the Bubble,
'till by its expansion it had driven out almost all the water that had got up
into the stem, that so it might attain as near as could be to that degree of
heat and measure of expansion, that it had when the water began to rise in it.
And we were careful to leave two or three drops of water unexpell'd at the
bottom of the pipe, that we might be sure, that none of the included Air was by
this second rarefaction driven out at the orifice of it; as the depression of
the water so low assured us, on the other side, that the included Air wanted
nothing considerable of the expansion it had when the water began to ascend
into the pipe. Whilst the Air was in this rarefied state, we presently removed
the little Instrument out of the stagnant water into stagnant Quicksilver,
which in a short time began to rise in the pipe. Now, if the ascension of the
liquor were the effect of Natures Abhorrence of a Vacuum; or of some internal
principle of Motion; or of the Compression and propagated Pulsion of the
outward Air by that which had been expelled; why should not the Mercury have
ascended to the top of the pipe, as the water did before? But de facto it did
not ascend half, or perhaps a quarter so far; and if the pipe had been long
enough, as well as 'twas slender enough, I question, whether the Mercury would
have ascended (in proportion to the length of the stem) half so high as it did.

Now of this Experiment, which we tried more than once, I see not, for the
reason lately expressed, how any good account will be given without our
Hypothesis, but according to That it is clear.


A. I think I perceive why you say so; for the Ascension of Liquors being an
effect of the prevalency of the external Airs pressure against the resistance
it meets with in the Cavity of the Instrument, and the Quicksilver being bulk
for bulk many times heavier than water, the same surplusage of pressure that
was able to impel up water to the top of the pipe, ought not to be able to
impel up the Quicksilver to any thing near that height. And if it be here
objected, as it very plausibly may be, that the raised Cylinder of Mercury was
much longer than it ought to have been in reference to a Cylinder of Water, the
proportion in gravity between those two Liquors (which is almost that of
fourteen to one) being considered; I answer, that when the Cylinder of Water
reached to the pipe, the Air possessed no more than the Cavity of the globulous
part of the Instrument, being very little assisted to dilate it self by so
light a Cylinder as that of Water: But when the Quicksilver came to be impelled
into the Instrument by the weight of the external Air, that ponderous Body did
not stop its ascent as soon as it came to be equiponderant to the formerly
expelled Cylinder of Water; because, to attain that height, it reached but a
little way into the pipe, and left all the rest of the Cavity of the pipe to be
filled with part of that Air, which formerly was all s^ut up in the Cavity of
the Bubble; by which means the Air, included in the whole Instrument, must
needs be in a state of expansion, and thereby have its Spring weakened, and
consequently disabled to resist the pressure of the external Air, as much as
the same included Air did before, when it was less rarefied; on which account,
the undiminished weight or pressure of the external Air was able to raise the
Quicksilver higher and higher, 'till it had obta^ned that height, at which the
pressure, compounded of the weight of the Mercurial Cylinder and the Spring of
the internal Air (now less rarefied than before,) was equivalent to the
pressure of the Atmosphere or external Air.


B. You have given the very Explication I was about to propose; wherefore I
shall only add, that to confirm this Experiment by a kind of Inversion of it,
we drove by heat a little Air out of the Bubble, and dipped the open end of the
pipe into Quicksilver, which by this means we made to ascend 'till it had
filled about a fourth part or less of the pipe, when that was held erected.
Then carefully removing it without letting fall any Quicksilver, or letting in
any Air, we held the orifice of the pipe a little under the surface of a Glass
full of Water, and applying a moderate heat to the outside of the Ball, we
warily expelled the Quicksilver, yet leaving a little of it to make it sure
that no Air was driven out with it, then suffering the included Air to cool,
the external Air was found able to make the Water not only ascend to the very
top of the pipe, and thence spread it self a little into the Cavity of the
Ball, but to carry up before it the Quicksilver that had remained unexpell'd at
the bottom of the stem. And if in making the Experiment we had first raised, as
we sometimes did, a greater quantity of Quicksilver, and afterward drove it
out, the quantity of Water, that would be impelled into the Cavity of the pipe
and ball, would be accordingly increased.


A. In this Experiment it is manifest, that something is driven out of the
Cavity of the Glass before the Water or Quicksilver begins to ascend in it: And
here also we see not, that the Air can pass through the pores of Quicksilver or
Water, but that it drives them on before it, without sensibly mixing with them.
In this Experiment there appears not at all any Circular Wind, as Mr. Hobbes
fancies in the sucked Vial we are disputing of, nor any tendency outward of the
included Air upon the account of such a Wind; but, instead of these things,
that the ascension of the Liquors into the Cavity of the pipe depends upon the
external Air, pressing up the Liquors into that Cavity, may be argued by this,
that the same weight of the Atmosphere impelled up into the pipe so much more
of the lighter Liquor, Water, than of the heavier Liquor, Mercury.


B. You have said enough on this Experiment; but it is not the only I have to
oppose to Mr. Hobbes his Explication: For, that there is no need of the
sallying of Air out of a Vial, to make the Atmospherical Air press against a
Body that closes the orifice of it, when the pressure of the internal Air is
much weakened; I have had occasion to show some Virtuosi, by sucking out, with
the help of an Instrument, a considerable portion of the Air contained in a
Glass; for having then, instead of unstopping the orifice under water, nimbly
applied a flat Body to it, the external Air pressed that Body so forcibly
against it, as to keep it fastened and suspended, though 'twere clogged with a
weight of many ounces.


A. Another Experiment of yours Mr. Hobbes's Explication brings into my mind,
by which it appears, that, if there be such a Circular Wind, as he pretends,
produced by Suction in the Cavity of the Vial, it must needs be strangely
lasting. For I have seen more than once, that, when you have by an Instrument
sucked much of the Air out of a Vial, and afterward carefully closed it, though
you kept the slender neck of it stopped a long time, perhaps for some weeks or
months, yet when 'twas opened under water, a considerable quantity of the
Liquor would be briskly impelled up into the neck and belly of the Vial. So
that, though I will not be so pleasant with Mr. Hobbes, as to mind you on this
occasion of those Writers of Natural Magic, that teach us to shut up
Articulate Sounds in a Vessel, which being transported to a distant place and
opened there, will rende^ the Words that are committed to it^ yet I must needs
say, that so lasting a Circular Wind, as, according to Mr. Hobbes, your
Experiments exhibited, may well deserve our wonder.


B. Your admiration would perchance increase, if I should assure you, that
having with the Sunbeams produced smoke in one of those well-stopt Vials, this
Circular Wind did not at all appear to blow it about, but suffered it to rise,
as it would have done if the included Air had been very calm. And now I shall
add but one Experiment more, which will not be liable to some of the things as
invalid as they are, which Mr. Hobbes has alleged in his account of the Vial,
and which will let you see, that the weight of the Atmospherical Air is a very
considerable thing; and which may also incline you to think, that, whilst Mr.
Hobbes does not admit a subtiler Matter than common Air to pass through the
Pores of close and solid Bodies, the Air he has recourse to will sometimes come
too late to prevent a Vacuum. The Experiment, which was partly accidental, I
lately found registered to this sense, if not in these words: [Having, to make
some Discovery of the weight of the Air, and for other purposes, caused an
AEolipile, very light considering its bulk, to be made by a famous Artist, I
had occasion to put it so often into the fire for several Trials, that at
length the Copper scaled off by degrees, and left the Vessel much thinner than
when it first came out of the Artificers hands; and a good while after, this
change in the Instrument being not in my thoughts, I had occasion to employ it,
as formerly, to weigh how many grains it would contain of the Air at such a
determinate constitution of the Atmosphere, as was to be met with, where I then
chanced to be. For the making this Experiment the more exactly, the Air was by
a strong, but warily applied, fire so carefully driven away, that, when
clapping a piece of Sealing-wax to the Pin-hole, at which it had been forced
out, we hindered any communication betwixt the Cavity of the Instrument and the
external Air, we supposed the AEolipile to be very well exhausted, and
therefore laid it by, that, when it should be grown cold, we might, by opening
the orifice with a Pin, again let in the outward Air, and observe the increase
of weight that would thereupon ensue: But the Instrument, that, as I was
saying, was grown thin, had been so diligently freed from Air, that the very
little that remained, and was kept by the War from receiving any assistance
from without, being unable by its Spring to assist the AEolipile to support the
weight of the ambient Air; this external fluid did by its weight press against
it so strongly, that it compressed it, and thrust it so considerably inwards,
and in more than one place so changed its figure, that, when I showed it to the
Virtuosi that were assembled at Gresham-Colledge, they were pleased to command
it of me to be kept in their Repository, where I presume it is still to be seen.


FINIS.
OF THE CAUSE OF Attraction BY SUCTION.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

PREFACE.
HAving about twelve years ago summarily expressed and published my Opinion of
the Cause of Suction, and a while before or after brought to the Royal Society
the Glass Instrument I employed to make it out; I desisted for some time to add
any thing about a Problem, that I had but occasionally handled: Only, because
the Instrument I mentioned in my Examen of Mr. Hobbes's Opinion, and afterward
used at Gresham-College, was difficult enough to be well made, and not to be
procured ready made, I did for the sake of some Virtuosi, that were curious of
such things, devise a slight and easily made Instrument, described in the
following Tract, Chap. 4th, in which the chief Phenomenon, I showed before the
Society, were easily producible. But afterward the mistakes and erroneous
Opinions, that, in Print as well as in Discourse, I met with, even among
Learned Men, about Suction, and the Curiosity of an Ingenious Person, engaged
me to resume that Subject and treat of it, as if I had never before meddled
with it, for the reason intimated in the beginning of the ensuing Paper. And
finding upon the review of my later Animadversions an Mr. Hobbes's Problemata
de Vacuo, that some passages of this Tract are referred to there; I saw my self
thereby little less than engaged to annex that Discourse to those
Animadversions. And this I the rather consented to, because it contains some
Experiments, that I have not elsewhere met with, which, together with some
other parts of that Essay, may, I hope, prove of some use to illustrate and
confirm our Doctrine about the Weight and Spring of the Air, and supply the
less experienced than ingenious. Friends to our Hypothesis with more grounds of
answering the later Objections of some Learned Men, against whose endeavors I
perceive it will be useful to employ variety of Experiments and other Proofs to
evince the same Truth; that some or other of these may meet with those
Arguments or evasions with which they strive to elude the force of the rest.

The Title of the following Essay may sufficiently keep the Reader from
expecting to find any other kind of Attraction discoursed of, than that which
is made by Suction. But yet thus much I shall here intimate in general, that I
have found by Trials purposely made, that the Examples of Suction are not the
only noted ones of Attraction, that may be reduced to Pulsion.

OF THE CAUSE OF ATTRACTION BY SUCTION.
CHAP. I.
I Might, Sir, save my self some trouble in giving you that account you desire
of me about Suction, by referring you to a passage in the Examen, I long since
writ, of Mr. Hobbes's Dialogus Physicus de Natura Aeris, if I knew, you had
those two Books lying by you. But because I suspect, that my Examen may not be
in your hands, since it is a most out of Print, and has not for some years been
in my own; and because I do not so well remember, after so long a time the
particulars that I writ there, about Suction, as I do in general, that the
Hypothesis I proposed, was very incidentally and briefly discoursed of, upon an
occasion ministered by a wrong Explication given of Suction by Mr. Hobbes, I
shall here decline referring you to what I there writ^ and proposing to you
those thoughts about Suction, that I remember I there pointed at, I shall annex
some things to illustrate and confirm them; that would not have been so proper
for me to have insisted on in a short and but occasional Excursion.

And I should immediately proceed to what you expect from me, but that Suction
being generally looked upon as a kind of Attraction, it will be requisite for
me to premise something about Attraction it self. For, besides that the Cause
of it, which I here dispute not of, is obscure, the very Nature and Notion of
it is wont by Naturalists to be either left untouched, or but very darkly
delivered, and therefore will not be unfit to be here somewhat explained.

How general and ancient soever the common Opinion may be, that Attraction is a
kind of Motion quite differing from Pulsion, if not also opposite to it; yet I
confess, I concur in opinion, though not altogether upon the same grounds, with
some modern Naturalists, that think Attraction a Species of Pulsion. And at
least among inanimate Bodies I have not yet observed any thing, that convinces
me, that Attraction cannot be reduced to Pulsion; for, these two seem to me to
be but extrinsical denominations of the same Local Motion, in which, if a moved
Body precede the Movent, or tend to acquire a greater distance from it, we call
it Pulsion; and if, upon the score of the Motion, the same Body follow the
Movent or approach to it, we call it Attraction. But this difference may
consist but in an accidental respect, which does not Physically alter the
nature of the Motion, but is founded upon the respect, which the Line, wherein
the Motion is made, happens to have to the situation of the Movent. And that
which seems to me to have been the chief cause of men's mistaking Attraction for
a motion opposite to Pulsion, is, that they have looked upon both the moving
and moved Bodies, in too popular and superficial a manner; and considered in
the Movent rather the situation of the conspicuous and more bulky part of the
Animal or other Agent, than the situation of that part of the Animal, or
Instrument, that does immediately impress that motion upon the Mobile.

For those that attentively heed this, may easily take notice, that some part
of that Body, or of the Instrument, which by reason of their conjunction in
this operation is to be looked on but as making one with it, is really placed
behind some part of the Body to be drawn, and therefore cannot move outward it
self without thrusting that Body forward. This will be easily understood, if we
consider, what happens when a Man draws a Chain after him; for, though his Body
do precede the Chain, yet his finger or some other part of the hand, wherewith
he draws it, has some part or other that reaches behind the fore part of the
first Link, and the hinder part of this Link comes behind the anteriour part of
the second Link; and so each Link has one of its parts placed behind some part
of the Link next after it, 'till you come to the last Link of all. And so, as
the finger, that is in the first Link, cannot move forwards but it must thrust
on that Link, by this Series of Trusions the whole Chain is moved forwards; and
if any other Body be drawn by that Chain, you may perceive, that some part of
the last Link comes behind some part of that Body, or of some intervening Body,
which, by its cohesion with it, ought in our present case to be considered as
part of it. And thus Attraction seems to be but a Species of Pulsion, and
usually belongs to that kind of it, which, for distinctions sake, is called
Trusion, by which we understand that kind of Pulsion, wherein the Movent goes
along with the moved Body without quitting it whilst the progress lasts; as it
happens, when a Gardener drives his Wheel-barrow before him without letting go
his hold of it.

But I must not here dissemble a difficulty, that I foresee may be speciously
urged against this account of Attraction. For it may be said, that there are
Attractions, where it cannot be pretended, that any part of the Attrahent comes
behind the Attracted Body; as in Magnetical and Electrical Attractions, and in
that which is made of Water, when it is drawn up into Springs and Pumps.

I need not tell you, that you know so well, as that partly the Cartesians, and
partly other Modern Philosophers, have recourse on this occasion either to
screwed Particles and other Magnetical Emissions, to explicate Phenomenon of
this kind. And, according to such Hypotheses, one may say, that many of these
Magnetical and Electrical Effluvia come behind some parts of the attracted
Bodies, or at least of the little solid Particles, that are as it were the
Walls of their ^ores, or procure some discussion of the Air, that may make it
thrust the Moveable toward the Loadstone or Amber, etc. But if there were none
of these, nor any other subtle Agents that cause this Motion by a real, though
unperceived, Pulsion; I should make a distinction betwixt other Attractions and
these, which I should then style Attraction by Invisibles. But, whether there
be really any such in Nature, and why I scruple to admit things so hard to be
conceived, may be elsewhere considered. And you will, I presume, the freelier
allow me this liberty, if, (since in this place it is proper to do it,) I show
you, that in the last of the instances I formerly objected (that of the drawing
up of Water into the Barrel of a Syringe,) there is no true Attraction of the
Liquor made by the external Air. I say then, that by the ascending Rammer, as a
part of which I here consider the obtuse end, Plug, or Sucker, there is no
Attraction made of the contiguous and subjacent Water, but only there is room
made for it, to rise into, without being exposed to the pressure of the
superior Air. For, if we suppose the whole Rammer to be by Divine Omnipotence
annihilated, and consequently incapable of exercising any Attraction; yet,
provided the superior Air were kept off from the Water by any other way as
well as 'twas by the Rammer, the Liquor would as well ascend into the Cavity of
the Barrel; since, (as I have elsewhere abundantly proved,) the surface of the
Terraqueous Globe being continually pressed on by the incumbent Air or
Atmosphere, the Water must be by that pressure impelled into any cavity here
below, where there is no Air to resist it; as by our Supposition there is not
in the Barrel of our Syringe, when the Rammer, or whatever else was in it, had
been annihilated. Which Reasoning may be sufficiently confirmed by an
Experiment, whereby I have more than once shown some curious persons, that, if
the external Air, and consequently its pressure, be withdrawn from about the
Syringe, one may pull up the Sucker as much as he pleases, without drawing up
after it the subjacent Water. In short, let us suppose, that a Man standing in
an inner room does by his utmost resistance keep shut a Door, that is neither
locked nor latch'd, against another, who with equal force endeavors to thrust
it open? In this case, as if one should forcibly pull away the first Man, it
could not be said, that this Man, by his recess from the Door he endeavored to
press outward, did truly and properly draw in his Antagonist, though upon
that recess the coming in of his Antagonist would presently ensue; so it cannot
properly be said, that by the ascent of the Rammer, which displaces the
superior Air, either the Rammer it self, or the expelled Air, does properly
attract^ the subjacent Water, though the ingress of that Liquor into the Barrel
does thereupon necessarily ensue. And that, as the Comparison supposes, there
is a pressure of the superior Air against the upper part of the Sucker, you
may easily perceive, if having well stopped the lower orifice of the Syringe with
your finger, you forcibly draw up the Sucker to the top of the Barrel. For if
then you let go the Rammer, you will find it impelled downwards by the
incumbent Air with a notable force.

CHAP. II.
HAving thus premised something in general about the Nature of Attraction, as
far as it is necessary for my present design; it will be now seasonable to
proceed to the consideration of that kind of Attraction, that is employed to
raise Liquors, and is by a distinct Name called Suction.

About the Cause of this there is great comention between the New Philosophers;
as they are styled, and the Peripateticks. For the Followers of Aristotle, and
many Learned Men that in other things dissent from him, ascribe the ascension
of Liquors upon Suction to Natures abhorrence of a Vacuum. For, say they, when
a Man dips one end of a Straw or Reed into stagnant Water, and sucks at the
other end, the Air contained in the cavity of the Reed passes into that of his
Lungs, and consequently the Reed would be left empty, if no other Body
succeeded in the place it deserts; but there are only (that they take notice
of,) two Bodies that can succeed, the Air and the (grosser Liquor) the Water;
and the Air cannot do it, because of the interposition of the Water, that
denies it access to the immersed orifice of the Reed, and therefore it must be
the Water it self, which accordingly does ascend to prevent a Vacuum detested
by Nature.

But many of the Modern Philosophers, and generally all the Corpusc^larians,
look upon this Fuga Vacue as but an imaginary Cause of Suction; though they do
it upon very differing grounds. For, the Atomists; tha^ willingly admit of
Vacuities, properly so called, both within and without our World, cannot think
that Nature hates or fears a Vacuum, and declines her usual course to prevent
it: And the Cartesians, though they do, as well as the Peripateticks, deny that
that there is a Vacuum, yet since they affirm not only, that there is none in
rerum Natura, but that there can be none, because what others call an empty
Space having three Dimensions, has all that they think belonging to the
Essence of a Body, they will not grant Nature to be so indiscreet, as to strain
her self to prevent the making of a thing that is impossible to be made.

The Peripatetic Opinion about the Cause of Suction, though commonly defended
by the Schools, as well Modern as Ancient, supposes in Nature such an
abhorrence of a Vacuum, as neither has been well proved, nor does well agree
with the lately discovered Phenomenon of Suction. For, according to their
Hypothesis, Water and other Liquors should ascend upon Suction to any hight to
prevent a Vacuum, which yet is not agreeable to experience. For I have
carefully tried, that by pumping with a Pump far more stanch than those that
are usually made, and indeed as well closed as we could possibly bring it to
be, we could not by all our endeavour^ raise Water by Suction to above See
Cont. of Phys. Mech. Exp. the 15 th Exp.
36 foot. The T^rricellian Expt shows, tha^ the weight of the Air is able to
sustain, and some of our Experimts show, it is able to raise a Mercurial
Cylinder equal in weight to as high a Cylinder of Water as we were able to
raise by pumping. For Mercury being near ^^ times as heavy as Water of the sam^
bulk, if the weight of the Air b^ equivalent to that of a Mercuri^ Cylinder of
29 or 30 Inches, it mu^^ be able to counterpoise a Cylinder o^ Water near
fourteen times as long that is, from thirty four to near thirt^ six foot. And
very disagreeable t^ the common Hypothesis, but consonant to ours, is the
Experiment the I have more than once tried, and ^ think elsewhere delivered,
namely^ That, if you take a Glass Pipe of a^bout three foot long, and, dipping
one end of it in Water, suck at the other, the Water will be suddenly made to
flow briskly into your mouth: But, if instead of Water you dip the lower end
into Quicksilver, though you suck as strongly as ever you can, provided that in
this case, as in the former, you hold the Pipe upright, you will never be able
to suck up the Quicksilver near so high as your mouth; so that if the Water
ascended upon Suction to the top of the same Pipe, because else there would
have been a Vacuum left in the cavity of it, why should not we conclude, that,
when we have sucked up the Quicksilver as strongly as we can, as much of the
upper part of the Tube as is deserted by the Air, and yet not filled by the
Mercury, admits, in part at least, a Vacuum, (as to Air) of which consequently
Nature cannot reasonably be supposed to have so great and unlimited an
abhorrency, as the Peripateticks and their Adherents presume. Yet I will not
determine, whether there be any more than many little Vacuities, or Spaces
devoid of Air, in the Cavity; so called, of the Pipe unfill'd by the Mercury;
(so that the whole Cavity is not one entire empty Space;) it being sufficient
for my purpose, that my Experiment affords a good Argument ad hominem against
the Peripateticks, and warrants us to seek for some other Cause than the fuga
Vacui, why a much stronger Suction than that, which made Water ascend with ease
into the Suckers mouth, will not also raise Quicksilver to the same height or
near it.

Those Modern Philosophers that admit not the fuga Vacui to be the Cause of the
raising of Liquors in Suction, do generally enough agree in referring it to the
action of the Suckers thorax. For, when a Man endeavors to suck up a Liquor,
he does by means of the Muscles enlarge the cavity of his Chest, which he
cannot do but at the same time he must thrust away those parts of the ambient
Air that were contiguous to his Chest, and the displaced Air does, according to
some Learned Men, (therein, if I mistake not, Followers of Gassendus,) compress
the contiguous Air, and that the next to it, and so outward, 'till the
pressure, successively passing from one part of the Air to the other, arrive at
the surface of the Liquor; and all other places being as to sense full, the
impelled Air cannot find place but by thrusting the Water into the room made
for it in the Pipe by the recess of the Air that passed into the Suckers lungs.
And they differed not much from this Explication, that, without taking in the
compression of the ambient Air made by the thorax, refer the Phenomenon to the
propagated motion or impulse, that is impressed on the Air displaced by the
thorax in its dilatation, and yet unable to move in a World perfectly filled,
as they suppose ours to be, unless the Liquor be impelled into as much of the
cavity of the Pipe, as fast as it is deserted by the Air that is said to be
sucked up. But though I readily confess this Explication to be ingenious, and
such as I wonder not they should acquiess in, who are acquainted but with the
long known and obvious Phenomenon of Suction; and though I am not sure, but
that in the most familiar cases the Causes assigned by them may contribute to
the Effect; yet, preserving for Cartesius and Gassendus the respect I willingly
pay such great Philosophers, I must take the liberty to tell you, that I cannot
acquiess in their Theory. For I think, that the Cause of Suction, they assign,
is in many cases not necessary, in others, not sufficient. And first, as to the
Condensation of the Air by the dilatation of the Suckers Chest; when I consider
the extent of the ambient Air, and how small a compression no greater an
expansion than that of the Thorax is like to make, I can scarce think, so
slight a condensation of the free Air can have so considerable an operation on
the surface of the Liquor to be raised, as the Hypothesis I examine requires:
And that this impulse of the Air by a Suckers dilated Thorax, though it be wont
to accompany the ascension of the water procured by Suction, yet is not of
absolute necessity to it, will, I presume, be easily granted, if it can be made
out, that even a propagated Pulsion, abstracted from any Condensation of Air,
is not so necessarily the Cause of it, but that the Effect may be produced
without it. For suppose, that by Divine Omnipotence so much Air as is displaced
by the Thorax were annihilated; yet I see not, why the Ascension of the Liquor
should not ensue. For, when a Man begins to suck, there is an AEquilibrium, or
rather AEquipollency between the pressure, which the Air, contained in the
Pipe, (which is shut up with the pressure of the Atmosphere upon it,) has, by
virtue of its Spring, upon that part of the surface of the water that is
environed by the sides of the Pipe, and the pressure which the Atmospherical
Air has, by virtue of its weight, upon all the rest of the surface of the
stagnant water; so that, when by the dilatation of the Suckers Thorax, the Air
within the cavity of the Pipe comes to be rarefied, and consequently loose of
its Spring, the weight of the external Air continuing in the mean time the
same, it must necessarily happen, that the Spring of the internal Air will be
too weak to compress any longer the gravitation of the external, and
consequently, that part of the surface of the stagnant water, that is included
in the Pipe, being less pressed upon, than all the other parts of the same
surfaces must necessarily give way, where it can least, resist, and
consequently be impelled up into the Pipe, where the Air, having had its Spring
weakened by expansion, is no longer able to resist, as it did before. This may
be illustrated by somewhat varying an Instance already given, and conceiving,
that within a Chamber three Men thrust all together with their utmost force
against a Door, (which we suppose to have neither Bolt nor Latch) to keep it
shut, at the same time the three other Men have just equal strength, and employ
their force to thrust it open. For though, whilst their opposite endeavors are
equal, the Door will continue to be kept shut, yet if one of the three Men
within the Room should go away, there will need no new force, nor other
accession of strength to the three Men, to make them prevail and thrust open
the Door against the resistance of those that endeavored to keep it shut, who
are now but two.

And here (upon the by) you may take notice, that, to raise water in Suction,
there is no necessity of any rarefied and forcibly stretched Rope, as 'twere,
of the Air, to draw up the subjacent water into the Pipe, since the bare
debilitation of the Spring of the included Air may very well serve the turn.
And though, if we should suppose the Air within the Pipe to be quite
annihilated, it could not be pretended (since it would not have so much as
Existence) that it exercises an attractive Power; yet in this case the water
would ascend into the Pipe, without the assistance of Natures imaginary
Abhorrence of a Vacuum, but by a Mechanical Necessity, plainly arising from
this, that there would be a pressure of the incumbent Atmosphere upon the rest
of the surface of the stagnant water, and no pressure at all upon that part of
the surface that is within the Pipe, where consequently there could be no
resistance made to the ascension of the water, every where else strongly urged
by the weight of the incumbent Air.

I shall add on this occasion, that, to show some inquisitive Men, that the
weak resistance within a Vessel, that had but one orifice exposed to the water,
may much more contribute to the ascension of that Liquor into the Vessel, than
either the compression or the continued or reflected impulse of the external
Air; I thought fit to produce a Phenomenon, which by the Beholders was without
scruple judged an Effect of Suction, and yet could not be ascribed to the Cause
of Suction, assigned by either of the Sects of Philosophers I dissent from. The
Experiment was this: By a way, elsewhere delivered, the long neck of a
Glass-bubble was sealed up, and almost all the Air had been by Heat driven out
of the whole cavity of the Bubble or Vial, and then the Glass was laid aside
for some hours, or as long as we pleased; afterward the sealed apex of the
neck was broken off under water: I demand now of a Peripatetic, whether the
Liquor ought to be sucked or drawn into the cavity of the Glass, and why? if he
says, as questionless he will, that the water would be attracted to hinder a
Vacuum, he would thereby acknowledge, that, 'till the Glass was unstopt under
water, there was some empty space in it; for, 'till the sealed end was broken
off, the water could not get in, and therefore, if the fuga vacui had any thing
to do in the ascension, the Liquor must rise, not to prevent an empty space,
but to fill one that was made before. Nor does our Experiment much more favor
the other Philosophers, I dissent from: For in it there is no dilatation made
of the sides of the Glass, as in ordinary Suction there is made of the Thorax,
but only there is so much Air driven out of the cavity of the Bubble, into
whose room since neither common Air nor Water is permitted to succeed, it
appears not, how the propagated and returning impulse, or the Circle of Motion,
as to common Air and Water, does here take place. And then I demand, what
becomes of the Air, that has been by heat driven out, and is by the Hermetical
Seal kept out of the cavity of the Bubble? If it be said, that it diffuses it
self into the ambient Air, and mingles with it, that will be granted which I
contended for, that so little Air as is usually displaced in Suction cannot
make any considerable compression of the free ambient Air; for, what can one
Cubic Inch of Air, which is sometimes more than one of our Glasses contains,
do, to the condensation so much as of all the Air in the Chamber, when the
expelled Corpuscles are evenly distributed among those of the ambient. And how
comes this inconsiderable condensation to have so great an effect in every part
of the room, as to be able there to impel into the Glass as much water in
extent as the whole Air that was driven out of the cavity of it? But if it be
said, that the expelled Air condensed only the contiguous or very neighboring
Air, it is easy to answer, that it is no way probable, that the expelled
Particles of the Air should not by the differing motions of the ambient Air be
quickly made to mingle with it, but should rather wait (which if it did we
sometimes made it do for many hours) 'till the Vessels whence 'twas driven out
were unstopp'd again. But, though this could probably be pretended, it cannot
truly be asserted. For if you carry the sealed Glass quite out of the room or
house, and unstop it at some other place, though two or three miles distant;
the ascension of the water will, (as I found by trial) nevertheless ensue; in
which case I presume, it will not be said, that the Air, that was expelled out
of the Glass, and condensed the contiguous or near contiguous Air, attended the
Bubble in all its motions, and was ready at hand to impel-in the water, as soon
as the sealed apex of the Vial was broken off. But I doubt not, but most of the
Embracers of the Opinion I oppose, being Learned and Ingenuous Persons, if they
had been acquainted with these and the like Phenomenon, would rather have
changed their Opinion about Suction, than have gone about to defend it by such
Evasions, which I should not have thought worth proposing, if I had not met
with Objections of this nature publicly maintained by a Learned Writer, on
occasion of the Air's rushing into the exhausted Magdenburgic Engine. But as in
our Experiment these Objections have no place, so in our Hypothesis the
Explication is very easy, as will anon be intimated.

CHAP. III.
HAving thus shown, that the Ascension of Water upon Suction may be caused
otherwise than by the Condensation or the propagated Pulsion of Air contiguous
to the Suckers Thorax, and thrust out of place by it; it remains that I show,
(which was one of the two things I chiefly intended,) that there may be Cases
wherein the Cause, assigned in the Hypothesis I am examining, will not have
place. But this will be better understood, if, before I proceed to the proof of
it, I propose to you the thoughts, I had many years since, and do still retain,
about the Cause of the Ascension of Liquors in Suction.

To clear the way to the right understanding of the ensuing Discourse, it will
not be amiss here to premise a summary intimation of some things that are
supposed in our Hypothesis.

We suppose then first, without disputing either the Existence or the nature of
Elementary Air, that the Common Air we breath in, and which I often call
Atmospherical Air, abounds with Corpuscles not devoid of Weight, and endowed
with Elasticity or Springiness, whereby the lower parts, comprest by the weight
of the upper, incessantly endeavor to expand themselves, by which expansion,
and in proportion to it, the Spring of the Air is weakened, (as other Springs
are wont to be) the more they are permitted to stretch themselves.

Next, we suppose, that the Terraqueous Globe, being environed with this
gravitating and springy Air, has its surface and the Bodies placed on it pressed
by as much of the Atmosphere as either perpendicularly leans on them, or can
otherwise come to bear upon them. And this pressure is by the Torricellian and
other Experiments found to be equivalent to a perpendicularly erected Cylinder
of about twenty nine or thirty Inches of Quicksilver, (for the height is
differing, as the gravity of the Atmosphere happens to be various.)

Lastly, we suppose, that, Air being contained in a Pipe or other hollow Body
that has but one orifice open to the free Air, if this orifice be Hermetically
sealed, or otherwise (as with the mouth of one that sucks) closed, the now
included Air, whilst it continues without any farther expansion, will have an
elasticity equivalent to the weight of as much of the outward Air as did before
press against it. For, if the weight of the Atmosphere, to which it was then
exposed, had been able to compress it further, it would have done so, and then
the closing of the orifice, at which the internal and external Air
communicated, as it fenced the included Air from the pressure of the incumbent,
so it hindered the same included Air from expanding it self; so that, as it was
shut up with the pressure of the Atmosphere upon it, that is in a state of as
great compression as the weight of the Atmosphere could bring it to, so, being
shut up and thereby kept from weakening that pressure by expansion, it must
retain a Springiness equipollent to the pressure 'twas exposed to before, which
(as I just now noted) was as great as the weight ^ the incumbent Pillar of the
Atmosphere could make it. But if, as was said in the first Supposition, the
included Air should come to be dilated or expanded, the Spring being then
unbent, its Spring, like that of other elastical Bodies, would be debilitated
answerably to that expan^ion.

To me then it seems, that, speaking in general, Liquors are upon Suction
raised into the cavities of Pipes and other hollow Bodies, when, and so far as,
there is a less pressure on the surface of the Liquor in the cavity, than on
the surface of the external Liquor that surrounds the Pipe, whether that
pressure on those parts of the external Liquor, that are from time to time
impelled up into the orifice of the Pipe, proceed from the weight of the
Atmosphere, or the propagated compression or impulse of some parts of the Air,
or the Spring of the Air, or some other Cause, as the pressure of some other
Body quite distinct from Air.

Upon the general view of this Hypothesis, it seems very consonant to the
Mechanical Principles. For, if there be on the differing parts of the surface
of a fluid Body unequal pressures, it is plain, as well by the nature of the
thing, as by what has been demonstrated by Archimedes, and his Commentators,
that the greater force will prevail against the lesser, and that that part of
the waters surface must give way, where it is least pressed. So that that,
wherein the Hypothesis I venture to propose to you, differs from that which I
dissent from, is not, that mine is less Mechanical; but partly in this, that,
whereas the Hypothesis, I question, supposes a necessity of the protrusion or
impulse of the Air, mine does not require that supposition, but, being more
general, reaches to other ways of procuring the Ascension of Liquors, without
raising them by the impulse of the Air; and partly, and indeed chiefly, in that
the Hypothesis, I decline, makes the Cause of the Ascension of Liquors to be
only the increased pressure of the Air external to the pipe; and I chiefly make
it to depend upon the diminished pressure of the Air within the pipe, on the
score of the expansion it is brought to by Suction.

To proceed now to some Experiments that I made in favor of this Hypothesis, I
shall begin with that which follows:

We took a Glass-pipe bended like a Siphon, but so that the shorter leg was as
parallel to the longer as we could get it made, and was Hermetically sealed at
the end: Into this Siphon we made a shift (for it is not very easy) to convey
water, so that the crooked part being held downwards, the liquor reached to the
same height in both the legs, and yet there was about an Inch and half of
uncomprest Air shut up in the shorter leg. This little Instrument (for 'twas
but about fifteen Inches long) being thus prepared, it is plain, that according
to the Hypothesis I dissent from, there is no reason, why the water should
ascend upon Suction. For, though we should admit, that the external Air were
considerably comprest, or received a notable impulse, when the Suckers chest is
enlarged; yet in our case that compression or protrusion will not reach the
surface of the water in the shorter leg, because it is there fenced from the
action of the external Air by the sides of the Glass, and the Hermetical Seal
at the top. And yet, if one sucked strongly at the open orifice in the longer
leg, the water in the shorter would be deprest; and that in the longer
ascended at one suck about an Inch and half: Of which the reason is clear in
our Hypothesis. For, the Spring of the included Air, together with the weight
of the water in the shorter leg, and the pressure of the Atmospherical Air,
assisted by the weight of the liquor in the longer leg, counter-ballanced one
another before the Suction began: But, when afterward upon Suction the Air in
the longer leg came to be dilated and thereby weakened, 'twas rendered unable
to resist the undiminish'd pressure of the Air included in the shorter leg,
which consequently expanding it self by virtue of its Elasticity, deprest the
contiguous water, and made it proportionably rise in the opposite leg, 'till
by the expansion its Spring being more and more weakened, it arrived at an
equipollency with the gravitation or pressure of the Atmosphere. Which last
clause contains the Reason, why, when the person that sucked had raised the
water in the longer leg less than three Inches higher by repeated endeavors
to suck, and that without once suffering the water to fall back again, he was
not able to elevate the water in the longer, so much as three Inches above its
first station. And if in the shorter leg there was but an Inch and a quarter
of space left for the Air unfill'd by the water, by diverse skilfully reiterated
acts of Suction he could not raise the liquor in the longer leg above two
Inches; because by that time the Air included in the shorter leg had, by
expanding it self further and further, proportionably weakened its Spring,
'till at length it became as rarefied, as was the Air in the cavity of the
longer leg, and consequently was able to thrust away the water with no more
force than the Air in the long leg was able to resist. And by the recited
trial it appeared, that the rarefaction usually made of Air by Suction is not
near so great, as one would expect, problably because by the dilatation of the
Lungs the Air, being still shut up, is but moderately rarefied, and the Air in
the longer leg can by them be brought to no greater degree of rarity, than
that of the Air within the Chest. For, whereas the included Air in our
Instrument was not expanded, by my estimate, at one suck to above the double of
its former dimensions, and by diverse successive sucks was expanded but from one
Inch and an half to less than four Inches and an half, if the Suction could
have been conveniently made with a great and stanch Syringe, the rarefaction of
the Air would probably have been far greater; since in our Pneumatick Engine Air
may, without heat, and by a kind of Suction, be brought to possess many
hundreds of times the space it took up before. From this rarefaction of the Air
in both the legs of our Instrument proceeds another Phenomenon, readily
explicable by our Hypothesis. For if, when the water was impelled up as high as
the Suction could raise it; the Instrument were taken from the Suckers mouth,
the elevated water would with violence return to its wonted station. For, the
Air, in both the legs of the Instrument, having by the Suction loft much of
the Spring, and so of its power of pressing; when once the orifice of the
longer leg was left open, the Atmospherical Air came again to gravitate upon
the water in that leg, and the Air, included in the other leg, having its
Spring debilitated by the precedent expansion, was not able to hinder the
external Air from violently repelling the elevated water, 'till the included
Air was thrust into the space it possessed before the Suction; in which space
it had Density and Elasticity enough to resist the pressure, that the external
Air exercised against it through the interposed water.

But our Hypothesis about the Cause of Suction would not need to be
solicitously proved to you by other ways, if you had seen what I have sometimes
been able to do in our Pneumatick Engine. For, there we found by trials
purposely devised, and carefully made, that a good Syringe being so conveyed
into our Receiver, that the open orifice of the Pipe or lower part was kept
under water, if the Engine were exhausted, though the handle of the Syringe were
drawn up, the water would not follow it, which yet it would do if the external
Air were let in again. The Reason of which is plain in our Hypothesis. For, the
Air, that should have pressed upon the surface of the stagnant water, having been
pumpt out, there was nothing to impell up the water into the deserted cavity of
the Syringe, as there was when the Receiver was filled with Air.

CHAP. IV.
BUt because such a convenience as our Engine, and the apparatus necessary for
such Trials are not easily procurable, I shall endeavor to confirm our
Hypothesis about Suction by subjoining some Experiments, that may be tried
without the help of that Engine, for the making out these three things: I. That
a Liquor may be raised by Suction, when the pressure of the Air, neither as it
has Weight nor Elasticity, is the Cause of the Elevation. II. That the weight
of the Atmospherical Air is sufficient to raise up Liquors in Suction. III.
That in some cases Suction will not be made, as, according to the Hypothesis I
dissent from, it should, although there be a dilatation of the Suckers Thorax,
and no danger of a Vacuum though the Liquor should ascend.


And first, to show, how much the rising of Liquors in Suction depends upon the
weight or pressure of the impellent Body, and how little necessity there is,
where that pressure is not wanting, that, in the place deserted by the Liquor
that is sucked, there should succeed Air or some other visible Body, as the
Peripatetic Schools would have it; to show this, I say, I thought on the
following Experiments. We took a Glass-pipe fit to have the Torricellian
Experiment made with it, but a good deal longer than was necessary for that
use: This Pipe being Hermetically sealed at one end, the other end was so bent
as to be reflected upwards, and make as it were the shorter leg of the Siphon
as parallel as we could to the longer, so that the Tube now was shaped like an
inverted Siphon with legs of a very unequal length. This Tube, notwithstanding
its inconvenient figure, we made a shift, (for it is not easily done) to fill
with Mercury, when 'twas in an inclined posture, and then erecting it, the
Mercury subsided in the longer leg, as in the Torricellian Experiment, and
attained to between two foot and a quarter and two foot and an half above the
surface of the Mercury in the shorter leg, which in this Instrument answers to
the stagnant Mercury in an ordinary Barometer, from which to distinguish it I
have elsewhere called this Siphon, furnished with Mercury, a Traveling
Baroscope, because it may be safely carried from place to place. Out of the
shorter leg of this Tube we warily took as much Mercury as was thought
convenient for what we had further to do, and this we did by such a way as to
hinder any Air from getting into the deserted cavity of the longer leg, by
which means the Mercurial Cylinder, (estimated as I lately mentioned) retained
the same height above the stagnant Mercury in the shorter: The upper and closed
part of this Traveling Baroscope you will easily grant to have been free from
Common Air, not only for other Reasons that have been given elsewhere, but
particularly for this, that, if you gently incline the Instrument, the
Quicksilver will ascend to the top of the Tube; which you know it could not do,
if the place, formerly deserted by it, were possessed by the Air, which by its
Spring would hinder the ascension of the Mercury, (as is easy to be tried.)
The Instrument having been thus fitted, I caused one of the bystanders to suck
at the shorter leg, whereupon (as I expected) there presently ensued an
Ascension of four or five Inches of Mercury in that leg, and a proportionable
Subsidence of the Mercury in the longer, and yet in this case the raising of
the Mercury cannot be pretended to proceed from the pressure of the Air. For,
the weight of the Atmosphere is fenced off by that, which closes the upper end
of the longer Tube, and the Spring of the Air has here nothing to do, since, as
we have lately shown, the space deserted by the Mercury is not possessed by the
included Air, and the pulsion or condensation of the Air, supposed by diverse
modern Philosophers to be made by the dilatation of the Suckers Chest, and to
press upon the surface of the Liquors that are to be sucked up, this, I say,
cannot here be pretended in regard the surface of the Liquor in the longer leg
is every way fenced from the pressure of the ambient Air. So that it remains,
that the Cause, which raised the Quicksilver in the shorter leg upon the newly
recited Suction, was the weight of the collaterally superior Quicksilver in
the longer leg, which, being (at the beginning of the Suction) equivalent to
the weight of the Atmosphere, there is a plain reason, why the stagnant Mercury
in the shorter leg should be raised some Inches by Suction; as Mercury
stagnant in an open Vessel will be raised by the weight of the Atmosphere, when
the Suction is made in the open Air. For, in both cases there is a Pipe, that
reaches to the stagnant Mercury, and a competent weight to impel it into that
Pipe; when the Air in the cavity of the Pipe has its Spring weakened by the
dilatation that accompanied Suction.

The Second point formerly proposed, which is, That the weight of the Air is
sufficient to raise Liquors in Suction; may not be ill proved by Arguments
legitimately drawn from the Torricellian Experiment it self, and much more
clearly by the first and fifteenth of our Continued Physico-Mechanical
Experiments. And therefore I shall only here take notice of a Phenomenon, that
may be exhibited by the Traveling Baroscope, which, though it be much
inferior to the Experiments newly referred to, may be of some use on the
present occasion.

Having then provided an Instrument like the Traveling Baroscope, mentioned
under the former Head, but whose legs were not so unequally long, and having
in it made the Torricellian Experiment after the manner lately described; we
ordered the matter so, that there remained in the shorter leg the length of
diverse Inches unfill'd with stagnant Mercury. Then I caused one, versed in what
he was to do, so to raise the Quicksilver by Suction to the open orifice of the
shorter leg, that, the orifice being seasonably and dexterously closed, the
Mercury continued to fill that leg, as long as we thought fit; and then having
put a mark to the surface of the Mercury in the longer leg, we unstopp'd the
orifice of the shorter; whereupon the Mercury, that before filled it, was
depressed, 'till the same Liquor in the longer leg was raised five Inches or
more above the mark, and continued at that height. I said, that the Mercury
that had been raised by Suction, was depressed, rather than that it subsided,
because its own weight could not here make it fall, since a Mercurial Cylinder
of five Inches was far from being able to raise so tall a Cylinder of Mercury
as made a counterpoise in the longer leg; and therefore the depression we
spea^^ of, is to be referred to the gravitation of the Atmospherical Air upon
the surface of the Mercury in the shorter leg: And I see no cause to doubt but
that, if we could have procured an Instrument, into whose shorter leg a
Mercurial Cylinder of many Inches higher could have been sucked up, it would by
this contrivance have appeared, that the pressure of the Atmosphere would
easily impel up a far taller Cylinder of Mercury than it did in our recited
Expe^^ment.

That this is no groundless conjecture may appear probable by the Experiment
you will presently meet with. For if the gravity of an incumbent Pillar of the
Atmosphere be able to compress a parcel of included Air as much as a Mercurial
Cylinder, equivalent in weight to between thirty and five and thirty foot of
water, is able to condense it, it cannot well be denied that the same
Atmospherical Cylinder may be able by its weight to raise and counter-ballance
eight or nine and twenty Inches of Quicksilver, or an equivalent pillar of
water in Tubes, where the resistance of these two Liquors to be raised and
sustained by the Air, depends only upon their own unassisted gravity.

To confirm our Doctrine of the Gravitation of the Atmosphere upon the surface
of the Liquors exposed to it, I will subjoin an Experiment, that I devised to
show, that the incumbent Air, in its natural or usual state, would compress
other Air not rarefied, but in the like natural state, as much as a Cylinder of
eight or nine and twenty Inches of Mercury would condense or compress it.

In order to the making of this, I must put you in mind of what I have shown
elsewhere at large, See the Authors Defense of the Doctrine touching the Spring
and Weight of the Air, against Fr. Linus, chap. 5.
and shall further confirm by one of the Experiments that follows the next;
namely, that about twenty nine or thirty Inches of Quicksilver will compress
Air, that being in its natural or usual state (as to rarity and density) has
been shut up in the shorter leg of our Traveling or Syphon-like Baroscope,
into half the room that included Air possessed before. This premised, I pass on
to my Experiment, which was this:

We provided a Traveling Baroscope, wherein the Mercury in the longer leg was
kept suspended by the counterpoise of the Air that gravitated on the surface of
the Mercury in the shorter leg, which we had so ordered, that it reached not
by about two Inches to the top of the shorter leg. Then making a mark at the
place where the stagnant Mercury rested, 'twas manifest according to our
Hypothesis, that the Air. in the upper part of the shorter leg was in its
natural state, or of the same degree of density with the outward Air, with
which it freely communicated at the open orifice of the shorter leg; so that
this stagnant Air was equally pressed upon by the weight of the collaterally
superior Cylinder of Mercury in the longer leg, and the equivalent weight of
a directly incumbent pillar of the Atmosphere. Things being in this posture,
the upper part of the shorter leg, which had been before purposely drawn out
to an almost capillary smallness, was Hermetically sealed, which, though the
Instrument was kept erected, was so nimbly done by reason of the slenderness of
the Pipe, that the included Air did not appear to be sensibly heated, though
for greater caution we staid a while from proceeding, that, if any rarefaction
had been produced in the Air, it might have time to lose it again. This done,
we opened the lower end of the longer leg, (which had been so ordered before,
that we could easily do it, and without concussion of the Vessel,) by which
means the Atmospherical Air, gaining access to the Mercury included in the
longer leg, did, as I expected, by its gravitation upon it so compress the Air
included in the shorter leg, that, according to the estimate we made with the
help of a Ruler, (for by reason of the conical figure of the upper part of the
glass we could not take precise measures,) it was thrust into near half the
room it took up before, and consequently, according to what I put you lately in
mind of, endured a compression like that, which a Mercurial Cylinder of about
twenty nine Inches would have given it.

This Experiment, as to the main of it, was for greater caution made the second
time with much the like success; and though it had been more easy to measure
the Condensation of the Air, if, instead of drawing out and sealing up the
shorter leg of the Instrument, we had contented our selves to close it some
other way; yet we rather chose to employ Hermes's Seal, lest, if any other
course had been taken, it might be pretended, that some of the included Air,
when it began to be comprest, might escape out at the not perfectly and
strongly closed orifice of the leg wherein 'twas imprisoned.

To make it yet further appear, how much the Ascension of Liquors by Suction
depends upon Pressure, rather than upon Natures imaginary Abhorrence of a
Vacuum, or the propagated Pulsion of the Air; I will subjoin an Instance,
wherein that presumed Abhorrence cannot be pretended. The Experiment was thus
made:

A Glass-Syphon, like those lately described, with one leg far longer than the
other, was Hermetically sealed at the shorter leg, and then by degrees there
was put in, at the orifice of the longer leg, as much Quicksilver as by its
weight sufficed to compress the Air in the shorter leg into about half the
room it possessed before; so that, according to the Peripatetick Doctrine, the
Air must be in a state of preternatural Condensation, and that to a far greater
degree, than (as I have tried) it is usually brought to by Cold, intense enough
to freeze water. Then measuring the height of the Quicksilver in the longer
Tube above the superficies of that in the shorter, we found it not exceed
thirty Inches. Now, if Liquors did rise in Suction ob fugam vacui, there is no
reason, why this Quicksilver in the longer part of the Siphon should not easily
ascend upon Suction, at least 'till the Air in the shorter leg had regained
its former Dimensions, since it cannot in this place be pretended, that, if the
Mercury should ascend, there would be any danger of a Vacuum in the shorter
leg of the Tube, in regard that the contiguous included Air is ready at hand
to succeed as fast as the Mercury subsides in the shorter leg of the Siphon.
Nor can it be pretended, that, to fill the place deserted by the Quicksilver,
the included Air must suffer a preternatural rarefaction or discension; since
it is plain in our case, that on the contrary, as long as the Air continues in
the state whereto the weight of the Quicksilver has reduced it, it is kept in a
violent state of compression; since in the shorter leg it was in its natural
state, when the Mercury, poured into the longer leg, did by its weight thrust
it into about half the room it took up before. And yet, having caused several
persons, one of them versed in sucking, to suck diver's times as strongly as
they could, they were neither of them able, not so much as for a minute of an
hour, to raise the Mercury in the longer leg, and make it subside in the
shorter for more than about an Inch at most. And yet to show you, that the
Experiment was not favorably tried for me, the height of the Mercurial
Cylinder in the longer leg above the surface of that in the shorter leg was,
when the Suction was tried, an Inch or two shorter than thirty Inches, and the
comprest Air in the shorter leg was so far from having been by the exsuction
expanded beyond its natural and first dimensions, that it did not, when the
contiguous Mercury stood as low as we could make it subside, regain so much as
one half of the space it had lost by the precedent Compression, and
consequently was in a preternatural state of condensation, when it had been
freed from that state as far as Suction would do it. Whence it seems evident,
that 'twas not ob fugam vacui, that the Quicksilver did upon Suction ascend one
Inch; for, upon the same score it ought to have ascended two, or perhaps more
Inches, since there was no danger, that by such an ascension any Vacuum should
be produced or left in the shorter leg of the Siphon; whereas, according to
our Hypothesis, a clear cause of the Phenomenon is assignable. For, before the
Suction was begun, there was an AEquilibrium or equipollency between the weight
of the superior Quicksilver in the longer leg, and a Spring of the comprest
Air included in the shorter leg: But when the Experimentor began to suck, his
Chest being widen'd, part of the Air included in the upper part of the longer
leg passed into it, and that which remained had by that expansion its pressure
so weakened, that the Air in the shorter leg, finding no longer the former
resistance, was able by its own Spring to expand it self, and consequently to
depress the contiguous Mercury in the same shorter leg, and raise it as much
in the longer.

But here a Hydrostatician, that heedfully marks this Experiment, may discern a
difficulty, that may perhaps somewhat perplex him, and seems to overthrow our
Explication of the Phenomenon. For he may object, that if the comprest Air in
the shorter leg had a Spring equipollent to the weight of the Mercury in the
longer leg, it appears not, why the Mercury should not be sucked up in this
Instrument, as well as in the free Air; since, according to me, the pressure of
the included Air upon the subjacent Mercury must be equivalent to the weight of
the Atmosphere, and yet experience shows, that the weight of the Atmosphere
will, upon Suction, raise Quicksilver to the height of several Inches.

To clear this difficulty, and show, that, though it be considerable, it is not
at all insuperable, be pleased to consider with me, that I make indeed the
Spring of the comprest Air to be equipollent to the Weight of the compressing
Mercury, and I have a manifest reason to do it; because, if the Spring of the
Air were not equipollent to that Weight, the Mercury must necessarily compress
the Air farther, which it is granted de facto not to do. But then I consider,
that in our case there ought to be a great deal of difference between the
operation of the Spring of the included Air and the Weight of the Atmosphere,
after Suction has been once begun. For, the Weight of the Atmosphere, that
impels up Mercury and other Liquors, when the Suction is made in the open Air,
continues still the same, but the force or pressure of the included Air is
equal to the counterpressure of the Mercury no longer than the first moment of
the Suction; after which, the force of the imprisoned Air still decreases more
and more, since this comprest Air, being further and further expanded, must
needs have its Spring proportionably weakened; so that it need be no wonder,
that the Mercury was not sucked up any more than we have related; for there was
nothing to make it ascend to a greater height, than that, at which the
debilitated Spring of the (included but) expanded Air was brought to an
equipollency with the undiminish'd and indeed somewhat increased weight of the
Mercurial Cylinder in the longer leg, and the pressure of the Aerial Cylinder
in the same leg, lessened by the action of him that sucked. For whereas, when
the orifice of this leg stood open, the Mercury was pressed on by a Cylinder of
the Atmospherical Air, equivalent to about thirty Inches of Quicksilver; by the
mouth and action of him that sucked the Tube was freed from the external Air,
and by the dilatation of his Thorax, the neighboring Air, that had a free
passage through his windpipe to it, was proportionably expanded, and had its
Spring and pressure weakened: By which means, the comprest Air in the shorter
leg of the Siphon was enabled to impel up the Mercury, 'till the lately
mentioned Equilibrium or equipollency was attained. And I must here take
notice, that, as the Quicksilver was raised by Suction but a little way, so the
Cylinder that was raised was a very long one; whereas, when Mercury is sucked
up in the free Air, it is seldom raised to half that length; though, as I noted
before, the impellent cause, which is the weight of the Atmosphere, continued
still the same, whereas in our Siphon, when the Mercury was sucked up but an
Inch, the comprest Air, possessing double the space it did before, had by this
expansion already lost a very considerable part of its former Spring and
Pressure.

I should here conclude this Discourse, but that I remember a Phenomenon of
our Pneumatic Engine, which to diverse Learned Men, especially Aristotelians,
seemed so much to argue, that Suction is made either by a Fuga Vacui, or some
internal Principle, that diverse years ago I thought fit to set down another
account of it, and lately meeting with that account among other papers, I shall
subjoin it just as I found it, by way of Appendix to the foregoing Tract.

Among the more familiar Phenomenon of the Machina Boyliana, (as they now call
it,) none leaves so much scruple in the Minds of some sorts of Men, as this,
That, when ones finger is laid close upon the orifice of the little Pipe, by
which the Air is wont to pass from the Receiver into the exhausted Cylinder,
the pulp of the finger is made to enter a good way into the cavity of the Pipe,
which does not happen without a considerable sense of pain in the lower part of
the fing^r. For most of tho^ that are strangers to Hydrostatic^^ especially if
they be prepossessed wi^^ the Opinions generally received bot^ in the
Peripatetick and other School^ persuade themselves, that they f^^ the newly
mentioned and painful protuberance of the pulp of the finger to be effected not
by pressure, as (...) would have it, but distinctly by A^^traction.

To this we are wont to answer That common Air being a Body (...) devoid of
weight, the Phenomeno^ is clearly explicable by the pressu^^ of it: For, when
the finger is fir^^ laid upon the orifice of the Pipe, no pain nor swelling is
produced, because the Air which is in the Pipe presse^ as well against that
part of the finger which covers the orifice, as the ambient Air does against
the other parts of the same finger. But when by pumping, the Air in the Pipe,
or the most part of it, is made to pass out of the Pipe into the exhausted
Cylinder, then there is nothing left in the Pipe, whose pressure can any thing
near countervail the undiminish'd pressure of the external Air on the other
parts of the finger; and consequently, that Air thrusts the most yielding and
fleshy part of the finger, which is the pulp, into that place where its
pressure is unresisted, that is, into the cavity of the Pipe, where this
forcible intrusion causes a pain in those tender parts of the finger.

To give some visible Illustration of what we have been saying, as well as for
other purposes, I thought on the following Experiment.

We took a Glass-pipe of a convenient length, and open at both ends, whose
cavity was near about an Inch in Diameter, (such a determinate breadth being
convenient, though not necessary:) To one of the ends of this Pipe we caused to
be firmly tied on a piece of very fine Bladder, that had been ruffled and
oiled, to make it both very limber and unapt to admit water; and care was
taken, that the piece of Bladder tied on should be large enough, not only to
cover the orifice, but to hang loose somewhat beneath it.

This done, we put the covered end of the Pipe into a Glass-body (or Cucurbit)
purposely made more than ordinarily tall, and the Pipe being held in such
manner, as that the end of it reached almost, but not quite, to the bottom of
the Glass-body, we caused water to be poured both into this Vessel and into the
Pipe (at its upper orifice, which was left open) that the water might ascend
equally enough, both without and within the Pipe. And when the Glass-body was
full of water, and the same liquor was level to it, or a little higher within
the Pipe, the Bladder at the lower orifice was kept plump, because the water
within the Pipe did by its weight press as forcibly downwards, as the external
water in the large Glass endeavored to press it inwards and upwards.

All this being done, we caused part of the water in the Pipe to be taken out
of it, (which may be done either by putting in and drawing out a piece of
Sponge or of Linen, or more expeditiously by sucking up part of the water with
a smaller Pipe to be immediately after laid aside;) upon which removal of part
of the internal water, that which remained in the Pipe being no longer able, by
reason of its want of weight, to press against the inside of the Bladder near
as forcibly as it did before, the external water, whose weight was not
lessened, pressed the sides and bottom of the Bladder, whereto it was
contiguous, into the cavity of the Pipe, and thrusted it up therein so
strongly, that the distended Bladder made a kind of either Thimble or
Hemisphere within the Pipe. So that here we have a protuberance, like that
abovementioned of the finger^ effected by Pulsion, not Attraction^ and in a
case where there can be no just pretense of having ^^course to Natures
Abhorrance of a Vacuum, since, the upper orifice of the Pipe being left wide
open, the Air may pass in and out without resistance.

The like swelling of the Bladder in the Pipe we could procure without taking
out any of the internal liquor, by thrusting the Pipe deeper into the water;
for then the external liquor, having by reason of its increase of depth a
greater pressure on the outside of the Bladder, than the internal liquor had on
the inside of it, the Bladder must yield to the stronger pressure, and
consequently be impelled up.

If the Bladder lying loofe at the lower end of the Pipe, the upper end were
carefully closed with ones thumb, that the upper Air might not get out until
the Experimentor thought fit, and if the thus closed Pipe were thrust almost to
the bottom of the water, the Bladder would not be protuberant inwards, as
formerly; because the included Air by virtue of its Spring, resisted from
within the pressure of the external water against the outside of the Bladder:
But if the thumb, that stopped the Pipes upper orifice, were removed, the
formerly compressed Air having liberty to expand it self, and its elasticity
being weakened thereby, the external water would with suddenness and noise
enough, not to be unpleasant to the Spectators, drive up the Bladder into the
cavity of the Pipe, and keep it there very protuberant.

To obviate an Objection, that I foresaw might be brought in by persons not
well versed in Hydrostaticks, I caused the Pipe forementioned, or such
another, to be so bent near the lower end, as that the orifice of it stood
quite on one side, and the parts of the Pipe made an angle as near to a right
one as he that blew it could bring it to. This lower orifice being fitted with
a Bladder, and the Pipe with its contained liquor being thrust under water
after the former manner, the lateral pressure of the water forced the Bladder
into the short and horizontal leg, and made it protuberate there, as it had
done when the Pipe was straight.

Lastly, that the Experiment might appear not to be confined to one liquor;
instead of Water we put into the unbent Pipe as much red Wine (who^e color
would make it conspicuous) as was requisite to keep the Bladder somewhat
swelling outward, when it was somewhat near the bottom of the water; and then
'twas manifest, that, according as we had foreseen, the superficies of the red
liquor in the Pipe was a good deal higher than that of the external water, and
if the depth of both liquors were proportionably lessened, the difference of
height betwixt the two surfaces would indeed, as it ought to happen, decrease,
but still the surface of the wine would be the higher of the two, because being
lighter in specie than the common water, the AEquilibrium between the pressures
of the two liquors upon the Bladder would not be maintained, unless a greater
height of wine compensated its defect of specific gravity. And if the Pipe was
thrust deeper into the water, then the Bladder would be made protuberant
inwards, as when the Pipe had water in it. By which it appears, that these
Phenomenon, without recourse to attraction, may be explicated barely by the
Laws of the AEquilibrium of Liquors.

FINIS.
NEW EXPERIMENTS About the PRESERVATION OF BODIES IN VACUO BOYLIANO.

By the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel over against the little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

PREFACE.
MY willingness to make the bulk of the Papers about the Hidden Qualities of
the Air less inconsiderable, by things that were of affinity to the Subject,
inducing me to tumble over some of my Adversaria, I met among them with diverse
loose Notes, or short Memorials of some Experiments I made several years ago
(and some of a fresher date) about the Preservation of Bodies by excluding the
Air, wherefore I was easily persuaded to subjoin these to the Additional
Experiments last recited. For it seems not yet clear, by what manifest Quality
the Exclusion of the Air should so much contribute to keep from putrefaction
variety of Bodies, that are usually found very much disposed to it. And
therefore 'till the Cause of this Preservation be further p^^^^^ated, it may
not be altogether impertinent to mention some Experiments relating to it. And
though these be only such as come now to hand, and were most of them set down
rather as Notes than Relations, yet being faithfully registered, and most of
them having been made in Vacuo Boyliano (as they call it) they will problably
be New, and so perhaps not altogether useless to Naturalists, who may vary
them, and requite me for them, by trying the same Experiments, I made by the
Removal of the Air by the bare Exclusion of adventitious Air. For sometimes
through have I did not, and sometimes for want of convenience I could not, try,
whether the same Phenomenon would appear, if the same Bodies were shut up with
Air in them, provided they were diligently kept from all commerce with the Air
without them.

NEW EXPERIMENTS ABOUT THE Preservation of BODIES IN VACVO BOYLIANO.
EXPER. I.
A Piece of roasted Rabbet, being exactly closed up in an exhausted Receiver
the Sixth of November, was two months and some few days after taken out without
appearing to be corrupted, or sensibly altered in Color, Taste, or Smell.

EXPER. II.
A small Glass-Receiver, being half filled with pieces of White-bread, (part
Crust and part Crumb) was exhausted, and secured the eleventh of March: The
Receiver being opened the first of April, part of the Bread was shaken out, and
appeared not to have been considerably, if at all sensibly impaired in that
time, save that the outside of some pieces of Crumb seemed to be a little, and
but a little, less soft and white than before. There appeared no drops or the
least Dew on the inside of the Glass. The remaining Bread was again secured
soon after,

The eighteenth of April, the Bread was taken out again, and tasted much as it
did the last time, the Crust being also soft, and no drops of water appearing
on the inside of the Glass.

EXPER. III.
This day (being the ninth of March) I opened a small exhausted and secured
Receiver, wherein, about the ninth of December, that is, about three months
ago, we had included some Milk: Upon opening an access to the Air, we found the
Milk well colored, and turned partly into a kind of Whey, and partly into a
kind of soft Curd. The taste was not offensive, only a little sowrish like Whey,
and the smell was not at all stinking, but somewhat like that of sowrish Milk.

EXPER. IV.
The Violet-leaves, that were put up, and freed and secured from Air the fifth
of March, being this day opened, ( April the seventh) appeared not to have
changed their shape, or color, or consistence: For, as for their odor, it
could not be well judged of, because he that included them had, for his own
ease, contrary to my express direction, ^rush'd many of them together in
thrusting them down; and by such a violation of their Texture, it is natural for
Violets to lose their fragrancy, and acquire an Earthy smell.

EXPER. V.
Having carefully placed some Violets in an exhausted Receiver, of a convenient
size and bigness, and secured it from immediate commerce with the external Air;
the Seventh month after we looked upon them again, and found they were not
putrified or resolved into any mucilaginous substance, but kept their shape
entire, some of them retaining their color, but more of them having so lost
it, as to look like white Violets.

EXPER. VI.
November the fifth, we conveyed into a conveniently shaped Receiver some
ounces of Sheeps-blood, taken from an Animal that had been killed that
afternoon. And after the exhaustion of the Air, during which, store of bubbles
were generated in the Liquor that made it swell notably, the included Blood was
kept in a place, (whose warmth we judged equal to that of a digestive Furnace)
for twenty days; for one or two of the first of which, the Blood seemed to
continue fluid, and of a florid color, which afterward degenerated into one
that tended more to blackness. On the twenty fifth of November we came to
let-in the external, and found it to rush into the Receiver, and the Glass
containing the Blood being held in a lightsom place, the most part of the
bottom of it seemed to be thinly overlaid with a coagulated substance of a
higher color than that which swam above it, which yet, though it appeared dark
and almost blackish in the Glass whilst it was looked on in the bulk, yet, if
it was shook, those parts of it that fell down along the inside of the Glass,
appeared of a deep but fair color. But whilst the Blood continued in the
Glass, it was supposed not to stink, since, even when it was poured out, though
its smell seemed to me (whose Organs of Smelling are tender) to have I know not
what that was offensive, yet to others it seemed to smell but as the Blood of a
newly killed Dog.

EXPER. VII.
Some Cream being put up and secured the seventeenth of March in an exhausted
Receiver, did this day appear to be more thick and almost Butter-like at the
top (whose superficies seemed rugged) than otherwhere, and afterward by being
well shaken together in the not inconveniently shaped Glass, was easily enou^^
reduced to Butter, whose Butter-milk, by the judgment of those who were more
used to deal in it than I, appeared not differing from ordinary Butter-milk.
And I found it had, like that, a grateful sowrness. The Butter was judged to be
a little sowrer than ordinary, but was not, as they speak, made.

[In the Entry of this Experiment, Blanks were left for the years; but the
Tenor of the words, and Design of the Experiment, and other Circumstances,
assure me, that the Cream continued a year in the vessel.]

EXPER. VIII.
February the eighteenth we looked again upon three Vials, that had been
exhausted and secured the fifteenth of September last, the one of these had in
it some slices of roasted Beef, and the other some shivers of white Bread, and
the last some thin pieces of Cheese; all which seemed to be free from
putrefaction, and looked much as they did when they were first put up:
Wherefore we thought not fi^ to let the Air into the Receiver, but left them as
they were to lengthen the designed Trial.

EXPER. IX.
February the eighteenth, there was a fourth Vial, wherein about six months
before, viz. August the twelfth, had been enclosed and secured some
Iuly-flowers and a Rose; and yet these being kept in the same place with the
rest, though they seemed a little moist, retained their shape and color,
especially the Rose, which looked fresh enough to seem to have been gathered
but lately.

N. B. That we observed not in any of these four Receivers any great drops, or
so much as Dew in the upper parts, viz. those that were situated above the
included matter.

EXPER. X.
June the fourth we left some Strawberries in an exhausted Receiver, and coming
to look upon them after the beginning of November, we found them to be
discolored, but not altered in shape, nor affording any sign of Corruption by
being at all mouldy^ Wherefore we thought fit to leave them still in the
Receiver for further Trial.

EXPER. XI.
May the second, 1669, a piece of roasted Beef, secured September the
fifteenth, appeared to be not at all altered: As did likewise a piece of Cheese
secured in another Receiver; and some pieces of a French Rose the same day (
September the fifteenth) secured in a third.

N. B. The Flowers sealed up August the twelfth, 1668, being this day looked
upon, appeared fresh, and consequently did so after having been kept eight
months and an half.

EXPER. XII.
There was taken Beer of eight shillings a Barrel, of a year old, near a Pint
of which, June the seventeenth, was put into a conveniently shaped Glass, and
it was afterward exhausted and secured from the Air; the most part of the
month of August proved extraordinarily hot. Toward the latter end there was at
several times great Thunder, which made the Beer in our Cellar, and in most of
those of the Neighborhood, turn sour. The first of September, the Beer was
opened, but did not seem to have degenerated into any soureness.

EXPER. XIII.
Being desirous to try, whether the Thunder would have such effect upon Ale
exactly stopped in Glass-vessels, as it often has on that Liquor in the
ordinary wooden Casks; I caused some Ale moderately strong to be put into a
conveniently shaped Receiver, and having exhausted the Air and secured a
Glass-vessel, 'twas put into a quiet, but not cool, place: Last week, which was
about six weeks after the Liquor had been enclosed, there happening some very
loud Thunder, and our Beer, though the Cask was kept in a good Cellar, being
generally noted to have been turned sour after this Thunder; I staid yet a day
or two longer, that the operation upon our included Liquor might be the more
certain and manifest; and then permitting an access to the outward Air, we took
out the Ale, and found it to be good drink, and not at all soured.

Compare this with the Wish made in the Essay of the Great Efficacy of
Effluviums, chap. 5. page 28. that such an Experiment should be tried.

EXPER. XIV.
September the twenty first, 1670, some Blackberries, included in an exhausted
Receiver, were opened June the twentieth, 1673, and were found free from all
mouldiness and ill sent, only there was found some Liquor that was sour, which
being taken out the Berries were secured again.

[ At the same time was another (...) of the same Berries exactly closed up i^
a Receiver, whence the Air was (...) pumped, to try what difference in the
Event would appear by this variation. But, coming in October the eleventh,
1673, to look upon the Glass, we found it cracked, and the Fruit all covered
over with a thick mould. Nor was this the only Vessel wherein Trials, made to
reserve Fruits, without any exhaustion of the Air, miscarried.]

October the eleventh, 1674, the sam^ Berries, being looked upon, appeared to
have their color altered, and much less black than before, but did not appear
putrefied by either loss of shape, or by any stinking smell, nor was the least
mouldiness observed to be on them, though they had been kept in the same
Receiver above four year.

That Fructus Horarii, especially so tender and juicy ones, should without any
additament be preserved from putrefaction so many times longer than otherwise
they would have lasted, as it is more than would be expected, so it may give
hopes, that both odd add useful things of this kind may be this way performed.

POSTSCRIPT.
THe foregoing Experiments, as the Memorials themselves declare, were all of
them made in Vacu^ Boyliano, nor did I intend to set down any other: But
meeting among those Memorials with a short account of a couple of Trials made
without the help of our Pneumatic Engine, I was induced to annex them, because
many may make the like, that will not be able to make such as have been
hitherto recited. And these two requiring no peculiarly shaped Vessels, it is
thought, it may prove of some Oeconomical as well as Physical use, if it be
shown by experience, that Liquors Hermetically-seal'd the ordinary way in
common Bolt-heads may be kept from souring very much beyond their usual time of
lasting.

June the fourteenth we put a convenient quantity of good Ale into a Bolt-head,
and sealed it up Hermetically; the next year, on the fifth of July, we broke
off the Seal, and found the Liquor very good and without any sensible
sowreness. The next day it was sealed up again and set by for thirteen months,
at which time the neck of the Glass being broken, the Ale was found pretty
sour, and therefore the Trial was prosecuted no farther: So that, though this
Liquor would not by this way of Preservation be kept from sowring so long as
the Wine, to be mentioned in the following Experiment, yet even a small
quantity of it was preserved good at the least above a year, which is very much
longer than Ale is wont to keep from sowring.

June the fourteenth, 1670, in a large Bolt-head was Hermetically sealed up
about a Pint, by guess, o^ French Claret Wine, which, when we came to look
upon, July the fifth, 1671, appeared very clear and high colored, and had
deposited store of feces at the bottom of the Glass, but fastened no Tartar
that we could perceive to the sides. Upon the breaking of the sealed end of the
Glass, the By^standers thought, that there was an eruption of included Air or
steams, and, above the surface of the Wine, there appeared, to a pretty height,
a certain white smoke almost like a mist, and then gradually vanished: The Wine
continued well-tasted, and was a little rough upon the tongue, but not at all
sour.

The Bolt-head was sealed up again July the sixth 1671, and so set by 'till
August the fifth 1672, at which time it was opened again, and then the Wine did
still taste very well.

June the twenty sixth 1673, the Bolt-head with the same Claret Wine was
opened, and was found very good, and was sealed up again.

October the eleventh 1674, the same Claret Wine was opened again, and appeared
of a good color, not sour, but seemed somewhat less spirituous than other
good Claret Wine, perhaps because of the Cold weather.

This, and the foregoing Trial about the Preservation of Ale, were made in Mr.
Oldenburg's House and Presence.

FINIS.

