A Minister's Counsel TO THE YOUTH OF HIS PARISH, When Arrived to Years of
Discretion.

Recommended to the Societies in, and about London.

BY FRANCIS BRAG, B.D. Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.

Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way, Psalm. 119.9. LONDON, Printed for
R. Wellington at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1699.

THE PREFACE.
WE have of late had several Useful Discourses published, concerning the
Education of Children, in order to the laying the First Foundation well: I pray
God they may have the intended good Effect!

But, though a Religious and Prudent Management of Youth Betimes, is of Infinite
Consequence, and gives 'em many happy Prepossessions, and no Care in the
Conduct of it can be too great; yet, it is but too too often found, that All is
soon defeated, when young Persons become their Own Governors, and are left to
their Own Disposal.

I therefore thought it might do some Service, to carry on the same Pious
Design a little further, and give some few Advices, whereby Manhood likewise
might receive an early Biass to what is truly Religious and Good; and Innocence
and Happiness run through all the Stages of this Life, and end at last in the
Blisses of Eternity.

What is here published was prepared at first for the use of those under my own
Care, and delivered to them in several Discourses: But hopeing it might be
serviceable to others too, I determined to send it abroad.

I Am very sensible, That to the following Advices I might have added more; and
some, it may be, will wonder that I have not; but I was loath to swell the Book
to a discouraging Bulk, considering that 'twas designed for the Perusal of
Young Gentlemen.

As for my Choice of these, I hope 'twill justify it self; and I have
endeavored so to manage them, as might best engage their Attention to whom
they are addressed, and give a right Seasoning to the Minds of those, who are
the Hopes of the Present Age, and upon whose Virtue and good Principles very
much depends the Religion and the Happiness of that which may Succeed it.

Happy shall I be, if in any measure instrumental to so great a Good as this!
But it is God alone that gives the Increase, though an Apostle be the Planter.

His Blessing, therefore, I most humbly beg, upon what is sincerely intended
for his Service, and the Public Benefit!

Advertisement.
A Course of Lectures on the Church-Catechism. By Thomas Bray, D.D. Recommended
as proper to be Read in Families. Price Five Shillings.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 3. r. the. p. 8. l. 7. r. implies. p. 15. l. 18. r. Temper. p.
23. l. 19. r. into. p. 31. l. 21. r. Altar. p. 33. l. 11. r. Complexion. p. 44.
l. 22. r. Devotion. p. 55. l. 20. r. walked. p. 74. l. 21. r. Distraction. p.
80. l. 10. after Present make a [:] p. 92. l. ult. before Company, r. next. p.
95. l. 14. r. News. p. 114. l. 18. after wicked [:] p. 130. l. 8. r. Comport.
p. 133. l. 13. after Sincerity [:] p. 141. l. 15. aftrr us r. But. p. 160. l.
8. r. keeps. p. 161. l. 4. r. Importunate. p. 170. l. 19. r. Ears. p. 174. l.
24. r. whom. p. 181. l. 7. r. his p. 183. l. 6. after Number, instead of [.]
make [,] p. 186. l. 18. r. Cireumstances.

ADVICE TO Young Gentlemen Arrived to Years of Discretion.
THE Beginnings of Manhood are so beset with Temptations to what is Ill, from
unexperienced Liberty, full Possession of Estate, Vigor of Nature, Warmth of
Passion, and the like; that more than ordinary Care is needful to manage all
this well, in the midst of a World full of Wickedness, Deceit and Flattery, and
as yet untried: And all the Aids of Reason and Religion will not be too much,
especially when it is considered how great an Influence the two or three first
Years of a Man's Own Government have, upon the Happiness of his whole Life to
come.

Religion, no doubt, is the Rule in General, by which we All, both Young and
Old, must steer our Course, in order to our Happiness; and which we shall find
to be the best Reason too; but because the Age and Circumstances of such as are
newly freed from the Inspection and Restraints of Governors and Tutors, and
beginning the World upon the Stock of their own Prudence and Discretion,
require a suiting and adapting some Particular Advices to them, I recommend
these few that follow to their attentive Consideration; in hopes, that by God's
Blessing, the employing their First Thoughts and Blooming Reason upon such
Serious Subjects, may give their Minds a right Taste and Relish, and make such
lasting good Impressions, as will be of unspeakable Advantage in their future
Life.

The First Advice.
AND first of all, Creatures; That an Infinitely Wise, Powerful, and Good Being
made them what they are; That the Powers they have of Thinking, Acting and
Enjoying, are all his Gift; and as the Life they have already Lived, and all
the Blessings of it, are owing to His Goodness and Support, so every Minute of
their Life to come, and all their Hopes and Expectations, depend entirely upon
His Care and Providence, who Governs and Disposes all things which He at first
Created.

Such Reflections as these, if at all dwelt upon, and pursued any thing home,
will Imprint so Aweful, and with all so Lovely an Idea of God upon the Mind,
and give a Man so true a Notion of Himself; as will be a Great Security against
those many Miscarriages incident to Youth, and be the Groundwork of an
Excellent Religion.

So long as they remember, that upon God is their whole Dependence; that every
thing they Love and Delight in is derived to them from Him: The Quicker
Apprehension young Persons have of the Excellency of their Nature, and the
Plenty and Happiness of their Circumstances; the fonder they are of their
New-springing Life; the more they are sensible of the Blessings that surround
and smile upon them, and pleased with the Prospect of many Happy Years to come;
the more Reason will they find to Admire, and Love, and Praise the Divine
Author of all this, and endeavor still to continue in His Favor, and by no
Means to forfeit His Blessing, by any Instances of Disobedience.

No Argument can be more engaging to Exact Duty, than such a one as this: My
All Is at stake, I must be Governed, or I Am undone; All I enjoy I have from His
Bounty who commands me this; and if I lose his Favor, he withdraws his
Blessings, and I shall no more enjoy any thing. Besides, the Guilt of basest
Ingratitude will sor ever lie heavy upon me, should I deny Obedience to my
greatest Benefactour; to whom I owe whatever I delight in, and even my very
Life.

If Infinite Beauty and Infinite Goodness will not command my utmost Services
and sincerest Love, what will? And where can there be more perfect Beauty and
Excellency, and greater Goodness, than in Mine and the World's Creator! who
has communicated Being and Happiness to all the Universe, and by whose
Bounteous Hand we are all supplied, with abundant Plenty of our proper Good!

For the same Reasons therefore that we love any thing, we shall find our
selves strongly engaged to Love our Creator infinitely more; and Imitation and
Obedience will naturally follow True Gratitude and Love. So that

Would Young Persons be but persuaded, Eccles. 12.1.
as the Wise King Advises, Thus to Remember their Creator in the Days of their
Youth; That His Hands have made them and fashioned them; and trace their Life
and their Happiness up to its Eternal Spring: And would they do this seriously,
and not too seldom, what Religious Affections would it not excite?

What Self-Annihilation, and Humblest Thankfulness; content in every Change of
their Condition, and Modesty and Moderation in their greatest Prosperity! What
Admiration at the Divine Wisdom, and Power, and Goodness, and entire
Resignation of themselves to all his Disposals, and resolved Conformity to all
his Pleasure! And what a happy Influence upon their future Life, such a Temper
of Mind as this would have, is not to be expressed.

The Second Advice.
BUT Secondly, Advice 2
Let them Remember too that they are Christians; the Disciples of Jesus, that
Eternal Son of God, the King of Glory, who is the Savior of the World. Who,
from a most deplorable Condition into which Mankind had plunged themselves by
Sin, by his Bitter Sufferings in their stead, and cruel Death upon a Cross,
Redeemed and Raised them up to Infinitely Happy Circumstances, and most
Glorious Hopes. And that upon this Reasonable Condition only, that they Believe
what He has done and suffered for them to be sufficient to their Salvation, and
trust in it as the only Meritorious Cause of it; and give full Assent to the
Great Truths He has made known to them, and carefully observe what He has
commanded, in the Gospel Revelation. All which was engaged for them in their
Baptism, or Admission into this Happy Society, and which they have since Agreed
to and Ratified in their own Persons, at their Confirmation.

There is no Title in the World, that carries with it so much Honor, emp^^ys
so much Happiness, and reminds of so much Duty, as that of Christian.

It bespeaks a Man a Friend and a Favorite, Romans 8.14. etc.
nay a Brother of the Son of God, received by Adoption into the same near
Relation to the most High; an Heir of God, and Coheir with Christ of Eternal
Glory in the Highest Heavens. 1 John 3.2.
Where he shall be made Like to his Heavenly Father in all his Communicable
Excellencies; and in the Bosom of Jesus for ever enjoy the most consummate
Felicity. And all this from a state of Enmity with God, and open Rebellion;
which had deservedly brought His Curse upon him, made him the Object of the
Divine Hatred and Vengeance; which would have made him extremely Miserable to
Eternal Ages, had not the most Compassionate Jesus made an Atonement with His
Blood, and Introduced this wondrous Happy Change.

But then, what Vast Obligations lie upon all Christians for such Amazing
Favors as these!

As first, so far to know themselves, as to Live suitable to the High Honor
conferred on them by God; which the Apostle styles Walking worthy of the
Vocation wherewith we are called, Ephesians. 4.1.
and not to Degrade themselves by vile and finful Courses. If God has raised
'em from so Low and Miserable, to so Glorious and Happy a Condition, 'twill be
Inexcusable Meanness of Spirit, and contrary to all the Principles of Honor,
to become Slaves and Drudges for such pitiful base things in comparison as the
Objects of Sense, and the Enjoyments of Brutes; and forgetting their Treasure
in Heaven, the Crown that awaits 'em there, employ all their Thoughts and their
Diligence, upon the Trifles of this Earth.

Again; If they are the Purchase of the Son of God, Redeemed by the Inestimable
Price of His most Precious Blood, from the Extremest Misery; there is all the
Reason in the World, that they should entirely Dedicate themselves to His
Service, as no longer their own, 1 Cor. 6.20.
and Glorify that Blessed Savior of theirs with their Bodies and their Spirits
which are his.

Would a Slave, ransomed from the Mines or Galleys, think much for ever to
serve and obey his Redeemer!

Would a Wretch, condemned to the Rack or Wheel, there to be Tortured to Death,
think any thing too much to do, for that dear kind Man, who procured for him
his Pardon! Can his Life and his Liberty be employed better, than in doing him
Honor, to whom he owes both! And how would our Blood rise against that
ungrateful Wretch, who would take no Notice of all this; or at most, return a
few cool dry Thanks, and refuse some easy reasonable piece of Service that was
requested of him, or put it off, till he had nothing else to do!

What Love and Duty then can be enough, to the Great Savior of the World, from
Misery infinitely greater than the most witty Malice upon Earth could e're
invent, and which too Never, Never should have End; and who, besides, has
raised us to a State as Glorious and Happy, as that we are redeemed from, would
have been Wretched and Miserable!

And can we think the most Compassionate Jesus, who underwent such barbarous
cruel Usage, and lost his Life in Torment for our Sakes, would e're require of
us unreasonable Things? No, no; All His Commands are Holy, Just and Good,
contrived on purpose to carry on the Gracious Design of making us both now and
ever completely Happy; and that at length, we may have full Possession of what
he has purchased for us.

That he may see the Blessed Effects of the Agonies and Travel of his Soul, and
conduct his little Flock (which Men's own Obstinacy does make so little) into
the blissful Kingdom of his Father; That where he is there they may be also,
Joh. 17.24.
and behold and partake of his Glory.

How can we better spend the Prime and Flower of our Age, than in the Service
of so Good a Master, and who himself did lead the way; performed what he
requires of us; and made his excellent Precepts look still more lovely, by the
Luster of his own Example!

Nothing can more commend the True Nobleness and Generosity of our Spirits,
than in the midst of those Temptations which surround us at our First Entrance
into the World, to Remember our Obligations to Jesus our Best Friend; and
freely lay our Fortunes, our Strength, our Reason, our Affections, our very
Life, down at his Feet, to be entirely Governed and Directed by him; who once,
as great a Person as he was, submitted to Poverty, suffered the greatest
Hardships, and e're he arrived to half the Age of Man, became a Sacrifiee for
us.

Certainly we cannot but think this highly reasonable; especially since we are
so firmly engaged to it by the most Solemn Promises and Vows; which every
Christian, we know, as such, lies under.

And therefore, unless we think that Youth will excuse us from every thing of
this Serious Nature, and that the Promises we make to our Creator and our
Savior, are of less Regard than those we make to Men; we must, upon all
accounts of Honor and Justice, as well as the Reason of the Thing, apply our
selves, and that with the soonest, to be as good as our Word, and conform our
Faith and Practice to the Gospel Revelation; as being the Condition, necessary
to be performed on our Part, in order to our being finally the better for what
Christ has done on His. And that such is the Condition, no grown Christian,
that has been duly instructed in his Religion, (as we all along suppose those
to be, to whom these Advices are given) can be to learn.

The Third Advice.
OUR next Advice therefore to Young Persons shall be, Faith; or in what manner
they are to give their Assents to the Great Truths revealed to us in the Gospel.

And but too much need there is of Advice in this Case, in an Age when it is
accounted a great piece of Folly and Meanness of Spirit, strange Credulity,
unbecoming Rational Creatures, to Believe any thing that they cannot fully
understand and Comprehend; whereby the Aweful Mysteries of our Holy Religion,
which make it to be what it is, and distinguish it from all others; by the ill
Arts of Sophistry, far-fetched Glosses and Interpretations of Men overconfident
of the reach of their own Understandings, are brought down even to nothing, and
made Contemptible.

But if this be not the very Height of Profane Arrogance, what is! It Is the
Destruction of all Divine Faith, and the greatest Ridiculing of Religion, when
the most exalted Truths of it shall be twisted about and distorted according to
Men's extravagant Fancies, and made to submit to the Imperfect Reasonings of
every Bold Intruder, that is Wise in his own Conceit.

The Advice of St. Paul therefore is Highly needful to be recommended to all
young Persons (whose forwardness and warmth of temper makes 'em generally too
apt to grasp at every thing, and confide too much in their own Wit and Parts)
St. Paul's Advice, I say, is very necessary for all young Persons in this Age
of Religious Skepticism and Infidelity, which we have in 1 Cor. 3.18. Let no
man deceive himself; if any man among you seems to be wise in this world, let
him become a fool that he may be wise. That is, they should so far distrust
their own Reason, in things of so Sublime a Nature as those we are now speaking
of, as to move with the greatest Caution and Modesty in their Enquiries about
such Truths as these. And tho, as it is fit they should, they make the best use
they can of the Understanding God has given them, and endeavor by all due
Means to Brighten and Improve it; yet still, Revelation should be valued as the
surest Guide, and all their own Notions humbly submitted to it.

For, consider a little; Does not common Experience assure any Man that will
attend to it, how very Imperfect Humane Reason is at best? Don't we daily find
that every Man's Understanding is of a very narrow Capacity in this World, and
that in things much more within our Reach than the Depths of our Religion are?

Now let any sensible Man say, which is the most rational Course for a Man,
contrary to his own manifold Experience, and that of all the World, to center
in Himself in his Enquiry after Truths of the most exalted Nature; or in a due
Sense of the Defects of his own Reason, to be very Diligent in seeking out, and
making use of better Helps, and readily Assent to them upon the Testimony of
the Divine Revealer, though he cannot Comprehend the Immense Truth, no r say, How
such things can be?

The things we now speak of, are such, as are utterly beyond the Reach, not
only of Humane, but perhaps of any Created Understanding; and which, as they
could never have been known by us at all, had not God been pleased to Reveal
'em; so, now they are Revealed, cannot be known perfectly and thoroughly, by any
but the Divine Revealer. But now, every Man must needs confess, that things of
so High a Nature, may be nevertheless True, for being Inconsistent with a poor
ignorant Mortal's former Notions and Conceptions. That is in short, an Infinite
Understanding may Reveal, what a Finite Understanding cannot Comprehend; which
yet ought by no means to be an Argument against the Truth of the Revelation.

And who that is a sincere Lover of Truth, but would most willingly embrace it,
in what manner soever it might come to his Notice! How glad of greater Light in
this Dark World, though for the present it may Dazzle his Undestanding by its
unusual Brightness, and make him the more sensible of the Darkness he was in
before! Especially, when assured, that it proceeds from the Father of Lights,
in whom is no Darkness at all, who is the Eternal Source of Truth, Infinitely
Wise and Good, that can neither Deceive nor be Deceived, Psalm. 36.9.
and in whose Light above it is, that we can really see Light.

It Is worth our while to take Notice here of the Behavior of our Lord and his
Apostles, towads the too curious Inquirers into the Secrets of the Kingdom; who
we shall find have met with a Reprimand from them, instead of any more
Particular Satisfaction.

Thus when Nicodemus heard our Savior Discoursing of the New Birth of a
Christian, John 3.
and Interposed this Question, How can these things be? He could have no direct
Solution of his Doubt; our Lord only upbraids his Ignorance of what his own
Religion might have furnished him with some Notion of, and again affirms the
Truth of what he had before asserted, and then Diverts to something else

And at another time, when talking with the Jews about his being the True
Bread, that came down from Heaven, John 6.
and of the necessity of Eating his Flesh and Drinking his Blood, if they would
have the true Life and Spirit of Religion in them; He returns no other Answer
to their Question, How can this Man give us his Flesh to eat? than by
Affirming, that His Flesh and Blood were Meat and Drink indeed; and how
exceeding happy the Effect would be, of eating the one, and drinking the other;
and even to his own Disciples, all the Satisfaction he thought fit to give, so
far as we can learn, was only this, The Words that I speak unto you, they are
Spirit, and they are Life.

When he discoursed of his being the Son of God, and One with the Father, and
that from all Eternity, though in appearance but a mean afflicted Man; which
exceedingly enraged the Jews against him, and urged them to Blaspheme: His way
was only again and again to assert and affirm it, and demonstrate that it was
so, by his Miracles; still leaving 'em in the Dark as to their Enquires how it
could be so. And so for the Mystery of Trinity in Unity, which is plainly
enough Asserted both by himself and his Apostles; neither he nor they, ever
attempted the Explication of this Mystery, any more than they did of the rest.

Indeed St. Paul gives the Corinthians some Description of the manner of the
Resurrection of the Dead; 1 Cor. 15.
which yet must be allowed to be One of the Great Mysteries of Christianity:
But then we may take Notice, that to the curious Enquirer, How are they Dead
raised up, and with what Body do they come? He ushers in his Answer, with this
very plain Rebuke, Thou Fool.

Now, since our Blessed Lord and his Apostles, thus waved the giving any
Particular Explications of these, and the like Mysterious Truths, which yet
they would have given, had it been needful, nay, so much as expedient,
especially when so often urged to do it, methinks, it should be a sufficient
Caution to every Man else, not to Intrude too far into those things which he
has not seen. What they thought fit to leave as Mysteries, to be only Believed
and Reverenced by Christians; methinks none that come after them should offer
to unveil; but choose to exercise their Faith about 'em, rather than their weak
benighted Reason; and even in the necessary Defense of them, follow the
Scriptures as their surest Guide.

And how happy would it have been for the Christian Church, had these Depths
been always venerated at a Distance! And that Quickness of Parts, and Warmth of
Temper, duly employed in Provoking to Love and Good Works, and in Confirming
more and more the Foundation of our Faith, which was abused in Digging up and
Destroying it; and Ruining that Charity, without which, though a Man speaks with
the Tongues of Men and Angels, and understands all Mysteries, 1 Cor. 13.2.
and all knowledge, St. Paul says, He is nothing.

And if such way of Proceeding in these matters would have been the truest
Wisdom in the Ages past, no doubt but it is so still in this. The sad
Consequences of the want of which, and crying up the contrary Practcie, of
laying open all Mysteries, are but too well known. It has indeed exposed
Religion to Innumerable Wounds from all its Adversaries, and tends more than we
can imagine, to Atheism, and all manner of Looseness and Debauchery.

Highly needful therefore is it to give our young Reasoners Warning of so
Dangerous a Rock as this, and persuade them to avoid it. And before I put an
end to this Advice, which is of such mighty Consequence, let me appeal to their
own Unbiased Reason, Whether a Man would not be better, much better employed,
in humbly and thankfully embracing, what God has been pleased plainly to Reveal
to his Church concerning the Incarnation of his Divine Son; for Instance, God
Manifest in the Flesh to destroy the Works of the Devil; and in sincerely
endeavoring to Imitate his most excellent Example, and pay Obedience to his
Holy Precepts, than in making curious and nice Enquiries into the Nature of the
Personal Union, which the more it is pried into, the more Humane Wit will be
confounded, and nothing in the Conclusion but a Pernicious Brood of Heresies?

Does it not more become us heartily to rejoice in the Satisfaction Christ has
made for Sinners by his Bitter Death and Sufferings, and continually to pay our
Humblest Acknowledgements, and Devoutest Praises, to God and Jesus for their
wondrous Love, and make it our great Endeavor to perform those Conditions,
upon which alone we can be Sharers in his Merits? Does not this become us
better, than to raise subtle Questions, and be always Quarreling about the
Nature of that Satisfaction; and in the Scuffle commit such Wickedness, as will
render it unavailable, if persisted in, to those that are so unchristianly
engaged?

The like may be said of the Mystery of the Adorable Trinity in Unity;
concerning which, Thus much I may say, I hope, without Offense, That to be
contented with what the Scriptures have plainly told us in this matter, and to
give all Honor and Glory, Love and Obedience, to the Great Creator, Redeemer,
and Sanctifier of the World, God Blessed for evermore, is more agreeable to the
Piety and Humility of a Christian, than to tear the Church in pieces, and give
the Enemies of our Faith too much occasion to Blaspheme and Ridicule it, by so
fiercely opposing one another in our Explanations, of what will be an
Inscrutable Mystery when we have done all.

Finally, I may add, That he is much the wiser Man and better Christian, who
with all due Awe and Reverence, and Preparation, frequently Adresses himself to
the Holy Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, and endeavors, in good
earnest, to keep the Pious Resolutions he then makes; than he who perplexes
himself, and disturbs and embroyls the Church, about the manner of our
Savior's Presence there, and of our receiving him. And I cannot but think
Solomon's Counsel in this, as well as other Cases, to be very excellent, and
worthy of our greatest Regard; Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean
not to thine own understanding. Prove. 3.5.

The Fourth Advice.
HAVING thus endeavored to secure the Faith of young Persons; Obedience.

Now the Main Spring of this, is a Devotional Temper of Mind, and a Quick Taste
and Relish of good things; whereby we become fully persuaded, that it is not
only our Duty, but our greatest Interest, upon all Accounts, to be Religious.
This will make us employ our Thoughts, our Desires and Affections, upon Divine
Objects in Good Earnest, and Quicken us on in the ways of Christian Virtue,
with Satisfaction and Delight. Whereas, when Men are Cool and Indifferent to
things of this Nature, Religion soon degenerates into bare Formality, and from
thence decays into Nothing.

The great Business then, is to engage the warm Affections of Youth upon
Religion, before they are too far taken up with other things; to turn the
stream of their Passions into the right Channel betimes, before they are
Habituated to some other Course; nothing being more Difficult than when they
are so, effectually to direct and keep 'em right.

My next Advice therefore is, That they would cherish that Natural Disposition
to Devotion, which is in most young People, before it is Destroyed and Quenched
by Vice.

Now by Devotion I mean, A settled Temper of Mind, arising from a Due and
Lively Sense of the Supreme Excellency of God and Religion; whereby we entirely
dedicate our selves to his Service in the way he has directed; and in all
things endeavor, and that with Warmth and Spirit, to behave our selves toward
him, as befits both him, and our selves.

I have given this Description of it, that we may know how to Distinguish it
from Superstition and Enthusiasm, which are the two Mimicks of Devotion, and
often borrow its venerable Name: And 'twill not be amiss, if before we proceed
any further, we consider a little the Several Parts of this Description, in
order to our Forming right Apprehensions in a thing of so great Consequence.

First then, True Devotion is a Settled Frame and Disposition of Mind; or such
an Habitual quick Sense and Relish of Divine Things, as is ready to exert it
self in Proper Acts upon Just Occasion, and Converse with God in Pious Thoughts
and Desires; or Discourse of Pious Subjects, pro Re Nata, as Things offer
themselves, and that with a kind of natural Freedom, Ease and Pleasure, as a
Man talks with, or of a Friend, or any thing else; that he Admires, Reverences
and Loves.

Our seating it in the Mind is to show, that those who place it in any thing
that is external, are mistaken in it; and the greatest Bodily Severities, the
Life of a Hermit, Pilgrimages, and Prayers, and Presents, though made to the
greatest Favorite of Heaven, Pomp and Splendour in Religious Worship to the
highest Degree, and the like, all this is not Devotion, for that is seated
within; and if the Mind may all the while remain Dead and Cold to Religion, as
certainly it may, we must then call it by some other Name.

For the same Reason Devotion does not consist in Rejecting all this, and
conversing with Heaven only in hollow Sighs and Groans, without any outward
Expressions of it at all; unless it be some odd convulsive Motions, which are
to show, it seems, as some will have it, the mighty Force of the Impressions
made within upon their Spirits. Men may be equally devoid of a truly Pious and
Devout Temper and Disposition, that overvalue, or utterly cry down such
outward Religion as this: And it is always a sign of Men's not knowing what True
Devotion is, or else of their real want of it, when they are fierce and eager
about what is so foreign to it; whether it be for or against it, is all one.
Again,

We say it is a settled Frame of Mind; that sudden Heats, and Flights of Fancy,
and bold Pretenses to great Familiarities and Intimaces with God, expressed in
long and warm Discourses with him, accompanied with Melting Accents, an easy
Flow of Words, and Gestures full of Ecstacy and Rapture, and it may be Tears
too, that such Fits as these may not be taken for Devotion.

If a Long Prayer would bespeak a Man Devout, then the Pharisees were so; who
yet, as soon as Grace was said, Devoured the Houses of the Widow, and were, in
our Lord's own Judgment, the very worst of Men. And as for the other Ornaments
of Devotion, they are partly Nature and partly Art, for which Men are beholden
to their Constitutions, and to frequent Use and Practice; and there are
abundance of Instances of very bad Men, who have Prayed like Angels, when, at
the same time, they were carrying on the most Hellish Practices.

Warmth and Fervor relating to things Sacred, no doubt does highly become us,
and will be in some measure where true Devotion is, and it is what we are now
persuading to; and nothing in the World can be more apt to excite it, nor
deserve it more, than the wondrous things of our most excellent Religion. But
then it ought to be considered, that even this is not Devotion, but only an
Attendant of it, a Bodily Passion that is stirred up by it; although it may, and
does react upon the Mind, and heighten and increase that which is truly so.

Thus the Fire that is brought to the Altar, first enkindles the matter to
which it is applied; but then, that again adds Strength to the Flame, and makes
it more vigorous and bright, till the Sacrifice becomes a whole Burnt-offering.

All Tempers are not alike, nor are the best always equally in Tune; some are
so Cool and Quiet, that nothing can Warm 'em to any sort of Passion; others, on
the contrary, immediately set on fire by every thing. In some the prevailing
Mixture is Heavy, Melancholy, and others are Lively, Brisk, and Forward, which
must needs cause great Variety in Men's outward Expressions of Religion; but to
draw Conclusions from hence, as to the Inward Disposition of their Souls, is of
very Dangerous Consequence.

This indeed may be said, that those who are naturally Warm in every thing
else, as young Persons generally are, it is an Ill sign, if they are not so in
Religion too; and the Colder a Man's Temper and Constitution is, the more ought
he to endeavor to Chafe, and Warm, and Inspirit it, that he may proceed more
cheerfully and feelingly in his Religious Duties. But after all, Sensitive
Passions, or the Ferment of our Blood and Spirits must not be called Devotion,
which, as was said, is a Divine God-like Temper of Mind, and entire Resignation
of our whole selves to God, in the midst of our coolest Thoughts and calm
Deliberation, nay of our greatest Aridites and Dejections of Spirit. In short,
as an excellent Author neatly expresses it, Dr. Scot.
It does not come and go like the Colors of a Blushing Face, but is the
natural and true Comple^^ion of the Soul.

The Last Part of the Description of True Devotion which I gave, tells us, That
the Service it pays to God is in the Way that he has directed, and in a manner
agreeable to the Divine Nature, and our own.

By this is excluded, in the first Place, all Superstitious Expressions of
Religion, such as the Roman Fopperies we mentioned before. For though outward
Reverence be highly becoming in all Religious Exercises, especially in Public;
yet it should be such as is Worthy of God, and may increase, as well as
express, the Devotion of our Minds; that so we may Glorisie the Infinite
Majesty of Heaven both with our Bodies and our Spirits, which are his.

Now God is a Spirit; and Man, is Rational, and his Creature; and therefore his
Devotion and his Worship should be Rational and Manly, in Spirit and in Truth;
Sincere, and issuing from his very Soul, as touched with the most Aweful Sense
of the Infinite Excellency of God, and the vast Distance of even the noblest
Creatures from Him; especially of a vile ungrateful Sinner, who is the Object
of his Anger and Hate, and should therefore humble himself to the very Dust
before him, and be filled with deep Impressions of Shame and Self-abhorrence in
all his Addresses to him. Which yet, the Wondrous Expressions of his Love to
Mankind, in our Redemption by the Blood of Jesus, should clear up into Praise,
and Joy, and Love, and highest Admiration at that which passes Knowledge.

But for a Christian so far to consult the Affecting of his Senses in Religious
Worship, whether by a multitude of glittering Ceremonies, by Bodily Pain or
Pleasure, or any thing of this Nature, as that he can attend to little else; I
cannot but think to be a very odd sort of a Devotion, and such as betrays
unworthy Apprehensions of the Divine Nature, in thinking he will be pleased
with such Performances; and no less of our own, when we place our Devotion in
them.

And no less unworthy of God, and unbecoming our selves, is the other Extreme,
of rejecting all Order and Decency in Religious Exercises.

It deprives him of that Public Honor and Homage, which it is fit the Lord of
Heaven and Earth should receive from his Creatures and his Vassals; and quite
takes away all Face of Religion out of the World: Which yet, when in
Conjunction with the Religion of the Mind, he has often declared himself well
pleased with; and expressly commanded his Peculiar People to pay him, and was
their Director in the manner how, and never has forbid to any since.

And nothing certainly more unbecoming us, poor Sinful Dust and Ashes! and who
had been extremely miserable, but that the Mercies of our God were Infinite;
nothing more unbecoming us in our Addresses to him, especially in Public, than
to confine within our Breasts the Sense we have either of his Majesty or of his
Mercy.

Rather with all humble Postures of our Bodies, and grateful Expressions of our
Lips, should we declare to all the World, and glad of an Opportunity to do so,
that there is an Infinitely Excellent, though to us Invisible, Being, to whom we
owe all that we are, and have, and hope for, and to whom all possible Adoration
and Praise is due.

And till of late, this was the Sense and Practice of all the World. But one
Extreme generally produces another; and too much of outward Religion in some,
has been the occasion of none at all in others: Both equally unreasonable, and
far from true Devotion.

As for Familiarities and Intimacies with God, they are likewise utterly
condemned for the same Reasons as before, being only an Argument of Men's
unmeasurable Boldness and Confidence, and that they very little understand, or
will not understand, either God, or themselves. True Devotion, is the most
Humble, Modest, Decent thing in the World; and is always attended with
Reverence and Godly Fear. And therefore such Men would do well to consider that
Passage, Luke 13.25, 26. where we find the Door is shut upon those, who, with
great Assurance, could knock and cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and plead great
Intimacy too, We have eat and drunk in thy Presence, and thou has taught in our
Streets; but still the Door continues shut, and this Killing Answer given 'em,
Depart from me, I know, you, not whence ye are, ye workers of iniquity. And
then it follows, There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall
see Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets, Persons peculiarly
remarkable for their Great Modesty and Humility, and profoundest Awe and Dread
of the Divine Majesty, and that though the Highest Favors were shown to them by
God; when ye shall see these in the Kingdom of Heaven, who were far short of
you in their Pretenses to it, and you your selves thrust out, as Bold and
Confident Intruders.

There is one more Mistake in this matter, which it will not be amiss to take
notice of; and that is, of those who are mightily for Blending Religion with
common Conversation putting every thing into a Religious Dress, and make this a
great Argument of a Devout and Heavenly Mind.

Now though I readily grant, that where there is True Devotion, innumerable Hints
and Opportunities will be taken to dart up Pious Thoughts to God, and Holy
Aspirations, and nothing more acceptable to him, nor a more becoming, and
grateful, and beneficial Employment of a Christian's Mind, and which I would
therefore earnestly recommend to the Practice of all good People, as the
Beginning of their Heaven upon Earth: Yet Devotion being a Rational thing, all
the outward Expressions of it to Men must be guided by Discretion, and made use
of only in proper Times, and upon just Occasion. But now, every Time certainly
is not proper, nor every Occasion just for things of so Sacred a nature as is
this we are speaking of: And at every turn, right or wrong, to wedge in a
Religious or Scripture-Sentence, and affect to speak nothing but the Language
of the Temple; is the ready way to cloy Men with Religion, and make them
nauseate the most Holy Things. And what has such a Tendency as this, is a
Strange kind of Devotion; very Indiscreet, if not much worse.

Having thus Considered the Description we gave of true Devotion, in order to
the preventing several great and dangerous Mistakes which are often made about
it; before I proceed to Recommend the Practice of it to young Persons from the
great Benefit and Pleasure that attends it, I cannot but take notice, how true
the Devotion of the Church of England is; and how infinitely to blame, and
without Excuse, those of her Communion are, if not truly devout.

Her Doctrine relating to it, is what we have now explained; and it is founded
on the Nature of God and the Nature of Man, consisting in what is highly
agreeable to each, and excluding Men's Private Fancies and Humors, Superstition
and Enthusiasm, and every thing that is unbefitting either God or our selves.
And as for the Manner of expressing it, in Private we are left to our Liberty,
provided we keep within the Bounds of Decency and Reverence. And in Public,
there is every thing that is needful to raise and increase true Devotion, and
fix it upon its due Object, and make it look like it self; but nothing to
divert the Mind from its Holy Employment, and divide and weaken its Attention,
or make it degenerate either into Sordidness and cold Indifferency, or an
unbounded Liberty of Expression and Behavior.

How few, and how comely are her Ceremonies! Such as an humble Devotion would
choose, were they not enjoined; such as express with Decency, though without
Pomp, the Inward Sentiments of a Pious Mind, and distinguish our Religious from
Common Assemblies, and that is all. So careful is our Church not to give
Offense, that although something more of this nature would not be too much, yet
less than she prescribes would be indeed too little.

Her Service I may truly call Divine; it being, for the main, collected from
the Holy Writings; and the rest taken out of the best Liturgies of the
Primitive Church. Compiled it is with excellent Judgment, expressed in plain,
but very proper Language, divided into short, but comprehenfive Collects; with
variety enough to entertain the Mind, and prevent its tiring; but not so much
as to scatter its Thoughts, and tempt it to lose it self in unprofitable
Wanderings. And where all we have to do is to bear our part in it with all the
Warmth and Fervor that we can, and to which the Brevity of each particular
Prayer does very much conduce.

As for the Music of our Church, (in Declaiming against which, many are so
strangely Religious, as to place a great part of their Devotion and Zeal, who
really are Objects of our Pity as well as Indignation) no Man can express to
what a Pitch it wings Devotion, what Holy Flames and Ardors it excites, how it
withdraws the Soul from Earth, and mounts it up to Heaven. Indeed, it gives the
Highest Relish to Religion, and prepares the Mind for a due Reception of every
thing that is good. The Pleasure it creates is so Refined and Spiritual, that
Flesh and Blood cannot bear it long; but faints, and almost dies away, as
overcharged with Heavenly Delight. In short where there is never so small a
Spark, 2 Timothy 1.6.
either of Natural or Religious Fire, this will (...), awake and blow it up
into a vigorous Flame.

And now it is time to recommend to young Peoples greatest Care the cherishing,
and more and more increasing that Natural Disposition, which they generally
have to Devotion, from the Consideration of the great Benefit and Pleasure that
attends it.

To begin with the Latter. And indeed. True Devotion must needs be extremely
Delightful, because the chief Ingredient of it is Love. It Is a willing
Dedication of ones self to God, and a Warmth and Fervor in his Service, as a
Being above all others infinitely Lovely; and both to our selves and all the
Creation, infinitely kind and good.

Now there is no Passion so pleasing and delightful to the Soul as Love. It
carries Pleasure in the very Notion of it, and all Delight does necessarily
suppose it. And therefore, Devotion and Pleasure are as Inseparable as Pleasure
and Love.

Indeed by Accident, Love may have some Mixture in it of Uneasiness; as when
it is placed upon and Object empty and undeserving, and which at length does
therefore balk and disappoint the Soul; or when the Object loved as yet cannot
be enjoyed, which gives a Dash of Perplexity and Fear. But the Proper Act of
Love is Complacency; and which, when God is the Object, must needs be Vnallay'd
and Pure.

When, therefore, a Man has so Lovely an Idea of God, as entirely to Devote
himself to him; and finds, that the closer he views him, and the more he knows
of him, the more Beauties he still discovers, and has his Devotion and Love
still more and more increased: How will his Delight Proportionably grow with
'em! How will he applaud his happy Choice, and say with the Seraphick Psalmist,
One day in thy Court is better than a Thousand! Especially when he reflects,
with what Tenderness and Endearment all his Addresses are received, and repaid
with the most Affectionate Returns. No forbidding State and Pride, no
unreasonable Reserves, nothing that will damp and chill the Votary's Affection;
but all the Sweetness and winning Charms, that are apt to encourage and invite,
and then to crown the highest Pitch of Love.

So that Devotion is Love Triumphant; it is both Desire and Fruition: Desire
that is sure of Success, and Fruition that fully satisfies, but never cloys.
And were the Object is so infinitely lovely, the Love so entire, so pure, so
reciprocal, and the Enjoyment so complete; How truly Heavenly must the Pleasure
be! For what are the Felicities of that Glorious Place, but the Result of
Devotion and Love! So true is that of Holy David, Delight thy self in the Lord,
and he shall give thee the Desires of thine Heart. Ps. 37.4.

But, Secondly, the Benefit of a Devout Temper of Mind is as great as the
Pleasure of it; and that,

First, Because it is so delightful. No doubt but whatever will fix and root
Religion in the Soul, and make a Christian steadfast and unmovable in it,
always abounding in the Work of our Lord, ought to be esteemed as highly
Beneficial; but now, nothing more certain to do that, than the Pleasure and
Satisfaction we receive from it; when we find by our own happy Experience at
present, that our Pious Labors are not in vain; and are assured, that the
delight we now have in Religion, though it be very great, is but as the First
Fruits of the full Plenteous Harvest of Happiness, which we shall reap from it
to all Etenity in the Kingdom of God.

Devotion therefore making Religion so delightful, will make it lasting too;
and when its Pleasures have been so fully tasted by us, that the divine Relish
of them is quick and lively upon our Spirits, all Attempts to remove us from
it, will be as ineffectual, as the Dashes of a Wave against a Rock.

But further: This devout Temper of Mind is highly Beneficial to us, because
it is the Living Fountain under God, of every good Thought, and Word, and Work.
It warms the Heart with Seraphick Affections, sends up Heavenly Breathings and
Aspirations to God, and fills the Mouth with Halleluja's. It furnishes the
Closet and the Church with Prayer and Praise, and joins us to the Angelick
Choir above. It Is this supplies the Penitent with Groans that cannot be uttered;
with Holy Sighs and Tears, and lays him prostrate in the Dust; and then raises
him up to New and Heavenly Life. This it is enkindles Zeal for the Glory of our
Beloved, and engages our best Endeavors to promote the Interest of his
Kingdom. In fine, this is the Life and Spirit of Religion, and derives it self
from no less Principle than the Spirit of God. He is the great First Mover, and
this his Powerful Instrument.

So that the Devout Person is truly (...), rightly prepared and disposed to
Eternal Life, and has the Seed of God abiding in him; that blessed Principle of
Spiritual Growth and Improvement, which will in due time exert it self, till he
comes to the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, and is thoroughly
furnished and instructed to every Good Work.

Nothing therefore is of greater Consequence to all People, but more especially
to those who are beginning their Christian Course, than by forming in their
Minds true Apprehensions of God and Religion, and a frequent Retreat from the
World, spent in Meditation and Prayer, and Conversation with Books of Piety and
Practical Religion; to preserve and increase such a truly Devotional Temper of
Mind, as will make 'em pursue with Life and Spirit the great Business of their
Salvation.

The Fifth Advice.
BUT, lest Warmth of Temper alone should be taken for Piety and Devotion, (as
it too often is) and Religion, by this means, degenerate into Hypocrisy, and
outward Show, and become Wordly and Designing, or at best humoursome and
uncertain; it is highly needful to advise Young Persons, carefully to take heed
of Insincerity: That their Affection to Religion be True and Hearty, fixed and
deep Rooted in their very Souls, and not made up of sudden Flashes of Passion,
and a few Fits of natural Enthusiasm, which are often made use of to the worst
of Purposes.

And, first, in General, let them confider, That whoever is Religious indeed,
his Aim and Design in the Practice of Religion, is sincerely the same with that
of our Lord in Teaching it; which was no other, than to Advance God's Honor,
in the present and eternal Happiness of Mankind: By making them Holier and
Better, to render their Lives easy and comfortable while upon Earth; and
capacitate 'em for the Happiness of Heaven, when this short Life shall end.
Thus the Apostle, 2 Tit. 11. etc. The Grace of God that brings Salvation to
all Men has appeared, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts,
we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this present World: Looking
for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
Iniquity, and purify unto himself a Peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

For this purpose then, our Holy Religion was taught us by the Son of God; and
True Religion, no doubt, will effectually bring to pass that for which it was
designed: And he that is Religious indeed, is therefore so, that the designed
Effect may thoroughly be wrought upon him; in full persuasion, that unless it is
so, his Pretenses to Christianity, however warm and forward they may be, will
signify nothing; and he must never expect to be really Happy here, or to give a
good Account of himself at the day of Judgment.

And consequently, his great Care is to be Master of the Power and Substance of
Religion, without which, the Form of it, though managed with never so much
Decency, and Constancy, and seeming Zeal and Earnestness, is really but a Piece
of Mimickry, a Holy Stage Play, an excellent Part Acted by an Ill Man in
Masquerade. Which though performed never so much to the Life, is still without
Reality; and therefore indeed puts an Abuse upon Religion, and robs God of his
Honor, defeats all his Gracious Intentions for our Happiness, and will be very
Tragical in the Conclusion.

This in General. But more particularly, in the first Place, Let young People
have a care of putting on Religion, either as a thing of Custom only, an
Ornamental Dress, to recommend them to the Good Esteem of the World, and get
them Reputation; or to bring on Business and Preferment; or, which is still
worse, as a Cover to vile Practices, which must be disguised before they can be
put in excution.

If only the first of these be a Man's End in his Religion, Math. 6.2.
our Savior assure us, He has his reward; a few empty Commendations will be
all his Recompense.

But what a strange Religion is he of, who values the Praise of Men, more than
the Applauses of his own Conscience, and the Praise of God! Our Lord's
Directions are quite otherwise. Thou, says he to every one of his Disciples,
shall not be as the Hypocrites are, (whose Character we have, Matthew 6.) Take
heed, let Secrecy and Sincerity be mingled with all thy Religious
Performances, (which is the Sum of what is there diliver'd in this matter) and
then, Thy Father which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

But if he further designs it as an Instrument of Wordly Gain and Advancement,
or a Disguise for those Ill Methods which he intends to take in order to them,
this is rank Hypocrisy indeed. And not only the Pharisees of Old, but very
many since, have ruined Kingdoms, as well as private Persons, by Prayer and
Fasting, and the Semblance of an extraordinary Devotion. In short, he whose
Religion is not at least as great in secret, in his Closet and his Bed, when
only God can see it, as it is in Public, when in the Eye of Men, ought to look
upon himself as a Diessmbler in it; especially if Gain he his Godliness, and
Religion only made use of as a Hook to draw it to him.

Secondly, Let the employing our Zeal about the Circumstantials of Religion
only, be carefully avoided, (whether in observing or not observing 'em is all
one, as was touched before) when we neglect, and it may be violate, the
Greatest Duties of it.

For can any Man be so weak as to believe, that the observing or not observing
such and such Modes of Worship, can cleanse the Soul; and make it like to God,
and fit for Heaven? They serve indeed for Decency and Order, when used with
Judgment and Moderation; and ought not to be slighted and neglected, when
enjoined by Lawful Authority; but it is those Duties that will renew us in the
Spirit of our Mind, and work our Souls into a Divine Frame and Temper, which
should be a Christian's chief Care to practice in Sincerity of Heart.

Was it not Gross Hypocrisy in the Pharisees, to be more careful and diligent
in Titheing Mint and Cummin, and Annise; in their Washings and Fastings, and
Attendance at the Public Offices in the Temple, and the like; than in
performing the weightest matters of the Law, Justice, Mercy, and Fidelity; nay,
indeed to Act quite contrary to them?

Would not the cleansing themselves from Extortion and Excess have been a much
more becoming Employment for them, than to be always taken up with washing
their Hands and their Garments, and Scouring the Cup and the Platter? These
things ought ye to have done, says our Lord, and not to have left the other
undone.

Let us beware therefore of Depending too much upon our being of this or that
Party, for or against such and such Ceremonies, going so often to Prayers,
hearing so many Sermons, and the like: For it is not this that will stand us in
any stead, unless we follow the Example of the Holy Jesus, walk as he walk^ and
adorn our Souls with the Graces of his most excellent Religion. And if we still
are Envious and Malicious, Furious and Revengeful, Intemperate and Unchaste,
Unjust and Uncharitable, and the like; and find our selves very little careful
to mortify these vile Affections, spending our Zeal and Warmth upon things of
infinitely less Consequence; it must be concluded, that we are not yet
Christians in Sincerity. Our best Performances at this rate are but as a
Sacrifice without a Heart, which was always esteemed as one of the worst of
Omens, and an Argument of God's great Displeasure.

Thirdly, It Is a very Ill sign when People pick and choose the Instances of
their Obedience to the Christian Law; and make a great Show of, and Stir about,
some Particular Duties which are agreeable to their Natural Temper, and which
they have no Temptation, or it may be Ability, to Transgress; and all the while
Indulge themselves in the Sins they Love and Delight in, though never so expressly
forbidden in the Gospel.

As if, for Instance; Because a Man's Constitution inclines him to be Temperate
and Chaste, he should therefore place the greatest Part of his Religion in
Chastity and Temperance, and in the mean time allow himself to be Censorious,
Malicious, Covetous, Unjust, or the like; or, on the Contrary, because he is
honest and good natured, though he Whores and Drinks, and lives like a Brute, yet
shall imagine he may fare well enough, because he has no Gall in him, wishes no
body any Harm, and is no ones Enemy but his own. But this is a Religion of
every Man's own making, not that which our Savior taught the World; it is as
various as Men's Tempers, and at this rate, every Man will change his Religion,
according to the Alterations of his Constitution. Or rather, He will change the
Instances of his Impiety; for True Religion is always the same.

Nay, not only such and such a Constitution, but a vigorous Health, and a full
Fortune, are necessary to the Commission of some Vices; and he, who in a
Consumption of his Body or Estate, may pass for a Man of a very good Life; may
yet, when Health and Plenty mortify these vile Affections, spending our Zeal
and Warmth upon things of infinitely less Consequence; it must be concluded,
that we are not yet Christians in Sincerity. Our best Performances at this rate
are but as a Sacrifice without a Heart, which was always esteemed as one of the
worst of Omens, and an Argument of God's great Displeasure.

Thirdly, It Is a very Ill sign when People pick and choose the Instances of
their Obedience to the Christian Law; and make a great Show of, and Stir about,
some Particular Duties which are agreeable to their Natural Temper, and which
they have no Temptation, or it may be Ability, to Transgress; and all the while
Indulge themselves in the Sins they Love and Delight in, though never so expressly
forbidden in the Gospel.

As if, for Instance; Because a Man's Constitution inclines him to be Temperate
and Chaste, he should therefore place the greatest Part of his Religion in
Chastity and Temperance, and in the mean time allow himself to be Censorious,
Malicious, Covetous, Unjust, or the like; or, on the Contrary, because he is
honest and good natured, though he Whores and Drinks, and lives like a Brute, yet
shall imagine he may fare well enough, because he has no Gall in him, wishes no
body any Harm, and is no ones Enemy but his own. But this is a Religion of
every Man's own making, not that which our Savior taught the World; it is as
various as Men's Tempers, and at this rate, every Man will change his Religion,
according to the Alterations of his Constitution. Or rather, He will change the
Instances of his Impiety; for True Religion is always the same.

Nay, not only such and such a Constitution, but a vigorous Health, and a full
Fortune, are necessary to the Commission of some Vices; and he, who in a
Consumption of his Body or Estate, may pass for a Man of a very good Life; may
yet, when Health and Plenty comes, be quite another sort of a Creature.

But now, True Religion, is an Uniform State of complete Virtue; that is, is
always the same in Kind, though not in Degree. The sincere Christian, whatever he
may do by Surprise or Inadvertency, will not at any time, or in any
Circumstances, allow himself in the Commission of any known Sinful Action, or
the Neglect of any known Duty, let his Constitution or his Fortune be what it
will. But is heartily grieved, not only for his Sins, but for his Infirmities
too, and in good earnest endeavors, in every thing, to preserve a Conscience
void of offense both toward God and Man. Though nevertheless, the Degrees of his
Virtue may and will vary, that is, be sometimes more Intense, and sometimes
more Remiss, than usual, as long as he continues in this state of Imperfection.

Let every Man therefore have a care of a Partial, Humoursome Religion; which
will prove, in the Conclusion, to be very little better than none at all.

And now, having Cautioned Young People against a Feigned Hypocritical
Religion, and shown 'em by what Marks it may be known; let me desire 'em to
consider the Ill Consequences of it.

And First, as to this World. Whatever Advantages a Pretended Religionist may
Propose to himself, he, for the most, Fails of them, and is at length Detected,
and found to be what he is. After all the Pains he takes to act his Part
dexterously, and make his Disguise sit natural and easy; after all, his Fears of
being out, and letting his Visour fall, and the continual Restraint he is fain
to put upon his Natural Temper, denying himself many things, which otherwise he
would and might enjoy: After all this, which is really more Trouble than he
need be at to be a Christian indeed, some unlucky Accident or other usually
lays open all. Unlucky, did I say, rather the contrary, Prosperous, Hypocrisy
being the greatest Curse that God can Inflict, as confirming the Wretch in it,
and so sealing him up to Destruction.

Ill Practices cannot long be so concealed, but thatsome body or other will find
'em out; and bad Practices, and sanctified Pretenses agree so very Ill, that
more Notice than ordinary will be taken of so great a Discord; and People have
a strange Itch of telling to one, and then to another, the little
Miscarrriages, much more the Crimes, of such as have the Repute of better Men
than their Neighbors.

To be cheated, and it may be ruined, by one whom we took for a Saint, is
extremely surprising; and will raise Men's Indignation to an extraordinary
height, and make their Complaints loud and clamorous, and so the thing flies
and spreads, and the Man is discovered to be a Wolf in Sheeps Clothing; and
then there is an end of his Gaining by his Hypocrisy; for none but a Fool will
have to do with a known Cheat, especially a Religious one. So that Men are
often ruined, rather than advanced by such Mock-Religion; and the Praise, that
for a little while attended their fair Shows, becomes changed into lasting
Infamy and Contempt.

But suppose the Cheat is carried on so artificially, that it is not discovered
by Men, and as to this World the counterfeit Christian has his End: The poor
Wretches Condition, as was hinted but now, is then but so much the worse, and
really next to desperate, with respect to the Eternal World which follows this.
For indeed, Sincerity is all in all; it is that, when all is done, that must
recommend us to the Divine Acceptance; for what is there else on our Part that
can do it?

How imperfect is the Religion of both Tables, and that even of the best and
most truly good Christian upon Earth! How full of Ill Ingredients too, through
the Curruption os sinful Nature, and the Temptations of the Devil! How guilty
are we all of Sins innumerable, in all our Relations; and those not of Surprise
only and Infirmity, but too often with the Consent of our Wills, and that
against the Disswasives of our Reason and our Conscience! For this, in Virtue
of Christ's Blood, Repentance is the only Remedy. But then, how imperfect even
at the best is that! So that unless the Sincerity of our Religion might be
accepted instead of the Perfection of it, what would become even of the best
Man living!

What have they to trust to then, that have no Sincerity; who in their
Intercourse with God and Man are all over a Trick and a Lie? Do they think that
God cannot see through their Disguise, because, perhaps, Man could not; and that
they shall pass undiscovered into Heaven, because they have the outward
Appearance of a Christian? But it is the Heart that God regards, the Inmost
Secrets of which lie always naked and open to his All-seeing Eye; and to whom
the fairest Pretenses imaginable will fignify nothing, without Truth in the
Inward Parts, Psalm. 51.6.
as the Psalmist expresses it.

For other Failures, merciful Allowances, no question, will be made, by him who
knows and pities our Infirmities; but no Excuse for the want of Sincerity: That
is Absolutely required of every one of us, as being perfectly in our own Power,
and without which every other Act of Religion is turned into a Provocation.

And if this be true, Lord, Job 27.8.
What is the Hope of the Hypocrite? as Job says. His Trust is as a Spiders
webb, and his Confidence, if he have any, shall but bring him to the King of
Terrors. For whereon should he ground his Hopes? On the Merits of our Savior?
But he is no more a Savior? But he is no more a Savior to the Hypocrite, than
the Hypocrite is a Disciple and Servant of his: He was a Christian in Name, and
no more, and Jesus will be his Savior in name, and no more. And this was his
constant Language, while upon Earth, Woe unto you Hypocrites, and why call ye
me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?

And if he cannot ground his Hopes upon the Merits of our Savior, where can he
ground 'em else?

How necessary therefore is it for every Man, as he hopes to be saved, not to
rest in the bare Show and Profession of Christianity, nor vilely make Religion
an Instrument of vain Glory, or a Cloak for Wickedness; but resolve to be in
his Heart, and in the Sight of God, what he appears to be to Men. That he who
knowth all things, may know that he sincerely Loves him; and truly endeavors,
though with great Mixture of Imperfection, to obey and serve him.

The Sixth Advice.
HAving thus endeavored to secure a warm and a sincere Sense of Religion in
young Persons,

And first, Let 'em have a care of Rashness, and overhasty choosing or acting
in any Instance of Moment whatsoever. That there is very much of this in the
World, especially among young People, is past a Question; and duly to
Deliberate, though in things of Consequence, is looked upon, and that justly, in
such whose youthful Heat is not yet cooled by Age, as an Argument of a Person
of extraordinary Hopes: This Prudent Caution, and Sedateness of Temper, and
wary Management of Affairs, being, for the most part, the peculiar Glory of the
Hoary Headed. And even These must and do confess, That they too often observe
some Remains of Juvenile Headiness in their Resolutions and Choices, and that
more Coolness of Thought, and closer Consideration would have done much better.

What a Malevolent Influence such Inconsiderate Rashness has upon a Man's
Happiness, common Observation will inform us; and I believe I may say, there is
no Man living, that has not himself smarted for it, as well as observed
Multitudes of others to do so; and very probably does still, and always shall
feel the Ill Consequences of being led by a Headstrong Impetus of Passion,
Resolving and Acting on the sudden without Due Thought and Deliberation.

And indeed, how can it be otherwise? How can Men expect things should succeed
well that are done in a Heat, not examined half through, and so must needs have
much more of the Venture in 'em, than any reasonable Security of the Event?

It Is true, there is something of the Venture in every thing relating to this
World, and the most cautious wary Men may find themselves mistaken; but then,
this makes it still less a Wonder, that those should succeed amiss, who scarce
Deliberate at all: And what is done at random, it is by mere chance if it hits
well.

He that Considers well before he Acts, has time to look upon things from one
end to the other, to turn and examine 'em on every side, and weigh and compare
'em together, and so in all probability, will make a much better Choice, than
he that chops upon what comes next, and gives it but a careless passing Glance,
and knows not its Ill Qualities till he comes to use it; and smarts for his
Folly in making so hasty a Bargain, when it is gone too far to be recalled.

But should a wary Man, after all, take wrong Measures, and be overseen, still
he has this Comfort, That he did his best to prevent his being so; and may, by
that very Oversight well observed and improved, be the less liable to be
Imposed on for the future. Whereas, when a Man reflects that his Ill Choice was
wholly owing to his Rashness; that if he had deliberated a while, he might have
done much better, and saved himself those Troubles, and Vexations, and
Entanglements, which now he must even submit to, and rub through as well as he
can: This is a Cutting Thought, that will Exasperate the Mind to great degrees
of Anguish, beyond the Power of ordinary Applications to alleviate.

Now when all this may be prevented, and a Man's Mind kept at Ease, and his
Affairs managed happily, at the light expense and little trouble of a few cool
Thoughts; who would not immediately begin the Experiment?

When a Man first begins to be his Own Governor every ones Eye is upon him;
some with Ill design, others with Good; some to make a Prey of him, others to
expose and laugh at him; and some few others out of a kind and generous
Intention to set him right when he proceeds amiss. So that every thing that is
Dear to a Man, his Fortune and his Reputation, his Quiet and his Innocence,
all is very much concerned in his prudent Management of his Affairs at first.
More than ordinary Care therefore is needful to be taken, and more than
ordinary Circumspection, when we walk amongst Precipices, and are in frequent
danger of dropping into Ruin. It Is not our being arrived to the Years of
Discretion, but making Due Use of that Discretion, which bespeaks us Men; and
this cannot be done without more than a little Thought and Proceeding leisurely,
and making use of an experienced Faithful Guide too, in ways of Difficulty and
Danger. And no Man's Circumstances can look more promising than his, who calmly
makes use of his own Understanding as far as it will direct him, and then
consults wiser Heads than his own, before he engages in any thing of Moment.

The Seventh Advice.
BUT Secondly, Pride and Ambition.

As to the first, let 'em consider, That whatever makes Men Proud, is
originally the Blessing of Heaven, bestowed upon them not for their own
Advantage only, but for that of every one else within the Circle of their
Conversation. Greatness of Quality suppose, to protect and encourage Virtue;
Greatness of Estate to minister to others Wants; the Endowments of the Mind, to
qualify for good Government, and the Instruction of the Ignorant in all useful
Knowledge; and Beauty, to render us the more acceptable, and engage our
Affections the more firmly to one another, by so Sensible an Argument.

Now from this Observation, we may discover both the Vileness and Folly of this
great Sin of Pride.

For to begin with Beauty: What can be a greater Abuse of this good Gift of
God, and silly likewise to the last degree, than to be so over-opinionated of
it, as to carry our selves high, and stately, and slightingly to others; and
thereby turn so engaging a Motive of Men's Love, into an Occasion of their
Hatred and Aversion?

And so, to be Imperious and Assuming, upon account of Birth, Quality, or
Estate; to despise and trample upon Inferiors, and make use of Power and
Wealth only to exalt our selves, and depress every body else: This is not only
to run quite counter to the gracious Design of our great Benefactor, but is the
ready way to make our selves the Calamity of Mankind, by the Ill use of that
very Bounty of Heaven, which, if managed as it should be, would render us the
Blessed Instruments of making all about us Happy.

And so for Wit and Parts; to make the Advancement of ones own Reputation the
chief Aim, and to pride ones self in that, and despise and expose others,
instead of instructing and informing 'em; much more, to corrupt their Minds, by
instilling false Principles and Notions into 'em, to carry on the Intrigues of
a Party, and raise a Name to our selves at the Price of others Ruin: This is
Hellish indeed, the most impious Abuse of such noble Gifts, and very like the
Destructive Pride of Lucifer himself. And it is the greatest Folly too, it being
the most effectual way utterly to destroy that Reputation which we design to
raise.

Besides, great Disquiet and Discontent must needs fill the Breast of him, who
is so exalted in his own Imagination, and yet finds, or at least thinks he
finds so little proportionable regard from every body else. And very likely it
may be so indeed; for the more a Man Idolizes himself, the less will he be
respected by others, and really deserves to be so. And if he is so full of
Resentment, as to discover it, and the Pride of his Heart together; this makes
him still more despised, and that vexes and enrages him still more, till
something very Fatal is too often in the Conclusion.

If the Proud Man is great and powerful; then Oppression, and Tyranny, and
Revenge, with all its dire Attendants: If in a meaner Condition, then Envy and
Hate, undermining and blasting others, and all the sad effects of an
exasperated Spirit. And if any smart Affliction befalls him; instead of
Patience, Resignation and Repentance, nothing but Rage, and Fury, and wild
Di^^raction, ready to Curse God and dye.

So highly needful is it for every Man to beware of Pride; especially those
whose Age and Circumstances render 'em most in Danger of it, through a full
Possession of what is most apt to excite it.

Not but that a young Person may please himself in reflecting upon any of his
Excellencies and Endowments; for who can choose but be delighted in the
Possession of what is good and desirable? But then, God must have all the
Glory, (for of our selves we are, and have nothing) and our Brethren all due
benefit and advantage. We must not be the less, but rather the more affable and
condescending; and despise and undervalue no Body. And in short, no other
Affections must be suffered to arise in our own Souls by any thing that makes
us thus differ from other Men, than Love and Thankfulness to our Divine
Benefactor, and great Desires, and frequent Resolutions and Contrivances, of
doing more and more good in our Generation.

Let a Man be thus disposed, and thus employed, and he need not fear the guilt
of Pride; though at the same time he be very sensible, that he is not as other
Men are.

As for Ambition, or eager Aspiring after Greatness; we may consider, that
nothing is more common, than for Men, either to sink in the Pursuit of it, or
to be undone by its Attainment.

And indeed, nothing has filled History with more Tragic Relations, than the
Fate of Ambitious Men; whose very Methods too, of raising themselves, have
proved at length their Ruin.

Very often Men Grasp at that, which they cannot tell what to do with when they
have it: For every one that has Vanity enough to think fine things of himself,
and bustles mightily for an Employment equal to his fancied Merit, is not
therefore really cut out for such Employment. Some make a very Indifferent
Figure in high Stations, who looked well enough when more within their Element;
and then, their Awkward Management, and it may be Insufficiency, exposes 'em to
so much Shame and Contempt, and the Uneasiness consequent upon it, as must
needs destroy their Happiness.

But make the best of the matter, and suppose Merit, and Ambition, and Success
to go together; yet still there are those, whose Minds are as Aspiring to the
full, and their Sense as great, and their Envy very quick-sighted, prying and
inquisitive, restless and contriveing, ready to catch at and improve every
little trip and miscarriage: So that indeed, unless there be an equal degree of
Cunning mixed with Ambition, the Man need only be left to himself, to do his
own Business.

And whenever he begins to decline, either in his Fortune or his Reputation,
and comes within their reach, they will not fail to lend him their hands to bring
him still lower, till they have him quite down, and by trampling upon him,
raise themselves into his Seat.

In short, all Hights are unsafe and uneasy, and few Men's Heads are strong
enough to bear 'em long; and how miserable a Fall is from 'em, I need not say:
And therefore to be so hot in scrambling up to 'em, as it is seldom innocent, so
is never wise. And when All Is done, that is the most Lasting and best Relished
Promotion of any kind whatever, which is least of a Man's own seeking, and
comes on by easy, quiet steps. For it has none of those Worms at the bottom,
which are generally found under Advancements of too hasty Growth; and which
never fail to eat out their Heart, and soon reduce 'em to nothing.

If God's Providence designs a Man for an Eminent Station, he knows which way
to raise him to it, and will capacitate him for it, and set him fast in it; and
we may have observed, that those have been the greatest Blessings both to the
Church and State, whose Preferments have stolen upon 'em with least Noise and
Flutter.

It Is true, Men ought to have their Eyes open to see the Hand of Providence in
such cases, and humbly and thankfully to be directed by it, in making due use
of those Opportunities that are put into their Power to Improve. And it is as
true, that what a Man may lawfully and honorable receive, he may innocently
ask for; and to be Above making any Applications toward the bettering ones
Circumstances, when there is just occasion for it, is a Spice of that
Haughtiness of Temper we but now condemned. But to be eager and restless, and
always upon the Hunt in things of this nature, no Man can justify. And those
Alterations in a Man's Condition, though seemingly for the better, which look
like the Effect of his own Bustling and Importunity, rather than the
Designation of Providence (which carries sufficient Marks along with it whereby
it may be known;) seldom prove well in the Conclusion, as being, too often, not
right in the Principle; at least, they are not so thoroughly happy, as those in
which Providence is more remarkable than any thing besides; and which are
therefore quite throughout Innocent.

A steady Belief of God's disposing all things with Infinite Wisdom and
Goodness; and a full Persuasion, that what Additions of Worldly Good, in any
Instance whatever, are fit for us to have, we shall in due time have 'em;
together with an Innocent Diligence in the Station we are in at present: This
is the true Temper of a Christian; and that alone which can render Worldly
Greatness Safe and Easy.

Thus may we be advanced without Ambition; and in the midst of growing Honors,
preserve that Calmness and Indifferency of Soul, which will insure to us
Happiness, let things go how they will: Whereas, on the contrary, a Mind High
and Aspiring will make it impossible for us to Taste it even in the most
Flourishing Condition, and render the Straits and Neglects of Low Circumstances
utterly intolerable.

Now who would not Infinitely value that Temper of Mind, and earnestly
endeavor after it, especially in so sickle a World as this; which will make
him happy in any Condition, teach him how to abound and how to suffer want,
Phil. 4.11, 12.
and in every state therewith to be content?

The Eighth Advice.
IN the next Place, unclean Thoughts, and a too quick Resentment of things as
Injuries and Affronts.

How very inclinable to both these, young People are, is too well known; and
therefore, their Care and Watchfulness ought to be equal to the Danger. They
both proceed from that Warmth and Spirit which is in vigorous Youth, and are
consequently the harder to be avoided, having Nature so much of their side,
which will make it necessary to use the more Diligence, and begin betimes, that
better Affections may have the first Possession, and Nature become mended by
Religion.

As for the first of these, the keeping the Mind chaste and pure from the
Defilement of unclean Thoughts; besides that, it is the greatest Security
against Speaking Filthily, (the most unbecoming thing in Nature to a young
Mouth, especially that of a Gentleman) and Acting so too; for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, and from the heart proceed
adulteries and fornications: Besides this, unclean Desires, should they proceed
no further, must needs be an unspeakeable Plague and Disquiet to the Soul.

This Impure Passion is expressed in Scripture, and in our common way of
speaking, by Burning; because of the uncontroulableness of it when suffered to
get Head, and Impatience of Resistance. And therefore, whoever Indulges to
Thoughts of Uncleaness, sets his Soul on a Flame; and must either suffer
himself to be consumed in the Fire, and fall a shameful Victim to his Lusts; or
else with great Disquietude resist 'em, and strive against an almost Remediless
Evil, which often grows the stronger for being opposed, and rages the more for
want of being satisfied. And so, besides the guilt of entertaining those Impure
Desires at first, the wretched Creature has brought himself to this
uncomfortable Straight, either to yield to 'em, and suffer himself to be
carried on whither the Torrent drives, which he cannot but know, will upon all
Accounts, bring him to certain Ruin; or else must spend his time in the most
uneasy Employment, of checking Impatiently strong Desires. But now, he that has
begun to Purify his Soul betimes, and nipp'd unchaste Thoughts in their very
first rise, and planted Pious Meditations in their Room, and is warmed with the
Fires of an Affectionate Religion; besides the Quiet and Serenity that attends
Innocence, and a Conversation with the most full and satisfying Objects, there
is this over and above, that in this Case there is no need of curbing and
restraining our Desires: Devotion and Heavenly Love can never burn too bright,
nor flame too high; the more vigorous they grow, the Soul is still the Happier;
and Happiest of all is she, when quite overcome with the Divine Flame, and made
a whole Burnt-offering to God. And as for the too quick Resentment of things as
Affronts and Injuries; he that is of this Temper, and indulges himself in it,
must bid Adieu to all Repose and Quiet. It cannot reasonably be Expected, that
every one we converse with should think as we think, and Act as we Act, and
make our Interest theirs, and jump with us exactly in Disposition and Humor;
and in all things observe the Rules of Decency and good Breeding toward us.
Innumerable things, do what we can, will fall out cross and untowardly; and the
most Inoffensive Persons, partly through Mistake, partly through Imprudence, and
want of Consideration, may make such Trips, as if Men are resolved to catch at
every thing, may be construed in an ill Sense, and made the Occasion of a
Falling out.

But then, the Question is, Whether it is not better, either by taking things by
the best handle, and putting a favorable Interpretation upon 'em, or else
quite overlooking and passing them by, to live in Peace and Quietness; than by
every such Accident to be blown up into Passion and Fury, and great
Indecencies, and it may be so far transported as to commit what we shall have
Reason to repent of as long as we Live? For no Man can say before hand, how far
his Passion shall proceed. Prove. 17.14
The beginnings of strife, as Solomon says, being like the letting out of
Water, very difficult to be stopped again; and from a small Rill at first,
growing into an Inundation that bears down all before it.

It cannot be denied indeed, but that sometimes there will be Just Occasion for
Resentment; and when there is so, neither Reason nor Religion does forbid it.
But even then, some bounds must be set to it; as Prudence would tell us, if
there were no such thing as Christianity. For really, a Man cannot give his
Adversary a greater advantage over him, than to heat himself out of the use of
his Reason; he thereby laying himself quite open to him, and perfectly
betraying himself into his power. And I Would fain know whether it is not much
better, even in base of a considerable Injury, to endeavor to right ones self
calmly and quietly, in the Methods that Cool Reason and Good Laws direct; than
by following blind Passion, and I cannot tell what Mistaken Notions of Honor,
to be far more Injurious to our selves than ever the greatest Enemy was, that
we had yet to deal with?

What is this but to Punish our selves for other Men's Faults? To make our Lives
extremely troublesome and uneasy, because such a one is proud and haughty,
another silly and impertinent, a third behaves himself rudely and like an
Ill-bred Clown, and a fourth it may be has made too bold with our Reputation,
and said things of us which he cannot Justify? And therefore, with great
Reason, did Solomon say, Prove. 19.11
The discretion of a Man deferreth his Anger, and it is his Glory to pass over
a Transgression. And in another place, Prove. 14.29
He that is slow to Anger is of great Understanding, but he that is hasty of
Spirit exalts Folly. Which wise Observations I shall leave to young Persons
serious Consideration; and proceed to

The Ninth Advice.
ANother piece of Advice which I think very needful to be given and observed,
Conversation now in use; that they would have a care of Conforming too much to
that; which, for the most part, is made up of Vanity and Censure, and a
treacherous collecting such Remarks and Observations in one Visit, as may be
matter for Invidious Reflections the next. And this is now become an Art, and
set Rules there are of Learning and Practicing it; and a great Reflection it is
upon a Man not nicely to observe 'em, especially if he transgresses on the good
Natured side. And to encourage Peoples Proficiency, those that are most ready
at it, and carry it most smoothly on, and with the least suspicion, and make
most use of it upon Occasion, are esteemed as Persons of the best Breeding and
best Sense, and their Company Courted, as the most agreeable and diverting.

This is that which we call Glozing and Complement, Expressions of Kindness and
Esteem, without Sincerity at the bottom; when Men's fair smooth Behavior, set
Flourishes, great Civilities, etc. is nothing but Dissimulation; and they are
really upon the spy all the while, that they may discover something in each
others Discourse or Behavior, whereby they may Expose one another when there
is opportunity. And this, as a choice Treasure, they lay up safely in their
Memories, and bring it out to the next Company they are in, and show it with
all the Advantages that may be, Comment and Enlarge upon it, and recommend it
as the Subject of every ones nicest and most critical Remarks, and so it is
handed round. Which seems to be most exactly described by the Psalmist, Psalm.
41.6. And if he come to see me, he speaks Vanity, his Heart gathers
Iniquity to it self, and when he goes abroad he tells it. So that after all,
it is an Old Fashioned Vice, though probably the World has refined upon it, and
improved it, by long Use and Practice; Wickedness, as well as other things,
being perfected by time.

Now that this is really the present Modish way of Conversation, every one that
knows what Conversation is, must needs be sensible. What a World of seeming
Endearment do we meet with every where? So many Fine Expressions of Men's
extraordinary Value, Kindness and Respect, such frequent Assurances of ready
Service and Assistance, and the like; that did those deserve all this to whom
it is given, and those that give it sincerely mean as they speak, we should
have a Heaven upon Earth. Such great Desert and Excellency on the one hand, and
so much Benignity and Rejoicing in each others Good, on the other, would make
the World a Family of Love, and again give Occasion to the Wonder and Envy of
the Enemies of our Faith, when they should see the Christians so entirely love
one another. But what is at the Bottom of all this? Why truly, for the most
part, either nothing, or what is very much worse. It Is either a set way of
Conversation, made use of Indifferently to every body, to show the Man's
Breeding, more than his Friendship; and though there is no Sincerity, there is yet
as little Malice in it; or else it is designed as a Snare, to trepan People into
such Discourses or Behavior, as may give Occasion for the exposing and
ridiculing of them afterward. And it is no new thing, for a Man to have as Ill
a Character in good earnest given of him, and by the same Person, behind his
back; as he had a Fair one, in Complement, before his Face. Nay, those very
things which were then spoken well of, and it may be deserved it, shall have
quite another Gloss set upon 'em, in the Company where it may be Acceptable.

What more usual than for People to be upon the Pump in their Visits? Making
use of little sly Arts and Fetches, to discover one another Thoughts of this
or that Person, such and such an Action or Occurrence, how they are inclined in
such an Affair, and the like; and all this on purpose to make 'em the Subject
of the next Discourse, to display their want of Wit, or Breeding, to call in
question their Prudence, or their Principles, and not seldom to make a breach
between Family and Family, Friend and Friend, whose good Correspondence, and
right Understanding, they before envied, and would fain destroy.

And how happy do some account themselves, in Plenty of such kind of
Observations! which, to be sure, shall lose nothing in their Communicating 'em
to others, nor fail of their End for want of any Additions that are necessary.
Their Company, they think, cannot but be very diverting, which will make Men so
knowing in other Folks Matters, and furnish Ill Nature with so many choice
Topics for Censure, and Occasion so much of a Laugh. And if a loud Whisper
will recommend any thing of this Nature, and make it fly further in the
Disguise of a Secret; then it shall be disclosed with seeming Caution as a
great Trust, an Argument of the Confidence they have in you; when all the while
they are upon the watch what your Sentiments will be of the matter, and as
officiously carry them back to the Party concerned, as they brought their
Treacherous Remarks of him to you. And thus is the Fire of Contention kindled,
and that too often, beyond all possibility of Exstinction.

That this is no Feigned Description of modern Conversation, I may Appeal to
any Man's own Observation, and to very many's Practice. But now, one would
wonder, what should Incline People to it. Whether Pride and Envy, which prompts
Men to sink every Bodies Reputation but their own; whether Malice and Revenge,
which takes this secret undiscovered way to return an Injury; or that Hellish
Temper of doing Mischief for Mischiefs sake, and making sport with setting
People together by the Ears, and exposing and deriding one another: Whether
all, or any thing of this Nature, or whatever else it is that puts Men upon it;
this is certain, that nothing can be said in its Justification; and every one
condemns it when himself is concerned in it; nay, Men cannot but have very ill
Thoughts of such as they know are of this vile Temper, although not touched by it
themselves, and though the News they bring of others too, may be Acceptable
enough.

And indeed, there can be no worse Ingredients of Society, than outward shows
of Friendship and Endearment, where there is no Sincerity; especially where the
most Treacherous Observation of what may be to a Man's Prejudice is concealed
under it, and that with an Intention of divulging it the next opportunity.

The end of Society, is mutual Comfort and Assistance; in order to which it is
necessary, that Men heartily desire each others Good, and endeavor to promote
it to their Power; whether by Counsel and Advice, or by some Beneficial
Actions, as occasion shall require.

And to this, a Friendly imparting one another Circumstances is needful, so
far as Prudence will allow; and such Expressions of Kindness to each other, as
may induce some reasonable Assurance, of all due and seasonable Help. And this,
every Man (being in some degree sensible of his own Indigence and Imperfection)
does naturally expect from the Society of others; and it cannot but be mighty
pleasing to him, to meet with such, as by the kindness of their Expressions,
and endearing Behavior, give him great Reason to believe, that what Assistance
they can give him, when he needs it, he shall have: And nothing is more
becoming a Man and a Christian, than such a Courteous way of Conversation.

And that nothing might be wanting to complete the Happiness of the Social
Life, God gave to Man the Faculty of Speech; whereby our Thoughts and Designs,
what we want, and what we desire, might presently, and with ease, be made known
to one another, and which must needs make our Intercourse highly pleasing, and
of great Advantage. But then, there must be Truth and Sincerity in all this, or
else All Is spoiled. For an outward Show of Friendship and Civilty, which is
either nothing but show, or, which is Infinitely worse, a Cover for Treacherous
and Base Designs, does indeed tend to the destruction of all Society, and makes
Conversation either the most uneasy thing in nature, or else a Decoy into the
worst of Misfortunes.

For Men must be supposed, either to believe the Civilities they receive from
one another to be Real and Hearty, or the contrary. If they take them to be
Real when they are not so; 'twill prove a very dangerous Mistake, as we shall
see in the Sequel: And if they look upon 'em as hollow and designing, I need
not say how grating and unwelcom they will be, and what uneasiness every Man
must undergo, that is forced to be continually upon his Guard, as in the midst
of Spies, and treacherous Observers of whatever may tend to his Prejudice.

What more odious to a Man, than that which he knows to be Flattery, and the
Fawnings and forced Smiles of a Perfidious Enemy! To be fain to weigh every
word before one dares to speak it, by no means to venture to be free and open,
for fear the Enemy should take Advantage by it, but always upon the Reserve,
full of Care and Circumspection, as in the midst of Ambuscades, and walking
amongst Boggs and Quagmires. This certainly must needs make Conversation the
most troublesome thing in the World. A Life led in a Desert would be more
eligible than such Society as this; and the Prophet Jeremy very feelingly
expresses his Resentment of it, Chapter 9. Verse 2. etc. O that I had in the
Wilderness, says he, a Lodging Place, that I might leave my People and go from
them, for they are an Assembly of Treacherous Men; they bend their Tongue like
their Bow for lies. Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor (or, as in the
Original, his Friend) and trust not in any Brother; for every Brother will
utterly supplant, and every Neighbor will walk with Slanders. They have, (as
'twere artificially) TAVGHT their Tongue to speak lies, thine Habitation is in
the midst of Deceit. One speaks peaceably to his Neighbor with his Mouth,
but in his Heart he lays his wait.

And David thought, he need not wish worse ^o his most Inveterate Enemies, than
that their Table, their Freeest Conversation, and most Intimate Society, Psalm.
69.22.
might become to 'em a Snare and a Trap.

As for the Baseness, and unhappy Consequences of such a Treacherous Manner of
Behavior; 'twill not be amiss to consider both a little.

With Respect to the First, Friendship is so Sacred a thing, that to Dissemble
it for vile Purposes, and under its Cover to play the Devil with one another,
is a most unpardonable Crime, and like Judas's betraying our Savior with a
Kiss. From Caresses and Endearments, to proceed immediately to spiteful
Reflections, Ill-natured Censures, and Poisonous Malignant Whispers, such as
will blast my Reputation, and blacken my good Name, or at least make me
Ridiculous, and the Subject of Men's Sport and Laughter: For a Man to Dive to
the bottom of my Soul, by sly Insinuating Arts, false Protests of Love, and
desire of my Happiness, (which Methods are but too succesful with those that
have more of the Dove than Serpent in them) and then expose me, when ever
'twill ingratiate himself to do so: This is extremely base, beyond expression.

To speak worse of any Man behind Iris Back than we would dare to do before his
Face, is certainly a very pitiful unmanly thing; and to wound an Absent
Person's Reputation, is even as bad as to give his body an unexpected
Treacherous Stab. In so nice a Case as a Man's Credit, every one ought to have
all the Fair Play imaginable; that he may be able to defend himself, and not be
inevitably exposed to all the Dirt that every Malicious Pick-thank shall rake
together and throw upon him. And in case of Natural Failings and Defects, which
are more a Man's Misfortune than his Fault, to Blazon 'em about is barbarous
and inhumane. But all this is still much worse, if we all the while hold Fair
with the Person when we see him, and are as obliging and complaisant to him as
to any body else. The Consequences of this deceitful Fawning Way, are very
pernicious upon all Accounts.

Indeed, a too obsequious complemental way of Address, though there be no Ill
Designs at the bottom, is yet too often of unhappy Consequence, especially to
young People. First, because it is so apt to blind Men's Eyes as to their
Failings and Imperfections, and to create and that insensibly, such fond
Fancies in their Heads, as end in intolerable Pride and Self-conceit. And
therefore, it is accounted one of the greatest Misfortunes of Persons of great
Quality, that they can seldom meet with those that will tell them the Truth;
but whatever their real Deserts may be, they are always admired and extold,
humored and complied with in every thing, their Vices gilded over with the
Arts of Flattery, great things said of what deserves but little; and nothing,
of what deserves Reproof, unless it be to hide and palliate it; and so they are
drilled on in Ignorance of themselves, 'till Death draws aside the Curtain, and
shows 'em what indeed they are, and too often opens a dreadful View of the then
incorrigible Wickedness, which before they took but little notice of, or were
taught to pride themselves in, as Excellencies and Accomplishments. This is, no
doubt, a very Deplorable Condition, and many are so unhappy as to fall into it,
through the Excessive Civilities (as they are called) of those whom they Converse
with. But it is a strange sort of Civility that betrays into such Fatal
Deceptions as these; and Plain-dealing, would Men consider it, will prove to be
the most Obliging thing in the World.

Again, this over-smoothness of Tongue and Carriage, is apt to make an
undesigning Good-natured Person take those for his Friends who are not so; and
who, though they mean him no harm, it may be when they caress him so, yet
intend him as little good. That is, they have no further Aim or Design, than to
show their Good Breeding; and when the Visit and the Complement is over, the
Friendship ends with it, and they are as they were before.

But now, suppose I should be so Credulous, as to take all this for Real
Friendship; and should therefore acquaint the Man with my Circumstances, which
are such perhaps, as none but a Friend indeed should be Acquainted with, and
desire his Advice and Assistance: What a Blank would it be to me to find him
cool, and strange, and glad to shift me off, who before was so full of
Endearment and Protests of his readiness to serve me, nay, as Importunate, it
may be, for an Employment, as a poor Wretch that is ready to starve for want of
one?

How would it vex me to have unbosom'd my self to a Fawning Hypocrite; and to
lie at his Mercy for the Concealment of what would mightily prejudice me, if it
should be known: And instead of receiving any Assistance from him, be forced to
acknowledge it as a great Favor, that he does not expose and ruin me; nay,
find my self obliged to Buy that Favor, perhaps at a very dear rate! In such a
Case (and such Cases there have been) what should I think of that Glozing way
of Behavior which betrayed me into such unhappy Circumstances?

But suppose this Man of Complement should prove my Enemy at last, and make an
Ill Use of my Credulity, and Lure me on to further Confidences and Intimacies,
on purpose to get me more certainly into his Clutches; What a Fatal Mistake
should I then be under! There is nothing certainly more mischivous, nor more
unavoidably so, than a Counterfeit Friend, who is really an Enemy; nor any
thing therefore of worse Consequence, than that way of Conversation which is so
apt to deceive People in this Matter, and incline them to take such Serpents
into their Bosoms.

Nor is it less destructive of Neighborhood and Society. In Conversation,
especially when as we think amongst our Friends, we are apt to Indulge to an
easy Openness and Freedom; the kindly Flow of Spirits, occasioned by agreeable
Company, unlocks an undesigning Persons Breast, and shows his Mind in its Pure
Naturals. And this indeed it is, that gives the true Gust and Relish to
Society, which presently grows Palled and Flat, when every one's upon the Stiff
and the Reserve.

But now, for a fly underhand Observer, to feign a Compliance with all this,
and it may be speak much in Commendation of it, and in the mean time make it
his Business to Remark upon every thing that is said and done, and then turn
Informer where-e're he goes, and endeavor either to redicule his Company, or
set them and their Neighbors together by the Ears; this Turns Society into a
Civil War, and makes Neighborhood as uneasy as living upon the Confines of an
Enemy.

And after all, what Advantage has the Wretch himself, by this Double
Treachery, of screwing himself First into this Man's Intimacy by his
counterfeit Civilities, and then into that Man's Favor by his Ill-natured
Censures and Reflections upon him? What does he get by all this, but the loss
of his own Reputation, as one that delights to make Mischief, a Betrayer of
Society, and that can afford no Man a good word, and sometimes it is more Fatal
to him, and engages him in such a way of Justifying himself, as costs him his
Life.

Which brings to my Mind that Saying of David, Psalm. 55. last verse, The
Deceitful Man, or Treacherous Friend, whom he was before complaining of, shall
not live out half his days.

Wherefore, for a Close of this Advice; though I am far from Pleading for the
morose and rude, yet I cannot but think, that upon all Accounts 'twould be very
happy for every one to be as sparing of his Complements as he can, and with all
as sparing of his Censures. To make Truth and Sincerity the Guide of his
Civilities, and choose, in his Conversation, to talk of Things rather than of
Persons; and when of Persons, to say no worse of any one behind his Back, than
he would freely do before his Face; or rather, nothing that is Ill at all,
since it is by no means fair to fix ill things upon a Man, who is not Present to
make his own Defense.

And since, what we have been discoursing of is but too much the Breeding and
Accomplishment, as well as Practice of the World; 'twill be our Wisdom not to
be too credulous when fine things are said to us, and to be as wary as is
possible in our common Intercourse, that we give no Advantage to the Lurking
Adversary; and Reserve those Freedoms, and that Innocent Openness of
Conversation, (which is the Life of Society, as that is the Life of Life) for
such as by long Experience we know to be Indeed our Friends.

And if to this we add all the Discouragement we can to such whose trade it is
to be Busy-Bodies, and to fetch and carry Stories and Reports, not at all to
listen to, or show our selves pleased with 'em, but rather Reprove and Check
'em, and shun their Company, and fairly acquaint the Parties concerned, how
bold such and such have been with their Reputation, and caution 'em against
them for the Future; this would soon break the neck of this vile Practice,
which is kept up by that Countenance which is given to it, and the satisfaction
too many show in hearing others censured and exposed, and the great Curiosity
they have of prying into the Concerns of their Neighbors.

Let us therefore take the Apostles excellent Advice, and study to be quiet, 1
These. 4.11. Romans 12.^.
and to do our own Business; to Love one another without Dissimulation; to be
candid in our Censures and Interpretations; and in all things resolve to do as
we would be done by: And then, we shall find Society, not only more Safe, but
really more Pleasant and Endearing, than all the Address, and Modish Courtships,
possibly can make it.

Nothing does sweeten a Disposition more, than True Religion, and which is All
in all; it makes a Man Sincere in his Civilities; and from the Heart as
obliging both in Words and Actions, as Truth and Innocence will Permit. This is
true Christian Good Breeding; and whatever is more or less than this, comes of
Evil. More, is but Fawning and Flattery, and as we have seen, of very Dangerous
Consequence; and Less, is Salvage and Brutish, and unbecoming a Man and a
Christian: He only that keeps the Middle Way, is a Man of Temper, and fit to be
a Friend.

The Tenth Advice.
AND now, Young as well as Old, cannot but think it very possible for the Scene
to be changed, and it may be suddenly, and a sad Alteration made in our
Circumstances; and the best of us all must Acknowledge (and the better we are,
the more readily shall we do it) that such a Change would be no more than we
Deserve: It will not be amiss sometimes to remind our selves of it, and Arm our
selves beforehand with such Considerations, as may Enable us to bear what
Trouble may come upon us, as becomes Men and Christians.

When we are easy and happy, our Thoughts are our own, and we can without
Disturbance weigh and compare things together; but when Affliction is either
actually upon us, or very near approaching, the Surprise, and Confusion of
Thought that is caused by it, is apt to make us very incapable of thorough
Reasoning and Consideration.

The proper Time therefore to lay in Arguments against immoderate Trouble, and
which, by our often revolving 'em in our Thoughts, may make so lasting an
Impression as to become our own, and serviceable to us upon Occasion; the Time
for this so Necessary a Provision is before the Evil Days come. And this is so
far from being an unsuitable Employment for Young Persons, that nothing can be
more needful upon all Accounts. 'Twill be a good Allay sometimes to that Levity
of Temper, which very often proceeds too far, and Transports 'em to great
Irregularities, and hastens Misfortunes sooner than otherwise they would come;
and 'twill quiet and settle their Spirits, and induce that Seriousness of Mind,
which is necessary to their successful Management of any of their Affairs, and
that Good Counsel in any Instance, may take place and be effectual. And
besides, if we consider how very apt Trouble is to rise to excessive degrees,
and get too great a Head to be mastered by us; no doubt but it is our Wisdom to
make early Provision against it, such as both Reason and Religion will
plentifully furnish us withal; that so those fatal Excesses of Trouble may be
prevented, which have proved to very many the Ruin both of Body and Soul.

And in order to this, let us first consider, how unreasonable a thing it is to
indulge and give way to Trouble, and lay Afflictions so extremely to Heart, as
we are apt to do, when from easy and prosperous Circumstances we fall into
them.

The proper business of Reason, is so to regulate the Passions, as to make them
serviceable, but by no means suffer them to be prejudicial to us. Now all the
Good that Trouble can do a Man, when he sees an Evil approaching, or feels the
present Weight and Pressure of it; is, that 'twill rouse and excite his
Endeavors to prevent and remove it; or, at least, to alleviate, and make it
more supportable. But, when instead of this, we suffer it to grow so much upon
us, as either in that degree to sink our Spirits, as to make us lie down under
our Burden as utterly without Hope; or else to raise 'em to the pitch of
Frenzy, and engage us in Courses that are desperate and wicked: This certainly
is no likely way to bring our Troubles to an end, unless it be a very fatal one.

Because a Man has lost one, or a few Blessings, therefore to take no notice of
those many others that remain; because, in some respects, he is less happy than
he was, therefore to resolve not to be happy at all, and give way to a Passion,
which, he knows, will make him very miserable: Because his Troubles are great,
therefore to refuse to be comforted, and muse continually upon the Dark side of
his Condition, and make it doubly Afflicting by Impatience; because the Weight
is heavy, therefore to add to it still more and more, by all the Aggravations
he can think of: To indulge and cherish what we complain of and groan under,
and to hug Misery so close, that neither Reason nor Religion, God nor Man,
shall persuade us to part with it and let it go; to suffer neither Time nor
Sleep to do their proper Offices, and calm the Boilings of our Spirits, but
incessantly add Fuel to that Flame, under the Scorchings of which we at the
same time cry out, and which we cannot but know will at length consume and burn
us up. Let any Man in his Senses say, whether this (which is but too much the
way of People in Affliction) is not against all the Reason in the World.

Nor is it less contrary to Religion; which consists in nothing more than a
firm Belief and Trust in Divine Providence, patient Submission to God's Will,
Contempt of the World, and careful Imitation of our Lord's Example; with each
of which immoderate Trouble is utterly inconsistent.

For, First, Who that has a lively strong Persuasion, that a Being infinitely
Wise and Good does constantly take Care of him, and order all things relating
to him; but will check rather than cherish the Uneasiness of his Mind under any
of his Disposals: And however irksom it may be to him at first, make it his
Business to reconcile himself to it, and fully acquiesce in it, as being the
Result of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and therefore for the best, though he
cannot at all discern, perhaps, at present, how it should be so.

And this he will find still greater Reason to do, when he considers, That as
he believes God to be Infinitely Wise and Good, so by constant sad Experience
he finds, that Himself is very short-sighted and ignorant, foolish and wicked;
can see but a little way into the Consequences of Things, is very much mistaken
and corrupted in his Choices, and would be very miserable, should God bestow
upon him every thing that he desires. And therefore, though such a Loss, or such
and such an Infliction may at first touch him to the very quick; yet he quiets
all again by considering, that taking all things together, it is what ought to
be, and will be for the best, and that Time will evidently demonstrate it to be
so, and that it cannot but be so, since it is ordered by him who is infinitely
Wise and Good, and withal so Powerful, that no Affliction can be too great for
him to remove, when his Wisdom and his Goodness see it fit to do so.

Infinite Wisdom knows best when; and Infinite Goodness will not suffer it to
last a Moment longer; and Infinite Power can remove it with a Word.

Again, (as is evident at the first Glance) excessive Trouble is very
unbecoming a Christian, because it is utterly inconsistent with Patience; which
is that Temper of Mind, whereby a Christian calmly and quietly bears all
Pressures, however heavy and afflicting, with entire Submission to the Divine
Will, as being assured, that God's great Design, though by various Methods, is to
make us completely happy. He that thus evenly behaves himself under the
Discipline of Providence, and will not be tempted to think ill of God, or
Desert his Service, though he smarts under his Corrections, nor take Ill Courses
to remove his Trouble; this is the Patient Christian: And the more he may be
sensible of Affliction, in other respects, the greater is his Patience, if he
thus calmly and quietly submits.

Very remarkable are our Savior's Words to his Apostles, when he foretold them
what they should suffer for his sake, and such as bespeak this quiet submissive
Temper to be the Great Security of all our other Duty; Luke 21.19.
Possess ye your Souls in Patience. As if without it even a Man's Soul, all the
Powers of it, not only his Will and Affections, but his very Understanding
could not be his own; but perfectly at the Command of any other, who could lay
more Troubles on him than he had Patience to bear. And therefore the Scripture
frequently joins Faith and Patience together, Heb. 6.12. -- 10.36.
as each others Mutual Support.

And indeed, in a World so thick set with Troubles and Vexations, Eccl. 2.15.
Woe be to him, as the Wise Man says, that has lost Patience; and what will he
do when the Lord shall visit him? That is, when God shall lay any great
Calamity upon him, how will he do to bear it, who can bear nothing with any
tolerable Temper, not so much as common Crosses and Disappointments!

Another great Duty of our Holy Religion, is, Contempt of the World; or at
least such an Indifference to it, as that we may hang loose from things below,
and employ our chief Care and Endeavor, to make sure of our Glorious Reversion
above. (...) 19.26.
Lay not up for your selves Treasures upon Earth, says our Lord, but in Heaven;
for where your Treasure is, there will your Hearts be also. What shall we think
then of their Religion, who are so inseparably fastened to the World in their
Affections, as not to be able to bear any of its Frowns, without an excessive
Concern, as if their whole Happiness was torn from them, and nothing worth
their Notice left, to hope for or expect! What we lightly esteem, we can easily
part with, and live contentedly without; especially if what we value most of
all, be secure and safe. If therefore we had Religion enough to fix our Hearts
there, where our Heavenly Treasure is, and set a due Estimate upon it, and
believed it as certain to the Sincerely Good, as it is Glorious and
Everlasting, and looked upon the World as empty in Comparison and of no Esteem;
we should with much less Regrett part with the Enjoyments of it than we do, and
bear its Troubles with more Sedateness and Evenness of Temper.

I don't say with no Concern at all, for that is Impossible; and during our
Abode in the state of Mortality, there are many things so necessary to our
Support and Comfort in it, that as we may and ought to Pray for 'em, and be
thankful when we receive 'em, so may we in Due Degree desire to keep them, and
be Loath to part with 'em; and when they are gone, resent their Loss. But then,
all this must be Tempered with so prevailing a Mixture of Heavenly-mindedness,
as may soon make us lose our Resentment of any Worldly Crosses, in the cheering
Thoughts of what a Glorious Reversion we have in the Kingdom of God.

This is the True Noble Spirit of Christianity, which makes a Man so much Above
these little things of Earth, as to permit no more than a Transient Uneasiness
to affect him, at the ^^ss of any of them; reflecting presently upon there
Immense Treasures of Eternal Happiness, which are Reserved in Heaven for Him,
and which his Comparatively Light Afflictions Here, do only serve to raise his
Value of, and increase his Desire of enjoying.

Nothing more demonstrates the Strength and Power of Religion than this, nor
does any thing more betray the Weakness and Infirmity of it than the contrary.

In the Last Place, Immoderate Trouble removes a Man to a vast distance from
the Temper and Example of Jesus our Blessed Savior.

For if we enquire how he behaved himself under those almost continual Troubles
which he met with, we shall find no Turbulency of Passion, no Murmurings and
Repinings, but a quiet Resignation of Soul, a Calm Sedateness of Demeanor, an
entire Trust in God, and an Admirable Charity to the worst of his Enemies.
This, the Story of his whole Life will Witness; and when his Days grew near
their End, with what incomparable Patience and Submission to the Divine Will,
did he receive the bitter Cup of his approaching Sufferings!

Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me; there are expressed the
feeling Resentments of relucting Nature: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as
thou will; there is his entire Acquiescence in God's Will concerning him.

And when he Actually Sufferd what was so Dreadful to him in the Expectation,
with what Mee^^s, and Silence, and Wondrous De^ency, and Presence of Mind did
he demean himself, and that under the sharpest Afflictions both of Body and
Soul! And when, in the midst of his Agonies upon the Cross, he was Barbarously
Insulted by the Me^ciless Spectators; all they could Provoke him to utter was
this strangely Good Prayer, Father forgive them, they know not what they do.

This is our Lord's Example in this matter, and which, in some measure at
least, he expects that we should Imitate; and it is a great part of our Religion
to do so.

But now, if we are so far from this, as to Indulge that Passion to Excess,
which our Lord's Practice, as well as Precept, engages us to keep under and
Control; if we lose all Patience when we are afflicted, though our Lord when he
was so, was a Perfect Lamb; if we can bear nothing, when our great Master with
admirable Temper did bear so much, and that too, for our sakes, and in our
stead: If Christ and Christians are so very much unlike in this Respect, what
is their Religion!

Such Considerations as these, if we go no further, will let us see both how
unreasonable and unchristian a thing it is, to suffer Trouble to proceed
without Restraint.

But 'twill not be amiss to endeavor to prevent so great an Evil, by one
Reflection more upon the Nature and Design of all Affliction; which is intended
by God as a Means to Cure the Diseases of the Soul, and a Fatherly Correction
for former Faults.

But now, Excessive Trouble, utterly hinders the Operation and good Effect, and
turns the Medicine into Poison, and gentle Chastisement into Ruin and
Destruction. A strange Ill Disposition this! and which we cannot begin too soon
to rectify.

When the Rod is in the Hand of Infinite Love, and Kindness infinitely greater
than we bear unto our selves, proportions the Weight and Number of the Strokes;
in the Name of God, what Cause is there for such great Degrees of Trouble? I
believe there are but very few so Entirely Heedless of the Methods of Divine
Providence, as not to have Observed, and to Remember the Wondrous Mixture of
God's Goodness with his Punishments; what an Ascendant his Mercy has had over
his Justice, and how Happily, and sometimes Unexpectedly, he has put an End to
his Public and Private Corrections!

Which of our selves have not enjoyed much more of Happiness than we have felt
of Trouble and Affliction? Psalm. 94.19.
And even in the midst of Sorrows of our Hearts, how have God's Divine Comforts
in an unaccountable manner Refreshed our Souls!

What unthought of Happy Events have prevented, or put an and to, former
Misfortunes that have Threatened or been upon us; and many things brought about
by a strange Series of good Providence, which have Surpised us into full
Happiness before we were aware!

Let any Reasonable Man therefore say, whether it is not the Wisest and most
Christian Course, after Humbly Acknowledging God's Hand in every Affliction,
and searching out Diligently for the Cause of it; to endeavor, by sincere
Repentance and Amendment, to Close with the Gracious Design of it; and so,
either keep it off when it only Threatens, or incline God to Remove it, if
Actually upon us; and then Buoy up our Spirits in a full Persuasion that all
will end in our Good?

That Blessed Being, who formerly so Graciously, and Surprizingly, Diverted, or
put an End to my own, or others Afflictions, is as Good, and Wise, and Powerful
as ever; why then should I Despair of the like Mercy again, (though I cannot
foresee it may be how it should be,) from him who changes not, and can do what
he pleases?

The Spirit of a Man, Prove. 18.14
says Solomon, will sustain his Infirmity; and such Thoughts as these will
sustain the Spirit of a Man, and enable him with a Christian Steadiness of
Mind, to bear what God shall please to lay upon him. But a wounded Spirit who
can bear! A mind pierced through with Impatience and Distrust of Providence, is
it self a Burden more intolerable than any other Affliction in the World.

But after all, that what has been already said may be thoroughly effectual, let
us not forget to take St. Jam. 5.13.
James's Advice along with us, and if any man be afflicted, let him Pray.
Excellent Advice indeed it is, and no greater Consolation can a wounded Spirit
receive, than in Calling upon God in the Time of Her Trouble. For He is the
Fountain of Comfort, and the Great Disposer of all Things; it is His Grace and
Holy Spirit that must teach us Resignation and Submission to His Will; and if
we make devout Addresses to Him, and with a calm and even mind await His
Leisure; we may in his Good Time expect to see our Troubles have a Happy end:
For God will not always be Punishing, neither keeps He his Anger for ever.
Wherefore to close this Advice; since there is no Man living that is secure
against Affliction, and Comfort in it is what every one Desires; and very few
when Trouble is actually upon 'em, are either able to give it to themselves, or
capable of Receiving it from Others; I could not but think it, as I said, of
great Advantage to Young Persons, to furnish 'em with such Considerations
beforehand, as may be of use to prevent excess of Melancholy and Dejection,
or any Desperate and unjustifiable Undertakings; and Prepare 'em to Comfort
themselves, under the severest Dispensations of Providence, with that patience
and evenness of Temper, which becomes the Reason of a Man, and the Faith of a
Christian.

The Eleventh Advice.
HAving in the Foregoing Advices endeavored to Prevent such Errors and
Mistakes in Young Gentlemen's Faith and Practice, Apt to fall into, and which
are of unspeakable ill Consequence; give me leave now to suppose, that things
have not been managed by them as they should be, and some of those many
Temptations they are surrounded with, have been too Successful, and robbed 'em
of their Innocence, and engaged them in some Courses that cannot be justified:
So that to the former Preservatives, 'twill be needful to add some few. Advices
more, in order to their Recovery.

And First, let me earnestly Recommend to them a frequent serious
self-Examination; a Particular enquiry into their Thoughts, Actions, and
Discourses, what they are, and have been, and whether they are and have been as
they should be, and to what end and Conclusion they tend.

And this is not only a highly Beneficial Employment, as we shall see by and
by, but it is a very Easy one too; for there is no Reasonable Man's Memory so
extremely treacherous, but if duly Consulted, will inform Him of matters of
Fact which are His Daily Practice, that is, in the Main; for some Particulars
no doubt may escape the nicest Examination. And when the enquiry is made, there
is something within that will Accuse or Excuse, Acquit or Condemn immediately;
and let us see the Tendency of our Good or Bad Actions respectively, without
any Tedious Process, or long series of Argumentation.

For the plain Truth, and which we all of us know very well, is in short this.
If we Guide our steps to the best of our Power and Knowledge by the Rule of
Reason and Religion, and endeavor to follow where our Savior has gone before;
and are willing to listen to, and be Directed by the Guides that God has
Provided us when we are at a Loss, or have mistaken our Path; then we need not
Question but we are in the way that Leads to Life and Glory: And if we persist
and go on in it, let it be Broad or Narrow, Rough or Smooth, upon the Mountains
or in the Valleys, or the like; and though we sometimes, nay often make a false
step, yet through the Merits of our Savior, and the Guidance of his Blessed
Spirit, we shall at length arrive at a Happy Journey's end.

But if on the contrary, we find that our Dispositions are earthly, sensual,
and devilish, that we live without God in the World, are Licentious and
Unchristian, directly opposite to Christ's Precept and Example, in open
Defiance to Religion, or if more Fair in outward show, yet without Sincerity:
Such ways as these are the ways that lead to Misery and Ruin, not only in the
World to come, but even in this too. And whoever goes on in 'em without
control, and will not be recalled, will at length, and very likely before He
is aware, after all the Misfortunes he has run through here, find himself a
miserable Inhabitant of the Place prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

Now by Frequent Self-Examination, I mean no less than Daily; that every Night
when we are retired from the World, and the noise and hurry of that day's Stage
is over, and we have taken up our Lodging to Refresh our selves for the next;
then, as David expresses it, Ps. 4.4.
to commune with our own Hearts in our Chamber and be still. That is, without
Prejudice or Passion, to Consider quietly and seriously, as in the Presence of
God Omniscient, Ps. 139.
who is about our Path, and about our Bed, and spyeth out all our ways, what
our behavior that Day actually has been, and what it should have been, and
Consequently to which State we have been Traveling, to the Kingdom of Life and
Glory, or to the Regions of Eternal Death?

And this Daily Scrutiny into our Lives and Conversations is so agreeable to
Reason, that Heathen Philosophy did particularly Recommend it, and it is one of
the Golden Precepts, as they are deservedly called, of the School of
Pythagoras; Admit not sleep to close your eyes, till you have recollected
thrice each single Action of the day, and asked your selves such Questions as
these. Wherein have I transgressed? What have I done? What Duty have I omitted?
Run over these things, beginning at the First, and then, if you have done ill,
be Troubled; if well, Rejoice.

What can be more excellently said than this? What more useful Practice can
there be in this our Pilgrimage, (as the Scripture calls our Life, and really
it is no other) than at the close of every Stage thus to look back upon our
Goings, observe where we have erred and wandered, at what we stumbled and fell,
upon what Motives and Temptations, that so we may Prevent the next Day the
miscarriages of this, see our Error before it is too late, return before we
have wandered too far, set a greater value upon our Guides, more heedfully
observe their Directions, and be the more wary and circumspect in our future
Journeys, for being so easily thrown down, deceived and led aside in those that
are past. How much easier is it to Recollect and Amend the miscarriages of a
Day, than of Months, or Years? And Consequently, how much safer is it for every
Man thus to Consider his ways whilst his Memory can tell Him what they were,
and whilst it is in his Power with so much ease to amend them if they are amiss;
than to go carelessly on, till for want of Examining, he takes the Wrong way for
the Right, gets a habit of going astray, and so becomes not sensible of his
Error, till it is too late to Mend it; or at least has wandered so long, that the
difficulty of Recovering the right way is almost Insuperable!

No better Office certainly, than to direct a Stranger in the Road that He
should take, to warn Him of Dangers that He may meet with in it, and to lead
Him back and set Him Right, when He has lost his Way: Especially when He is in
Haste, and Night is coming on, and the Business he goes about of greatest
Consequence.

Now nothing can be of greater Consquence than the Journey of a Christian
through the World; He Travels upon Eternal Life and Death; His Journey is
Great, and therefore He had need to lose no Time; and the Night with every Man
is coming on apace, and no Man can tell how soon it may be Night with Him; and
it is a long Night too, and may be Eternal, and will certainly put an end to His
Journey whenever it overtakes Him, whether it be to Heaven or to Hell. And
therefore those Considerations that will set us right in our way, and expedite
our Great Business, and help to Conduct us safely to that Happy Place where we
all would be, are no doubt well employed.

But for all this, Young People I Am afraid will not be very easily Persuaded to
put this Advice in Practice; and therefore the more need to press it earnestly
upon them. They look upon it as a very uncomfortable Way of Traveling, to be
still Doubting whether they are right or no, continually Enquiring, and
listening to every melancholy or designing Person, that shall pretend to give
them better Directions. If now and then a misgiving Thought arises, it is
smothered presently by Business or Pleasure; and when a Guide of Souls is met
with who Faithfully informs them of the way they ought to take, tells them
they are in the wrong, and must turn back if they would see their wished for
Journey's end, and that That Path will lead them to their Ruin: They look upon
this as a Greeting of Course from Men of their Profession, and make it their
endeavor to Persuade Him to go along with Them, rather than think of turning
back with Him. However, let Him take his own Course, they are resolved still to
follow theirs; it is the way they have been used to, and which offers it self
readyest and fairest to them, and is smooth and pleasant, the Entertainment
good, and most of their Friends and Acquaintance, it may be, do bear 'em
Company in it; so that very loath they are to make too nice Enquiries, lest
they should be made sensible of the necessity of Performing so ungrateful a
Task, as with many a weary step to beat the Hoof back again, and turn their
Feet into a Track they have no Mind to.

But in short, would this be Prudence in our Journeyings here in this World?
And why should not our Judgment be the same with Respect to the Other?

We need not be told, I suppose, that here we are Strangers, have no abiding
City, but seek one to come; where when we once Arrive, we shall be for ever
fixed as in our proper Place of Abode, our Home.

That other World consists of Two, and but two States, the one Infinitely
Happy, the other as Infinitely Miserable.

To these two States there are two Highways that lead, which though they meet in
a Point at the beginning, yet Widen Insensibly and Infinitely, and at length,
become as far distant from each other, as Heaven is from Hell.

And therefore in all Reason, as our First Care should be to set out Well, so
our next, immediately to turn Back, if we perceive that we have gone amiss. For
every step that we then take, carries us further and further wide from Heaven,
and nearer to Destruction.

Well then, if this Daily Self-Examination be of such vast Consequence, what
ever will make us incapable of it, should carefully be avoided, Particularly
Unseasonable and Intemperate Drinking. How can He close his Day with such a
serious Scrutiny as we have now been speaking of, who has staid so long at the
Wine, as to be able to think coherently of nothing, and who is fitter for a
Frolic, or for sleep than Meditation? A constant Practice of Night-Revels is
upon all Accounts a most unhappy thing, but upon none more so than because it
unfits a Man for this great Duty; whereby He becomes a Stranger to himself, and
his own Proceedings, and that in matters of the greatest Moment; and all this
for a Belly-full of Liquor, and empty frothy Mirth.

Moderate Wine, and seasonable well chosen Conversation, are Blessings which
our Holy Religion does by no means Envy us. Certainly, I may enjoy my Friend
without forgetting my self, and have the satisfaction of others Company,
without making my self unfit for my own.

And I Question not, but upon trial, any Man will find those Days spent most to
his Satisfaction, which are closed with a serious Reflection upon his ways at
Night: And all that I further desire of Young Persons upon this Particular, is,
that they would immediately try the Experiment, and beg the Assistance of God
in those excellent Words of the 139 Ps. ult. Try me O God, and see the ground
of my Heart, Prove me and examine my Thoughts; look well if there be any way of
wickedness in me, and lead me in the way Everlasting.

The Twelfth Advice.
WHEN upon such Enquiry, Stubborness and Obstinacy, and wilful Ignorance, or
non-Attention to the great Obligations that Religion and their own true
Interest do lay upon them.

None are so Deaf, we say, as those that will not Hear; none so Provokingly
Wicked and hard to be Reformed, as those who Industriously set themselves to
keep out any Thought that may check them in their Carreer, and incline 'em to
Return; whom no Calls will awaken, no Arguments Persuade so much as to think of
Amendment; and who like the deaf Adder, stop their Ears to the voice of the
Charmer, charm he never so wisely.

This sort of Men, think they shall be undone, if they once give ear to
Persuasives to Religion; that 'twill Deprive them of what they esteem as their
Happiness, and draw 'em into the snare of a few designing Men, who will Lord it
over their Liberty, hamper 'em with severe Impracticable Rules, turn 'em into
Mopes, and instead of allowing them their former Pleasures, be continually
reading Lectures to 'em of Self-denial, Mortification, and Repentance, and all
in Hopes of an unseen Reward, no Body knows when nor where. And because they
cannot but own, however, that something very powerfully moving is in such
Discourses, something that touches 'em in an unaccountable manner, even forces
Approbation from them, and as 'twere Charms 'em into a Compliance; therefore
they are Resolved they will stop their Ears, and so defeat the Holy Magic of these
Mercenary Charmers;

This is that wilful Spiritual Deafness so often mentioned in Scripture; when,
as our Lord expresses it, Hearing the Sermons of the Gospel, Men hear not,
neither do they understand, (or Attend and Consider, as it is in the Original)
in order to their suitable Practice; and therefore He so often uses this
Expression, He that has ears to hear, let him hear. There is likewise a wilful
Blindness of the Soul, whereby the Scripture Represents to us Wicked Men's
Disregarding all Inward Conviction of their own Minds, and keeping themselves
as Ignorant as they can of their Guilt and of their Duty, and the necessity of
a Reformation; and which is very emphatically expressed, Mat. 13.15. This
Peoples heart is waxed gross, (...), grown Callous and Insensible, through an
overcharge of the Pleasures of the World, and their Ears are dull of hearing,
as before explained, and their eyes have they closed, (...), they have winked
hard; as we shut our Eyes hastily and strongly, when we fear the approach of
any thing offensive to them; lest at any time they should see with their Eyes,
and hear with their Ears, and understand with their Heart, and be Converted,
and I should heal them.

Now the Understanding is the Eye of the Soul, or that Faculty whereby the Mind
receives the Light of Truth and Knowledge; of which Light there is now, thanks
be to God, abundant Plenty streamed down from Him who is the True Light that
enlightneth every Man that comes into the World; 1 John 9.
and which whosoever will receive may enjoy, and that according to his full
capacity.

But as the Material Light may be intercepted by the interposition of Bodies
too close for it to penetrate; or, as the Eye may be incapabable of receiving
its Rays, or wilfully shut and close it self, and deny admittance to them, though
shining in full luster round about; and upon either of these Accounts the Body
may remain in Darkness: So the Soul may not enjoy its proper Light, either
through the Understanding's being not capable of receiving it, (which is
unavoidable Ignorance, the case of Natural Fools) or else for want of a due
medium, through which it may be transmitted, such as is Good and Competent
Instruction; (which yet, if by our own neglect we want, we cannot plead as an
Excuse) or else, our Minds are Ignorant and Dark, because we wilfully Refuse to
let in any Light or Knowledge to them, will not admit, or attend to any thing
that would Dispel those mists of Error and Delusion, which hang over them as a
Dark pitchy Cloud: And this is a Blindness altogether owing to a Man's self, a
Rebelling against the Light, as Job Expresses it, Job 24.13.

But is it not strange, that Men should so delight in this Spiritual Blindness,
as to force it upon themselves! That a Rational Creature should be better
pleased with the Darkness and Confusion of his Understanding, as to the things
of Religion (though of all the noblest Furniture of our Souls) than with a
Bright, Clear, Godlike Mind! Nay, so much better pleased as studiously to keep
out all new access of Light, to stop up every Avenue, every chink and cranny,
through which it unawares might steal into his Soul! This is strange indeed! and
the more we Consider it, the more we shall wonder at it, but yet it is no News.

An Vnthinking Life guided by the false Lights of Humor and Custom, every one
may observe is the Life that too great numbers of Young People lead; and the
great Truths of Religion, and the obligations they derive upon our Practice, if
meddled with at all, it is but slightly and superficially, one Glance and away,
and then all is well, if their Hearts are but Gross enough to give them no
disturbance by secret misgivings, and inward gripes and twinges.

And what is the Reason of all this, but Guilt and the Impurities and
Defilements of their Souls? To make too nice Enquiries into their Religious
Obligations, would be troublesome they think to do, and much more so when done;
and therefore better be quietly blind and ignorant in these matters, than to
have their Eyes opened to behold their misery and shame.

Light is the great Discoverer of Uncleanness, and shows it to be what it is;
and who, that so beholds it, but will for shame, if nothing else, endeavor to
remove it! When the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shines in upon the
Soul of a Sinner, what shameful Discoveries will then be made! How foul will it
appear even to the wretch Himself! How exceeding vile and sinful, that which
before was cherished as his Darling!

But such Discoveries as these the Sinner does by no means Desire should be
made; and therefore indeed it is, that He excludes this Light. This is the
Condemnation, says our Lord, that Light is come into the World, and Men love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are Evil; for every one that
does evil hates the Light, 3 John 19.20.
neither comes to it, lest his Deeds should be Discovered and Reproved.

There is such Deformity and Ghastliness in the face of Sin, when seen without
its Mask in a True Light, as must needs Create infinite Horror and Aversion in
the Soul: Witness the Opinion a Dying Sinner has of it; for then it appears to
him Naked and without Disguise. And therefore, the God of this World, that
great Deceiver, first blinds the Minds of those that are Lost, darkens their
foolish Hearts, 2 Cor. 4.4. Romans 1.^1.
as the Apostle expresses it, and then drills 'em on from one Vice to another
with false Appearances of Good, that so Wickedness and Ignorance may quietly go
hand in hand together. And the poor bewitched Creatures are so Pleased with
this infernal State, and so used to it; that they Conspire with their Deceiver
to lengthen out this fatal Darkness till it becomes Eternal.

This is a very dismal Condition, and into which People are very apt (...)
slide before they are aware, and which we are now endeavoring to secure Young
Persons from, or Recover 'em out of, if betrayed into it; and they may know
when they are so, by asking themselves seriously these few Questions.

When I feel some good Motions springing up in my Mind, in order to my leaving
some ill Courses that I am engaged in, don't I presently check 'em, and Divert
my Thoughts to something else?

When I have had a Glimps of the foulness of Sin, and the Misery that will at
last attend it, by a gleam of Light from above shot, unexpectedly into my Soul;
how have I behaved my self under such beginnings of Conviction? Have I been
glad of that Discovery, and endeavored to let still more Light in, by opening
the Eye of my Understanding, weighing and Considering things more thoroughly
than formerly, searching the Scriptures, Advising with good Books, and good
Men, and Praying God to make my Darkness to be Light; or have I not rather been
in pain till I had chased the Light away, and skreen'd my Soul from its
unwelcome Rays, by clapping the World between, thrusting my self into business
or Company, or any thing that might keep out such uneasy Thoughts, as the
Discovery of my inward Pollutions would raise within me? And speak sincerely,
is not a fondness for Sin, a secret Resolution to continue in it, and a fear of
being too Powerfully inclined to mortify and destroy it; is not this at the
bottom of all?

The Answer that every Man's own Conscience will make to these few Questions,
will inform him whether he is of the Number of the spiritually Blind or not,
and who besides are always Deaf, as was said, to what Advices may be given for
their Recovery. And their Condition is really so Deplorable (as we shall see
presently) that nothing more nearly concerns every Man than to use his utmost
endeavors to secure himself from it.

By what has been hitherto said, concerning a stubborn Obstinacy in wicked
Courses, we see the Scripture represents such Persons, as spiritually both Deaf
and Blind; as is the Condition then of those that are Naturally so, such, though
infinitely worse, is theirs that are so to Religion. And 'twill not be amiss to
consider this Representation a little.

To be Blind is certainly a very great Misfortune, and to be Deaf perhaps a
greater; and how helpless and disconsolate the Condition of either is, we may a
little imagine from what we have observed of the Circumstances of each, and
from these Men's own moanings and Complaints.

Senses that are so Recreating, and so Instructive, that convey so much
Pleasure and so much Knowledge to the Soul; Pleasure of a Refined and Spiritual
Nature, and Knowledge the most necessary and Beneficial: the loss of either
must needs make a strange alteration in a Man, and be an unspeakable Affliction.

How Deplorable then is the Condition of those that have lost 'em both! Our
imagination is quiet Confounded, when we would frame an Idea of it.

Neither to hear, nor to see, is in effect to be out of the World; it is as if a
Man should be shut up in a dark Cave, in the midst of an unfrequented Desert,
without other Company than his own sad Thoughts and dismal Reflections. For
continual Darkness, and Silence, and Solitude, is the sad Portion of the both
Deaf and Blind, though in the midst of their nearest Relations and best Friends.

The loss of but one of these noble Senses, may be very much made up by the
free use and Enjoyment of the other, together with the charitable assistance of
good Persons who enjoy them both. The Eye, by the help of Books and Writing,
may let in those Discourses to the Mind, which used to be transmitted through the
Ear; and signs may keep up that Friendly intercourse and Society, and
communicate those Thoughts to one another which used to be conveyed in Sounds.

And the Ear, so far as concerns the Improvement of the Mind, may by others
Reading and Discourse mightily supply our want of Ability to Consult Books our
selves. Such shifts as these, may in some measure alleviate the Misfortune of
being either Blind or Deaf, and make it tolerable; But what, unless a miracle
can help him, that is Both He is quite excluded, not only from the Advantages,
but the Comforts o^ Society; incapable of any thing tha^ might Divert the
sadness of hi^ Thoughts, or mitigate his Trouble He lives at most but the
lowest sort of Animal Life, but one degree above the Vegetative, save that He
can think, and reflect upon his Misery, (and that with great Confusion too, and
which will Aggravate it much) and Pray to God by Death to take Him from it; the
Hopes of which Deliverance in Time, is all the Comfort that he has. He is
indeed Sealed up to the most dismal Condition that can be imagined in this
World; exposed inevitably (as to any of his own help) to the Dangers of it,
incapable of its Comforts and Enjoyments, and had abundantly better be out of
it, than thus buried alive as 'twere in it.

Like this, though Infinitely worse, as we shall see presently, is the Condition
of the Spiritually Blind and Deaf, as before described; and though I never knew,
or upon enquiry could Hear of any Naturally so, (which as often as I think on,
I cannot but admire God's Wonderful good Providence and care of Mankind, in
suffering so very few, if any, to be so extremely miserable; when yet, the one
Sense is as soon lost as the other, and he that to Day lost his Sight, might
the next Day lose his Hearing, as well as one Man this, and another that, and
when one and the same Accident or Distemper might easily deprive of both at
once;) though I never knew, as I said, or could hear of any Naturally both Deaf
and Blind, yet Spiritually there are, God knows, abundance. But it is their own
Act and Deed, God's care being equal to Preserve Men from being so in the one
Sense, as well as the other.

Now the extreme Misery of the Spiritually Deaf and Blind, (or in other words
the Obstinate and Irreclaimable) consists in the following Particulars.

First, As the Naturally so are in Effect out of the World, and Dead while they
Live; so these are out of the Church, receive no Benefit by the Communion of
Saints; have none of the Comforts and Advantages of that Holy Society; no
Commerce with, nor influences from the Divine Head of it Christ Jesus; have the
Name of Christians, and that is all, but live like Infidels in the Darkness of
their Mind, and the Vileness of their Practice, as if there were no God, no
Religion, no future State, or no Account then to be given of our Actions in
this.

And what sad circumstances must those needs be in, who thus deprive themselves
of all the means of Grace and Salvation in this World, and of all Hopes of
Happiness in the next!

For, Secondly, those that are in this Condition are exposed to Ruin so far as
we can see, unavoidably.

A Charitable Friend may preserve a Man Naturally Blind and Deaf from
approaching Dangers, and snatch him from imminent Perils, which He knows
nothing of himself, nor can receive Information of from others, much less tell
how to avoid; but who can do this for one that is Spiritually so? Man cannot;
and to expect that God should, is groundless Presumption.

He that has stopped his Ears, and shut fast his Eyes, and that for this very
Reason, lest He should hear and see, be informed of his Duty, and made sensible
of his Errors, and inclined to Reform 'em; how can this Man of all Men, expect
that God should make him Hear and See, and Convert and Save him whether He will
or no?

As our Lord said to the wilfully Blind Pharisees, (and the case is the same
with the Deaf) if ye were Blind indeed, ye should have no Sin, but now ye say,
we see, and yet see not, (as it is elsewhere laid to their charge) therefore
your sin remains, John 9.41.

The Blindness of our Understandings which is not wilful, and the defects of
our Obedience consequent upon it, God will pass by; and afford us, if not a
perfect Light, yet such as shall be sufficient to guide us, if we will follow
it, into the ways of Peace. But He that can see, and will not, or He that once
could see, but has wilfully put out his Eyes, or keep^ them fast shut and
closed on purpose that He may not see his Duty, because He has no mind to do
it; God has no where said that He will force open his Eyelids, or restore him
his Sight by Miracle, and convince and reform Him irresistibly; but rather, and
it is but just, that the Blackness of Darkness is reserved for him for ever. St.
Jude.


Thirdly, to be thus Spiritually Blind and Deaf, is a Condition extremely
Deplorable, because it admits of no Comfort or Consolation; the Man has made
himself not capable of receiving it from others, nor can his own Thoughts
suggest any thing but what will make him still more Miserable.

For Conscience, do what we can, will sometimes be awake, and when it is so,
its clamours and upbraidings are so importan^ and loud, that they will be
heard, and its Convictions are written upon the very Mind it self. Like so many
flashes of Lightning, they at once Dispel the Darkness of the Soul, and show it
its Condition, and by intolerable scorchings begin Hell upon Earth; as the
Regions of the Damned have no other Light, than is caused by the flames that
torment them. A Light that will convince indeed, but not Convert, and only
serve to cause a quicker Sense of the Horror of that dismal State they are in.

No Man can express, what Agonies obstinate irreclaimable Sinners sometimes
feel; what dire forebodeings of the Wrath to come! Which though they endeavor
never so industriously to stifle, will yet revive again, to their unspeakable,
unallay'd, Terror and Confusion.

The Naturally Deaf and Blind, if their Conscience be quiet, may think upon
God, and Pray to Him, and receive Comfort from Him, and hope that though
heaviness may endure for this disconsolate dark Night, yet the Morning, the
Dawning of Eternal Day will bring Light, and Joy, and Healing under its wings;
and their sad lonely silence be exchanged for the ravishing Sounds of Heavenly
Halleluja's, and the blessed Society of the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect;
till the long wished for Time, when the Happy Euge, well done Good and faithful
Servant, shall fix them for ever in the Joy of their Lord.

But to the Spiritually so, to think upon God is to begin their Hell, for to
such He is a consuming Fire; and to think upon Death, is to open to themselves
a horrid Prospect of the Torments they shall for ever Suffer after it. Death
indeed, will open their Eyes and their Ears, (and the Thoughts of it too, will
do it in some measure) but to such Objects, as they had better never have been
born, than e're acquainted with.

Thus does our Lord most feelingly Represent to us the miserable Condition of
an obstinate Sinner, by the greatest Misfortune that can befall us upon Earth.
And now, if this be so, how nearly does it Concern us every one, with the
greatest Care and Diligence to prevent this growing Calamity, which is so apt
to steal upon us without our Observation!

The Pleasures and Prosperities of the World, especially in the days of Youth
and vigor, seem to bid fair for Happiness; and we are apt to be so mightily
delighted with 'em, as to Drink deep of 'em and often, till at length we grow
insensible of Spiritual things, and then comes on that Blindness and Deafness
to Religion which we have now discoursed of; and what is the sad Consequence we
have just now seen.

The greater therefore our Danger is in this matter, the greater in all Reason
should be our Care to prevent it; and since all proceeds from too much love of
the World, therefore in the first place to resolve to love that less; and begin
in Time to work our Hearts into a Pliant, Ductile Temper, such as may keep our
Ears open to fair Warnings, charitable Reproofs, and good Advice. And then, if
we look upon the uneasiness we feel at such Discourses as an ill Symptom, and
make it an Argument for our still greater attention to them; and so far embrace
every Conviction of our Consciences, as to let it continue with us and bestow
some Thoughts upon it; if we do this, and do it Sincerely, and in Time, we
shall find the Cloud begin to remove from our Understandings, and Spiritual
Light and Knowledge will flow in apace; we shall plainly discover the Cheats
that were before put upon us, the fatal Mistakes we were under; and this will
unstop our Ears, and make us still more and more Attentive to the Words of
sound Wisdom, the faithful Counsels of those that wish our Happiness; and that
will make our Hearts still more and more Tender and Impressible, sensible of
our true Interest, our Duty, and our Danger, which will excite our utmost
Diligence to secure the one, and avoid the other, crying unto God for help; who
never Rejects that Prayer which begs his Assistance, that we may serve him
better, and to which we add our own Sincere Endeavors.

Now who that is Blind or Deaf, or but in Danger of being so, would refuse an
easy certain Cure? And when He knows how much he may contribute to it himself,
do you think He would delay to do his utmost toward it? And how overjoyed would
the Blind be, to be sensible of the faintest Glimmerings, and open wide his
be-nighted Eyes, to let in more and more of cheerful Light! How Ravishing would
the least Sound be to the Deaf Ear, and excite its utmost Attention to receive
still more! And how much greater would be the Joy, of the both Deaf and Blind,
to recover either Sense so far, as to have though but the least Intimation, that
there was some Hopes of their enjoying both again; that it lay very much in
their own Power to effect it, and that the blame must be their own if they did
not!

How eagerly would they do every thing they could, to make a free entrance for
Light and Sounds, and welcome every new Accession of either with Transports of
Delight! How earnest their Prayers to God for his Blessing, and how unfeigned
their Thanks and Praises for Success! What a quick Grateful Relish would they
have of the almost forgotten Pleasures of the Eye and Ear, and how would they
Improve the Advantages of both! How feellingly sensible would they be of their
former Miserable State; and how would they dread and avoid every thing, though
never so remote, that might lead to it again!

If we may suppose all this of the Naturally Blind and Deaf, how much more
should it be verified by the Spiritually so, whose case as we have seen is
infinitely more deplorable, and whose Desires therefore of recovery in all
Reason should be stronger far, their Prayers more Importunate, their Joy
greater in the Hopes of it, and their endeavors more earnest to bring it to
Perfection! And He that is so stubborn and obstinate, as wilfully to continue
in this sad sttate, into which too he has brought Himself; where should the
blame of his Ruin be placed but upon Himself?

Let every Sinner therefore, instead of impiously and ungratefully accusing God
of Tyranny and Injustice, Arbitrary Power, and merciless Decrees, and the like;
as if He first hardened their Hearts and took away their Hearing and their
Sight, and so sealed them up to Destruction, and then resolved to inflict
Eternal Punishments upon them, because they did not do Impossibilities; hear
and see, when He had made them Deaf and Blind, and have a tender Sense of
Religion, when He had made their Hearts callous and past feeling: Instead of
such horrid Blasphemy as this, let every Sinner give Glory to God, by humbly
acknowledging that it is his own doing, and the Consequence of his listening to
the Destroyer, rather than the Savior of Mankind. Whoever perishes, I say it
again, must blame himself for it; for it is his own wilful Blindness,
Stubborness and Obstinacy, that has deprived him of the means and possibilities
of Salvation. To save such a one, God must proceed quite contrary to the Nature
of Virtue and Vice, and the established Rules of his Word, and force him to be
Good and Happy, notwithstanding all his Resistances and Refusals. But a forced
Virtue, and a forced Heaven, are strange new things that one shall seldom hear
of.

When a Sinner is arrived to that degree of Obstinacy, that nothing but
extraordinary, nay miraculous Grace, can soften and Reform him, God's not
giving him that extraordinary Grace, but leaving him to the usual constant
Assistances of his Holy Spirit, and Methods of the Gospel, which his Obstinacy
has made Ineffectual to him; (for what Instructions and Advices can take Place
upon the Deaf and Blind?) this seems to be the most Intelligible Account of
God's hardening any Man. It Is only Permitting him still more and more to harden
Himself, by not using extraordinary Means to Prevent it; and which is but a
Just Punishment for his former Stubborness.

As in the Story of Pharaoh, He hardened his own Heart so far, as to receive no
Impression either by God's Severity in inflicting, or his Goodness in Removing
Seven of the Ten Plagues; and then God is said to harden his Heart, or to give
him up to his own Fatal Obstinacy. So in Isaiah, chap. 6.9, 10. ver. where God
commands the Prophet to Denounce to his Rebellious People, the Judgment of
making their Hearts fat, and their Ears heavy, etc. which our Lord said was
fulfilled in the Pharisees, Mat. 13.14, 15. The Reason of this Threatening is,
because they had made themselves Deaf and Blind before: Ye Hear indeed, but
Understand not, or do not attend and Consider; and ye See indeed, but do not
Perceive, or take Notice; therefore, as by way of Punishment, make this Peoples
Heart fat, and their (...) heavy, and shut their Eyes, etc.

Wherefore, to Conclude this Advice; the way for us not to Perish, is not to
Destroy our selves by our incorrigible Obstinacy: and He that does not make
himself Blind and Deaf, and insensible to Religion, need never fear that God
will make him so; whose Solemn Protestation is, that He desires not the Death
of a Sinner, and whose constant Call is, Turn ye, Turn ye from your evil ways,
for why will ye dye, O House of Israel!

The Thirteenth Advice.
AND now, continuing in such ill Courses as Young Persons may have fallen into;
the next Advice will be, that they endeavor to Recover themselves by a sincere
and speedy Repentance.

And here, to prevent Mistakes in this matter, which are very often made, and
of very fatal Consequence; 'twill be needful briefly to show what true
Repentance is. It Is such a Sense of Sin as fills the Soul with Shame and bitter
Remorse for having Committed it, utterly condemning it, as the greatest
Baseness, Ingratitude, and Folly; Resolving for the Future no more to be Guilty
of it, and keeping that Resolution to the best of our Power. Or in other Words,
it is a Man's willing Amendment of his former Faults, proceeding from a thorough
Change of his Judgment concerning them; attended with great Sorrow and
compunction of Spirit, for his acting so contrary to His own Reason and best
Interest, and violating the Just Commands of God, whose innumerable
Benefactions to Him, make his utmost Services but a Just Debt.

Now from this Description of Repentance, we may take Notice that it is not
every Religious fright, occasioned either by some awakening Discourses of the
Dreadful Punishments that will overtake a Sinner in the other World, backed
with the Terrors of his own guilty Conscience, or by a fit of Sickness, when
the near Approaches of Death open His Eyes, and give him a Sight of those
Torments, and never dying Flames, which He is like to suffer, and seem to be
just ready to take hold of Him: Much less is it a few forced Sighs and Tears, a
Lord have mercy upon us, and a heedless unaffectionate Repetition of some
Penitential Forms, the Sense of which we do regard but little. Notwithstanding
all this, a Man may retain the same Affection to Sin, and be as Bad again as
ever; and such sort of Penitents, always are so, and very often Worse. This
sort of Sorrow for Sin, is like that of a Traitor at the Gallows; He Repents
him, it may be, that He was engaged in such and such Practices, because they
brought Him thither, and the Time of his Execution is come; but at the same
time He is as much an Enemy to his Prince as ever, and would gladly Repeat his
Treason, could He do it with Impunity.

Let every one therefore have a Care of taking any thing of this Nature for
Repentance. The greatest and most pungent remorse for Sin, unless it is followed
by a thorough amendment of Life, is nothing but what we call trouble of Mind,
and the lashes of Conscience; which though they are apt to put Men upon making
serious Reflections upon their ill Courses, and by Degrees may bring them to a
true sense of the Wickedness of their Sin, which is a good step toward
Repentance, yet it is but a Step: And a great deal more must be done by him that
will repent indeed. His Mind and Judgment must be entirely changed, his Temper
and Disposition altered; ill habits must be rooted out, and the contrary good
ones Established in their Room: And his sorrow for Sin, which at first was for
his own sake, and for fear he should suffer what God had threatened to inflict;
must be improved into a true godly sorrow, such as respects that infinitely
good Being who he so ungratefully rebelled against; and melts him down into all
the passions of Shame and Confusion, and self Abhorrence and Condemnation,
which attend a deep sense of doing basely by one who is infinitely kind and
good to us. It Is this alone that will work Repentance to Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10.
not to be repented of, (i. e.) a constant Better Life.

Now from this short Account of the Nature of true Repentance, we may see
plainly, that it is a Work which must be set about Immediately, if we would
bring it to Perfection. It Is as Difficult as Necessary, and requires very great
Resolution, Watchfulness and Diligence to carry it on succesfully; and is
indeed, the proper business of Youth. Mat. 5.25.
Agree therefore with thine Adversary quickly, as our Lord advises, and with
all the speed imaginable set about that great Work, without which our Ruin
will be inevitable.

And that young Persons may be the more effectually Persuaded to so ungrateful
a Task, so Melancholy an Employment; they may please to attend to the
following Considerations.

First, Every deferring this great Duty to some other time, is a resolved
Continuance in a state which we know God infinitely hates, and a new step to
final Impenitency.

No Man's Conscience is seared and benumbed in an instant; there must be frequent
Acts of Violence done to it to silence its Clamours, and make it stupid and
insensible. Now every time we put off our Repentance, we renew that Violence;
our Conscience has less and less of feeling; sin grows more and more habitual,
and therefore seems to sit lighter and easier upon us; and that makes us still
more Confident and Careless, and so we go smoothly on in the way of Ruin, till
we become past feeling, Ephesians. 4.19.
as the Apostle Phrases it, and then past Cure.

Thus the Sinner, if let alone, will certainly in the end become his own
Executioner. Every Permission of Sin to abide with us without Disturbance, has
it is Proportion of the Guilt and Misery of that hardened State, which St. Austin
thought was the sin against the Holy Ghost. And the longer it is Permitted, the
greater is that Guilt, Romans 1.28.
and 'twill insensibly grow into a Reprobate Mind; and then, without Remedy,
will follow the intolerable Punishment. And therefore, unless we can dwell
with Everlasting Burnings, it nearly concerns us, without further delays, to
destroy Sin in its Embryo, and very first Beginning, lest before we think on it
it arrive to this fatal Perfection, and bring forth this Death.

But Secondly, though by God's special Care and Assistance, a Sinner may be
awakened before he comes to this sad Period (which yet, because no Man can be
sure of it is a very great Madness to trust to) yet the longer we delay our
Repentance, the difficulty of it will Proportionably increase upon us.

When length of time has made Sin habitual to a Man, and it becomes fixed and
rooted in his Nature; it must needs be a very hard task to destroy those
inveterate ingrain'd Habits, and pluck up those spreading Roots of Bitterness,
which have so long overrun, and taken Possession of the Soul. The Prophet
Jeremy says, it is as easy for an Ethiopion to change his skin, and a Leopard
his spots, Jer. 13.23.
as for those to do good that are accustomed to do evil; which signifies at
least that it is the greatest Difficulty, and requires an almost endless labor
to perform.

Now what strange folly is it, to suffer so fatal and spreading a Disease as
Sin, to go on for many Years without control, when even now at first it is
hardly to be cured, and will give us a full Employment to keep under even to
the last of our Days, though we take it in time, and begin with it immediately!

Besides, as much as Youth is apt to depend upon the future, and still defer
till to Morrow; how uncertain is it whether to morrow will be Theirs! We can
only be sure of the Present Moment, ten thousand Accidents may deprive us of
the Next; Accidents as unforeseen and unprovided for, as are the Miseries of
humane Life to an unborn Infant. Now what extreme Madness is it for Creatures
in such precarious Circumstances, to slumber and drouse away their Opportunity;
and defer a Business of such infinite Consequence, when none but God can tell
what the next Hour may bring forth!

But Thirdly, of all times the time of Sickness and approach of Death is the
most Improper and Unseasonable for this great Work of Repentance.

For First, It Is then more Difficult than at any time before; our evil Habits,
are then more deeply Rooted Sin more Predominant than ever by reason of long
Possession; and God more than ever displeased, and his Spirit more than ever
grieved, and nearer being quenched by those often repeated Delays, which the
Sinner has then spun to their utmost length. Now in other matters, we think it
a very odd Contrivance, for a Man that has a great Work to do, to neglect all
Favorable Opportunities, and pitch upon a time, which of all others will lay
the most and greatest Hardships in his way; and why should it not be at least
as unreasonable in this Case of Repentance?

No Work I Am sure can be of greater Importance than this is, nor are any
Difficulties more Pressing than those a true Penitent must overcome; and
therefore, to defer it till a time when 'twill be more difficult than ever, and
our Ability to strive against that Difficulty less than ever, (as we shall see
presently) is certainly the greatest Madness in the World.

Secondly, Besides, the Devil is then more than ever busy to secure a Sinner
to himself; makes use of all his Wiles and Cunning, either wholly to prevent
his Repentance, or make it ineffectual as knowing Men are then less than ever
able to Discover and Resist 'em.

If the Sinner be of a cheerful Temper, apt to believe the best of his
Condition, (which is the Case of the generality of Men) he closes with him
presently, and endeavors to work him up to Carelessness and Presumption.
Represents to his mind a display of the great Goodness of God, his Tenderness
over Mankind, that his Mercy is above all his Works, and Triumphs over his
Justice, and is always ready to forget and to forgive; but carefully diverts
all Thoughts of what we are to perform first, that we may be capable of this
Mercy. If the Man's Conscience should sometimes be awake, and tell him the
Truth in this Matter, that Repentance must go before Pardon, and that this is a
very difficult Work, especially upon a Bed of Languishing; He presently lulls
him asleep again, by insinuating, that were there not a Savior, things would
be bad indeed; but Christ has suffered for Sinners, and wholly satisfied God's
Wrath, His Righteousness was Perfect and Redundant and shall be Imputed to 'em,
if they will entirely Roll themselves upon Him, and being Clothed with his Merits
they need not fear acceptance. Misapplying the Words of St. Paul, that a Man is
justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law; Romans 3.28.
and concealing those of St. James, what does it profit a Man to say he has
faith if he have not works, 2 Jam. 14.17.
can faith save him? For faith without works is dead, being alone: And those of
our Savior too, Why call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say?
Luke 6.46.13.3.
And, Unless ye repent, ye shall all perish. And as for the Terrors of God's
Vengeance, it is true, He will indeed inflict them, but it is upon the Reprobate,
whom He has from all Eternity Predestined to Destruction; but the Elect are not
at all Concerned in them, and that He is one of that Happy Number, His
groundless Confidence, and the Numbness of his Conscience, shall be made an
Argument.

Thus will this wicked Spirit, by cunningly blending things False and True
together, drill a sick Man on in this pleasant Slumber, and lengthen out this
unhappy Dream, till his Opportunity, is gone and his Oil spent, and in the
midst of his Assurances He becomes a Prey to the Prince of Darkness, who will
carry him in Triumph to the place of his Miserable Abode.

And as to this sort of Men He thus appears like an Angel of Light, all Smiles,
and Sweetness, and Comfort; so to those of a more Melancholy, diffident
Temper, He shows himself as He is, with all his Horrors and his Flames about
him. He continually fills their Minds with dreadful Ideas of the Inexorable
Justice, and Severity of God, of the Impossibility of pleasing him, of their
being Reprobated by him; and represents to them their Sins in their full
numbers, and worst aspect, and heightened with all imaginable Aggravations. And
it may be, terrifies them with Hellish Dreams, fills their Fancy with strange
Scenes of Horror; and lets 'em know how ready he is to seize their guilty
Souls, as soon as ever parted from their Bodies; till he finally makes 'em,
what he would have them be, quite Desperate.

If by these means he finds, that he cannot wholly Prevent the Repentance of a
sinner, (which yet a miserable Experience tells us he too often does) yet it
shall go hard, but he will hinder its being thoroughly Effectual. And to this
end, he one while [distracts the Sick Man's Mind with endless Scruples and
Difficulties concerning it; not such as will at all Conduce to Promote and
further it you may be sure, but such as are fruitless and unnecessary, and of
endless Controversy, such as will Amuse and Confound him, and waste much Time,
and keep him wavering and in Suspense, and negligent of what is indeed
Repentance to Salvation.

Sometimes he interrupts his Serious Thoughts by thrusting in Affairs of the
World, unseasonably and impertinently; and often so Troubles and Perplexes
those things which it is necessary for him to take some Thought about, that they
become greater hindrances, to the one thing needful, than one would imagine.

When the Sick Man Prays, He will cool the fervor, and break the Intenseness
of his Devotion, by throwing into his Mind trifling and it may be Profane
Fancies; when he should Communicate, he Tempts him to defer it under pretense
of being unprepared, and unworthy to partake of those Holy Mysteries. Such Sins
as he ought most of all to be afflicted for, he will help him to Palliate and
Excuse; and if they cry too loud not to be heard, he will endeavor to contract
and lessen the Measures of Repentance: And some Devilish Device or other he has
ready upon all occasions, to make a Dying Man's Penitence imperfect and
unavailing.

Now, though this great Deceiver is ready, through the whole Course of our Lives,
thus to Circumvent and Cheat us of our Happiness; yet is he more than ordinary
Industrious to secure a Sinner when leaving the World, and upon the Brink of
Eternity; for then, if he has him not, he must for ever lose him. And the
circumstance of a Dying Condition give him great Advantages over a Poor
Languishing, Amazed, Dispirited, Affrighted Creature, and it is but too too
often that he is Successful against those that madly while their Repentance off
till then.

For Thirdly, The inseparable Attendants upon a Death Bed are such, as if there
were no such Adversary to deal with, would render it a very unapt season for so
great a Work as this.

Our Powers and Faculties both of Soul and Body, are then generally mightily
Disordered and very little Serviceable; our Apprehension dulled, our
Understanding and Judgment, and Memory, weakened and Impaired; our Minds
Distracted by fears and uncertainties, and our Bodies Languishing, full of
Pains and great Discomposures. Some Diseases make the Patient stupid, and
utterly Inapprehensive; others heat Him into Frenzy and Distraction; and some
keep Him continually upon the Rack, and will not suffer him to attend to any
thing but his present Misery: And even the most favorable have enough in 'em,
mightily to hinder our Progress in this great Duty, for which a whole Life of
Youth and Health, and perfect soundness of Mind and Body will not be too much.
No wonder therefore, if the weaknesses and Infirmities of Sickness, and the
Approach of Death, which make a Man scarce capable of settling his worldly
Affairs, should be a very unfit Time for him to begin to make his Peace with
God, and Prepare himself for Eternity.

But in the last place, Let us suppose all that can be desired in such a Case
as this; that the Distemper is not so Violent, but that it leaves a Man the
free use of his Reason and all his Faculties, and the decays of his Body are
gradual, and without excessive Pains; and Death comes on by easy gentle steps:
'Twould yet be a very great Folly to put off Repentance even to such a Death
Bed as this, because it is so hard a Matter to have any tolerable Assurance that
the utmost we can then do, is Hearty and Sincere, and will be to any purpose.

It Is the Fruits of Repentance that Prove the sincerity of it; and Sorrow and
Regret for past sins, and wishes that we had never committed them, and the
like, how pungent, and how earnest soever they may be, are not Repentance, but
only a step in order to it. For Repentance, as was said, is a thorough Change
of a sinner's Mind and Life; which, whether such Sorrow will really effect or
not, nothing but Time can show. And therefore, the Man that Repents not till
his Time is just Expiring, that has no Temptation to his former Vices, nor
Ability to Commit them if he had, must needs be very uncertain whether He
indeed Repents, or is only scared and frighted with the near Prospect of the
endless Miseries that attend a sinner after Death. That it is too often, thus
with dying Penitents, their returning to their Vices when God has Restored to
them their Health, is Proof sufficient; and whether it is not so in any
particular Man's Case, no one can say, unless he Lives to make the Trial.

Now what a Comfortless disheartning thing is it, for a Man to Breath out his
Soul in such great uncertainties! How miserably anxious must his Breast needs
be, about the safety of his Condition and his Acceptance with God, which yet he
can have no Assurance of, till his Condition is fixed and become unalterable!

The only Remedy is to Repent Immediately; that we may have time to approve the
Sincerity of our Repentance, and enjoy the unspeakable Comforts both in Life
and Death, that will attend our being at Peace and Reconciled to God.

Wherefore, as the Wise Ben Sirach excellently advises, make no tarrying to
turn unto the Lord, Eccl. 5.7.
and put not off from day to day, for suddenly shall the wrath of God come
forth, and in thy security thou shall be destroyed, and perish in the day of
vengeance.

The Last Advice.
AND now for a Conclusion of all; Last Advice.
Let me Advise Young Persons, when by God's Assistance they are become so
Sensible of their Miscarriages, as sincerely to Repent of them, and resolve to
Reform: Let me then Advise them to seal and ratify those Pious Resolutions,
with a Devout Reception of the Holy Communion, and Confirm, and strengthen them
still more and more, and bring 'em to Perfection, by a frequent attendance at
the Table of our Lord.

The Sacrament of our Lords Supper, as it is one of the great Mysteries of our
Holy Religion, and therefore requires of us the profoundest Awe and Reverence,
and Religious Fear; so is it a Treasury of Blessings also, a Channel flowing
with Divine Grace and Bounty, and therefore calls for the highest Degrees, and
expressions of Desire and Love.

It Is like the Pillar of a Cloud and of Fire, that accompanied the People of
God in the Wilderness; Dark and Mysterious indeed on one side, and apt to
Imprint a Holy Dread upon our Spirits: But on the Reverse there is Light and
Heat to inflame our Love, and enkindle our Devotion, to enlighten our
Understandings and direct our Wills, to purify and refine us, and render us an
Offering of a sweet smelling savor, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

And thus was it esteemed by the Holy Men of the First Ages of Christianity;
when the Fires of Devotion burnt bright, and the Church was Acted by the Spirit
of Love and Purity. Many excellent Things were then spoken of this Mystery, and
great was the Reverence that was given to it; but then their Love to it
likewise was very great, their desires of it ardent, and frequent and constant
was their Reception of it. They called it a Mystery, and as such they revered
it; they called it too, a Feast of Thankfulness and Love, and as such they
rejoiced in it, and thirsted after it. And the Effect of this was Exemplary
Piety and Holiness of Life, and steady Profession of the Faith of Jesus, even
to the Death.

Afterward, when the Love of many did wax cold, this Sacred Duty grew more and
more neglected, two or three times a Year was thought sufficient to
Communicate, and sometimes once would serve the turn, and so it is still with
most amongst our selves; and the Wickedness, Ignorance, and Stupidity of the
middle Ages, and the open Prophanness and scandalous Debauchery of these last
Times, are the miserable Consequences of so great an Impiety.

And indeed, no wonder if the Disease get head, when Men omit to apply the
Remedy. The Holy Jesus, that great Physician of the Soul, who bests knows its
Distempers, and the Methods of their Cure, left this as his Dying Secret, to be
observed by all Ages of the World, for the Recovery and Confirmation of their
Spiritual Health. Now if after all this Care and Kindness, and excellent
Provision on His part, we slight his Directions, reject his Medicines, and
refuse Life when it is so Charitably offered us, and upon such easy terms; we
may thank our selves if we are, as we deserve to be, Diseased and Miserable.

I hope we are Sensible, that without God's Grace and Divine Assistance, we can
do nothing that is Good; which Grace being His free Gift, it is necessary that
we make use of those Means, and observe those Times and Seasons which he has
made choice of, in order to our Receiving that his Charity and Bounty. Now the
Chief of these, is the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; by which, we are made one
with Christ, and Christ with us, and he dwells in us, and we in him, as our
Church expresses it in the Exhortation at the time of the Celebration.

That is, it is the great Conveyance of every thing that is needful to the
Strengthening and Refreshing the Soul of a Christian, and making him run with
cheerfulness the Race that is set before him.

This then being the great Dispensatory of the Riches of God's Goodness, hither
must we come if we would be Partakers of it; and wilfully to Absent our selves,
is so great a Slight both of the Dying Institution of our Savior, and the
Blessings that will attend the due observance of it, as is utterly inexcusable,
and will be of very Melancholy consequence.

But I shall not Proceed further upon this Particular, either in giving an
Account of the Nature of this great Duty, or the Manner of Performing it, and
the Preparation requisite in order to it; there being so many excellent Books
already written upon this Subject. Only give me leave to make one Observation
or two, For the true meaning of which Words, See Archbishop Tillotson's Seventh
Sermon, Volume the third, Printed before his Death.
in Answer to the usual Plea for Men's neglect of this Holy Sacrament, viz. That
they are unfit for, and unworthy of it; and fear therefore, that if they do
Receive it, they shall Receive it unworthily, and eat and drink their own
damnation.

As for the latter part of this Plea, it proceeds from a great Mistake, namely,
the confounding these two very different things, being unworthy to Receive, and
Receiving unworthily: And which, when rectified, the thing will stand in a
clear light.

It Is True, every Man as a Sinner, is unworthy, not only of so great a Favor
as the Sacrament at the hands of God, but of every breath of Air he breaths, of
every Crumb of Bread he eats, in short, of every the least Blessing he enjoys;
and it is very fit he should be intimately sensible of this his Unworthiness;
but yet for all this, he that uses any of these Blessings soberly, and gives
God thanks, may very Worthily partake of and enjoy them.

So here, in this Case of the Sacrament, the best Man living cannot say he is
Worthy to Receive it, but yet may nevertheless Receive it Worthily, or in a
manner becoming so sacred a Duty. Nay, the more deeply sensible he is, of his
not being Worthy to Receive, the more Worthily, no doubt, he will Receive it.
And it is he that Receives Unworthily, not he that is Unworthy to Receive, that
incurs the Guilt and the Punishment which the Apostle mentions, 1 Cor. 11.29.

As for Men's being unfit to Receive, or unprepared; (not to take Notice of the
oddness of the Excuse, which is in effect the same, as to make carelessness and
idleness a Plea for Disobedience;) I only desire, they would ask themselves
upon what terms they hope to go to Heaven? If they know any thing of
Christianity, they must answer thus; I hope to arrive at that happy place,
through the Merits of Jesus my Savior, upon Condition of my own true Faith and
sincere Repentance.

Now if this be thus absolutely necessary to our Salvation, we must either quit
our Hopes of being saved, or else sincerely Believe and Repent; that is, have
such a Faith as purifies the heart, and works by love, and resembles us to
Jesus, and makes us partakers of a Divine Nature; and so Repent as thoroughly
to amend, and reform our lives, and entirely to turn from Sin to God.

This we see is indispensibly required of us in order to our future happiness;
and was so before the Sacrament was Instituted, and would have been so, had it
never been Instituted at all.

Now, that which is so necessary, as on our part, to bring us to Heaven, is the
very Preparation that is requisite, to fit us for the Sacrament; the
Qualifications for both are exactly the same. And therefore, he that hopes to
be Saved, must so Believe and Live, as to be fit to Receive the Sacrament;
(unless we'll say, that more is required to our Receiving the Sacrament
Worthily than to Eternal Salvation) and he that makes his Unfitness the Excuse
of his neglect of it, either knows not what he says, or else must know that he
must cure that Fault, or be for ever miserable.

A Good Life, as we all must own, if we believe the Scriptures, is absolutely
necessary to the Happiness we hope for in the other World; for without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord; and a Good life is without doubt the best
Preparation for the Sacrament. So that he that lives like a Christian is fit to
Communicate, and he that does not is fit for nothing but ruin. How strange an
Excuse then is this, which is so often made for Peoples neglect of the
Sacrament! For with the very same Breath they conclude themselves to have no
reasonable Hopes of being Saved! And so long as they continue unfit for the
one, they are incapable of the other! And dare they continue in such a state as
this? Would not such thoughts as these therefore be more becoming every one
that names the Name of Jesus? I am unfit for Heaven, therefore will I frequent
the Sacrament: Though I am Young, and probably may live for many Years to come,
yet since it is so uncertain whether I shall or no, and I cannot begin too soon
to fit and prepare my self for a happy future state, therefore will I address
my self to the Rece^tion of those conveyances of the Divine Grace and
Assistance, without which I can do nothing, and with which I shall be able to
do every thing that is needful to be done to my Salvation, through Christ that
strengthens me. This will complete my Repentance, confirm and enliven my
Faith, and in every respect make my Obedience more sincere and full; the more
Defects therefore in each of these I am sensible of, the more need have I to
approach that Holy Table, where all my Spiritual wants shall be supplied. To
thee therefore, Blessed Savior, I humbly come for help; that my sinful Body
may be made clean by thy Body, wounded and torn for my Offenses, and my Soul
washed by thy most precious Blood, which thou did shed for the remission of
my Sins. I am not worthy that thou should come under my polluted Roof; but
prepare for thy self an Habitation, by the Influences of thy Blessed Spirit,
and then, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Having thus Conducted Young Persons to the Holy Altar, which, unless they are
extremely wanting to themselves, is next to Conducting them to Heaven; I shall
leave them there to the blessing of God and our Savior, who is ready to
embrace them with the Arms of his Mercy, and seal them with his life-giving
Spirit to the Day of Eternal Redemption.

Only to their own Pious Meditations and Prayers, they may, if they please, add
the following Litany.

A LITANY FOR Young Gentlemen.
O God the Father of Heaven, of Angels and of Men; have Mercy upon us Miserable
Sinners!

O God the Son, who have Redeemed the World with thy most Precious Blood; have
Mercy upon us Miserable Sinners!

O God the Holy Ghost, the Lord and giver of Spiritual Heavenly Life; have
Mercy upon us Miserable Sinners!

O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, whose Wisdom and Power, and Goodness is
Infinite; have Mercy upon us Miserable Sinners!

Remember not, Lord, the Sins and Offenses of our Youth, nor be extreme to mark
what we have done amiss; Spare us, good Lord, spare us a little, that we may
recover our strength, and according to thy Mercy think thou upon us for thy
goodness.

Spare us, good Lord.

From forgetting our Creator in the Days of our Youth; from wasting the flower
of our age in vanity and folly, and reserving our decrepid Years for the
Service of God;

Good Lord deliver us.

From valuing the Blessings we enjoy more than the Giver of them; from trusting
in any thing more than in Providence; and from loving Pleasure more than thee
our God;

Good Lord deliver us.

From dishonouring our Bodies with Intemperance and Uncleanness; from polluting
our Souls with impure Imaginations; from defiling our Mouths with profane and
impious, or obscene Discourses;

Good Lord deliver us.

From abusing our Reason in opposing Religion; from debasing our Wit to the
service of our Lusts; from living like Beasts, when thou have made us Men and
Christians;

Good Lord deliver us.

From excesses of Passion, and a turbulent Spirit; from tormenting our selves
because others misuse us; from the guilt and the misery of Malice and Revenge;

Good Lord deliver us.

From Conceit and Pride, Envy and Ambition; from foolish Rashness, and
inconsiderate Heat; from despising our Guides, and following our own Counsel
only;

Good Lord deliver us.

From stubborn Obstinacy, and deafness to Advice; from contempt of Reproof, and
anger at the Reprover; from a blinded Mind, and a seared Conscience;

Good Lord deliver us.

From deadness in thy Service, and a formal Religion; from obedience that is
fanciful, humoursome, and uncertain; from a superstitious use, or neglect, of
the Ornaments of Worship;

Good Lord deliver us.

From forgetting Thee, or our selves, in raptures of Enthusiasm; from
pretending to Piety for the sake of the World; and from all the Paths that lead
to the Portion of Hypocrites;

Good Lord deliver us.

From conforming to the World in the Arts of Deceit; from fawning and flattery;
Censure and Detraction; from false Smiles and treacherous Friendship;

Good Lord deliver us.

From impatience in Trouble, and excessive Dejections; from distrust of thy
Providence, and Desperate Courses; from fretting against God, for what we bring
upon our selves;

Good Lord deliver us.

In all time of Temptation, by Prosperity or Adversity; in all sudden Surprises
and imminent Dangers; in the hour of Death, and in the Day of Judgment;

O Blessed Jesus! by all that thou have done and suffered for us, then succor
and deliver us.

And though unworthy, as we are, and miserable Sinners, yet encouraged by thy
boundless Mercy and Goodness, we beseech thee farther to hear us; and as the
Guardian and guide of our Youth, show us the way that we should walk in, for we
lift up our Souls unto thee;

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

O that our ways might be directed by thy Commandments, and our footsteps never
wander from them! that we might meditate upon thy Precepts, and delight our
selves in thy Service, and never forget thy Word;

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

Thy Hands have made us what we are, from thee comes all we have or hope for; O
give us the Understanding that we may entirely Praise and Love thee, and not be
stupid and insensible as the Beasts that perish!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

That it may please thee to inspire us with Affections becoming Christians;
that we may live worthy of that most Holy Profession, as Disciples of Jesus,
and designed for Glory!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That our Saviors life may be the rule of ours, that we may tread in his
steps, and become like him in temper, and spend our days as he did, in
advancing thy Glory, and doing good in our Generation!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That we may employ our Youth and our Strength, in the great work of our
Salvation, and run the way of thy Commandments with vigor and spirit, and the
warmth and fervor of a cheerful Mind!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That Religion may be esteemed by us as our chief good; that all things else
may be subservient to it, as the delight and the joy of our hearts!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

That our Faith may be irreproveable, steady and modest; such as may work by
Love and purify our Hearts, and bring down every thing that exalts it self
against obedience to Christ!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

That with our whole Heart we may devote our selves to thy Service; and be
sincerely what we do Profess; and value the Joys of a quiet Conscience, above
thousands of Gold and Silver!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

That our Baptismal Vow may be kept Inviolate, the Promises we have since made
to thee faithfully performed, and all our Pious Resolutions made good!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

O let us not go wrong, thou guide of our steps! O let us not fall, thou that
art our Support! Discover to us the snares that are laid for our Souls, and
grant that we may ever escape them!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

And when we are down, Lord, do thou raise us up! When we go astray like Sheep
that are lost, O seek thy Servants, pity our sad state, and bring us back unto
thy fold again!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

We will think on our ways, and turn our feet unto thy Testimonies; we will
make haste without delay to keep thy righteous Judgments; with thy assistance,
which we humbly beg, and

Beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

But who can tell how often he offends! Cleanse thou us therefore from our
secret faults, and keep us from presumptuous Sins, lest they get the Dominion
over us!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

May we never despise the Riches of thy long-suffering and forbearance; nor by
our continued impenitence, treasure up Wrath against the day of Wrath; but be
entirely softened by thy goodness, and speedily led to Repentance!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

And may it please thee to give us that which is Repentance to Salvation, a
Godly sorrow working a thorough amendment of every evil Thought, and Word, and
Work!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

That it may please thee to assist us in our Addresses to thy Holy Altar, where
we will again dedicate our selves entirely to thee, and do thou verify our
Offering!

We beseech thee to hear us, good Lord.

Pity our Infirmities, and prepare our Hearts for the reception of our dearest
Savior; hearken to the good desires which thou thy self have put into our
Minds; and grant that by thy help, they may be brought to good effect, through
Jesus Christ our Lord!

Good Lord, we beseech thee to hear us.

And thou, Eternal Son of God, we most humbly beseech thee to hear us!

O spotless Lamb of God, that take away the Sins of a wretched wicked World,
have Mercy upon us, and now and ever grant us thy Peace; we are thine, O
therefore save us for thy Mercies sake!

Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us.
Lord have mercy upon us
Our Father which art in Heaven; hallowed be thy Name. Thy kingdom come, Thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven. Give us this Day our daily Bread.
And forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. And
lead us not into Temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

BOOKS newly Printed for, and Sold by Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St.
Paul's Churchyard.
A Discourse of the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays, with some
Considerations of the Occurrences of Humane Life. By Timothy Nourse, Gent.
price 4 Shillings. A Treatise of Education, especially of Young Gent. in 2
parts. By Obadiah Walker, D. D. the Sixth Edition, much enlarged, price 3 s.
Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning, the Second Edition, with large
Additions. By William Wooton, B. D. Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl
of Nottingham, price 6. s. A Brief and Easy Method to understand the Roman
History, with an exact Chronology of the Reigns of the Emperors, an Account of
the most Eminent Authors, when they flourished, and an Abridgment of the Roman
Antiquities and Customs, by way of Dialogue, for the use of the Duke of
Burgundy. Translated from the French, with large Additions, By Mr. Tho. Brown.
Very proper to be read in Schools, price 2 s. The whole Works of that Excellent
Practical Physician Dr. Tho. Sydenham; wherein not only the History of Acute
Diseases are Treated of after a New and Acurate Method; but also the shortest
and safest way of Curing most Chronical Diseases. Translated from the Original
Latin, By John Pechey, of the College of Physicians. Travels in and through
Italy, Describing the Libraries, Monasteries, Nunneries, Temples, and Palaces
of Princes, with an Account of their Habits, Customs, and Laws. By Mr. Lassels,
Gent. The Second Edition enlarged, price 5 s. The History of Polybius the
Megalopolitan, Containing an Account of the Transactions of the whole World,
but principally of the Roman People during the first and second Punick Wars, in
three Volumes. Translated by Sir Henry Sheers, and Mr. Dryden. The third Volume
never before Printed, price 10 s. Sir Thomas Pope Blount's Essays upon several
Important Subjects. The third Edition enlarged. To which is added a New Essay
of Religion, and an Alphebetical Index to the whole, price 3 s. De Re Poetica:
Or Remarks upon Poetry, with Characters and Censures of the most Considerable
Poets, whether Ancient or Modern. By Sir Thomas Pope Blount, price 5 s. A
Natural History containing many, not common, Observations. By Sir Thomas Pope
Blount, price 3 s. A short History of Monastical Orders, in which the Primitive
Institution of Monks, their Temper, Habits, Rules, and the Condition they are
in at present, are treated of by the Author of Frauds of the Monks. The Art of
Knowing ones Self, or a Diligent search after the Springs of Morality, price 2
s. 6 d. Lilly Improved, Corrected, and Explained with the Etymological part of
the common Accidence. By W. T. Master of a Boarding-School at Fulham above 22
years, price 1 s. Five Love Letters, Written from a Nun to a Cavaleer, with the
Cavaleer's Answer. Translated by Sir Roger L'Estrange, price 1 s. 6 d. A
Discourse of Plurality of Worlds. Translated from the French, price 1 s. 6 d.
The Dialogues of the Dead, in two parts. Translated from the French. The French
Common Prayer in 12 s. or in large 8vo. Mauger's French Grammar. The Sixteenth
Edition, price 2 Shillings.
Where you may be Furnished with all sorts of Novels.

FINIS.

