A SERMON Preached at St. CATHARINE CREE-CHURCH On the 26th of November, 1691.
BEING THE Thanksgiving-day, FOR THE Preservation of the KING, and the Reduction
of Ireland. By Nicholas Brady, M. A. Minister of St Catharine Cree-Church, and
Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Ormond. Printed at the Request of his
Parishioners.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Crouch at the Corner of Popes-Head-Alley, over
against the Royal Exchange, 1692.

To my Worthy Friends The Parishioners of St. C. Cree-Church.
Gentlemen,
I Am so many ways indebted to you, both for your obliging Election of me to be
your Minister, and for the several Civilities which I have received since my
living amongst you, that I could not refuse so small an acknowledgment, as that
of publishing the following Discourse at your Request; tho I am not ignorant,
that besides its own defects, the very subject matter of it will expose it to
the Censure of some, who will not allow others the liberty to speak well of the
Government, whilst they assume to themselves the privilege of Railing at it,
and speaking evil of Dignities. But since I proposed to my self no other end in
it, when I delivered it from the Pulpit, than the instruction of my
Congregation, and the discharging of a good Conscience: I am little concerned
what Reception it may meet with abroad, being abundantly satisfied (by the
desire you have testified to have it made public) that it has had its wished
effect upon You who heard it, and for whose use and advantage it was primarily
designed. As therefore I have consented to the Publication of it, for no other
reason, but because I could not deny you the absolute disposal of that which is
so justly your own; so the only return that I expect or desire, is that you
will go on to exemplify it in your practice; and approve your selves in all
things else, as true Friends to the Government, as you have done in your
favorable acceptance of the following Discourse. That it may please God to
give you frequent occasions of Praises and Thanksgivings, and to perfect the
Deliverance which he has so happily begun, shall be the constant Prayer of

December. 4th. 1691. Your Hearty Well-Wisher, Obliged Friend, and Servant in the
Lord, N. Brady.

A SERMON Preached on the Thanksgiving-day.
PSALM. XVIII. The former part of the last Verse: Great deliverance gives he to
his King.


GOD having rejected Saul from being King over Israel, and having raised up his
chosen Servant David to govern in his stead, many were the Attempts against him
of his potent and designing Enemies, both by open Violence, and by secret
Practices: But the Lord, whose right hand has the pre-eminence, and brings
mighty things to pass, whose Counsel shall stand, let there be never so many
devices in the heart of man, gave Victory unto his King, and showed Mercy unto
his Anointed; and by signal and frequent manifestations of his Power,
established and quietly settled him in that Throne, to which his good Providence
had so remarkably conducted him. In grateful Commemoration of these wonderful
Deliverances, the Royal Prophet composed this Psalm of Thanksgiving, as we may
clearly gather from the Preface of it, where it is entitled, A Psalm of David
the Servant of the Lord, who spoke unto the Lord the words of this Song, in the
day that the Lord delivered him out of the hand of all his Enemies, and out of
the hand of Saul. In it, he gives us a large and eloquent description of
Almighty Power and unbounded Goodness, and shows us how eminently they had both
been exerted in his own favor; and being rapt up into a holy ecstasy, upon a
due contemplation of the Mercies which he had received, he breaks forth into
this passionate Acknowledgment in the words of my Text, Great deliverance
gives he to his King.

In my following Discourse upon which words, I shall insist upon these four
particulars; The two former of which are contained in my Text: The two later
are naturally deducible from it, and fitly accommodated to the present occasion.

First, I shall examine what it is to be Gods King, and what qualifications are
generally found in such a Prince as may justly deserve that Denomination.

Secondly, I shall show, that to such a Prince as is God's King, God will give
great deliverance.

Thirdly, I shall prove, both from the qualifications generally found, and from
the deliverance given, that his present Majesty does justly deserve the
denomination of God's King.

Fourthly and lastly, I shall enquire what Returns are due from us to God, for
the great deliverance which he has given to his King.

First then, I shall examine what it is to be Gods King; and what
Qualifications are generally found in such a Prince, as may justly deserve that
denomination: Great deliverance gives he to His King.

It is indeed most undeniably true, that in a large and unlimited sense every
Sovereign Prince may be styled God's King, since the most Arbitrary Tyrants and
most forcible Usurpers, are without question ordained by God, according as he
testifies of himself, Is there any evil in the City, and I have not done it?
But what we here mean by His King, is such a King as is designed by God to be
the instrument of signal Mercies, and an extraordinary Blessing to the people
which he governs: And in such a Prince as we now speak of, these three
following Qualifications are generally found.

1. A visible and more than common designation of him to the Government.

2. A Course of Government advantageous to his People, and tending to the
Advancement of True Religion.

3. A Life Exemplary and Unblameable in his private Actions and Conversation.

1. Then, in order to denominating a Prince God's King, there is generally
found a visible and more than common designation of him to the Government.

God, in his ordinary Dispensation of common Mercies, generally proceeds in a
settled course; he makes his Sun to rise daily, his Rain to fall at its
appointed Season; and thus he dispenses his usual Blessings after a familiar
manner, in a regular way, and ties himself up (as it were) to Rule and Method:
But when he designs to bless remarkably, and to give extraordinary Instances of
his good Will and Favor, he then has no other bounds but his own Omnipotency,
and constrains us to confess, that it is the Lord's doing, by making his
proceedings appear mavelous in our eyes. Thus, if a Nation be to be rescued
from Slavery, a Moses shall be sent in the power of Miracles; if a tottering
Government be to be settled and confirmed, a David shall be conducted to the
Helm, by a constant Series of most especial Providence; if Idolatry be to be
rooted out, a Jehu shall be Anointed to it in a particular and solemn manner;
that so, at the same time that we are sensible of the Mercy, we may also
perceive from whose hand it comes; that God may not only give Blessings unto
his People, but may make unto himself also a glorious Name. For indeed, we are
all too apt to sacrifice to our Net (as the Prophet words it) to ascribe our
successes to our own endeavors, than which we cannot offer a greater affront
to the Almighty, Author of them: God therefore being willing to assert and
vindicate his own Honor, and being jealous of his Glory, which he will not
give to another, interposes visibly in such remarkable occurrences, and by so
doing extorts a Confession, that we were not delivered by our own strength,
neither did our own arm save us; but his right hand, and his arm, and the light
of his countenance, because he had a favor for us. When we find things go on
in the common road, and proceed forward in an unbroken course, if any
alteration happens for the better, we are apt to impute it to Chance or
Accident, or the uncertain Vicissitude of Worldly affairs, and seldom do we
look up to a higher Cause: But, when in order to that end, we see the current
of Affairs unaccountably diverted from its proper Channel, Ancient
Constitutions abolished, and new ones introduced; and all this done as suddenly
and surprizingly as a Scene is shifted in the Theater; when when we see the
mighty, against all manner of probability, brought down from his seat, and the
humble and meek, against all human appearance, exalted to it, we cannot then
but discover his hand in it, who raises up one and casts down another, we
cannot but acknowledge that our Salvation is of the Lord. This therefore is the
first Qualification generally found in such a Prince, as may justly be
denominated God's King; a visible and more then common designation of him to
the Government.

But because this may be as well applied to Tyrants, who are sent by God for
Scourges to a Rebellious Nation, as to those who are designed Protectors and
Deliverers; therefore,

A second Qualification of such a Prince, as may justly be denominated God's
King, is a Course of Government advantageous to his People, and tending to the
Advancement of True Religion.

The two great Ends which God proposes to himself, by sending a Blessing of so
high a Nature, are the benefit of those to whom he sends it, and the Glory of
his own great Name: The former of these cannot be attained, but by such a
Course of Government as is advantageous to the People; nor the later, unless it
tend to the advancement of God's Worship in its Purity, and to the furtherance
of true Religion: But God neither lays his designs so shallowly, nor executes
them so weakly, as to run any hazard of a disappointment; and consequently his
ends will assuredly be completed, and that probably by such means as I have
already assigned. And indeed this is the truest (...)or touchstone, by which we
may at any time be able to distinguish, whether God sends us a Prince in Mercy,
or whether he gives us a King in his Anger; since those who are designed for
the Executioners of his Vengeance, are as discernably advanced by the Divine
Assistance, as those who are intended for the Instruments of his Favor: It is
not therefore the bare Accession to a Crown by an unbeaten Path, that can
denominate any one (in the sense of my Text) Gods King; but such a management
of Affairs during his Administration, as may answer the intentions of unbounded
Goodness. God sometimes conducts one to the Throne, and seats him in it, and
when he has so done, abandons him to himself; and then how different is the man
from what he was before! all the expectation that was raised by his unusual
promotion is most unhappily disappointed; his Lusts and his Passions hurry him
to extremities. Neither Law nor Conscience can set bounds to his
Extravagancies; and his Exit is generally as shameful and as miserable, as his
coming in was honorable and hopeful: But when God has appointed one to be his
King, he does not only lead him to it by the hand, and establish him in it, but
upholds him also with his Power, and directs him with his Wisdom, that he may
be able to go in and out before so great a People. Then, the expectation which
was at first raised by his signal advancement, is happily kept up by his worthy
performances; then does Justice run down like waters, and Righteousness like a
mighty stream; because God has given his Judgments unto his King, and has
poured out his spirit upon his Anointed. This therefore is the second
Qualification of such a Prince, as may justly be denominated God's King, a
course of Government advantageous to his People, and tending to the advancement
of true Religion.

A Third Qualification by which a Prince may justly be denominated God's King,
is a Life exemplary and unblamable in his private Actions and Conversation. A
Prince that is designed for a Scourge and an Avenger, is generally as ill a Man
as he is a King; since it is the usual method of God's Providence, to burn the
Rod after he has made use of it; and Executioners (we know) are seldom chosen
out of the best of men; the basest and the worst are commonly thought good
enough for such an Employment: But where Blessings are dispensed, they are
always transmitted through the hands of Favorites. The Mercy of God is his
darling Attribute; nor will he ever prostitute it so far, as to impart it by
the means of such who have themselves no title to it: The greatest of all
mercies, the Covenant of Grace, was conveyed to mankind by his best-beloved;
and so it is proportionably with subordinate Blessings: Now we know without
holiness it is impossible to please God; and how shall he convey the
refreshings of his goodness, by such a One as is the object of his displeasure?
We cannot therefore look upon any one to be God's King, where we do not see
some Rays of the Divine Perfection breaking forth in his Life and Conversation:
And hence it is that the Royal Prophet, who names himself his King in the words
of my Text, styles himself in the Preface of this Psalm, the Servant of the
Lord. And certainly it is the greatest advantage imaginable, toward drawing
down Blessings of the first magnitude upon a Nation, to have a Prince whose
Actions are exemplary and unblamable; since he is not only qualified thereby to
be a fit Instrument for the conveyance of them; but by the strength and power
of so eminent an Example, will probably influence his Subjects also, and fit
them for the reception and improvement of them. This therefore is the third
Qualification of such a Prince as may justly be denominated God's King, a Life
Exemplary and Unblamable in his private Actions and Conversation.

And indeed, the Royal Author of this Psalm of Thanksgiving might justly apply
that title to himself, since he was signally qualified in these three
particulars. Through what an amazing labyrinth of Dangers and of Difficulties
did the clue of Divine Providence direct him to the Throne! How studiously did
he consult the good of his Subjects, and how zealously did he establish
Religion in its purity! How Examplary was his Life, and how Unblamable his
Conversation! Well might he then assure himself of the Divine Protection, and
that God would give great deliverance to his King.

And this leads me to the consideration of my second General, namely, to show,
that to such a Prince as is God's King, God will give great deliverance: Great
deliverance gives he to his King.

God is not a man that he should repent, nor does he ever do things by halves,
but will thoroughly complete whatever he has designed: To raise up a man after
his own heart, to advance him by unusual methods to the Supreme Authority, to
promote by his means the public good both of Church and State; and when by the
vigorous discharge of his Duty in so eminent a Station, he has exposed himself
to dangers and to difficulties, to let him then sink poorly under them, were to
impeach himself of impotency or inconstancy, either of which would derogate
from the Divine Perfection. God has engaged himself in honor, to stand by him
whom he has so visibly acknowledged for his King; and if God be for him, who
can be against him? How little will all the Tricks and Contrivances of human
Policy be able to supplant or undermine him, who has the Wisdom of God to
support him and sustain him! God brings the counsel of the Heathen to naught,
and makes the devices of the People of none effect: But the counsel of the
Lord stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all generations: How
little can the united Forces of Conspiring Adversaries prevail against him, who
has the Power of God to strengthen and uphold him! He will not be afraid for
ten thousands of the people, that should set themselves against him round
about; for God smites all his enemies upon the cheek-bone, and breaks the teeth
of the ungodly. Since God has designed him for the performance of a work, he
will not suffer him to faint till the Accomplishment of it; for that were to
frustrate his own intentions, and consequently to be inconsistent with himself;
that were to make the workers of Iniquity to rejoice and triumph, and to say
over him, There, there, so would we have it; to leave the two great ends at
which he aimed, the benefiting the public, and the advancing true Religion,
utterly imperfect and uncompleated; and to bring his own power into question
and dispute: And therefore Moses makes use of this argument effectually and
successfully, to turn away God's Anger from the Jewish Congregation, by
interesting the Divine Honor in their preservation, for perfecting the work
which he had undertaken; Now if thou shall kill all these people (says he) as
one man, then the Nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
Because the Lord was not able to bring this people into the Land which he swear
unto them, therefore has he slain them in the wilderness: and now I beseech
thee, let the power of my Lord be great as thou have spoken. But, shall the
designs of the Lord just come unto the birth, and can there be wanting strength
to bring forth? No certainly, God will rise up as in mount Perazim, and
strengthen himself as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his
strange work; and bring to pass his act, his strange act: He will give
Salvation unto his King, and will deliver David his servant from the peril of
the Sword; he will hear his Anointed from his holy Heaven, even with the
wholesome strength of his right hand. Having thus run over the two general
Propositions which were contained in the words of my Text, I proceed in the
third place, to consider the former of these two, which are naturally deducible
from it, and fitly accommodated to the present occasion; namely, to prove both
from the qualifications generally found in such a Prince, and from the
Deliverances given to him, that his present Majesty is God's King.

The first Qualification, as you have been told, is a visible and more than
common designation of him to the Government: And certainly, no Prince was ever
advanced to the Sovereign Authority in a more remarkable manner, or more
evidently promoted by God himself, than ours was. For, how prodigious will it
appear in future Story, that presently upon his Landing, with so inconsiderable
a party is compared to the numerous multitudes that might have opposed him, he
should quietly possess himself of the whole Kingdom, almost without the
effusion of one drop of Blood! Who, but God alone, who has the hearts of all
men in his hand, as the rivers of waters, and turns them whithersoever he
pleases, could have bowed the hearts of all the people to him, even as the
heart of one man? Could any thing be more strange or improbable, if we consider
it after the manner of men, than that a King, peaceably possessed of the Throne
of his Ancestors, established in the Government for several years, and thereby
having had means to oblige many, should scarce find one in the extent of his
Dominions, that durst maintain and espouse his cause against an Enemy, in all
appearance much weaker than himself! That an Army of Englishmen, and
consequently Courageous, should unanimously Disband, without fighting a stroke
in behalf of him who had raised them and maintained them? That so many
different Factions which divided us among our selves, should unanimously agree
in the same Resolution, and fill up the vacant Throne by common consent,
notwithstanding all former Heats and Animosities? Yet these almost impossible
Suppositions did all concur, to advance his present Majesty to the Government
of these Nations, and thereby to convince us that he is God's King.

A second Qualification, as you may remember, is a course of Government
advantageous to his People, and tending to the advancement of True Religion:
And here also I may safely affirm, that his present Majesty has fully and
sufficiently made good this Character. For, does not the English Reputation
which was lately sullied, and almost totally Eclipsed, begin to shine out in
its Ancient Luster, and to dazzle the Eyes of Foreign Beholders? Are not Liberty
and Property, those two great privileges which jointly make up the Birthright
of an Englishman; and happily distinguish him from most other Subjects,
rescued from the encroachments which they were about to sink under? Are not the
several Courts of Justice and Equity advantageously redeemed from Bribery and
Oppression, and become in deed, what they were formerly but in name? But above
and before all, is not our endangered and almost supplanted Religion settled
again upon its sure Foundation, and not only by Law Established, but by Law
protected also? Are not our Churches retrieved from their destined perversion
to the use of Error and Superstition, and settled in the due Exercise of a
Reasonable Service? These, and such like, have been the blessed Effects of his
present Majesty's Government, and they abundantly evince to us, That he is
God's King.

A Third Qualification, as you have been informed, is a Life Exemplary and
Unblamable in his private Actions and Conversation: And here we ought to bless
God, that we can now commend a Prince's Morals without the odious Imputation of
Servile Flattery; that we can extol in him the practice of such or such
Virtues, without being thought to Ridicule him thereby for the Commission of
the contrary Vices: That God has been graciously pleased to set one over us,
who is not only a good King, but a good Man too, and makes Greatness and Virtue
no longer incompatible. And O! that the Influence of good Example were as
strong and prevalent as the Contagion of an ill one! And that both Sexes would
be as ready to take Lessons from the Throne of Modesty and Sobriety, as they
are generally prone to follow great Examples of Licesitiousness and
Intemperance! I choose to speak less than I ought upon this Head, lest I might
be thought by some to say too much; and shall only add, that as well by this as
by the two former qualifications, his present Majesty may justly challenge the
denomination of God's King.

Another Branch of the proof proposed, was to be taken from the Deliverances
which have been given him, by which also God has approved him to be his King.

If ever the Providence of God watched over any single person in so eminent a
manner, as to make him seem to be the whole care of Heaven, his present Majesty
has been blessed with that advantage: Not to insist upon the wonderful
Deliverances he has experienced in his former years, being inured to Hardships
and Difficulties, being bred up from a Child in the midst of Dangers, and
having been a Man of War from his Youth: We shall find sufficient Instances of
the Divine Favor and Protection, since his Auspicious Entrance upon the
Government of these Kingdoms. How did the Weapons of his Enemies drop out of
their Hands upon his first Appearance within this Nation, as if a Voice from
Heaven had given Command, Touch not mine Anointed, and do my King no barm! How
has he beeen surrounded with a Wall of Brass in the midst of Horror and
Destruction! How has the Lord covered his Head in the day of Battle; and when
Thousands have fallen on his side, and ten Thousands on his Right Hand, yet has
not suffered it to come nigh him! How industriously has he pursued and sought
out Danger, and how constantly has that avoided him and fled before him! How
has God rebuked (in his Favor) the Winds and the Seas, and brought him forth
safe from the horrors of the deep, and set his Feet upon a Rock, and ordered
his goings! How has he discovered and laid open to him the secret Machinations
of his Treacherous Adversaries, and made themselves to fall into the Trap which
they had laid for him. In a word, How has God protected him from perils by
Land, and perils by Water, perils from his own Countrymen, and perils from the
Heathen! (as St. Paul expresses himself in his Catalogue of Distresses.) Well
may we then conclude with the Royal Psalmist, That many and grievous have been
his Troubles, but the Lord has delivered him out of them all; and both by the
qualifications required in such a Person, and by the great Deliverances which
he has given to him, has undeniably demonstrated that he is His King.

But, as if it were a small thing in the Eye of the Lord to rescue and relieve
him out of all his Distresses, and to give great deliverance unto This His
King. He has done yet more for him and us; he has added to his Deliverance
Success and Triumph, witness the happy Reduction of the Neighboring Nation: So
that he has not only saved his life from destruction, but has crowned him also
with mercy and loving kindness; as for his Enemies he has clothed them with
shame, but upon himself he has made his Crown to flourish. Certainly, the
consideration of such extraordinary advantages, should powerfully induce us to
give praise unto God, who has given such great deliverance to his King, and
communicated by Him such Benefits to us all.

And this leads me to the consideration of the Fourth and last General, being
the second Proposition deducible from the words of my Text; namely, To enquire
what Returns are due from us to God, for the great deliverance which he has
given to his King.

Ingratitude is not only the basest, but the most dangerous too of all Vices,
and draws after it a Train of Consequences, no less fatal and destructive, than
they are shameful and dishonorable: Even amongst Men themselves, he forfeits
all Title to future Favors, that is unthankful for those which he has already
received; and nothing makes a Man less befriended in his necessity, or more
unpitied in his adversity, than the black Imputation and Character of an
ungrateful person: But when the Case is stated between God and Man, the woeful
effects of so degenerate a temper are vastly greater and more pernicious: for
then, we do not only cut off our own expectations, and render our selves
incapable of future mercies; but we lose the advantage also of all our former
Blessings, and by an unhappy kind of Alchymy convert them into Curses. How
signally and remarkably we have lately felt the comfortable Refreshings of the
Divine Goodness, none can be so stupid as to be ignorant, none so impudent as
to deny: If we look upon the Preservation and Establishment of our tottering
Religion, the happy Union of our selves at home, and the successful progress of
our Arms abroad, we cannot but acknowledge, that God has compassed us about
with Songs of deliverance; if we consider the many Dangers and Distresses from
which it has pleased the good Providence of God to protect his present Majesty,
both as to open Violence and secret Practices, so that no weapon, no design
formed against him has prospered, and how he has been pleased to bring him back
to his longing People in Health and Safety, we cannot but confess, that great
deliverance has he given to his King: And from both considerations we must
necessarily infer, that vast Returns of Gratitude are due upon our side; which
we are obliged to pay after the following manner:

First, By Praises and Thanksgivings to Almighty God, the Author and Fountain
of them all. So many visible appearances of the Divine Providence have entitled
God to the sole Honor of our signal Deliverances, that it would be a direct
robbing him of his Glory, to pretend to ascribe it to any other; he having
acted upon these occasions, as he expresses himself by the Prophet Isaiah; And
I looked, and there was none to help; and I wondered that there was none to
uphold; then my own Arm brought Salvation. Thus God arose, and his and our
Enemies were scattered; and they that hated both him and us, fled before him.
Therefore not unto us, O Lord, neither to King nor People, not unto us, but
unto thy Name give praise, for thy loving mercy and for thy truths sake. Nor
must we think it sufficient to draw near thus unto God with our mouths, and to
honor him with our lips, to give him only a verbal acknowledgment; no, we must
demonstrate our gratitude to be real and substantial, by making that return
which he chiefly expects, in the amendment of our Lives and Conversations:
according to the instruction of the Prophet Micah, He has shown thee, O man,
such things as be good; and now what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?

But Secondly, We must testify our gratitude for these Deliverances, by
Loyalty and Obedience to their present Majesty's, the blessed Objects of some
of these Mercies, and the happy Instruments of all the others; and having
rendered unto God the things that are God's, we must also render unto Coesar
the things which be Coesars. Nor indeed can we, without the highest dis-respect
to God himself, be wanting in our Duty to two such Princes, whom he has so
signally declared to be His King and Queen. Now this Obedience must be
expressed by a due Recognition of their just Authority, by Prayers and
Supplications offered up in their behalf, by a decent and respectful Behavior
toward them, and by Reverent Expressions in relation to them; but chiefly and
especially, by a hearty and vigorous Assistance of them both with our Lives and
Fortunes, for the completing those great Deliverances, which God through them
has so happily begun.

Thirdly, We must testify our Gratitude for these Deliverances, by Love and
Assection one toward another, the mutual sharers and partakers of them.
Behold, how good and joyful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity! Let us, in the name of God, lay aside all manner of rancour and malice,
all unseemly heats and animosities, all odious names of Parties and of
Factions, Let brotherly love continue, and the only Contention amongst us be,
who shall most Zealously serve his God, who shall most Vigorously assist his
Prince, and who shall most Cordially affect each other. Thus (as St. Peter
advises, Let us add to our godliness brotherly kindness,) and to brotherly
kindness charity.

And therefore Fourthly and Lastly, We must testify our gratitude for these
Deliverances, by showing Charity to our distressed Brethren. It is the most
natural Return of Thankfulness to Almighty God for rescuing us from our
Distresses, when we endeavor to Copy out that great Original, by relieving (as
far as we can) the necessities of others: For, can we be truly thankful for
Mercies, and not love that God from whom we have received them? And he that
says he loves God, and hates (that is, relieves not) his brother, is a liar,
says the Apostle, and the truth is not in him. In a word, a grateful Return
must be made, in such a manner as we know is well-pleasing and acceptable to
God; and therefore to do good and to distribute, we must not forget, for with
such Sacrifices God is wellpleased. To him, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
three Persons but One God of Mercy, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, and
Thanksgiving, for the manifold Blessings which he has conferred upon us all,
and for the great Deliverance which he has given to his King.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by Samuel Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's Head.
Ally next Cornhil.
FOLIO
RVshworth's Collections. The Life, Reign and Death of Edward II. King of
England and Lord of Ireland, with the Rise and Fall of his great Favorites,
Gaveston and the Spencers. Written by E. F. in the year 1627, and Prented
verbatim from the Original.
QVARTO.
A Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at
Guild-Hall-Chappel, upon Good Friday, March 29 1689. A Sermon Preached before
the King and Queen at White Hall, on the 28th of December, 1690. A Sermon
preached before the King at Belfast in Ireland, on the 14th day of June, 1690.
All three by George Royse, D. D. Provost of Oriel College in Oxford, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to their Majesty's. The true Interest of the Princes of
Europe, in the present State of Affairs.
OCTAVO.
The Ingenious and diverting Letters of the Lady -- Travels into Spain:
Describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreations of that People. Intermixed with great Variety of Modern
Adventures, and surprising Accidents; being the truest and best Remarks extant
on that Court and Country. The first and second Part. * The third and last Part
of the Lady -- Travels will be published with all speed. Materot Redivivus, the
Italian Master, showing the great Variety and Beauty of the Italian Hand, being
a Royal Sheet of Paper, Containing about 950 Letters. By John Airs, Master of
the Writing-School near St. Paul's. Sold by him and Samuel Crouch.

