AN Husbandmans Harrow to pull down the Ridges of the PRESBYTERIALL GOVERNMENT
and to smooth, a little, the INDEPENDENT. That they and others may walk
together upon plain Scripture Grounds, without stumbling on the ridgedness of
either, or both. Containing diverse new and unanswerable Arguments, properly
deduced from Sacred Scriptures to this purpose, that have never yet been
proposed by any on either partee, Which induces the Husbandman to make thus
bold whether welcome or no. And having prooved also the said Scripturall
Arguments, that like teeth of steel, they will pull down the Ridges, before
they break or bend; having been forced to try them upon ridged lands: because
he could not walk upon either of their grounds without stumbling on the Ridges.

Written by ELLIS BRADSHAVV of the Parish of Bolton, in the County of
Lancaster, Husbandman.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the black spread Eagle
at the West end of Paul's. 1649.

To the Reader.
BEloved Brethren; Who ever you be that shall read or hear, and understand
those things that are here expressed. I desire briefly in the name of God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, to admonish and exhort, yea, to kindle, and encourage
you in the ways of truth, of meekness, and of righteousness, as Psalm. 45. and
Hebr. 1.

But to danke, and daunt, and discourage the adversaries in every respect,
wherein they do oppose, or exalt themselves against the Lord Jesus, or against
his Scepter; yea, against his Kingdom, against his truth, and meekness, and
righteousness, as Hebr. 1. 8, 9, etc.

For the time is come, that he has taken to himself (even) his great power,
and has in (measure) reigned, as Revel. 11. 17.

Nay, there is heard (already, even) a loud voice, saying in heaven; (to wit,
in the Church) Now is salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and
the power of his Christ; for the Accuser of our brethren, (to wit, Satan) is
already cast down, which accused them before our God day and night, as Revel.
12. 10, 11, 12.

And they have (in measure already) overcom by the blood of the Lamb, and by the
word of their Testimony. And if you ask (who) that have thus overcome. They
are plainly noted what stamp they are [of;] For they are of such, as have not
loved their lives unto the very death. This is their stamp, and let it be their
Motto, for there is none more proper, neither any more precious, or truly
honorable amongst the Sons of men.

And therefore rejoice ye heavens, (to wit, ye Churches) and ye that dwell in
them.

But woe be to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil
himself is come down unto you, [and that] having great wrath, knowing that he
has but a short time, till he must be enclosed, and chained up, in the
bottomless pit, for a thousand years, as Chap. 20. 1, 2, 3. for he must be shut
up, and a seal set upon him, that he shall deceive the Nations no more, till
the thousand years shall be fulfilled: though after that, he must be loosed,
for a little season.

And therefore to dank, and dant, and discourage the Adversaries; and for
terror and amazement, even to the people of God; yea, such as fear his Name,
whether they be small or great. Lest they should be engaged on the adversaries
part; against Michael, and against his Angels, as Revel. 12. 7. Even against
him, I mean, That is the first and the last, that lives, and was dead, but
that is now alive for evermore, Amen: who has the keys of hell and of death,
Chap. 1. 17, 18.

Yea, for terror unto such, as shall engage against him; I might write a Book,
not only within, but on the backside; like that spoken of in Ezekiel; And all
full, even of bitter lamentations, and mournings, and woes.

Though it is doubtful, it should but be in (vain to the most part.) For even
the people of God, that are his Elect and precious, are many of them grown,
even secure and careless; yea, dull and incapable of any deep impressions,
either of fears, or hopes: And they are too apt, either not to [hear,] or when
they have heard, to let the wordsslip, as Heb. 2. 1, 2, 3. and so incur to
themselves so much greater judgments, unless they repent.

And therefore, woe, woe, and alas for ever, to all that do but neglect; much
more, that despise so great salvation, Hebr. 2. 3, 4, to 9.

Yea, woe, woe, and alas for ever, to the inhabitants of the earth that forget
God.

And above all, unto them, that in measure know God, and yet in no measure will
glorify him as God, neither are thankful; but become vain in their
imaginations, etc. as Romans 1. 21. Yea, who have changed the truth of God into a
lie: and worshipped, and served the creature (yea any creature) more then the
Creator, who is God indeed, blessed for ever, Amen.

Yea, Woe, woe, and alas for ever, unto those, who not likeing to retain God
in their knowledge, nor in their minds and thoughts, he shall give them over to
a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient, being filled
with all unrighteousness, etc. as the particulars are enumerated, Romans 1. 28,
29, 30, 31, 32.

Yea, Woe unto the world because of offenses: And though it must needs be, that
offenses shall come, yet woe unto such, by whom they come: It were better for
them that a Mill stone were hanged about their necks; and they were cast into
the Sea, then that they should offend but one of the least of those little
ones,' that believe in Christ, as Matthew. 18. and 3. to 14.

And what ever men think, yea, though they care not to despise or offend, and
reproach, yea even murder and destroy, and seek to root out, even the very
names and posterities of any such little ones, that believe in Christ; making
no more account of the killing of such, then of so many Fleas.

Yet, It is not the will of their heavenly Father, that so much as one of these
little ones should perish, as verse. 14. And therefore it is, that he does
admonish us, how to deal with such, if they trespass against us, verse. 15,
etc. For precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. And he
will doubtless preserve their souls, though cruel Cains, shall destroy their
bodies: yea, he will doubtless, preserve the faithful, and plenteously reward
every proud doer.

But let it admonish such who are faithful, and that obey his voice, to take
heed unto themselves; and if their brethren sin against them, tell them of
their faults; and if they repent, forgive them, etc. yea, though seven times
over in one day, as Mat. 18. For we are not allowed to hate our brethren in our
hearts; but to tell them of their faults plainly. Neither is it lawful to judge
and censure them, as Romans 15. 4. 7, 10, 12, 13, 19, 22. and Chap. 15. 1, 2, 3,
5, 6, 7. according to appearance, but righteous judgment; We are not allowed
to account them as enemies, but to admonish them as brethren; yea though they
so far disobey, even the Apostles sayings, as that we are necessarily engaged,
to Withdraw from them, as 2 These. 3. 6.

And therefore woe unto such, what ever they be, whether Presbyterians, or
Independants, that shall resist the truth, of which they are convinced, and
shall, through partial respects to their own parts, seek the destruction either
of other, and remain implacable, and malign, and hate, and despise their
brethren, because in every respect they cannot accord to be of their minds, nor
walk with them just in their ways, when yet not withstanding if partiallity do
not blind their eyes, they may both see faults in their own ways, in which they
are engaged, which no engagement ought to bind them to maintain or abide in
after they are discovered, but they ought freely to confess their faults each
to others, as James 4. 11. 12. and Chap. 5. 16. being convinced of them, and
both of them ought to consent freely to the wholesome words of our Lord and
Savior even Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
and not to teach otherwise; but if any do, the Apostle tells us plainly, (and
we are apt to believe it,) That such are puffed up, and know nothing, but dote
about questions and strifes of words, whereof comes envy, strife, railing,
evil surmisings, perverse disputings, of men, of corrupt minds, and destitute
of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness: And bids Timothy, from such
to withdraw himself, as 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4, 5.

And we are apt to do as he advised Timothy, for if it was good for Timothy, it
is in all liklihood good for us also; and how shall we think such men honest,
that will not approve of the things that are honest, as the Apostle injoyneth
them in another place? For it is not enough not to oppose, or resist, and speak
against such things, but they ought to approve them, and testify their assent
and agreement thereunto, so far forth as they are apparently honest or true,
etc. else they do implicitly oppose and resist them, or show their
unwillingness to embrace and obey them, and that they are stubborn and
rebellious, and even at enmity with God in those respects, because he crosses
them even in their own devices and ways, etc. And doubtless many good men in
these our days are deeply engaged in this very sin, and yet we are not allowed
to judge and censure them as enemies and Apostates, but should love, and pity,
and pray for them, considering our selves as also subject to the same failings.

Beloved Brethren, The Scripture is clear concerning Jonas, that he was a
Prophet of the Lord, and was immediately called and sent of God, as a choice
and famous man, to prophecy against Nineve, and yet because that he knew the
goodness and mercy of God, and that upon repentance he would pardon; he was
unwilling even to preach the preaching which the Lord commanded him, in all
likelihood, lest his future prophesying should be the worse credited; and how
rebelliously he carried and demeaned himself, till he was forced through
extremity, by the power of God, to submit unto him, and humble himself, and out
of the belly of hell even to cry unto him: And after all that, being but a
little afflicted for want of the gourd, how passionately angry and teeny he
was, and durst profess stubbornly, even in the presence of God, speaking it
vocably unto him, that he did well to be angry, even to the very death; like a
man desperate, and as he had been at enmity even with God himself; and yet he
was, doubtless, a man inspired with the Spirit of God, and very intimate and
familiar with him: Look for this Jonas 4.

And therefore strange is the temper, and natural frailties and dispositions
(by nature) of some good men:

Nay, who can we read of almost in Scripture, though never so holy and fully
inspired, but we may read likewise of their failings and infirmities, and of
some of their gross and notorious sins; as David in the matter of Uriah; Peter
in his dissimulation, and building up that by his practice, which he destroyed
by his doctrine: and Paul had his infirmities and Pricks in the flesh after his
conversion and calling to the Ministry. Elias also was a man subject to like
passions, as the Apostles were, who confessed themselves subject to like
passions as others, Acts 14. 15. and yet they were men full of faith, and of
the Holy Ghost; so was Barnabas, so was Peter, so were all the Apostles, and
many others, in whom we might instance; and it would be useful to determine
from murder, or [hating] of their brethren, which is no better then
[man-slaughter,] as 1 John 3. 5. which many are too apt to take liberty to do,
(because they see some faults and miscarriages in them,) as if it were a ground
fully sufficient to excuse their malice, because they have some spots, yea some
flesh, as well as spirit: And they will not believe, that any such have the
Spirit of God, because they have also a spirit of flesh, a Law in their
members, by which they are led captive, against the Law of their minds; for
they will not consider that they have but the Spirit of God in measure: And
that it is needful they be sometimes left to their own strength, that they
might remember, and freely acknowledge, by whose strength they stand, and give
the glory to God; for who is there, but is apt to think, that their mountains
are made strong, so that they shall never be moved, and to judge, and censure,
and condemn their brethren, and say of themselves like the proud Pharisee, [We
are not like other men?] If they should not sometimes have pricks in the flesh,
and messengers of Satan sent to buffet them, a little matter will puss us up;
and therefore it is that the Apostle admonishes, that he that thinks he
stands, should take (special) heed lest he fall.

For by how much the more confident any man is in his own strength, by so much
the more likely he is to fall: And by how much the more severe, rigorous,
censorious, or uncharitable, any man is in judging of others; by so much the
more likely and sure he is so to fall himself, as to be justly culpable of the
same, or worse then those whom he judged, condemned and censured.

And therefore it is, That Christ himself has admonished us, Judge not, that
you be not judged, Mat. 7. 1, 2, etc. Romans 2. 1, to the end. Chap. 7. and Chap.
14.

And should not they that are strong bear the infirmities of the weak, but they
must please themselves? Should not every one of us please his neighbor in that
which is good to edification, as Christ himself also did? Romans 15. 1, 2, 3. and
Chap. 14. and 1 Cor. 16. 14.

Is it not the advice even of the Holy Ghost? Is it not the will of our
heavenly Father, that we should study the things that make for peace, and that
might provoke unto Love? Not unto Wrath, nor to enmity nor hatred, but that
which is the end of the Commandment, and the very life and strength of all
Community, and of the Commonwealth; yea, the happiness and felicity of all
Kingdoms, yea Governments, whatsoever, Civil or Ecclesiastical, and the
subjects thereof.

And it is the only, or at least the chief sign of the dwelling of God, either
in or amongst us: If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfect in us; for God is love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God,
and God in him, 1 John 4. 12, 16, 20, 21.

And not only so, but it is a token of his blessing likewise, for there the
Lord commands the blessing, yea, even permanent blessing, and that the chief
of all, to wit, [Life] for evermore, that is to say, where there is unity of
brethren, and that they dwell so together, Psa. 133. and continue in their love.

And though it be true that in some good measure the Spirit of life from God is
already entered into the two Witnesses, and they are creeping up to stand upon
their feet; so that great fear is (in measure) fallen upon them that saw (and
insulted over) them, as Rev. 11. 10, 11.

Yet, let us never expect the approbation of God, and to be called up to
heaven, nor to ascend in a cloud to such eminent respect in the [Church
universal] which is meant by [Heaven] Verse. 12. till faith and love, which are
the two proper and essential [witnesses] that are here meant, be inspired into
us by the Spirit of life from God, and shall raise and advance us, who are but
the subjects in whom they recide, and who are but the instruments in whom they
act, as a visible express of their invisible power and nature, etc. for the
glory of God, and the terror and amazement of all his adversaties: for it is by
faith, if we prevail with God, or do any thing worthy of respect with him, or
in the sight of men, as Heb. 11. And faith works by love; And he that
believes has the witness in himself: See 1 John 4. 7, 8. So that if these two
Witnesses be inspired into us, and we be acted by them, it will be indeed to
the terror and amazement of all our enemies, that are enemies of God.

And there shall be such an earthquake in the same hour as shall affright a
remnant, who shall give glory to the God of Heaven; And we shall bear a part in
that triumphant song, Verse. 15. to 18.

And therefore Edifying one another in Faith and Love, which are in Christ
Jesus, ought to be the end and chief endeavor of all our business in Church
affairs, as it is the end of the whole Law, and as I hope in God it shall be
mine, Who am,

Your Brother in the Lord Jesus, Ellis Bradshaw.

The Contents.
COntaining by way of preambulation, the grounds and Rules, according to which
the following Discourse is held forth, drawn from the end of the Commandment,
Which is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned. Page 1. 2. 3. 1. First, showing the end of the Commandment to be
better in value, and more to esteemed then the means to accomplish it, and
therefore ought to be chiesly eyed in all the way that leads thereunto. 2.
Secondly, the Illustration and application of the foresaid end of the
Commandment, prescribed as four Rules, to try all Laws, Arguments, Doctrines,
and motives by, ^hether they lead properly to the end of the Commandment, yea
or no, that so we might embrace, or avoid them as we ought to do. Page 4. 5. 6.
7. 3. Thirdly, four grounds and arguments drawn from Scripture, as intending,
and tending to a Reconciliation of the Churches of God, in respect of the
Government and Discipline there of, Pa. 7. 1. The first from the lawfulness of
Chastity or Marriage. Page 8. 9. 2. The second from the lawfulness of community
of goods, amongst such who can so agree, or the claiming of propriety amongst
such who cannot. Page 9. 10. 3. The third from the lawfulness of fasting, and
prayer; or of eating and drinking. Page 10. 11. 4. And the fourth from the
lawfulness of such, who think they ought, of being of the strictest Sect of the
true Religion, such as were the Pharisecs, or one more remiss, such as was the
Scribes. Page 12. Intending chiefly hereby to clear, that no man ought to blame
anoother, for being more strict and conscientious, then he himself (...), or it
may be [needs] or ought to be; his calling of God, not engaging him to it, as
it does the other, being bound in spirit to the quite contrary, and in
conscience both. Page 12. And one the other part, That those that are stricter
ought not to blame such as are more remiss in some respects; because for ought
they know, they are so engaged, and called of God, and either bound in
conscience, or bound in spirit, within their own Sphere. Page 12. Conseq. The
consequence where of being to this purpose, That they ought not therefore to
compel each other, unto conformity, either to the strictness of the one, or the
remisness of the other: proving that the Magistrate ought to tolerate, or
suffer both, and not to engage them one against the other. Page 12. 4.
Fourthly, The application of the aforesaid grounds, and arguments to the matter
in hand; to wit, to the Churches, and the government thereof. Page 13. 14. 15.
5. Fifthly, First the application of the aforesaid grounds and conclusions by
way of just reproof unto both parties, because they do not agree, and live,
and love, and carry as brethren. Page 15. For which end the Rule of Charity is
proposed, and a little proscsecuted Page 16. 17. 18. 2. The punctual
application of the precedent conclusions are briefly asserted; first to the
one, and secondly to the other, and a general consequence concluded thence.
Page 19. 6. An objection proposed and answered at large; to wit, that seeing
Presbyteries plead that Independents Rules and ways of discipline, are not more
strict, but more remiss, and loose in many respects, giving way for liberty of
all Religious without control by the Civil State, as so they speak of them:
Page 19. It is answered at large, That the Rules and Principles, according to
which they engage to act, are manifestly stricter, and lawfully too, in diverse
particulars, which are held forth in several assertions, wherein likewise they
are engaged, in duty and conscience, so to do: Though it is not denied, but
many Presbyterians are engaged in conscience to do the contrary, and are fully
persuaded that they ought so to do for the time present. P. 20. 1. It is
asserted, That they are justly stricter with whom they do incorporate and join
themselves in Church policy, because that, so far forth as their joining
together has respect to the policy and government of the Church, no Church can
be too strict. Page 20. Though, in other respects, they ought to join according
to the rule of Charity, and not of Certainty, as in administration of the Word
and Sacraments, as 1 Cor. 16. 14. Chap. 13. and Chap. 10. 32, 33. 2. It is
asserted, That (for the same ends, and reasons, and respects, alleged in the
former) they are justly strict and conscientious, and teach it as a duty, That
all that are found, and known to be men of approved fidelity, within convenient
bounds, should thus incorporate and join themselves; and to engage themselves
in Covenant unto God, for better security and deeper engagement unto all
brotherly and Christian duties, and to deal impartially in all such business,
as concerns them all, for the glory of God, and the Churches good; and to be
wise as serpents, though innocent as doves. P. 21, 22. 3. It is asserted, and
proved at large, That the Principles of Independents are stricter, and nearer
to the Scripture rules, for edifying of the Church, in that they do not limit
the holy one of Israel to speak in public by the learned only. P. 22 to 47
For proving Whereof, 1. It is asserted from 1 Cor. 12. 7, to 12. That naturally
and manifestly flows from hence; That to whomsoever the manifestation of the
Spirit is given, it is given to such to profit withal. Page 23. 2. It is
proved against an objection to the contrary, That such who have the Spirit of
God, and are spiritualized thereby, may discern all things, yea, the deep
things of God, as 1 Cor. 2. 10. 15. yea, though they be unlearned in the
tongues; And that the manifestations of the Spirit may be evident and
demonstrable, even in these our days, to such who are spiritual, though not
unto others, as verse. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Page 23. 24. 3. The particular gifts, or
notes, or qualifications, or operations, or administrations, are the chief of
them produced from sacred Scripture, whereby the manifestation of the Spirit of
God, and of power, etc. may be evident and demonstrable in such as are not of
those that are learned in the Tongues, nor graduates in the Schools, even in
these our days, yea, and that in such who do no miracles. Page 24. 4. It is
asserted and proved against an Objection, That these particular gifts and
administrations, which are reckoned up by the Apostle Paul, cannot be so
counterfeited by the carnal, but they may easily be discerned by those that are
spiritual P. 24, 25. And to that purpose there is diverse Notes from sacred
Scripture, which (being found in any) do prove for certain, and do evidently
demonstrate, that it is indeed even the Spirit of God that speaks in them,
yea though they do no miracles. Page 25. 1. The first from John 7. 18. Ibid. 2.
From John 10. 10. 28. Page 26. 3. From James 1. 17, 18. Ibid. 4. From John 16.
8. Ibid. 5. From 1 Cor. 4. 5. and Chap. 14. 24, 25. Ibid. 6. From John 3. 21.
Ibid. 7. From Phil. 2. 15, 16. and Ephesians. 5. 13, 14. Ibid. But that the
chiefest of all these particulars, or any that can be exhibited, is a clear
understanding and knowledge of God, and of the sacred Scriptures, and the
secrets thereof, and of the secrets and mysteries of his sacred Kingdom:
Because without all controversy, great is the mystery of godliness, as the
Apostle says, Col. 1. 26. 27, 28. Romans 16. 25. Ephesians. 3. 9. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Titus 1. 2. page 27. To which a Reason is rendered, drawn from the contrary,
Luke 8. 10. Mark 4. 33, 34. Mat. 13. Ibid. And a Consequence gathered, backed
with 1 Cor. 4. 5. and Matthew. 10. 19. Ibid. And an Objection answered, to
satisfy such who count it immodesty. page 28. 1. And another to satisfy such
who object, That speaking unto men to Edification, and Exhortation, and
Comfort, is not properly to prophecy, because prophesying is foreshewing of
things to come; which is fully answered, and clearly vindicated, that it is
properly prophesying, as the Apostle asserteth it from Heb. 11. 1. and John 10.
10. and 1 John 5. 11, 12, 13. 1 Cor. 14. 1, 3, 4. And the chief of all for the
perfecting of the Saints, and for the work of the Ministry, and for the
edification of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. page 29.
2. And secondly, That it is a more present evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit then showing of things to come, as Agabus did; for till the things be
come, they do not manifest the Spirit of God. page 29, 30. 3. And thirdly, The
danger is showed to those that despise, or resist, and disparage these things
or ways, etc. or them that use them; or to any authority that will not suffer
it, and give liberty to all them, whose spirit God has raised, to build up the
Churches in their most holy faith, lest wrath be upon them from the Lord, as
Ezra 1. 5, 6. and Chap. 13. 16, 23. and Chap. 8. 22, 23. and Psalm. 2. page 31.
32, 33. Yea, that it is matter of dangerous consequence, either to act, or
comply with such; showed by many Reasons, and all Objections answered fully,
which are too many, and too large to abreviate. page 47. 4 Assertion is,
concerning their Independency, in respect of other Churches, whiles they do
well, as Romans 13. 3, 4. and 1 Pet. 3. to the 23. and Chap. 4. 1, 2. and 12.
with the Reasons that necessarily engage them so to stand, which are
unanswerable. page 47. to 53. 5 Assertion is, concerning their maintaining the
Power, and Kingdom, and Supremacy of Christ; in which it is showed, that they
necessarily assume Democracy to maintain his Monarchy against Antichristian
tyranny and usurpation. page 53. to 56. 6 Assertion is, That they are justly
stricter in keeping themselves within their own sphere, in not judging those
that are without in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5. 12. in a spiritual way, as
Mat. 18. 15. to 21. page 56. 57, 58. Having done with the Presbyterians for the
time present, here is three grand particulars instanced in against the
Independents, and punctually argued from Scripture grounds. 1. First,
Concerning Ordination of Ministers, and other Officers. page 58. to 63. 2.
Secondly, Concerning the authoritative acting of an Assembly of Churches in the
Name of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, wherein is proved, that withdrawing of
Communion is not sufficient, but they ought to proceed even to Excommunication,
yea even to Execration, if their sin so deserve, as for toleration of Idolatry,
Blasphemy, and such heinous sins in their Church Members or Officers. page 63.
to 68. 3. Thirdly, Concerning their strictness in trial of all whom they admit
to partake of the Sacraments, which is named page 68. but prosecuted and argued
against them from page 72. to the end of the Book. But betwixt page 68. and
page 72. the Authors apprehensions, partly abreviating what has formerly been
said, are proposed briefly by way of Result; and then Objections answered
concerning this main difference about admission to the Sacraments, and other
particulars before named, to the end of the Book.
FOrasmuch as the Author does in all things hold forth Charity, which is the
bond of perfectness, Col. 3. 14. and that we are bound to prove all things,
hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21. Therefore, I say unto the ensuing
Treatise,

Imprimatur

THEODORE JENNINGS.
August 9. 1649.
An Husbandmans Harrow to pull down the Ridges of the Presbyteriall Government,
and to smooth a little the Independent; that both they and others might walk
together upon plain Scripture grounds without stumbling on the Ridgeness of
either or both.
THe end of a thing (says wise Solomon) is better then the beginning thereof.

Therefore it follows, that the end of a thing ought chiefly to be eyed as a
mark to shoot at, yea, as the complement, and perfection of all endeavors, and
means, and ways to attain such end.

And so likewise the Apostle Paul, by the spirit of God, gives us clearly to
understand, That the end of the Commandment is love, out of a pure heart, and
a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1. 5.

From which we may justly argue; That if Love, etc. be the end of the
Commandment: And if the end be better, then the means, to attain it.

Cons. Then the means for the accomplishment, (and that should lead unto, or
acquire such an end,) ought not to be pleaded, or set against; nor valued and
esteemed above the end.

Reas. For then it utterly frustrates, and makes the means void, if we rob or
spoil it of its proper end; And so both end and means are utterly vain.

Instan. As for Instance he that pleads the Law against Justice or Legality
of proceedings in matter of State, against the good, and peace, and safety of
the people.

He pleads against both the Law, and justice, and against the good and safety
of the people: And not only so, but he disparageth the Law, and legal
proceedings. As if they intended not, or at least, were not able to attain
their end, but were made on purpose to obstruct such Justice, as ought to be
their end, for which they are made.

And though it is true, that the Law of God, being of absolute perfection, can
never properly be so pleaded; yet unjustly, and improperly, it both may, and
is; though it ought not so to be, but the quite contrary, as has been said.

But how much more ought the Laws of men, (being not absolutely perfect, nor
sufficently wise to attain their end) never to be pleaded; but with chief
reference, and clear respect to the end thereof.

So that he that objects, or pleads them at all; should hold forth with them,
even the end it self; and should make it manifest, how the Law he pleads,
tends as a means, to acquire unto, or bring about such end: Lest he plead the
Law against Justice, as some have done; though deeply learned in the Laws of
the Land; Endangering thereby, to establish Arbitrary, Tyrannical power,
greater then before: concerning which, there is enough already, and at large
expressed to the whole Kingdom.

Only this I add, that I cannot but wonder, how any rational man can ever
desire such enslaving power; or delight to use it, if he had it granted,
considering

1. First, they can never rationally, nor justly expect, nor be certainly
assured, of the cordial affection of any such subjects, who are but subjected
by Arbitrary, cruel and tyrannical power.

For all subjection, that is but merely enforced, is evidently clear, to be
defective in love.

2. Secondly all mere force by power, etc. is so far short of provoking unto
love, or any cordial affection, or honor indeed; as that it dis-ingageth and
repels the affection, and force of love, and of all proper uniting principles;
and quite diverteth them into enmity and hatred, and dis-esteem: especially, in
case, when the honor and service which is forced unto, is not just and proper;
but undue, unsuitable, and more then just, and without desert.

3. Thirdly, as the Scripture speaks, for a man to seek his own glory, is not
glory, no, it is his shame; for when pride comes, then comes shame: and it
is not only lawful but even the bounden duty of them that love the Lord, to
hate evil, as pride, and arrogancy, and the evil way. And even the mouth that
speaks proud things, they ought to hate.

4. Fourthly, What honor is it, or what glory, or renown, for a man to Rule and
have the command; yea, or to sway a Scepter over a Kingdom of slaves? Were it
not his shame amongst Kingdoms of men? And what renown could he possibly get in
time of Wars, by leading forth his slaves to battle, to engage them in service
against Armies of men?

Would they not cowardly desert him, and leave him naked, rather then lose
their lives, which are always dear unto slavish men? they are always so
ignoble, and of such timorous spirits, in case of danger.

And then also, in regard they are not engaged, nor bound cordially unto him,
through personal love, and of their voluntary accord, but enslaved through
force; they will not care, if they find an opportunity for their own safety,
and release from him, if they sell him into the hands of their greatest
enemies, or lay violent hands on his person themselves, as it often is; yea,
and for the most part, there is few Tyrants that escape murder, or just
execution, but it is their end.

By the just judgment of the merciful God, who loves mercy, but hates
cruelty, wrong, and tyranny, and will avenge it, though justice fail in the
hands of men, one time or other, look Isai. 14. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Look
also verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. For the
same measure, that men mete unto others; the same shall be measured unto them
again.

But why should I wonder, to see us all prone to be ambitious, proud, haughty;
seeing we are not fully and thoroughly rational, but in a great measure lead
with sensuality.

But were we thoroughly rational, how could we be proud, that are dust and
ashes, and know our selves such, and that we are but mortal?

Seeing he alone, who is the only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, has immortality, and dwells in light which is inaccessible, which no
man can approach unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see; to whom alone be
ascribed, honor and power everlasting, Amen, Amen.

But thus much briefly, by way of Introduction, or preambulation, to what I
chiefly intend to fall upon, as of all points most meet and necessary, to be
insisted on in these contentious, quarrellous, and perilous times: I mean, in
regard of that great dissension, that is now amongst us, about the Churches
Government, and discipline, etc. Concerning which, I shall endeavor, through
the grace of God, to keep close to the principles that I have premised, and
that as briefly as may be. And shall cast in also even this poor mite into the
Churches Treasury, and that by way of proposal, as aiming chiefly at the
proper end, which is the end of the Commandment, as has been said.

For without all controversy, That which is the end of all the Commandments,
should be all our ends, in all our endeavors, and undertakings.

But the undoubted end of all the Commandments, is doubtless, [Love] out of a
pure heart, and good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned.

This therefore being the proper end; I shall hold it forth in all the means,
that I shall propose, from the Law of God; and shall carry it along in my own
intention; and also make it manifest, as much as possible, how such means,
properly tends to atchieve that end; and how useful and necessary such means
is, to attain there unto, the Lord assisting: who is able to do it, and to make
it clear.

1. And first then, because it do appear to be against [Love] To God above
all, and our Neighbors as our selves. It is worthy to be rejected; for even
the whole Law is contained in this; Yea, what ever it be that is against Love,
is against God; for God is Love, and Love comes of God; and is shed abroad in
our hearts by the holy Ghost; and if we be partakers of this divine love which
is shed in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost; We are made partakers of the godly
nature; and it is of all others, the first and chiefest of those fruits of the
Spirit, and the most essential, 1 John 4. 7, 8, 12, 13, 16, 17. And so is a
clear evidence, That God dwells in us, and we in him; for the love of God is
essentially of God, such love, I mean as comes of God.

2. And secondly, If it do appear to be against this love, out of a pure heart;
it is also worthy to be rejected; for what ever Law, Doctrine, or argument
shall be proposed, to oblige men to in purity, either in heart, or life, It is
without all controversy against the Law of God; for Blessed are the pure in
heart, for they shall see God, and men ought to keep themselves pure, Mat. 5.
8. 1 Timothy 5. 22. Especially in heart, for thereout comes the issues of life.

3. Thirdly, if it be proposed against a good Conscience, it is worthy to be
rejected, as not included in the Law of God.

For all Laws, Doctrines, or Arguments, whatsoever they are that would engage
us against a good Conscience, manifestly grounded on the Word of God, and of
sound Doctrine, that cannot be reproved; we ought to reject them, and yield no
obedience, nor approbation thereunto, either in obedience unto men, or to
please them, etc. For we must not be men pleasers, nor servants of men, but
obey God rather then men; and ought to love, and therefore serve, and honor,
and please him, rather then men. For all the men in the whole Universe, cannot
by any means give men liberty of Conscience to commit sin; if their
Conscience tell them, and be convinced from the Law of God, that they ought not
to do it, as Romans 2. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

But their Consciences, will accuse, and condemn them also; and that in the
day of Judgment, when God shall Judge the secrets of men, by JESUS CHRIST,
according to the Gospel.

Therefore, as they cannot properly give men liberty of Conscince, no more then
save, and exempt men from punishment due for their sins against Conscience;
they ought not to bind, or engage men to obedience unto any Law, against a
good Conscience, rightly grounded on the Law of God, as has been said; But
should give men liberty, to be as strict and severe, and as careful, and
watchful, and as inquisitive is they please, how to keep a good Conscience,
void of offense both to God and men.

4. Fourthly, if any Law, or argument, or motion whatsoever, shall be made
against Faith; to wit, unfaigned Faith, As that we should not believe or trust
in God, but in something else; or that we should believe, or put hope and
confidence in any thing else; or that we should not believe whatsoever he
says, or proposes to us in his sacred Word, or bids us believe, etc. We
ought to reject it; yea, though all the men and Churches in the World, would
engage us to believe, what they assert and resolve upon, as being most able,
because wise and learned; and because a multitude of Counselors to determine
and resolve, what ought to be believed in such a case.

Yet if we certainly know, that the Word of God affirms the contrary; we
ought to believe it, and to reject their resolves, and counsels and assertions,
be they what they will; and must not conform, nor comply with them, nor approve
the same. But if an Angel from heaven, or the whole world being become an
Arrian, should decree, or teach us, the Arrian heresy, we should let him be
accursed; and so also for any other Doctrine, then may be made manifest, as it
ought to be, from sacred Scripture.

There is a time spoken of Zach. 13. when men shall be so zealous against false
Prophets, and false Prophesying, that a man's father and his mother that begat
him, shall say unto him, thou shall not live; for thou speak lies in the
name of the Lord; and his father and his mother, that begat him, shall thrust
him through, when he prophecy, Zach. 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.

We must therefore resolve, to let God be true, and every man a liar, and
therefore rather to believe him, then all, and every, or any man in the whole
world. And also we must and ought to draw near unto God, in full assurance of
Faith, not casting away our confidence in God, which has great recompense of
reward; for faith in God is of all other graces, Love excepted, the most chief
and principal, and the most essential; for it is said of Faith and Love, that
they are in Christ Jesus; yea, though now in heaven. It is not said, that they
were in Christ* to wit, when he was on earth, but that they are in Christ
Jesus; for when the Apostle writ so of him, he was ascended already into
heaven; yea, and though he be in heaven, yet he is said to dwell in men's hearts
by Faith.

And therefore such faith may well be called a precious faith, being so
properly essential to the spirit of Christ; as that where Faith dwells,
Christ also dwells properly and essentially, even by his holy spirit: for
faith and love, which are in Christ Jesus, are not only fruits, but they are
essential witnesses of his holy Spirit abiding in us: He that believes (says
the Apostle) has the witness in himself: 1 John 5. 10. And so he that loves,
it is also a witness that he is born of God, and knows God, Chap. 4. 7. and
that he also dwells in us, verse. 12. and that he has given us of his spirit,
verse. 13. And so That we are made partakers of the godly nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4.
and have in some measure, even the mind of Christ, and the spirit of Christ,
though yet but in measure, because of our finite capacities: whereas in Christ,
even the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily, or rather essentially.

Therefore it follows, That what ever Arguments, or Laws, or Doctrines, make
against Faith, or that but tend to the weakening thereof, or that would hinder
our edifying, and being built up in faith and love, which are in Christ Jesus;
should utterly be rejected, as ungodly, unjust, untrue, opposite, and
contradictory to the Law of God, and to his Sacred Word, which is one, and
cannot be broken, nor alleged properly for such an end; And therefore these
four Rules may stand as cautions, that we admit not any thing, contrary
hereunto; though it should be urged, and presented to us, or proposed, or
commanded, in the name of God; or as being grounded on his sacred Word: For it
it cross, or oppose, or would deprive us, or make void to us this end of the
Commandment, to wit, Love out of a pure heart, and good conscience, and faith
unfeigned; it is false, and wicked, and that which will not stand with the Law
it self, and therefore ought to be rejected of all good men: And therefore with
full purpose to keep to these Rules, as the end also of what I do intend, I
shall further propose these ensuing Grounds and Arguments, both as intending
and tending to a Reconciliation, and full Agreement of the Church of God, in
respect of Government, and the Discipline thereof, as hereafter follows.

1 Ground is, That it is lawful, yea, and the bounden duty of some men, and of
some women, to be more abstenious from things lawful in themselves, and to bind
themselves to a stricter Discipline then others need to engage themselves, or
be bound unto, or be absteni^us from.

Reas. For it is the duty of some men, and of some women, to make themselves
chaste for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat. 19 ^^. and 1 Cor. 7.

For the Kingdom of heavens sake, that is to say, That they might be more free,
both from the cares of this life, and from all carnal engagements, or
disturbances, or distractions, and inducements whatsoever; that might either
trouble, or molest them, or engage their minds, or withdraw their affections,
or hinder their devotions, both of bodies and spirits, in respect of God.

But that they might fully consecrate, and devote themselves, both souls and
bodies, to the sacred government of his grace and spirit; that the Kingdom of
God, by his grace and spirit, might have full scope and dominion in them, both
of their souls and bodies; and that they might more freely attend, and wait
on the Lord, without separation, or without disturbance, or cumber, or
distraction, by any means: But might glorify God both in their bodies and
spirits: And that with all their hearts, with all their souls, with all their
minds, and with all their strength, as so the Law of God requires they should.
For this is the measure of our love to God, that the Law requires, and that
Christ exemplified, and commanded likewise, that he that can receive this,
should receive it.

And it is also the Apostle Paul's advice, by the spirit of God, as better for
such, who can abstain that they should not marry, if they had power over their
own wills; that is to say, had they gift of continency, as Matthew. 19. 10, 11. 1
Cor. 7. 37, 38, 39. 40. and this also the Apostle exemplified, and wished that
all men were even as he himself in that particular.

And thus therefore, I hope that no man will deny, but that it were better for
some, both men and women; such especially, who have the gift of continency, to
abstain from Marriage, and make themselves chaste, for the Kingdom of Heavens
sake, but that they may thus do, It is good for such not to touch a Woman, as
1 Cor. 7. 1.

And yet for all this, Marriage is honorable amongst all men, and is ordained
of God, And some are called of God to that estate; and do in that estate, live
a holy and a blameless life. Enoch walked with God, after he begat Methuselah,
three hundred years, and begat sons and daughters, Genesis 22. 24. Of whom it was
witnessed, That he had pleased God, and that he was therefore translated, that
he should not see death, Hebr. 11. 5. And it was lawful for Peter to lead
about a wife, a sister, and so for the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas. And
Zachary and Elizabeth were both righteous before the God, walking in the
Commandments, and Ordinances of the Lord blameless, as Luke 1. 5, 6.

And David was a man after Gods own heart, save in the matter of Vriah: and yet
had many Wives, and Concubines: And Adam in Innocence, before he sinned, had
his wife, and was commanded to be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
earth, etc. And how else should men be multiplied, and succeed, etc. but by
means of procreation, as God has ordained, and appointed, and called men; as
doubtless, he has, some after this manner, and some after that: For it were a
wicked Antichristian Doctrine, to forbid to marry, or to command to abstain
from meats, which God has commanded, to be received with thanksgiving, 1 Timothy
4. 3, 4, 5.

But such who are so called, and inclined for marriage, are not very suitable
for consociation with such-as make themselves chaste, nor they for them, in
these respects.

2. And secondly, It is lawful for some, to give all their goods unto the poor,
and to give their bodies to be burned, 1 Cor. 13. 3. And in case, when called
of God, and required so to do, it is their duty.

For the young man in the Gospel, ought to have done so, as Christ advised him,
that he might be perfect. And it had been good for him so to have done; for in
consideration thereof, he might have had treasure in heaven, and have followed
Christ, Math. 19. 21.

And also, Whosoever will save his life, (when Christ calls him to part with
it) shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose it for his sake, shall find it,
Math. 16. 24, 25, 26. and Math. 10. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39.

And it is lawful for such, who are of one heart, and of one soul, to have all
things common, and not to title, or claim any thing, that any of such
possesses as his own, Acts 4. 32. But such, amongst such, as are possessors of
Lands, may lawfully sell them, and bring the price thereof, and lay it down at
the Ministers feet; that distribution may be made unto every man, (amongst
them) according as he has need; as verse. 34. 35. 37. but this community is
only proper amongst such as are of one heart.

And yet for all this, He that provideth not for his own, especially them of
his household, he is worse then an Infidel. And riches are given to some, as
great blessings; as to Abraham, and David, and Solomon, and Joab,etc. and it is
a more blessed things to be a giver, then a receiver.

And men have a true and just property in their own goods, or estates, as Acts
5. 4. and it is in their own power, neither ought any to be compelled to such
community of goods, and estates; nor to distribute and communicate, but as they
do it freely, of their own voluntary minds without grudging, or any impulsion,
as of necessity, either to the poor, or to the Ministry, as Gal. 6. 6, 7, 8,
9, 10. and 2 Cor. 9. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. And the Apostle moved them; not as
speaking by commandment, but by reason of the forwardness of others, and the
Example of Christ, who being rich, for their sakes became poor; that they
through his poverty might be rich, as Chap. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And
that supplying each others, there might be equallity, as Verse. 14. 15. as
doubtless, to such who are mutually affected, it is no more, but equal, and
therefore a duty, but otherwise not, but were a sin.

3. It is lawful for a man to beat down his body, and to bring it in
subjection, by fasting, and by labor and travail night and day, as 2 Cor. 11.
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, etc. It is not unlawful to fast often; yea, twice in the
week, like the Scribes and Pharisees.

Yea, it is lawful for man and wife to defrande one another, with consent, for
a time; that they may give themselves unto fasting and prayer, so they come
together again; That Satan tempt them not, for their incontinency, as 1 Cor. 7.
5. And they that do thus, doubtless may see cause for it, why they should fast
(sometimes) when they give themselves unto prayer. As first, because when the
stomach is empty, the whole strength of the soul, and spirit, is set at
liberty; (It not being bent and employed in digestion of meat.) That with full
bent of all the powers, and faculties, both of soul and body, they may strive
and wrestle with God in prayer, and be the more faithful and confident; and
the more capable and apprehensive of spiritual understanding: for when the
stomach is burdened and cloyed with meat, the strength of the spirit is
necessarily engaged, for digestion of the same; and makes the mind drowsy,
and dull, and the more incapable, and unfit for Communion and fellowship with
God, and for the presence and power of his holy Spirit, working therein, and
acting, and exercising, and enlarging the same, according to his will; making
request for the Saints, according to the will of God, even with sight, and
groans, that canned be expressed.

It is therefore meet, upon serious occasions, of seeking unto God, that we
fast and pray, with fullness of devotion, and fervencie of spirit, if we would
obtain.

And secondly, in regard that some things are not attainable; some kind of
Devils not cast out, but by fasting and prayer, Mar. 9. 29. which clearly
implies, that fasting and prayer jointly, are more powerful and prevalent with
God, then when severed, as prayer only.

And yet for all this, it was lawful for Peter, and the rest of the Apostles to
eat and drink, etc. and who could eat, or who else could hasten unto outward
things, more then wise Solomon, who seriously concludes; That there is nothing
better for a man, then that he should eat and drink, and he should make his
soul to enjoy the fruit of his labor; and this he saw, that it was of the hand
of God.

For God gives to a man that is good in his sight, Wisdom, and knowledge, and
Joy; but to the sinner, he gives travail; to gather, and to heap up, that he
may give to him, that is good before God, Eccles. 2. 24, 25, 26.

And the Lord Jesus, even Christ himself, as his own words do plainly declare;
that contrary to the practice of John the Baptist, He the Son of man came
eating, and drinking, eating bread, and drinking wine; insomuch that they said
of him, Behold a gluttenous man, and a wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and
sinners, Luke 7. 34.

And the Disciples of John fasted often, but his Disciples fasted not whiles he
was with them.

And therefore it follows; that as there is diversities of gifts, and of
administrations, and operations given out by the self same Spirit, dividing to
every man severally as he will.

Even so accordingly, men are called of God, one after this manner, and another
after that; and have so also their proper gifts of God, as 1 Cor. 7. 7. And as
God has distributed to every man, as the Lord has called every one, so he
ought to walk, for so the Apostle ordained in all Churches, as verse. 17.

And therefore it follows, that it must not be expected, that every man should
be alike absteneous from the things of this life; not bind themselves to so
strict a discipline, both over their bodies and minds, etc. as some others,
both will, and can, and ought, to do.

4. The Apostle Paul, after the most strict Sect of the Jewish Religion, he
lived a Pharisee; which clearly implies, that at least, there were three that
were several Sects of the Jewish Religion; of which the Pharisees were the
strictest; and yet they were all Religious men, and of the true Religion too:
there were Scribes, and Pharisees, and Saduces, and all religious and zealous
also in their own ways, and according to their own Traditions, and Doctrines;
though they something differed amongst themselves; yet they were all tolerated
by the Civil State; and the Civil State was not reprehended either by John the
Baptist, or by Christ himself, for such toleration: but their false Doctrines,
and Covetousness, and Hypocrisy, were reproved, and sharply too.

1. Consequence, And therefore it follows, That all ought not to be compelled
to engage themselves, to so strict, and holy, and severe a discipline, as ought
to be tolerated, and practiced by others who can embrace, and freely engage to
endure the same, considering these grounds before named.

2. And secondly it follows, That a stricter Discipline ought to be tolerated
by the Civil Magistrate; that such who please, and can freely accord, to engage
themselves to the exercise thereof, (amongst themselves) may have liberty to
do it: provided they offer not to enforce their way.

Then ought to be imposed, or made as a general, and binding Rule, or way of
Government, to which all must necessarily be engaged in or bound unto.

Reason. For it is the Duty of some men, as has been said, to bind themselves
to a stricter Discipline then others need, or ought to do. The one being
qualified, through the grace of God, and fitted for it; and so manifestly
engaged and called of God, so to do: but the other not qualified; nor so
disposed, through the grace of God, are manifestly, engaged, and called of God,
to the quite contrary, as in these four Instances, above written.

1. Concerning Chastity or Marriage.

2. Concerning community of goods, or claiming of propriety.

3. Concerning fasting, or eating and drinking.

4. Concerning being of the strictest Sect of the true Religion, such as was
the Pharsees; or of one more remiss, such as was the Scribes.

But it will be demanded, how these may be applicable to the matter in hand?

I answer, that as the case stands betwixt man and man in these particulars; so
it does also betwixt Church and Church: for they are all governed by the same
Law, and by the same Spirit, and the case is the same in every respect*

1. For such who make themselves chaste for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, it is
good for such not to touch a Woman, as 1 Cor. 7. 1. And therefore they ought to
be careful how they carry themselves in such respects. And it is not lawful
for such to marry, if they so resolve, and know they have power over their own
wills, as has beer said before.

Even so a Church being rightly constituted, and having Divine power, and
authority given her, through faith in God, and the Lord Jesus Christ: And that
desires to be presented, as a chaste Virgin only unto Christ, and to be
governed by him. It is not lawful, for such a Church, or at least, not good for
her, to bind her self, to be subject to the Vote, or power and Jurisdiction
of other Churches that are not constituted as a chaste Virgin only unto
Christ; and to be ruled by him, and by his Word and Spirit.

Or if they be not resolved, to be as chaste as she, and as fully subject to the
Rules, and Laws, and ways of Christ, but think they ought to consociate with
such, who are more loose in their Doctrine, and Government, and ways, etc.
which as yet she cannot resolve to do, upon any principles she has yet
received from Christ her head.

And there is a resemblance nto a little remarkable, held forth to us by the
Holy Ghost, betwixt the Husband and Wife, and Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.
22. etc. both of them, being bound to be subject alike, though yet in the Lord.

And as it is so, that there is cause of Jealousy, that some Women will not
continue chaste. So there is cause of Jealousy, that some Churches will not be
espoused unto one Husband: that they may be presented, as a chaste Virgin to
Christ; but their minds will be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ, as 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3, 4.

Secondly, As it is with a man, as has been said, so it is with a Church, in
the second particular: For, if a particular Church shall amongst themselves,
being of one heart, and of one mind, have all things common, and none of them
claim propriety of goods, as merely his own; but that they may be distributed,
as every one has need. As so it is lawful, if they can so agree, and do it
freely without grudging, or repining: yet it were unlawful, and a folly, and
madness, to join themselves so in community of goods, to such in whom they
could not expect the like community, they being quit of a contrary mind, and
heart, etc. like Ananias and Saphirah, covetous and hypocritical, and only
aiming at carnal ends.

Thirdly, And so likewise, as it lawful for a particular man, to give
themselves much unto fasting and prayer, as has been said.

Even so it is likewise, for a particular Church, if they so agree amongst
themselves, to give themselves much unto fasting and payer, as in their
apprehension, they shall think they have cause; for the good of their souls,
in general or particular.

Where it may be on the contrary, some other Churches, in their apprehensions,
have more cause of thankfulness; finding for the present, that the Bridegroom
is with them. As so for this reason, the Disciples of Christ fasted not,
whereas the Disciples of John fasted often.

And why then, should Churches of different judgments, in these respects, be
bound by Authority, all to rejoice, or all to mourn, and fast, and pray, at the
same times, and no more frequently; but as all can agree, so to humble
themselves.

And how should it choose, but engage men to hypocrisy, save only in case of
some general judgment, of which we are certain, that all are sencible and
affected with it.

And fourthly, and lastly, As it is lawful for a particular man, to be of the
strictest Sect of the true Religion, such as were the Pharisees.

So it is lawful for a particular Church, to be of the strictest way, in
respect of Government, Doctrine, and Discipline, that can be devised, or made
good from Scripture, as lawful, etc. And the Magistrate ought not to enforce
her, to conform unto any Churches, that are more remiss and loose, or
careless, or not so strict, or careful, and conscientious, as they ought to be.

Though I will not deny, But the Magistrate ought to tolerate, such who think
they ought not to be so strict, as well as the other.

For as all good men whose general bent, is the glory of God; cannot attain
such measures, or degrees of grace, and wisdom, as of faith and holiness, and
of zeal, etc. one as another.

Even so all Churches, though they be true Churches, cannot possibly attain, to
be so rightly constituted, and so severe, and strict, in Discipline, and
Government, and Doctrine, etc. as others can, though the stricter, the better,
in some respect, as I shall hereafter show; though in some things to be over
strict is a foul fault. The one conceiving, that they ought to proceed,
according to the rule of charity, and the other of certainty. The one
expecting, but faith Historical, in their admissions; But the other searching,
for Faith Justifying, such as appears by Works, in all such whom they do
approve. As there is strong Arguments, that might easily be produced on both
patties, even from sacred Scripture, that it is not easy to reconcile. I hope,
they will not say, that either of them yet, have clearly demonstrated, from
sacred Scriptures, their own resolves concerning Baptism: I shall therefore,
it may be, propose betwixt them; something of that.

But from these precedent grounds, First, it is clear, that these conclusions,
will justly reprove, and, I hope, convince, both the Independents, and
Presbyterians; in that they do not labor to accord, and love, and strive to
live and carry as Brethren, and communicate together in all the Ordinances, as
Brethren ought, and as occasion serves. But the one striving to enforce
conformity to their ways, and rules, and principles, etc. to which (in
conscience) they, it may be, are engaged. And the other, blaming, and
condemning them, as too remiss, and not so upright and conscientious, nor
walking by so just and strict a rule, in constitution, government, and
discipline of the Congregations, as they ought to do, and as they are resolved
to engage themselves, and therefore seek for liberty so to do.

By this means they fall at varience, and fall out by the way, and about the
way, though they be Brethren, and so do know, and acknowledge each other.

And first then, let them both consider, this falling out by the way, is not
(like) as they were brethren, for by this says Christ, All men shall know
that ye are my Disciples; If ye love one another. Is this like love, which is
the end of the Commandment, as is before proposed, even thus to bite, and
devour, and destroy one another? And all because that both parties, but seeing
in part, and knowing in part, and understanding in part, are of different
Judgments. As so they are likely as yet to be in some thing or other, whiles
it is so with them, as that they are not perfect, till that which is in part
shall be done away.

And what then, will they never agree, till they all be perfect? will they
never love, till in every particular, they be of one judgment?

But it will be objected, that men who think themselves in a right way, and
others wrong; and holding forth their arguments from clear Scripture grounds
that are sufficient to convince themselves: They are apt to think that the
other are obstinate, and that they see, and will not see, nor acknowledge the
truth: so that they cannot choose but be in a great measure out of charity with
them: as accounting them perverted, and men that sin, being damned of their own
consciences.

Answ. I answer, That if we can know for certain, after once or twice
admonition, that men sin, being damned of their own consciences, it is a
foul thing, Such ought to be rejected, Tit. 3. 10, 11.

But such must be known to be Heretics, and obstinate, etc. And therefore
observe the nature of love in this kind, that we be not censorious, and too too
injurious, in judging our brethren in this kind. For Charity, (says the
Apostle) suffers long, and is kind: Charity envieth not, nor vanteth not it
self, nor (...) it pufft up: does not behave it self unseemly; seeks not her
own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil: Rejoices not in iniquity, but
rejoices in the truth; bears all things, believes all things, hops all
things, endures all things, etc. 1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7.

And seeing that all these are natural properties of that love which is the end
of the Commandment: Let us try our selves by all these properties, whether we
have behaved, and carried our selves accordingly toward such, before we
censure, and let our hearts loose, to reject and oppose, and deal with them as
enemies of God. We ought not to hate, nor to deal with such as enemies at all;
but to love, and pity, and pray for them; and acknowledge them brethren, and
admonish them as brethren, though they seem to walk disorderly, and obey not
the Word even of God himself in some things, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15. and Mat. 5.
44, 45, 46, 47, 48.

Though I do confess, that if any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, he
ought to be held even in execration, if it manifestly appear. And we ought to
contend earnestly for the faith which was once delivered to the Saints, Jud. 3.
And we should stand fast to our Christian liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free, and not be entangled again with yokes of bondage, nor suffer men to Rule
over us at their pleasure, according to their own fancies, or arbitrary wills,
not submitted to the Laws of God; nor holding to the head, and to the
foundation, etc. Coloss. 1. 18. and Chap. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19,
etc.

But still always, with due respect to their persons; as pitying their
ignorance, weakness, infirmities, failings, and imperfections that we discover
in them. As considering our selves, lest we also be tempted, and that we also
have been in like condition, in one particular respect or another; having been
erroneous, and misapprehensive, and offensive unto others, in such respects:
for who that lives, but if he will examine, he may remember that he has erred
from the truth, in some thing or other: and been reduced and convinced by
others; or by searching of the Scriptures have seen our selves (as of our
selves) subject to all, or to any error. And that we ought to acknowledge, that
it is of grace, and the gift of God; that we are sufficient, or able to know or
understand any thing of the things of God. And why then should we be high
minded, and not rather fear, least we also fall, or fail, etc. of the grace of
God? Or why then should we be too confident, either that we do not, or that we
cannot err?

And if we do not expect, that men should think so of us, why are we so angry,
that all men are not just on our minds? and that they will not follow us, nor
conform unto us, just in our ways?

Does it not Imply, that we think of our selves above that which is meet? to
wit, that we cannot err, and expect that others should think so likewise. And
what is this less then the Pope, that Antichrist, and the Church of Rome
challenge to themselves; and by reason thereof exalt themselves above the
Magistrates, above all that is called God, or that is worshipped* etc.

Whereas on the contrary part, it is manifest, that the generality of the whole
Christian world, has erred iexceedingly: Was it not once said, That the whole
World was become an Arrian? Nay, were not all the opposers of the Arrian
Heresy, in an error likewise, both one and another? to wit, those that
maintained, That the Trinity of Persons was one substance. For though the
Trinity of Persons be one and the same in Essence, yet they are not one
substance, for the blessed Deity is all Essence, as the Scripture is clear,
Exodus 3. 14.

I Am that I am: to wit, that He [Is,] is all Essence.

But no proof can be made from Scripture ground; that the invisible God is any
substance at all, but an Infinite Essence, and not locally circumscriptible, as
all substance is: but unlimitably existent; filling both all place, and every
substance, both in heaven and earth, and infinitely beyond them on every side:
circumventing all things, and filling all things, even from the very top of the
highest Heavens, to the middle, and bowels or center of the earth: and yet he
himself is not cirumvented, with any thing at all; no, not with [place] it
self: in which, as Philosophers speak, All things stand: But is Infinite and
unlimitable, without circumference, and without center; the heavens of heavens
are not able to contain him, but he fills all things: as the Scripture is
clear, and as might evidently and convincingly also be made to appear to any
rational man, by Reasons and Arguments, drawn from the motion and government of
all things, and constant course, and subsistence of the heavens, and of the
earth, and waters, and all visible Creatures: for who else is the efficient
cause of their being, and subsistence, and of their motion, etc. Look Romans 1.
18, 19, 20, 21. and Psalm. 19. 1, etc.

But if all may err, and every one has erred; and it may be does err in some
thing or other: Then all and every particular man, ought to fear himself, lest
he also do err, and that in such particulars, wherein he thinks, that he
justly opposes, and condemns others: And ought to search the Scriptures, and
to search the meaning of the Spirit, even in the Scripture it self: and to be
sure of that, before he be too confident, and surious in opposition, or judging
of others, as Heretics, etc.

He that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. He that thinks he
knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know, says the Spirit of
God. Then we ought therefore to put on Charity, which is the bond of
perfectness: and not to break off Love, but upon sure grounds, that they are
enemies of God, whom we so judge, and censure, etc.

But for more punctual applycation of these precedent conclusions unto both
Parties, to wit, to the Independents and Presbyterians, I shall briefly assert
these clear consequences from the aforesaid grounds: first to the one, and
then to the other.

And first then, to the Presbyterians I assert as follows, in behalf of the
Independents.

1. That it is lawful yea and the bounden duty of some men, to bind themselves
to a stricter discipline, then others need or ought to do: The one being
quallified, through the grace of God, and fitted for it, and so manifestly
engaged, and called of God so to do, for the time present, whiles they think
they ought.

2. To the Independents, that the Presbyterians not being so qualified, or
disposed, or called, through the grace of God; but manifestly engaged, to the
quite contrary; And as is it were bound in spirit, within their own sphere, or
place, or calling, or way, etc. ought so to continue, whiles they think they
ought, till they be convinced from Scripture grounds that it is their duty; and
that they are called of God, to a stricter Rule, and way of Discipline, then
they yet do practice; or can freely embrace, or engage to endure, as witness
the four precedent examples.

Consiqu. And therefore it follows, That a stricter Discipline ought to be
tolerated, by the Civil State; that such who please, and can freely accord, to
engage themselves to the exercise thereof amongst themselves, may have liberty
to do it: provided always, that they do not offer to enforce others unto their
way: but only the freedom, and liberty of themselves, and of their own, etc.
then ought to be imposed, and made as a general, and binding rule, and way of
Government; to which all must necessarily be engaged in, or bound unto: as has
been said before.

Object. But it will be Objected, seeing I propose this Assertion to the
Presbyterians, in behalf of Independents; that it will be necessary, that I
show wherein the Independents rules, and ways of discipline, are stricter then
theirs; for they are generally accounted, by the Presbyterians, more remiss and
loose in many respects; giving way for liberty of all Religions, without
control by the Civil State, as so they speak of them.

Answ. I answer that their rules and principles, according to which they engage
to act, are manfestly stricter, and lawfully too, in diverse particulars,
wherein I shall briefly instance: And wherein I think they are likewise
engaged, in duty and conscience so to do, though I will not deny, but many
Presbyterians are engaged in conscience, to do the contrary, and are fully
persuaded, that they ought so to do for the time present.

1. And first, they are stricter with whom they incorporate, and join
themselves in Church policy: And so far forth, as any particular Church is
politically joined, for the government thereof, and for the good of the body in
every respect. A Church can never be too strict, but the stricter the better:
and the more likely it is, to be well ordered and governed, and built both in
faith and love, and all other graces and virtues whatsoever; that may tend for
the benefit and good of the whole.

And therefore, their principles are to admit none to be incorporated with
them, but men of approved fidelity: Because according to their princples, they
having liberty, and power in all Church affairs, that are of joint concernment,
and that respect them all, as in Elections, or Ejections, Admissions, or
deprivations, Receptions, or Rejections; Receiving in, or casting out, from
amongst themselves, they all having interest, as members of the body, have
liberty, and power, for vote, or sufferage, as they are bound in conscience,
and can see just cause, and render a reason of their faith, hope, or desires
therein; grounded upon Scripture evidence, as so they ought to have. They, I
say, according to their principles, having this power and liberty, etc. are
bound to be strict, with whom they incorporate and join themselves: Lest by
sway of vote; things should be carried Antichristian-wise, to the dishonor of
God, and of the Church, etc. by male administration of all the Ordinances that
concern them all, to be careful of in the sight of God.

For if men be admitted to have vote in Election of Ministers, and Elders, and
Deacons, etc. that are not approved, for ficelity and fitness, to discern, in
some good measure, whether they be men of good and honest report, and full of
the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, suitable for such a place; they may cause the
Election and Approbation of such as will defile the Church with corrupt
doctrine, and unsound principles, and ways, and manners, to their own
destruction.

And therefore all that are accounted to be truly religious, are not fit to be
incorporated, as members of the body, to have liberty and power in such
respects, till they come to ripeness and maturity of judgment in spiritual
respects: In like case, as the Levites, though they all were given as a gift
unto Aaron and to his sons, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, yet they were not to administer and wait on the service of the
Tabernacle, but from twenty and five years old, and up wards: And from the age
of fifty years they were to cease waiting on the service thereof, and should
serve no more, as Numb. 8. 24, 25, 26. Clearly implying, That only in case of
ripeness of judgment, and ableness, and fitness, for such a business, they
ought to be used, and admitted, etc. but not otherwise, least they spoil the
Government, of Discipline, and Service, that belongs unto them: However,
notwithstanding, all that are accounted to be truly religious, ought to be
admitted unto all the Ordinaces, yea, even to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, though never so weak in understanding and knowledge, as all the Levites,
even during their minority; yet Aaron was appointed to bring them with him, for
they might be present, though they did no service: And through they might not
administer, and do the service of the Tabernacle, yet they might be admitted to
come near with the rest, and to offer for themselves, though not for others, as
the rest of the Priests, as Numb. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and Chap. 16. 45. So that
whatsoever concerned but themselves only, they might come near, and approach
to do it, (whereas no stranger might intermeddle) though they might do no
service that concerned the Tabernacle, till they came to years: But of this
more fully in another place.

2. And secondly, As they are stricter with whom they do incorporate, and join
themselves, for these respects:

Even so, for the same ends and respects, they are very strict and
conscientious, and ought so to be, that all that are found, and known to be men
of approved fidelity, should thus incorporate and join themselves; I say, their
principles are, that all ought so to do, that live not too remote, but within
convenient bounds, and in convenient numbers, for frequent assembling of
themselves together: and to engage themselves in Covenant unto God, in these
respects, and unto all brotherly and Christian duties, for better security, and
deeper engagement, both to God and men, not to deal unfaithfully in all such
business, as concerns them all, but without partiality, or respect of persons,
as before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels.

And all the account will be little enough, in things that concern the good of
their souls, and the souls of posterities, that may yet succeed, to the end of
the world; for whom they ought to provide, and be careful for, that the Gospel
of peace, and of glad tidings, and all the Ordinances, might be preached and
administered, when they are gone in power and purity, as well as to themselves:
And to beware of dogs, and evil workers, and wolves, etc. and as much as
possible, to keep them out, least ungodly men, being crept in, should turn the
grace of God into wantonness etc. And this Gospel of peace, being a pearl so
invaluable, as it were easy to show, in every respect, can never be guarded
with too great security, or deep engagement, nor too strictly kept from being
soyled or defiled with the hands of men

And though it be true, that the men of this world are wiser in their
generations, (and for conservation of their own liberties, privileges, pearls
and estates, and to confirm and secure them, even to their posterities after
them, if possible for ever,) then the Children of light, as Luke 16. 8. Mat. 7.
24, 25. And may justly also rise up in judgment, and condemn our folly and
carelessness herein: Yet no man will say but that the children of light ought
to be as wise in their generations, and in their precious things, and in the
things of God, and that concern their souls, for so we ought, even to be wise
as servants, though innocent as Doves.

And therefore to incorporate such as stand approved, and are men of fidelity,
within convenient bounds, is doubtless the duty of all, and every such, in
times of liberty, for public administration of the Ordinances of God, and for
Government and Discipline: And in times of persecution, at the least privately,
they ought so to do, without being restrained by the civil State, and limited,
and kept within parochial bonds, against their Christian liberties, and duties
also, both to God, and men.

3. And thirdly, The principles of Independents are stricter and nearer to the
Scripture rules for edifying of the Church; They do not limit the holy one of
Israel to speak in public by the learned only: For first, as the Apostle
says, The manisestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal.
1 Cor. 11. 7.

Assertion. From whence it naturally and manifestly flows, That to whomsoever
the manifestation of the Spirit is given, it is given to such to profit withal.

It is objected. That the manifestation of the Spirit are not so evident and
perspicuous in these days, as in the primitive times; and the witnessing
thereunto by miracles is ceased, and therefore we may easily be deceived;
especially such who are unlearned and unstable, are easily deceived.

Ans. 1. I answer first, Whether any now adays has the manifestations of the
Spirit, yea, or no; yet this assertion is true, for it does not assert either.

Ans. 2. Secondly, I answer, That if the manifestations of the Spirit be not
evident and demonstrable in these days, how can even the learned Ministers
preach as they ought, and as the Apostles did, in the clear evidence and
demonstration of the Spirit, and of power, That so men's faith might not need to
stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 4. 5.

Ans. 3. Thirdly, Though for want of the witnessing thereunto by miracles,
those who are carnal and do not believe, cannot discern the manifestations of
the Spirit, and the power of God, whereby men speak, as Verse. 8, 14.

Yet for all that, they may speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yea, even
the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom, which God has ordained
before the world unto their glory; and those secret mysteries, which eye has
not seen, neither ear heard, etc. which God has prepared for them that love
him, he does reveal unto such by his Spirit, Verse. 6, 7, 8, to 16.

Consequence. Such therefore, though they be unlearned in the Tongues, (I mean)
who having received the Spirit of God, are thereby spiritualized, may discern
all things, as Verse. 10, 15. yea, even the deep things of God. Therefore it
follows, That the manifestations of the Spirit may be evident and demonstrable,
even now in these days, to such who are spiritualized through faith in God,
though not to the carnal or worldly etc. who do account these spiritual things
foolishness, as Verse. 14. and wanting an eye of Faith, cannot discern them;
because they are invisible: For as the light of the body is the eye, Matthew. 6.
22, 23. so the light of the Soul, whereby, and where-through it understands,
or discerns spiritual and invisible things, is the eye of Faith. For as God
himself being invisible, is only seen, or comprehended, and known through
Fatih: so are also the things of God, undiscernable without Faith, Heb. 11.

Quest. 1. But in what particular gifts, or qualifications, or administrations,
or operations, are the manifestations of the Spirit of God, and of power,
evident and demonstrable in any that are not learned in the tongues, now in
these days?

Answ. I answer, that many of those, yea, and the chief of all those, that are
reckoned up by the Apostle, and are by him asserted, as manifestations of the
Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 8, 9, 10. and Chap. 13. 3. are doubtless evident, and
demonstrable in some unlearned in the tongues, even in these days.

As 1. The word of Wisdom. 2. The word of Knowledge. 3. Faith. 4. Prophesying;
to wit, in speaking unto men, to edification, and exhortation, and comfort,
which is the chief of all. 5. Discerning of Spirits. 6. Interpretation of
Scriptures, that are dark and mysterious, and generally not understood.

Quest. 2. But may not some men, by means of good Education, attain to a great
measure of wisdom and knowledge, even in spiritual things: and so to the word
of wisdom, and of knowledge, and to speak unto men to Edification, and
Exhortation, and Comfort; and yet not have the spirit of God, nor his power
evidently demonstrable, as is asserted?

Answ. I answer, No: For the natural man perceives not the things of God,
neither [can] he know them, says the Apostle, because they are spiritually
discerned. And therefore he neither can know them, nor speak of them feelingly,
and apprehensively: but only Theoretically; according to the largeness and
capacity of his memory: as he has learned, and is grounded in the principles
of Religion, and of Faith, and Doctrine; as it were in a Catachetical
child-like manner; who can keep to the words, but know not the sense; And do
by Art of memory, speak in the same words, and phrases, and manner, and form of
doctrine with others. But as for feeling apprehension, and spiritual
understanding, and knowledge [indeed,] of what they speak; they are utterly
incapable, whiles they want faith. And this is easy to discern, by their
coldness on the one hand, or their zeal on the other, in delivery thereof: And
by their Emphatical, or loose and light expressions, and arguments, and
motives, and means etc. it is easy to discern, whether a man speak in spirit,
that is to say, whether it come from the heart, and affection; or but from the
brain only. Neither is it easy to counterfeit hearty affection, but it may
easily be discerned, that it is but forced. A very Idiot may, by strength of
memory, speak the bare words of a Sermon, and rabble them over; but he cannot
keep to the distinct sense of every period, according to the proper intended
Emphasis, or meaning thereof; but may by improper periods and interceptions,
make the sense seem quite contrary to what it is indeed: but a man that
understands it, and is apprehensively affected, according to it, can express
it suitable to the true intent and meaning thereof.

Even just so it is, betwixt men that are spiritual, through faith in God; and
such as are carnal in all their expressions, concerning spiritual things.

Obj. But though it be difficult, and hard to counterfeit, yet it may be done;
so as few, or none, can discern, but they are as spiritual and as sound as
others.

Qu. What notes therefore is there to prove, for certain, and that will
evidence, and demonstrate indeed, that it is the spirit of God, that speaks in
such, miracles excepted?

Ans. There is many notes, by which men may be known, to speak in the Spirit,
and by the Spirit of God. But some are more certain and infallible then others.
I shall therefore instance, in some of the most certain: And those that on
purpose are given out, by the Spirit of God, as evident demonstrations, of the
same Spirit, and of power, etc.

1. And first, That note given out by the Lord Jesus Christ himself, is an
evident demonstration, that men are sent of God, and come not of themselves; to
wit, seeking his glory, (if that do appear) For says Christ, He that comes
of himself, seeks his own glory; but he that seeks his glory that sent
him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him, Joh. 7. 18. Their
zeal therefore for the glory of God, and self-denial, is a manifestation of the
Spirit of God.

2. That, Joh. 10. 10. The Thief comes not, but for to steal, and to kill,
and to destroy. But the good shepherd (...) that they might have life, and have
it more abundantly, to wit, spiritual life; so that a desire will appear in the
good Shepherds; that the sheep of Christ might have A spiritual life, through
faith, and that they might be edified and built up further in the same faith,
even from strength to strength. And rather then sail of this their ends, they
will not stick to lay down, even their lives for the good of their sheep, as
verse. 11. But will continue to build them up further in faith, and love, which
are in Christ Jesus: as verse. 28.

3. The wisdom which is from above, is first, pure; not dark, and confused,
darkning the council with words without knowledge, but pure words, Psalm. 12.
6. 2. It is peaceable; not wrangling, and froward, angry, and contentious. 3.
It is gentle and meek; not sour, and proud, and harsh, and furious. 4. It is
easy to be entreated; not self-willed, and obstinate, obdurate and implacable,
but ingenious, and tractable. 5. It is full of mercy, and good fruits, both in
word and deed: and not cruel, and unmerciful, pittiless, and careless of doing
good; neither to the just, nor unjust. Look Jam. 17. 18.

4. It is the property of the holy Ghost, when he comes, or by whomsoever he
speaks, To convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment,
Joh. 16. 8.

5. And to lighten things that are hid in darkness: and make the councels of
the hearts manifest; as 1 Cor. 4. 5. and Chap. 14. 24, 25. The first, by a
clear unfolding, and interpreting of sacred Scriptures, that are dark, unto
others, and not formerly opened: and this of all others, is the most manifest
evidence of the Spirit of God. And secondly, a speaking to the heart, and to
the souls and consciences of men; discovring their very thoughts, and councels:
And approving themselves, to every man's conscience in the sight of God.

6. Their coming to the light that their deeds might be made manifest, that
they are wrought in God, is a clear evidence, that they do truth, as John. 3.
21. their end appearing to be such, that they mean no falsehood.

7. Their shining forth as lights in the world; and holding forth the word of
life, Phil. 2. 15. 16. Yea, even the faithful word, that cannot be reproved:
and making it manifest; as they ought to do: for therefore they are called, the
light of the world: Marth. 5. 14. For all things that are reproved, are made
manifest by the light: for whatsoever does make manifest, is light, Ephesians. 5.
13, 14.

But the chief of all these particulars, is a clear understanding, and
knowledge of God, and of the sacred Scriptures, and of the secrets and miseries
of the Kingdom of God; for without all controversy, Great is the mystery of
godliness, as the Apostle says, Coloss. 1. 26. 27, 28. Romans 16. 25. Ephesians. 3.
9. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Tit. 1. 2. 1. Pet. 1. 20.

Reas. For to them that are without, and unbeleeving, all things (says Christ)
are done in Parables, Luke 8. 10. and Mar. 4. 33, 34. Matthew. 13. 11, 12, to 18.

How much more then are the secret mysteries of God, and of Christ, and of our
spiritual union, and communion with him (which is only spiritual, through
faith and love) Parables and Mysteries unto all such, who have no knowledge of
God at all; but only as they have heard of him, by the hearing of the ear; or
barely Theorettical, without an eye of Faith.

Consiq. Therefore it follows; that he that speaks understandingly, and
apprehensively of these secret Mysteries; does evidently demonstrate, that he
speaks by the Spirit, through the power and grace of the Spirit of God; who
only reveals, and gives understanding of the things of God; as has been
said: so that it is manifest, that it is not they that speak, but the Spirit of
their Father that speaks in them. And by how much more they shall lighten
things, that are hid in darkness; and make the councels of the hearts manifest,
as 1 Cor. 4. 5. by the clear unfolding, or interpretation of sacred Scripture,
and of the secrets thereof; especially such as are dark and mystical, and hid
from others; or that have not formerly been explained, and opened; or not
convincingly, as a clear result, producing an infallible assent.

By so much the more evident, and demonstrable it is; that it is not they that
speak; but the Spirit of their Father that speaks in them, Matthew. 10. 19. 20.
Yea, that they are sent to speak, or to declare those things, being thrust
forth, even by the Spirit of Christ who dwells in them; and being Lord of the
harvest thrusts forth Laborers into his Hanvest. For how is it is possible,
that things that are hid from the wise and learned, should be revealed even
unto babes, and to the foolish, etc. (in respect with this world,) if they were
not inspired, and revealed unto them by the Spirit of God, seeing they have not
learned them by humane documents, but from God only.

Object. But it will be objected, That it were immodesty, yea presumption, and
a tok^n of spiritual pride in men, if they should so much as acknowledge, much
less affirm, that they are taught of God, and that immediately, by the
inspiration of his blessed Spirit; and that it is not they that speak, but the
Spirit of their Father that speaks in them: But especially for unlearned men,
that are but as babes, compared with the wise and learned, it were a shameful
thing in them to do it, above all compare.

Answ. I answer, If they understand and know such things as have been said,
even the secrets and mysteries of the Kingdom of God, which they have not
learned, not bin taught of men.

To whom then should they ascribe the glory? Ought they to ascribe it to their
own wisdom? Dare the learned ascribe their spiritual understanding, and
knowledge of God, and of the things of God, either to their own wisdom, or
their learnedness in the Tongues, which a carnal man may attain unto, that can
know nothing of the things of God, as has been said?

Were this to give God the glory, and to do it as of the ability that God
administreth, that in all things God might be glorified? Were this to speak as
the Oracle of God, and in his name? 1 Pet. 4. 11.

Might not such justly expect the judgment of Herod, to be struck with an Angel
of the Lord, and to be eaten up of worms, because they give not the glory unto
God of what they do or speak, in his sacred name, that is good, or excellent,
and true etc.

And it is doubtful, at least, that such who utterly exclude all that are not
learned in the tongues, I mean, from speaking unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort, or from any ministration in the name of God in
public, especially that they thereby intimate, that their abilities for
spiritual ministration are only attained through learnedness in the Tongues;
for how else durst they be so bold, as to limit the holy one of Israel, that he
shall not speak but by the learned only?

Object. But it will be objected, That speaking unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort, is not properly to prophecy; for prophesying is
properly foreshewing of things to come, though such who prophecy, do ordinarily
also speak unto men to edification, etc. as well as prophecy of things to come.

Ans. 1. I answer, first, That they that edify the Church, build them up in
Faith; and Faith is of things invisible, and chiefly of things to come; For
Faith is the ground of things hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11. 1. And therefore edifying, or building men up further in the true
faith, and giving them better evidences and grounds of things hoped for from
sacred testimonies, is, of all other, the chiefest prophesying, and most
useful, powerful, and comfortable, for giving life to the souls of men, both in
this life, and in the life to come, spiritual life I mean, even joy and comfort
unspeakable and full of glory, See Joh. 10. 10. 28. and 1 John 5. 11, 12, 13.
Yea, for perfecting of the Saints, as Ephesians. 4. 11. to 16.

2. And as for the other, as of foreshewing new things to come, as Agabus
prophesied of the dearth and famine over all the world.

Though it be a part of prophesying not so ordinarily attainable, and more
difficult in these days, yet it is not so needful nor useful as the other: And
though it be a more certain and evident demonstration of the sacred Spirit
inspired into such, when the thing is accomplished and come to pass; yet that
part of prophesying which the Apostle commends as the chief of all, to wit,
speaking unto men to edification, etc. is both far more profitable, and a
clearer evidence (for the time present) of the Spirit of God, then the other
is. And

Therefore I say, first, it is the most present evidence, and most immediate
demonstration of the spirit, and of power, because foreshewing of things to
come is no present and immediate evidence of it self, till the things be come
to pass that are in truth foreshewed; though it is true, that foreshewing of
things to come, is the very complement and perfection of prophesying, and the
most visible demonstration of the Spirit of God, as Deuteronomy. 18. 22. and Joh. 16.
13. when the things are accomplished.

2. But, secondly, yet this prophesying intended by the Apostle, is the most
useful, and the most profitable of all other gifts, for the edifying of the
Church: And therefore says the Apostle, Follow after Charity, and desire
spiritual gifts, but chiefly that ye may prophecy. 1 Cor 14. 1. And the reason
is rendered Verse. 3. because He that prophecyeth, speaks unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort: which is the chief end of all gifts*
For all that are zealous of spiritual gifts, should seek that they might excel
to the edifying of the Church, as Verse. 12. Although the gift of tongues, and
so also foreshewing of things to come, is a more evident demonstration to
convince them that believe not, as Verse. 22. yet look the end of all gifts, as
1 Cor. 14. 12. Ephesians. 4. 12. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. Romans 12. 6, 7, 8. for [that]
should be our end. But prophesying, says the Apostle, serves not for them
that believe not, but for them that believe, Verse. 22. And therefore is of
greater and more profitable use for the edifying of the Church. But wherefore,
or wherein is it more useful? The Apostle answers, and brings it in as a
reason, to wit, For he that prophecyeth, speaks unto men to edification,
exhortation, and comfort.

Consequ. And therefore it follows, That speaking unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort, is of all other gifts the most useful, and most to be
desired and sought after, and to be most esteemed, and accounted of by the
Church of God: And so are all such who have that gift, and do not hide it in a
napkin, but use it accordingly for the same end for which it is given, whiles
they keep unto sound doctrine that cannot be reproved; and speak but according
to the Law and Testimony, and seek but only and chiefly hi glory that sent
them; and that they might excel to the edifying of the Church, and to convince
the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment: And if they contend
earnestly, if it be but for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints; or
do but stand and fast to the Christian Liberty where with Christ has made us
free, and that they might not be entangled with yokes of bondage, not be as men
pleasers or servants of men, after they are bought with a price, provided they
preach nor seek any liberty at all to do any evil, either in word or deed; nor
to be contentious and disobedient to the Truth of God; I say of such, they are
sent of God: And whosoever resuseth, resists, disparageth, disgraceth, or
despises such, does even the same to him that sent them: And such, of all
others, ought to be hon^red, even with double honor, that both rule well, and
also labor in the word and doctrine by speaking unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort, as has been said.

And therefore all that are in authority ought to give liberty to all them
whose spirit God has raised to build up the Churches in their most holy Faith,
lest wrath be upon them from the Lord, as Ezra 1. 5, 6. and Chap. 7. 13, 16,
13. and Chap. 8. 22, 23. and Psa. 2.

It is therefore a matter of dangerous consequence, either to act, or so much
as seem to act, or comply with such, who doc exclude all from any spiritual
ministration, in the name of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, yea even in
public, (I mean) that are not learned in the Tongues; for they exclude, it
may be, such as Peter and John and all the Church which was at Jerusalem, who
were all scattered abroad, and went every where preathing the word, See Acts 8.
1, 4. Psa. 2. throughout. And the Apostle speaking to the Hebrews, tells them,
That when for the time they ought to have been [Teachers,] yet they had need to
learn, etc. Heb. 5. 12.

1 Reas. For what is it else, but to limit the Holy one of Israel, that he
shall not speak, but by the learned only, either in private or public?

Who has told us plainly, That he hides things from the wise and learned,
that he reveals unto babes, Luke 10.

2. Reas. And what is it else, but clearly to oppose the Apostles rules, given
out for direction in such cases, to wit,

1. As every man has received the gift, so let him administer the same, as
good disposers of the manifold grace of God.

And 2. Let every man administer according to the measure or proportion of his
Faith.

3. And how dangerous is it to advise, much less to compel any man to hide his
talent in a napkin, and not to suffer him to occupy with it for his masters
advantage, least it be taken from him? yea, though it be that [man] that has
but one poor Talent, who doubtless ought to put it forth in his place and
calling, as well as those that have five or more, see Heb. 10, 22, to 26, etc.
Heb. 5. 12, to 15. etc.

4. And how shall those things be made known to the Church that are on purpose
hid from the wise and learned, and only revealed unto babes, etc. if we cannot
be content to learn them at babes, as good old Eli both did, and was glad to
do, at the child Samuel? And has not God on purpose done it; And chosen the
base and foolish things of this world, to confound the wise and the mighty,
etc. as 1 Cor. 1. 2, 27, 28. 29. and Chap. 2. 11, 12, 13, 14 on purpose I say.

Yea, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence, but that he that glories,
might glory in the Lord.

Was not the word of the Lord, revealed unto the Child Samuel, rather then to
good old Eli: And did not Eldad and Midad prophecy in the Camp, as well as the
rest, and as lawfully too; the Spirit of the Lord coming upon them: did Moses
forbid them till he had blessed them; or till their callings of God should be
evidenced by miracles; as Moses was, and as some do expect; or they will not
hear an unlearned man; see John 11. 9, 10, 11. John did no miracle, though all
men held John as a Prophet. Or shall we charge them with immodestie, for
offering to preach, without Ordination?

Was no Prophet accounted a Prophet, but that wrought miracles, or was ordained
by men: and learned in the tongues? Look Joh. 10. 41.

Was not Amos an Herdman, and a gatherer of Sacamore fruit; when the Lord took
him, and sent him to prophecy? And do not his words good, to them that walk
uprightly, by whomsoever he sends them?

Is it not lawful for the Lord Jesus Christ, to thrust forth laborers into his
harvest; without License from the learned in the tongues?

Or do not they that refuse, whomsoever he sends, refuse him? Or is it
lawful to forbid any, whom he sends; to preach unto men, that they might be
saved? Like the wicked Jews, the salvation of souls being their chief end, as
the drift of their doctrine will easily show.

Is it not lawful, for them that know the terror of the Lord, to persuade men?
And should not every man administer according to the measure of his faith; and
be as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God; as has been said, without
license, from the learned in the tongues?

And must they but only be suffered, to administer according to the measure,
and degrees of their learnedness, and knowledge in the tongues merely?

Have none the manifestation of the spirit, but the learned in the tongues?

Or dare we cross the Apostle, and say, that the Manifestation of the Spirit,
is not given to every man, to profit withal?

Or that the chief grace and gift of the Spirit, and that which is most
profitable, and useful to the Church for Edification; and therefore most
chiefly to be desired, is [not] that men might prophecy?

Or what is this prophesying, that is so much to be desired, above all other
gifts; yea, above the gift of tongues? Is it not speaking unto men to
Edification, and Exhortation, and comfort? 1 Cor. 14. 1, 3. Is is not preferred
before the gift of tongues? How much more then is it to be preferred before
[Learnedness] in the tongues; which is only taught by humane Document; and is
not given as a manifestation of the Spirit: but is that which a carnal man,
that knows nothing, neither can know any thing, concerning spiritual things,
may attain unto, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

Therefore learnedness in the tongues, being no manifestation of the Spirit at
all; is therefore no sign, that men are called of God, and sent to preach.

But he that has prophecy, let him prophecy according to the proportion of
faith.

But who is this [He] that has prophecy, in the Apostles sense in this place?

But he that speaks unto men; to Edification, and Exhortation, and Comfort.

And yet further by way of Directory, he gives forth a most exact Rule, to wit:

Quest. But how, and what order must be used?

Answ. Let the Prophets speak, two or three, and let the rest judge: And if any
thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold his peace.

Quest. But why so?

Answ. For ye may all speak one by one, that all may learn, and all may be
comforted, verse. 29, 30, 31.

Quest. But where, and when, and in what company must this be, that the
Prophets may all speak one by one?

Answ. When the whole Church of the Corinthians was come together, as verse. 23,
24, 25, 26, 27.

And therefore also, when any whole Church, rightly constituted; as the
Corinthians was, are come together, they may do the like,

Quest. But were not this immodesty, in these days, when the whole Church is
come together in some place; and every one has a Psalm, has Doctrine, has a
Tongue, has Revelation, has an Interpretation; That all these one by one,
should be communicated for the good of the whole, as verse. 26, 27, 31, 32. all
that are Prophets I mean, for so is the Directory? verse. 29. 24.

Answ. Was this the practice of the Churches in the Primitive times, by the
Apostles direction? Might all that were zealous of spiritual gifts, seek that
they might excel, to the Edifying of the Church? as verse. 12.

And must it therefore now, be accounted immodesty, because it is not the
custom in our Churches, before these times?

Yea, must it be accounted immodesty, to use the same liberty in those
Churches; which are of purpose so constituted; that the gifts of all that are so
qualified, may be most useful and profitable unto all: that all might learn,
and all might be comforted, and all might be edified; as verse. 30. 31. And
might grow in grace, from faith to faith, and from strength to strength, till
they come to be tall men and women, in Jesus Christ: as Psalm. 84. 7. Yea, that
holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands, having
nourishment, ministered and knit together, might the more increase, with the
increase of God? as Coloss. 2. 19. and Chap. 3. 12, 13. to 18.

And why should any member of the mystical body of Jesus Christ, be therefore
despised as useless, and unprofitable, because unlearned in the tongues?

Has not God himself, on purpose, so provided and tempered the body together,
and given more honor to that part which lacked: that there might be no Schism
in the body: but that the members might learn, to have the same care one of
another: Seeing the heat cannot say to the feet, I have no need of you: as
Chap. 12. 13. etc. to the end. Proposing the usefulness, and propriety and
necessity of every member of our natural bodies; to be as patterns unto bodies
spiritual: that all the members, in their several places, might be accounted
of, encouraged, honored, comforted, edified, and esteemed of, as they ought to
be, necessary and useful for the good of the whole; showing that the most
feeble members ought not to be despised, but, as much as in us lies, honored
and clothed with more abundant comeliness: And every one called forth,
employed, desired, and deputed (by such who can discern their proper gifts, or
fitness and abilities, for the necessary use and good of the whole, or of any
other parts or members of the body) to such employments as they are fittest
for: And this calling and deputation would take away all appearance or
suspicion of immodesty in any such members, to what ever employment they are
called unto.

But while it is otherwise, and that the very constitution of our Presbyterian
Churches require, that none be admitted, but that is so and so learned (and
that enters in by the learned's door) It were immodesty to observe the Apostles
rules in such Presbyterian Churches. And it is no marvel if such who do it (yea
though in other Churches) be accounted silly fellows, and tubpreachers by the
rude people, who it may be account them, as they did paul and others, no better
then mad, as Verse. 23. For they are so accounted, and spoken of too, and that
by our grave Divines, so reverendly they esteem of the gifts of God, and of the
graces of his Spirit, which are the more perspicuous, by how much more they are
unlearned in the Tongues.

And therefore it is no marvel if it be so unto them all, as is spoken in these
Scriptures, Isa. 29. from the 9, to the end, Micab 3. 5, 6, 7, 8. Hosea 8. 12.
Let them look to it that despise prophesying, that resist and Spirit; yea, that
like Jannes and Jambres resist the Truth, and that despise but the least of
those little ones that believe in Christ; for they do despise, and resist him
and his sacred Truth.

And it is to be feared, that many are guilty even of speaking [words] against
the holy Ghost; A dangerous sin (as it needs must be) that shall never be
forgiven either in this life, or in the life to come, as Mat. 12, 30, 31, 32.

It is no marvel, if such Ministers, yea though the chiefest of all on the face
of the earth, have no manifest Vision, as once it was in the days of Eli, when
they caused the people to despise the offering of the Lord; even so I mean,
they cause the people to despise such service, and offerings, and sacrifice, as
God now requires, as Rom, 12. 1^. Rev. 1. 6. 1 Pet. 2. 7, 8, 9, 10. For they
that despise these things, despise not men, but God.

It is no marvel, if they must be content either to learn it at babes, or to be
without, and dye without knowledge, as 1 Samuel 3. 1, 17, 18. Hos. 4 5, 6.

Object. But it will be objected, That the like ways for edifying of the Church
in these days, that were practiced in the Apostles times, are not suitable now,
because that those extraordinary gifts are ceased.

Ans. 1. I answer, That the chief and most profitable of all those gifts, for
edifying of the Church, is still on foot, to wit, Prophesying, speaking unto
men to edification, and exhortation, and comfort, as has been said, 1 Cor. 14,
1, 2, 3.

Secondly, I answer, That the same Spirit works also now, in them that
believe, and is as full of power, and as willing also to edify the Church; for
it is not changeable: And what know we, but some now adays are full of matter?
the spirit within them constraining them to speak, Job 32, 18, to 22. So it was
with Elihu, who had not another, but even the self-same spirit; who divides to
every man severally as he will: And so it was with David, and Paul, and
Jeremiah, and others, as a fire within them.

But it is to be feared, as least, if not a thing obvious and manifest, that
there is some, even now adays, as in the days of old, that shut the doors of
the Kingdom of God, and neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that
would, as Christ himself told them. Yea, Light is wanting, and Vision fails
them, and they walk in darkness, and yet despise the help of any new lights,
though many old lights (that are public and clear, and manifest unto others,
and that of old likewise,) would be new lights unto them, if they could
discover them, 1 John 2. 10, 11. But they are in darkness, and walk in
darkness, and know not whither they go; nor what they speak, nor whereof they
affirm, But even speak evil of the things they know not, 2 Pet. 2. 12.

And yet, for all that, would be accounted, and expect to be followed, and
obeyed of all, as if they were omniscient, like God himself, and could not
possibly err, Verse. 10. But all have not the knowledge of God; this may be
spoken to all our shame: Else they would know, that he that thinks he knows
any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know.

Object. But there is ordinarily Scriptural examples alleged against this
which has been said, concerning preaching of unlearned men that are not
learned in the Tongues, nor graduates in the Schools, to deter men from
presumption in such respects, to wit, the examples of Vzza, and Vzziah, and of
Korah and his company.

But they are mis-applyed for the most part, as I shall make it manifest from
sacred Scripture.

1. For first, Whereas they are applied against all unlearned men that take
upon them the Priests office; they apply them also against Peter and John, as
Acts 4. 13. and 8, 1, 4.

2. And secondly, It is manifest in Scripture, That in some sense, all the
Elect are truly and properly called Priests, and both do, and ought to offer
sacrifice, and to take upon them so far forth, even a Priest-like office.

Reas. For the Apostle Peter, writing to the strangers, scattered through
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, that were Elect, etc. 1 Pet.
1. 1, 2. calls them a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, etc. Chap. 2. 9.
And a holy Priesthood, verse. 5. And that also to offer up spiritual sacrifice,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. And that they might show forth the praises
of him who has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light. And Rev.
1. 6. It is said of Christ, That he has made us Kings and Priests unto God and
his Father.

I hope therefore, that none will deny but all the Elect may offer these
sacrifices, to wit, these spiritual sacrifices of prayers, praises, and
virtuous living, to show forth the virtues, and praises of him that has called
us, etc.

And that also, without danger of being struck with leprosy, or death, or
being swallowed up of the earth, like Korah and his Company, or being destroyed
with fire, or any such judgment, if they do it in sincerity, and offer not
strange fire, like Nadab and Abihu; And if they charge not others with taking
too much upon them, that are called of God and precious, etc. like Korab and
his company.

Object. But it will be objected, But what, is there no difference then, but
all that are elect may take upon them to preach?

I answer, Yes, There is diversities of gifts, and diversities of operations,
etc. And there is degrees and measures given out of the same Spirit: It is
only true of the Lord Jesus Christ, That to him was not given the Spirit by
measure: And as all members of the body are not fit for, neither have the same
office; so it is also in the body spiritual, That one and the self-same Spirit
gives out to every one severally and variously as it pleases him: There is
and ought to be feet and hands, as well as eyes and mouth, which are most
properly placed in the head.

And though it be true. That if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same
is none of his.

Yet it therefore follows not, That all that are his have the manifestations of
the Spirit.

It is one thing to have the Spirit, and another thing to have the
manifestations of the Spirit.

But where ever the manifestation of the Spirit is given to any man, it is
given (says the Apostle) to prosit withal, in their several places and
degrees, according to the measure, or nature, or property of their gifts, and
calling; and qualifications: For,

To one is given by the Spirit, the word of wisdom; to another the word of
knowledge, by the same Spirit: And to another faith, by the same Spirit: to
another the gifts of healing, by the same Spirit: To another the working of
miracles, to another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits to another
diverse kinds of tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues. As 1 Cor.
12. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, etc.

I shall therefore compare such, who (in any of these particulars mentioned by
the Apostle) have the manifestation of the Spirit, to the sons of Aaron; to
whom belonged the Priesthood in a peculiar manner, above the rest of the sons
of Levi: for such, who have (in any of these particulars) the manifestations of
the Spirit, they have, as it were, a visible unction from the holy One, 1 john
2. 20, 27 According as Aaron was anointed, and his sons also with him, and
sprinkled with holy oil, Levit. 8. 30, 31. And so were consecrated, and
appointed to their charge at the Lords appointment, as Verse. 33, 34, etc. And
as Aaron was above his sons, and wore the brestplate, and other ornaments that
were peculiar unto him, as Verse. 7, 8, 9. and to him only as the chief Priest;
so the Ministers of the Word are chief, and ought to be so accounted and
esteemed in the Church; and all other officers, as Elders and Deacons, who are
resembleable to the sons of Aaron, (if such as they ought,) ought to be chosen
and consecrated likewise, as well as the Ministers: And they should be known
approved, as men full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, and of honest report
likewise, or else they are not suitable to be joined with the Ministers, nor
consecrated by them, unto any office in the Church of God, as appears, Act. 6.
3.

But all that are such, having the manifestation of the Spirit, both lawfully
may, and ought to desire the office of Bishop, as a worthy work; or any such
office, or liberty in the Church: whereby they might be useful or profitable to
the same any kind of way. For as the manifestation of the Spirit is given to
every man to profit withal; so, to profit the Church ought likewise to be
their end, and the desire, and endeavor of all that have such gifts: and they
may and ought, even to seek occasions, that they might do good, and desire of
God that they might be sent: as the good Prophet Isaia, when his lips had been
touched with a coal from the Altar, and that his iniquity was taken away, and
his sin purged: he readily answered the Lord, even before he had his message;
Here am I, send me, Isai. 6. 6, 7, 8, 9. And they that are zealous of spiritual
gifts, ought to seek, that they might excel, to the edifying of the Church. And
such, whose end is only the Edifying of the Church, ought not to be restrained,
but rather put on and encouraged, and called forth (by such who can, and do
discern their proper gifts and abilities for the same) to such employments and
ministrations, as they are fittest for; and might be most useful in: for the
good of all, or any part thereof.

1. I say therefore, we may justly compare all such who have the manifestations
of the Spirit, to Aaron, and his sons; and they are all fitted and qualified on
purpose for spiritual ministration, or profit to the Church in one kind or
other, as their gifts and abilities are fittest for; and ought to be called and
consecrated thereunto, and suffered to administer, as occasion serves, and as
need requires.

He that has prophecy, ought to prophecy according to the proportion of
Faith; or ministry, should wait on his ministry; or he that teaches, on
teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation; he that gives, should do it
with simplicity; he that rules, with diligence; and he that shows mercy,
with cheerfulness, Romans 12. 6, 7, 8.

One way or other, such who have the gifts, though differing one from another,
ought to use them, for the edifying, and good, and benefit of the Church: and
ought not to hide their talents in napkins; but to occupy with them for their
masters profit. And he whomsoever, that despises these things, despises not
man but God, who has given unto some, that are unlearned in the tongues, even
his holy Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8.

2. And secondly, We may justly compare all the rest of believers (that as yet,
for the present, have no such gifts, or manifestations of the Spirit) to all
the rest of the Tribe of Levy, Who thought they did not bear the iniquity of
the Sanctuary, and the iniquity of their Priesthood, nor minister before the
Tabernacle of witness, nor might not come nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary,
and the Altar, lest they should die:

Yet Aaron was appointed to bring them with him, that they might be joined unto
him, and minister unto him; And keep his charge, and the charge of all the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, for all the service of the Tabernacle. Whereas
a stranger might not come near unto them.

But Aaron and his Sons must keep the charge of the Sanctuary, and the charge
of the Altar, that there might be no wrath any more upon the children of
Israel: As there had formerly been occasioned by the rebellion of Corah, and in
part of all the Congregation, Numb. 18. 2, 3, 4, 5, and Chap. 16. 45.

For as the Lord told Aaron, that behold he had taken their brethren, the
Levites, from among the children of Israel; to them they were given as a gift
for the Lord, to do the service of the Congregation. But he, and his Sons with
him, should keep the Priests office, for every thing of the Altar, and within
the veil; and that they should serve; for he had given their Priests office
unto them, as a service, or gift; And the stranger that came nigh should be put
to death: as Chap. 18. 6, 7.

Even so we may justly say, behold, the Lord has taken all true believers,
from amongst their neighbors, and give them as a gift of the Lord, to be
joined with the Ministers, and other Officers in the Church of God, to do the
services of the Congregation, and to keep all the charge of the Church, in all
outward respects, as for receiving in or shutting out from the public
assembly, jointly with them.

But the Ministers, and Officers are to keep the charge of all within the
veil; as of the Word, and Sacraments, which they are to administer, in the
name of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ; and to take care, that none be
admitted, but such who are outwardly, or at least, professedly clean; having
their hearts purified through faith, and repentance, etc.

Though yet, this always provided, that as the Levites, Levit. 8. 14, 15, 16,
18, 19. Thought they all were given as a gift unto Aaron, and his Sons, to do
the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: (Yet) they were not
admitted, to administer and wait on the service of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, but from 25 years old, and upwards; and from the age of 50 years
they should cease waiting on the service thereof, and should serve no more, but
should minister with their brethren in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to
keep the charge, as Numb. 8. 24, 25, 26.

Even so also, Though all believers are given as a gift to the Ministers, and
Officers of the Church, to be joined with them, in opening, and shutting; in
binding and loosing; in all such respects as concern the whole Church, for the
good of all, as when all must receive, or all reject; all approve, or
dis-allow; all elect, or eject, etc. because that all are accessory, or jointly
engaged in such general business, as members of the body, 1 Cor. 3. 16, 17.

Yet they are not admittable, in this respect, neither, till they come to
ripeness, and maturity of judgment in Christianity; and be established in the
faith, and in the trade and practice of Christianity, in all duties belonging
thereunto: for there is a childhood and minority, as well in grace, as nature,
1 Cor. 3. 1, 2.

And therefore says the Apostle, Receive the weak, but not unto doubtful
[disputations:] Romans 14.

Even so say I, the weak ought to be received, but not to intermeddle in
doubtful [Elections;] or Ejections, etc. in which they have no skill, nor
judgment, and experience in.

For so the wisdom of God accounted fit, to appoint the Levites, in such like
service, and respects, that belonged to their charge: Lest by any means, their
service and office should be despised, through maladministration, or childish
ignorance or defection, and therefore they must not administer, till they came
to the age of 25. Years, etc.

And therefore to conclude, an abrevate, from all these comparisons; It is thus
much in effect.

Abrev. To wit, All the Elect, that are built upon Christ by a lively Faith,
are lively stones, built up a spiritual house, yea, an holy Priesthood, to
offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
and Chap. 1. 2.

So that all Believers are accounted as Priests, even from their first
ingrafting into Christ by faith, (in some respects) as is before specified.

But as there was Priests of diverse orders; so also ought the true Believers to
be distinguished.

I compare therefore the newly converted to the Levites in their minority, till
they came to years: and all the grown Christians, that are approved and
experienced in the trade and practice of Christianity, to the Levites when they
came to years of discretion.

And all the Elders and Officers elected by the Church, or that are full of the
holy Ghost and of wisdom, I compare to the Priests, the sons of Aaron, yea,
though they be of such as are not learned in Tongues, if they have such gifts,
and qualifications, as are manifestations of the Spirit of God.

And so the Ministers of God, I compare to Aaron, who in many things was above
his sons, as has been said.

And who knows, but the Lord Jesus Christ, upon whose shoulder the Government
lies, will govern his Church after these examples, seeing the Apostle Peter
does thus compare them, as resembling the Priesthood, and not as resembling the
Jewish Nation, both Priests and People? for that he does not, see also, Mal. 4.
4. And then the danger lies not against men unlearned, that have the
manifestation of the Spirit, and of power, least they should perish in the
gainsaying of Korah, because they take upon them, being called by the Church,
to preach and administer in the name of God. But the danger lies against such
who are sensual, having not the spirit, and yet will take upon them ministerial
functions in the name of God, because they are learned in the Tongues, and
Graduates in the Schools, Jude 11, 18, 19, 20. See Zech. 12, 13. Chap. These
are strangers that may not come nigh, etc. as Numb. 18. 4, 22.

But it will be objected, That if unlearned men be suffered to preach, they
that are unlearned, and unstable, may wrest the Scriptures to their own
destruction, as 2 Pet. 3. 16, 17. and may lead others into errors and schisms,
and cannot be hindered, nor suppressed; neither can it otherwise be avoided; but
men that know not the original, should ordinarily mis-understand dark places
of Scripture, and so like blind guides lead men into the ditch.

Answ. I answer that it is true, That men that are both unle arned and
unstable, do, and will wrest some places of Scripture; and it cannot be
avoided, but there will be false Teachers, even amongst us in these days, as
well as there was false Prophets in the days of old, as 2 Pet. 2. 1. And such
also, it may be as shall privily bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them, and shall bring upon themselves swift destruction: And
there is no security given out in Scripture, That none that is learned in the
Tongues should be of the number of these false teachers: for men that are
learned in the Tongues, may be unstable, and wrest the Scriptures: and by how
much the more they, that are unstable, are learned in the Tongues, they are
even so much the more dangerous, if they should be suffered.

And therefore unstableness is a greater fault, and more dangerous then
unlearnedness in the Tongues: And men may he learned in the Scriptures, or
unlearned either, and yet learned in the Tongues.

Men ought not therefore to be inhibited to preach, (lest they should be
unstable, and wrest the Scriptures) for then the learned, as well as the
unlearned, should both be inhibited.

But such, who (being proved) are found unstable, and that they do wrest the
Scriptures, no man will deny, but such may, and ought to be inhibited, when
they are found out, and convicted of error, or of schism, etc. yea, though they
be of the learned.

But to inhibit men before, were to censure and condemn men before they be
heard. And see Ezekiel, 18. 20. The righteousness of the righteous ought to be
upon him, as a badg of honor; but the wickedness of the wicked should but be
upon himself.

But the best and surest way to prevent the sowing and spreading of Errors, or
Schisms, is to give liberty, that any whomsoever, that preaches in public,
may in public also be reprehended (be they learned or unlearned) if they
preach erroneously in any Congregation; that so the same Auditory, that hears
them preach any Error, or Schism, or false Doctrine, may, by just reprehension
from clear Scripture-evidence, be satisfied to the contrary; and have such evil
seed purged out quickly, before it grow up, or be spread any further; for so it
ought to be: And those Churches are not rightly constituted, where this liberty
is either wanting, or not in use, when the Truth of God is wronged, and
wrested, and turned into a lie; and when his sacred Word is handled
deceitfully, and mis-applyed, as it often is, even by the learned in the
Tongues, that are unstable etc. And yet no man allowed to reprehend them for
it, nor convince them of it, at least not in public: And how then shall the
same Auditory be purged from it, if their reprehension be not as public, as
the doctrine is preached? For who knows that all the Congregation shall every
one of them be assembled again? and the doctrine may be such, as may lead them
to perdition and destruction, both of their souls and bodies.

And this liberty being in use, will doubtless make both the learned and
unlearned a great deal more careful, to keep unto sound doctrine that cannot be
reproved.

And they that plead so much against liberty of preaching of men unlearned in
the Tongues, for fear of the spreading of errors and schisms, and yet will not
allow this public liberty of reprehension (as has been said) to prevent, and
avoid, and purge the same. I can hardly believe that the spreading of Errors
and Schisms is the chief cause that makes them zealous therein, but some other
by, or self-respects, which they will not own.

For no man, that is zealous against such spreading gangrenes, but he will
allow, and justify, and approve all possibe means to avoid or stay them, else
he is not cordial in that respect: And what means possibly can be more awful,
and more suitable, and even necessary, then public reprehension of public
Errors? The Apostle Paul reprehended Peter before them all, Gal. 2. 14.

And them that sin (says the Apostle) rebuke before all, that others also may
fear, 1 Timothy 5. 20.

But it will be objected, That it were an immodest part for any man to implead
his Minister in the public Congregation; and might disgrace, and disparage,
and dishonor him for ever.

Ans. I answer, That it is far greater immodesty in such Ministers to need to
it, and to give just occasion by dealing immodestly with the Truth of God, to
the disgrace, and disparagement, and dishonor of God; in respect of whom, and
for maintenance of whose Truth, we must not know either father or mother, son
or daughter, Minister or Master, brother or friend; but to undervalue,
disgrace, dishonor, disparage, yea, and even hate them, in comparison thereof;
and rather then baulk the Truth, that concerns the good of immortal souls,
especially in case, when it may endanger the loss of souls, so precious is the
Redemption of souls, and their continuance for ever: and of so high esteem
ought the glory of God to be valued of us.

He that valueth himself, or his own honor, or grace and glory, yea, or his own
life, better then the Truth and the Glory of God, deserves no better, but
shame and dishonor for his self-ish ends and pride, etc. And he that does
truth, and comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest that they
are wrought in God, He will be desirous to be tried by the touchstone, even the
Truth it self; and will love him better that lets him see his error (in such a
case) then him that flattereth with his lips, or holds his tongue, and lets
him run on in erroneous paths, either in life or doctrine.

And it is a sign, that such men do [evil] that hate the light, and that will
not abide the trial by the touchstone, in as open and public a place, as they
have held forth doctrine, provided always that it be done with meekness, in a
loving way, as it ought to be; for so says the Apostle, Let all your things be
done in love. And that there be also a free acknowledgment, by them that do it,
of their own weaknesses, and subjection of themselves to all or any Error, and
to be likewise tempted and drawn aside; and that they only stand, and are
upheld by the Grace of God, of his free accord; and with a clear manifestation
of such material and weighty causes, and considerations, moving them thereunto,
as are of greater value and consequence, then the credit, and reputation, and
honor due unto such a Minister; for it ought not to be done upon slight
occasion, but matters of weight, and such as will overbalance all the shame
and disgrace that may possibly fall upon such a Minister.

And it is a sign, that men come of themselves, (and are not sent of God) if
they seek their own glory: or if their own glory be so near and dear unto them,
that they cannot be content to undervalue it, to the glory of God, or to his
sacred truth; if they cannot be content to let God be [true] and every man a
liar; but will rather oppose the truth of God, then acknowledge themselves to
have erred from the truth, Jam. 5. 19, 20. It is a shrewd sign, that there is
in such men, a spice of that pride, that exalts the Pope, above all that is
called God, or that is worshipped: Who arrogateth power, and dominion to
himself, as if he could not err; for all men must believe, what he asserteth;
and punctually obey his commands, and decrees, though never so untrue, or
unjust etc. Yea, though quite contrary to the word of God, and to the light of
reason: Or else they must be Excommucate, out of their Churches: oh horrible
pride! and yet a spice thereof, is doubtless to be found in all men by nature:
And in the natures of many, that yet notwithstanding have the grace of God; for
they are partly flesh, and partly Spirit; and it is rare to find out such a
man, as can deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow Christ [fully:]
That can endure the cross, and despise the shame; for men can very hardly
endure to be [crost;] yea, though they cross and oppose, even the truth of God;
how much less then, would they endure the cross, and the shame, and spitting?
And they cannot endure to be despised, and dishonored, when they do despise,
and dishonor God. How much less then, can they despise the shame, in respect
of the honor and glory of God?

But it will be objected, that if this were suffered, any man (that would)
might implead the Minister, if he think he err, even when he has preached the
truth of God. And so many raise controversies of disputation, when ever they
please, to disturb and trouble the Congregations; amongst which, there are
some that are weak, that ought to be received, but not unto controversies of
disputation.

I answer, as before, that it ought not to be done, but in matters of weight,
that may be clearly evinced from the Word of God.

And if any oppose, or contradict the truth, either through malice, or
ignorance; It may minister occasion to such a Minister, to convince
gainsayers; and then the shame, and dishonor, will light on them, and the
truth of God be the more splendorous, in that respect; and if it be done of
malice, his malice that does it will be discovered; and if it be through
ignorance, he may be convinced, and better informed; and will have cause of
thankfulness, both to God, and the Minister, that has converted him, and
resolved his doubts.

But if it were the custom, that Judicious men might not (only in case of
erroneous Doctrine, but of things dark and mysterious, that are not fully
cleared in their ministration) put them on by way of question; or desire them
to illustrate, or clear such a point; or enlarge themselves in profitable
points, and confirm them better; It might be very profitable to the Church of
God: For the people will more regard and consider better, of such particular
points, as have been the subject of such discourse, and are, as it were,
vindicated, and concluded upon (and so confirmed against all objections, or
obscurities whatsoever, even in the public Congregation, and by the most
Judicious in reputation amongst them) then of other particulars.

And this also would be a means, to debar all such from usurping the Ministry,
that are not able for it: and to convince gainsayers, and stop their mouths;
and to maintain also, and vindicate the truth.

Yea, it would be a means to seclude all such, as are not men of selfdenying
spirits, such as the Lord Jesus requires; that such should be (if they would
attain to be his Disciples) especially, his Ministers.

4. The Independent principles are likewise stricter, in standing fast to such
Christian Liberties (in other respects) wherewith Jesus Christ has made us
free; Then the ways and principles, or at least, the practices of Presbyterians
will suffer.

1. As first, concerning their Independency, in respect of other Churches
whiles they do well, as Romans 13. 3, 4. and 1 Pet. 3. to 23. and Chap. 4. 1, 2.
and 12, etc. For as it is granted by [All:] That in case of necessity, as when
a Church lives where it cannot govern in a Presbyterial way, in a Classical,
and Synodical manner; because there is no Churches to combine with, within
convenient bonds: or at least, none that are willing. They allow them power
within themselves, both for constitution, and dissolution of such a Church, as
they see occasion, for the benefit of the same; and the glory of God, and their
souls health.

And therefore seeing all power both for Government, and Discipline, is
necessarily allowed them in such a case. Though they are not against the
consociation of true Christian Churches, for the mutual advice, and
Edification, and help, and comfort of one another; or in case of admonition,
etc.

Yet they utterly deny, to submit themselves, as under the Jurisdictive
authority of any such Churches, save only in case of advice or council, or
admonition; or at most, as sister Churches in every respect, and as they shall
convince them from Scripture grounds; that their decrees, or results, are
according to God, and to his Laws and Testimonies, concerning them, either in
Doctrine, or Government.

And therefore will not submit, to bind themselves to be ordered or governed,
by the votes of such, in any respect, till they first know, what their votes
are that they submit unto; lest they should be enslaved to the wills of men,
against their consciences; which are, or ought to be only bound by Scriptural
decrees, or loosed either: And therefore ought not to be submitted to the
decrees of men, not infallibly guided, though never so numerous, or wise and
learned; who all may err, and often do: and therefore ought not to challenge
any binding authority, or power whatsoever, or loosing either, but only in
case, and so far forth as they can and do, even convince the Conscience, from
Scripture evidence, In the name of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ; that
their decrees are just, and ought to be obeyed, and submitted to: And it is
lawful as well for a Church, as a particular man, to go to the Law and to the
Testimony, as they are enjoined.

And to search the Scriptures daily, whether those things be so, that are
decreed, or taught us; or that are preached unto us, yea, though by an Angel
from heaven: And if we find they teach us another Gospel then what we have
received, we must let them be accursed.

And it is evident, that the Apostles, and Elders, and the whole Church being
assembled with one accord; resolved of nothing, till it was cleared from
Scripture; that all assented, and agreed to it, even the whole Church, as Acts
15. 22, 25.

And it is certain, that either a particular man, or particualar Church,
having Scriptural grounds, may say as [they,] It seemed good to the holy Ghost,
etc. For what the Scripture decrees, the holy Ghost decrees.

And therefore all Assemblies, Congregational, Presbyterial, Classical,
Synodical, National, or Ecumenical, should only be as this in the Acts, to
consider of such matters, as verse. 6. And to resolve them from Scripture; that
all being assured from Scripture ground, may with one accord, pass sentence
with them, being fully assured, that it seems good to the holy Ghost, as well
as unto them, what ever is resolved, or decreed, or done in his sacred name.
Else they are presumptuous and self-willed, and do usurp authority over the
Church of God; if they take upon them to bind and loose, and do not make it
manifest, as they ought to do, from Scripture evidence; that it seems good to
the Holy Ghost, as well as them, Coloss. 4. 4. And though it is true, that we
ought to obey them that have the oversight of us, and that have the Rule over
us, and to follow their faith, as Hebr. 13. 7, 17. Yet it must be in case, when
we know them to be such, as watch for our souls, as they that must give
account; that they may do it with joy, and not with grief. And it must be upon
consideration of the end of their conversation: that it is Jesus Christ
yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever. For they that preach unto us the
Word of God, should not be changeable; least they carry us about with diverse
and strange doctrines, as verse. 8. 9. which we must not be, to follow their
faith; nor in obedience unto them, That turn away their ears from the truth,
and are turned unto fables, as 2 Timothy 4. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5. and 2 Timothy 3. 2
3, 4. 2 These. 3. 6. 7, 8. And if any come unto us, and bring not the true
Doctrine, we must not receive him to house, neither bid him God speed, as 2 John 10.

How much less, may such be received as Ministers of God; and maintan'd either
by tithes, or other maintenance. And how unlawful is it (therefore) either for
Magistrates, or others, to force maintenance, of any such; or to limit men by
Parochial bounds; that in case a Parish, shall heap to themselves teachers
after their own hearts, having itching ears, that turn from the truth: Yet men
must be enforced, to maintain such teachers, and to hear them likewise; and
must not withdraw themselves, as the Apostle injoynes us; nor go elsewhere,
unless we can remove our habitations also; which cannot choose but be sometimes
inconvenient; and to our utter overthrow in wordly respects.

All which bondage, is a great infringement to our Christian Liberty, in them
that do it, and ought not to be approved nor assented to, by any that desires
to keep a good conscience void of offense, both to God and man.

Reas. For how many thousand Parishes, both have been, and are, not only here,
but in other Kingdoms, by this means, kept utterly destitute of any spiritual
food, for the good of their souls: And that sometimes, even for a whole age
together, during the Parsons or Vicars life, Who once enstall'd, can never be
removed, If he be conformable, to the Government on foot, and can please the
greater, or most of the Parish; yea, and though he be never so carnal; If he
have but learning, and an outward form of doctrine and profession, in respect
of Religion, like the generality of the Congregation: though he utterly deny
the power of godliness; yet all his Parishoners, (though never so godly and
conscientious) must hold them contented, during such a man's life, for they must
allow him his Tithes, or maintenance; and they must not obey the Apostles
direction, to wit, from such turn away.

But they must keep to their own Church, and be bound to submit to their own
Minister, unless they can remove out of such a Parish. And so in all
likelihood, famish the souls of their whole families; If God be not merciful,
in stretching forth his immediate hand in an extraordinary unexpected way: [For
the ordinary Way] Is by the foolishness of Preaching, (as so the World accounts
i^) to save them that believe.

And therefore let men say what they will, but there is no other way, to keep
such men out, for intruding themselves, and being intruded upon them; but to
let all that are godly, and conscientious, have free liberty, to approve, and
receive, or admic, and in stall, whom they generally allow off; or to
dis-approve, reject, turn from, dis-install, or eject, whom they dissavow. For
how else can they, in such respects, obey the Apostles direction; and keep a
good conscience, void of offense both toward God and man, Heb. 13. 8, 9. 2 Timothy 3. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 4. 3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 7, 8. 2 John 10. and Joh. 10. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, to 16.

Let any man tell me but [how] and I shall silence for ever in that respect.
How, I mean, they shall answer these Scriptures as they ought to do.

If it be promised that the Presbyterial Govenment will so provide, that none
shall be admitted, and approved off, but such as are truly spiritual, and of
the most able, and fit for the Ministry, that can be found; and then it need
not to trouble the conscience of any man in that respect.

I answer, that I cannot believe it, till I see it done, or by what means it
should be effected; Whiles [all] have vote, and power in Election, and may,
either choose whom they think good, or be without, All (I mean) that have taken
the Covenant, many of whom, have so little understanding in Spiritual things,
that they are not thought worthy to receive the Sacrament. And how then can
such discern, whether men be spiritural and able for the Ministy; or they be
but carnal, and such as can know nothing of spiritual things, to wit, of the
things of God. As a Corinthians, 2. 14.

The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can he know them,
because they are spiritually discerned; to wit, through an eye of faith.

But the spiritual man, to wit, a man thoroughly spiritualized, through faith in
God; discerns all things, yea, even the deep things of God

Object. It will be objected, that all that are godly, and truly
conscientious, are not able to discern of the fitness of men, for spiritual
employment. And therefore it is more wisdom, to commit the apporveal of all
spiritual men, to the Wise and Learned, and to the Elderships, etc.

Answ. I answer, that He that enters in by the door, (which is Christ himself,
our Archbishop, is the shepherd of the sheep;) as Joh. 10. 2. 9.

And to him the Porter opens, and the sheep hear his voice, and he calls
his own sheep by name, and leads them out: And when he puts forth his own
sheep, he goes before them; and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.

And a stranger will they not follow, but will fly from him; for they know not
the voice of strangers, as verse. 3. 4, 5.

This is the promise, and the plain assertion of Christ himself; That his sheep
know his voice, by whomsoever he sends it; for the Porter, to wit his (holy
Spirit) opens their hearts, as he did the heart of Lydia, even to hear, and
obey, and to follow, and do; to embrace, and to receive, yea, to love, and
honor; even such, who bring them such glad tidings, of life, and peace, and of
truth, etc.

And therefore, though they be not able to discern, and discover, and judge who
is fittest, and the most able; for such, and such employment; yet they can
discern, who are sent of God, and bring his message; so far, at least, as not
to follow a stranger: for the voice of strangers, is strange unto them; and
such as they will not follow: so that the general approbation, of the sheep of
Christ; such especially, who are known to be his, is the note of a shepherd
that is called of God, and sent to preach; or that is called to officiate in
any place about spiritual things.

And though they cannot discern who is fit for office; yet if the wise, and
learned, should appoint them a stranger, or an hireling, and that cares not
for them; or such whose voice they know not, or to whom the Porter opens not:
They ought not to follow, but to fly from them, as from thieves and robbers:
yea, as sheep from wolves, that would murder, and destroy, and devour their
souls: as verse. 5. 8. 10. 12, 13.

But if this be their duty, as doubtless it is; if they once discern who are
such or such: Then it necessarly follows, that they ought not by authority to
be otherwise impelled; but that in such respects, (as do so highly concern the
good of their souls, and the souls of their households, and their posterities
after them, till the world determine,) They might have liberty of conscience,
as they dare answer it, at the great tribunal; to deal impartially in all such
cases, of such concernment, to approve, or reject, as they think they ought.
And as considering themselves, even now already in whatever they do; to be
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels: as 1 Timothy 5. 21.

And this is a Liberty, wherewith Jesus Christ has made us free; to which it
is our duty to stand fast. And to beware of such as shall come unto us, in
sheeps clothing, that yet inwardly are ravening wolves. And he has promised,
that we shall know them by their fruits, Mat 12. 30, to 35.

And they that would spoil us of any such liberties, are in that respect, to be
accounted no better then Thieves and Robbers: yea, spiritual thieves, that
would spoil our souls. And such therefore we ought not to receive, nor to bid
them God speed, where they teach such Doctrine; unless in hope that they do it
ignorantly: and that we only receive them, in hope to reduce them, from such
dangerous error.

If it be objected, that men will not allow any maintenance to such whom they
may not have vote in Election of; unless it be compelled or forced from them,
which is not warrantable, as has been said, and proved by some.

I answer briefly, that whatever others that are malignant, and enemies to the
Church of God, will do or refuse, give or withold in such a case, that does
not exempt thosewho are godly and conscientious form doing their duties, and
from being impartial in such weighty business that concerns the good of their
immortal souls; in which cases all things should be done without partiality or
respect of persons.

And they ought rather so to join themselves, as to maintain a Ministry upon
their own charges, then to give their sufferage or vote for such to be
installed in a place, as ought not to preach.

And if it were so, that the truly religious would join themselves, and engage
in Covenant each to others, for this end, that all of them might speak even the
same thing, without partiality or respect of persons.

There would scarce any accept of a place, but that were either called or
approved by them; nor would they continue against their wills, nor act contrary
to their general results from Scripture grounds.

But whiles they sit loose, and are partially engaged, and do not assemble
themselves (even their own selves) for these and such like business that
concerns them all; how is it possible that they should know the minds each of
others, or the grounds or reasons upon which they act? or how to resolve fully,
so as all may assent, and be satisfied in conscience from sacred Scripture,
that so they ought to resolve in such and such cases.

And therefore they ought thus to join and assemble themselves, and be engaged
deeply each unto others, that things of this nature might be justly carried,
without partiality or respect of persons, yea, at least in private, if
authority will not suffer them to engage in public; if there be so many
within convenient bounds, as may in any possibility do good this way.

5. They are stricter in maintaining the Power, and Kingdom, and supremacy of
Christ, then the Presbyterian Government (as in now stands) will allow or
suffer.

Reas. For though they do allow, that the body of the Church should be obedient
and subject to the Ministers and Elders of the same, so far forth as they hold
forth the Word and Voice of Christ, as Joh. 10. 4. and do make it manifest (as
they ought to do) from the Law and Testimony, that their ways and words, or
judgments, and censures, or proceedings, are right, as in the way of the
Churches of New England, appers page 100. Chap. 5.

Yet in case, when the Officers of a Church shall err, and commit an offense,
or miscarry the business that concerns them all, or that in any respect
concerns the glory of God.

They make bold to over rule them, and to maintain the truth, and rescue the
innocent, or condemn the guilty, and to elect, or eject, receive, or refuse;
yea, to remit or retain, as they find cause and ground form Scripture; yea,
though quite contradictory to the judgments, and decrees, and results of their
Elders; and in case of obstinacy, even to proceed to censure and to cast them
out, as unsavory salt, if their sin so deserve.

And this democracy is necessarily assumed and exercised by the Church, in
choosing their Officers, and jointly with them in admitting members; and in
censuring, or acquitting, and remitting offenders: And that to preserve the
Monarchy of Christ from Antichristian usurpation, lest they should be in forced
to let men at their pleasure bear rule over them, and become as men pleasers,
and servants of men, as many have done; and that without all remedy, or hope of
remedy, whiles their Officers live, as has been said before, in the like case:
And all, because that they had not power within themselves to censure and
remove them; but having their power to seek (form other Churches, or from
without their own,) could never find it to remove them by, as in conscience
they ought.

But were forced to yield even blind obedience, and to submit themselves to
what ever decrees were imposed on them, whether right or wrong, truth or
falsehood, good or evil.

And what else can be justly expected form the Presbyterial Government, if they
require obedience to what ever they decree or determine by Vote, in Classis or
Synod, or Congregational Presbytery, when they make it not manifest as they
ought to do; from sacred scripture, that such decrees are just, and ought to be
executed and obeyed, etc. by all or any whom they do concern, that are under
the Government, and of the Kingdom of Christ?

For what is this but to give them liberty for the absolute exercise of
arbitary power, after men are chosen to such anoffice?

For what is it but Arbitrary power (in spiritual respect:) that is not
submitted to the Word of God, to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his Law and
Testimony, as well as such is accounted Arbitrary power (in civil respects)
that is not submitted to the Laws of the Land?

And this cannot choose but at least sometimes engage or enforce us unto blind
obedience (if we submit thereto,) and that unto men, as if we were necessitated
to account of them, as if they could not err.

And therefore doubtless such (whoever they are) that either claim (as due) or
expect such obedience, do extol themselves even above the Apostles, and expect
more obedience, and honor, and service, then they ever required, who were
(notwithstanding) more infallibly guided. For they rather commend, then blamed
the Bereans, for searching of the Scriptures, whether those things were so,
that were preached by them.

And what may this prove, but not only the infringement of the Churches
liberties, but even the just rights and liberties of the subjects, yea, and the
privilege of Parliament: For if the Parliament were bound, as in duty to God,
to establish and confirm what ever a Synod, or an Assembly of Divines, should
conclude, or decree amongst themselves, to be just and right in the sight of
God, and that without evidence form sacred Scripture, What a gross slavery
might even their very consciences be subjected to? For was not this the means
of introduction of Popery and all superstition that ever was established in the
Christian world; to wit, obedience unto Synods, as if they could not err?

And is it not as dangerous now, lest men should yet err, and mislead the
Parliament, and the whole Kingdom, yea, and all the Churches? Are we sure that
they are more infallible, then in former ages?

Doubtless, I say, they ought not to challenge, nor expect or plead for any
such obedience, nor that they either do or can do any thing Authoritatively
indeed, but what they make good and manifest from Scripture; for then only,
and only so far forth, they may Authoritatively say, It seemed good unto the
holy Ghost and us; as has been said before: for even the Apostles were but
drawn together to consult and consider of those things, neither did they
decree, till James stood up and resolved the matter from sacred Scripture, by
concluding such a result, as to which they all assented: It was not carried by
multiplicity and majority of votes, what should be decreed; but by the best
Scripture evidence.

Neither are any such either fit or worthy to be members of an Assembly, Synod,
or Classis, or congregational Presbytery, that can be content to let things
pass upon slender debate, and without result from Scripture grounds upon bare
votes, it may be inconsiderately gathered, to be made as decrees, for the
Churches Government, and that about matters in controversy, concerning faith
and doctrine, or ways and manners, or any such like.

Considering that the eyes of the chief Seers, in a whole Kingdom or Nation,
yea in the whole universe, may be covered: and the sacred Scriptures may be
unto them all as a sealed book; yea, they may account even the great things of
Gods own Law as a strange thing; as Isai. 29. Verse. 9. to the end. Micah 3. 5,
6. 7, 8. Hosea 8. 12. And yet may think it strange, that such men as they
should either be, or be accounted blind; as those that said unto Christ, Are
we blind also?

And therefore it behooves the Magistrates, and all in authority, to restrain
and limit them in these respects that so highly concern even the life and death
of their immortal souls, and of posterities after them, unto all ages: I say,
to restrain and limit them to the Law and Testimony in what ever decrees they
decree to establish: else they are guilty even of the blood of souls, which
they lay open to be bought and sold at the will and pleasure of presumptuous
men, that are self-willed, and lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters,
proud, etc, of which sort there is many in these last days.

6. They are stricter, and justly too, in keeping themselves within their own
sphere, in that they require not obedience from all the inhabitants within
parochial, no nor local bonds; to the decrees of Synods, Classis, and
Presbyteries, as jure divino; for that can never be proved from Scripture
grounds, to be either duty or lawful, but only so far forth as their decrees
are just, and held forth also from Scripture grounds, in the name of God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ: to be obeyed, or disobeyed; not as they tender the
displeasure of men, in what ever authority, place, or power, Ecclesiastical,
or Civil; But as they [tender] the breach of the Law of God, or their obedience
unto him, or as they fear his wrath, or expect his love, and blessing, etc.
Neither do they resolve, to deal with all indefinitely, in a spiritual way; as
they are admonished to deal with brethren, Matthew. 18. to 21. by way of private
reproof and admonition; and after that, to tell it to the Church; before they
be unto us as heathens, and publicans; for many are so to us, even as heathens
and publicans; even in the judgment of Charity, and certainty both: being yet
without in the Apostles sense, 1 Cor. 5. 12. And what have we to do with them
that are without; to whom all things (as yet) are done in Parables, What have
we, therefore, to do to judge them, the Apostle knew not, that we had any
occasion, nor proper interest or power so to do, save only in general in the
public Ministry. Neither are we enjoined, (for altogether) not to company with
such; nor not to eat with such; if they be but (Fornicators, or Covetous, or
Extortioners, or Idolaters of this world,) as 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11. and Chap. 10.
27. For we are not bound to Rebuke Scorners, and deal with them as brethren,
in spiritual respects; we are only bound to deal with breathren, such who are
so called, and accounted of, through their visible profession of Christianity:
(not of Atheism, and gross prophanness;) such, who never yet thought
themselves fit to receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: for how are they
within, or in fellowship with us, or in company together, who abhor and hate,
and had rather almost be in company with devils, then with such, whose ways
are a rebuke unto theirs. And how then shall we in any respect, withdraw from
such, who never yet were in company with us, but against their wills; 1 These.
3. 6.

And how is it proper, to judge, or censure; or to remit, and pardon, (as 2
Cor. 2. 7, 8. 1 Cor. 5. 12, 13. Joh. 20. 23.) such who are utterly incapable of
any proper impression, or sense, or dinte of a divine rod; a spiritual censure,
or admonition, or rebuke, etc. yea, or of being remitted, though they outwardly
reform, till they inwardly repent, and be at peace with God, not only for open,
but for all their sins, open, and secret; unless men purposely intended to
delude their souls: for though for trespass against man, he that is injured,
upon Repentance may forgive it; as Mat. 18. but sins against God, he only can
pardon, who sees the heart, and whether they repent indeed. And men can only do
it, declaratively and effectually, in his sacred Name; according to the
appearance or visibility of their cordial repentance (in their apprehension;)
not for one only, but for for all their sins, Jam. 2. 10, 11. and 1 Samuel 2. 25.

And thus much briefly against the Presbyterians, for the time present, though
I have more particulars to have instanced in; yet if in these particulars, a
reconcilement were made, the rest would follow with more ease.

But these things being true, as I am confident that any rational man (that
will but seriously consider of these particulars, with the grounds and reasons,
that are here alleged, with an impartial eye) will freely confess, that the
Independents are justly stricter, and ought so to be, in these particulars; and
that their grounds and reasons are sound and substantial for so doing, and
that the Magistrate ought not to restrain or limit them, in the prosecution of
these just, and lawful, and godly ends: But to tolerate, and protect them, and
encourage them hereunto, by all possible means: yea, though in these respects,
they be manifestly stricter then the Presbyterial Government, as it now stands,
will permit and suffer.

And now having done with the Presbyterians, for the time present, in behalf of
the Independents: I shall turn my hand to the Independents, in behalf of
Presbyterians; for though I cannot charitably conceit them, in respect of their
ends; to wit, that they are not good; yet, I have something against them, in
respect of their ways, and dare not be partial in the things of God; but must
speak out, according to my apprehension, as well against them, as the
Presbyterians; for it is dangerous to be partial in the Law, or respect
persons. Job. 32. 22.

1. And first then, though it is not denied, but that in case of necessity such
a Congregation so incorporated, (being men of fidelity; faithful men) may
ordain themselves Pastors, Elders, and Deacons, as they stand in need, and
exercise all spiritual Jurisdictive power amongst themselves, as they see
cause, for the glory of God, and the Churches good. For in case, when no other
Pastors of other Churches can conveniently be obtained to assist them therein,
to whom it more fitly and properly appertains, being called by the Church so to
do; It is confessed they may do it themselves.

Reas. But in ordinary propriety, as the Apostle says, The less is blessed of
the greater; for he so concludes, Hebr. 6. 7. that it is so without
contradiction, proving that Melchisedec was greater then Abraham, because he
blessed him, verse. 4. 7.

Argu. But Ordination by imposition of hands, is an act of blessing; and is
effectual to confer a blessing in the Name of God, if administered in faith,
Matthew. 18. 19. though otherwise not, as Jam. 1. 6, 7, 8.

Conseq. 1. And therefore by consequence, The more faithful that men are, and
the more likely, such their blessing is to be effectual, and to be conferred
indeed; as many instances mght easily be produced.

Conseq. 2. And therefore it follows, That the most faithful that can be
obtained, is the most fit for such an act; because it is most likely, that such
their blessing will be effectual, the more and rather.

Reas. And therefore it was, that John the Baptist did, according to modesty,
object against Christ, when he came to his Baptism, I have need (says he) to
be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? But our Savior answered, that he
should let be now, because that thus it became them, to fulfill all
Righteousness.

And the Reason was, because in common reputation (at that time) John was
greater then he: For all men held that John was a Prophet: But Christ as yet
had not showed forth his glory, in so eminent a manner, as to be so esteemed.

Object. But it is objected, That a [Church of beleevers] or a company of the
[Presbytery] are, in common reputation, greater then [one,] to wit, any [one]
man whom they may ordain, and so in that respect, The less is blessed of the
greater, as Hebr. 6. 7. For two, (says Solomon) are better then oNe. And the
promise is made unto two or three. Mat. 18.

Therefore it follows, if two or three be preferred to one, that a whole Church
of faithful men are better then two or three, and greater in esteem, and their
prayers, or blessings, are the more likely to be valide and effectual.

And therefore it is not unfit in that respect, but proper and comely, and so
much the more hopeful, that such their blessing, through faith in God, will be
effectual, though they want the assistance of some more eminent men (then such
yet are) whom they do ordain: The prayer of a righteous man avails much,
says James, if it be fervent, Jam. 5. 16. And how much more available may we
expect the prayers of a whole Church will be with God, as it was when Peter was
in prison? Act. 12. 5.

Ans. I answer briefly, That it is not unlawful, but may be done, and not
improperly, in case of necessity, as has been said.

But, first, observe, That the addition of some more eminent men to be, as it
were, the mouth and hands of such a whole Church, does not deminish, but
increase their number of faithful men, if such can be obtained to assist them
therein, and so by their own Argument so much greater blessings are likely to
be conferred at their request.

And it may he sometimes that the prayers of some one man being more earnest
then the rest, may obtain the blessing, or some particular request, rather then
all the rest; as it is said of Elias, James 5. 17. 18. and 2 Kings 2. 12. The
Charrets and Horsemen of Israel.

Reas. For it is not because of the number of Intercessors, nor because of the
righteousness [only] of such, or so many as shall pray unto him, that he grants
their request; but it is rather because of their faithfulness and fervency in
such very particular for which they pray, as Jam. 1. 6, 7, 8. and Chap. 5. 16.
For it sometimes falls out, that men that are the most faithful ordinarily, yet
may in some particulars be more diffident then the weakest, so that their faith
failing them, they begin to sink; as Peter on the water, though he had walked
already, through the power of God, yet the sight of a storm struck him into
doubts; and you know the place where it is said of Christ himself, That he
[could] do no great works there, because of their unbelief.

And therefore it is not the bare form of ordination, though administered by
never so many, or never so eminent men, that can prevail for a blessing on such
or such a man; but it is the fervency and faithfulness of such who do ordain
them that obtains the blessing; for by how much stronger men are in faith in
that very particular, so much the more powerful they are with God to obtain his
blessing, and the presence and power of the Holy Ghost to be in greater measure
conferred upon him to enlarge and enable him for such a work, and for service
to his name in such an office.

And therefore such men, who in the general apprehension of such a Church, are
the most faithful and fervent in spirit that can be obtained, and the most
inward and familiar with God, ought to be requested, and sought unto by such a
Church to assist them in ordination of any such officer, and to be their mouth
and hands unto God, even the mouth and hands of the whole Church, who (as it is
granted) ought to be present, and to join in prayer together with them.

And thus to do, is not to [aliene] their own liberties in that respect, for
they may do it themselves in case of necessity, as has been said, when there
is not to be had more eminent and faithful men then is amongst themselves, or
if they cannot obtain them: For it does not take such liberties from them, nor
power to use them, in case of necessity, because that others assist them at
their request, no more then another Minister, praying or preaching together
with them at their request, takes away from them their proper liberty of
praying themselves.

And therefore I shall much wonder if any godly conscientious man shall oppose
this doctrine, though the custom has been (as they were instructed by some of
their Ministers) to practice otherwise: yea, and though I also speak it in
behalf of those of the Presbyterial way, for I do not speak it in behalf of
men; but in behalf of the truth, which I ought to esteem before all the men on
the face of the earth; I therefore speak it, because I believe, that thus it
becomes them, to fulfill all righteousness: For greatness in reputation ought
to be preferred in such public Ministrations above greatness in deed, for
Christ was greater [in deed] then John the Baptist, though not in [Reputation]
at the time of his Baptism, and therefore so it became them; to fulfill all
righteousness, Mat. 3. 24, 15. For without all contradiction the less is
blessed of the greater in ordinary ways, at least of the greater in Reputation:
John had need to be baptized of Christ, the less of the greater, to this Christ
assents; but John was greater in Reputation at that present time, therefore it
became them rather to follow the general Reputation, then the inherent power
for Baptization, wherein subsisted the greatness in deed in respect of power.

For the Original of Power is only in God, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Not not in him that
planteth, nor in him that waters: And is but apprehended, or fetched out by
faith, as by an immediate hand, and accordingly administered, according to the
strength or measure of faith, in such an Instrument, by whom such blessing or
benefit whatsoever is mediately administered.

It was not properly the spirit of Moses that was put upon the Elders, Numb.
11. though it was so called, Verse. 17. even the Spirit that was on him; but it
was more properly even the Spirit of the Lord, as Verse. 29. that rested on the
Elders, and on Moses both; and in that respect only it is properly said, That
the Lord took off the Spirit that was on him, and put it upon them, as Verse.
25. 26, 17. for it was no other but the self-same Spirit, even the Spirit of
God, though measured out as it pleased him, as 1 Cor. 12.

We must not therefore expect the blessing, because administered in such a way,
or in such a manner, no, nor by faithful men, (though we may the rather,) but
because administered through faith indeed, in the name of God, whom we ought to
acknowledge as the only fountain and original spring from whence it is derived,
and variously dispersed, as it pleases him, as Jam. 1. 16, 17, 18. and is not
in the power or custody of men to give the increase, or blessing indeed, as 1
Cor. 3. 7. And therefore all the Ordinances (though never so purely and
properly administered, in respect of order, and forms of Government or
Administrations) will be utterly vain, invalid, empty, fruitless, and
unprofitable, unless ministered in Faith, yea, through Faith in God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and that in every particular: for it is not sufficient that
such administrators have Faith in God for the saving of their souls, but they
must have Faith to apprehend his promises, concerning such particulars,
whatever they administer, or desire of God to be done for them upon such
occasions; or else they may not expect to receive such things, as Jam. 1. 6, 7.
And therefore the most faithful is weak enough for the meanest administration
in the Church of God.

And therefore the end of ordination being the blessing, the means to attain it
should be so ordered, as is most likely to attain unto, or acquire this end: we
should so run, that we might obtain: For, in such public cases, men often
take Gods name in vain for want of aiming chiefly at the proper end of any
service, duty, or ordinance that men take in hand.

But thus much briefly for this particular, because I hope no man will
contradict what is here asserted.

2. A second thing that I have against the Independent Government, is briefly
this, to wit,

That though they do allow of consociation of Churches for advice and counsel,
and for the help and encouragement, resolving, comforting, etc. or for the
discouragement, forsaking, and conviction, or withdrawing from, as need
requires:

Yet they do not allow of any authoritative acting, by an Assembly of such
Churches, either for, or against any particular Church, though need require so
to do; but do account it sufficient to withdraw communion, if they so deserve,
according to Mat. 18. as the direction is, to deal with a brother in case of
trespass, not considering that this directory is only given out, how we ought
to deal, in case of trespass, against man, one brother against another, and
that in such trespasses as deserve not excommunication out of such a Church,
but a private withdrawing of brotherly fellowship by that particular man
against whom the trespass is committed, to wit, Let him be unto thee as an
heathen man, and as a Publican, Verse. 17. It is not said, that either such a
man, or any other, for trespass properly against man, should be excommunicated
from the public ordinances; but they are first admonished to note such by a
letter, and have no company with them, that they might be ashamed, to see how
that will work to bring them to repentance; but they must not for such faults
account them as enemies, but admonish them as brethren, as 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14, 15.
and bear them patiently, yea, though we think of them, that they are evil men,
2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. For we may easily be deceived, especially in our own
cause, and be apt to judge and censure without moderation: And Excommunication
ought only to be administered in case of sin against God, when we can scarce,
in the judgment of charity, think any better of them, but that they are wicked
men, cast out from amongst your selves: That [wicked man] says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 5. 13. and of this sort also were Hymeneus and Alexander, who had made
shipwreck of Faith, and fell to Blasphemy; besides which, or for such like
gross and notorious sins, and that against God, we read not of any that were
delivered unto Satan like those, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

Argu. But this directory of our blessed Savior, going no further but to
private withdrawing, in case of trespass, brother against brother, is not
sufficient to direct the Church how she ought to deal, in case of sins
deserving that dreadful sentence of Excommunication: but we must likewise take
in, for further direction, that 1 Cor. 5. and many other Scriptures, as you
shall hear anon.

Consequ. Therefore it follows, That as a particular Church is bound as well to
deal with offenders (if they so deserve) by that heavy sentence of
Excommunication, as withdraw their communion and fellowship from them in case
of lesser sins:

Even so in like case, Churches consociated ought to deal with offending
Churches (if they so deserve) by that heavy sentence of Excommunication, as
well as withdraw their communion from them in case of lesser sins: And the
Churches censures of Excommunication ought not to be bounded within the verge
of particular churches against particular persons; but ought to be executed
against whole Churches by the sister Churches (consociated and assembled for
that very end) if their sin so deserve; as in case of toleration of blaspemy,
or idolatry, or Sabbath-breaking, or adultery, and such like gross profaneness
in the Members of the Church, as 1 Cor. 5. 10, 11, 12. and do not censure them
for it. And take notice by the way, That I therefore say [in the Members of the
Church] because such who are profane, and never professed Repentance, nor Faith
in God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, though they come to the Church, yet they are
not capable of Excommunication, because that even in the judgment of Charity
they are as yet without, in the Apostles sense, and are not of such as are
called brethren; but being already without, and in the power, and slavery, and
captivity of Satan, need no more casting out, nor delivering unto him: but it
were gross foolery to spend the Churches censures upon such wicked men, neither
could it be expected to be effectual against them, nor take impression on them;
And therefore the Apostle does not for altogether inhibit our companying
together with such, as Verse. 10. but with such (amongst such) as are called
brethren; with such a one, that they should not eat: Whereas in another place,
If any man that believed not invited them to a feast, if they were disposed to
go, they might go; for he gives them no inhibition in that case, but only a
directory how to carry themselves, as 1 Cor. 10. 27.

And it is but a foolish thing to bring men to the stool of repentance for some
one particular notorious sin, till they can also profess and seriously too, as
before God, that they repent for all, both secret and open, and do hope for
pardon. And it is but a deluding of men's consciences, to put them in hope of
pardon for one, till they repent for all, and do resolve to forsake them, Jam.
2. 10. 11.

And thus much by the way; I do now come to the point, and do briefly assert:

Assert. That it is the duty of true Christian Chuches, jointly consociate, or
assembled together, not only to admonish, and withdraw communion, as has been
said; And as it is granted by Mr. Cotton, in the way of the Churches of N. E.
page 109. Sect. 6. to wit, That they look at it, as their duty, to be faithful
one Church to another; in like sort, as the brethren of one Church are called
to be faithful one toward another; In regard that Churches enjoy, and profess
communion one with another, as well as brethren of a particular Church;
alleging Cant. 8. 8. and 2 Cor. 11. 28. Look also Sect. 7.

But that therefore, it likewise follows, even from their own argument; That an
assembly of Churches, is also bound to deliver unto Satan, in the Name of God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ, and by his power etc. any such Church, as shall so
deserve; or the Officers, or Ministers of any such Church, who shall so
deserve, if their own Church shall neglect to do it; else, they deal not
faithfully with such Ministers, or brethren, not with such a Church, as in duty
they are bound, 1 Cor. 5. after the Apostles doctrine and example, 1 Timothy 5.
19. 20. as has been said: Nay, if they but call themselves brethren, or
Ministers of Christ, Rev. 2. 2, 20. 21. or Churches of Christ, as Chap. 3. 9.
yea, Jews and are not.

They ought, I say, to be dealt with, by Divine authority, in the name of
Christ, as Synagogues of Satan, as false Apostles, as wicked Iezebels, as lying
brethren; And so proclaimed (jointly) by the Churches, with one consent, and
delivered to Satan, that they might learn, not to blaspheme, or not to seduce,
and deceive the servants, and people of God; nor call themselves Apostles and
ministers of Christ, when they are not; or his Ministers and Ambassadors, in
such things and messages, wherein they are not; as Revel. 2. 2, 20. or call
themselves Jews, or of the people of God, and are nothing so, as Chap. 3. 9.
but do lie notoriously, and that in the name of Christ.

I say, the Censures of the Church ought to pass upon them, in as public and
declarative a way and manner, acco^ding to their sin, as their sin shall
deserve; and that in the name of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ; whose
judgment it is, that ought to be administered, and publicly held forth in his
sacred Name, with the grounds thereof, from the Law and Testimony, if men so
deserve, even to execration.

Reas. For the like care, and the like means in every respect, is to be used,
held forth, and exercised over such sister Churches; whether false or true, if
they be so deemed, through their own profession, as is, and ought to be used
over particular brethren, by a particular Church; whether such brethren be
false or true, that through their own profession, are deemed brethren, or
called brethren, as 1 Cor. 5. 11.

And if Admonition, and in some cases Excommunication, be Ordinances of God,
sanctified for the healing of the souls of Gods people gone astray; it were a
sacrilegious injury, either to the Ministers, or Elders, or to whole Churches,
when they go astray, to deprive them of the benefit of such wholesome
medicines, when the estate of their souls stand in need thereof: as so their
own arguments does plainly resolve, in the way of the Churches of N. Eng. Page
101. Chap. 5. Sect. 6.

But it cannot be denied, but even whole Churches may so far Apostatize, and go
astray, either in life, or doctrine, or government, etc. as well as particular
members of a Congregation.

Reas. For suppose all the Congregation do not act so wickedly, as to be
Fornicators, Idolaters, or Adulterers, etc. yet they may be induced to connive,
and indulge, and be accessory with such in a great measure, as the Corinthians
were, with the Incestious person, and therefore were sharply reprehended by the
Apostle Paul.

And if after admonition in such cases, as are proper for such gradual
proceedings, there follow not Repentance, and Reformation; or if any Church
shall tolerate Idolatry, Blasphemy, or Profaneness, all sister Churches ought
in such cases, to proceed roundly against them. Look in the way of the Church
of New Eng: page 93. But for more certain testimony, examine and compare these
Scriptures following, to wit, 1 Cor. 5. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 6. Deu. 13. 5, 6, etc. to
the end. Exodus 33. 7. Acts 13. 45, 46. Judge. 20. Josh. 7. 13, 24, 25, 26. Deuteronomy.
27. 15, etc. Joshua 22. 16, etc. Iere. 48. 10, Mal. 1. 14. And such like many
Prophetical, Popular, and National curses, which are exemplary for us to use in
like cases: And they are no other, but the express mind and will of God; which
being unchangeable, ought to be published, and declaratively held forth, as
occasion requires; and the more public, and the more visible and general that
it is, and the more faithfully, and emphatically that it is expressed, and the
better it is, and the more likely that it should be effectual for the end
thereof; yea, the more voices that proclaim it, or assent unto it, with
affection of mind, and faith in God, suitable thereunto; and it is the more
available, and acceptable with God, and efficacious and operative on the hearts
of men, to deter, and restrain them from any such wickedness. And what need we
any more, or more plain injunction, then the Apostle has given us: to wit, If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in execration, yea
maranatha: 1 Cor. 16. 22. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.

They had once occasion to have used these curses in the name of God, against
some Members of famous Churches in New England; and some it may be, might find
occasion to use them here, against such spies as bring an evil report upon the
Land of Canaan; the [Spiritual] I mean. And doubtless, if used in faith, as
they ought, they would be effectual; for many such Spies are culpable of
judgment from the hand of God, as well as these, who dyed of the plague before
the Lord; as Numb. 14. 36, 37. Yea, good men, whose souls shall be saved, may
yet deserve to be made exemplary by the hand of God, in such a case, for the
terror of others; as so (no doubt) were Nadab, and Abihu, and Vzza, and others,
as we may well hope; for even Aaron himself, was admonished by Moses, how to
carry himself, lest he also should dye before the Lord, if he were provoked,
Numb. 18 3.

And this kind of Divine Authority is far more awful, and fit to be used in
all such cases; then carnal, worldly, and humane authority; as the effects
would prove, if ministered in faith, as James 1. 5, 6, 7, 8. and by the power of
our Lord Jesus Christ, as 1 Cor, 5. 4. to wit, through faith in his name;
confidently believing, that according to his promise, he will make it
effectual; and ratify in heaven, what ever they agree on, or bind on earth or
denounce, etc. as Matthew. 18. For if a man have faith in God, yea though never
so little, if it be but as a grain of Mustard Seed, provided it be concerning
such very particulars, is he prays for, or desires to be done; yea, though
it were for removing trees, and planting them in the midst of the Sea, it
should doubtless be effectual, Matthew. 21. 25. Yea, What ever ye ask of God
in prayer, believe that ye shall receive it, and it shall be given you, says
our Savior Christ, Mar. 11. 22, 23, 24. Mat. 17. 20. Luke 17. 6.

And this Divine Authority, this power through faith, being ministered in his
Name, as it ought to be, is a far greater, and more awful authority, then any
humane power, or carnal authority, that can be given by men, in what place
soever; for it is indeed The power of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, spoken
of, 1 Cor. 5. 5. It is the power God. Mat. 18. 18, 19, 20. fetched down from
heaven, by the hand of faith.

3. A third thing that I have against the Independent Government, is their
strictness in trial of all, whom they admit to partake of the Sacraments. But
lest I should be over-tedious, and there being many Arguments, which have long
been opposed each against other, concerning this maine difference, which if
once reconciled, all other differences, would easily be agreed.

I shall therefore propose my own apprehensions, partly abreviating what has
formerly been said in some particulars, by way of result, and then shall answer
some objections concerning this main difference, and shall so conclude, lest my
Book should swell to a tedious Volumn.

After that a particular Church is constituted and organized, for
administration of all the ordinances they ought to observe; these ensuing
Rules, as most consonant with the practice of the Apostles, and of all the
Churches in the Primitive times, and most suitable to the Word of God, and the
rule of Charity therein contained; and to his own ways, held forth to us for
our imitation, who profess oour selves to be followers of God as his dear
children, and to walk in love, as Christ has loved us; and do account the end
of the Commandment to be love, out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and
of faith unfeigned.

1. First, It ought to be their chief care and endeavor, that the preaching of
the Word (which is the chief means that God has appointed for the saving of
souls) be with all diligence, publicly administered, both to believers and
infidels, even to all comers, with this end, and respect chiefly, That such who
are already believers, might be edified in faith and love, which are in Christ
Jesus, and that others might be convinced, and converted, and turned to the
faith, yea, and that even all such whom God has ordained to eternal life
through Jesus Christ: for care should be taken, that non should be lost, nor go
astray, nor be offened in any respect, that neither bruisedreeds should be
broken off, nor smoking flax extinct, or quenched; nor that which is halting be
turned out of the way, but rather healed, and restored, yea blown and kindled,
and bound up, and mollified, and helped, and strengthened, by all possible means
that God has appointed in his holy Word.

2. Secondly, as saving of soul, and edifying of the Church, is the chief
business to be cared for, and endeavored by the Church, and as the ministry of
the Word is the chief means tending thereunto: so it necessarily follows, that
not only for the present, but for future likewise, provision be made, that none
be elected, nor admitted into office, as Minister of the Word, to labor in the
word and doctrine, nor to rule and govern, or minister to the poor, as Deacons,
etc. but such who are so qualified, as the Word of God requires they should;
that so they might not be lead, either by blind guides, or Idol shepherds, dumb
dogs, devouring wolves, soul-murtherers, false Prophets, that sew pillows under
all armholes; and flatter men into a fools paradise, being partial in the Law,
or profane and scandalous in any respect: as the Scripture is large for
direction herein, how they ought to be qualified, through faith, and love,
which are in Christ Jesus, Act. 6. 3. Not any officer, no not the Deacons, but
care should be taken, that they should be men of honest report, full of the
holy Ghost and wisdom.

3. Thirdly, that in any possibility, this might be secured, and provided for,
not only for the present, but for future generations (as much as possible) it
ought to be the care of every Member of that body corporate, that visible
Church so joined, and constituted;

That none be admitted, and joined, or incorporated together with them, either
first, or last, either for the time present, or for future generations: But
such only, in whom all the members of the said body (In the judgment of
charity) may justly confide, that they will not, to their knowledge (either in
Elections, or Ejections, approbations, or results, in any Church-busness,
either for receiving in, or casting out, or any matter wherein their voice or
sufferage is justly requisite, as a member of the body) deal unjustly or
impartially, perfidiously or unfaithfully, but as before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels; Lest in after times, by means of ungodly
men, which might be crept in, if care be not taken, and provision made, to keep
such out, they that are ungodly might heap to themselves Teachers after their
own hearts, such as have been mentioned: And therefore so far forth as such
body corporate is in any respect politically joined, for the good of the whole,
every member being part of the whole, and therefore having interest in the
whole it self, and that not only for the good of the rest, but for it self
likewise; and therefore ought in conscience to have vote and sufferage amongst
the rest, in all such cases as concern the whole, for the good of all.

So every member ought to be careful, that none be admitted as joint members,
and incorporated with them, as a body politic, but such in whom they do and
can confide; That they will not, to their knowledge, in any such case, either
deal unfaithfully concerning the whole, or any particular member, in any such
respect; but, as has been said, for the glory of God, and the good of the body.

And not only so, but trial should be had concerning their knowledge and
spiritual understanding, both in the things of God, and that concern the
Church, in respect of Government and Discipline thereof, that they be both
sound, and able to discern even of things that differ, in some good measure;
and be likewise conscientious, suitable thereunto.

For, as they that are weak ought to be received, though not unto doubtful
disputations:

So, they that are weak ought to be received, but not unto doubtful Elections,
and such like business, as necessarily require, that men should understand and
know, what they do, when they act therein.

And therefore it was, that though all the Levites were accepted of God, and
taken for all the first born of the Children of Israel:

And given as a gift to Aaron and to his sons, from among the children of
Israel, to do the service of the children of Israel in the Tabernacle of the
Congregation: and to make an atonement for the children of Israel, that there
be no plague among the children of Israel: When the children of Israel came
nigh unto the Sanctuary, etc.

Yet they were not required, as called of God, to go in, and wait on the
service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, but from twenty five years old
and upwards; and so but to continue till they came to fifty years old, and were
then to cease waiting on the service thereof, and should serve no more, as
Levit. 8. 18, 19, 24, 25.

So that it evidently appears, That till they came to ripeness of years, and to
a suitable discretion and gravity, for such holy service, it did not appertain
unto them to administer in such a service.

And so no more it does to men that are true Believers, and truly faithful,
till they come to maturity and ripeness in knowledge, and have their wits
exercised, as the Apostle says, to discern both good and evil.

For it is all one, to be led by others that are blind guides, as to act of
our selves ignorantly and blindly; not knowing what we do, or speak, or whereof
we affirm; For we may speak evil or good, and that injuriously, of the things
we know not: And so, through blind guidance, perish in the ditch.

4. And fourthly, This being so, and that such Church affairs are of such
weighty consequence and concernment to every member, and for the good of all,
and for the saving of souls; That it is not possible men should be too
provident and circumspect in these respects.

It is therefore requisite, and that which is the duty of every member of such
a body, to take care, that none be admitted to be incorporated, and joined with
them, to have power and vote in the general business, but such only as are
known and approved for faithfulness and sincerity in true Christianity, in the
practice of piety and of religious service and worship of God in all such
duties both private and in public, as God requires.

And though they be thus known and approved by some that are Officers and
members of such body politic, Yet for fuller satisfaction unto all the rest,
it will be needful that they should openly and publicly, before all the
Church, not only profess their faith in God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
their repentance and resolution through the grace of God, to forsake all their
sins, and to carry themselves suitable unto such profession both before God and
men.

But, for further security and satisfaction to all the Church, they ought to be
engaged, by entering into Covenant both with God and the Church, to continue
faithful and just, and to deal impartially in all such respects, according to
their knowledge, as God shall assist and strengthen them so to do; and thus far,
and in these respects, such particular body can never be too careful, nor take
too strict trial of such who are admitted to be Members of the same.

But if they be not careful and strict herein, the men of this world shall rise
up in judgment against them, and condemn them herein; who in civil Corporations
are careful and strict, that none be admitted to have vote amongst them, in
Election of Officers, for the Government thereof, but such only as (having
served an Apprenticeship some certain time) are experienced amongst them, and
practiced in their Trades, and are so made free; and that saying of Christ is
justly verified against all such, That the men of this world are wiser in their
generation, then the children of light, and will be applied in displeasure
against them, if they know these things, and will not obey and do accordingly;
yea, even the blood of souls will one day be required even at their hands, if
they will not be careful and faithful, and provident in the use of means, which
properly tend to the saving or damning of immortal souls.

5. And fifthly, on the other part, for the Administration of the Sacrament of
Baptism, and of the Lords Supper, such particular Church ought not to be
strict, nor ridged and severe, but with all charity, meekness and patience,
bear the infirmities and burdens of others, and may not please themselves; as
these Scriptures hold forth unto us, 1 Cor. 16. 14. and Chap. 13. and Chap. 10.
32, 33. and Acts 2. 41. 42. Chap. 16. 15. Chap. 8. 37. 1 Cor. 1. 16. Mat. 3. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

And therefore, first, the Sacrament of Baptism ought to be administered unto
all such children, one or both of whose legitimate parents are true believers,
I mean, believers of the true Christian Faith, though yet for the present their
faith is not justifying, in respect of themselves, but merely Historical, as
Acts 8. 37. If they be not dogs or swine, scorners of, or barkers against the
ways of God, and his Church and People.

And this also is but only to be expected to be held forth or manifested to the
Church in the serious and public profession and acknowledgment thereof in the
public Congregation.

For it was no more that Philip required of the Eunuch, and Peter of the
Jailer, whose whole household was baptized of him upon such profession: Yea,
though they be such men who are not admittable to the blessed Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, by reason of scandal, which may lie upon them, yet if they
earnestly desiring the salvation of their children, and being such who, in
their minority, were baptized likewise, and professing a purpose to amend their
ways, and turn unto God, they ought not to be put back, but to be baptized, and
their parents admonished how they ought to instruct them and bring them up, and
that they themselves also should bring forth fruits meet for repentance, as the
Covenant of God made with them in Baptism in their minority requires of them,
if they will not be accounted Coveant-breakers both with God and man; and so
their charge lies even at their own doors, and the Minister is clear, and the
Church satisfied, if it be serious and in public, etc, for all outward
Ordinances ought to be administered according to the judgment of Charity, and
ought not to be restrained to the judgment of Certainty, but according to Love
or Charity, the properties whereof are not to think evil, but to believe all
things, hope all things, and to take all things in the better part, and not to
judge or censure according to the appearance, but righteous judgment, and as we
can make it manifest that we ought so to judge.

2. And secondly, in like manner for Administration of the blessed Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, it is only needful that such who would be admitted to partake
of it, should in the public Congregation make open profession of the true
Christian Faith, and confession of, and repentance for their sins, with a
resolution to abandon and forsake them, and to walk worthy of that vocation
whereunto they are called of God, and of such communion and fellowship with the
Church of God whereto they are admitted. Provided always, that they be
admonished beforehand of the danger and judgment that they are liable unto (if
they either for the present shall deal hypocritically with the Church of God in
such public profession, and do but lie and dissemble before God and men) as
did but justly befall Ananias and Sapphirah: And likewise of the judgment and
censure that the Church is bound publikly to denounce and pronounce against
them in suspending them again from such communion; if they turn again with the
dog to his vomit, and with the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the
mire, and will not be reclaimed by gentle means to forsake their sins, and so
the fault shall lie at their own doors, if they do dissemble, or turn again;
and both the Minister and the Church is guiltless herein before God and men,
for they cannot justly deny them the Ordinance, though they have sinned
notoriously, if they freely confess such their notorious sins, and profess
repentance, and a full purpose of amendment of life, and that they are
persuaded that God has pardoned, and does and will accept them in Jesus
Christ, and save their souls.

For what know the Ministers, or the whole Church, but that they are converted,
and truned unto God with all their hearts, if they so profess? And upon what
grounds can they lawfully deny to administer the same unto any such, though
their sins aforetime have been as scarlet or crimson dye in the sight of men?

And who knows but such public engagement may oblige them in conscience for
future time, and for fear of the judgment of God against them, to keep their
Covenant, and amend their lives, and turn unto God, and cleave unto him even
with all their hearts, and find mercy with him; whereas on the contrary, if
they should be rejected, or deferred and rebuked, and not accepted and
believed, when they so profess, they should do as much as in them lies, even
to destroy their weak faith, and to quench the sparkles of their smoking flax,
and break in pieces such broken reeds, whom, for ought we know, God has freely
accepted and received unto mercy, and for whom Christ has dyed, and ordained
such Ordinances to increase and strengthen their feeble faith, as well as for
the strong and most faithful Members of the Church of God: For who would have
thought that Christ should have called Zachous, the Publican, and dined with
him, rather then any of the faithful and godly people of the Jews at Jerusalem,
who doubtless believed as well as he, and to have eaten and drunken with
Publicans and sinners? But he gives the Reason, For he came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, etc.

But it will be objected, 1. That these are novel Distinctions and Divisions,
that some should be admitted to have their children baptized, and neither of
the parents admitted as yet to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

2. And again secondly, That some should be admitted to the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, and yet not be admitted to be incorporated Members of that
particular Church, nor have votes in Elections, and admissions or ejections,
and censures, etc. as the members have; this is novel and strange.

I answer, That it is no more novel, then the sacred Scripture and primitive
Examples, as I nothing doubt, but to make it manifest; and that these
distinctions and divisions are of absolute necessity in a Church rightly
constituted, and governed, and disciplined; and the Ordinances of God rightly
administered, both to the weak and strong, as they ought to be.

1. And first then, I shall endeavor to make it good, that the children of such
have been baptized by the Apostles themselves, upon bare profession of
Historical Faith, without either confession of their sins, or profession of
their Repentance, and a resolution of amendment of life, that we read of in
Scripture.

And in my apprehension, this is either clear form the Baptism of the Iaylors
household, and from the ordinary Tender of Baptism to the whole households of all
that professed bare Historical Faith, to wit, That Jesus Christ is the Son of
God; or else our grounds are to seek for the Baptism of Infants, Acts 16. 15,
31, to 34. and Acts 8 37.

And if they be such parents, who have been baptized in their minority, their
childrens case is no other, but in equal respect with the Grand children of
such parents whose Grandfathers are holy, but their own parents profane, who
yet ordinarily are accounted admitable.

2. And secondly, concerning admittance of all to the Sacrament of the Lord
Supper, that do desire admittance, and will in the public Congregation
profess a true justifying, and lively Faith in Jesus Christ; and if their sins
have been notorious, do freely confess them, and profess Repentance, and a
resolution of amendment of life:

I cannot see how any Church can deny to admit them, whatever they have been in
former times; but that they ought to administer the outward Ordinance upon that
ground, without any further trial or examination; and ought not to defer the
acceptance of them, with all brotherly love, and kind respects, as dear
brethren; for so in the judgment of Charity (seeing they cannot know the
contrary of certainty) they ought to judge, as has been said before: And there
was never more required of any in the primitive times, as 1 Cor. 16. 14. and
Chap. 13. and Chap. 10. 32, 33. andActs 2. 41, 42. I shall therefore engage any
that oppose this doctrine, to show a Scriptural example on the one hand, as
there is many on the other.

3. But thirdly, That all these should, at their first admission to the outward
Ordinances, being but babes in Christ, be likewise admitted as visible Saints,
and members of a visible Church, and should so be approved of by such a Church
and every member thereof, and incorporated with them politically to have power
and vote in Elections, etc. (in my apprehension) were very absurd.

1. For, first, till their sanctification be visible indeed unto such a Church,
how can they approve them as visible Saints? this were deeply to engage the
members of the Church to dissemble their judgments, which is not lawful, for
they must lay aside all guile and dissimulation, as well as all
uncharitableness, in judging of one another, as 1 Pet. 2. 1.

2. And secondly, They ought not to make any judgment at all, but leave it to
God, whether they stand or fall to their own masters; but in cases of
certainty, in which they have good ground for a full persuasion this way or
that way, lest by any means, they should wrong their brethren, or the Church of
God; for they should sometimes quench the smoking flax, and break also the
bruised reed; and sometime again disparage and disgrace the judgment of the
Church by approving such as do but deal hypocritically.

3. And thirdly, This were as much as if the Levites should all have been
admited to attend on the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation from
their very childhood, as well as after that they were come to years of
discretion: for the case is justly parallel, as these Scriptures will prove,
Levit. 8. 18, 19. 24, 25. and 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. Rev. 1. 6.

Reas. For thus I compare them, All the Elect that are built upon Christ by a
lively faith, are lively stones built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood,
to offer up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.
5. and Chap. 1. 2.

So that all Believers are accounted as Priests, even form their first
ingrafting into Christ by Faith.

But as there was Priests of diverse Orders; so also ought the true Believers to
be distinguished; I compare therefore the newly converted to the Levites in
their minority, till they came to years; and all the grown Christians, that are
experienced in the trade and practice of Christianity, to the Levites, when
they came to years of discretion: And all the Elders and Officers, elected by
the Church, I compare to the Priests, the sons of Aaron; and so the Ministers
to Aaron himself; and who knows but that the Lord Jesus Christ will govern
his Church after these examples parallel hereto, seeing the Apostle Peter does
thus compare them as resembling the Priesthood? 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. and Chap. 1. 2.
as has been said before.

4. And fourthly, This double Reception is clear also, in my apprehension, from
the Apostles own words; Them that are weak (says he) receive, but not unto
doubtful disputations; and therefore by consequence not to act, or vote, or
exercise power in doubtful Elections, and intricate business, which, for want
of understanding, they are not able for, till their wits be exercised in
spiritual things to discern both good and evil. It is not proper to admit them,
or approve them as joint Members of such body politic, till all the rest of
the Members be in some good measure satisfied, both of their abilities suitable,
and of the sincerity of their hearts and intentions for the good of the same.

But for further satisfaction, that these are no novel Distinctions or
Divisions of the Church, but of ancient use in the policy of the Churches in
the primitive times: Consider the words of Origin, alleged against the
Remonstrant, who recites the words of Origin to be these, to wit, That it was
the custom of the Christian Teachers first to examine such as desired to hear
them, of whom there were two Orders.

The first were Catechumeni, or beginners.

The other was of such as were more perfect.

Among whom there were some or dained to enquire into the life and manners of
such as are admitted into the Church.

That they may banish such from the public Assembly, that perpetrate
scandalous acts.

I say, Let it be considered, whether the policy of the Church in those times
was not justly parallel to that which has been said, and whether it be not also
suitable to the policy of some civil Corporations, who ought to be followed in
all wise policies, that may tend for good of a body spiritual, as has been
said.

Consider therefore whether those (...) or [Beginners] of which Origin spoke,
were not like [Appren^io^^] that had not served out their time in a City or
Corporation, and therefore had no voice in Election of Officers as Majors and
Aldermen, and those of the Common Counce:

And secondly, Whether those whom he speaks of, that were more perfect, were
not like Freemen of a City, who have a vote in Election of Officers for the
Government of the whole, and of a Common Counsel, etc.

And thirdly, Whether those that were chosen and ordained out of that order,
which they accounted more perfect, Whose office, to which they were ordained,
was to enquire into the life and manners of the people, and to banish, etc.
were not like the Aldermen and Common Counsel of a City, to whom all is
committed?

And fourthly, Whether the Christian Teachers of those times were not over all,
as Majors of Cities, who are chosen by vote of all the freemen, and of none but
freemen; for Apprentices have no vote, till their freedom be examined, and
approved likewise?

And the children of Light ought to be as wise in their generation as the men
of this world; and the Church is compared to a City or Corporation:

So that the Paralels in every particular do hold correspondency both with the
Levitical Priesthood, to whom the Apostle compares the Church,

And to the practice of the Churches in the Primitive times, is Origin relates
them,

And to the Civil Government of Bodies Corporated,

And to the Reason and end of all Policy Civil and Ecclesiastic, to wit, the
good, and benefit, and safety of the whole.

1. As first, Those that upon profession of the true Christian Faith, and
repentance for their sins, and or a resolution to amend their lives, are
admitted to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper;

Are justly parallel to all the Levites, that, during their minority, were not
admitted to attend upon the service of the Tubernacte:

And they are justly parallel to those that, in the Primitive times, were called
Cateemement or Beginners:

And they are justly parallel to Apprentices in a City that have not served out
their time:

And they hold correspondency with the Reason and End of all Government and
Policy, which is the good of the whole:

For as the heir, so long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be lord of all, but is under Tusors and Governors, till the time
appointed of the fat, her, as the Apostle says in a case not unsuitable; so for
the veny same reason, there being a childhood and minority in [Grace] as well
as [Nature,]

Reason tells us, that it is not fit, nor good, nor safe, nor likely to tend
for the good of the body; that power of government, or vote in elections should
be committed unto such, who are not yet capable of such a business, or are
doubted of, whether they do intend the good of the whole, no more then women
are to have vote amongst them, nor any specified in these parallels instanced
in.

2. And secondly, those who are admitted, not only to the Sacrament, but to be
incorporated as joint members, of a particular Church, upon such trial and
approbation, as has heerv said,

And justly parallel to all the Levites, That being come to year of
discretion, and gravity, were admitted to attend on the service of the
Tabernacle, if without blemish.

And they are justly parrallel, to those in the Primitive times, that were more
perfect then the beginners.

And they are justly parallel, to the freemen of a City, who have votes in
Elections, and out of whom the Common Council is chosen, as their
representatives; and to act for them as neeed requires.

3. And thirdly, the Elders chosen, by all the joint members of such a
particular Church, and ordained; etc.

Are justly parallel to the Sons of Aaron, to whom belonged the Priesthood, in
a peculiar manner, above the rest of the Sons of Levi, for they were anointed
with the holy oil, as well as Aaron, Levit. 8. 30, 31. and were ordained, and
consecrated to the Priests office.

And they are justly parallel, to those that were chosen and ordained in the
Primitive times, to look into the lives, and manners of such as were admitted
into the Church, and to banish, etc.

And they are justly parallel, to the Aldermen of a City or Corporation.

4. And fourthly, The Ministers of the Churches, that are chosen by the Eldens,
and all the rest of the body, Numb. 4. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 27.

Are justly parallel, to Aaron the chief Priest, who figuratively represented
the Lord Jesus Christ, and governed, and ministered in his sacred Name, and was
above his Sons.

And they are Justly parallel, to the teachers in the Primitive times, who were
chief in government, as well as in all other ministrations, in the Name of God,
and the Lord Jesus Christ; and therefore are called Angels. Revel. 2.

And they are also parallel, the to Majors of cities; who though they are chief
in power and command, yet it is by consent, and according to the agreement;
both of the Aldermen, and of the common Council, who are chosen by the freemen
as well as the Major, for the agitation and transaction of all their business,
for the good of all.

But it will be objected on the other part, that this public profession of
faith, and repentance, and of a resolution to amend our lives, and to walk
worthy of such vocation, will be thought too much, considering that many both
men and women, are bashful, and timorous, and unfit to speak, and declare
themselves in the open Congregation.

Answ. I answer briefly, that they may come before hand to the Ministers and
Elders, and signify their minds and desires unto them, and desire them to
express so much in public on their behalf, to satifie the Congregation of
their desires and resolutions, and of their repentance, and hope in these
respects, and it will be sufficient, that they testify their assent to what
they express for them, and in their names and behalf.

And how can the whole Congregation be more easily satified in these respects,
that men are cordial and sincere in such desires, then by doing it publicly in
the open Congregation, Who may all bear witness of such profession? and if
they turn back, and live not suitable in some good measure, they may all join
in their public censure, in like manner, as in their admittance.

And it cannot be denied, but that which is the duty of every man and woman to
believe, and do, before he approach to receive the Sacrament; That he ought not
to deny, to profess in public before all the Congregation, that are of that
profession, with whom he desires communion.

And no man will deny, but that these ensuing duties are requisite, and
necessary to be believed and done, before we approach to this Ordinance.

1. First, Repentance for all our sins, with confession of them, such as have
been notorious and public, if they be objected against us, even in the public
congregation; with a resoltuion to forsake them, and amend our lives, etc.

2. Faith is a necessary duty, before we approach to receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; for without Faith we cannot receive the things signified; we
cannot eat the flesh, and drink the blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, but by a
lively Faith.

For the outward bread and wine, being but the Sacrament or Sign thereof, is
not the thing it self, that is thereby signified; for the one may be eaten by
dogs and swine, but the other cannot, but by him only that has true
justifying and saving Faith. And therefore this Faith must at least be
[professed,] else the most charitable judgment cannot think them prepared for
this ordinance, If they deny to profess it before the whole Church.

3. Thirdly, Love is also a necessary duty; Love unto God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. And love to our brethren, and neighbors, and the whole Church of God.

For a true faith works by love; and he that loves not, knows not God; for
God is love, and he that loves not his brother, abides in death, etc.

And therefore no man is fit to receive the Sacrament, that is not reconciled,
both to God and men, and in charity with all, as these Scriptures show.

But it will be objected, that if all children of such believing parents, who
outwardly profess, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, must be admitted to the
Christian baptism; Then, all must be admitted without distinction: For all will
profess, that they so believe, though they be never so wicked and malicious
enemies to the Church of God, and even unto Christ himself; but our holy things
must not be given unto dogs and swine, Mat. 7. 6.

I answer. True, if they be dogs or swine; that is to say, if they be such, as
bark against, and speak evil of the ways of God, and of his Name and Truth,
or of his Ministers, or Disciples, and Children, etc. for righteousness sake:

They may, and ought to be excluded from all such privileges, and their
children likewise. Or if they be despisers and scorners of such holy things;
turning with the dog to his vomit, and with the saw that was washed to her
wallowing in the mire; they may be excluded, and ought so to be, if they can be
proved apparently to be such. But as the Lord inhibited the condemning of any
man, or putting him to death under two or three witnesses: yea, though one
witness, might never so fully assert and assure it to the judgments of men,
yet it must not stand.

Even so also, it must either be apparent, and clearly witnessed. Or it is not
sufficient to exclude their children from their outward Ordinance; they
themselves being such, who have been baptized in their minority: for they are
no other but in like condition with grandchildren of godly parents, who are not
approved as actual believers, and yet their children are admitted unto
baptism; If they be not so profane, as to account them dogs, or swine, etc. as
has been said. If they turn not to be enemies to the Church of God. He that is
not against us, is with us, says Christ.

Object. But it will be objected; If the Root be not holy, how may we expect
that the branches should.

But the Apostle plainly asserteth it, that such, whose parents are both of
them unbeleeving, are unclean. Now this he only means, that they are
outwardly to be accounted unclean; for he does not so judge, as if all were
Reprobates, that are borne of such parents, but that they are not to be
admitted, as the children of the Church, to the outward privileges, till their
hearts be purified through faith in God, when they come to years: and therefore
this Doctrine, is quite contrary to the Apostles assertion.

I answer briefly, That I list not to be contentious in this matter; for in
this case, as no man ought to be compelled to bring his children unto Christian
Baptism; so no man ought to be compelled to Baptize any; but to do in these
things, as their charitable judgments shall engage them in conscience of their
duty unto God, and to their Christian neighbors, and to the Church, etc.

For there is strong arguments on both sides, the quintessence whereof, I shall
briefly propose on both parties, and leave them to their consciences, to engage
them to either, as they think best:

And first then, for answer to this precedent Objection, I do confess that
this argument were unanswerable, if it were certain that the Apostle spak it,
of such believers, as have true visible, saving, and justifying faith: and that
such as they can likewise demonstrate for satisfying of the Church that they
are such believers.

But if the Apostle only mean it, of such a faith, as upon profession whereof,
the Ennuch was admitted; to wit, a believing that Jesus Christ is the Son of
God. And that there is no name given under heaven, by which we can be saved,
but the name of Jesus Christ.

If such as these, I say, be the believers, intended by the Holy Ghost in this
place, then we remain still, in the same dubitations as we were before. And so
all that profess; yea, or do but confess, that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,
must be accounted in the judgment of charity, as born of God, because that
Flesh and blood could never have revealed so much unto them, as 1 John 4. 2. as
Christ said unto Peter.

Provided always, that such their Profession be serious and cordial, at the
least, outwardly.

Object. But it will be objected, That Abraham recived the sign of
circumcision a seal of the righteousness of Faith, which he had when he was
uncircumcised, Romans 4. 11.

Conseq. Therefore it follows, That their Seal of the now Covenart, to wit,
Baptism, should not be administered unto any but such, or to their seed, that
have faith before, as Abraham had, to set this seal to.

Answ. I answer, That this Argument migh likewise hold the better; If the Faith
here spoken off, verse. 3. were believing in God, to justification.

But it is but as the other before spoken off: It is but said; Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Now believing God, that what
ever he promises shall come to pass. And believing in God unto justification,
are far different; for the Devils had the first but only the Elect do attain to
the second.

For even Abraham himself, as the Apostle says, was justified declaratively by
works, and not by faith only; Namely, when he had offered his Son upon the
Altar, James 2. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24.

Conseq. Therefore it follows, that this faith also, though it was imputed unto
him for righteousness, and shall also be imputed to all that so believe God.

Yet it is of it self but a bare historical, and only an outward historical
profession in the sight of men, and it is no more but such as the devils have,
and therefore tremble; but it is not saving and justifying faith, till men can
apply the promises of God, through Jesus Christ, peculiarly to themselves, as
to believe that God is [their God,] and that Christ is [their Savior,] which
many of the Elect can hardly attain to till their death beds, their faith is so
weak; but we must not destroy their weak faith, for whom Christ dyed; we must
not quench any smoking flax, nor break asunder the bruised reeds, nor turn
aside that which yet halteth out of the way; but it should rather be healed, or
bound up, or blown, and kindled by all such Ordinances, as might encourage them
to hold on, or that might strengthen their faith, for they ought to be dealt
with as [children,] by such doctrines and principles as are accounted the first
principles of the Oracles of God, because they have need of milk, more then of
strong meat; and what is Baptism, but one of the first Principles? as Heb. 5.
12, 13, 14. and Chap. 6. 1, 2. Yea, Baptism is such an Ordinance as the Apostle
Paul asserteth plainly, That he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the
Gospel; accounting Baptism a more inferior Ordinance then preaching of the
Word, though they sometimes minister it.

For the Ministry of the Word is a more spiritual Ordiance and Ministration,
for it is not Baptism that now saves us, to wit, not the putting away of the
filth of the flesh, (which is but the outward sign) but the answer of a good
conscience, when our hearts are purified through faith by the Holy Ghost.

And the Word is called, the Word of Faith which the Apostles preached, and
they did attend more constantly on the Word, and commanded others to administer
Baptism that were of less esteem for the Ministry of the Word, that they might
not be hindered neither by that, nor by serving of tables, from that spiritual
Ordinance for the saving of souls.

And it is plain from John the Baptists Confession, that even his Baptism was
far inferior to that of Christ's by his holy Spirit; and it is plainly said,
that there went out unto him Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round
about Jordan, confessing their sins; yea, such whom he accounted generations of
vipens were likewise baptized of him; for by a continued discourse by way of
admonition he speaks (even to them) saying, Verse. 11. indeed baptize [you]
with water to repentance, etc. I Mat. 3. 5, 6, etc.

But it may be objected, That even John the Baptist prophesied of Christ, that
he should baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, and so he also did
within a few days after his ascension; and that his fan is in his hand, and
that he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his garner,
but will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire, as Verse. 12. And therefore
it follows, that though John admitted all that came in a promiscuous manner,
yet Christ will purge more thoroughly, and blow away the chaff, when he has
gathered his wheat; and therefore it appears, that it is his mind that his
floor should be thoroughly purged, and all his wheat garner'd.

I answer true, but heed must be taken, that none of the wheat be lost; it were
better to retain the chaff and all, then lose any wheat; and there is sometimes
wheat so clothed with the chaff, that it cannot be unclothed by the threshing
instrument, but it will appear like the other chaff; and again, there is some
other chaff that is so like wheat, that you can hardly discern it, till you
know it by the weight; and so it is likewise with men not infallibly guided,
they cannot discern to judge at all by the Rule of Certainty, and therefore of
necessity they must only judge by the Rule of Charity; Till the Lord himself
shall come, and sit as a Refiner and Purifier of siver, and shall restore all
things, as Mal. 3. 3. and Chap. 4. 5. 6. I mean, in Spirit, first, to restore
all things before that great and fearful Day of the Lord, for every man's work
shall be tried by fire, to wit, [the fire of his Spirit,] of what sort it is;
and this Day of the Lord is near at hand; the fire is a little already kindled,
and the light thereof does a little shine, but our gross combustibles are long
in kindling, and there is much water cast upon them by such who should blow
them to make them flame, yet such waters shall be dried up to their prejudice
and loss, though they may be saved themselves.

It will be objected, That the promise runs both to Abraham and his seed, and
therefore the seal of Circumcision must needs be applied to all Abraham's seed
in their generations, till the coming of Christ, who was that peculiar Seed, in
which all Nations, yea all families of the earth should be blessed: But now the
promise, and so the Covenant runs, but to them and their seed that are of the
faith of Abraham, who, in that respect, is the father of us all; they that are
of faith, the same are the children of Abraham; but not the other.

Argu. But wicked men that have lived all their life long where the Gospel has
been preached, and yet live not only as Infidels, but rather like Athists: How
is the Promise and Covenant properly sealed unto them, or to their seed, save
only so many of them as the Lord our God shall call? How shall it so, so much
as seem (...), to apply it to their children, especially considering they do it
but of custom, more then conscience, when they bring their children? And this
custom was, it may be, chiefly incurred by the Laws and Canons of the Church
formerly in use, to which impulsive means was adjoined; so that if they had not
brought them, they might, for ought they knew, have been excommunicate both out
of Church and Markets, for so far the Excommunications, after Aggravations,
were extended; and how then shall we know their desires to have them baptized
now are so much as cordial, much less can it be known that they are so much as
mere historical Believers, that continue so obstinately profane after so much
preaching, which they have long heard, and the Gospel read, which all that were
ordined to eternal life, believed at the first preaching of it in the primitive
times, and how then shall we so much as think that they believe the Scripture,
or any such thing, as salvation in Christ, either temporal or eternal?

Ans. I answer, What know we but their children are elected, and are of those
to which God will show mercy: What know we, but some of their Predecessors were
such as loved God, and kept his Commandments, and therefore the Promise of
showing mercy unto thousands in them that so do is ground of hopes unto them,
Exodus 20.

And besides, the Promise runs but to the children of Believers, that are of
Faith, for those only are the children of Abraham; and then it will necessarily
follow, that so many of those children of Believers that prove not Believers,
but profane, must not have their children baptized, no more then the other,
till they come to years, and do desire it themselves being Believers also,
which will condemn some Independents practice, and enforce them to yield,
either to the one or the other; or at least wise, that if such as bring their
children to be baptized, can but prove that any of their Predecessors, even to
a thousand generations, have loved God, and kept his Commandments, they must
bantize them, as well as such children of profane parents, that were both
born, and educated under faithful Parents: for their profanness is so much the
more gross, and obstinate, and incorrigible, by how much better means, and
cause they have had of amendment of life; And therefore grant the one, and you
lose the other.

Object. But it will be objected, that all that were baptized in the Primitive
times, as Act. 2. 41. were admitted likewise unto all Ordinances, if at years
of discretion, as Act. 2. 41, 42. it is said, that They that were baptized, as
verse. 41. continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship; and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers, as verse. 42, etc.

Conseq. Now then it will necessarily follow, that none were admitted unto
baptism but that were likewise admittable unto all Ordinances, if at years of
discretion, and therefore none ought now to have their children baptized, but
that are admitted one or both parents to the Sacament of the Supper.
Considering both Ordinances are alike sacred, as appears from these Primitive
examples.

Ans. I answer, true; and so we ought to account them, in respect of
administering them to any at years of discretion. And as for the childen of
such; If you grant the one, the other is confessed.

But the difference still does hold, as before, whether men should be admitted,
and their children likewise, upon profession of faith merely historical, or
upon the holding forth of justifying faith, as visible believer Concerning
which, I am of opinion as is before showed, but desire that both parties, might
in this respect, without offense, or hart-burnings each unto others, walk in
love, and by the Rule of Charity, without judging or censuring each other, as
every man thinks, and is fully persuaded in his own heart, as before God, and
not as following men though never so eminent in other respects; for they are
not infallible. And this is certain, that we read not in Scripture, of any at
all, that desired baptism that were put put back; And it is not safe to act on
principles, that are not grounded there; but on the other part, all that gladly
received the Word, without any more trial, even three thousand souls were added
to the Church in one day, Act. 41. they had no time for any great trial of so
many.

But the the arguments being so strong on both sides, especially concerning
baptism, so that many godly and grave Divines, and holy men, are fully
persuaded in their very souls and consciences, that they ought to do the quite
contrary one to the other in this respect.

It therefore follows, that neither of them ought to compel each other to
their own principles nor ways herein, neither ought the Magistate to authorize
the one against the other, but leave them both at liberty in these respects, to
be stricter or remisser, as they think they ought; seeing a full, and clear,
and satisfactory result, cannot easily be produced from sacred Scripture, to
which all must necessarily assent unto. For to Impel unto either, by Civil
power, were manifest tyranny over the very consciences of the one, or the
other; and therefore ought not to be done; but as they tender the wrath and
displeasure of God, and will expect his judgment who having begun, will also
make an end, Deuteronomy. 32. 41, to 44. and 1 Samuel 3. 12, 13, 14, and Ps. 2. If such
be of the seed of the Jews (spiritual Jews I mean) See Ester 6. 13. for he is
not a Jew that is one outward, as Romans 2. 28, 29.

I have more particulars to propose betwixt them, tending to unity, concerning
other points wherein they are at variance, which I could not conveniently
include in one volumne; as the case stands with me at this time: But I purpose
(God willing) with all possible speed, to put them forth; proposing them as (in
my apprehension) an infallible result from sacred Scriptures, clearly deduced;
by unanswerable arguments.

1. What kind of Civil Government was commended to the Jews, by the Lord
himself, as the best form, or way of Government for them to establish in their
Commonwealth, of all other, who were his peculiarly beloved people above all
the Nations under heaven.

2. How far forth the Magistrate ought to compel by force and power, to the
keeping of the Law; to wit, the Moral Law of God. And how far forth it is not
lawful to use any force in that respect.

3. What is the best Rule to observe, and use, and the most proper and
warrantable, to assure an honorable, and liberal maintenance to all Godly and
faithful Ministers of the Gospel of Christ.

FINIS.

