THE Bragadocio; OR, THE Bawd turned Puritan: A NEW COMEDY.

By a Person of Quality.

Quantum mutata ab illa

Religionis Velamen omnia scelera tegit.

Licensed,

J. F.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane,
1691.

Dramatis Personae:
Bragadocio, or Bravado A Triumphing Coward, but a great Pretender to Courage,
and proud to be thought a Debauchee. Sir Popular Jealous -- A Seditious
Magistrate, that Patronises the People only to serve his own ends os 'em.
Shuffle -- Naturally of good Principles, but forced to Countenance the Faction
through Necessity. Roman -- A Gentleman of a low Fortune, but very Honorable.
Sir Credulous Trinket -- One that knows nothing of the World; inclined to
Melancholy, and always Freikish, and Superstitious. Flush -- Of good Parts, but
a rambling, hotheaded Blade; and rails against his University through
Discontent. Toper -- Flush's Companion, but a mere Sot. Jeffry -- Sir
Credulous's Servant. Gullman -- An old Bawd that deserts her Vocation, and sets
up for a Fortune; Married to Sir Popular. Juliana -- Carolietta -- Neices to
Sir Popular. Amazonia -- Toper's Wife, a Virago that Tyrannises over her
Husband, only to serve her self of Opportunities to Cuckold him. Faith --
Gullman's Woman, a Disciplined Baggage.
A Jeweller, a Quack, a Milliner, a Solicitor, a Pimp, a Carrier, a
Coffee-Man, Bullies, Sergeants, Tradesmen, and Attendants.

SCENE, London.

ADVERTISEMENTS.
Books lately Printed, and Sold by Tho. Salusbury, at the Sign of the Temple,
near Temple-Barr in Fleet Street.
THe History of the Late Great Revolution in England and Scotland, with the
Causes and Means by which it was Accomplished. Together with a Particular
Account of the Extraordinary Occurrences which happened thereupon. As likewise
the Settlement of both the Kingdoms under their Most Serene Majesty's King
William and Queen Mary. Price 5 s.

The Safety of France to Monsieur the Dauphin: Or, the Secret History of the
French King. Proving to his Son that there is no other way to secure France
from approaching Ruin, but by Deposing his Father for a Tyrant and Destroyer
of his People.

The Art of Brewing Beer, Ale, and other sorts of Liquors, so as to render them
more healthful to the Body, and agreeable to Nature, and to keep them longer
from souring, with less Trouble and Charge than generally practiced, which will
be a means to prevent those torturing Distempers of the Stone, Gravel, Gout,
and Dropsy.

A Collection of many Wonderful Prophesies, relating to the English Nation;
Plainly Foretelling the late Great Revolution, and Happy Settlement of this
Kingdom; his present Majesty's Successes in Ireland, and particularly his
Victory at the Boyne, and the Action at Sea betwixt both Fleets; with other
very Remarkable Things not yet come to pass.

Miscellany Poems, viz. 1. Remarks on the Death of King Charles the II. 2. On
the Succession of King James the II. 3. Upon Faith. 4. Upon Patience. V. Upon
Ambition. VI. To the University of Oxford. VII. The Soul to a Good Conscience.
VIII. The Soul to a Bad Conscience.

The Declaration and Manifesto of the Protestants of the Valleys of Piedmont,
called the Vaudois, to all Christian Princes and States, of the Reasons of
their taking up Arms just now against the Duke of Savoy. And why they have put
themselves under the Protection of William, King of Great Britain, and of the
Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland.

ACT I.
SCENE, Shuffle' s Lodging.
Enter Flush, and Shuffle. Shuf. BUT do'e resolve, say you, never to visit the
University again?


Flush. -- Not till Idleness and Hypocrisy be as much out of fashion as
Learning; -- I Will sooner herd with Savages in a Desert, where hungry Nature's
the sole Tutoress.


Shuf. -- This is just such a quarrel, as a Presbyter has against Episcopacy;
-- I am confident some Preferment there, would reconcile you,


Flush. -- Prithee don't mistake me; -- I never had the vanity to think I
deserved it; but though I had engrossed all the Morals, that ever the learned
Ancients taught, they would not ha'been proof against Exceptions.


Shuf. -- No! --


Flush. -- No of my Conscience, -- I have known a worthy Fellow that has been
learned as the Sybils, but modest religiously observant as the Vestals; --
Still and reserved as the Night, yet cheerful as the Morning; -- temperate and
strict as an Anchorite, and complying as unpracticed Youth.


Shuf. -- Sure none could object against so fair a Character.


Flush. -- Yes, -- a tedious Blockhead, scare capable of an Ordinary's Office
at the Reading of a Neck-Verse, shall cavil against his Schollarship; -- then
comes a second spitting pimpl'd Sot, and shall first hyccup in his Face, then
tell him, he is a Company-keeper, when at the same time the dizzie Ape can
scarce faulter out his unjust Exception; -- thus all of 'em after a successive
discovery of Ignorance, and ill Principles, shall prefer a desertless Dunce to
an accomplished Candidate.


Shuf. -- Prithee what kind of Complexion'd People do your Sages approve on, as
best qualified for their preferment?


Flush. -- Such easy suffering Sots as have lived in due observance of their
Insolent Grandeur, and Ridiculous Stateliness, that have no sense to discover
the want on it in them, and will suffer themselves to be solemnly cheated, and
never take notice on it.


Enter Sir Credulous. Sir Cred. Noble Gentlemen, I am your Creature.


Flush. -- It must be an affair of grand concern that brings you hither, Sir
Cred.


Sir Cred. -- Without Ceremony Gentlemen, I have no other business at present,
than to invite you to the chase of a crippl'd Worm hunted by a couple of lame
Snails.


Shuf. -- We Will attend your noble diversion. --


Exit Sir Cred. Shuf. -- Well, but don't let his impertinence divert your
discourse; pray continue it, and acquaint me with the order of their Discipline.


Flush. -- Order! ha, ha -- you will find no more there, than in Darius's Army
against Alexander; -- Arts and Sciences are promiscuous with Tricks and
Debaucheries.


Shuf. Ay! --


Flush. -- It Is an imperfect Emblem of the Chaos, where Bodies of strange form
and figure were hudl'd up together in a disagreeing concord.


Shuf. An Universal Medly indeed! --


Flush. You shall have a serious old Homilist making his unfashionable
Chamber-love to a tractable Laundress, -- a young breeding Heir penning
Madrigals on his Bed-maker, or Phillising the Skull's Daughter; -- and a
leading Tutor turning off an old Tradesman, because some Upstart has got a
handsome Wife.


Shuf. -- But as to the business of Learning; -- is not that promoted
nowadays?


Flush. -- Yes, as thus -- you shall hear a couple of old Casuists, splutter
their moldy Notions, and intricate Terms in one another's Faces, The one
laboring with remote Fetches, to salve the opinion of a contradicting
Dogmatist, whilst the other bladders him with broken Latin, transgressing
form, and confounding Axioms; then like two battered Game-Cocks, the last word
gets the Victory.


Shuf. -- They are very laborious upon it it seems.


Flush. -- No, no, -- They are too great to take pains; -- I have known a
Reverend poring Doctor, that has swouned half an Age over a St. Austin; and if
he chanced to mount the Pulpit but once in seven years, would after a
Praeludium of Hems, slyly draw his Memory out of his Pocket, and repeat the
Opinions of the Voluminous Fathers, then conclude with an Harangue against
Court Vanities, because some promising Lord has failed to make him a Bishop.


Shuf. You are resolved to spare none from the Scarlet Doctor to the draggl'd
Soph.


Flush. Some few good well principl'd men there is in their Society, but like a
Loyallist in a Faction, they must either comply or be abhorred. -- But Pry --
the let us go, we shall be too late else in good sadness.


Shuf. You may if you please, but I must wait here for a Gentleman; if some
thing should detain me, do so much as excuse me.


Flush. I shall.


Ex. Flush. Enter Roman. Romans Was this Flush I met upon the Stairs?


Shuf. Ay; He has been Railing at his University like a suspended Parson.


Romans He Is one of those lewd profligate Wretches that dishonor all places of
civil Education, because their own loose behavior is discountenane'd and
upbraided there.


Shuf. He Is above that vain thing called Learning, he may thank his Genisu.


Romans Which way is he gone?


Shuf. To the Palsgrave's-Head; the truth on it is, I engaged my Word to be
there too, But now I think on it, I Will dispose of my self otherwise.


Romans You have some rich beardless Foo! or other to manage; -- hanged, it is
time to give it over now.


Shuf. Your Servant good generous Sir; * I think it is more prudence to Thrive
and Rook whilst I Am Young, and so prevent it in my Old Age, then be forced to it
in these Days, and so have reason to condemn the negligence of my Youth.


Romans Truly, a Cheat at Threescore, is as Odious as a Usurer at Twenty.


Shuf. And a Knave without necessity is as unpardonable as a Mercenary Matron
that is Rich and Ugly.


Romans I Will assure you Shuffle, I always believed your Principle to be so far
honorable, as that nothing but the severe impulse of necessity could shake
'em: I have observed with what an honest Calmness, and even tranquillity of
Mind, you have born disappointments, and have pitty'd you several times when I
could not help you.


Shuf. Certainly my needs are so violent they cannot continue long; however,
whilst I am concerned with Sir Credulous Trinket, and Sir Populer, I must not
think of a Reformation.


Romans Sir Credulous Trincket, That Is my Rival; Pry-thee what sort of a
Gentleman is he? I have not the honor of his acquaintance.


Shuf. You are very unhappy in it, I Will promise you; He Is a most facetious
Person in his way; -- first he read himself into Melancholy, then was advised
to Travel as an expedient, which he undertook, and is now returned Freakish and
Superstitious; he knows nothing of the World, and is imposed upon by every one.


Romans I have had such an account of him -- Well but I have wondered often how you
contracted this intimacy with Sir Populer?


Shuf. First I got repute amongst his Creatures, and so had the opportunity of
hearing him, and being in his Company long I discovered him; which he
perceived, and thereupon declared himself to me; since we have unanimously
Whedl'd our Blewapron Men -- the design on it you may Interpret easily.


Romans Ay, I can apprehend it; -- It seems now you have taught your Spirit to
Truckle to your Interest.


Shuf. Yes, yes, I can out cant a Tubster, out fawn a Rook, out promise a
Courtier, and out swear an Evidence.


Enter a Dun Submissively. Shuf. Well, Sir, I know your Business, here is a
Gentleman with me now, but I shall be glad to see you to Morrow Morning.

Ex. Dun. A Pox o'these Dunns, they are as constant in a Morning as the
Milk-woman; -- I have warned the House I know not how often to deny me to all
Visitants without Swords.


Romans Poor Shuffle! -- Faith I never resented my own Condition more sensibly
than now; -- I am only sorry my fortunes are so Scant, because I cannot supply
thee; -- Come along with me, I Will try the extent of my Credit.


Ex. Ambo. SCENE. II. Sir Credulous's House, an Antichamber.
Enter Sir Credulous, Bravado, Jeffry. Sir Cred. Your Approbation Captain, your
Approbation; did you ever hear a Mag-pye discourse more Ingeniously, or greater
Reason since you were a Gentleman? Did ye?


Brav. I must confess not usually.


Sir Cred. Usually; did you ever? Speak.


Brav. To be plain with you, Sir Cred. once I did, but it was at Paris; -- I
heard one there that had more French then several of your Gentry that had
resided there some Years; it got my Name and Quality presently, I had a
Familiar acquaintance with it.


Jef. And learned all his French from it, I Will warrant him.


Aside. Sir Cred. Well, but consider Captain, my Mag has not had the advantage
of such a Gentleman's Conversation as your self; it was bred a plain Country
Bird, and had no other Tutor till I came to Town, than the Curate.


Brav. A very promising Mag!


Sir Cred. There was an Illiterate Cox-comb, the other day, told me he would not
give me 5 Guineas for it.


Brav. Some rude undervaluing Rustic that understood not its excellencies.


Sir Cred. But was your shattering acquaintance so accomplished in good earnest?


Brav. It deserves a Panegyric as well as some of our modern Heroes; It would
tell you in the Nightime what a Clock, as exactly as the Bell-man; would talk
as quaintly upon occasion as an affected Citizen; would repartee as smartly as
a Mask in the Gallery: -- several of our traveling Fops derived from it their
scraps of Complaisance, and little civil Impertinencies, they are daily
troublesome with in Park and Playhouse.


Jef. If it was not for these French Mag-pyes, I gess we should not have so
many English Owls.


Aside. Sir Cred. But Captain, I Will presume to tell you, I can show you as
great Rarities as all your Travels could entertain you with.


Brav. My Curiosity will be obliged to you.


Sir Cred. Jeffry! Here, take the Key of my Closet, and bring me Lisp and
Quaker.


Ex. Jef. Brav. What are these Sir Cred?


Sir Cred. A Brace of Animals, which the Vulgar take for Dogs; seriously, they
resemble 'em so much, you will scarce distinguish till you hear 'em discourse.


Enter Jeffry. Jef. Sir you had left your Closet door unlockt, and Lisp's got
out; one of the Grooms told me he is gone to wait upon Sir Populer's Bitch home.


Sir Cred. Very probable, he was always an obliging courteous Creature; -- But
where is Quaker?


Jef. Sir, he presents his service to you, and desires you to excuse him, he is
engaged.


Sir Cred. Engaged! Where, and upon what account?


Jef. With a Bone Sir, under the Dresser-board.


Sir Cred. No, no, his absence cannot be dispensed with; -- go and conduct him
in immediately; -- be as quick as a Juggler's hand.


Jef. Pish, -- I have as many Fools Errands to run upon, as a well-meaning
April-Bird.


Exit Jef. Brav. Pray resolve me, Sir Cred. what these two Prodigies are
designed for.


Sir Cred. Seriously Sir, I have made it my business to observe their humors
severally; the one I find to be of a tractable Genius, he will make a --


studies. Brav. Good Guide for the Blind.


Sir Cred. The other's of a more acid, choleric temper; I design him for a --


studies. Brav. Yard or an Orchard.


Aside. Enter Jef. pulling in an ugly Tyke. Sir Cred. Wuh you clumsie
Block-head you, could not you make your entry with more decency than this? --
Is that all the respect you give to your betters?


Jef. Respect! Ay, and too much for a worthless Tyke that deserves not a Crust.


Sir Cred. You know Sirrah your Ignorance excuses you; -- a Tyke!


Brav. Ay, and as contemptible an one as ever died of a crooked Pin.


Sir Cred. Well, have but a little patience, and I Will convince you presently, --
Jeffry provoke him.


Jeffry pincheth his ear, the Cur yells. Sir Cred. Now Captain, what think you
on it, did not you perceive a choice accent in his exclamation?


Brav. Ha, ha, nothing but the yelp of a pinched Cur.


Sir Cred. Sir, I am sorry for you, -- you hear still I perceive with a gross
unrefind sense, -- I Will assure you, I thought he was something Articulate; --
but he is out a' humor now; -- Jefry attend him in.


Ex. Jeffry with the Dog. Reenters. Brav. I wonder Sir Cred. a man of your
contrivance, should so much debase your noble Faculties; -- Why don't you
attempt some glorious Enterprise, and die a Hero?


Sir Cred. Seriously I am at present upon a Project which will be of greater
use to the City than the Ditch; but most of all to the Insurers; -- And that is
this -- I have devised an Engine to blow up the Thames, and so prevent all
Popish Conspiracies by Water, for you know they have done their worst already
by Fire.


Brav. the Watermen will abuse you then.


Sir Cred. No, no, I Will prevent that, -- I can convey it back in an instant by
the Penny-Post.


Brav. Shaw that is an ignoble design; contrive rather the good of the whole
Republic.


Sir Cred. Think you so?


Brav. Ay, ay, -- Erect some Gymnasium where Youth may be taught the Art of
Addressing and Decoying young Virgins at twelve without being beholding to the
Instiuctions of a good natured Mother, to Swear genteely, without frequenting
Gaming Houses; to profane daringly without keeping the Wits Company; -- and to
be experienced in all the modish sins of the Age without going to Court.


Sir Cred. You propound Impossibilities Captain.


Jef. Not so Impossible as your project upon the Thames.


Aside. Brav. Make me but Iniquity Master General and I Will undertake it; and as
the Age goes with success I Will warrant you.


Sir Cred. Say you so?


Brav. Nay more; -- I Will encourage it so far as to give 2 or 3 Manors toward
its endowment: But we'll discourse farther on it at Dinner; I don't much care if
I Dine with you*to Day.


Sir Cred. Sir you will do me Honor.


Ex. Sir Cred. Brav. Jef. Marry Gad a Mercy -- That was the Gymnasium he was
con^^^ all this time.


Enter Shuffle. Shuf. Well honest Jeffry; how does Sir Credulous do?


Jef. What store of Visitants he has against Dinner time.

Aside. Why he is in a sit of Melancholy, and has ordered that no body shall
have access to him.


Shuf. I am a particular Friend man; -- I Will go and divert him, he has not
Dined I suppose.


Jef. But if that will not prevent you, this will --

Aside. From you Sir it is possible he may admit of a Visit, since there is only
two Gentlemen with him; one of'em's a Draper, the same that sent his Man to you
Yesterday with a Note.


Shuf. That Soliciting Rogue! -- A Pox of his importunity -- But why may not
this same Youth smell my business?

Aside. I Will urge it farther --

Aside. Go tell the Gentleman I desire a word with him.


Jef. Ha! -- He Is at Dinner Sir, I must not disturb him.


Shuf. At Dinner before Eleven! Ho Sir, you are a fine Fellow indeed; -- Are
you so quick at turning away Business? -- It Is a piece of frugality your Master
will not thank you for.


Jef. In good earnest Mr. Shuffle, there is so many, and such clearing Stomachs
at his Table every Day, that tho there was as much variety as in Heliagabalus's
Feast, it is piece meal't into as many reversions as an Alms-basket, -- Pray
Sir, help me for your own sake, as well as mine, only to repel some constant
Intruders, and then much good may do you.

Enter two Bullies, as to one another. 1. Y'gad Jack here lives the Hospitable
Knight.

2. Sweetheart, how does my worthy Friend your Generous Master; -- He Is
within, is not he?


Jef. Gentlemen, if your business be urgent, you may find him at the Swan on
Fish-street-hill; -- he waits upon a Country Lady there, that longs for a
Codshead.

1. 'Sbud what does he mean? -- He invited us this Morning.

2. Ay, and made us swear not to fail him.


Shuf. He ne need not have put that constraint upon you.


Aside. Jef. Gentlemen, if it be any business that I can do, I am ready to
serve you.

1. No, no, we'll wait upon him at another convenience.

Shuf. and Jef. discourse together, 2 Bullies apart from one another. 2. 'Slife
Tom, it cost me two pence (all the stock I had) at the Coffee-house in the
Morning, -- I went to read the News, a purpose to provide my self of lies and
hard words for him.

1. And I took a whetting turn in the Walks about ten for a preparative; -- a
plague o'their disappointments.

2. S'hart, we had better have accepted Harry's Invitation; -- but who would
have imagined this?

1. Come, let us to the Change, we'll pick up some body.


Jef. cries after them as they are going out. Jef. Gentlemen, will not you be
pleased to leave your Names?


Shuf. I Will engage they have as many as the Grand Seignior has Titles.


Jef. Or as an address of a whole County.


Enter a Jeweller. Jew. I desire to speak with Sir Credulous Tinklett if he be
at leisure.


Jef. What nature, Pray Sir, is your business of?


Jew. I have some Stones of value for him; -- but I must deliver 'em to his own
person.


Shuf. I remember Sir, he was telling he expected you, and commanded me to take
these trifling concerns (as he called 'em from you; -- and to desire you to
wait his approbation.


Jew. Here Sir, I Am sure they will please him.


Shuf. takes the box, goes out, and reenters. Shuf. Sir, he desires you to
walk in, he will dispatch you presently; -- he has sent to a Lapidary to have 'em
tried.


Jew. I left a Customers in my Shop; -- but I Will attend his honor in a Trice.


Ex. Jeweller. Shuf. A very fortunate riddance; ha, ha, ha,


Jef. What Is the matter Sir?


Shuf. Only some transparent Glass-bobs, that the Counterfeit Rascal has left
in my possession; -- he will as soon peep through a Pillory, as come here again.


Jef. He would have put these Toys upon Sir Credulous for real ones, I Will
warrant, if you had not prevented him.


Shuf. No doubt on it, -- Come Jeffry we have made our Post good long enough.


Ex. Shuf. Jef. SCENE III. Gulman' s Lodging.
Gulman-sola looking in a Pocket-Glass. Gull. In vain I strive to call past
Nature back,
The Youthful Dye that glowed in either Cheek.
And forced so many melting Sighs and Vows,
Is gone beyond the reach of Female Arts:
My Glass, that kind Indulgence of my fears,
Now does forbear to sooth my willing faith,
And lays its pleasing flattery aside;
Fool that I was to credit Lovers Oaths,
And put my choicest sweets into their hands
Without consideration for the exchange;
But still I Have one reserve, providing time
Has for the loss of beauty, ge'en me wit,
And sure it is time to use it. --
Enter Faith. I hope you have had success by your stay.


Faith. -- Such success Madam, as you foretold before I went.


Gull. -- Truly I doubted it; -- was he in a sullen humor?


Faith. -- Ay, as peevish as if his Wife had stayed out late last Night; --
There Is a Broker, it seems, he has some concerns with, is run away.


Gull. -- But did you whisper him as I ordered you?


Faith. -- Yes, I told him you were just upon Marriage with Sir Populer, and if
he did not give you credit for the Silks; things would look a little
suspiciously.


Gull. -- And did you offer him such advantages as I directed you?


Faith. -- Yes Madam, I urged every thing I thought might be effectual; I told
him the safest way to secure his arrears, would be to venture once more upon
you.


Gull. And what answered he?


Faith. -- Upon that, he examined his Shop-book, and showed me your Accounts,
the Total Sum I did not much observe, nor the Particulars; only the File of
Items, which was as deep as a Flight of Wild-Geese.


Gull. -- That base unreasonable Creature; has the Conscience then to put me
down for the Necessaries I had from his Shop? -- Thou know Wench, how
unusually civil I was always to him, when I kept a convenient House.


Faith. I am sure Madam, he had 'em always fresh out of the Country* without
paying for a Maidenhead; -- he was so nice always, I am sure a Lord has been
glad of his refuse ever now: -- But you may see --


Gull. It Is even true, a past kindness now-a days is as little regarded, as a
future promise; but what could the ungrateful Wretch say to you?


Faith. After he had closed the Book, he broke out into passion, and swore he
could not wonder at your impudence, because you were so and so: But before the
damned Bawd was any more Tawdry at his charge, he won'd see her Ca^ted; -- nay,
he swagger'd worse then when he mist his Ring at our House.


Gull. At his charge base man! -- It seems he looks upon the debt as desperate;
-- as I am a sinner, I fear he will noise it abroad and betray me.


Faith. Never fear it, -- though he has little good-meaning for you, yet the
hopes he has of a change of your condition, will prevent him.


Gull. How must we do in this case Wench? -- Let me die in a Ditch, if I be not
as much at my wit's end, as I have been ever now to direct a young unmanag'd
sinner.


Faith. Never despair Madam, I have some comfort for you; -- Don't you remember
his eldest Prentice? -- The same that rallied so at our door one Sunday Night
for entrance, when all our Beds and Couches were in use.


Gull. -- Yes, and swore he would have the House pulled down the Shrove-Tuesday
after; -- But what of him?


Faith. I perceived as I was in the Shop, how diligently he watched the cast of
mine eye; and now and then I seemed accidentally to throw half a look at him,
which he would so far improve, as to return me a familiar smile, -- as who
should say --


Gull. Well.


Faith. -- I observed this, and willingly forgot my Fan, which he very
officiously followed me out with; -- then after a cast of his
Counter-courtesie, he promised me, such a trivial thing as my Errand expressed,
should not be wanting for my own sake.


Gull. And there was the cause of your stay.


Faith. -- He had nothing as earnest toward the bargain.


Gull. When do you expect him?


Faith. Exactly at nine -- He Will be as punctual as a Tertian Ague.


Gull. -- You Will know how to pay him.


Faith. -- Ay Madam, I thank your Conversation.


Gull. -- Well, if this should unfortunately fail, I must even betake my self
to the poor Whore's last refuge, grave honest Crape.


Faith. Truly Madam, it is a very modest agreeable dress, and especially for one
of your design; since you profess as much Religion as a Lady Abbess, you must
be as reserved in your habit too; Sir Populer will mistake your Necessity for
your Zeal.


Gull. Then I must remonstrate against abominable Gauds; as he calls 'em.


Faith. -- And rail against Point, as tedious Vanity.


Gull. -- Against Neck lases and Pendants, as undercent costly Trumperies.


Faith. -- Rich Gowns, you must call, Popish Seducers,


Gull. -- And imbroider'd Petticoats, Man-catchers.


Enter Sir Populer precisely dressed. Faith. Hist! Sir Popular.


as to Gullman. Gull. -- Take comfort Girl, the good man was very full upon
that point the last day; you took notice of his Doctrine?


seeming as if she did not perceive Sir Pop. Sir Pop. Sister spotless you are
well employed, I conceive; there are not many of your Sex that imitate you now
adays; -- they will rather exhort their Women to read a wanton Pamphlet, than a
Paragraph of a good Sermon.


Gull. Plainly Brother, I was even reminding her of her great concern in this
World, -- we are all Flesh.


looks up. Sir Pop. Ay Sister, but that consideration is but little laid to
heart in these days.


Gull. -- Especially amongst the Worldlings that are set above us.


Sir Pop. -- Never trust me, I am weary of this vexatious world, I wish I were
well disposed out of it.


Gull. -- Offenses are given daily, and by those that should heal 'em; -- The
parti-colour'd Priests put on their Masquerading Robes, and tread a French
Dance to the sound of an Organ.


in a Canting tone. Sir Pop. Whilst the Judges give false measure, in the Whore
of Babylon's Scarlet Petticoat.


Gull. -- A Parchment Cloak of blank Deeds would be a more seemly Wear for 'em
a great deal: -- Well, who knows, what they have to answer for!


casts up her eyes. Sir Pop. Then what a pack of debaucht Reprobates are they
about court; -- They haunt their Neighbors Board, and defile their Beds; and
here amongst the number, if a teaching Brother carries but some crumbs of
Consolation, to a Sister in anguish; how uncharitably will they interpret the
duty.


Gull. What gaudy Kicshaws are their Women? In good truth, they are as common,
as if the Land were unpeopl'd; and how hideous is their dress! -- I have even
resolved to put my self into a plain Primitive Grab; and defy the scornful: --
Come, Faith my private duty calls upon me.


Faith. -- It Is about your Prayer time, forsooth.


Ex. Gull. Faith. Sir Pop. This is the way I have chalkt out to compass my
design; the Widow is Rich and Religious; -- Well, my Addresses must be
consonant with her Severity: I must Nose, Cant, and turn up my Whites, Squint,
and counterfeit the reserved Purity of an Hermit, to diguise me whilst I sue
for such a Blessing: -- In the mean time I must play the Patriot with Artifice,
and Resolution; foment Fears and Jealousies, disperce Sedition, blind and
baffle my unthinking Followers, and be concerned only for the Religion of my
Interest; -- This is the taking sure way of repairing decayed Reputations.

Say what you will; a thriving Zeal is best
To serve the City God of Interest.

Finis Actus Primi.
ACT II.
SCENE, Sir Popular's House.
Enter Sir Popular, Shuffle, and three Tradesmen. Shuf. I Think we have got
fairly by our Passive Obedience, forsooth! And yet for all this Court Doctrine
we should find but few of the Sticklers but upon Trial would hang an Arse to
die Martyrs for it.


Sir Pop. Alas, it is too sure, to our irreparable damage I fear; -- We are
undermined my Friends and Neighbors; -- Popery and Slavery lurk under ground
to blow up our Lives and Liberties, -- Our great Senate, that like a firm Bank,
braved the Impetuous Flood, and confined it to its Channels, is removed; and
now England, distressed England, is at the mercy of a threatening Deluge; -- How
soon it may break in upon us, we cannot tell; -- The great Ministers, are
Mercenary Pensioners; and Creatures to the French Interest; The Favorites are
the high-flown Torys, a swarm of Insects bred of the malignancy of a corrupting
Nation, and the few just men are stigmatized with aspersions; Witnesses are
managed, Courts of Justice are influenced, and though Imposts are but few for
the present, I Will warrant they will play us an after-Game with a witness, and
Trade and Commerce is decayed: -- In brief, there is such traducing, shaming,
tampering, and conspiring, that I never go to Bed, but I expect to rise with my
Throat cut.


They seem disordered. Shuf. And too great reason you have for it, -- whilst I
was at the Nine-penny Ordinary the other day, there came a person up to us, in
the habit of an Oyster-wench, with Oyster-knives as sharp as Razors.


Sir Pop. -- Some Jesuit sure enough.


Shuf. Ay doubtless, he looked suspiciously.


Sir Pop. I had notice on it, and ordered the Watch to be doubled; -- besides,
the Constables was upon their Rounds all Night.


Shuf. -- Yet there was a Shoemaker had the Skin of his Throat ripl'd as he
slept upon a Bulk.


Sir Pop. The Watch saved his life.


All. -- Bloody Villains.


Shuf. It was buz'd about at Richard's this Morning, that the Papists had a
private Meeting yesterdy, at One upon the Exchange, about pulling down the
Monument the first dark Night, to put the City to the charge of building two
other.


They shake their Heads. Sir Pop. One for the Memorial of the others ruin; --
but how was it discovered?


Shuf. -- They were fortunately overheard, but slunk away in the Crowd.


Sir Pop. Cursed Devils! -- I had a Letter from a Friend in the Country, that
advised me to forbear French Wine; it seems the Grapes were poisoned upon the
Vines; -- They have got a trick of intoxicating the Air, several have been
before the Chamber of poisoning for it.


Shuf. Indeed, I have observed since this last Vintage, several pimpl'd Faces;
-- But our English Men --


Sir Pop. Are a people of a robust Constitution, else we had seen alterations
before this: -- You have heard of the miraculous massacring Engine, that was
found in Devonshire, by a Justice of Peace that was a searching for Armor,
have not you?


Shuf. Only a blind imperfect account on it.


Sir Pop. 'Twil hurl out above five Miles such a sort of Wildfire, as is
nourisht by water, and not to be extinguished but by Fasting and Prayer.


All. Matchless wickedness!


Sir Pop. -- Then 'twill sling for the same distance, an instrument infallibly
mortal, without either piercing or discoloring the Skin; so that a Crowner
knows not how to return the Inquest.


All. Barbarous Villainy!


Sir Pop. But the worst is, it assassinates the Soul as well as the Body,
unless one be Spiritually Cap-a-pee'd.


Shuf. -- It Is more terrible then Totchy Old Time with a sharp Sith in his Hand.


Sir Pop. It Is charged upon occasion with a large measure full of Dispensation
Powder, and laden with the Case -- Shot of Equivocation, which the Popish
Engineer so artificially Discharges, that the carnally naked infallibly Perish.


All. Horrid Butchery!


Shuf. I remember now I have heard on it; -- But you mistake the manner of its
discovery, Sir Popular.


Sir Pop. Very probable, the confusion of the times disorder my Memory.


Shuf. It came from beyond Seas in a Letter which expressed the use on it; and was
directed to a great Roman Catholic in the West, but through scarcity of Paper
it broak the vale and appeared.


All. Wonderful providence.


Sir Pop. But how little do these Conspiracies awake us? What miraculous signs
of a Sickly State appear daily? It Is not long since whole Armies appeared in
the Air, near Durham, and the French Standard displayed.


Shuf. Not long since Antichrist was seen Riding upon the Beast with the Whore
of Babylon behind him.


Sir. Pop. It Is not long since Hailstones fell in the Fashion of Crucifix's
and Agnus Dei's.


Shuf. Nor since one of the Heads upon Westminster Hall cried fire.


The Blew-Apron men seem disordered all this time. Sir Pop. Not long, since the
Horse in the Poultry-Market nicker'd for Provinder.


Shuf. But the City would give him none.


Aside. Sir Pop. Not past a Month since, the Watch saw a Dreadful Comet that
hovered above the Banqueting House, and streamed out it is Scarlet Tail toward
the City.


Shuf. Ay; and one of the Life-Guards lighted his Pipe at it. All. -- Daring
Brute.


Sir Pop. -- But that which dismays me the most, my Friends, is an Apparition
my own Eyes were witness of; It was in the likness of an Aged man, Riding upon
a Jaded Rainbow; and out of his mouth there proceeded a Label with this
Inscription -- O England, prepare, for dessolation is at hand.


All. Good Heavens!


Shuf. Sure the Harbinger had made a long Journey, by the faultring of his
Steed.


Sir Pop. Yet all these preter-natural Omens cannot Alarm a self-secure
Generation; -- How many Suns of late have appeared in the Heavens? How many
Moons of differing Figures and Magnitude have been seen at once, to the
Distraction of Astrology?


Shuf. How many tall Men and mixed Monsters have been shown of late at
Bartholomew-Fair; even to the admiration of Men, Women and Children.


Sir Pop. Brutus was never more concerned for the sinking Liberties of his
Fellow Sublects then I am; the Sword of Tyranny like that of Damocles hangs by
a single Hair over our Heads, and if we only gaze at the threatening Spectre,
without providing against the Portent; we may expect the violation of our Lives
and Liberties, Rights and Religion; -- But now my Friends we'll adjourn, and at
our next Convention, we'll propound such measures as are most consistent with
our present Calamities.


Ex Sir Pop. and the blue-Apron-men. Manet Shuf. Shuf. Hist! Mr. Zeal, Mr.
Zeal.


Re-enter Zeal. Sir, You must send me a Bever, I am so much out upon the
Cause, I must be endebted to you at present.


Zeal, It Is the same thing Sir, you shall have the choice in my Shop.


Exit Zeal. Shuf. And he shall have more of my Custom. --

For I, with Citts, as with false Dice, will play,
First sweep enough, then throw the Cheats away.

Exit Shuf. Enter Juliana, as looking upon a Watch. Jul. Past Three! The long
expected Minute's past,
Which I with Love's Impatience waited for;
I cursed Time's aged pace, and blamed my Watch,
Because the Hand so faintly stole about;
But now the hour that flattered my false hopes
Is come, and gone; but still my Lover stays:
Even thus the thirsty Traveller, that knew
Once of a cooling Spring, near such a Hill,
Impatient of the Days tormenting heat,
Thinks every step a journey, till he comes
To that refreshing place he used of old,
Then eagerly preparing to lie down,
He spies the bottom parcht, the Pebbles dry,
Then mutters his complaints, and budgeth on;
Grant he be safe -- He Is here --
listens. Enter Carol. How soon the gaudy Bubble disappears.


Carol. -- Alone Cousin! -- You'v been rapt up in Lovers Paradise.


Jul. -- I was discanting a little, upon a passage I have read in a French
Novel.


Carol. -- And you the Heroin; -- You are glorying in your Conquests over your
vanquished Admirers. --


Jul. You are in your pleasant vein Cousin.


Carol. -- I am always in it; -- I have no Murdered Servants to answer for, I
thank my Complexion; no languishing Lover has caught cold with syrenading under
my Windows; I was never accused in the Mystical Name of Cloris by the Dying
Sonneteer, nor blamed as an Accessory in his Swan-like Dirge; -- Nay, I never
caused the Death of a young Tree, by an Anagramming Penknife, I never --


Jul. Received a present of Value from a Servant, and then declared you hate
him; -- you never gave a Rhithming Lover a Subject to allude upon, and then
exposed his endeavor.


Carol. If a young generous Fop prevents me, and swears his Life depends upon
my Acceptance; I cannot be so barbarously scornful as to see a towardly Fool
cut off; -- or if an unfortunate pretender must needs discover his Dullness, I
am forced to comply with him, and use him accordingly, to be rid of farther
importunities.


Jul. Now, I am much of another Humor, -- I could not receive a Gift from one
I disrespected; nor laugh at his Poetical Imperfections; -- I should rather
pity him, though not many deserve it.


Sighs. Carol. Come Cousin, that Sigh betrays you; be free with me; -- Has not
that Gentleman that makes visits to you, and you believe to be the only brave
Man upon Earth; given you Reason to retract your Opinion? Ay, a Conscious blush
too, -- Well, I perceive your disorder, -- We'll have a Song to divert you, --
Here -- Lyddy, Sing your new Song.

Calls aloud. Lyddy, Enters, and Sings. See how regardless she surveys
Whole Crowds of fettered Swains,
That boast themselves her Sacrifice,
And Triumph in her Chains.
See while their trembling Hearts expect
Some blessing from her Eyes,
She frowns, and with a cold neglect,
Kills all their blooming Joys.
Fair, Mighty Nymph! if you thus have
To show your endless power;
The number of your Slaves, alas,
Will lessen every hour;
And while you please your boundless Will,
Your Empire will decay,
You Will not have lover left to kill,
Nor Subject to obey.

Carol. Well Cousin, how do you relish the Air?


Jul. I suppose the Words were the love-task of some of your obsequious
Admirers.


Carol. Ay, and the Composure too; -- He excused himself with the Poets Apology
for their dullness, haste; pretending they were his extemporary Thoughts over a
Glass of Wine, tho one would scarce perceive it by the Spirit.


Enter Boy, to Carol. Boy. Madam, Yonder Is a Gentleman desires to kiss your
Hand; I showed him into the Dining Room, and left him rubbing his Sword.


Carol. It Is that Fierce, Vapouring, Coward, Bravado, I fancy; and I had as
soon receive a Visitant in the Smallpox, only 'twill be no disposing of him
before my Unkle's return, unless I go and contrive some way.


Exit Carol. Enter Romans Romans My Joy! [ salutes her] It Is true, I have lived
since I saw you last, but no otherways than dying Parents, that for the hopes
of seeing an only Child, and feeling Death come stealing on, will set their
Teeth, contract their Fist, recall their palling Spirits, and struggle with
appointed time; I have lived to see you once again, now let me die, I cannot
choose a dearer place than this.


points to her Feet. Jul. And would you die without me? -- How could I survive
you?


Romans Thou Miracle of Women! -- You have all the Perfections of your Species,
without the Frailties, you have Wit and Discretion without Design; you are
Humble and Easy without making your self Familiar, and Modest without being
Coy; you are constant in spite of Importunities, and Beautiful though a
Fortune; you are --


Jul. -- Since I have some Qualities that please you, I shall value my self the
more; But Dearest, why did you stay?


Romans My Heart; -- I came as directly at the hour, as Death, before, I was
loath, -- least Sir Populer should be within, and my Visit renew his Suspicion.


Jul. My Watch then was like my Wishes, too forward, I expected you this
live-long half-hour, and with as much impatience, as Chemists do, for the
result of some Experiment; a Thousand Fears as great as Love could frame,
distracted me.


Romans But how long Madam may we believe, the time will be our own? When returns
Sir Popular?


Jul. O presently, within this half hour.


Romans We must husband it with such caution, as a besieged Town does, their
failing Provision.


Enter Boy. Boy. -- Madam, Sir Populer is newly come in, and has sent to speak
with you.


Exit. Boy. Romans The news of Peace never came more unseasonably to the Soldier
of Fortune.


Jul. -- With what reluctance I obey, let my sighs demonstrate; -- My Dearest,
you may be safe here from the busy eye of jealousy; if possible, I Will steal a
visit to you.


Romans The kindest power that ever favored love, attend thee.


[Salutes her] Exit. Jul. The rarest piece, the whole Creation has produced, is
gone; -- What -- cannot I bear one hours absence? How shall I compose this
unruly Passion? When she is for ever doomed to a Rival's Arms? -- The raging
Storm of Love heaves in my breast, and like the weather-forc'd Mariner that
labors to avoid the Shore he wishes for. I must refuse, what I esteem so
dear; I love her too well to Marry her, my unkind Fortune forbids the Banes; I
could not see her condition below her worth and quality, and therefore must be
cruel out of kindness.


Enter Bravado. Brav. Dear Captain Roman, I am thine abundantly.


Romans -- You expect I should return you the same Title back? but how came you
here?


Brav. What an impertinent question is that to one of my correspondence amongst
the Ladies; -- Why, pretty Mrs. Charlietta could not be well, till she saw me.


Romans -- She wanted a Vomit, I suppose, and thought that the sight of you might
provoke it.


Brav. -- I protest Roman, if I thought you designed it as an Abuse, I would
not take it. --


Romans -- If I should tell thee thou were handsome, I should abuse thee indeed.


Brav. By the Life of Hercules, there is scarce a Lady of Quality about
White Hall, but has my Picture.


Romans -- To hang up among their Caesar's of the French Draught.


Brav. -- -- What a Devil! your so witty -- But what de'e think if it be for
their Cabinet Contemplations; -- I am in Watercolors I assure you.


Romans -- It Is true, thou art well enough for a Foyl, -- But what brought thee
hither to me?


Brav. -- My little Genius Charlietta directed me; -- Sir Popular surpised us
-- a plague of his interruption.


Romans You were a bouncing of your lofty Heroic Lies I Will warrant.


Brav. I protest to tell you truly I was promising pretty largely, there was --


Romans -- Some Matrimonial Affair in hand?


Brav. Will you not disclose.


Romans -- Prithee don't enjoin me to secrecy; I don't desire you should
communicate any thing that requires it.


Brav. You have more Honor than to betray a Love Parol I am sure, -- know then
I had got her consent.


Romans To marry?


Brav. No, but to enjoy the Freedom on it without the Form.


Romans -- It cannot be sure.


Brav. 'Slife there is no holding out where I Besiege, she Surrendered upon the
first Summons, our Parley was very short.


Romans I am surprised, though, I confess, I had but little Knowledge of her; --
Well, -- There Is not above one Virtuous Woman.


Brav. One! That Is too many by 'th Exception; -- Why who would have thought her
Cousin Juliana had been common?


Romans -- Juliana common!


Brav. -- Ay as a Bench in a public Walk; -- We Coacht it out a Town together
Yesterday.


Romans Rascal Dog, you Lie, you abuse her; -- but here is her Vindication.


[Lays his Hand on his Sword.] Brav. Why, -- What Is the Matter? I meant like a
Friend, I knew you loved her, and therefore took this Occasion to undeceive you.


Romans Sirrah, I have scarce Patience to wait for a farther Information; yet the
Respect I have to the quiet of the House, shall prevail with me at present, but
be satisfied, thou shall speak it to her Face, and as I find occasion, I Will
proceed.


Brav. If she denies it, I have Circumstances will silence her.


Enter Carol, as to Roman. Carol. Sir, My Cousin sent me to desire your
Patience, I fear her concerns will force her to be uncivil a little longer.


Brav. -- That Is happy.


Aside. Romans -- Madam, Your Presence will teach us to Dispense with your
Cousin's Absence.


Carol. -- Captain Bravado, this was a Courtesy to entertain this Gentleman
with your Company all this time.


[Roman Studies.] Brav. Faith Madam, I was never disobliging, especially when
commanded by so fair a Lady as your self.


Carol. I fear Sir, your Complaisance may be Injurious to you.


Brav. No Madam, my Business is not very extreme; though there is an assignation
waits me; then I have Two or Three Challenges to write and send away.


Carol. Challenges!


Brav. Ay Madam, one is to a Courtier that pretends to Love where I do; another
is to a Poet that reflected upon me under one of his Characters; the Third is
to an Officer that jostl'd me in a Crowd, and never begged my Pardon.


Carol. Sensible affronts indeed; -- but I hope you will stay and Caress Madam
Towers, the Beauty of Hatton-Garden, before you go, -- list -- she is coming up
I think --


[Enter Juliana, whispers Roman, and goes out.] Brav. You, Roman, How came you
thus acquainted with this same Madam Towers? By Jove a pretty Woman.


Romans What would he mean?


Brav. -- Why the Lady that whispered you; -- I thought I had Lampoon'd all the
handsome Women in Town; -- I never see this before.


Romans Never see her, say you?


Brav. -- No, as I Am a Man of Honor.


Carol. -- It was my Cousin Juliana.


Brav. -- No!


Romans -- Yes Sirrah, this was the very Lady you made so Infamous; this was your
Wench at will; -- Draw Dog -- Draw, thou something less than Coward.


[ Romans draws, kicks Brav.] Romans No Courage, Dastard.


Brav. Prithee, don't take this Advantage, my Sword's not in Case.


Romans -- No Excuse shall give thee Refuge Slave, I Will fetch thee one that is.


Exit Romans Brav. Confound his Civility; -- I Will go and choose one for my self,
I thank him.


[Exit Brav. at the other side.] Carol. -- Was ever Coward thus bafl'd before?


Enter Romans with a Sword. Romans Ha! -- Is he gone? -- Has he abused me again
this way?


Carol. -- He was resolved not to be guilty of a second rashness.


Romans -- Well, he knows the greeting he must have, when we meet.


Carol. -- He was in have to send away his Challenges.


( Brav. peeps in, and draws back. Romans -- If the fixed opinion I have of
Juliana's Virtues could have been shaken, I had resigned it upon this Rascal's
aspersion; But Madam, I must beg of you not to take notice on it to her, it may
trouble her; -- my hopes of seeing her now, will not invite me to stay; her
business I fear is in dispensable. -- Lady your Servant.


(Exit Roman. ( Brav. peeps in, and enters as in haste, with drawn Sword. Brav.
God's Death, is not the Coward returned yet?


Carol* Yes, but Mr. Roman's newly gone.


Brav. By the Martial Deity it was his safest course, else I would have had no
more mercy on him, than a tedious Poet has of an Actor's memory.


Carol. O brave! -- I wonder you that are so bloodily inclined should have so
much mercy of your self as to avoid him.


Brav. Why de'e think I would trust him to choose a Blade for me; -- The very
Sword he drew against me, was mine in point of Honor; I gave it him thrice
upon terms.


Carol. -- Mr. Bravado, I must needs tell you, I question your Courage; and
nothing but some bold piece of Chivalry, can redeem your Reputation.


Brav. Command me Madam an Impossibility, and I Will effect it; Shall I fetch you
the Sultan's Head out of the midst of his Janizares? Or the Pope in Effigy from
the strength of the Rabble? Shall I bring you --


Carol. Nothing but that Sword of yours that Roman wears.


Brav. That Madam, is so mean an attempt, 'twill fully my honor; but since you
command it, to morrow you shall see it laid at your feet.


Carol. Well, remember it; -- but I have out-stay'd my time I must go --


Brav. That Is the only trial I cannot stand; But is -- there no contrivance,
Madam, can continue you another Lovers minute.


Carol. Not now, Sir; -- Then you know Sir Popular's conclusions when he sees a
Stranger here.


Brav. Can you bestow me in no place conveniently, till opportunity present?


Carol. Let me see -- Ho, I have it, -- There stands a low Table there
sometimes; now if you will couch upon your hands and knees, if any should chance
to come in, they will mistake you for it; I Will disguise the design with a Carpet;
-- I know no other way of securing you, till I can wait upon you.


Brav. The posture will be a little uneasy, but the consideration of such a
blessing after it, will teach me to endure it.


Carol. You must kneel here.


(He goes to the side of the Stage and kneels. Carol. Here -- Boy -- ( Boy
enters) bring the little Persian Carpet out of the Dining Room.


Enter Boy with a Carpet, she covers him. Carol. He becomes a Carpet better
than a Sword, -- I Will be merry with him, if he be not pre-discover'd; such a
triumphing Coward cannot be abused enough.


Exit. Carol. Enter Gullman and Faith. Gullman in a homely Dress. Gull. How do
I look, Wench, since I reformed my Dress?


Faith. -- Indeed Madam, as taking, as one of five and fifty can be.


Gull. Five and fifty Huzzy; it is only five and thirty, I have been no more
this twenty years; -- -'It Is not so long since I was in a Lampoon; but Youth
would be as inconvenient to one of my design, as it is to a Beardless Candidate
for a Bishopric.


Enter Shuffle at a distance. Shuf. By all that is good, that nauscious old
sinner Mother Gullman; -- Is she then Sir Popular's Rich Widow? -- Well, this
Wind may blow me some profit; -- I Will pretend I do not know her.


Faith. A Stranger here Forsooth!


Shuf. -- Lady I come in the behalf of Sir Popular Jealous, and do assure you,
an important occasion detains him at present from kissing your fair hands.


Gull. I am sorry Sir Popular should make choice of such an unwelcome Mediator;
-- Go, go, and repeat your branching Vanities to your fine tawdry Gugaws; you
are mistaken here.


Shuf. Mistaken, Madam, that cannot be, you are a Fortune, I want one, and Sir
Popular needs none.


Gull. -- What would this troublesome young Fellow say?


Shuf. Faith nothing Madam, but I Bachelor take you Widow; Come, come, reclaim
a young Extravagant by the surest way, Marriage -- There it is in short.


Gull. You scandalous, vain, paultry Scoundrel, that never bless your self but
when you snees; a shilling of your own, I Will warrant, is as rare to be seen
with you as an Eclipse, and you could have the impudence to talk at this rate
to me; I would as soon marry a Criminal under the Gallows; -- so take that for
your final answer.


Shuf. Now Madam, to return you my sense of your Denial in your own Dialect,
you are a mercenary, loathsome, superannuated, ugly Sinner; you have Bawded
almost ever since you left Bulking; one of your Names is Gullman, I remember
your House by a lasting Token; you have more Diseases about you then a whole
Campaign in a hot Summer; you are worse plastered and patcht up than an old
leaky calkt Vessel; -- It Is high time indeed you set up for a Fortune; -- I Will
draw the Curtain and expose you, and will have you sent to Bridewell
immediately.


He goes toward the Door, Gullman follows and holds him. Gull. Dear Worthy
Sir, for goodness sake, consider, you will utterly ruin me; if you do this, I am
undone for ever.


Shuf. There Is no way to relieve you but one,


Gull. -- Any way, dear Sir, rather than that.


Shuf. -- Well, the tender regard I have to the extremity of any one's
condition, has so far wrought upon me, that I am willing to come to a
Capitulation with you.


Gull. Your Terms, sweet Sir?


Shuf. You shall give me a Bond for 500 l. to be, due precisely upon your
marriage with Sir Pop. -- if he fails you, the Contract shall be void.


Gull. -- But you will endeavor to promote the Match then for your own private
Interest, as well as mine.


Shuf. -- That I will; -- You shall be represented to all advantages I Will
promise you.


Gull. -- Provide but the Writings, and I am satisfied.


Exit. Shuf. Enter Sir Popular. Sir Pop. -- Sister Spotless, I bid you welcome
to this earthly Mansion.


Gull. Brother Jealous you have my thanks sincerely.


Sir Pop. -- I conceive, our beloved friend Shuffle, would acquaint you with my
business; -- in earnest, he is a good man.


Gull. -- Plainly, I have great hopes in him; I was recollecting his memory
with some wholesome Passages out of a Manual I have at home.


Sir Pop. I have a small piece in this Room, that was writ by a worthy Elder of
Tower-street, that fled afterward into New England; -- I Will recommend it to
you Sister.


Sir Pop. stands upon Bravado's back, and reaches up. Sir Pop. -- It Is removed
-- I know not where to look it.


Gull. -- It may be fali'n down about that Seat Brother.


Sir Pop. goes to look for it about Bravado, he starts up with the Carpet about
him, Sir Popular runs back in confusion. Sir Pop. Good Sister speak to it, -- I
am unfit, -- I had no Devotion in my Family this Morning.


Gull. -- Alas Brother, I have a mortal aversion to all Spirits but my own.


Faith. In the Name of Goodness, what art thou?


Brav. throws off the Carpet. Brav. Nothing but your humble Servant Lady, -- My
Name's Bravado.


Sir Pop. How Is this! -- Some Popish Priest, that designed to fire the House --
Hoa, hoa, within there.


calls aloud. Enter two Servants. Sir Pop. -- Secure this Suspicious Person in
the Garret, till I be at leisure to take his Examination and commit him.


They haul Brav. out. Gull. -- What Providence was here! We might have been all
blown up.


Sir Pop. -- All their Villainies are detected; -- Come Sister, I Will order him
to be brought before the face of Justice, and then give him over to condign
Punishment.


Exit Omnes. SCENE, Toper' s House.
Enter Toper with a Bottle in his hand. Top. Was ever honest man thus tormented
with a confounded abusive Wife; -- S'bud, -- here is one of her Badges grieves
me so, I am scarce able to lift a Glass to my head,

[laying his hand upon his arm] but here is my Comforter for all that.

[drinks] This I was forced to secure with as much caution, as a Sailor does a
prohibited Truck:

( drinks) Ha! -- marry if 'twas not for this refocillation, I should look as
forlorn, as a Bottle half out.

( drinks) Ah, ah -- this Brandy's a friendly creature.

( drinks and looks at the Bottle) Alac, alac, I am a dying man, my Hourglass
is almost run out, and she is so watchful, 'twill be difficult to replenish it.


Enter Flush. Flush. -- My dear old Pitcher, art thou whole yet?


Top. -- No, I have almost lost one of my ears; -- She checkered my Corpse like
a Chess-board for my last Bout with you; -- A drought choke her for an
unreasonable creature, I have not slept over a Pot, nor set a Glass* upon its head
this two days, Mun.


Flush. Profound abstinence! There Is a mortifying penance indeed: -- By
Bacchus I have been at the death of a Sea-Captain, and two Dutch Merchants,
since you and I breathed one another at Isaac's last.


Top. What did you drink?


Flush. -- True Nants; -- I challenged 'em at their own Weapons, by Stingo we
had a smart Engagement on it; we poured it down like Cataracts, till we were so
inflamed, you might have made Slap-dragons in our Mouths.


Top. O Man, for such a Risk now!


Flush. By Jove, I came to promote it. -- Here will be that solid trifle Sir
Credulous, -- the Reckoning will be his.


Top. -- Alac, alac, I doubt I must not go along with you.


Enter Sir Credulous and Jeffry. Flush. -- Illustrious Knight, give me leave to
lick your feet.


Top. -- I am sorry Sir, I have never a Cask of Brandy to bid you welcome with.


Sir Cred. -- Seriously Gentlemen, I left a Scene of pleasant diversion to wait
upon you.


Flush. Then Sir we must acknowledge our Obligation to be the greater.


Top. Was it some Bowl of Punch Sir?


Sir Cred. No, no, a more delicious entertainment; -- it was a Combat betwixt a
Flesh-fly and a Spider; but after some dispute, the vanquished Fly begged
Quarter with what voice she had; but I left her to the fury of the mercy-less
Insect.


Flush. -- 'Twas unkind not to relieve her.


Top. -- Here, Sir Credulous have at ye.


drinks. Jef. -- I should like an Encounter with that, better than the Spider's
skirmish with the Fly.


aside. Sir Cred. -- I must crave your pardon Sir, I am not disposed to pledge
you, I drink nothing at present but the simplest Spring Water that flows.


Flush. -- What Is this? -- Did not you give me your honor that we should
carouse it with whole Cisterns in a hand, and Volleys of Huzzahs at every
health.


Sir Cred. -- But, since; I have consulted the Configurations of the Heavens,
and I find that Mercury my little influencing Planet forbids it; he is
Retrograde, and till his motion be direct, I must forbear.


Flush. Prithee Knight don't be superstitious, or if you must, let Bacchus be
your Tutelar Power; he deserves to be a Constellation the best of all the Pack;
-- He Is the jolliest Hero amongst 'em.


Sir Cred. Seriously Gentlemen, if I had apprehended, you would have desired me
to drink; I should scarce have come.


Enter Amazonia as to Toper. Amaz. Sirrah, thou drunken, drousie Sot, how often
have I charged you to forbid this thirsty spunging hollow Shurk the house;

( toward Flush) Let me see him within these Walls again, and I Will batter thee
worse than I would do an Alehouse Windows.


Flush. Hey! -- but why so netl'd good Madam? If I keep him company, I pay my
Club with him; and as for the Civilities I receive from him here, he cannot say
they are unreturn'd, when I have an opportunity at my Lodgings.


Amaz. Thou Lodgings! Ay, may be such as the Constable provides for thee, when
he finds thee drunk; -- Thou art like some Fatherless Libel* condemned and
disowned; and no body dare entertain thee for fear of scandal; Thou art so
notorious a Bilker, that White-Fryars refuses thee.


Flush. If you were any thing but a --


Amaz. But a what, Rascal?


goes up to him. Flush. A passionate Woman, you would not use this Language to
a Gentleman.


Amaz. A Gentleman, you pitiful insignificant Scoundrel; It Is a clear Gentleman
then I Am sure, What Lands have you, or ever had, but what you carry upon your
Shoes in dirty Weather? What other Tenement, but that crasie Cottage, that
Kennel for your Soul? It had dilapidated before this, if that steep't
Punch-Bowl there, had not repaired it.


as to Toper. Sir Cred. She Is more abusive than a Bill in Chancery; -- Observe
how I Will bob her.


as to Flush apart. Amaz. Sirrah, how came the Parlour Hangings cut, the Chinay
broke, the Carpet stained? Tell me, or Ill use you worse, than the Posts do, as
you reel along.


Toper looks sillily, Sir Cred. steals behind her, draws out his Mouse-box, and
bolts out the Mouse before her face. She starts. -- He laughs, she beats him.
Sir Cred. What, what is the matter Lady? -- I meant you no harm by my troth.


Amaz. Do ye sport with me, you babbling Buffoon, get you gone amongst your
Play-fellow, and be waggish there. -- I Will scower the House of you all -- Out
with ye --


She turns 'em all out. Amazonia sola. Amaz. Though the stupid Block-head, has
not sense himself to that degree as to be jealous; yet his Companions by their
too frequent residence here, may be injurious to my unsuspected pleasures; but
now these trifling fears are removed, and my kind youthful Gallant may come
secure from the turn of Interruption: -- Though such a Husband may be a Woman's
grief upon one account, yet the good ill Quality may be useful upon another; --
When my Lover is not expected, I confine the Sot to his hated Abstinence; but
when his presence would be troublesome, I indulge his weakness, and the easy
Fool thankfully withdraws.


Exit. Finis Actus Secundus.
ACT III.
SCENE, A Coffee-House.
Scene draws, and presents Sir Popular's Mechanics seated at a Table, with
News before 'em. They discourse seriously. 1. NO, no, we shall not have a
Parliament this half year, I have a great suspicion of some Court practices,
let me tell you that.

2. -- Ay, there was a Council not long since, where 'twas debated about the
establishing of a standing Army; but the result on it I shall not know till to
morrow.

1. For certain Neighbor?

2. Ay, ay, but too sure, I had it from the mouth of one of my Lord President's
Grooms.

3. There was a Stranger at my Shop very lately, that told me, the French
Ambassador had a private Audience about some Affairs that nerely concerned the
Liberty of the Subject.

1. -- But Providence, I hope, will defeat all their Machinations.

2. Here Boy, bring me the Impartial Protestant Mercury.

(Boy carries him a Paper. Enter Sir Popular, and Shuffle. Sir Pop. What News
Mr. Fickle?

2. Here Is some that is material.

(Reads.) From Colchester we are informed, That on the 22d* Instant, a certain
poor Journey-man Tailor lay intranc'd for some days, and could not be reduced
to the least sense by all the Extremities could be applied; -- at last after
several painful groans, the Organs of his Body begun to be disposed, and he
returned to himself; after which, he sent away for a learned Divine* and
tendered him this following account, viz. That something appeared to him in the
likeness of an Eagle, with Magna Charta under its Talons; then presently he
heard a voice in these words, This is England' s Emblem, unless it use means.
-- Which Relation was not a little surprising to all True Protestants there
present.


Shuf. 'Twas only some Surfeit of Cucombers.


Aside. Sir Pop. And Magna Charta under its Talons! -- How exactly did the
Vision represent Tyranny cowering over Liberty.


They seem startled. Shuf. -- How desolate with thou be, to see the Honorable
Court of Aldermen slavishly whipped with their own Fasces!

^^^^^hen our Chests will be rifl'd, our Goods and Chattels distrain'd, (...),
and so be hanged at our own expense.

(...) Conventicles must be turned into Quires, our grave formal (...) fly
Copes, whilst Hopkins and Sternhold blow the Bellows (...) the Organs.


Sir Pop. Our Matrons will be Ravished, our Daughters Deflowered, our Children
brought up in profane Toryism.


in a Tone. Shuf. The face of the times seem to threaten all this, and still we
put the danger far from us.


Sir Pop. I wish the Divination of a Strowling Gypsy prove not too fatally
consequent.


Shuf. Do ye mean the Prophecy in Seventy Eight?


Sir Pop. No, another since, but altogether to the same purpose; only in
different Words and Postures; -- This last, star'd and raved and foamed, and
then howled out in a dreadful Tone, the Dragon of Bow, will devour the
Grasshopper of the Exchange.


Shuf. Trade you see must truckle to Superstition.


Sir Pop. The signs on the Change, to the sign of the Cross.


Shuf. -- Lawful Gain, to Peter Pence.


Sir Pop. -- The Frock, to the Sirplice.


Shuf. -- The Shop-Book, to the Mass Book.


Sir Pop. And a good bargain of Wares to --


Shuf. -- An ill one of Errors.


Sir Pop. -- But since there is means, my Friends and Neighbors, let us be
resolute; shall we be trampled upon like Worms, when we may resist like Lions?
Let us Petition, Protest, Remonstrate, Covenant, and Associate against the
Common Enemy; let us set apart a day of Humiliation for a Blessing upon our
undertakings; let none of us grudge our Christian Contribution to relieve our
distressed Religion; it lies bleeding, and her gaping Wounds cry loud for Oil,
whilst we only look on and pity; let us make a Public Bank, and list our
selves under St. Michael, to go out against the Dragon and his Angels.


All. Agreed, agreed, agreed.


They call for Coffee, the Boy fills the Dishes and places them; they take 'em
off, Sir Pop. says Grace to himself, before he drinks, and after Sir Pop. Come,
my Friends, our present Concerns desire more privacy.


Exit Omnes. Boy. Kindly-Welcome Gentlemen.


Enter Sir Credulous, Toper, and Flush. [ They seat themselves.] Flush. Dam
these dull drousie Coffee-Houses; I hate 'em; -- None but your dosing Dunces of
business come in 'em; -- I had as soon be seen in a Church as here.


Sir Cred. O Sir, these are of great convenience to a Republic, I Will assure
you; for beside the incomparable virtue of the Berry, you may know ^here daily
how the Pulse of the State beats.


Flush. Pray don't tell me of your State Symptoms, if it be discomposed* I
cannot retrieve it, unless a healing Draught, my own prescription, will do it.


Top. Ay, that is the only Restorative when all is done.


Flush. And we shall have work for it presently: we are so nigh your house, we
shall have all the Mum-Glasses, and Coffee-pots about our ears quickly.


Sir Cred. What do you mean by that Mr. Flush?


Flush. Why, I fear the Inquisition of Toper's Hellish Wife, that piece of
eager Wine upon the Fret.


Top. I frequent Coffee-Houses so seldom, she will never suspect I am here man.


Sir Cred. Mr. Toper, I can secure you three days to your own disposal, without
interruption from her.


Top. Marry, Heavens bless you Worthy Sir, but how?


Sir Cred. I Will administer a certain thing of the nature of an Opiate, but made
up of the choicest Ingredients the four Elements could afford. -- It Is
compounded of the Animal Spirits of a Dormouse, and several invaluable Simples
refined by extraction; one Scruple provokes a dead sleep without intermission
for three days.


Top. For pity sake, give her one Thousand, I Will pay for 'um with all my heart.


Sir Cred. Alas Sir, the Treasures of the East would not do it, yet however out
of revenge to her, and good will to you, I Will prepare a Semi-scruple more.


Top. And I Will drink your Health as long as I can stand.


Flush. What a parcel of Improbabilities lie scattered about here? -- What Is
this? -- The Domestic Intelligence?


(Takes up a Paper. Sir Cred. O let us hear that by all means; it insists upon
the Revolutions of our own Country -- Let Us hear if --


Flush. The English Genius be as pregnant at invention, as the Foreign; -- Well
--.

(Reads.) Yarmouth, Nov. the 6th. This day a Vessel laden with Clare^s, was
forced upon the Sands, and was slav'd, before she could be got off; but all her
Crew came safe a-shoar.


Top. Marry, I should have liked the News better if the men had been lost, and
the Wine saved. -- A Murrin take the Storm.


Flush. -- By the next ^umper, if I had been aboard, I would have embraced a
sinking Hogshead, and gone to the bottom merrily.


Top. O mun, the Tritons had a blessed time on it.


Flush. -- Ay, there was roaring doings amongst 'um; -- Sure 'twas a Jovial
sight, to see old Neptune pierce a Vessel with his Trident, and all the watery
Court drinking round in full Shells.


Top. -- Then reeling along and breaking their Heads against the Rocks.


Sir Cred. -- Seriou^ly, 'twou'd be ravishing to hear the frolic Sirens sing,
Down the Red Lane.


Top. -- And to see the sociable Souls knock upon a wrackt Hull for more
Liquor. -- Oh!


Flush. And the Green Sickness Nymphs simpering at full ones, -- Puny Sluts.


Sir Cred. -- 'Twas always my Hypothesis, that the Reflux was caused by their
drinking, and the Flux by their disemboagning.


Flush. -- And a very reasonable supposition too.


Sir Cred. -- Indeed Gentlemen, I have spent some years study in searching into
the Economy of that Element, but not with the satisfaction my curiosity
requires; I am now thinking to descend in a Vehicle of Glass, and so p^y into
that Constitution, I shall be taken for some Chrystalline Rock.


Top. Poo -- this only loses time. Boy -- A Glass of Mum.


(Boy brings one. Top. Jackanapes -- why no fuller? Here Is not above two Gulps.


Boy. -- It Is right Brumswick, indeed Sir.


Sir Cred. -- Pray Sir show me that Intelligence you had in your hand.


Flush. -- No, no, we shall be too late.


Sir Cred. It Is no matter then; -- I had only a little occasion to look amongst
the Advertisements.


Flush. Have you found some Spaniel, or strayed Horse?


Sir Cred. -- No, but I have lost an elaborate Thought; if any of the Poets
find it, I shall never have it again.


Flush. Never fear it Sir Credulous, they commonly publish all they have, and
more too a great many times.


Sir Cred. Mine are remarkable, I shall distinguish it, -- But are you not for
a Dish of Coffee?


Flush. No, no, I hate to have a puddle of your Outlandish Nuisance cloging my
Stomach.


Top, Puh. -- a scouring Bottle of Pontack will scour it again, Mun.


Sir Cred. Nuisance! Take it from me, its Virtues are unknown; -- But what say
you to a Glass of Mum.


Flush. Loathsome, ropy stuff; the tired Citizen's recruit: I need none of their
Artificial Provocations*


Sir Cred. Sweetheart, qualify a Dish of Coffee with an allay of Tea.


(Boy brings a Dish, he Drinks. Top. Faith let us be for Harry's now, I am for
honest Trinkelo, I have not had my stowage this two days.


Flush. -- Come Sir Credulous, now for a sprightly Cup.


(Exeunt. Boy. Welcome Gentlemen.


SCENE II. Sir Popular' s House.
Enter Bravado and Carolietta. Carol. But would not Sir Popular be very severe
with you if he was informed who you were?


Brav. Ay, as the Prentices are upon a Pillory'd Papist; there was a pious
Baggage with him, did help to exasperate him the more.


Carol. I am sorry for your misfortune.


Brav. Let me be hanged, if I was not baited by a rack o'Slaves, worse than a
Pick-pocket; they lug'd me about, and stripped me; and accused me of a design to
fire the House, and that my Snush box was a Granado.


Carol. But could not the Boy that admitted you, resolve the doubt?


Brav. When I alleged, I had several honorable Visits to your Ladyship the
little heedless Lace-coat said, he had never seen me here.


Carol. That forgetful Jack!


Brav. -- But when the Constables came with their painted Authority in their
hands, one of 'em knew me, and confirmed what I had said before in relation to
my self; then Sir Popular begged my pardon, and promised me his assistance in
the promotion of the Match; which, Madam, I hope you will please to bless with
your consent.


Carol. As soon as you present me with Roman's Sword.


Brav. Alas Madam, it is too degenerous a Trophy, only your Commands will gloss
it.


Carol. -- Well Sir, I hope the next time I see you, to see the Sword in your
hand.


Brav. I Protest Madam, to tell you truth, I do a little despair of disarming
the Coward to day; my Engagements are so obliging, I fear I can scarce neglect
'em to correct his late insolence. -- But --


Carol. These Men of Honor are always so taken up; -- It Is some dwelling
business I fancy.


Brav. Ay, by your fair self, and with both Sexes, let me perish.


Carol. -- You are a Man of business, Mr. Bravado.


Brav. -- My Lady Love-all

(a pois take her) sent to me to be at my Lodgings about three; her Coach, it
seems, must stop there; I had no sooner read her Billet, but I had another to
unknot from my Lord Scruple, a ticklish resenting Puppy; -- I must second him
in the Morning.


Carol. I never thought my Lord had been quarrelsom.


Brav. No more he is; he has ill nature enough, but he wants Courage, hang him,
I have been very smart on his Livery, have banter'd his Coach and Horses,
ridiculed the conceit of his Dress, checked the rudeness of his Caresses,
corrected the harshness of his French, the darkness of his Stanzas; and from me
all this seemed like privilege.


Carol. It Is like Sir, you might claim a particular freedom, as his Familiar.


Brav. No Faith, I past all ths upon him at Longs's the first time I saw him;
though if one, he suspected would not fight, had but misplac't the least
Tittle, he would have improved it to a breach of Civility, and then have grown
Captious.


Carol. So much for my Lord; now for my Lady Love-all; if I mistake her not,
she is none of the most correct Pieces.


Brav. As disorderly a Maukin as ever was beholden to art; -- She has a cast of
an eye, which I persuade her is a wanton, delicious Ogling; then her Lips are
bloated, which she calls full and pouting; and her Chin is reflext, but she
complements the deformity as a dimple; then her complexion is a kind of a Hue
made up of all colors, and changeable according to the position of the eye.


Carol. So, -- your description is copious enough a'ready; yet it seems you can
dispense with all these Errata's.


Brav. I protest her Passion is so unmanageable, she will admit of no repulse.
Nay, she will betray it in public; She Is now working me a Suit of Lace which she
expects I Will wear.


Carol. 'Twere pity Sir to disappoint so kind a Creature, which I am afraid
you must do, if your stay here be any longer; -- I would not detain you another
Minute for all the Joys you carry along with you; -- Therefore, pray, if you
must be formal, take your leave.


Brav. If the Queen of Love should come to court me, to the full possession of
her store, I would refuse the sueing Charmer for one Kiss of that inviting
Hand: Ay, though my Principle was in the Field, and stripping to encounter; I am
sure I should struggle with my honor, before I could leave you.


Carol. Fie Sir, this is too soft, this Spirit will never disarm Roman.


Brav. I could as soon be kick't, and --


Enter Roman as reading a Letter: Bravado slinks out at the Door. Carol. Mr.
Bravado, What are you gone?


( cries after him. Romans -- How! Was that sparkish thing here, and gone?


Carol. -- Ay, and in all the haste that a Coward can make from the pursuit of
danger; -- I Am beholden to you Sir, else it would have been as difficult to have
removed him, as it is to separate an old Statesman and his Opinion.


Romans -- I am sorry Madam, I was not instrumental to your delivery a little
sooner.


Carol. Truly his Company was as insupportable, as a noise of Beggars is to a
Miser; first he tortured me with an endless display of Prowess; then made a
Digression to the Women, how passionate some person of Honor was for him; and
--


Romans I fear he will scarce make me a Consident to his Amorous Achievements any
more.


Carol. No, -- you did not acquit your Trust with that Fidelity was requisite;
but he resolves to correct you for it -- I have appointed him proportionably a
harder Task than ever Hercules undertook.


Romans Is it to discharge a Pot-gun without winking.


Carol. No, it is only to make me a Present; I conceit I could weild a Sword
well, and should fancy yours in particular; but I have made a Vow to receive it
from no hand but his.


Romans He Will sooner venture to snatch one out of the hand of Justice. -- But
where is your Cousin Madam?


Carol. Gone to the New-Exchange Sir, -- Did not her Boy give you a Letter?


Romans Yes, but it did not take notice where she was; only, that her return
would be within less than an hour.


Carol. In the mean time Sir, if you please to divert your self with a History,
I Will fetch you Sir Walter Rawleigh; I have a little trifling concern that calls
me away.


Romans No, -- I Will go and dispatch half an hours business, and be here again, --
Madam your Servant.


Exit. Romans Carol. -- How agreeable this Gentleman's behavior is in comparison
of Bravado's; his modest and equal Deportment steals on insensibly, and wins
upon our Sex; whilst the other thinks his modish lewdness is most prevailing;
and thus provokes hate with that very Quality he thinks incites Love.


Enter Juliana. Jul. Has Mr. Roman been here yet Cousin?


Carol. Yes, and newly gone.


Jul. -- Gone! -- It is not Three; I am sure the Chair-men pac't away at a
considerable rate, but did not he excuse his haste?


Carol. Only with a Promise he would be here again about half an hour hence; --
But I Will leave you Cousin to be passionately elegant upon your Lover's absence.


Exit Carol. Jul. -- And sure our thoughts tower with the noblest flights,
When pinioned with the softest Plumes of Love;
What Pageantrys of fond Immortal Joys,
And what vain senceless fears we apprehend1
Tyrannick Passion blindly curbs our Souls,
And subjects all our reason to its Laws;
Whilst slavishly we own its Sovereign right
Esteeming such bright Chains as Ornaments.

Enter Boy with a Letter. Boy. Madam, a Footman in a Blue Livery seam'd with
red, gave me this Letter.


(gives her the Letter.) Exit. Jul. It Is from Mr. Roman, Pray Heavens the
Enclosure prove as welcome; I open it with as much awful dread, as a modest
Penitent does his heart to his Confessor.

( Reads it and sighs.) -- Nor was my fears, thin shallow Phantoms; -- Alas
some ill natured business has detained him; and we must be divorc't a whole day
more; -- A Day! -- It must not be -- I cannot be rackt with the Convulsions of
hope and fear so long; -- I Will write with all the feeling Thought, Pathetick
Love candictate. -- But sure he will come, it was only some design to heighten my
surprise. -- But if he should not -- Yes he will -- my confusion of thought
distracts me; -- I make needless Objections, and return as wild Answers; --
Well -- my restless passion has almost wrought it self into a calm; -- my
Spirits grow dull, my Eyelids heavy, and all my Faculties indisposed; -- I Will
endeavor to settle my disorders with a Slumber.


(She sits down, and leans back as sleeping. Enter Sir Popular, Sir Credulous,
and Jeffry. Sir Cred. Ha! Seriously the Lady's Organs are untuned; -- but don't
disturb her.


Sir Pop. Pray let me conceive your reason for it.


Sir Cred. You shall know it presently -- Jeffry here take this Key, -- go into
my Repository, and fetch me the Paper with the black Seal upon it.


Jeffry takes the Key and goes out. Sir Pop. I hope you intend no harm here,
Sir Credulous,


Sir Cred. -- No, no, -- I have only sent for a certain Philter, which was
found out after many years travel, and long experience, by that Aesculapius of
his* Age, Don Arnando Curioso the Spanish Physician.


Sir Pop. The Virtues of it?


Sir Cred. -- They are innumerable Sir, -- if you be Frenchify'd, it cures you
beyond Mercury, without Salivation or Bagneo, if you be scorbutic, it carries
off the malignity by its operation Diuretic, -- if* you be Hypocondriacal, it
--


Sir Pop. -- Here Is a hippo-conjuring with you; -- Do you make my House an
Hospital? This was not the business of your visit, I conceive, Sir.


Sir Cred. But its greatest virtue is --


Sir Pop. -- Pray no more of its Vices, Sir.


Sir Cred. I tell you Sir, it is of so subtle and insinuating a nature, that by
its Incorporation with the air, it smites upon the Olfatick Organ, and
produces the effect of Love; 'twill be requisite to my design with your Niece.


Sir Pop. Most requisite indeed.


Enter Jeffry gives him a Paper. Sir Cred. Sir Popular take care to hold your
Nose upon the opening of this Paper, or your Passion may be greater for me then
becomes your Sex; Jeffrey, do you make use of the same precaution.


Jef. Not I Sir, none can love a good Master too well.


Sir Cred. An honest Servant.


Sir Cred. unties the Paper. Sir Pop. ges up to him, and speaks through the
Nose. Sir Pop. In earnest, it is like your ordinary Damask Powder.


Sir Cred. It resembles it indeed.


Sir Cred. holds it under Juliana's Nose. Sir Pop. It Is no such subtle Body,
Sir Credulous


Sir Cred. -- You must know Sir, there are certain minut^ Volatile Particles
afloat amongst the grosser; and from these proceeds this Philo-poietick quality.


Jef. His Trumperies are like the French flim-flams, valuable only because of
their hard Names.


(Aside.) Sir Cred. ties up the Stuff. Sir Cred. Here Jeffry, -- carry it
safely back. -- But hark you Sirrah, has no odd Commotions solicited you?


Jef. In Faith Sir, Methinks you look exceeding lovely; ah that Eye, that Chin,
that Forehead; in faith Lady Master if you were but a Woman, I know what I know
-- ah,


Sir Cred. Get you gone, get you gone, you Knave you; -- did not I give you
warning of this.


(Ex. Jeff. bowing and kissing his hand toward Sir Cred. Sir Cred. Now, Sir
Popular, you may enlarge your imprisoned sense.


Sir Pop. What a wonderful effect it has wrought upon the poor Creature, I
perceive there is no resistance.


Sir Cred. You may as soon unravel your Destiny.


Sir Pop. Now Sir, since your Marriage with my Niece is unquestionable, I
conceive, you will consider how active and industrious I have been; her Fortunes
are exactly as I acquainted you; and thereupon I must presume to tell you, I
have a Suit to you


Sir Cred. I will not part with an Atom of my Powder before hand.


Sir Pop. Under favor Sir, d^ believe my request to be so unreasonable; --
It Is only to lend the Good Old Cause one Thousand Pound before the Consummation
of your Conjugal (...), and another Thousand after.


Sir Cred. What, then is your Brotherhood's Treasury exhausted?


Sir Pop. -- It Is only lent for the better confirmation of our Laws and
Liberties; and must be to be expended in the maintenance of the Cause
aforesaid; I am commissioned Receiver, and will take care your Talent shall be
improved; in earnest I will.


Sir Cred. Soft; -- She awakes. --


Juliana as ignorant of their presence. Jul. Why did the dear delusion fleet
away,
And so abruptly close its flat'ring Scene?
How pleasingly transported have I been
With short and kind abusing Ecstasies?
I thought I tumbled on a Mossy Pallet,
Close by a Stream that gently stole away,
And hum'd with soft confusion as it run
Amongst the rustling Pebbles, and along
The verdant Banks, grew Rows of stouping Vines:
Up starts a Sylvan from a Covert bush,
Untwines the circling Branches till they bled,
And brought the swelling Clusters to my hand,
Then after some Grimaces, trip't away.
One Grape far more transparent than the rest
I culled, and sporting with it, dropped it in,
Then catching at it suddenly, methought
I slip't, and so awak't with the affright.
Still, still --

Skee sees 'em and starts. Sir Pop. Neice, Neice, I must not suffer you to
choose a Grape for your self, I have provided one here for you.


Sir Cred. Lady, I was the Grape you were so concerned for, and am safe; --
through this transparency you may read my passion.


Jul. Pray Sir don't insult over an innocent surprise.


Sir Cred. 'Twill be convenient Sir Popular* that you moralize the Sylvan and
withdraw; I perceive the Operation already; therefore your Presence and the
Lady's Modesty may be a little disonant.


Sir Pop. In earnest, you provide discreetly.


[Ex. Sir Pop. Sir Cred. Now fair Angel, let not an Abstemious Bashfulness
restrain your Desires; Come and pour out your Lovesick Soul into my Breast, --
I Will cherish it, and restore it whole again.


( Goes to her to Salute her, she throws from him. Jul. -- Infect not me with
your Pestilent Breath; I loath your Embraces.


Sir Cred. Shaw, this is the strangest humor: Come, I Am confident you love me.


Jul. Enjoy your belief then.


[ Ex. Juliana. Sir Cred. Well. -- She shall never taste the Joys she has
refused, I Will punish this coyness with disdain, till her Tears petrifie her;
then she shall stand as a Monument for bashful Maids.


Enter Carol. Carol. I cry you mercy Sir, if I have intruded upon your
Secrecy; I expected my Cousin had been here.


Sir Cred. Don't retreat my Pretty Creature, bless me only till I have given
you an account of that unhappy Creature.


Carol. Unhappy! No sure.


Sir* Cred. She might have been otherwise, only she neglected it; -- in Fine,
Madam, she loves me.


Carol. In troth* as great an unhappiness as could befall her.

( Aside.) But I hope Sir, you are not so cruel as to see her Virgin Blossoms
snatched by Death; since you can prevent the Tyrant's long reach.


Sir Cred. But if I do; I Will be hanged in her Zone; -- She has already disowned
her Title to my Heart, and never shall be admitted to a second Claim.


Carol. Truly some of these Women are so humerous -- Now, I never could refuse
in public, something I longed for, and then condemn my self for it in private.


Sir Cred. Most excellent Form, you alone have reconciled me to your Sex; There
is a secret Harmony betwixt our Complexions, and I do here proclaim you
Mistress of my Heart.


Enter Bravado. Brav. What -- Sir Credulous here? -- You have made use of my
Name Knight for your Introduction.


Sir Cred. You mistake Sir; my own challenges a greater Interest.


Brav. And you have a pretense to that Lady.


Sir Cred. I have seriously; and her goodness has encouraged it.


Brav. -- Madam will you throw your self away, upon an undiscerning Idiot, that
dotes more upon Tinsel Toys than real perfections? He Will barter your whole
Fortunes for a Painted Rattle.


Sir Cred. Lady, he is a stupid Illiterate Animal; in nothing humane, but only
that he laughs and looks up; -- You must pardon him, he knows not how to value
a Rarity.


Brav. Why, you Incorrigible Fool, will you miscal your Trangam Rarities?


Sir Cred. I Will appeal to you Lady if these be Trangams; -- First for
Antiquities -- I can produce one of the Trojan Horse's Shoes; a Black-Jack of
a Grecian Officer's Boot-Top; a Pocket-Glass of Janus's Spectacles, and several
others. Now for my Novelties --


Brav. Your Antiquities are Cheats, and your Novelties, Trash.


Sir Cred. -- Thou art a Moving Clod, and acts only by the Dictates of Heat and
Moisture.


Brav. You are an Hospital of lame Arts, and sickly Sciences.


Sir Cred. Thou art a Liar with a bad Invention.


Brav. -- Thou art a Title Page to a Treatise of Elves and Goblins.


Sir Cred. Thou art an Aesop Fables, without the Morals:


Carol. Gentlemen, you talk of Elves and Goblins, would they don't hear you;
I Will assure you this Room's haunted.


Brav. By Jupiter, if a leering Shadow should come in hither, I would make bold
to kick its lean Worship out again.


Sir Cred. I scarce think thou have bravery enough to encounter Air.


Brav. I never heard he durst draw a Sword.

(Aside.) Come Sir Draw, you shall have a fatal proof on it presently.


They both Draw. Sir Cred. Now Sir, I Am for ye.


Brav. -- Ha; -- Would I were well off it again.

( Aside.) It Is your Armor perhaps that makes you resolute; we'll strip and
fight it fairly.


They both strip. Carol. Indeed Gentlemen, there shall be no blood shed here;
-- I Will call in the House.


Exit Carol. Sir Cred. Now Caitif, I Will mince thee worse than a City Sempstress
does her words.


Brav. -- And this shall maul you more, than a dull Author does his Original.


Sir Cred* Have at your Soul. --


[They both fly back, and push quick at a distance. Enter two Anticks and
Dance, Sir Credulous and Bravado run in a Fright to either side of the Stage,
and stand close; The Anticks take their Coats in the Dance, and throw 'em out
at either Door, then their Hats, then their Peruques off their Heads, and dance
out with 'em. Sir Credulous looks out fearfully. Sir Cred. Bless me, what a
frightful Gambol was this, am I alive, tro.


Brav. locks up. Brav. Are they gone -- I am all in a Sweat, -- Doubtless they
were a couple of Devils, that were waiting for us, if we had killed one another.


Sir Cred. But they were disappointed for all their cunning; -- My hair stood
so erect, I could perceive it move my Wig.


Brav. Why, where is it?


Sir Cred. lays his hand upon his head. Sir Cred. Good now! It Is gone and yours
too.


Brav. -- Mine too! A Plague of their Pilfering Frolic; -- And our Clothes
too, as I live --


They look simply upon one another. Enter Carol. Carol. You are like Gladiators
indeed now, Gentlemen.


Brav. I Protest Madam, Sir Cred. ows his Life to an Accident, or let me perish


Car. -- Was not your Sword sharp enough?


Sir Cred. Ha, ha, the Lady was arch upon him there; ha, ha, seriously the
Fancy makes me amends for the loss of my Clothes.


Carol. -- How! -- Your Clothes gone, say you?


Brav. Ay, faith Madam, -- just as I directed the dead-doing point to his
Heart, his guardian Devil interrupted the Pass, sweep't away our Clothes, and
vanished in a Flash of Fire.


Sir Cred. Fair Creature, the odds were mine when the Demons came; -- but the
truth on it is, they took their leave a little rudely.


Carol. Gentlemen, Sir Popular will be here presently; therefore if you will walk
into my Chamber you may be unseen there, till you can Careen your selves again.


[Exeunt. ACT IV.
SCENE I. Shuffle' s Lodging.
Shuffle solus. HOw ill my Practice and my Principles agree! -- My Maiden
honor at first resolved and strugl'd with unwilling Conflicts, before it
yielded; but Poverty importuned, and Proffers prevailed; -- Now I can cheat a
Citizen with a City Conscience; -- Yet still methinks I have some remorse; --
But why have I? -- These People I deal with, deserve no better; -- They Will lift
one hand up to Heaven, and pick Pockets with the other: -- A fair
Correspondence with them, loses its gloss; and is but Honesty misplac't; But --

Enter a Quack. Quack. 'Tees strange Sir, yoo should no remember me, meetheenks
yoo have no reeson too complain of me usage, -- Dee Cure was both speedy an
perfect: -- But yoo dou foorgeet me.


Shuf. No, no, my Shins and Shoulders put me in mind of you: I feel the
Symptoms on it still; I fear the Lues frets in my Veins still; then, I have
Gleetings frequently.


Quack. Dese be oonly some Seminal Wastings, de which do proceed from your
Weekness; bot me vill send you a Dose of my Pilulae Retentrices, de which vill
obstruct 'em.


Shuf. None of your sipper-sawses for me any more, good Mr. Doctor, you have
tampered with me too much already; but my comfortis, No Cure, no Money.


Quack. Vell, Vell, bot Begar me vill no abused by yoo, -- Me vill eder have my
Money or yoor Boody.


Shuf. A Pox of your damned mincing; why do you clip at this rate to me you
Counterfeit Rascal; do not I know you? Was not I the first that advised you to
melt your words; and pass for a Forreigner? If it had not been for me, you had
only been a Zany still; Did not I witness you went out Doctor at Padua, and
taught you to counterfeit your Testimonial from thence?


Quack. Well, Well, this shall not bring you off, I Will tell you so much.


Shuf. Do your worst you drudging Clyster-pipe, I Will make you fly the Town,
I Will assure you; I Will acquaint the College who you are; and how you are in Fee
with an Apothecary, to prescribe costly Drugs, and rich Compositions; which he
only observes in the making up of his Bill, but never in his Administrations.


Quack. You shall lose your self, as you walk along, before I repair you again.


Shuf. You repair me! -- You Suppositor; thou art not Physician enough to
prescribe a Drench; -- Get you gone and rake in distressed Fundaments; hide your
Ignorance with hard words; and maul your Latin beyond cure.


Ex. Angrily Enter a Milliner. Shuf. Sir, your humble Servant; -- Faith I am
glad you are come, I was just going to send for you.


Mill. Honest Mr. Shuffle give me your hand; -- I was going upon a little
business this way, and thought you would take it ill if I did not call to see
you; -- My Wife gives her service to you.


Shuf. -- It seems then this Visit was designed; -- You told her you were
coming hither.


Mill. No really not I; she surmis'd so, but I did not design it at that time.


Shuf. Then the Obligation is less of my side: -- Come, come, you Gentle Rogue
you, you came a' Dunning, did not you? Hanged Man, modesty and the business of
your Errand are inconsistent.


Mill. Really Mr. Shuffle you mistake me, I had no occasion for Money.


Shuf. And that is well; the truth on it is, I have money ready, because I am
unwilling to transgress my promise; but since your Occasions are indifferent,
'twill do me a kindness; I must dispose of it elsewhere.


Mill. But a --

(Scratcheth his head.) Well -- dee see -- I am now going.


Shuf. -- -- Nevertalk of going yet Man; here will be my Lord Change presently;
he has turned off his old Milliner; I Will recommend you to him; he shall go home
with you and furnish himself.


Mill. Your Servant good Sir, I fear I shall be too late for an occasion;
besides, I don't go directly home, I have Concerns by the way. -- Here Is one at
Door Sir --


Exit. Enter a Solicitor. Soll. Mr. Shuffle the Money has been due above a
Fortnight, and I could hear nothing from you.


Shuf. How could you expect it, unless it were to contract another Debt with
you; doubtless you are not so unreasonable as to demand Payment.


Soll. -- You know Sir, I am only an Agent, it is another's business; I am
obliged to the Duty of my Office.


Shuf. Prithee don't sham me with your Duty and your Office; de'e think I am a
stranger to your specious plausible Cheats, don't I know how you shift and
contract in one another's Names.


Soll. I profess to you, the Money was not my own.


Shuf. May be so; nor is that your own by right, which you hook in by your
barbarous advantages; how many raw Cullys have I decoyed e're now into your
ravirous Nooses.


Soll. And I think Sir, you used to have a considerable share.


Shuf. Did not my Treachery deserve it? -- That I should be such a Villain as
to sell my Friends! Well, since you have past this upon me, I Will do the young
Gentleman some justice upon you.


Soll. -- You cannot injure me, the Law will justify me.


Shuf. Will It justify your contracting with Minors? and taking advantage o
their Nonage, by some of your legal Quirks.


Soll. -- There Is no such thing, I never exacted so.


Shuf. Have you the Forhead to deny it? Have not I provided you of such Squires
as would subscribe to any terms for the relievance of their present wants? I Will
unravel all, I Will promise you; -- We'll plague you, if a Bill in Chancery will
do it.


Soll. -- See what that Court will decree for you; -- but you are so
passionate, I had rather pay the Money, than be concerned with you; -- So your
Servant.


Exit. Roman knocks, Shuffle stands close and will not speak. Enters. Romans His
Door's open, he must be within.

[ Romans spies him.] Here, here, I want nothing of you; I am none of your Misers
Ghosts that haunt you for Treasure.


Shuf. I Will promise you, I thought, by the authority of your Rap, that you would
been some person of a worse design; I have been tormented with these sort of
Creatures unmercifully.


Romans Not so ill as I have been with another sort.


Shuf. Where Prithee?


Romans -- In Gray's Inn Walks.


Shuf. -- There Is variety of humor;


Romans -- If Apery may be called humor.


Shuf. It passes for it there; -- But who did you see?


Romans -- I saw that splendid, Orthodox Fop, Jack Rigle, and was troubled with
him.


Shuf. How?


Romans Why first, after he had run out his Chain of Thoughts, by way of
Greeting, he broke out, Dam-me, he was glad to see me, and especially at that
Juncture; for he had expressed his sense of the Times, Allegorically, in a Letter
from Leghorn; and must have my judgment on it, which I vouchsaf't very freely,
and told him his Style was tedious and obscure; he had so tag'd it with
misapplied Figures, that like his Pantaloons, it made a noise and was
troublesome.


Shuf. And would not he Glout upon it?


Romans No, but would reconcile me with some of his Rhapsodys which he produced;
I read, but he thought I did not give 'em grace enough, and thereupon snach't
'em, then thundered 'em off in a fancied Heroic greatness; -- but the
wofullest stuff that ever Aquafortis writ on Knife, or Tobaco-Box.


Shuf. He affects that way of tinkling, but with ill success commonly. -- Well,
how was you rid of him?


Romans Another seasonable Fop came singing up to us, and took him aside; then
begging my pardon, which I easily granted, he turned out his Toes, and
gracefully moved away.


Shuf. How did you bestow your self then?


Romans -- I kept my seat still, and presently, two trim, loud Gentlemen seated
themselves by me, and made remarks upon all that past by; then would babble
Gibberish to one another, thinking to have it mistaken for French: Now would be
passionate and talk of love, making Allusions to the Trees, and walks; after a
while two Ladies came, and took up the Bench below me; which they no sooner
saw, but left me and run upon them.


Shuf. -- Was not Harry Smirk there?


Romans Yes, yes, and shouldered a tawdry Chambermaid along, and bare all the
time; he had up all his revised motions of head and hand; nor could a female
pass without a distorted bow, and an obliging smile from him.


Shuf. He has a pretty impudent familiar way with him; -- But was not Madam
Burly to be seen?


Romans O, She Is as constant as the Usurer; she was trouling about very
painfully, and all mufl'd up in Lace; then, her Knots, her Towers, her Gloves,
her Gown, were so exact, and suiting, they represented her a most uniform
deformity.


Shuf. You had variety of entertainment indeed.


Romans Ay; -- there was a poor discarded Poet sitting very pensively under the
Covert of an Elm; I pitty'd his solitude, and walked up to him; and after an
Epitome of his observations, he begun to complain of the humor of these times;
that preferred silly apish Farce, to true solid wit.


Shuf. May be he had been damned lately. -- Now let me have your company to the
Coffee-house; and you shall see as luxurious a Medly of Manners there, though of
another nature.


Romans I cannot hear a sordid Slave saucily arraign the Proceedings of his
Superiors, besides, Sir Popular and I are at odds.


Shuf. He will not be at the Cabal this time, he is treating about Marriage with
that old harra'st Whore, I told you off.


Romans 'Twill be very merry if she can but bubble him at long run.


Shuf. Never doubt it; I have whetted him, and am in Fee for my Interest of
both sides; I Will serve my self of him, and then expose him.


Romans -- I must go steal into his House, which I should hate like a Pesthouse,
but only that the Divine Juliana's there.


[ Exit. Romans Shuf. SCENE II. Sir Popular's House, A Dining Room.
Enter Sir Credulous, and Bravado, as without Wigs and Coats, with 'em
Carolietta. Carol. Gentlemen, if you had been seen in my Chamber, perhaps the
occasion might ha'been censured too severely; but here is a Closet in this Room
will secure you.


Brav* This Whoreson Boy of mine! He might have been here before this; I shall
be too late, I have 2 or 3 Cowards to Post before 6 a-Clock.


Sir Cred. Jeffry stays long too; -- What an unadvised Mortal was I to
undertake any thing this particular day; Hesiod reckons it inauspicious in his
Emeralogia; yesternight the Candle burnt blue, and this Morning I saw a Tom-Tit
perching upon a Bough with his Tail toward me: I divined --


Brav. Hang your Divinations.


Sir Cred. Methinks I feel some chilling Particles tacitly creeping through my
Pores.


Speaks as if cold. Carol. Come but into the Closet, and I Will fetch either of
you a Nightgown.


Shows 'em into the Closet* Carol. I fancy this Knight is the most humerous
Whim that ever made antic Love; I have provided a pleasanter Masque than the
last was, if it have but the good fortune to take -- Here are some Implements
in order to it.


Lays down two Vizards on the Table. Exit Carol. Enter at the other side
Gullman and Faith. Gull. Did observe Wench what a languishing kind of a Leer
Sir Popular squinted at me?


Faith. Yes, I believe your Canting Fop is a little carnal; he is just such
another Arch Wag, as our Brown Betty picked up in the Rounds one Night.


Gull. -- Ho; I remember him; -- He used to bring a Sword and Riding coat under
his black Cloak, to appear sparkish; he thought his own Habit was too
notorious; He was a good friend to the House though.


Faith. But he took so much Flogging up to it, before one could stir his
Inclinations.


Gull. Betty would complain, she used bodily austerity upon him, till her Arms
ach'd; he was a little dull of Discipline, only he paid well.


Faith. -- A shame take her for a Slut, she incroacht upon me that night; he
was made prize in my Province; -- marry was he.


Gull. He dispatched business three times a Week in the Blue Chamber
constantly; -- But I hope I shall have no need to return to these poor shifts
again.


Faith. If the Scriv'ner prove but faithful.


Gull. -- He Is well enough; the pretext of a mistake will indemnify him; he
really has that Widow's Fortunes in his hand that I personate; -- Then Mr*
Shuffle will endeavor to promote it for his own sake.


Faith. Now Madam if advice from me would not seem a little untimely to one of
your experience; I should look upon it as the safest way to secure him; to let
him command the freedom of your person, when you perceive a rising desire
fermenting in his Veins, he would then certainly Marry you, least the discovery
of his fall, should bring scandal to the Fraternity.


Gull. May be Wench he will take us unawares; therefore leave the Prayer Book
upon the Table, and go down.


( Faith lays down a Book.) Exit. Enter Sir Popular. Sir Pop. Sister Spotless,
I had come sooner, but that I was obliged to do justice upon a wicked
Apostatizing Brother, nay more, he was taken with a false Worshiper in the very
Act of Filthiness, Foh! Foh! I am sick with the Repetition.


Gull. Oh! abominable, well plainly I am armed against all the Insults of lend
men, there lies my Sword of Defiance*


Points to her Prayer Book, which Sir Pop* takes up. Sir Pop. In earnest a good
Woman, I Will warrant it, some of our thorough reformed Authors: Well, the Wicked
may talk of their Ability and Learning, but I could as soon edify on the Seven
Champions, as the best of their Writings; no, no, writing of Divinity to any
purpose is a sort of Hereditary Patrimony, which none but our Sanctified
Brethren can justly lay claim to: What! the Title Page is lost? What may you
call this Sister?


Gull. I have even forgot the Name, I fall commonly directly to the Matter,
it is very edifying.


Sir Pop. No doubt on it, a body may know a good Book by Simpathy, my Bowels
commonly Simpathize with an Holy Author, before I know one word of his meaning;
but let me see,

( He takes out his Spectacles.) I Will find you out a place presently that suits
my Imperfections. Ha! How! What Is here? Sure I don't see right.


(He opens the Book, and it proves to be Obscene. Gull. Oh! I am ruined, it is
it, but too sure, that cursed careless Jade.


Sir Pop. turns into the middle again. Sir Pop. How! What means this? -- Avoid,
avoid, O wicked!


Runs out and reenters. Gull. Abominable, Oh Brother she is lost, she is lost,
utterly lost, this was that wicked lost Wretches doing, my sinful Maid: Oh!
Horrid, and defile my Chamber too with it! I must even take a new Lodging, I
shall be as fraid to stay hereafter, as if the Room was haunted with Spirits.


Sir Pop. Turn her away Sister, she would corrupt a Convert.


Gull. She Is a Harlot, an unclean Harlot, and shall be no longer under my Roof.


Sir Pop. What will you say now if this Pious piece have some itching
Inclinations this way her self? I can guess shrewdly by my own Hypocrisy, and
believe me, an affected Cant, and a lift or two of the Whites, are the easiest
parts of Devotion, I Will attempt her at a distance, and if her Inclinations are
right, she will quickly make the most of a double meaning Saying.

( Aside.) Well Sister, I cannot but think of this lost Creature, but indeed we
are all frail; but when we find our selves weak, we should apply wholesome
Remedies to prevent the growth of our Distemper; letus, Dear Sister, beware of
our own steps, we know not how soon the Minute of Sin may come upon us, we'll
arm against it; let us be joined together to morrow in Pious Wedlock.


Gull. Ah Brother the memory of my late Husband forbids it, though I must
confess, I wish to be secure from Temptation as well as may be: But Brother let
us burn that filthy obscene Book, verily I shall be sick whilst it stays in the
Room: Oh, I am extreme queasie, the other day I eat but a little piece of a
Pullet that was singed with a Leaf of an old Common Prayer Book, and it has
lain in my Stomach ever since.


Sir Popular takes up the Book again and looks in it, and at every Picture be
shrugs, grinns, and leers at Gullman, who turns up her eyes, and wriggles about
Sir Popular. Sir Pop. Well Sister, we will however see the Inventions of the
Wicked, and detest them: Good lack! Sincerely it is pretty to the eye, though it
be Lewd and Abominable.


Gull. Ay, They have the Pleasures of this vain World.


Sir Pop. They have so, you little Rogue you; you Pigs-ny's, you little
Creature, ye Pugs-face you.

( He chucks her under the Chin.) In earnest, I am I know not how -- As it
might be -- Strangely, I say it Backsliding. -- Well, let me be far enough, Is
the Canonical hour past?

( He Jumps up.) I profess, Matrimony shall be ratified to morrow, you pretty
little Fubs you.


Gull. Indeed Brother! Oh no, it will be Friday an unluckly day,


Sir Pop. Oh foh! Dear Sister, that is really Antichristian, and Superstitious;
What! An Observer of Times and Seasons? Oh! It Is Popery altogether, beside we
must not trust our selves too long in the hands of the Tempter: No, no, to
Morrow, to Morrow.


He takes up the Book again, and looks, and laughs, and strokes Gullman's
Bubby's. Gull. Sure you mistake Brother, it must not be by any means.


Sir Pop. Why Sister, why art thou refractory? I tell thee, while our thoughts
are upright, we may do what is pleasing to us: Well, well, my little Spouse,
you are my Spouse, you Wag you, my Heart is wedded to thee, and I must fulfill
my just desires with thee; Oh the Comfortable Condition of Wedlock! I say
Sister hearken unto me.


Gull. But Brother, the Wicked may see us, let us not be a stumbling block
before them.


Sir Pop. Sister, here is an Apartment in this Room convenient for us, but
least some wandering eye should be about the Keyhole, I Will fetch these
Whirligigs I observed upon the Table; in earnest, these Vanities may be useful
though uot lawful.


He fetches the Vizards. Gull. Well Brother, you are even the most Powerful Man!


They put on the Vizards, and go for the Closet, Sir Pop. opens the Door, Sir
Cred. and Brav. bolt out and run off, crying Devils, Sir Pop. and Gull. as in
confusion. Sir Pop. Sister, Sister, make haste down; -- These Roysters have set
the House in an Uproar; -- I Will only set things in order, than come to your
Lodgings and comfort you.


Gull. -- I hope if you come 'twill be for an honest end Brother.


Exit. Gull. Sir Pop. How strangly this Creature is infatuated betwixt Lust and
Zeal; This Religion is a pretty sort of deluding Perspective, it represents all
Objects of its own color; -- I have used it like a Jac-call, it hunts down the
Prey, but never goes to share; -- Well, this Surprise had like to have been
fatal; -- How the Devil came Sir Credulous in this Closet, and in that posture?
-- A Ourse upon the Disappointment: But she will continue perhaps in her Sacred
Rapture; -- I Will go to her before her Transport be settled, and renew my Court;
This Religious Twang, I perceive, is the most prevailing way of Caress; if I
carry her but at last, I have played the Hypocrite to some purpose; -- It Is
lucre that licenseth all things, I hate a Conscience must be humored. --

Mine is a Complaisant, Good Natured Toy,
Demure as City Dames, but never Coy.

Exit. SCENE II.
Enter Amazonia. Amaz. It Is strange, this dear expected man should stay, I am
all Convulsion till he comes; -- My dead, dried up Sot is now belching out his
noisome fumes, and weltring upon his Elbows amongst wet Tobaco on a slatter'd
Table; whilst I am preparing for a Luscious Brimmer of Love, with all the
restless Drought Desire can cause.


Enter Bravado. Brav. My dear Creature, if this Transgression beyond the
Period, can be atton'd with the Sacrifice of my Heart; you have kindled it with
your Eyes, and here I Will offer it.


Amaz. Indeed I wished and fretted till I saw you, -- But why these Flourishes?
I Will excuse you without this Eloquence; this is not the Language of Love and
Familiarity; -- But where were you?


Brav. Let me die, if I did not come almost directly from Sir Popular's; Madam
Charlietta

(a poison her) detained me.


Amaz. I perceive then I am neglected; -- These Men dote on new Mistresses like
new Fashions, though the old ones be both more easy and graceful. -- Well, false
man, Well.


Brav. Prithee my Dear don't pout.


Amaz. I am sure she is as ill shaped a Jone as ever was modeled by Rectifier;
then her Smile is the oddest simp'ring air; her Teeth are rusty in spite of
all the Operator's art, and fit only to be scoured with a Shooe-Brush; then she
flourishes her Fan so awkerdly; and shadows with her Patches so irregularly;
Fough -- I admire you can think on her.


Brav. Hang her a fond young Slut; she forced her Maidenhead upon me; and is
grown the most Insatiate Creature; -- I was forced to heap Sin upon Sin, and
Lie upon Lie, before I could get, and was excused from her; at last, with much
ado: -- Indeed she presented me with a Pendulum of a most ingenious fancy.


Amaz. You base, unconstant Wretch, get you gone, and replenish your feeble
drained Chine with Broths and Jellys, and away to her again.


she throws away. Brav. My Dearest! I have plentiful Reserves still; -- Let me
stifle you with the Sweets of Love.


Amaz. Well, false Man, I Will trust my Honor in your hands once more, but if
you come near her again, may all the Curses that an injured incensed Rival and
a Woman can invent, fall upon you.


Brav. But let us not delay our mutual happiness, my Dear, all things conspire
to heighten our blessing.


Amaz. Ay, -- the Cuckold snores by this time; and the next Room waits us with
all its Conveniences; -- Here take my hand --


Brav. Ha! -- What noise is this? -- Yonder Is some bustle below.


Enter a Servant. Serve. Sir, Sir, here are a Company of rude Gentlemen that
swear they will have this Room, -- One of 'em they call Mr. Flush -- They Are
coming up. --


Exit. Amaz. Oh dear -- Alas! I am undone; -- He Is my Husband's Companion, --
Run, run behind the Hangings there, whilst I go behind the Curtain, that
skreens the fire place.


They hide themselves severally. Enter Sir Credulous, Flush, Toper, and two
Bullies. Flush. Gentlemen, we are now in great Nature's Storehouse, here is
both Wine and Women; -- Let every man follow the dictates of his Inclination.
-- I declare for bowzing; let all such as are Proselytes for the great Genius
of Goodfellowship, hold up their hands.


They all hold up but Sir Credulous. Flush. What is the Knight a Heretic?


Top. -- Marry he deserves to 'be stak't to a Tobaco-pipe, and burnt in Brandy
for it.


Flush. His Spurs shall be^^l'd off, his Arms revers't, and his Posterity
attainted.


Sir Cred. Seriously Gentlemen, my temperament will not allow it; you see I am
sanguine, hot and moist; but heat is the predominant quality.


Flush. 'Sbud, is that a Carcass to be indulged, -- Come, come, disoblige it
for compliance and be drunk.


Sir Cred. O Sir, you never think of an Inflammation.


Flush. Shaw, -- What signifies it to be lukewarm a little; I would not shirk
a Glass for a general Conflagration.


Top. Wough, this is a stingy humor Sir Credulous; -- fill up your thirsty
Veins with consoling Bub, Mun; then fall down dead.


Flush. And when you are translated to Purgatory, disgorge your o'recharg'd
Stomach, and so put out the flame.


Sir Cred. A Glass or so, Gentlemen, is very inspiring, therefore rather than
reta^'d your Jollity, I Will neglect my self, and take one round.


All, O rare Sir Credulous.


Sir Cred. Now for the Quantity and Quality.


Top. Quantity! Fie, fie, no Limitations, Mun; -- We are resolved to have a
Bout on it, and agreed upon this place as the most out of my Wife's Road; -- The
Devil's in her if she finds us out here. -- What think you? --


Sir Cred. Has she taken my Drops?


Top. Ay marry, I stole 'em into her Glass at Dinner; I saw her begin to
stretch and gape presently after.


Sir Cred. They Will do her business.


Top, -- I am as dry as Touch-wood; What shall we drink?


Sir Cred. -- No sophisticated French Wine; It Is full of Tartar.


Flush. -- What say you to a spacious Bowl of Punch, Genteels.


All. -- A Bowl of Punch, a Bowl of Punch.


Top. -- Hoa -- the House -- here. --


Enter a Servant. Flush. -- Go and compound a Bowl of Punch quickly; you have
my Receipt, let it direct you; -- only remember to throw in five Quarts of
Whitewine to make up a Body.


Serve. You shall have it Sir.


Exit. Top. How we shall dust it about! Oh --


Flush. -- My Receipt is mightily in request now; They observe it altogether at
the Tower; I was the other day amongst 'em there.


Sir Cred. You would find hot service.


Flush. -- Ay, we drunk in Discipline, by the Word of Command; -- It Is the Camp
way, and a'mode now. -- But how dee like my Panegyric upon Punch, Sir
Credulous?


Sir Cred. Most ravishing, I profess.


Flush. -- 'Twas a hotheaded Flash; -- if you did but observe, the words are a
designed Bombast, which is the most natural and expressive way to describe the
lumbring confusion of a Frolic.


Sir Cred. -- Very adapt indeed, -- then the disparity of your numbers.


Flush. -- Alludes to the distraction of the Company; -- One Capers, another
Cringeth, this tumbles down, another over him, and all are jumbling about in a
various Heterocliton of humor.


Top. Yonder comes the Lovely Vessel -- Now ha'for it old Lads.


Enter the Servant with a Bowl as at a distance. -- They shout. Flush. Run the
proud Argo with all her liquit Freight aground.


He places the Bowl upon the Table. Top. Now my Souls of Brass, let us seat
our selves, and bounce it off; marry if I mind Degree, or Quality, let me never
drink more.


He sits down they after him, he takes up the Glass. Top. -- Here Is a Thimble
indeed! Wuh this will never douse us.


Flush. That! It Is like attempting to scoup drowned Zealand clear with an
Oyster-Shell; Let Us drink full ones with a Levit of Trumpets at every Health.


Sir Cred. No, no, That Is too extravagant; we'll sip out of the Bell of an
opening Cowslip to the buzzing Accents of an Humble Be.


Top. Ha ha ha, Siping! That Is very fine; -- I am mistaken if we came hither to
Sip; -- Go and fetch us a good thumping hollow Beaker, go -- Siping Qouth a',
--


Exit Servant. Flush. Prithee, it is Porterly to drink Punch out of a Beaker.


Top. -- Tell not me of your Genteel Conrtly way of Quaffing, I am for true
honest, downright drinking.


Enter Servant with a Beaker. There, there, this is the Measure.

Flush. Let that be the Standard then; I Will sound it, though 'twere as deep as
Doomsday.


Sir Cred. Seriously Gentlemen, it is too Hyperbolical; but I Will venture to
evacuate it once or twice.


1 Bully. By Styx, I scorn to refuse it.


2 Bully. And I, by Lucifer.


Flush fills and Drinks. Flush. A Health to our Royal Master.


The rest Sing, whilst he Drinks, And so round at every Health. Flush. Hah my
brave Boys! Is not this better than Plotting, and Leaguing, and Clanning and
Shamming? A Pox of these unquiet Curs, that must be yelping against Heavens
Luminary, and only because it is bright.


Sir Cred. A troublesome Crowd of Insects, that are Pestilential to the heat
that preserves 'em.


Top. That Buz like Bottl'd-Ale, and only make a noise because they are froathy;
-- Foh -- the very naming 'em furrs my Mouth; -- I must even rence it with a
Bumper or two.


( He fills twice and Drinks.) 1 Bully. -- Ah rare Toper! Thou art the Prince
of a Man.


Top. Y' Good Faith you Rogues, you see the worst of me; I only Plot how to
avoid the Slavery my Wife would Plunge me in, and to enjoy my Liberty in a
Chimney Corner, with a Pot and a Pipe before me.


2 Bully. -- By Lucifer that is reasonable enough.


Top. I tell you truth, or let this be my last.


fills and Drinks. Sir Cred. You have none of this at the University, Mr. Flush.


Flush. Yes, yes, Drinking is looked upon as a perfection there; if a young
Blade after four years Residence, has but learned to make a Supernaculum; and
as much Logic as will prove a Countryman to he a Horse, he is a good
Proficient.


Sir Cred. Indeed! -- Sleepy Jack Seaton, or honest old Hereboord's will teach
'um the latter presently.


Flush. Let Us about with it, and be sprightly my Men o'Mirth, ten Goe-down's to
you Sir Credulous.


He Drinks. Sir Cred: Generous Mr. Flush I am yours to Intoxication.


He drinks to 1st. Bully. 1 Bully. Dear Sir, your Devoted.


He drinks to 2d. Bully. 2 Bully. Dear Tom, I am thine.


He drinks to Toper. Top. Don't limit me, Mun, I am heavy, and must fall to the
bottom, marry must I.


Toper takes it off. Flush. Gallant Toper, thou shall be Canonized y' faith.


Top. -- A Saint Man!


Flush. Ay, and of as good Authority as any in the Calender's -- Shrove.
Tuesday shall be your Anniversary.


1 Bully. By Stix, his Face is like a Holiday already.


Top. Nay, but if you will honor me, make me the Prince of Drunkards.


Flush. We will; -- and your Inauguration shall be to morrow; It Is too late now
for the Solemnity.


2 Bully. We'll all be his Peers.


Flush. Ay, his Mightiness shall confer Dignities upon us all; it is usual now
adays for a private Club to frame a new Constitution.


Top. And why may not we, as well as the sober Party; -- but how far man shall
my Dominions extend?


Flush. Throughout all the Taverns, Brandy-Shops, and Alehouses, betwixt
White-Chappel and St. Giles's.


Top. Ah -- I shall be a happy Prince -- Duke Trinkelo shall be my Allie.


Flush. Myriads of Mirmidons shall defend your Reeling Mightiness from
Constable and Watch, Pillars and Posts, from Chamber-pots above, and Channels
below, and all such Hostilities.


Sir Cred. Ha ha, What, no Laws?


Flush. -- Yes, yes, but Lex bibendi, shall be Lex suprema, the rest shall be
digested into a Code.


Top. Marry, I shall be a Prince presently at this rate, I am as Drunk as a
Lord a'ready.


He looks drwsily. Flush. The other Stoup old Toast.

(He fills, Toper drinks.) Ho, hoa, -- It Is down by Stingo.


Top: Ay, if 'twill but stay,

(He wrings and pukes.) This Punch is plaguey cucutting Liquor.


He Hiccups and Throws. Flush. Ha ha ha -- run behind the Curtain there, into
the Fireplace, and disburthen.


He reels thither, draws by the Curtain, runs back, Amaz. after him, he falls,
she over him, the Company rise. Flush. Udsbodikins; how came this Incarnate
Devil here;


They both rise. Amaz. O thou lumpish, weltring Swine, thou stupid Log, --
Here Is a pickle with all my heart -- Sirrah, Beast, how came you amongst these
roaring Rake-hells, these tearing debaucht Ruffians? -- I could find to pull
those big, rouling eyes out, that stare and glow in your Fool's Noddle -- I
thought I should find out your Haunts at last.


Flush. I believe Madam we have rather found out yours, how could you slink in
hither unseen? I guess you expected somebody, you would have been civiler too.
--

( She runs at him, he goes back.) Touch me, and I Will have you stripped, and
turned down Stairs; -- Don't presume the Privilege of your Sex shall excuse you.


Amaz. Thou pitiful, profligate Shirk; -- He that gives thee but a Pot of
Brandy's thy Darling; ay, for one poor Pipe of Smoke, Thou Wilt call a dull
drousie Pluralist, a diligent sound man; a poor poatching Pettyfogger, an able
Council; a Penny Pamphleteer, an Authentic Author; or a Tooth-pick-maker a
Virtuoso; thou offscouring of the Town, how durst thou pronounce so impudently
upon me? Sirrah, I Will make you know there is never a House of Entertainment,
within the Sound of Bow bell, which I have not a Spy in -- I Will --


( Flies at him, and pulls of his Wig.) Flush knocks, enter a Servant. Flush.
-- A Cord here quickly --

(Ex. Servant Reenters with a Cord.) Now Gentlemen, if we think to continue
Company, we must resolve to tie her down to a Chair, and Gag her -- Here Is a
Gag --


Bullys. Agreed.


They Gag her and tie her down. Amaz. Tie me! Brutes, -- Rascals. --


Top. But are you sure she is fast? -- Come -- lets even take of our Liquor
peaceably and lovingly, -- A Po-Pox take her for a --


He gets to the Table and drinks alone. Flush. Ay, Gape on till your Jaws crack.

(He knocks, enter Servant.) Sirrah, how came this Fury here.


Serve. I know not, Sir.


Flush. Get you gone you Pimping Rogue, and let her down into the next Room
through the Trap-door, that Devise to escape Constable; -- if you untie her
Sirrah, I Will confound you worse than the Pox has done.


Sir Cred. Sure there has been some default, else my Guttae Soporiferae had
charmed her as fast as an Incantation.


The Door opens, she sinks and makes a noise, they laugh. Flush. Now Gentlemen,
since the Bawd of the house has informed of the Company, let us batter the
Windows, flash the Hangings, break the Chairs, and fight our selves out in the
Uproar.


1 Buly. We'll rout 'em by Jove.


2 Bully. Hey for a scouring Frolic.


Flush and two Bullys draw. Flush. Now for the Onset; -- Come my Squires,
follow your Knight,


(They go to the place where Bravado absconds.) Flush. Here let us demolish all
before us, and rip the Hangings up in order.


He goes to thrust in his Sword, Bravado breaks out. Brav. I protest I Will make
one with you my honest old rending Rogues; -- let us pull down the house, and
crush the Sinful Crew.


Flush. Bravado! So so -- the Mistery's explained now; Toper, I give you Joy of
your stately branching head.


Top. -- Wuh, What Is the matter man?


Flush. Oh nothing, nothing; -- You are only Cuckolded, and by this same honest
Gentleman here.


Top. Marry, but I Am mistaken if he escape so; -- make him drink half a dozen
Bumpers for his pains.


Sir Cred. Ha ha, Seriously Mr. Toper bears it with the indifference of a
Stoic.


Brav. Gentlemen, you are well disposed; but let me die, I don't understand
you; -- I had an Assignation here, with a Person of Quality, and expected her
every Minute; a Devil on your unseasonable Invasion, It Is at least a hundred
Broads out of my way.


Flush. But why did you abscond, we are all known to you?


Brav. -- You came poud'ring up Stairs with such Authority, I was afraid you
had been a Legion of Bailiffs.


Flush. But why did you not appear upon acquaintance with our Voices?


Brav. Why' Pox I thought you would oblige me to Drink, and my Palate is so
Debauched, since my last Randezvous with my Lord, that any liquid thing's a
Potion to me.


Flush. All these Wheadles will not take; -- But to show you how tender I am of
these Amorous Miscarriages, I Will prevail upon the Cuckold and Company to leave
you to the Complement of your Intrigue. -- Come, Gentlemen, let us Troop.


Top. Wuh, the Bo-bowl is not out yet Man.


Flush. Do but you get rolled down Stairs, and you shall have as much as you
can swill. -- Come, it is late.


Exeunt, leading Toper, two Bullys Singing. Brav. Now must I go and enlarge my
unfortunate Herion that suffers in Limbo; then our twisted Souls shall relish
all the boundless Joys, that Passion endeared by Disappointment can contribute.

The Drunkard is the kind contented Ass,
He never Resents, but when you take his Glass.

ACT V.
SCENE I. A Bed Chamber.
Enter Toper Drowsily Top. WHat a shame's the matter with me trow? -- I am as
Sick as a Horse, and I Am sure I had not above six Quarts 'i my Guts -- Foh --
here is the strangest taste 'i my Mouth methinks ( Spits) marry I think my
throat 's clogged quite up with Rubbish -- oa -- it is as rough as bad ways in
frosty Weather; -- How my Pulses heave, and my Arms shake and dindle 'i. Oh!
How a good draught of small Beer would hiss down! ( He stretches) But it is near
morning sure -- they are not up 'i the House -- I never was thus out 'i tune
before; I have caught cold under the Table whilst I slept, although they had laid
three or four Chairs upon me; -- and these one would have thought might have kept
me warm. -- Is there never a Couch in this Room think ye, nor a Fireplace
strow'd with Rushes ( he gropes about) What Is this -- a Bed -- Ah! -- this is
comfortable -- I shall be a happy Man if Flush find me not out and unkennel me:
-- Marry, I Will 'een take a comfortable Nap; then rise up Fresh, and slay 'em
every Soul.


(He lies down.) Enter Servant, with a Candle after him, Bravado and Amazonia.
Amaz. Are you sure Sweetheart we may be secure here.


Serve. -- Ay Madam; -- He, they call Toper, is lying dead Drunk under the
Parlor Table, I have newly bolted him in; the rest tumble together in the same
condition above in the Garret.


Brav. Here -- be you Sentinel below?


(Gives him Money.) (Ex. Servant. Amaz. -- But did you tell the Company that
some Body had released me; and that I was gone, say you?


Brav. Ay, and they believed it.


Amaz. But did not they suspect us, think you?


Brav. -- No, no, -- I made every thing clear.


Amaz. -- Now let me tell you such a Transaction, as will heighten our
Appetites to the delicious Banquet.


Brav. -- Mine, my lovely Angel is so eager already, that Artifice cannot
improve it; -- I am all Heat and Youth; my Eyes tremble, my Breast pants and
throws; my Nerves frisk, my Breath quivers, and a kindly generous Fire thrills
in my Veins.


Amaz. -- Whilst I am ready to receive your kindest Tenders with an equal
warmth.


Brav. Let Us hasten therefore, to let loose our bounding Passions to their
absolute Range and Forage.


Amaz. I am all Compliance.


( Brav. lays his Sword and Hat upon the Table, makes the Door fast, takes her
hand.) Brav. Now my Angel, let me lead thee to the Stage of love, to act the
softest part that ever was uttered in broken sighs.


He leads her to the Bed side, she withdraws the Curtain, spies Toper. Amaz.
Ha! my Husband! --


Toper speaks as in sleep. Top. -- Pish Man -- the Cup does not stand at me --
What -- are you here Sweetheart?


Amaz. signs to Brav. to go out. Amaz. Thou Eternal Sot! -- I Will smother-thee
in the Bed-Cloaths*


She muffles his Head and holds him down, Brav. opens the door and is running
out, but is stopped by Flush and two Bullies. Flush. Are you here! -- Come, you
shall back with us.


Brav. Good honest dear Rogue excuse me; I am sleepy, I must to Bed.


Flush. What, you are afraid to disoblige your Complexion: Come prithee, we
want a fourth man till Toper be cast up.


They drag him in. Amaz. Heavens! -- I am discovered -- What shall I do?


Aside. Flush. -- Ay! -- The Lady Amazonia! -- Your Servant Madam, you will
find out your Husbands Haunts, I perceive.


Amaz. My Husband! I scorn it, I disown him; my Vow, in the Church was extorted
from me, and therefore it cannot oblige; I always hated him, and had rather
throw my self into the Embraces of a Leper, crusted all over with an uncurable
Scurf, than into his feeble Paralitick Arms.


Toper rises from the Bed. Top. Marry Sweetheart, an you before that, I am as
indifferent as your self; I had rather lay my Lips to the Bung-hole of a
Beer-Barrel, than Salute the finest of your Sex, and there is for you again.


Flush. No wonder she opposed your keeping Company with this rigor; it seems,
that too great plenty of Liquor, by a common kind of an Antiperistasis has
dried you; -- You are no farther useful then only to supply her with Money and
Opportunities; this is the Spark that relieves her with all other satisfactions.


Top. O Sir, much good may do you; you are happy, you have done more than ever
I could do; -- I could never please her, by my Faith.


Amaz. Thou! no truly I think not; I never loved to have you come yawning in my
face, and infesting me with your undecocted Lees of Ale, a Hogo strong enough
to fetch one out of a Fit of the Epilepsie; -- out upon it -- A Dray-horse were
as good a Bedfellow.


Flush. Since your Ladyship's so very nice and delicate, I would advise you to
avoid these gross Hogo's, and devote your self altogether to this rare,
calcined Piece.


as toward Brav. Top. O happy Opportunity! Gentlemen, you are Witnesses of her
Infamy; Now let us go and drink a dozen and consult over it about a Divorce.


Amaz. Ay, do, do, the Law will force you to allow me Alimony, but if it should
not; I have provided against all Extremities, and will never see you more; --
so a fig for you -- Adieu Cuckold -- Come, my Dear. --


Exit. Brav. leading of Amaz. 1 Bully. -- Prodigious Impudence!


Top. Now my Ranting Rogues, let us go and Carous for Joy; now I may tipple
undisturbed, and be accountable to no body, ye Rascals; -- I Will never sleep
without a Roundlet of Brandy under my head, and when I die let overflowing Cups
drop tears of my Tomb -- Hah Boys --


Jumps. Flush. Whilst my finger draws out a liquid Epitaph.


Top. -- I shall love thee my old Trojan whilst I live, for trapaning my fierce
Mrs. Damnable thus; -- I shall faith. Flush We were forced to corrupt the Scout.


Top. -- But hark you mun -- Who is this same young Fellow that Sparks her
thus?


Flush* The most White-liver'd Coward that ever took advantage; and a modish
sort of a Fop that is proud to be reckoned a Debauchee; -- He Will boast of his
Venereal Misfortunes, as so many Badges of Immortal Honor; and is as proud of
a Surgeon's Bill, as a Noble-man's Chaplain is of his Scarf; -- There Is not a
Great Person about Court, but is his Familiar, he pretends; Nor a taking
Nameless Pamphlet, which he does not adopt; -- He Is a --


Top. So mun so, we have had enough of him here, let us discourse the rest of
his Qualities over a Glass; -- we'll go to Harry's, he is an honest Fellow,
he will broach a fresh run for us. -- Come, my Three Merry Boys, I shall be a
Prince indeed now. -- Hey Boys. --


Flush. Ay, and as absolute as your Draught; you shall be no more Homager to
your quondam Imperial Confort; we all swear Fealty to your Diadem; and Brimmers
shall be tendered as the Test; -- he that knocks under board shall be looked
upon as a Dissenter, and amerc't a Penal Groat the next Morning. -- Come. --


Exeunt, SCENE II. Sir Popular's House.
Enter Roman and Juliana. Romans No wonder, Madam, your so soon this Morning,
since this is almost the last hour you can call your self your own; sure your
Barbarous Uncle will revoke the too severe Doom.


Jul. No, -- he will urge it with all the rigor that lucre can provoke him to;
-- he knows my aversion forfeits half my Portion; but rather than contract a
holy Vow with any other than your dear self, I Will resign my life too, as a
burden without ye.


Romans Alas, my wondrous Creature, I am each way unworthy of so divine a
Blessing; my Fortunes are as mean as my Deserts; -- I have never a gaudy Coach
graced with a Rank of Lacquies to attend you; no supple French Valet calls me
Master; I have no swelling Titles, no fawning Parasites, no --


Jul. But Nature has enrich't you with Treasures more valuable, and though the
Remains of my divided Portion will not be an equivalent to your Merits, I am sure
my Passion will.


Romans How could I see the loveliest thing my heart ever knew, in a station
beneath her too great Worth and Beauty! No, my sole delight, rather than throw
away your Excellencies upon one would undo you, surrender your self up to your
Uncles Pleasure, and Marry the Party he designs* he is rich, and can support you
in an Equipage sultable to your Fortunes.


Jul. And can you be so unkind as to leave me now after all your large
Professions? Pray don't; -- I cannot suffer whilst you are near me; we'll enjoy
more Wealth in one another's Love, than all the World can give; and when my
slender Competency fails, I can Limn, Embroyder, work Lace, and do a thousand
such pretty trifling Knacks.


Romans Thou Mirror of Perfections! Thy goodness has amazed me; -- When Love
goes to draw Seraphick Sweetness with a Cherub's Face, Thou shall sit to the
little Genius.


Jul. -- Then since you think I deserve you, Why de'e grudge me the Present of
your self.


Romans Madam, I am no more my own; though I fear the gift may be fatal; if the
visible Universe were mine to give you, I should think it too mean a Jointure.


Enter Carol. Carol. Indeed Cousin, the Knight will be here presently; it is
time now to settle your looks into a Marriage Figure.


Jul. -- Is Sir Popular resolved upon it still?


Carol. -- Ay, ay, -- he is unalterable in such a case as this; he expects
you will rather be nick't of your 5000 l. than consent to the Match.


Romans Some of these Aldermen have Consciences as large as their Charter.


Jul. I have not seen this Sir Credulous above thrice; the last time was
yesterday, and then I used him so, I thought he would have made no more Advances.


Carol. Truly he resented your Carriage, after his way; I found him in a
moderate Foam.


Jul. And did not you tell me he resolved I should die for him, rather than he
would prevent it with one kind word?


Carol. -- I did so, and more then that, he was so sweet upon me I was half
afraid he would have Ladyfi'd me.


Jul. -- Why such a change then?


Carol. Sir Popular was with him before five this Morning, and tampered with
his Fool-ship then, I fancy.


Jul. They Are both very quick.


Romans Ay, Matrimony now adays, requires as little warning as in the Playhouse;
where the Parties shall make the first Interview in the Fourth Act, and Marry
in the Fifth.


Enter Shuffle. Shuf. Ladies, your humble Servant: this, I understand is like
to be a jovial day.


Romans Ay, Sir Popular intends to have a band of Fiddles toward the Evening.


Shuf. No, no, he is for none of your Cat-gut Minstrelsie; but prithee Roman,
What pretenses can you have here now?


Romans Why truly Shuffle as many as ever I had.


Shuf. Well, but this is no time for fooling; -- in short, the business is this
--


Sir Pop. Marries this very day, and is now at Sir Credulous Trinket's.


Romans Very good.


Shuf. He stays to bring Sir Credulous along with him, in order to Marry Madam
Juliana at the same time.


Jul. But he shall find he cannot dispose of me.


Shuf. But he can dispose of part of your Portion then, and that consideration
will satisfy him as well. -- Pray Madam, let me understand your Circumstances
in this case, it is possible I may relieve you.


1 Bully. -- Prodigious Impudence!


Top. Now my Ranting Rogues, let us go and Carous for Joy; now I may tipple
undisturbed, and be accountable to no body, ye Rascals; -- I Will never sleep
without a Roundlet of Brandy under my head, and when I die let overflowing Cups
drop tears of my Tomb -- Hah Boys --


Jumps. Flush. Whilst my finger draws out a liquid Epitaph.


Top. -- I shall love thee my old Trojan whilst I live, for trapaning my fierce
Mrs. Damnable thus; -- I shall faith*


Flush We were forced to corrupt the Scout.


Top. -- But hark you mun -- Who is this same young Fellow that Sparks her
thus?


Flush* The most White-liver'd Coward that ever took advantage; and a modish
sort of a Fop that is proud to be reckoned a Debauchee; -- He Will boast of his
Venereal Misfortunes, as so many Badges of Immortal Honor; and is as proud of
a Surgeon's Bill, as a Noble-man's Chaplain is of his Scarf; -- There Is not a
Great Person about Court, but is his Familiar, he pretends; Nor a taking
Nameless Pamphlet, which he does not adopt; -- He Is a --


Top. So mun so, we have had enough of him here, let us discourse the rest of
his Qualities over a Glass; -- we'll go to Harry's, he is an honest Fellow,
he will broach a fresh run for us. -- Come, my Three Merry Boys, I shall be a
Prince indeed now. -- Hey Boys. --


Flush. Ay, and as absolute as your Draught; you shall be no more Homager to
your quondam Imperial Consort; we all swear Fealty to your Diadem; and Brimmers
shall be tendered as the Test; -- he that knocks under board shall be looked
upon as a Dissenter, and amerc't a Penal Groat the next Morning. -- Come. --


Exeunt* SCENE II. Sir Popular' s House.
Enter Roman and Juliana. Romans No wonder, Madam, your so soon this Morning,
since this is almost the last hour you can call your self your own; sure your
Barbarous Uncle will revoke the too severe Doom.


Jul. No, -- he will urge it with all the rigor that lucre can provoke him to;
-- he knows my aversion forfeits half my Portion; but rather than contract a
holy Vow with any other than your dear self, I Will resign my life too, as a
burden without ye.


Romans Alas, my wondrous Creature, I am each way unworthy of so divine a
Blessing; my Fortunes are as mean as my Deserts; -- I have never a gaudy Coach
graced with a Rank of Lacquies to attend you; no supple French Valet calls me
Master; I have no swelling Titles, no fawning Parasites, no --


Jul. But Nature has enrich't you with Treasures more valuable, and though the
Remains of my divided Portion will not be an equivalent to your Merits, I am sure
my Passion will.


Romans How could I see the loveliest thing my heart ever knew, in a station
beneath her too great Worth and Beauty! No, my sole delight, rather than throw
away your Excellencies upon one would undo you, surrender your self up to your
Uncles Pleasure, and Marry the Party he designs; he is rich, and can support you
in an Equipage suitable to your Fortunes.


Jul. And can you be so unkind as to leave me now after all your large
Professions? Pray don't; -- I cannot suffer whilst you are near me; we'll enjoy
more Wealth in one another's Love, than all the World can give; and when my
slender Competency fails, I can Limn, Embroyder, work Lace, and do a thousand
such pretty trifling Knacks.


Romans Thou Mirror of Perfections! Thy goodness has amazed me; -- When Love
goes to draw Seraphick Sweetness with a Cherub's Face, Thou shall sit to the
little Genius.


Jul. -- Then since you think I deserve you, Why de'e grudge me the Present of
your self.


Romans Madam, I am no more my own; though I fear the gift may be fatal; if the
visible Universe were mine to give you, I should think it too mean a Jointure.


Enter Carol. Carol. Indeed Cousin, the Knight will be here presently; it is
time now to settle your looks into a Marriage Figure.


Jul. -- Is Sir Popular resolved upon it still?


Carol. -- Ay, ay, -- he is unalterable in such a case as this; he expects
you will rather be nick't of your 5000 l. than consent to the Match.


Romans Some of these Aldermen have Consciences as large as their Charter.


Jul. I have not seen this Sir Credulous above thrice; the last time was
yesterday, and then I used him so, I thought he would have made no more Advances.


Carol. Truly he resented your Carriage, after his way; I found him in a
moderate Foam.


Jul. And did not you tell me he resolved I should die for him, rather than he
would prevent it with one kind word?


Carol. -- I did so, and more then that, he was so sweet upon me I was half
afraid he would have Ladyfi'd me.


Jul. -- Why such a change then?


Carol. Sir Popular was with him before five this Morning, and tampered with
his Fool-ship then, I fancy.


Jul. They Are both very quick.


Romans Ay, Matrimony now adays, requires as little warning as in the Playhouse;
where the Parties shall make the first Interview in the Fourth Act, and Marry
in the Fifth.


Enter Shuffle. Shuf. Ladies, your humble Servant: this, I understand is like
to be a jovial day.


Romans Ay, Sir Popular intends to have a band of Fiddles toward the Evening.


Shuf. No, no, he is for none of your Cat-gut Minstrelsie; but prithee Roman,
What pretenses can you have here now?


Romans Why truly Shuffle as many as ever I had.


Shuf. Well, but this is no time for fooling; -- in short, the business is this
--


Sir Pop. Marries this very day, and is now at Sir Credulous Trinket's.


Romans Very good.


Shuf. He stays to bring Sir Credulous along with him, in order to Marry Madam
Juliana at the same time.


Jul. But he shall find he cannot dispose of me.


Shuf. But he can dispose of part of your Portion then, and that consideration
will satisfy him as well. -- Pray Madam, let me understand your Circumstances
in this case, it is possible I may relieve you.


Jul. Thus Sir; -- 5000 l. was left me by an Uncle his Elder Brother, upon
condition I should consent to Marry the first Match that Sir Popular offered
me; otherwise, the Legacy was to fall to him, provided it could appear, that he
had only propounded my Fortune, and no indirect means to himself.


Romans It Is exactly as I represented it to you yesterday.


Shuf. -- Ay, and observe what use I have made on it already; -- you must know,
he has shamed Sir Credulous out of a 1000 l. this Morning; and by my
procurement, has quitted all his future Claims to Madam Juliana's Legacy by a
General Release, which is now in Sir Credulous's Custody.


Romans -- Well, -- but Sir Credulous will re-deliver it, I suppose, upon the
breach of the Match.


Shuf. -- You shall hear -- I have persuaded him to present it to the Lady,
after her consent; as a means to work upon her Ingenuity, by making her
Mistress of her own Fortunes.


Romans So she must seem to give her assent.


Shuf. Ay, Madam, be sure you sweeten him up as if you were his own; I Will
contrive to Spirit him out of the way, till Sir Popular be Married, I Will
warrant you.


Romans There will be no need on it; she may absent her self, after it is in her
Possession.


Shuf. But de'e see; -- I am interested in Sir Popular's Marriage, and must
endeavor to maintain a plausible understanding betwixt Sir Credulous and him,
till the Ceremony in the Church be consummated; -- in short, I have some Money
due from Sir Popular for a secret service.


Romans I partly apprehend you; -- so that, you would secure Sir Credulous, till
you had received your Sum, least his disturbance might be of ill consequence to
you.


Shuf. Ay, ay, -- Now, Sir Popular having a 1000 l. by him, he will discharge me
without any farther trouble, rather than have me expose him.


Romans Besides, -- his contracting with Sir Credulous upon such an account, though
indirectly, will invalidate his Title, by the Condition of the Will.


Shuf. But prithee don't you be seen here, till you receive a Summons from me;
-- I Will to the Bridge, and order her to detain Sir Popular, till the other
Knight be disposed off.


Exit Shuffle. Carol. This Mr. Shuffle is such another; he will overreach my
Uncle if it be possible to do it.


Romans Ay, indeed, there is a hopeful prospect of circumventing him now; but it
will be convenient for the better circulation of the business, that I absent my
self.


Jul. My heart, you will remember the faith that is betwixt us.


Romans How unseasonably you remind me; -- Can the Tenant forget the Service he
holds all his Lands by? Or a Beggar the needy moving Cant that sustains him?
But you could not doubt me sure; your Idea Sollicits for you, and never leaves
me; it distracts my thoughts, and breaks my slumbers; I must rove about like a
restless Ghost till I see you again.


Jul. -- And when must I expect you, my Thoughts?


Romans -- About an hour hence I hope; -- till then the whole Hierarchy protect
you.


Exit Roman. Carol. I fancy Cousin this love is a pretty pleasant Babble;
there is such dying Leers, such unaccountable Gestures, such soft confusion
amongst you. -- Methinks I could wish for a little experience of that antic
Foolery, only for an opportunity to laugh at my self.


Jul. Could not Mr. Bravado bring you acquainted with it?


Carol. No, -- He has a Quarrel against me.


Jul. -- Some Love Skirmish.


Carol. -- He Swears, he will never see me again, which Oath I hope he will observe.


Jul. Does he suspect the Humor you past upon him Yesterday?


Carol. I almost fancy so; -- some had been fooling with the Visards, and so
Bug-bear'd both of 'em out of the Closet, else I had trick't 'em neatly.


Jul. But you must leave these Merriments now; -- our new Aunt's severity will not
dispense with 'em.


Carol. -- We shall be worse pestered now with a Religious Din, than ever;
there'll be such screwing of Faces, and drawing of Sentences through the Nose,
amongst the Assembly. -- Well, if she don't prove a right one in the
conclusion, I am mistaken.


Enter Sir Popular, and Sir Credulous. Sir Pop. Kins-woman, I have brought you
the Gentleman I design for your Husband, and I conceive he may be a
proportionable Match for you; -- Therefore prepare for Marriage this very day.


Jul. -- The notice is very short, Sir.


Sir Cred. Let this be the day Lady by all means; the Asterisms are in a very
amicable aspect, and seem to be our Genial Torches; -- if we should decline
this Invitation, perhaps their future position might continue malevolent out of
revenge.


Sir Pop. Kinswoman, I charge you be advised by me, and be joined forthwith;
He Is a good man, and has a comfortable Fortune, I conceive.


Jul. Sir, I never knew how to disobey you.


Sir Pop. In earnest, very meekly answered; -- Well, I have some Negotiations
to look after; after I have attended these, we'll all go together, and dispatch
the pious Affair. -- Hem --


Exit Sir Pop. Carol. Then Sir, you have forgot your Asseverations to me?


Sir Cred. -- Seriously, Sweet Madam, I was assailed with such violence, in
this fair Ladies behalf, by my worthy Friend Sir Popular that I am not empowered
to disoblige him.


Jul. So rather then be uncivil to him, you will do injustice to her; -- -- O
good Sir, let not me in the least be the cause of such an Immortality!


Carol. Fie Cousin; -- here is a coldness indeed, and such approaching Joys in
prospect! -- Believe me, there is no other engagement betwixt us, than the
obligation of common Civility.


Sir Cred. Indeed, Fair Lady, I must confess, your Cousin was not thought
unworthy of those respectful Tenders you neglected yesterday; but upon second
thoughts, I did believe your ill-advis'd Behavior to be the effects of your
Modesty, and do therefore remit your miscarriage.


Jul. 'Twere pity Sir, to trespass on so good a Nature.


Sir Cred. Seriously, most excellent Being, Choler never predominates with me,
I can allow for Sublunary Failures.


Carol. -- Or else you would Massacr'd Bravado yesterday.


Sir Cred. He Is an abusive Gentleman, and did impose a little too much upon my
Mediocrity.


Carol. -- Have you seen him since, Sir?


Sir Cred. Seriously, fine Lady, no; -- I was Arrested by a Gang of good
Fellows; they would have me make one with 'em; -- 'Twas past Ten of the Clock
when I left 'em, I could not endure it any longer; there was such Drinking, and
storming, and scuffling; -- Here lay a Hat, there a Wig, here one lay supine,
there another; -- I profess you might have seen as various a Horchpotch as in a
Giblet Pie.


Jul. But don't you find your self indisposed this Morning, Sir?


Sir Cred. The Emulsion has cooled me a little, but I am cloudy still; else I
had invented some uncommon curiosity, for the Illustration of our Nuptial
Solemnity.


Jul. -- Some Mask, or Fireworks?


Sir Cred. No, no, these are dull -- A pair of Turtles supporting a Pageant
that represents the Solitary Phoenix, first warbling out an Epithalamium, and
then expiring in a Spicy Flame, would be a high Conceit.


Carol. You have Traveled, Sir, I fancy.


Sir Cred. O very far, and altogether in search of Nature, which I found at
last in spite of all her Mazes, and am now improving her into an Art.


Carol. Is it possible, Sir?


Sir Cred. Questionless; -- I am now teaching a Magpy to discourse in form, a
Snail to walk erect, a Sammon to become Amphibious, and graze in Medows; -- In
short, I am teaching Nature to be unnatural.


Carol. And has wrought the Experiment upon himself.


Aside. Jul. -- You Will out-doe the Greshamites.


Sir Cred. O, they are a Phegmatick Society.


Carol. -- Sure your Education has been costly, Sir Credulous?


Sir Cred. Costly! -- Ay, I think it has: -- So much at Amsterdam for learning
to eat a Lobster; so much at Paris for mounting a Kite, so much at Madrid for
scourging a Top --


Jul. -- Your own Country might have accomplished you with these Perfections.


Sir Cred. O you are much mistaken, fair Madam; -- your Foreigners are more
polite a great deal; there is not a Curiosity Master in England, let me tell you
so much.


Jul. Why, Sir, is the breaking up of a Lobster a Curiosity?


Sir Cred. A choice one believe me -- But now for my more solid and substantial
Sciences; -- There Is first --


Enter Shuffle. Shuf. May I give you Joy, Sir Credulous?


Sir Cred. You may antidate your Salutation, if you please.


Shuffle takes a part with Carol. Jul. -- Now there is some appearance of a
Delivery from him, and all his Odious Impertinence.


Aside. Carol. We'll leave you with this Gentleman, Sir; -- your Brides Dress
must be refined a little.


(Exrunt.) Shuf. Have you presented your Lady with Sir Popular's discharge yet?


Sir Cred. Seriously I had forgot.


Shuf. -- O fie, -- run after her with it -- quick --


Sir Credulous runs out, and Reenters. Sir Cred. -- I forced it into her hand;
-- she expects it is some Song, I Will warrant you; -- She loves me extremely, I
knew the vertueo' the Philter was irresistible.


Shuf. Udds me! Now you talk of Philters; -- Who de'e think did me the honor
to take notice of me this Morning?


Sir Cred. Who, pray?


Shuf. -- The famed Astrologer, Rabbie Nathan, born a Jew, but bred a Chaldean
for some time; -- you must be acquainted with his Fame certainly.


Sir Cred. O Sir, who can be a Stranger to it? Would our Personal Acquaintance
were as great.


Shuf. He Is at present hard by; I Will send the Footboy to him to desire his
Company here.


( Exit Shuffle.) Reenters. Sir Cred We should have sent in more formality to
such a Personage as he is.


Shuf. -- He Is a most obliging Man in his way; -- I am confident he will come, if
he be not gone to the Synagogue; -- it seems there is some Jewish Rite
performed there to day.


Sir Cred. Has he any English?


Shuf. -- Yes, but almost as broken as his Nation.


Sir Cred. -- I have tome little smattering of Hebrew, but none of Chaldy.


Shuf. No! why the Radix is altogether the same; Chaldy was only the more
Courtly Dialect.


Sir Cred. -- But is his English intelligible?


Shuf. -- Yes, only a little harsh and broad. -- He Is here --


Enter the Quack in a Fur Cap, and shag'd Gown. Quack. Hail Rabbie Shoffle.


Shuf. All Hail most Honorable Prophet.


Quack. -- I am hoonly a Magus haan dee Divine by Causes naatouraal.


He looks earnestly upon Sir Cred. Sir Cred. Mr. Rabby, I shall think my self
highly honored, if your Reverence will condescend to Dine with me.


Quack. Nay, I neever eat with the hun-circumcis'd; I smell no Christian Pork.


Shuf. -- If this Rogue don't forget his Lesson, we shall have success.


Quack looks in Sir Credulous's hand. Quack. I Swear, thou haast ha mole hin
the hollow of thy haam.


Sir Cred. Seriously I have so; is it his skill in Palmistry that directs him,
think we?


Quack. Thou do purpose to take to thy self a Wife before the sixth hour.


Sir Cred. I profess, a most Incomparable Man.


Quack. Nay, nay, -- The Plaanets, aan the Fowls of the Aar, aan the Flaame,
aan the Smook, aan the Entrails, aan the Shears, aan the Ompha do forbid thee.


Sir Cred. Ay! -- Then my Calculation was not exact.


Shuf. -- Rabbie's Infallible; -- there has been some mistake in your Scheme.


Quack. Louk even this Glass, aan thou shaalt behold the Revolution of thy days;
It waas the South-sayer Uzzi's, whou waas ouf the Tribe ouf Lettle Benjamin.


He gives Sir Cred. a Perspective, Sir Cred. looks in it, Shuf. signs the Quack
to Sir Cred's Pockets, Quack feels the outside, and shakes his Head. Sir Cred.
I profess Rabby, I can scarce discern any thing.


Quack. -- That ees because thou waants my Vestments; cloth thy saalf even
them, aan thy Fortune shaall appear; they were Consecrated when I sojourned in
the Saandy Desert, aand have a Proognosticating Quality.


Sir Cred. I beseech you most Reverend Rabbie, let me try 'em. -- A Profound
Man!


Aside. Sir Cred. puts off his Coat and Breeches gives'em to Quack, puts on his
Breeches and Gown.


Shuf. Come, Sir Credulous I Will help you to hold it steady.


He lays his Arm about Sir Cred's Neck, Quack rifles his Breeches Pockets, and
slips out. Sir Cred. I profess, I can discern nothing, but a kind of a
glimmering Confusion, -- Most Excellent Rabby.


turns about. Shuf. Ha! -- What now! -- He Is Vanished, as I live.


Sir Cred. -- Heavens shield us! -- Indeed I thought the House shook. --
Strange! --


Shuf. Your Clothes are Vanished with him too; -- Are not they?


Sir Cred. Ha. -- No, -- I see 'em there --


Sir Cred. takes up his Breeches. Sir Cred. Ay! -- My Breeches are light,
methinks -- Heavens! -- He Is gone with a Hundred Pieces, besides Medals and
other Movables.


Shuf. It cannot be sure; -- marry he is a Jew indeed.


Sir Cred. -- A Pox Rabby him, would there were a Hogs-pudding in his Belly.


Shuf. -- See what he has left you in Exchange. in his Prognosticating Pockets.


Sir Cred. gropes, and pulls out a Bill. Sir Cred. -- What Is here --

(Reads.) -- At the Ignoramus-Head in Cabal-Corner, near Treason-street, --
Lodges the much noted Astrologer, Rabbie Nathan the Chaldean, he Resolves
Questions, Calculates Nativities, and performs other Secrets, and is to be
spoke with at his own Lodgings, from Nine till Eleaven, by all such as will
make trial of his Art.


Shuf. Here Is a Cheat! -- We'll have it Recorded at Filchers-Hall amongst the
Memoirs of the Pick-pockets.


Sir Cred. Is there no way think you to countermine this Typical Rogue?


Shuf. Your best way will be to go directly to Mr. Zeal's the Constables, you
remember where I went in, when we parted the other day.


Sir Cred. Ay, Very well.


Shuf. Charge him along with you to Rabby's Lodgings, and if you find him
there, take him up.


Sir Cred. But I shall be too late for my other concern.


Shuf. -- No, no, Rabby does not lodge far off; -- It Is true, the place is
Obscure, but Mr. Zeal's acquainted there, he will find it out -- Make haste,
never stay to alter your Habit.


Sir Cred. I approve of your advice, and will about it with -- all Expedition.


Exit. Sir Cred. Shuf. I must help him to his Movables again, else the Humor
would look a little pilfering, and base.


Enter Carolietta and Juliana. Carol. We conveyed your Conjurer out a*doors* --
What is he, pray Sir?


Shuf. A Quacking Bill-poster by profession; I was a little indebted to him,
and Sir Credulous, I thank him has discharged the trifle.


Jul. How have you disposed of the poor Innocent Knight Sir?


Shuf. I have furbisht him out in the Garb of a Grecian (though he believes
it is the Habit of an Hebrew, and have directed him to a Constable that will
secure him, I Am sure.


Jul. Without any pretense?


Shuf. You must know, I prepossest him this Morning, that there was a Jesuit,
one Father Wildfire, about Town, and that I was to be in Company with him
about ten of the Clock, and would endeavor some occasion to betray him into
his power.


Jul. So the Constable will have him before Authority?


Shuf. No, I advised him to secure him till I came; -- The design on it was, to
get Sir Popular Married in the mean time.


Jul. You need not have given your self so much trouble, -- It seems, my Uncle
was impatient, he is gone to Church already, and the Ceremony almost over by
this time.


Shuf. Happy News! -- I Will away and rescue Sir Credulous, and be here again
presently. -- Your Servant Ladies.


Exit. Jul. Truly I am very much obliged to this Gentleman for his Activity
upon my account.


Carol. I Will swear he is an Ingenious, good Natured Man; have you not observed
how he would rail against the times with Sir Popular, and be so serious and
concerned all the time; then turn his back, and fashion a Treacherous Smile; --
Well, methinks I could fancy his Humor.


Jul. So Cousin, you are coming on I find; this Approbation of his Humor, is
preliminary to a Passion for his Person.


Carol. Indeed, a bold conclusion from such slender premises; -- Is that your
Love-Sophistry?


Enter Shuffle. Shuf. 'Twill be convenient, Madam, that you withdraw; Sir
Credulous is coming up.


Exit. Carol. and Jul. Enter at the other door Sir Credulous. Shuf. You have
made a quick return, Sir Credulous.


Sir Cred. -- My Entertainment did not Invite me to stay, I Will promise you.


Shuf. -- What was the matter pray?


Sir Cred. -- Why, I was almost Murdered amongst 'em; -- The Constable was not
within, and when I desired one of his Prentices to direct me to Rabby's
Lodgings, he said there was no such place in the City, but houted at me, and
exposed me to the fury of the Rabble, that scowr'd after me with Bones and
broken Bricks, and if I had not most nimbly approach't this Asylum, they had
certainly demolisht me.


Shuf. -- Indeed their behavior was a little rude to a person of your Quality.


Sir Cred. -- Seriously I think it is my fortune to fall into the hands of Jews
to day; they tell me below, that Sir Popular is gone to perform his Conjugal
Rite.


Shuf. Ay, and Madam Juliana too.


Sir Cred. And I here? -- It cannot be. -- Pray, explain your meaning.


Shuf. -- Why then, she is most certainly another Man's Wife.


Sir Cred. -- My Lady another Man's Wife say you?


Shuf. -- Ay, indeed; -- and therefore I persuade my self, that this practice
was agreed upon betwixt Rabby and Sir Popular, to hurry you into a confusion,
and so present him with an opportunity of stealing away to Church without ye.


Sir Cred. Ay, ay, there lay the Intrigue, -- I find then Sir Popular has
abused me.


Shuf. If I deal ingeniously with you Sir Credulous, believe it to be the
effects of my good Wishes; therefore to be plain; you have exposed your self so
notoriously by doting upon every worthless trifle, and busying your Brain
about such odd Fantastic Queries, that every needy Sharping Rook discovers
your blind side, and serves his ends upon you.


Sir Cred. I hope you will not condemn my Emulation for knowledge.


Shuf. -- First, recompose your Mind, and endeavor to know more of the World;
leave your nice Contemplations, and observe the Public; you will soon discover
that my advice was seasonable, take my word.


Sir Cred. I profess to you, I do a little fear, I have been imposed upon of
late; I Will therefore scrutinize into the Manners of Men, frequent Gaming
Houses, Bowling-Greens, and all such places of Concourse.


Shuf. Continue your Resolution.


Sir Cred. But how shall I proceed with Sir Popular, I would have him notify'd?


Shuf. Come, I Will direct you.


Exeunt ambo. Scene changes to a Dining Room.
Enter Gullman and Faith. Gull. How do I become my Honor Wench?


Faith. -- Wench! I must now be Mistress Faith, and your Ladiship's Woman.


Gull. But did you observe with what solemnity Mr. Shuffle gave me Joy?


Faith. Ay; -- I Will swear it happened well of his side, he has got 500 l. in
Gold of Sir Popular.


Gull. -- I was afraid, I should have been discovered upon it, only he helped me
well out with it, by saying I could not call in any of my own, and therefore he
procured such a Sum for me.


Enter a Pimp and a Carrier. Pimp. Madam, I give your Ladyship Joy.


Carr. -- Wah they say yea'r dubbed a Lady to day, Good Gullman, by my Saul Ise
glad to hear't, maury mickle Glee may you have on it, that is the warst that I
wad ye.


Gull. Upon my Honor good people, I don't know you.


Carr. -- Ah well-a-day, what have you forgotten Honest Robbin your and
Yorkshire Carrier, that brought ye up all your Deft Lasses.


Gull. -- Faith, give the Poor Man 6 d. and set him away.


Carr. -- Maury but I mun have mare than 6 d. or 6 l. outhor; yea owe me for
Nell Bounce, and Bessy Nessle still, I reet weel rememmer; an like your Worship:


Enter Sir Popular, and stands privately behind. Sir Pop. How! -- My Lady
entertaining two Distressed French Protestants! -- These are not people of fit
Quality to be seen with her I conceive; -- but I Will over-hear the occasion on it.


Aside to himself. Gull. -- Upon my honor poor Wretch, I cannot understand thee.


Carr. -- Lac-a-day, Wah dinnot yea know Robbin that used to furnish you with
fresh Ware? -- I have even the Bonniest Lass at my Inn now, for your Worship's
purpose, that ever went Rigledy, Rigledy.


Sir Pop. What Is this! -- Lass, and fresh Ware? -- Would all things be right.


Aside. Gull. -- Sure good people you are mistaken someway; I am not the person
you should address to; -- therefore pray walk down, your Company is a
disparagement to my Quality.


Sir Pop. I commend her, she will not make her self little.


Aside. Pimp. -- Pray Madam don't think to put us off so; we have forborne you
long enough; therefore pray pay me the 5 l. that is due to me.


Gull. For what Sir?


Pimp. -- For my diligence in the execution of love business; you know, at
first I was only employed to fetch and carry; but after, upon experience of my
Agility of Body, and satisfactory Dimensions, you were pleased to advance me to
your highest station; -- and I think I behaved my self like a faithful
Pains-taker till you left off Bawding*


Sir Pop. Ha! -- What Is that you say Sir? -- My Lady a Bawd? -- Speak -- I
command you speak.


( Gull. seems disordered.) Enter Shuffle and Roman. Shuf. -- I Will speak for
him; and can assure you, you are Married to as great a Bawd as ever graced Cart,
with no other Portion than Disease and Scandal.


Sir Pop. I die, I faint, -- Thou Devil, -- Thou Damned Whore, -- I Will murder
thee presently; -- Where Is my Gutlace, -- My Dagger, -- My Pocket-Flail. -- Oh,
oh. --


She runs out, Faith after her. Carr. Maary honest Friend, if she be your Wife,
I mun luke of ye for my Silver; she had good sound ware of me, weel I wate, and
sea good Morn to you.


Exit Pimp and Carrier. Shuf. It Is pity Sir, to let the poor honest Carrier
suffer; if you should chance to live together, and keep a Public House; he will
import another Argosie, and restock your Lady with Merchandise.


Sir Pop. O thou base, insulting, Treacherous Rogue; this was thy contrivance,
I have Treason against thee, and will impeach, and hang thee, thou Dog.


Shuf. Now you remind me on it, I have something against your Good Worship too,
Most Noble Patriot. -- Here -- Sergeants --


cries aloud. Enter Sergeants. Shuf. -- Sergeants do your Office.


1. Serj. We Arrest you in the King's Name, at the Suit of Sir Credulous
Trinkett in an Action of a Thousand Pound.


Sir Pop. -- S'heart, has this Devil here served me with an Action;

( He looks on the Writ.) O my Life, my Name! -- Thou Barbarous Rascal, I will
tear these Eyes from that Perfidious Skull.


Shuf. -- Officers, away with your Prisoner, and take care he don't do Justice
on himself, and hang himself up in his own Chain.


Exeunt with Sir Pop. Manent Roman, Shuffle. Romans Ha, ha, -- His Nuptials are
Solemnized with a Boon Grace methinks.


Enter Sir Popular's three Blue-Apron'd Men. 1st. Good Lord, Mr. Shuffle, Sir
Popular's in a wonderful great Agony yonder, it seems he is Married to some
lewd Woman and is Arrested.


Shuf. Ay, indeed, your old Patroon is under great Affliction, a grosser
Villain never headed Faction to my knowledge, he only startled you with
groundless fears, to gloze and gull you out of Plentiful Contributions; then
lavish 'em out upon Strumpets.


1st. -- Bless us! -- Truly it appears so now.


2d. -- Plainly, he has a 100 l. of mine in his hand, for maintenance of the
Liberty of the Subject, -- -- Ah wo'es me! --


3d. -- And 200 of mine, by fair Yea and Nay; -- I have no other Security, than
a Promise of re-payment in Lands. -- Ah --


Romans Indeed Gentlemen, you have a hopeful Bargain on it: This was your Darling
Demagogue that you revered.


Shuf. -- I must confess, I have been a Rascal amongst you, and have concorded
with Sir Popular, to baffle, poison, and seduce you* but now my needs are a
little mollify'd, and I do therefore recant, and am resolved never to have
recourse to these Consecrated Frauds again.


1st. -- Good Heavens! -- How strangely we have been deluded Neighbors --
Let Us even leave Conventickling, take the Oaths, and go to Church.


Exeunt. Shuf. Now my Friend, go and make your self Master of Madam Juliana and
Fortunes; I think Sir Popular's Pretenses to 'em are disabl'd.


Romans -- I have reason to esteem thee a Friend indeed* That has neglected thy
own Interest to serve me.


Shuf. I hope we have contracted such a Tie, as Jealousy can never violate, or
necessity betray.


Romans And now let us confirm it by Alliance; -- Madam, you have not vowed
Celibacy I am confident. -- She will consider the Appurtinances of Wit and Good
Humor.


Shuf. Truly such a Fortune would clear my Debts, redeem my Credit, and help me
to some Honorable Employment.

Of late, like some Fat Meteor I Have blazed,
And with false flagrant Zeal, the Crowd have 'maz'd;
But now these Rays shall center in a Star,
Which for the future shall be regular.

FINIS.

