Practical Discourses UPON THE PARABLES OF OUR Blessed Savior, WITH Prayers
annexed to each Discourse.

By FRANCIS BRAG, Vicar of Hitchin in Hertfordshire.

Vtile est, [Libros] Plures a Pluribus fieri, diverso stilo, non diversa Fide,
etiam de Quaestionibus Iisdem; ut ad Plurimos, ad alios sic, ad alios autem
sic, Res ipsa Perveniat. Augustine. de Trinitate. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. IMPRIMATUR,

Sept. 27. 1693. Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Henrico Ep. Land. a Sacris Domest.

LONDON, Printed for S. Manship, at the Ship near the Royal Exchange in
Cornhil, 1694.

To the Right Reverend Father in God Thomas Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
My Lord,
I Humbly beg your Lordships Favorable Acceptance of this Address; which is
designed as a Public Expression of the Great Veneration I have for your
Lordship, and of the Grateful Sense I retain of the Favor and Encouragement
you have hitherto been Pleased to show me, since your Happy Accession to this
See.

I do not, cannot think this a Present worthy of your Lordship; but being
induced to publish these Discourses, in hopes that the Novelty of the Dress
they appear in, may incline some to look upon them, who seldom take notice of
things of this nature when in the usual Garb: I could not but Dedicate them to
your Lordship, as my Diocesan, and as an Account in part how I discharge my
Duty in my Cure, under your Lordships Inspection and Government.

If I shall be so Happy as to do any Service to God and Religion by this
Publication, I am sure your Lordship will not disapprove of it, and I shall
have what I aim at: I therefore beg your Lordships Blessing, and your Prayers,
that these my well-meant Endeavors (however otherwise Deficient) may be
Successful to that Great End: And with all due Deference to your Lordships
Eminent Worth as well as Station, I am, and shall make it my Care to Approve my
self,

My LORD, Your Lordships Dutiful and Humble Servant, Fr. Brag.

THE PREFACE.
THE Parables of our Savior being full of Excellent Instruction, and in a
Familiar way teaching the Greatest and most Necessary Truths; I thought it
would be a very useful Undertaking to Discourse Practically upon them: And by
explaining them, and enforcing the Sense couched under them, to make them
serviceable to the Great Ends for which they were designed. The engaging Men in
a Hearty Love and Obedience to our Great Master Jesus, and in an Industrious
Provision for the Happiness of the other World.

But before I proceed to consider the Parables themselves, I think 'twill be
convenient to give a Brief Account, why our Savior so often spoke in that
Mystical Manner to his Hearers? And it is a Question which his own Disciples
asked him, after he had delivered his first Parable of a Sower; they came unto
him and said, Why speak thou unto them in Parables? Matt. 13.10. To this our
Lord gives a double Answer in the 11th and following Verses, thus. I speak to
the People in Parables, because it is given to you, that are true Believers and
my Faithful Disciples, to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, or of
the Gospel; but to them, that is, as they are described in the 15th Verse,
whose Heart is waxed Gross, or Obdurate and Obstinate, and their Ears dull of
Hearing, and who have closed, or wilfully shut their Eyes against the Light
and Truth that I manifest to the World, lest at any time they should see with
their Eyes, and Hear with their Ears, and Understand with their Heart, and
should be Converted and I should Heal them: To such as these, as very Unworthy
of the Favor, it is not given to have the Mysteries of Religion plainly
revealed to them but only Mystically, and Covertly by way of Parable. That is,
'twas by way of Punishment for their Infidelity and Hardness of Heart, and
Despising and Rejecting His former Plainer Discourses on the Mount and in other
Places; and their Averseness to believe in him notwithstanding the Miracles he
did, and Blasphemous Attributing his casting out a Devil from one possessed who
was Blind and Dumb, to the Power of Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils: 'Twas
by way of Punishment for this strange Obduracy of theirs that he took upon him
that more Obscure way of Instructing them than he before had used; and which
new Practice of his, was a tacit Intimation of his Displeasure against them,
and did threaten a Total Concealment of those Glad Tidings from them which he
came to bring unto the World, if they persisted in their Obstinacy and
Disbelief.

And this is manifest from the whole of what St. Matthew records of our Lord's
Discourses before this 13th Chapter; which we find to be very Plain and
expressed in the usual manner, till the Pharisees with Hellish Malice would
disparage the Great Miracle he wrought upon the possessed Man, by ascribing it
to Art-Magick and the Power of the Devil: And from that Time, after Confounding
that Objection, and sharply reproving their Perverseness and great Obstinacy,
he very frequently expressed himself by way of Parable in his public
Discourses, and afterward in private explained all to his Disciples; and he
gives this reason for his so doing, verse 12. For whosoever has, to him shall
be given, and he shall have more Abundance; but whosoever has not, from him
shall be taken away even that he has. That is, He that upon my former Plain
and Open Instructions has Believed and Obeyed me, shall have still more and
more as Plain Manifestations made to him of the Mysteries of the Gospel: But he
that has made no Good Use of what was then so clearly made known to him, but
continued still Faithless and Obstinate, shall for the Future be Deprived of
that full Light and Sunshine of the Gospel, and be afforded only some Obscurer
Glimmerings of it, and behold it as through a Veil. A Punishment this, had they
understood it, very Great; and which was enough to cure them of their
Stubbornness, and make them more ready to embrace that Heavenly Discipline
before it was too Late; For that Eclipse of that Glorious Light, was a certain
forerunner of that Eternal Night which was to follow, unless they speedily
Repented and Believed. And this should be an Admonition to us likewise to Fear
und Tremble and walk with the greatest Circumspection, lest we Fall after the
same Example of Unbelief and Disobedience; lest we so long Reject that Light
which is come into the World and prefer Darkness before it, as to become
utterly unworthy of it, and it be quite hid from our Eyes, and outer Darkness
at last become our Portion.

This is one Reason our Lord gives of his speaking to the People in Parables;
it was by way of Punishment, and as an Expression of his Displeasure at their
hardened Infidelity.

There is another, and that a very Merciful one, as respecting a sort of People
not Maliciously Faulty as those beforementioned, but chiefly to blame for
Heedless Inadvertency; it is thus expressed, v. 13. of this 13. chapter Therefore
speak I to them in Parables, because they seeing see not, and hearing they hear
not, neither do they understand. That is, because his Plainer and more Common
Discourses were but little regarded by them, and not considered and attended to
as they should be, but forgotten as soon as heard; therefore the more to engage
their Attention, and induce them to look close into and dwell longer upon what
he said, he put his Discourses into a more Mystical and uncommon Dress; that
their desire of understanding his hidden Meaning, might employ more of their
Thoughts about it, and put them upon making a further enquiry than otherwise
they would do, and by that means his Doctrine make a deeper Impression upon
their Minds and Memories. For Men are naturally desirous of finding out
Mysteries and Hidden Meanings, and more than ordinary Attentive to what is
unusual and out of the common road of talking, and will take Pains to discover
what is under the Disguise of a Parable, and be much more pleased and affected
with the Discovery of such a hidden Treasure (to which our Lord elsewhere
resembles the Gospel) than if the same thing had been offered them at an easier
Rate. And accordingly St. Luke, after he had recorded several of our Savior's
Parables, subjoyns that all the People were very Attentive to hear him; and no
Doubt but they were as Inquisitive to Understand what they had heard.

And indeed, though this be a Mystical way of Instruction, and has something of
Obscurity in it, yet as it may be managed, nothing can be more Familiar, or
more suitable to the Capacities of the Meanest Auditors. For the vulgar sort
are but little Receptive of Abstracted Notions, and Nice and Lofty
Speculations; and that is most likely to take with them, which is clothed in a
Dress they have been well acquainted with, and Illustrated by some Material
Representation: For by this means, a Truth which otherwise delivered they would
either not Apprehend, or not Consider and Attend to; being expressed by way of
Resemblance to what they have been much used to, and understand very well, is
presently entertained, and becomes Familiar and Easy to them, and they can as
well remember and attend to it, as to other common Concerns of Life. And
accordingly we find our Lord's Parables taken either from some common and known
Actions of Men, such as of a Husbandman sowing Corn in his Field, and the
springing up of Weeds with the good Corn, of a Fisher throwing his Net into the
Sea, of the looking for a lost Sheep, and the Extravagancies and Repentance of
a Prodigal Son, and the like; or from some common Accidents and Events that are
taken notice of in the World, such as of a Treasure found that was hid in a
Field, the Plentiful Product of a Man's Ground, the Vnfruitfulness of a Tree,
the Reckoning of a Master with his Servants, the Importunacy of a Poor Widow
for Justice, and such like. Relations of this nature are easily Remembered, and
People are naturally apt to listen and attend to them, and the meanest Capacity
can understand and apprehend them, and if well managed, they make what is
repesented by them appear very Lively and Affecting, as if 'twere Acted before
our Eyes; and by this means the Truths delivered under that Disguise insensibly
Insinuate themselves, and work upon the Mind even before a Man is aware of it,
or can set himself to make Resistance.

And as these Parables of our Lord were drawn from the most Familiar things,
they were so Apt likewise, and so excellently Managed, and there was so great
Analogy between the things represented and the Representations of them, that a
little Thought and Reflection of even an ordinary Understanding, would discover
what was hid under so thin a Veil: And accordingly we find several of our
Savior's Parables taken presently by the Auditors in their true and naked
meaning, and no doubt but more were so than the Evangelists took notice of. But
least they should not be apprehended, we find our Lord, when in Private,
explaining them to his Disciples, and giving them command to speak in the Light
what he told them in Darkness; Matt. 10.27.
and by this means, that Impression which the Parable made upon the Fancy and
Imagination of the People at the first relation of it, would afterward either
by Men's own Interpretation, or the Apostles, have its due effect upon their
Understandings, Wills and Affections.

Besides this General Usefulness of Parables, there is one thing they are more
peculiarly proper for, and that is Reproof; which is a thing Men are most of
all Impatient of, and that must be managed with great Prudence and Nicety, or
it will do much more Harm than Good. If it be too Plain and Open and Severe, it
often Hardens an Offender still more; and if it be too Cool and Lifeless, it
loses its Force and makes no Impression.

In an Effectual Reproof then, there must be sufficient Strength and Smartness,
and likewise so much Privacy and Secrecy in it, as may not exasperate the Man
too much from a Sense of the great Shame and Ignominy that attends the laying
Open his Faults to the World. Now Reproving by way of Parable does all this.
There may be Strength and Smartness enough in it if it be well chosen and
applied; and yet there is so much of a Disguise and Covering upon it, as makes
it very Private, and not to grate so much upon that Tender Passion of Shame, as
a more public and barefaced Reproof would do. It Is, as one handsomely expresses
it, like Lancing a Sore with the Lancet wrapped up in a Sponge; when under
Pretense and Show of nothing but smooth and gentle Usage, the place is
unexpectedly opened and the Corruption let out; which the Patient would not
have suffered to be done, if attempted Roughly and without that Stratagem. And
there is a notable Instance of this Parabolical way of Reproving, mentioned 2 Samuel 12. Upon David's Murder of Uriah, that he might enjoy his Wife without
Disturbance, the Prophet Nathan was sent to Reprove him for it, and denounce
God's Great Displeasure against him: And that he might do this the more
effectually, did not Flatly and Immediately tell him of his great Wickedness,
but frames a Parable of a Rich Man that had great Flocks and Herds of his own,
who yet to entertain his Guest, took the Only little Ewe Lamb of a Poor
Neighbor of his, which he had bought and nourished up with great Tenderness
and Pleasure; and dressed it for the Man that was come to him. And David 's
Anger, the Story says, was greatly kindled against the Man, and he said unto
Nathan, as the Lord lives the Man that has done this thing shall surely die,
and shall restore the Lamb Fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he
had no Pity. When the Prophet saw that his Design had so far taken effect, he
immediately follows his Blow, takes Advantage of the Kings Displeasure, and
makes the Application home, Thou art the Man. And this Mystical Reproof struck
David so deep, that without making any Excuses, he presently confesses his
Guilt, that he had sinned against the Lord; when it is very likely a Rougher and
more Downright Reprimand would have exasperated the King into Rage and
Impatience at his being so exposed by the Prophet, rather than have melted him
into so humble and pungent a Remorse as this.

This Course then our Lord took, not without great Wisdom; and by Parables apt
and well chosen and very expressive of his Meaning, reproved the Obstinacy,
Hypocrisy, and other Vices of the Jews, who were Men Stubborn and Refractory,
and Impatient of too open a Rebuke: Especially the Pharisees, whose Pride and
Haughtiness, and great Repute with the People, made them not able to endure any
thing of Reproof, tho wrapped up in the Disguise of a Parable, much less when
public and open, and in plainer Terms. Though as to the Pharisees, when this
milder way would not do, he more plainly and sharply rebuked and exposed their
Great Wickedness and Vile Hypocrisy.

These are the Reasons why our Lord spoke so much in Parables; and it was a
Course which many of the Greatest and Wisest Men had taken before him. The
Prophets in the Old Testament, and several of the Heathens, expressed their
Instructions and Reproofs in such a Mystical manner, and by way of Fable or
feigned Relation of some Action or Occurrence that bore Resemblance to what
they would Inculcate; as is very evident to such as Converse with their
Writings. Which Course, had it not been very Effectual to the Ends for which it
was designed, it would not have been so much in Reputation as it was; and if it
was so effectual then, why may it not be so still; if not to frame new
Parables, yet to explicate and enforce the Old? Especially those which our
Lord, with admirable Wisdom and Judgment, made use of to reprove Vice by, and
encourage a Sincere and Persevering Piety?

The Truths that are couched under these Parabolical Expressions, are of the
greatest Importance, and such as it nearly concerns us to attend to, and
Practice accordingly; and the manner of expressing them is such, as illustrates
with great Advantage, and very movingly recommends them, and that in such a
Familiar way, as fits them to all Capacities though never so Indifferent; and may
be of great use to work upon the meaner sort, who I fear are too little
apprehensive of what is delivered in more Abstracted Terms.

I have therefore Practically considered the most, and most useful of our
Savior's Parables, passing by those only that wholly relate to the Jews, and
that Infant State of the Gospel, and cannot without Violence be made Serviceable
to the Improvement of Religion amongst Christians, especially now at this
Distance from the Times wherein they were spoken. But of this sort there are
but Three or Four; and the rest that are not Particularly Discoursed of, are
Co-incident and of the same Sense with those that are. And I hope this may not
be an Unprofitable Undertaking through his Blessing who Alone can give the
Increase; to Advance whose Honor in promoting the Good of Souls they are made
Public.

I desire only that two things may be further observed: The one is, That these
Discourses are on Purpose designed to be Purely Practical, as I have styled
them in the Title Page, and as every Intelligent Reader will discern, when he
finds me wave many Fair Opportunities of Controversy that lie in my way; and
my Reason for so doing, I think, is very sufficient, (viz.) Because it is too
Observable that the great Defect of Christians nowadays is in their Practice,
which yet is the One thing Necessary. The other is, that, According to the
excellent Advice of More Nevochim in the Preface.
Maimonides, the Reader expect not (Rationem and Explicationem omnium verborum
and rerum in Parabola Contentarum ad Rem Significatum, etc.) a Minute and
Particular Application of every Word and Thing in a Parable, to the Sense that
is couched under it; but be contented with a more General Explication of the
Sum and Scope of it. For otherwise either the main Intention of the Parable
will be quite lost, or at least the Mind will be tired in hunting after an
Explication of what cannot be explained; and nothing be the Result of such
Fruitless Study, but that Empty Vexatious Disappointment, which all those
Experience, who make it their endeavor to find out, or rather force from the
Words of an Author, that which the Author himself never so much as dreamed of.
All therefore that a Man should propose to himself in the Explication of the
greatest part of any Parable, is to find out what is the main Drift and Design
of it; and what it is which the Author of it would Instruct Men in, by that
Allegorical Scheme of Speech.

But though this be Excellent Advice, and I have endeavored to observe it in the
following Discourses; yet, where it could be done without unnatural Straining
and Violence, I have been very Particular in my Explication: And indeed, most
of our Savior's Parables are so aptly expressed in the Parts as well as in the
Whole, that they not only will Bear but Require a Minute Application of the
Allegory to that which is represented by it, and which receives a great
Advantage from it; as may be observed in the Perusal of what is now offered to
the Reader's View.

The INDEX.
Par. I. OF the Sower. Matt. 13.3, etc. Page 1 Par. II. Of the Tares. Matt.
13.24. p. 35 Par. III. Of the Pearl of great Price. Matt. 1345. p. 82 Par. IV.
Of a Merciful King and his Unmerciful Servant, Matt. 18.23. p. 122 Par. V. Of a
King that made a Marriage for his Son. Matt. 22.2. p. 164 Par. VI. Of the Ten
Virgins. Matt. 25.1. p. 204 Par. VII. Of the Good Samaritan. Luke 10.30. p. 232
Par. VIII. Of the Talents. Matt. 25.14. p. 270 Par. IX. Of the Covetous Rich
Fool. Luke 12.16. p. 304 Par. X. Of the Barren Fig Tree. Luke 13.6. p. 338 Par.
XI. Of the Prodigal Son. Luke 15.11. p. 365 Par. XII. Of the Rich Man and
Lazarus. Luke 16.19. p. 395 Par. XIII. Of the Importunate Widow. Luke 18.1. p.
424 Par. XIV. Of the Pharisee and the Publican. Luke 18.9. p 456
The most Considerable Errata, occasioned by the Author's distance from the
Press, the Reader is desired thus to correct with a Pen before he peruses the
Book, viz.
PAge 14. Line 1. dele in. p 15. l. 6. r. these. p. 16. l. 24. r. tells. p. 24.
l. 28. dele it. p. 25. l. 14. dele and. p. 26. l. 29. r. comes often. p. 29. l.
23. r. showers from. p. 30. l. ult. r. Track. p. 39. l. ult. dele in the Ear.
p. 60. l. 6. r. our. p. 74. l. penult. r. Tares that. p. 78. l. 23. r. passed.
p. 83. l. 5. r. Fine. p. 91. l. 17. r. to. p. 111. l. 10. r. eternally. p. 119.
l. 1. dele the. p. 129. l. 17. r. have. p. 133. l. 15. r. affected. ib antip.
r. their. p. 141. l. 3. r. then. p. 142. l. 7. dele us. 144. l. 20. r. if. 162.
l. 7. r. own. p. 171. l. 8. dele and. p. 185. l. 20. dele and. p. 186. l. 23.
r. us as. 202. l. 10. r. slighted. p. 223. l. 3. r. were. p. 227. l. 13. r. his
228. l. 28. r. breaking p. 234. l. 12. r. struck so p 239. l. 6. r. behavior.
p. 241. l. 16. dele such. ib. l. 17. r. which. 245. l. 17. r. that. p. 252. l.
12 r. Mankind. p. 257. l. 29. r. general. 266. l. 12. r. Relief. p. 284. l. 14.
r. of. p. 289. l. 23. r. from. p. 328. l. 13. r. Indignus. ibid. l. 15. r.
Charae. p. 329. l. 6. r. accordingly. p. 332. l. 3. r. sleep. p. 333. l. 6. r.
unspeakably. p. 335. l. 12. r. we. p. 342. l. 28. r. Dewes. p. 355. l. 29. dele
Public. p. 361. l. 25. r. your. p. 374. l. 18, 19. for they r. he. p. 378. l,
10. r. she. p. 380. l. 10. r. those. ibid. l. 29. r. Passions. p. 382. dele
Crysippi porticus and grex. ibid. r. prava. p. 392. l. 4. for Savior r.
Father. 404. l. 3. r. in the Favor. 405. l. 27. r. makes. p. 415. l. 27. r.
could not. p. 416. l. 26. r. irreconcilable. p. 430. l. 2. r. numbed. p. 441.
l. 25 r. encourager. p. 457. l. 23. r. Favor. p. 470. l. 25. r. bitter. p. 475
l. 29. r. depreciate.

PARABLE I. Of the Sower that went forth to sow his Seed.
Matthew. xiii. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Behold, a Sower went forth to sow.

And when he sowed, some Seeds fell by the Way-side, and the Fouls came and
devoured them up.

Some fell upon sttony Places, where they had not much Earth; and forthwith
they sprung up, because they had no Deepness of Earth:

And when the Sun was up, they were scorched, and because they had not Root
they withered away.

And some fell among Thorns; and the Thorns sprung up and choked them.

But other fell into good Ground, and brought forth Fruit; some an
Hundredfold, some Sixty-Fold, some Thirty-Fold.


THIS Parable is very fitly placed first, as giving Account of the Causes of
Men's Fruitfulness or Unfruitfulness in Christianity; and consequently, shows
what is to be avoided, and directs to what is to be done, in order to Men's
being bettered by the Sermons of the Gospel: Which is a thing first of all to
be taken notice of, by such as would be Christians endeed.

Our Lord's Interpretation of this Parable, Matthew. 13.19. Mark 4.14. Luke 8.11.
from a Collation of the Three Evangelists that record it, is this:

The Seed is the Word of God, or the Word of the Kingdom; that is, the Gospel,
the Religion that Christ Jesus came to teach the World. When any one hears
this Word, and understands it not, then comes the wicked one or Satan
immediately, and catches away that which was sown in his Heart, lest he should
believe and be saved; this is he who received Seed by the Way-side. But he that
received the Seed into rocky or Stony Places, is he that hears the Word and
presently with Joy receives it, yet has not Root in himself, and so endures
or believes but for a while; for when Tribulation or Persecution arises
because of the Word, he is soon offended or discouraged, and falls away in Time
of Temptation. He also that received Seed among the Thorns, is he that hears
the Word, and goes forth, and the Cares of this World, and the Deceitfulness
of Riches, and the Lusts and Pleasures of this Life entering in, choke the Word,
and it becomes Unfruitful, or at best brings no Fruit to Perfection. But, He
that received Seed into the good Ground, is he that having heard the Word,
Understands or considers it, and receives and keeps it in an honest and
good Heart, and brings forth Fruit with Patience, according to his Ability,
whether Thirty, Sixty, or an Hundredfold.

From the Parable thus interpreted by its Divine Author, it appears, as was
said, that the Design of it is to show what are the Causes of Men's improving
or not improving under the preaching of the Gospel; that so we may know what to
avoid and what to embrace and endeavor after in order to our being fruitful
under those Means of Instruction we enjoy.

We shall now consider each Part of this Parable with its Interpretation.

The First is, Behold, a Sower went forth to sow: And when he sowed, some Seeds
fell by the Wayes-side and were trodden down, and the Fowls of the Air came and
devoured them up: The Interpretation is, that the Seed which is sown is the
Word of God, and when any one hears this Word and understands it not, then
comes the Devil or the wicked one immediately, and catches away that which
was sown in his Heart, lest he should believe and be saved. This is he that
received Seed by the Way-side, or this is that Seed which fell by the Way-side.

The Word of God is compared to Seed, because of its fructifying, growing and
increasing Nature; because it has in it an Active Principle, and will when
sown, (unless killed and made unfruitful by Accidental Injuries) spring up into
excellent Fruits and in great Abundance, to the Glory of God, and the
nourishing, strengthening, nav the immortalizing of Men; for of this Divine
Seed consists that Heavenly Bread, which whosoever eats of shall live for ever.
It Is this Seed that brings forth those Graces of Christianity, which keep up
the Divine Life in the Soul; it is this that makes it grow in Grace and in the
Knowledge and Love of the best and noblest of Objects, our Lord Jesus; it is this
that is its Preparation for Heaven, and an Earnest of that Immortal and
Glorious Inheritance. For, wheresoever that Seed is sown, Romans 6.22.
and springs up, and brings forth Fruit unto Holiness, the End most certainly
will be Everlasting Life.

And this Word of God, is not only, for these Reasons, compared to Seed, but to
Seed sown: It Is not only potentially fruitful, but the Powers of it are now
called forth into Act; it is actually sown, the Gospel is preached and made
known to the World, its excellent Precepts are openly declared, and planted in
Men's Hearts, by the Proposal of infinite Rewards and Punishments to such as do
or do not obey and practice them. And, this Seed thus sown, is watered with the
Dews of Heaven, with the Distillations of the Divine Grace and Blessing, which
are in sufficient Plenty afforded to every Man; so that God, the great
Husbandman, is not wanting in any thing that is necessary to the Flourishing
and Increase of that Seed, which he has thus committed to their Hearts: And
therefore he expects (and it is but reasonable he should) to see it grow and
bring forth Fruit where'ere it is planted; wherever the Word is preached he
expects the Fruit of Righteousness. The Seed is good, and most of all agreeable
to the Soil wherein it is sown (for Religion is the best Reason, and therefore
most natural to a reasonable Soul) and it is sown in great Plenty; there is no
Scarcity of God's Word among us, and it is watered sufficiently with the Dew of
Heaven, the Grace of God, which is not wanting to any Man that will receive it,
and therefore at our Peril we must all be fruitful; none of us must appear
before our great Lord empty, lest the Punishment of Barrenness be our Portion,
and we be burnt up with unquenchable Fire.

This Seed then, or the Word of God, being thus actually sown, the Christian
Religion planted in the World, and all things done on God's Part, in order to
its being fruitful, and which accordingly he expects it should be; it highly
concerns us, in the next Place, to take care that it be so, and that nothing
make it otherwise.

That is, that, in the First Place, it be not like Seed sown or scattered by
the Way Side, which is trodden down by the Feet of Men and Beasts, or devoured
by the Fowls of the Air. We must not be thought less and inconsiderate after we
have heard the Word, and suffer our Souls to be like a Highway, laid open and
exposed to all Comers, to all Sorts of wandering, useless and wicked Thoughts,
which thronging in Abundance, will trample down the Good Seed that was sown,
that it shall never more appear, be no more thought of or remembered by us. Nor
must we leave it to the Mercy of the Fowls of the Air, the Devil and his
Legions, who, like Birds of Prey, hover over us continually, and are always
ready to catch away immediately those good Instructions instilled into our
Minds, lest they should grow into Faith and Salvation, and which they see lie
scattered and unregarded by us, and unobserved, throw in their Places, the
Seeds of Sin and Misery, which, like ill Weeds, will flourish any where and
grow apace. Thus heedless of so great a Treasure must we by no means be, but by
Recollection of Thought, advert closely to the great Truths of the Gospel, and
exclude all wandering and vain Imaginations, and carefully gather up those
Notions of Religion which lie scattered in our Minds, and reduce them to some
Order and Connection, and infix them by Meditation still deeper in our Souls;
and instead of a dry, barren and common Way, for all Temptations and Injections
of the Devil, for numerous and vain and incoherent Phancies, we should by
serious Attention to those concerning Truths, that we have read or heard, make
our Souls (as Solomon expresses it) a Garden enclosed, a Spring shut up, Cant.
4.12.
and a Fountain sealed: And then no Fear of the Seeds being trodden down or
devoured by the Fowls of the Air; but 'twill remain rooted and grounded in our
Hearts, and will bring forth its Fruit in its Season.

Secondly, We must take care that the Word be not like Seed sown in stony and
rocky Places, where there is no Deepness of Earth; lest, it spring up too
hastily, and when the Sun is hot it be scorched and wither away because it has
no Root. That is, as our Lord interprets it, we must be careful not only to
receive the Word with Joy, and have an extempore superficial Religion, and
believe and obey only for a while; but likewise to endure, and not be offended
or discouraged though Tribulation or Persecution arise because of the Word, nor
to fall away in Time of Temptation.

I doubt there are too many of these Rocky Hearers, that perhaps are well
enough pleased to be handsomsely told of their Duty, to hear a well-pen'd
Sermon, and for the present readily assent to the Truth and Reasonableness of
what is discoursed to them; and believe it their Interest to live as becomes
Christians, and rejoice at the News of being freeed from the Tyranny of the
Devil and their own unruly Lusts and Passions, of being made Children and Heirs
of God, and Coheirs with Christ of an Eternal Inheritance, and that there are
never-fading Crowns of Glory reserved for them in the highest Heavens; and are
resolved to set about the Performance of that Duty immediately, which is so
excellent in it self and shall be so infinitely rewarded. And indeed, the
Christian Religion is so highly reasonable in its own Nature, so conducive to
the Comfort and Happiness even of this Life, and the sure Way to such endless
Bliss hereafter, that it cannot but be very pleasing in the Theory, to any Man
of Sense and Reason.

But after all this, I fear there are too many Hearers, that like Rocky Places,
have only a Surface of good Earth, and retain this good Affection to Religion
but for a while, and at the Bottom are impenetrable as a Rock, and will not
suffer the good Seed to shoot so deep into their Hearts, and take so firm a
Rooting as is necessary to its Fruitfulness and Increase.

Their Spring is quickly over, a Blade or a Stalk is the farthest Progress
their Religion makes, and never arrives to the full Corn in the Ear; but when
they meet with any Difficulty in the Practice of it in it self, or any
Opposition to it either without from Men, or from the Devils Temptations
within; For want of Deepness of Earth and Moisture they fall and wither away.
If there were nothing else for 'em to do but to receive the Promises, they
would with Joy indeed give ear to the glorious Descriptions of the Happiness of
a Christian: Nay, that Happiness is so exceeding great, that at present they
may very well be glad to hear of the Way to attain it, and for a spurt set
cheerfully about it, and a shallow Crust of Earth will be sufficient to make
some Show and Appearance of Fruitfulness and Increase. But, unless the Heart be
thoroughly pliable, and there be Deepness of Earth, an humble Sense of the great
Need we have that this Divine Seed should take Root and grow up in our Souls,
and likewise the Moisture of a sincere Repentance for our former Barrenness and
stony Hardness of Heart, the Word will take but shallow Rooting for all our
sudden Raptures, and upon upon every Difficulty and Temptation be ready to
languish and wither, especially when the Heats of Persecution strike upon it;
and then, too often, the latter End is worse than the Beginning, and the Men
grow more hardened and insensible than ever.

Those therefore that find themselves of this rocky Temper, so difficult to be
persuaded to be Christians indeed, so ready to look upon the smooth Side of
Religion only, and please themselves in the Theory of it, admire the Promises
of Christianity, but find great Resistance in their Breasts when the Word would
take deeper Root, and they are exhorted to a still more and more excellent and
fruitful Piety: These Persons are by all means to endeavor still more and more
to soften their Hearts, and make them pliable to the Impressions of the Word of
Life; that it may sink deep into their Souls, and be fixed there beyond the
Danger of yiedling to every Temptation, and withering when Adversity shall
come. They must not boggle at any thing that appears to be their Duty, but be
diligent and industrious in ridding their Minds of their former Evil Habits and
Inclinations, and inure themselves to the Obedience of Christ; not pretending
Hardship or Impossibility when He commands, not endeavoring to lessen the
Obligation of any of his Precepts, or shifting it from themselves, nor
expecting Heaven upon easier Terms: But, knowing their Lord's Will, endeavor
to do it in Sincerity, upon such Obedience only, through the Merits of Christ,
hoping for the Promises.

And this Course, like good Tillage and Manuring of our Ground, will soon
mollify the Heart, and make it not only superficially, but entirely Pliable to
the Word of God, receptive of its Impressions to the very Bottom, so that it
shall dwell in us richly, and bring forth Fruit, not only in Times of Security
and Peace, but even then when Tribulation shall arise because of the Word, and
take still deeper Root, and bring forth greater Abundance, notwithstanding all
the Storms and Scorchings of Persecution, or even a fiery Trial.

Thirdly, in order to the Fruitfulness of the Word, we must be very careful
that it be not like Seed that falls among Thorns, lest the Thorns spring up
and choke it, so that it yield no Fruit. That is, that after the hearing of the
Word we go not forth and suffer the Cares of this World, and the Deceitfulness
of Riches, and the Lusts and Pleasures of this Life to enter in and choke the
Word, and it become utterly unfruitful, or at least, bring no Fruit to
Perfection.

It Is by a lamentable Experience, too true, that the Love of this World very
much hinders our Provision for the next; and it is as true, that this is the
greatest Folly and Madness in Nature, because the World to come is upon all
Accounts, so infinitely to be preferred before the present, that there cannot
be the least Competition between them: For, how can a World of Cares and
Vexations, of Misery and Affliction of all Sorts, of Hazards and Uncertainties,
of Sickness, Pain and Death, as this is, compare with a World of eternal,
unmixed and uninterrupted Happiness, as is the other. And therefore, one would
think Men should be so wise and so much their own Friends, as to bestow their
greatest Endeavors in Pursuit of their main Interest; and not on the contrary
such egregious Fools, as for the Gain of an empty Bubble to forfeit an happy
Eternity.

So far as is consistent with the Care of the Soul, it is very allowable to mind
the Affairs of this Life: Nay, it is a Duty of our Holy Religion for every man
to be industrious in his Calling, and to enjoy with Thanksgiving the Portion
that God has given him here below: But to invert God's Order, and place that
First in our Esteem which should be Last; when he says, seek ye First the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and then all needful things of this World
shall be added unto you, to run quite counter, and First provide for Abundance
here, and then (and that but very coldly, God knows) think a little of the
Kingdom of God and his Righteousness; this is such a preposterous Course as can
never end in any thing but Shame and Confusion.

If it be true, that the Gain of even the whole World would be a very
unprofitable Exchange when compared with the Loss of the Soul; and if it be
true, that the Loss of the Soul will follow upon the Unfruitfulness of the Word
of God, for Faith alone will not save, but must bring forth the Fruits of the
Spirit: And finally, if it be true, that a too great Love and eager Prosecution
of the things of this World will choke the Word of God; and make it unfruitful,
as our Lord in this Part of the Parable affirms it will: If all this be true, I
see not how it can be avoided, but that such as have a Desire that the Word of
God should be fruitful in their Souls in order to the eternal Salvation of
them, must love the World less, and their Souls more must be careful in the
First place to grow in Grace and be rich toward God, and clear their Minds of
these worldly Thorns and Briars, lest the Divine Life be stifled and that Seed
choked which alone can fructify to a happy Immortality. We must use this
World, yet so as not to abuse it; but certainly he abuses it and all the
Blessings that God affords him in it, who so immoderately Doats upon it, as to
prefer it before the Service of his great Benefactor, and spends most of his
Thoughts and Endeavors about the increasing Wealth, and the Enjoyment of these
sublunary Pleasures, and can spare but very little, if any of his Time and
Pains, to prepare himself for the Enjoyment of God in Glory.

And yet, as plain as this is, Men are generally so little affected with it, as
not only to neglect Religion as much as ever, and love the World still more and
more; but even to plead the Cares of the World as an Excuse for their Coolness
in Religion, and the Unfruitfulness of the Word of God in their Souls. We would
be oftener at the Sacrament, and more constant in at the Prayers of the Church,
and in reading and meditating upon the Holy Scriptures, but that the Cares of
the World and the Hurry of Business takes up most of our Time and Thoughts. But
for God's Sake, let such consider; is that an Excuse, which is it self as great
a Fault as any? Will God accept such an Excuse at the Day of Judgment? Has he
not plainly forewarned us of the Danger of too much worldly Mindedness? Has not
St. John said plainly, 1 John 2.15.
love not the World nor the things of the World, for whosoever loves the World the
Love of the Father is not in him: And our Lord as plainly, ye cannot serve God
and Mammon? How strange a Plea then is it for the Neglect of Religion, to say
we are deeply engaged in the Persuit of this World's Good!

If we believe we have Souls to be saved, methinks we should take care of them
in the First place; and as for this World, a moderate Industry, such as does by
no means entrench upon Religion, is all that can be justified. And what our
Lord said to the Scribes and Pharisees about their taking care of lesser
Matters and neglecting the weighty things of the Law, should be our Rule in
providing for our Families, and providing for our Souls. These things ought ye
to have done, and not to have left the other undone. He that provides not for
his own House, according to the Measures of Necessity and Moderation, is worse
than an Infidel, it is true; but he that provides not for his own Soul is still
more unnaturaly cruel.

These are the things that our Blessed Lord says make this Heavenly Seed, the
Word of God, unfruitful; and therefore those should with the greatest Care and
Application possible, be provided against; nothing being of so great Importance
to us as the Flourishing and Increase of the Word of God.

I come now to consider the last Part of this Parable, viz. what it is that
will make this holy Seed to thrive and bring forth plentifully the Fruits of
Righteousness; and which Course consequently, it highly concerns us all to
take, that we may not be barren under the Means of Instruction that we enjoy.

Our Lord expresses it thus: But, other Seed fell into good Ground, and
brought forth Fruit, some an Hundredfold, some Sixty and some Thirty. That is,
he that received Seed into the good Ground, is he that having heard the Word
understands it, and receives and keeps it in an honest and good Heart, and
brings forth Fruit with Patience according to his Ability, whether Thirty,
Sixty or an Hundredfold. In this Part of the Parable there are Five things to
be considered.

First, That the good Ground in which the Seed of the Word will take deep
Rooting, and bring forth Plentifully is an honest and good Heart.

Secondly, That that which infixes the Seed of the Word in this good Ground, is
Consideration, translated understanding the Word.

Thirdly, That the Seed so planted in this good Ground, must be diligently kept
and preserved in it.

Fourthly, That we must expect the Increase of it with Patience, and take care
that the Fruits come to Perfection; and

Lastly, That this Increase must be proportionable to the Quantity of the Seed
that is sown, and to the Strength and Power of the Soil in which it is sown;
that is, to every Man's Ability, and the Opportunities he has had of
Improvement, whether Thirty, Sixty, or an Hundredfold.

First, The good Ground, in which the Seed of the Word will take deep Rooting
and bring forth plentifully, is an honest and good Heart; that is, a Heart
sincerely desirous to be informed in its Duty, and that cordially proposes to
perform it, and is truly humble and of a modest teachable Temper.

St. 1 Cor. 3.5, 6.
Paul tell us, that though he plants and Apollos water, yet it is God alone that
gives the Increase: Now, can any Man imagine that God will make that effectual
to our Good which we despise and value not, and force those Favors upon us,
which we neither now desire, nor if we had them should do other than neglect?
The Graces of Religion are too precious to be bestowed upon such brutish
Natures, and none but those that have Hearts earnestly desirous of his Divine
Assistance, that they may be purifyed and renewed by his blessed Spirit, and
instructed in his holy Will that they may know how to pay a more acceptable
Service to him; none but those that have such honest and good Hearts can expect
the Word should flourish and grow fruitful, and they only that thus hunger and
thirst after Righteousness shall be filled.

And this those would do well to consider, who frequent our religious
Assemblies in compliance to Custom only, and because their Neighbors do; or to
learn new Modes and Dresses, or to show their own; or to while away the Time
that lies useless upon their Hands, or to meet a Friend, or please their Ears
with some new Notion, or to gratify their Curiosity, or the like: Let not such
Persons be deceived, God is not mocked; let not such think they shall receive
any thing of God but the Fierceness of his Displeasure, for their profaning to
such vile Purposes what he intends as a Means to their Salvation. Those only
shall receive Advantage by God's Word, that sincerely and earnestly desire its
Nourishment that they may grow thereby.

This honest and good Heart, is likewise Modest and Teachable; and indeed, this
Disposition is very necessary in order to the Fruitfulness of the Word.

For, Pride and Conceitedness are naturally the greatest Hinderers of
Improvement in all Sorts of Acquirements whatever; but in Religion they do the
most Mischief of all, and are the great Destroyers of whatever is religious and
good.

For, besides that a high Opinion of ones own present Endowments cuts off all
Endeavors of growing better, and renders all spiritual Advice barren to him
that thinks he has no need of it: Besides, that Reproof frets and inrages one
that thinks Commendations rather belong to him; and Instruction, in Cases of
Difficulty, is thrown away upon a Man that thinks himself Wiser than his
Teachers: Besides these and several other Natural Ill Consequences of an
overweening Opinion of ones self, which might be mentioned, there is this yet
above all, that it utterly bars and shuts out God's holy Spirit; it deprives
the Soul of his gracious Influences, and diverts the Streams of his Grace and
Benediction from watering our Hearts: Prove. 16.5.
For Pride is an Abomination unto the Lord, a thing that he hates and detests
above all things: And St. James tells us, that instead of assisting, God
resists the Proud, Jam. 4.7.
is his professed Enemy. And no wonder if that Soul be barren, which is thus
cursed of God, and denied those refreshing Dews of his Favor which alone can
make it fruitful. Let us therefore lay our Foundation low in Modesty, Sincerity
and Humility, and God will build us up to Life everlasting. We shall then be
like Trees planted and deep rooted by the Rivers of Water, that bring forth
their Fruit in their Season; our Leaf shall not wither, and whatsoever we do it
shall prosper, Psalm. 1.3.

Secondly, that which infixes the Seed of the Word in the good Ground of an
honest and good Heart, is Consideration and Meditation, rendered in our
Translation understanding the Word. The Word in the (...).
Original signifies weighing, pondering and considering: And St. James says
agreeably, whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty and continues
therein, that is, as the (...).
Words in the Greek signify, has looked close and dwelt upon it by serious
Meditation, he being not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Work, this Man
shall be blessed in his doing, Jam. 1.25.

He therefore that desires the Word should increase and multiply, must not only
receive it in an honest and good Heart, but infix it there by serious
Consideration; and be not like those compared to thorny Ground in the Parable,
who, having heard the Word, go sorth and think no more of it, but suffer the
Cares and Pleasures and Riches of the World to enter immediately into their
Minds and choke the Word, so that it becomes unfruitful: But by after-
Meditation and Recollection of Thought make it sink still deeper into their
Souls, and strike a Root to the very Bottom of their Hearts.

And indeed, without such Consideration, there can be very little Hope, if any,
of its Fruitfulness. For, in all Learning, it is Meditation that gives a Root to
what is read or heard, and fixes it deep in the Mind; it is that which makes it
a Man's own, and serviceable to him upon occasion; and without it, the most
accurate Discourse would tickle the Ear only, not inform the Understanding; and
truly, the more excellent, the less Beneficial, unless it be weighed and
examined by a serious and near Inspection.

Thus, the Doctrine of Christianity, tho the most excellent in it self, as
proceeding from the Divine Word, the Wisdom of the Father, is seldom embraced
as such by Persons of a trifling unthinking Spirit, but rather appears harsh
and unreasonable; or at best is but faintly approved of, and for a short
Continuance. For, the Beauties of Holiness, like other chief Excellencies, are
not to be clearly seen and fully discovered by a slight and cursory Glance, but
by a diligent and curious Search; like Gold, that is not to be found upon the
Surface of the Earth, but lies further in, and is treasured up within her
Bowels. Wherefore, as we tender our Perseverance in the Faith and our eternal
Salvation, we must not think our Task is over when we have heard the Word, but
always set some time apart (and the sooner the better) to meditate and lay it
to Heart, and frequently revolve it in our Minds, consider it in all its
Relations and Tendencies, its Nature, and its happy and glorious Effects; and
then we shall be entirely satisfied that it is our most reasonable Service, and
above all things our Interest to practice its Divine Precepts, and that it
flourish in our Souls, and bring forth Fruit in Abundance.

Thirdly, This Seed so planted and fixed in this good Ground, must be likewise
diligently kept and preserved in it.

Sloth and Idle Carelessness always have an ill Effect; and many hopeful
beginnings are nipp'd and crushed, and come to very deplorable conclusions, for
want of that care and Industry, which was necessary to promote and further them
to Perfection.

But above all they are most Dangerous in Religion. For besides that they
Naturally tend to make Virtue weak and degenerate; they give a fair Occasion to
our great Enemy to assault us, (that infernal Bird of Prey, who is ready
immediately to catch away the good Seed, if unregarded, and throw his wicked
Suggestions into their Place) and who is glad to find us thus weak and unarmed
and careless of our Safety; and is too wise not to improve such Opportunities
to his best Advantage. And what Hopes, but we shall be shamefully plundered of
that Precious Seed which God has sowed in our Hearts that it may spring up to
Immortality, when we are thus careless and negligent, and unable to make any
great Resistance!

Therefore the Wise Man advises to keep the Heart with all Diligence; Prove.
4.23.
and St. 1 Pet. 1.5.
Peter, to give all Diligence to add to our Faith Virtue, etc. that so these
good things may be in us and abound: And our Lord tells us, Mat. 13.25.
in the next Parable to this, that 'twas while Men slept that the Enemy came
and sowed Tares. Wherefore, awake to Righteousness, 1 Cor. 15.34. 1 Pet. 3.8.
says St. Paul; be sober, be vigilant, says St. Peter, for your Adversary the
Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. Let us
therefore endeavor, as St. Paul advises Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.2.
to keep that which is committed to our Trust, and to walk circumspectly, not
as Fools but as Wise; lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his Subtilty, so
our Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity that is in Christ: We must be
wise as Serpents as well as innocent as Doves; lest, when the Word has begun to
thrive and prosper in our Souls, it be at length rooted out by the Temptations
of that old Serpent, and bring no Fruit to Perfection.

Fourthly, we must expect the Increase of this good Seed with Patience and
Perseverance, and take care that the Fruits come to full Maturity.

We must expect the Increase of this good Seed with Patience, because all
Improvement is a thing of Time: Men cannot arrive at Perfection, even in Vice,
in an instant, much less in Virtue. There are many intermedial Steps and
Advances to it; and as when Seed is sown there first appears but a tender
Blade, which, in process of Time improves to a Stalk, which every day grows
taller and stronger; and at length appears the Ear and the Grain in the Ear;
and even after that complete Formation of the Plant, there is yet some
considerable Time before it comes to perfect Ripeness; and all this while the
Husbandman waits with Patience till the Time comes of gathering the ripe Fruits
of the Earth: So in Religion, there are gradual Advances to Perfection. The
Beginnings of Religion, the first Sproutings of this Heavenly Seed are and will
be tender and unconfirm'd, but Time will strengthen and improve them; every Day
will make some Advance to Perfection, where there is an honest and good Heart,
and Sincerity at the Bottom: But these Advances may be very leisurely, and like
the Growth of Plants, scarce discernable in their Progress, and yet at length
the Word of God brings forth its genuine Fruits in great Abundance. And this,
though perhaps slow pace in Religion, must be born with Patience and Hope; for
in due Time, for all this, we shall reap if we faint not.

And this those should consider who expect to be complete Christians in an
instant, and are impatient of Delays, and disheartened by every Rub and
Difficulty; and because their Practice cannot keep pace with their too forward
and passionate Wishes and Desires, are apt to despair of ever coming to that
Ripeness of Christianity, which will fit them for their great Masters Garner;
and too often let slip what they have already attained, and give over in much
Dejection after they have made a very hopeful Progress. But this is a cunning
Artifice of the Devil, and ought, with the greatest Care imaginable, to be
provided against; and a Man's best Defense in this Case is Patience, or a calm
and resigned Expectation of Increase and Blessing from God in his due Time,
when we have done our own best Endeavor; a waiting God's Leisure, a confiding
in his Goodness who only gives the Increase. And (as St. Jam. 5.7.
James expresses it) as the Husbandman waits for the precious Fruit of the
Earth, and has long Patience for it, until he receive the early and latter
Rain; so should we be also patient, and in Patience possess our Souls and
establish our Hearts. For there is a latter Distillation of the Divine Grace as
well as that which is early and at First; and which, when God pleases to afford
it, we shall then grow up to Perfection: And though sometimes it may not be so
plentifully showered down as we could wish, yet will not be finally wanting in a
sufficient Degree, to such as sincerely embrace it and cooperate with it.

And as our Lord expresses it in another Parable, Mark 4.26. (which, for its
near Resemblance to this and the next, I think it needless Particularly to
discourse of) The Kingdom of God, or of Grace, is as if a Man should cast Seed
into the Ground, and should sleep and rise, Night and Day, and the Seed should
spring up and grow he knows not how, from the Blade to the Ear, and to the
full Corn in the Ear; and when the Fruit is ripe, he puts in the Sickle
because the Harvest is come. That is, though good Men's Progress in Religion
oftentimes be not so quick and hasty as they may and wish; yet, though almost
insensibly, it may daily grow and increase, and at last the perfect Fruits of
Righteousness be visible in their Conversations.

Therefore let not a slow Improvement discourage any Man that is sincerely
desirous of making still higher Advances, but let him hold fast what he already
has, do his best Endeavor still to grow in Grace and the Fruits of the
Spirit, and then with Patience wait upon God for a more plentiful Increase.

In the last place, this Increase of the Word must be proportionable to the
Quantity of the Seed that is sown, and to the Strength and Powers of the Soil
in which it is sown; that is, it must be according to every Man's Ability, and
the Opportunities he has had of Improvement; in some Thirty, in some Sixty,
and in some an Hundredfold.

When a Husbandman sowes his Seed, if he sowes in great Plenty and upon good
Ground, we know he expects to reap in a proportionable Abundance; and when he
sowes more sparingly, and the Soil be not capable of so great an Increase, his
Expectations are accordingly. And so it is in Religion; from such as are of
pregnant Parts and Abilities, able to entertain and consider and make the best
Use of the Word of God that is sown in their Hearts, and likewise enjoy the
great Blessing of excellent Instruction, and have the whole of Christianity set
before them in a true Light, all the Duties and Rewards and Punishments of it,
so that there is all that can be done in order to an abundant Increase; from
such Men as these, God will expect much Fruit, even the Increase of an
Hundredfold; they must abound in every good Word and Work; and the Word of God
dwelling so richly in them, Line upon Line, Precept upon Precept, Treasures of
Instruction heaped one upon another, a scanty penurious Increase will not be
accepted, much less a total and entire Barrenness excused. For, so St. Paul,
Heb. 6.7, 8. The Earth that drinks in the Rain that comes upon it, and
brings forth Herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives Blessing
from God; but that which bears Thorns and Briars, is rejected, and nigh unto
Cursing, whose End is to be burned. And our Lord in very plain and express
Terms says the same, Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall
much be required, and to whom Men have committed much, of him they will ask the
more. But because all Men are not of Abilities alike, nor have the same
Opportunities of Instruction and Improvement; where there is any Defect either
in the sowing of the Seed, or in the Capacity of the Soil, God will
proportionably abate in his Expectations of Increase. But, though he will not
expect the same Degree of Increase from every Man, yet he will expect some; if
not an Hundredfold, yet Sixty; or if not Sixty, yet at least Thirty.

And, if this be true, in what a miserable Condition are Myriads of the Hearers
of the Word, who receive the Seed in great Plenty and Abundance, and are able
likewise to bring forth a considerable Increase; and yet are as unfruitful as
if their Souls had lain always fallow, and were never cultivated and
impregnated by the Means of Spiritual Instruction! Let such be entreated by the
Love of God and their own immortal Souls, to look about them, and shake off
that stupid Numness and Insensibility that so fatally besets them, and bethink
themselves how sad their Condition will be, when at the great Harvest, the End
of the World, when God will gather the ripe Fruits and dispose them in his
heavenly Garner; when at that great Day our Lord shall expect Fruit from the
Seed that he has sown upon their Hearts, and shall find nothing but Briars and
Thorns, Wickedness and Impurity: Let them bethink themselves what a sad
Condition they will be in, when their Unfruitfulness shall be punished with
everlasting Burnings, and the Number and Sharpness of the Torments of Hell
increased upon them, because when they knew their Lord's Will, they did not
prepare themselves to do according to it.

Let them consider, that though God bears long with them, and frequently
importunes them to a more serious Reflection upon their Ways, that they would
turn their Feet unto his Testimonies, and be no longer unprofitable Hearers,
but Doers of his Word; yet it will not be always so, there will be an End of
this Day of Grace and Forbearance, and how soon God alone can tell; and perhaps
this Discourse may be the last Invitation to a new Life, which some that hear
it may ever have, or at least, the last that shall be attended with that Divine
Grace and Assistance which alone can make it fruitful. Wherefore, now while it
is called to day, harden not your Hearts, lest God should swear in his Wrath,
that you shall never enter into his Rest

Consider what our Lord says upon this Account, in this of Mat. 13.12.
Whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more Abundance; but
whosoever has not, from him shall be taken away even that which he has. The
plain Meaning of which is this, He that has made good Use of the Grace he has
already received, and the Instructions he has already heard, shall receive
abundantly more Grace, far greater Assistances, and much larger and more
frequent Showers of the divine Blessing than ever formerly he did: Christ will
come in to him and sup with him, and he with him, as it is expressed, Rev. 3.20.
that is, will freely communicate to him of his divine Favors and Refreshments,
and there shall be mutual Festivity and Joy between them; his Savior will take
him into the nearest Relation to himself; for he has told us, that whosoever
shall do the Will of his Father which is in Heaven, the same is his Brother,
and Sister and Mother; that is, as tenderly regarded by him as those dearest
Relatives.

And, how must that Soul thrive and flourish which is thus plentifully watered
with Showers above, and enriched with Streams issuing from the Fountain of
Goodness! But on the contrary, How intolerable will be his Misery that neglects
and disregards these Sermons of the Gospel, and is not a Doer of the Word, but
a careless Hearer only, deceiving, sadly deceiving his own Soul! From him shall
be taken away even that which he has; he shall be deprived of it to enrich his
industrious Brother and add to his Abundance. What Grace he had before shall be
withdrawn, and he naked and defenseless, left to the Fury of his Spiritual
Enemies; the Dews of Heaven shall no longer drop upon his barren Soul, but
parched and sapless it shall be reserved to eternal Burnings. Consider this,
all ye that forget God, and are unfruitful under all his Care and fatherly
Nurture and Admonition; lest at length he pluck you away and there be none to
deliver you. And remember the Words of Solomon, Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved still hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy.

And thus have I done with the first of our Saviors Parables, in which is set
before us a Blessing and a Curse; a Blessing, if when the good Seed is sown,
and we have heard the Word, we receive it into honest and good Hearts, and
according to our several Abilities bring forth Fruit to Perfection; that is,
obey and Practice it with Constancy and Perseverance: And a Curse, if we remain
still barren and unfruitful, not Doers of the Word but Hearers only, deceiving
our selves into eternal Perdition. It becomes us all therefore, to take heed
how we hear; and not be like the High-way-side, suffering our Thoughts to
wander from the Instructions we have heard, and leaving the good Seed
unregarded to the Mercy of the great Enemy of Souls; and exposing our Minds as
a common Tract to vain and wicked Fancies and Imaginations, and diabolical
Suggestions; nor like the stony Ground, impenetrable to any deep and lasting
Impressions of the Word of Life; nor like that overrun with Thorns and Briars
and noxious Weeds, such as are the Cares and deceitful Riches and Pleasures of
this Life, which will choke the Word and render it unfruitful: But, that we
treasure up this Divine Word in our Memories, ponder and consider it, and set
our Love and Affections upon it. So shall it grow and prosper and bring forth
Fruit, in some Thirty, in some Sixty, in some an Hundredfold; to the Honor
and Glory of God, and the eternal Salvation of our immortal Souls. Which, God
of his infinite Mercy grant for Jesus Christ his Sake.

Now, 2 Cor. 9.10.
He that ministers Seed to the Sower, both give us this Heavenly Bread for our
Food, and multiply the Seed that is sown, and increase the Fruits of our
Righteousness; that being enriched in every good thing to all Bountifulness,
there may be given through us, Thanksgiving unto God. Amen, Amen. The PRAYER.
I.
MOST Holy Jesus, thou blessed Author of the best Religion, who have in great
Plenty sown among us the Seed of a happy Immortality, even thy holy Word, and
watered it with the Dew of thy heavenly Grace, and art wanting in nothing on
thy Part to cause it to flourish and bring forth abundantly the Fruits of
Righteousness; I, thy unworthy Servant, unfeignedly bless this thy infinite
Goodness and tender Care for the Children of Men, but must with Shame confess,
that hitherto thy Care has been in too great Measure defeated by my
Inconsiderateness and Obstinacy; my Soul still remains barren as the
High-way-side, impenetrable to the Sermons of the Gospel, or at best, flitting
and unconstant in religious Purposes, which have been short-lived as the Grass
that grows upon the Top of the Rocks, or else choked with the Briars of
worldly Cares and Distractions, with covetous and sensual Desires. Thus have I
courted Death in the Error of my Life! But now, being awakened by thy Mercy,
and become sensible of the Danger I am in, and the sad Consequence if my
Barrenness continues, I humbly beg, and earnestly at the Throne of Grace, that
Thou, from whom is all our Sufficiency, would aid me with thy blessed Spirit,
and help my Infirmities, and strengthen me mightily in the inner Man, that thy
Word may ever hereafter take so deep a Rooting in my Soul as to produce the
genuine Fruits of Christianity.

II.
I am sadly sensible, O Lord, that the Heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? Do thou therefore, who art the Searcher of
our Spirits, purge my Soul of all lurking Hypocrisy and Pride and Self-conceit,
and every thing that will hinder the Growth and Increase of this heavenly Seed;
and make me apt to receive and cherish it, by creating in me an honest and good
Heart, and renewing a sincere and right Spirit within me. Grant that I may so
seriously attend to, and consider the great Truths thy Goodness has revealed
to us in the Gospel, as entirely to assent to them, and heartily endeavor to
conform my Practice to my Belief; and may I always heedfully preserve those
divine Instructions, and moving Arguments to a persevering Piety, which I have
learned from thy Word, lest the infernal Bird of Prey deprive me of the good
Seed, and in its room plant devilish Affections. And, O that Patience and
Hope, and an humble Dependence upon thee for Direction and Defense may be my
Support in this my Pilgrimage! That so, cheerfully running the Race that is set
before me, and thankfully acknowledging the early Influences of thy blessed
Spirit in my tender Years, and waiting for the later Distillations of thy
Grace, which will bring my Fruit to Perfection, and always endeavoring o
proportion my Increase to the Means and Opportunities of it, thy Goodness has
vouchsafed me; I may at last escape the Intolerable Punishment of
Unfruitfulness, and having my Fruit unto Holiness, the End may be everlasting
Life, through thy Merits and Mercies O blessed Savior Jesus. Amen.

PARABLE II. Of the Tares.
Matthew. xiii. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. Another Parable put Jesus forth unto
them, saying, The Kingdom of Heaven is likned unto a Man that sowed good Seed
in his Field:

But, while Men slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares among the Wheat, and went
his way.

But when the Blade was sprung up, and brought forth Fruit, then appeared the
Tares also.

So the Servants of the Householder came and said unto him, Sir, did not thou
sow good Seed in thy Field? From whence then has it Tares?

He said unto them, an Enemy has done this. The Servants said unto him, will thou then that we go and gather them up?

But he said nay; lest while ye gather up the Tares, ye root up also the Wheat
with them.

Let both grow together until the Harvest; and in the time of Harvest I will
say to the Reapers, gather ye together first the Tares and bind them in Bundles
to burn them: But gather the Wheat into my Barn.


THE Interpretation of this Parable is thus set down, Verse. 37. of this
Chapter. He that sows the good Seed is the Son of Man, the Field is the
World, the good Seeds are the Children of the Kingdom, but the Tares are the
Children of the wicked one; the Enemy that sowed them is the Devil, the Harvest
is the End of the World, and the Reapers are the Angels. As therefore, the
Tares are gathered and burnt in the Fire, so shall it be in the End of the
World. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of
his Kingdom all things that offend, and them that do Iniquity, and shall cast
them into a Furnace of Fire; there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Then
shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

From this Interpretation of this Parable, it appears, that the Design of it is
to show, for the Encouragement of the sincerely good, and Terror of the
Hypocritical; that though there may be many wicked Professors of Christianity,
that are Christians only in Name and Outside, and who in this World may be
confusedly intermixed among the good, and go undiscovered of Men, and
unpunished of God; nay, thrive and prosper here more than the good, and to all
outward Appearance, be the Favorites of Heaven, whilst the sincerely good
undergo many Afflictions, and appear to Men to be under God's Displeasure: Yet,
in the great Harvest that shall be at the End of the World there shall be a
Distinction made between the one and the other, the hypocritical shall be
separated from the sincere, and the former consigned to ever lasting Burnings,
and the latter received into the Heavenly Regions, the Place prepared for them
from the Beginning of the World.

This is the Design of the Parable. We shall now briefly consider how aptly
expressive it is of this Sense, and then discourse upon the several Parts of it.

The planting of the Gospel in the World in order to the converting Men to
Christianity, is compared to the sowing of Seed, because (as was said upon the
former Parable) the Gospel, like Seed, is that Principle of a future great
Increase of Piety and Holiness in this World, and of Glory and Happiness in the
next: It Is that, which, if sincerely embraced, and its Growth and Progress not
hindered, will spring up to Glory, Honor and Immortality: And it is said to be
like Seed sown or committed to the Furrows, and then left to its own seminal
Powers and the favorable Influences of Heaven; because the Gospel, being
actually planted in the World, is, as to particular Persons, left to make its
Way by its own Power and Efficacy, the Excellency of its Precepts, and its
transcendent Rewards and Punishments; together with the constant Dews of the
Divine Grace that attend it; without any more extraordinary Means, unless upon
some extraordinary Occasion, to make it take Root and fructify. It Is generally
proposed to all, in its whole Latitude; which is the sowing of it, and then Men
are left to their own free Choice, whether they will embrace it with its
Promises, or turn their Backs upon it and run the Hazard of its Threats,
without any irresistible Force to the one or the other; only the small still
Voice of God's Spirit in Men's Hearts, and Grace descending like the gentle
Dew, to soften and incline them to cherish this good Seed, which is the leaving
the Gospel to its own seminal Powers, with only the benign Waterings of the
Divine Grace and Blessing.

Our Lord is called the Sower of the good Seed, because he is the Author and
first Teacher of this holy Religion; and its Validity to the great Purposes to
which it is designed, depends upon the Merit of his bitter Death and Passion,
and the invigorating Virtue of his precious Blood. For, 'twas upon his
satisfying the Divine Justice by his Death, that he received Authority to mark
out to us this Way to Life and Reconciliation, as the only Principle and Seed
of Immortality.

The World is called the Field where this Seed is sown, because this blessed
Religion is catholic and universal, not confined to any particular Place or
People as the Jewish Religion was, but whosoever, of what Nation or People
soever, shall believe in Jesus, and repent, shall be saved. And agreeably in
another Parable (which, for its great Analogy to this, I shall not particularly
discourse of) the Gospel, or Kingdom of Christ is represented by a Net cast
into the Sea; Mat. 13.47.
not any particular Lake or River: And this World is styled the Field, because
this is the only Place of receiving this Seed and bringing forth the genuine
and expected Fruits of it; and he that shall refuse to receive this divine Seed
now while he continues here, or not suffer it to grow and increase and bring
forth Fruit; shall never have the like Opportunity again, but suffer for ever
the Punishment threatened to obstinate Infidelity, or barren Unfruitfulness.
This World is the only Field, this Life the only Seedtime, and at the End of it
comes that one great Harvest, which shall consign Men to an eternal Condition,
either happy or miserable, according to their Barrenness or Fruitfulness,
during this Time, and in this Place of Growth and Increase.

The Children of the Kingdom, or those that are sincere Christians, entirely
devoted to the Service of their great Master, and have received the good Seed
of the Gospel into honest and good Hearts, as it is expressed in the preceding
Parable: These are themselves likewise compared to good Seed, because they have
a substantial Piety, the Power as well as the Form and Appearance of Godliness,
and bring forth the genuine Fruits of their holy Religion. That divine Seed
that was sown in their Hearts, has produced, not only the Blade in the Ear, but
the full Grain in the Ear; the same Kind of Seed that was sown, appears in
their Lives and Conversations; the Seed of the Spirit brings forth the Fruits
of the Spirit, and the Seed of Holiness produces real and substantial Holiness;
so that the Gospel is called good Seed, as it is the first Principle of
Holiness; and truly pious Men are likewise called good Seed, as the genuine
Product and Increase of that first Principle. The Gospel is the good Seed sown,
and the sincerely religious are the good Seed as springing from it and being
produced by it.

The Children of the wicked one, or the hypocritical Professors of
Christianity, are compared to Tares or Gockle, because they have only a Show
and Appearance of Religion as Tares and Cockle have of Corn; but like them, no
Substance of good Corn, none of the real Excellencies of Religion, nothing but
hurtful and vicious Qualities as Tares are said to have; hurtful to themselves
in the final Consequence, as bringing them to so miserable an End; and hurtful
to others by their ill Neighborhood and Converse, as Tares to Wheat; and
likewise injurious to the holy Religion they profess, as reflecting Dishonor
upon it by their scandalous Conversation. Upon all Accounts it is infoelix
Lolium, as the Poet calls it; unhappy Tares they are, that bring Dishonor upon
God, and Destruction upon themselves and others.

The Devil is very fitly styled the Enemy that sows these Tares, because he is
the busy Prompter to Vice and Hypocrisy, and the great Encourager of it, by his
sly and wheedling Insinuations and wicked Injections: He is that great Enemy of
God and all things heavenly and good, and whose constant Endeavor it is to
oppose and weaken the Kingdom of Righteousness, and upon the Ruins of it to
establish his infernal Dominion.

The End of the World is compared to the Harvest, because then is the Time of
Gods gathering all Men from off the Face of the Earth, and disposing them
according to their Deservings, into a new State of endless Happiness or Misery;
as good Corn at Harvest, is taken from off the Ground, and carryed-away, and
laid up in Repositories of Safety; but the Tares and other noxious Weeds
severed from the rest, and bound up in Bundles to be burnt. And the Angels are
said to be the Reapers at this great Harvest; because it is by their Ministry
that God will execute his most equal Sentence, whether of Absolution or
Condemnation; the Righteous shall by them be caught up into the Clouds to meet
their Lord in the Air, and like good Corn, be laid up, and that for ever, in
God's heavenly Garner, for they shall ever be with the Lord; And the wicked and
hypocritical shall by them be separated from the good, and like vile Tares, be
thrown into a Furnace of Fire unquenchable. And thus much in short for the
Aptness of this Parable to express the Sense that our Lord concealed under it.

I shall now proceed to consider its several Parts: And it will inform us of
six things.

First, it will inform us of the State of the Christian Church in this World;
that there will be both good and bad under the general Name of Christians (as
Tares and Wheat together, go under the Name of one Field of Corn) and that the
Two first Planters of this Good and Evil respectively, are Christ and the Devil.

That there will be both good and bad in this World under the general Name of
Christians, will be no wonder to any Man that considers how many there are that
are Christians by Custom and Education only, because their Fathers were so
before 'em, and in their tender Years procured their Reception into that
Communion; but, seldom look any further into the Reasons and Inducements to
such Belief, and trouble themselves but very little to be informed in, much
less to practice the Duties that are bound upon them by that holy Profession:
And for the same Reason would have been Mahometans or Jews had their Parents
been so, and educated them in that Way, and therefore are Christians by Chance,
not Choice.

And this, those would do well to consider who spend the whole Six Days of the
Week in drudging for the World from Morning until Night; and then, like tired
Beasts, when they have filled their Bellies, without any further Thoughts, lay
them down to rest; and when the Lord's Day comes (which is designed for the
Nourishment and Improvement of their Souls in Piety and Goodness, and their
Instruction in the Religion they profess to be of) make little better Use of it
than their Horses do in the Stable, rest from bodily Labor, and saunter and
prate and drink away the Day; but seldom come at the Places of divine Worship
and Instruction; and if they do, are as little the better for it as if they
were absent. Let such consider, before it be too late, whether this Sort of
Christianity will bring 'em to Heaven or no? Whether their being baptized in
their Infancy will save 'em without any more to do? Whether their telling our
Lord at the Day of Judgment, that they happened to be born in a Country where
his holy Religion was professed, and of such as called themselves Christians,
and were by them presented to a Minister of Christ who received them into the
Pale of the Catholic Church, and that they continued to call themselves
Christians all their Lives, and now and then came to Church as other Christians
did: Let them consider, whether at that great Day such an empty Plea will be
accepted, when the Judge comes to enquire into what Obedience they have paid to
his Commandments? If it will be accepted, Mat. 7.21.
why does our Lord say, not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of my Father which is in
Heaven? Mat. 7.14.
And why is the Way said to be narrow, and the Gate strait that leads to Life,
and that few there be that find it? but, if it will not be accepted, as most
certainly it will not; Doubtless, it highly concerns such Men to consider more
seriously of Religion, than they have done hitherto; unless they think their
Souls not worth taking care of, or that the everlasting Pains of Hell, are not
so great as those of Repentance and living a new Life. And though for the Reason
assigned above, it is no Wonder that many ill Men here, go under the common
Name of Christians, and that Title be all the Christianity they can boast of;
yet 'twould be a very great Wonder indeed, if such empty Tares as these should
be laid up with the good Wheat, and get to Heaven as much by Chance as they
became Christians.

Further, it is no strange thing to find ill Men amongst a Society of
Christians, because Men are free Agents; and Religion does not force, but only
by proper Methods incline and persuade: And those, who in their Infancy were
devoted to the Service of God, and educated in his Discipline in their tender
Years, may yet, through the Predominancy of their Lusts and vile Affections,
and the Temptations of the wicked one, together with their own careless
Inadvertency, be, when grown up, inclined to live at quite another Rate than
Christianity allows: And though, for Fashion's sake, they may retain the Name
of Christians, yet choose to be indeed the Servants of their own Passions, and
of the Prince of Darkness.

And therefore, it is very unreasonable for the Enemies of Religion to conclude
as they do, that because many that profess Christianity, live in direct
Contradiction to it; therefore the whole is a Cheat: Because, did they believe
what that Religion teaches, to be true; they would not dare to live in such
continual Opposition to it.

Indeed, this should make all Christians very careful and circumspect in their
Conversation, lest they bring so great a Scandal as this upon their holy
Religion (remembering our Lord's Words, Woe be to him, by whom the Offense or
Scandal comes:) But it will not at all follow, that because some of a
Profession live contrary to its Precepts and Doctrine, that therefore the whole
is a Forgery.

For, believing and doing are Two very different things; and a Man may
habitually assent to the Truth of a thing, and yet not actually attend to it:
As a Man may be very well assured that there is a dangerous Pit in his Way, and
yet be so taken up with minding other things, as not to attend to the Danger,
and heedlessly fall into it. And so a Man may habitually believe that there is
a Pit of Bottomless Destruction, which will at length swallow up the
incorrigibly wicked; and yet, be so deeply engaged in the Pleasures and Follies
of the World, as not to attend to it till it is too late.

But, suppose some that call themselves Christians, do not at all believe any
thing of the Christian Religion; there are innumerable more that do believe and
live accordingly; and the Harmony of their Belief and Practice, methinks should
be a better Argument in the Affirmative, than the Infidelity and Debauchery of
a few titular Christians should be in the Negative. And though to a Man that
styles himself a Christian, and yet believes not a Word of the Matter, to him
the Whole of Religion (...) is as nothing, yet certainly it cannot be from
thence concluded, that therefore it is really and indeed a Fiction. For, that
may be assuredly true, and that to their Cost, which some Men don't care to
believe.

Thus we see it is no strange thing that there should be both good and bad that
go under the general Name of Christians in this World; and that though some are
much scandalized at it, and raise an Objection from it against the Truth of the
Religion, yet there is no Reason so to do; for, it is not the Name that makes a
Christian; he only is a Christian indeed, that to a right Belief adjoins good
Works.

The first Planters of the good Seed or the Tares, the bad or good Professors
of Christianity respectively, are Christ and the Devil. Christ, by teaching a
holy Reliligion to the World, such as shall conduct Men to Glory and
Immortality, and by the good Motions and Inspirations of his holy Spirit,
inclining 'em to embrace it, does endeavor to make all Men happy, to deliver
'em from the Miseries of this World, (for if Sin were weeded out of it, there
would be no Misery in it) and to prepare 'em for the eternal and ineffable
Felicities of the Kingdom of Glory; in which, after a persevering Righteousness
here, they shall be actually instated. The Devil, on the contrary, that great
Enemy both to God and Man, makes it his great Endeavor, by all Sorts of Wiles
and Stratagems, to obliterate the divine Impressions of this holy Religion upon
Men's Souls, to divert 'em from attending to its great Beauty and Excellency,
and the Nature and Duration of its Rewards and Punishments; to persuade 'em
that here lies the only Scene of Happiness, and that a future Felicity or
Misery is only fit to amuse and frighten Children withal; that the Desires of
the Body are given us that we might gratify them to the full, and that to deny
and mortify our selves, is the most unnatural Cruelty in the World; that we
must make our selves happy, while we have Opportunity, and not trust too much
to uncertain Reversions: And, when he cannot wholly blot out the Belief of
another World, then he endeavors to corrupt it, by persuading us that a very
little Religion will serve turn, seeing we have to do with so merciful a God.

And, if by these Means or the like, of which he has great Variety, he can
incline Men, if not entirely to apostatize from Christianity, yet, like Tares,
to rest satisfied with the Name and Appearance of Christians, and live at loose
and random, and follow the Stream of their own Passions and Desires, and his
sly Insinuations and tempting Delusions; then he has his End, and will at
length cheat 'em of the Happiness that Christ designed 'em, and decoy 'em into
his own Possession, and so bring them to the Portion of Tares and noxious
Weeds, that Furnace of Fire prepared for himself and his Angels.

And therefore, as we tender our eternal Welfare, we must be very watchful and
observant, that we may discover the sly Insinuations of this our great Enemy.
Whatever would disparage Religion, or lessen the Obligation to a good Life,
comes certainly from that infernal Tempter. The Temptations to an excessive
Gratification of our bodily Appetites, assuredly come from him; the
Opportunities of Vice are of his disposing, and it is he that ingages us in so
great a Love and earnest Persuit of the World. And therefore every thing of
this Nature must be rejected with the greatest Abomination, as the Endeavors
of our great Enemy, to deprive us of our Happiness, and involve us in his own
Ruin

And, on the contrary, those blessed Motions that we all of us often feel to a
more pious and holy Conversation, must be thankfully embraced, and cheerfully
followed, as the Directions and Excitations of our dear Savior, to what is
conducive to our eternal Happiness. They are those heavenly Dews which will
refresh our Souls, and improve their Growth and Increase in Holiness; and if
sincerely cooperated with, will at length bring the Fruits of our holy Religion
to Perfection.

And thus much for the first thing this Parable informs us of, namely, That the
State of the Gospel in this World is such, that there will be both bad and good
under the general Name of Christians (as good Corn and Weeds together go under
the Name of one Field of Corn) and that the first Planters of this Good and
Evil respectively, are Christ and the Devil; together with the Improvement of
each Consideration to the Interest of Religion.

But, before I quite leave this Particular, I shall, from what has been said of
the promiscuous Mixture of bad and good Men in the Christian Church, and God's
suffering it to be so without any extraordinary Discrimination; From this I
shall observe how unreasonable it is for some to object, as too many do, against
the Reception of the Lord's Supper in our Church, because, as they say, we
admit any that will come, even those that have been scandalous Livers, and by
that Means the Solemnity is profaned and made less beneficial to the good.

But now, supposing, though not granting that we admit any that will come,
though Men of ill Lives, (I say, not granting this, for the thing is evidently
false, as appears from the Exhortations to the Communicants before, and at the
Solemnity, and from the Rubric of that Office: And from the 26, 27, and 28th
Cannons of our Church, in which Ministers are expressly forbidden to admit
notorious Offenders, Schismatics and Strangers to the Communion.) But
supposing this, which is so evidently false as to the Church, to be true as to
some particular Ministers; why must communicating with such Ministers, and, as
we think, in such profane Company, be unchristianly abstained from, and the
Ministers declaimed against with so much Bitterness? At this rate they may as
well desert the Communion of the whole Church of Christ, and refuse to join in
any part of divine Worship; for no Doubt but ill Men are intermxi'd in all,
though they may not be discovered; and if their Company will unhallow and make
ineffecutal one Duty of Christianity, I cannot see why it should not do the like
to all the rest. And, if a Separation were admitted upon such Accounts as as
these, there would be no such thing as an external Communion of Saints,
because, such is the State of the Gospel in this World, that the bad will be
intermixed with the Good, as Tares are in a Field of Wheat.

And as to the Practice of particular Ministers, I charitably hope none do
admit of notorious Offenders to the Communion, without receiving satisfactory
Marks of their Repentance, or at least by previous Discourse or writing: When
they know of their Intention to communicate, let 'em know the great Danger of
receiving unworthily, and urge them to an immediate sincere Repentance, or else
forbid 'em at their Peril to approach the holy Table. And if after all this
they will come, we are to suppose in Charity, that they have repented, except
we are sure to the contrary.

And, if a Minister sees one at the Table, whose Life has, in many Instances,
to his Knowledge, been very faulty, unless the Crimes have been very great and
very notorious; to reject such an one, I think, (with Submission) would be
arrogant and uncharitable, and might exasperate the Man to so high a Degree, as
to make him throw off all Regard to Religion for the future; and in such a Case
the Exhortation appointed to be read at the Time of celebrating those Holy
Mysteries, should, one would think, be Warning sufficient for such an one, if
unrepentant, to withdraw; and if he stays, Charity would incline one to believe
that he was penitent. And, if a Person kneeling by, who, perhaps knows much
more of the Man's Course of Life than the Minister, shall be offended at his
communicating one that receives so unworthily, and speak hard things of him,
and abstain from that blessed Ordinance upon this Account for the future, as
profaned by such mixed Company at it; this is highly unreasonable,
uncharitable and unnatural. It Is unreasonable with Relation to their hard
Thoughts and Censures of the Minister, because Charity obliges him to think
well of such as present themselves at the holy Table, unless there be great and
undeniable Evidence of their obstinate and continued Wickedness; and in such a
Case I dare say no pious Minister would prostitute those holy Symbols to such
Swine: And, where there is not such Evidence, Ministers can search Men's Hearts
no more than other Men, and therefore must hope the best, and judge according
to the outward Appearance; and should they communicate some that receive
unworthily, by this Means (as it is to be feared they too often do) why should
they be blamed for that which it is impossible for 'em to help; and aspersed,
and all further Communion with them deserted, for suffering that ignorantly,
which God, though the Searcher of all Hearts, permits in his Church without any
open Discrimination; namely, the bad to join in all holy Offices with the good?
And this Practice is as uncharitable as it is unreasonable, because it is judging
and condemning those as Reprobates obstinate, unrepenting Sinners, whose Hearts
we cannot see; and who, though formerly egregiously wicked, yet now, through
the mighty Efficacy of God's converting Grace, may, for ought we know, to the
contrary, be better than our selves. And, it is an unnatural Practice too,
because it is the depriving our selves of the Comforts that attend the Reception
of that holy Sacrament, and those of Union and brotherly Love, merely upon a
groundless Nicety.

Let us all rather learn not to judge others before the Time, but leave every
Man to stand or fall by the unerring Judgment of our great Master at the last
Day; lest by judging others we condemn our selves who do the same things, and
it may be worse. And, instead of abstaining from the Sacrament, because some
come and are admitted to it, whom we think, and it may be not without Reason,
are not so well prepared as they should be; endeavor to make our selves still
more and more fit for so holy an Ordinance by a daily Amendment of Life; and
then our Fleece, like that of Gideon, shall be moistened, though other Men's be
dry. The Apostles were never the less dear to our Savior for Judas his being
amongst 'em, but the more so rather; and though, through the Wickedness that
was in his Heart, Satan entered into him after he had received the Sop our Lord
gave him at the Celebration of the Passover, and in all Probability did partake
of what he consecrated in Memory of his succeeding Death and Sufferings; yet
the rest received miraculous Assistances of the holy Ghost, and were faithful
to the Death, and for certain have received the Crown of Life. And I hope this
will satissy for the future, such as upon this Account have abstained from the
blessed Sacrament, and censured the Ministers of our Church, and (though
without all Reason) our Church it self: And as what has been said upon this
Matter, has been no impertinent Digression, so I hope it may be a beneficial
one.

Let us now proceed to the second thing this Parable informs us of, namely, The
Time when God's and our great Enemy the Devil sowes his Tares among the Wheat,
and that is while Men sleep. For so the Parable, while Men slept the Enemy came
and sowed Tares among the Wheat and went his Way. Then is the Time of his
injecting his wicked Insinuations into Men's Hearts, whereby to make 'em become
like empty Tares, Christians in Name and Appearance only, but devoid of the
substantial Graces and Virtues of that holy Profession,

By Men's sleeping is here meant a careless Inadvertency and Neglect of the
things of Religion; a stupid Security in a thoughtless Way of Life. And this is
a Metaphor which the sacred Writers have often made use of to this Purpose; and
it is so expressive of what they would represent by it, that 'twill be worth our
while briefly to consider, wherein the Likeness of such thoughtless
Inadvertency in religious Matters to sleep, does consist.

It is like it, in the first Place in its Cause: For, as Toil and Labor and
any thing that brings Weariness and consumes the Spirits, disposes the Body to
Sleep, and makes it desire Rest and Ease that it may have a Recruit; so this
moral Drowsiness or Hebetude of the Soul, generally begins to creep upon Men,
when they find difficulty in Religion; a little striving soon puts 'em out of
Heart, their Hands fall, their Knees grow feeble, their Soul faints within 'em,
all Hope of Victory is then laid aside, and they sit them down as Men quite
spent, and then steals that deep Sleep upon them which too often ends in Death.

Thus we often see Men set very briskly upon the Practice of Religion at First,
and seem wondrously pleased with their new Choice, and admire at their
Stupidity that they did not sooner discover the transcendent Beauties of
Holiness, and are resolved to redeem their misspent Time, and talk of nothing
but Raptures, and of reaching great Hights and Eminencies of Piety; when all on
the sudden they are at a Stand, there is a Lion in the Way, a right Hand must
be cut off, or a right Eye put out, i. e. some Favorite Vice must be cashiered
if they move any further, and that is a hard Saying, and the Men begin to cool,
a Stifness seizes their overheated Limbs, and a senseless Torpor invades every
Part of 'em; Mark 10.21.
and like the young Man in the Gospel, whom our Lord began to love for his
discreet Answers and towardly Disposition, when they must part with their
Riches to the Poor, and deny themselves, their corrupt Desires and
Inclinations, and take up their Cross and follow their Savior: Then they
become sad, and with Grief and Dissatisfaction leave him, and fold their Hands,
and return again to their Dream of Vanity. Just like those in the former
Parable, compared to stony Ground, who received the Word at first with Joy, but
having not sufficient Deepness of Earth, i.e. for want of through
Consideration, and beholding the smooth Side of Religion only, endure but for a
while, and in Time of Temptation and Difficulty, fall away, and their forward
Piety becomes dry and withered. Or like those mentioned in another Parable,
Luke 14.28. (which was spoken upon this very Account, and which, for its great
Affinity with this Part of the Parable we are now upon, I shall not
particularly discourse of) who begin to build, and sit not down first and count
the Cost whether they be able to finish, and so proceeding no further than
Foundation become the Scorn of all Men. But,

Secondly, as a State of careless Inadvertency to the things of Religion, is
like Sleep in its Cause and Beginning; so likewise is it, in its Progress and
Effects. For, like Sleep, it locks up all the Powers and Faculties of the Soul,
and suspends their Action; it dulls its Apprehension, and makes it take Evil
for Good, and Good for Evil; it vitiates its Reasoning, and makes it draw false
and fantastic Consequences and Conclusions; and therefore corrupts its Will
and Affections, and makes its Choices strangely foolish and ridiculous, such as
preferring Earth before Heaven, a little Ease and imperfect Pleasure here,
before Rivers of ineffable Pleasures that are at God's right Hand for evermore;
and the like. The lower Life is in this Case predomimant, and wild Dreams and
incoherent Fancies, make up such Men's Divinity, and their Rule of Life and
Manners. In short, the Life of such Men is but a Dream; their Notions, like
those of Men in a Slumber, dark, hovering and uncertain; their Discourse about
religious Marters, broken, disjointed unconcluding, full of Fallacies and
dangerous Sophistry, to cheat themselves of all Expectation here and Enjoyment
hereafter of what is their greatest, nay, their only Happiness. Their Actions
are like those done in a Dream too, extravagant, brutish, and unaccountable;
startled at Chimaera's and the Shadows of Danger, and insensible of the
Approaches of real and substantial Misery, though just ready to overtake them;
fond of a Bundle of Feathers, in love with an aerie Nothing, whilst their true
Interest is not in all their Thoughts. And, to complete the Parallel, they are
as deaf to all Reproofs as Men asleep; as little affected with good Instruction
and Advice, and so bewitched with the Fancied Sweetness of their Slumber, that
they are as loath to be awakened: And when by rudeer Applications they are,
like Men that have taken too large a Dose of Opium, they are presently overcome
with Heaviness, and shut their Eyes against all Conviction and fall asleep
again. And the final Event is this; that as natural Drowsiness clothes a Man
with Rags, so the moral will cloth him with Shame and utter Confusion.

And now, from this short Parallel which I have drawn between the Sleep of the
Soul and the Body; as we may see the Fitness of the Expression in the Parable,
so we may learn what Guard to keep upon our selves to prevent our infernal
Enemies sowing his Tares, or making us become as such, by his wicked
Insinuations and Suggestions. It Is while Men thus sleep, are thus thoughtless
and inadvertent to Religion, and taken up with the Gaieties and Pleasures of
this World, which, like pleasant Dreams, entertain the Fancy and Imagination
with much Delight, but soon vanish and become utterly unprofitable; then it is
that this subtle Enemy makes use of his Opportunity, and unobserved, steals in
his wicked Injections, which divert the Soul still more and more from attending
to her main Interest, and promote this spiritual Slumber so long, 'till too
often it becomes chronical and habitual, and an utter Oblivion of all religious
Obligations, an incurable Numness and Stupidity of Soul, God knows, too often
follows; and Men become like Tares, empty of all substantial Goodness, and at
best but Christians in Name and Show, and fit for nothing, but when God shall
see fit, to be gathered up from among the Wheat and burnt.

Wherefore it highly concerns all those that hope to be saved, not to sleep as
do others, but to watch and be sober; to awake to Righteousness, and walk
circumspectly, not as Fools diverted by every Feather and gay Appearance, but,
as Men that are wise to Salvation, always in a Posture of Watchfulness and
Defense. Fixing our Attention upon our Duty and the exceeding great Reward of
it, and often reflecting upon that intolerable Misery, which will certainly be
the Consequence of such fatal Slumberings, and still pressing on with greater
Courage as the Difficulties of Religion increase upon us; and daily
endeavoring still more and more to shake off dead Stupidity to Religion which
so easily besets us, and to rouse up the Faculties and employ 'em upon those
noblest of Objects, patiently receiving Instruction and Reproof; rejecting
every Notion and Opinion that would destroy the Necessity of a good Life, and
studiously avoiding Idleness and Sloth; and, according to our Lord's most
excellent Advice, adding Prayer to Watchfulness, that we enter not into
Temptation.

This Course if we take, we shall defeat this generally prevailing Stratagem of
the subtle Tempter; and being always in a Readiness to resist him, make him fly
from us with Shame and Disappointment. And our Souls will then grow more and
more substantial in Piety, and abound in it as the good Corn; and at length,
being grown ripe for the Glories and Felicities of Heaven, be gathered in
Peace, and laid up in Repositories of eternal Rest and Safety, as in the
blessed Garner of our Lord.

Thirdly, this Parable informs us of the Time of Discovery of the Tares, the
hypocritical Religionists; namely, the Time of bringing forth Fruit: When the
Blade was sprung up and brought forth Fruit, or when the Grain appeared in the
Ear, then appeared the Tares also. Then appeared the Difference between the
good Corn and the Cockle, which at first coming up looked as flourishing and
promised as fair as the good Corn; but when the Time drew nigh that the Corn
should appear and come to Ripeness and Perfection, then there was a manifest
Disparity, and what appeared so well at first was then found to be an empty
noxious Weed. And thus it is too often in Religion.

Many Men make a fair Show and Semblance of Piety; attend the Place of divine
Worship, with much seeming Seriousness and Devotion; and to all outward
Appearance, listen to the Sermons of the Gospel, and beg the divine Aid (as
that Dew of Heaven, which alone can make 'em fruitful) as earnestly as others
do: And this looks very well, and is (as far as Men or Angels can discern for
the present) as hopeful a Beginning as need be desired. The really good Seed
can send forth nothing more promising at first; and hitherto the Tares grow
undiscovered among the Wheat, by any Eye but that of God.

But after this first Blade has appeared, and that for some considerable Time;
after they have begun to make this Show of Religion; instead of advancing
further and further to Perfection, as the good Seed does, and abounding in
every good Work like the full Grain in the Ear; these have nothing but a Blade
and Stalk of Religion, no Fruit appears, there is no no real substantial Virtue
attends this Show of Piety, but rather the Works of the Flesh are discernable
in their Lives and Conversations. And this is a plain Discovery to themselves
and others, that they are but formal, not sincere Christians; vile unhappy
Tares, but not good Seed; for every Tree is known by its Fruits.

Wherefore, let no Man flatter himself with vain Hopes from a formal customary
Religion, when there are no real Fruits of Righteousness, but on the contrary,
much Wickedness and Folly and Vanity; for, unless his Religion makes him grow
in Grace and Virtue, and is seen in all his Conversation, 'twill be to no
purpose to make an hypocritical Show of it at Church; and is no better than the
most provoking Mockery of God, and an unnatural starving of the Soul with such
fantastic Food, and will consign to the lowest Hell, which is the Portion of
Hypocrites.

And as a hypocritical Religion will have a very sad Consequence in the other
World, so it exposes Men to much Shame and Contempt in this. For every Man that
sees such great Shows of Religion, such Pretenses to Christian Virtue, will
naturally expect to find the Man all of a Piece, and that to his Devotion and
Show of Godliness at Church, be added Sobriety and Righteousness in his
Conversation and Intercourse with Men. As when Men see the first Sproutings and
Flourishing of a Field that was sown with good Grain, they expect to find
Increase of the same good Fruits. But, when after all this fair and florid Show
of Piety and Goodness, there appears nothing but Tares, and the Man is over run
with wicked Habits and vile Affections, little or no Sign of a real Sense of
Religion upon his Mind, but rather the hidden Works of Dishonesty in his
Dealings; Lying and Collusion instead of Sincerity and Truth; Lewdness and
Intemperance, Pride and Malice, instead of Purity both of Flesh and Spirit:
When such Vileness as this treads upon the Heels of a Man's Show of Religion,
any Man may discern that he is a christian Pharisee, like a whited Sepulcher,
beautiful without, but within full of Rottenness and all Uncleanness; that his
Religion is confined to the Church, whither he goes sometimes for Fashion's
Sake to visit it, but always leaves it there behind him, and will not be
troubled with its Company abroad.

Now, such Hypocrisy as this, is certainly one of the most hateful things in
the World, and instead of gaining Reputation to a Man, is the ready Way to make
him a common Scorn: Men cannot but discover the abominable Cheat, and they cannot
but hate and detest it. Tares will at length appear to be Tares, and the sooner
for being among the good Corn. It Is therefore certainly the greatest Folly in
the World, to pretend to conceal under a fair Appearance, what will in a very
short Time discover it self, and will bring a Man to nothing but Shame and
Hatred in this World, and the Flames of Hell in the next. And it concerns every
Man that desires to be happy either here or hereafter, to lay aside all Guile
and Hypocrisy in Religion, and sincerely endeavor after the Power of Godliness
as well as put on the Form and Appearance of it. And thus much for the third
Part of this Parable, viz. when the Blade was sprung up and brought forth
Fruit, then appeared the Tares also.

The next thing it informs us of, is the holy Angels Observation of the Actions
of Men, especially of Christians, and their Diligence and Watchfulness in doing
God Service, and Zeal for his Glory: For thus it is said, the Servants of the
Householder, that is, the Angels, as it is in the Interpretation, came and said
unto him, Sir, did thou not sow good Seed in thy Field? From whence then has
it Tares? He said an Enemy has done this. They answered, will thou then that
we go and gather them up? They observed by the loose Lives of some Professors
that there were very ill Men that went under the Notion of Christians; which
they knew would reflect Dishonor upon Christ the great Planter of that holy
Religion, and would be injurious to the Progress of the Gospel; and therefore
they haste to tell him that they may have his further Commands, and with Zeal
for his Glory, and Intentions of great Charity to us poor Mortals, they offer
their best Endeavors to rid the Church of those scandalous hypocritical
Members.

That the blessed Angels, are, by God's Appointment, Observers, and that for
excellent Purposes, of the Lives and Actions of Mankind, especially of
Christians; is evident, not only from this Part of this Parable, but from many
other Places of Scripture, as an attentive Reader of the holy Writings must
often have observed: Of which, some few of the new Testament only that give
most Light to this Matter, I shall at present mention. St. Paul, in 1 Cor.
11.10. giving Directions for the more decent Service of God in the Church; for
this Reason says he, according to the Custom of that Time, ought Women to be
veiled or covered (as the true Sense of the Place is) in their public
religious Assemblies, because of the Angels: That is, lest any thing indecent
should be observed by those pure Spirits, who are present as God's Spies upon
the Actions of Men. The last Verse of the 1st. Chapter to the Hebrews is
likewise very plain to this Purpose, where the Apostle, speaking of the Angels,
Are they not all says he, (as assured of the Truth of what he said) Are they
not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister to them who shall be Heirs
of Salvation? That is, to take notice of their Behavior in the World, in order
to prevent their running into Courses ruinous, and to shield 'em from the
mischievous Assaults of wicked Spirits. And, to mention but one Place more, St.
Paul charges Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.21. Before, or as in the Presence of God and of
Jesus Christ, and of the elect Angels, that he would observe those things he
had taught him without Prejudice or Partiality: Which plainly supposes that
there were Angels then present, as Observers and Witnesses of what they were
doing and discoursing.

It being then thus plain from Scripture, that the blessed Angels are Observers
of Men's Lives and Actions, especially of those of Christians, as by God's
Appointment, and as Ministers of his divine Government; I shall not trouble my
self to make curious Enquiries into the Reasons why God appoints Angels to
observe and minister to us, since nothing escapes his own all-seeing Eye, and
his own all-mighty Arm can do whatsoever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth, in
the Sea and in all deep Places? Nor of what Rank and Order those Angels are,
and how many, that are thus employed? And whether every Man has a particular
Angel assigned him, as his Guardian and the Inspector of his Actions? Which
things are too high for us Mortals, we cannot attain unto them: But shall make
this good Use of this Particular relating to our Practice; That since we are
under the Inspection of such pure and holy Spirits, and whose Concern for our
Happiness is very great; since they are Witnesses of our most secret Actions,
and though invisible and unobserved themselves, are our curious Observers:
Methinks, we that are our selves but in one Rank of Being below 'em here, and
shall hereafter be equal to them, should not endure to be found by 'em
wallowing like Swine in the Filth of Sin, degrading our selves to a Level with
the Beasts that perish, and in base Hypocrisy pretending to be Christians, when
indeed we act like Infidels: Nay, too often, like Devils incarnate. How do
those good Spirits, though they may pity our deplorable Condition, yet withal,
despise and abominate the servile Baseness of such excellent Natures! Who,
notwithstanding they have such glorious Hopes, yet quit their heavenly
Reversion, for the low Enjoyments of this contemptible Earth! Methinks Shame
should deter us from vile and impious Actions, if nothing else; and the
Thoughts of the Dignity of our Nature, not suffer us to act so much beneath our
selves; and a Man not brutishly impudent, should not endure to expose himself
to the Observation of an Angel in such vile Circumstances, as he would be loath
to be found in by any Man he reverences and respects, nay, by a Servant or a
Child.

And as the Angels are Observers of Human Actions, so are they God's
Intelligencers to give him account of them, not that God needs such
Information, for every thing lies naked and open to his own all seeing Eye, but
for the greater Order and Decorum of his Government. And this their Office,
they perform with great Diligence and Watchfulness, and ardent Zeal for his
Glory; for no sooner were the Tares discerned by 'em to be among the good Corn,
the formal empty Christians to be intermixed with the sincerely good, but they
hasten to give account of it to their great Master, and, as not being able to
endure the great Dishonor reflected upon God and the purest of Religions, by
their base Hypocrisy and impious Conversation, they offer, with his Permission,
to remove those evil Doers, those not only unprofitable, but wicked Servants,
as unworthy to continue any longer in so sacred a Society as that of
Christians. Will thou that we gather them up? say they; will thou permit us to
weed this thy great Field of those noxious Tares, to cull out the empty nominal
Christians, and exert that Power thou have given us, to their deserved Ruin;
that the Residue of thy Servants may see it and fear, and keep from their
Abominations? And that those blessed Spirits, that angelick Host, is able to
perform this Service, no Man can doubt that remembers how one Angel in one
Night destroyed all the Firstborn in Egypt.

Now this their Diligence and Watchfulness in the Service of God, and Zeal for
his Glory, should put us upon a holy Emulation of doing God's Will on Earth, as
it is done in Heaven: That is, that we, who here on Earth, Luke 20.36.
are but a little lower than the Angels, and shall in Heaven be equal to them;
should now endeavor to be as like them as we can, and with the utmost
Cheerfulness, Alacrity and Diligence, perform the Duty our great Governor has
set us; and with a prudent Zeal endeavor in our several Stations, by
discountenancing Vice, and encouraging and promoting Virtue to the utmost of
our Power, to advance the Glory of God, and the Interest and Reputation of our
holy Religion. If Magistrates would take due Notice of those that live
scandalously and wickedly, and not bear the Sword in vain, but be, as they
ought to be, a Terror to Evildoers, and praise and encourage those that do
well; if the Governors of the Church, who are styled Angels in Scripture,
would act like the Angels in this Parable, and curiously inspect the Religion
of their Charge, and by such Methods as the Laws allow, either turn the Tares
into good Seed (which, though impossible in Nature, yet may be, and I hope,
often is done in Religion) or pluck 'em up, if stubborn and irreclaimable; if
Governors of private Families, warmed with the like holy Zeal, would take the
like Measures, and either reform their irreligious Servants and Dependents, or
else rid themselves of 'em, and bring 'em to due legal Punishment: If this
wholesome Course were taken with due Diligence, Watchfulness and Prudence, Vice
would soon be disheartened, and Virtue more and more thrive and Increase; God's
Honor would be vindicated, the Credit of Religion redeemed, our own temporal
Happiness advanced, and innumerable Souls saved, that otherwise would for ever
have perished.

And this would be a Work truly worthy of Christians; it is an angelick
Undertaking; and every Man that prays, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come,
thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven, is bound in his own Sphere, and
according to his best Ability, to promote what is contained in those Petitions,
to the Glory of God and the Interest of Religion; as he expects and hopes to
have an Answer of the following Petitions, and receive his daily Bread, and
have his Trespasses forgiven him, and to be preserved or supported in
Temptation, and delivered from Evil.

The fifth thing this Parable informs us of, is the Reason why God will not
suffer the Angels as yet to gather out the Tares from among the good Seed, to
discriminate Hypocritical from sincere Christians, and give them their due
Punishment; namely, lest while they gather up the Tares, they root up also the
Wheat with them; and therefore he suffers both to grow together until the
Harvest. That is, in other Words, the Reason of God's Forbearance of the
Wicked, and not suffering the Angels, those Ministers of his Justice, to punish
them in this World according to what they deserve; is his great Care and
Tenderness, even of the temporal Quiet and Safety of the Righteous: Which, by
Reason of their Intermixture with the wicked here, would at least be very much
disturbed through the rooting up a wicked Generation; and without the Help of a
Miracle, many a good Man might perish in so great a Ruin. But Miracles we find
God has never thought fit to work, but upon urgent Necessity, when his own
Glory, and the Interest of Religion and the Church cannot otherwise be secured;
now there being no such Necessity of punishing the wicked by destroying 'em in
this World, nor consequently of miraculously preserving those that are truly
good from a general Ruin; for the End of the World, that great Day of
Recompense, is not far off, and both may live together until then; God, for
the Sake of the sincerely good, lest the Rod of the wicked should come into the
Lot of the righteous, does generally restrain the Zeal of those blessed Spirits
the Angels, and forbears the Tares till that universal Harvest, when the Earth
shall be eased of its Burden, and then the good Seed shall be gathered
together in Safety, and the Tares left to be consumed in that great
Conflagration, when the World and all that remains in it shall be burnt up with
Fire unquenchable. And when, in Case of almost a total Corruption of a City or
Nation, and to strike a Terror into others, and convince the obdurate World
that God sees and is able to punish obstinate and irreclaimable Sinners, God
thinks fit to suffer his bright Host of Angels, utterly to destroy such wicked
Places as sometimes we know he has done; we have several Instances in
Scripture and other Histories of the miraculous Preservation of the good; and
that, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. 91.
though Thousands have fallen by their Side the Destruction has not come nigh
them; for he gives his Angels Charge over them, to keep 'em in all their Ways.

Of this great Care of Providence over the good, either in preserving for their
Sakes, Communities destined to Ruin, or else covering them under the Wings of
Providence, and shielding them from Danger till the Storm was over; there is an
Instance in the 18. of Genesis so very remarkable that I cannot pass it by. In
the 23. Verse of that Chapter, we find Abraham interceeding with God for Sodom
and Gomorrha (which he had resolved to destroy for the abominable and incurable
Wickedness that was in them) and he begins with what he thought would most
prevail with God to spare the Place, and tells him the Safety of the Righteous
would be hazarded, and that they would share in the common Destruction; and
therefore, lest he should slay the righteous with the wicked, which he knew the
Judge of all the Earth would be far from doing, he pleads with him for the Sake
of Fifty Righteous that should be found there (a small Number, one would think,
and easy to be found in such populous, though wicked Places) and at length
(being encouraged by God's wondrous Goodness, who complied with him in every
Request, and as he sunk the Number promised him he would not destroy) he, by
degrees, descends to Ten; which was as far as ever his Modesty would reach, and
one would think far enough to secure the most wicked City upon Earth.
Peradventure Ten be found there* And God said unto him, I will not destroy it
for Ten's Sake. Rather than those Ten should be in Danger of perishing in the
general Ruin, he will recall the destroying Angel, and at least respite the
Execution of his Vengeance; and for their Sakes reprieve the condemned Place of
their Abode. And when, through the extreme Wickedness of those Cities that
small Number of good Men was not found in them, and God therefore proceeded to
shower down his fiery Indignation upon 'em, yet he remembers righteous Lot and
his small Family, and sends two Angels to conduct 'em safely out of that
accursed Place, who hastened Lot, lest he should be consumed in the Iniquity of
the Cities, and upon his Request spared Zoar, which he fled to, and bid him
make haste thither, for that they could not do any thing till he was escaped
out of Danger; as you may read Genesis 19.22.

And what a boundless Ocean is the Goodness of God! That he should, not only so
graciously accept the imperfect Services of his own People, as to take them
into his peculiar Care and Protection; but for their Sakes likewise (that
Destruction might not so much as come nigh their Dwellings) to spare those that
have justly merited the severest Expresses of his Displeasure! This does indeed
verify the Words of the Psalmist, that his Mercy is over all his Works.

And this, as it should be a new Motive and Encouragement to true Holiness,
which will be so great a Security in perilous Times both to our selves and
others; and demonstrates the great Ingratitude and Baseness of the World, in
hating and despising and afflicting the good, who yet are as so many guardian
Angels to it, and shield it from the Expresses of God's just Vengeance: So it
will silence that Objection against Providence, drawn from the continued Safety
and Prosperity of the wicked, notwithstanding their living in open Defiance of
God and his Commands. For we see, they are but reprieved for the Sake of the
righteous, lest they should be involved in the Ruin poured upon the ungodly:
Their Punishment is but respited for a little while, and at the great Assize
God's Justice will have its full Course, and sink 'em into everlasting Ruin.
And, as the Husbandman may observe the Tares are among his good Corn, and
resolve at length to bind 'em up in Bundles and burn them, though his
prudential Care of the good Corn inclines him to let them alone till the
Harvest, and not pluck 'em up whilst the good Corn is standing and growing to
Perfection, lest it be rooted up together with them: So God sees and resolves
in due Time to punish according to their Demerit the vile hypocritical
Christians, but in a wise and tender Regard for the safety of the sincerely
good, withholds his Judgments during their Abode in the World, but will surely
repay the wicked Wretches what they have deserved, in the great Day of
Recompense.

And this brings me to the last thing this Parable informs us of, namely, that
though these vile unhappy Tares are forborne for a while, and let pass without
bearing any public Marks of God's Displeasure here; yet there shall most
certainly be a Time of Discrimination, even at the great Harvest; Mal. 3.18.
and then shall all Men discern between the righteous and the wicked, between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

For, then will the great Husbandman the Lord Jesus, as at the Time of Harvest,
say to his angelical Reapers, gather ye first together the Tares, and bind them
in Bundles to burn them, but gather the Wheat into my Barn. And accordingly
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all that have been a Scandal to it, and
under the Disguise of Christianity have done Iniquity, and shall cast them into
a Furnace of Fire, where shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth: And then shall
the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.

That is, when the Close of the World shall come, and the whole intelligent
Creation be met together at the Summons of the Trump of God; Men to receive
their several Sentences, whether of Absolution or Condemnation, according to
their several Deserts; and Angels to execute these Sentences: Then shall the
sincerely good Christians indeed and in Truth, be placed by the blessed Angels
of God on the right Hand of the glorious and just Judge, and after a Display of
their excellent Piety and Charity to all the World, hear this joyful Sound,
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
Foundation of the World; and then, be immediately caught up into the Clouds to
meet their dear Lord in the Air, and from thenceforth be for ever with him; and
shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father, having Crowns of eternal
Glory placed upon their Heads, and loud and rapturous Halleluja's in their
Mouths: Whilst those miserable Wretches, that knew no more of Christianity than
the Name, in whom Religion was only Show and Formality, having no real
Influence upon their Lives, and bringing forth no Fruits of Piety, whilst these,
shall find to their Confusion, that God is not to be mocked, and be placed on
the left Hand as Vessels of Wrath, and be doomed to depart for ever from the
Fountain of Happiness, into eternal Burnings, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels.

Then will the good find by a happy Experience, that there is indeed a Reward
for the Righteous, and that, however they were laughed at and discouraged here,
their Labor is not in vain in the Lord. And then will the Mock Hypocritical
Christians be sadly assured, notwithstanding all their Plea of having eaten and
drank in the Presence of the Judge and at his Table, and of his having taught
in their Streets; that without real and substantial Holiness no Man shall see
the Lord. And instead of being received into their Master's Joy, for cringing
and fawning upon him, and giving him magnificent Titles, Lord, Lord, Jesus,
Savior, but heeding little his Commandments; they shall be rejected with I
know you not, depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity.

And then will God be justified in the Face of the whole World, and found to
be, not an unconcerned Spectator of the Affairs of Mankind, but a wise,
all-knowing and just Governor of the Universe: And though Clouds and Darkness
seem here to be round about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the
Establishment of his Throne. Then will there be eternal Joy and Exultation of
the blissful beatify'd Souls of the righteous, and weeping and wailing and
gnashing of Teeth in the wretched Companies of the Damned for ever. Mal. 4.1.
Behold, the Day comes, says the Prophet Malachi, that shall burn like an
Oven, and all the proud, and all they that do wickedly shall be as Stubble, and
the Day that comes, says the Lord of Hosts, shall burn them up, that it shall
leave them neither Root nor Branch. Rev. 9.6.
And in that Day shall Men seek Death and shall not find it, and shall desire
to die, and Death shall flee from them.

And now for a Conclusion of the whole Matter: Since from this Parable of our
Lord's, it appears, that though an empty Show of Religion may pass well enough
in this World, and meet with no open Discrimination or Punishment from God
here; yet there shall most certainly be an after Reckoning, when all the
Thoughts and Intentions of Men's Hearts shall be revealed, and their vile
Hypocrisy and secret Impiety laid open before Men and Angels, and an
irreversible Doom of greatest Severity paid upon them according to their
Deservings: Since this is true, it nearly concerns us all to be Christians in
Reality, as well as in Name and Appearance; to obey the Commands of Christ, as
well as call him Lord, and to approve our selves true Disciples of this holy
Institution, by leading our Lives in all holy Conversation and Godliness;
diligently endeavoring to be found of this great Judge in Peace, without Spot
and blameless. Remembering that God shall bring every Work into Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good or evil; and that the wicked shall go
into everlasting Punishment, but the righteous into Life eternal.

The PRAYER.
I.
O Holy Savior, Jesus, from whom are derived all our Possibilities of
Salvation, the Means of Grace and the Hopes of Glory; but who expectest our
Concurrence with thy gracious Endeavors for our Hapiness, and for the Trial of
our Sincerity, permittest thine and our great Enemy to scatter his hellish
Injections where thou sowest thy heavenly Doctrine. I earnestly entreat thee, so
to assist me with thy Life-giving Spirit, that my Faith and Obedience, which
thou have made the Condition of my Happiness, may be so vigorous and active, as
to manifest that I am thine, not only in Word and in Show, but in Deed and in
Truth. Grant that I may ever esteem those inward Motions which I feel to a
progressive Holiness, to be what indeed they are, thy gracious Endeavors to
promote my eternal Welfare; and may I always thankfully and cheerfully embrace
and follow them. And whatever Thoughts and Inclinations tend to discourage
sincere Religion, and persuade to rest in the Formality of it; for thy Mercies
Sake, help me to reject them with the greatest Abhorrence and Indignation, as
the Endeavors of Satan to involve me in his own Ruin! And since it is while we
sleep that our great Adversary sowes these his Tares: Give me Grace, O blessed
Jesus, to awake to Righteousness, and rouse from my thoughtless Inadvertency,
and shake off my Dreams of Vanity, lest this spiritual Slumber at length prove
fatal and betray me into eternal Death.

II.
Thou have assured us, O Lord, to whom the Father has committed all Judgment,
that this Life is the only Time of our Probation; O therefore grant, that now,
in this our Day, all we that name the Name of Christ may depart from Iniquity,
and embrace the things that belong to our Peace before they be hid from our
Eyes! That by serious Consideration, we may make Religion our Choice, and
adhere to it firmly, with all our Powers and Faculties, and be in Reality thy
peculiar People, zealous of good Works; remembering thy blessed Words, why call
ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I command? And that, though here
the wicked go unpunished, it will not be always so, and at last Hypocrisy shall
meet with its Deserts. And may I always so attend to the Dignity of my Nature,
and the constant Inspection of thy holy Angels and glorious Self in all my
Ways, as not to dare to play the Hypocrite in thy Presence, who see the very
Secrets of my Heart, and be ashamed to expose my Vileness to those excellent
Spirits, and reflect upon the Confusion I shall be in at the Day of Judgment,
when the Goat and the Swine shall be discovered under the Profession of a
Christian.

And, O that the Zeal and Alacrity of these ministering Spirits in thy Service,
and for thy Glory, may put me upon a holy Emulation to do thy Will on Earth as
it is done in Heaven! That so, when the great Harvest shall come, and thou
shall say to the angelick Reapers, Gather ye together first the Tares, and bind
them in Bundles to burn them; but gather my Wheat into my Barn, I may find
Mercy at that terrible Day, and be received to a Participation of the Glories
of thy heavenly Kingdom.

Which grant, O blessed Jesus, I most earnestly beseech thee. Amen.

PARABLE III. Of the Pearl of great Price.
Matthew. xiii. 45, 46 The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a Merchant-man, seeking
goodly Pearls:

Who, when he had found one Pearl of great Price, he went and sold all that he
had, and bought it.


BY this, and the Parable immediately before it, of a Treasure hid in a Field,
which, when a Man has found he hides, and for Joy thereof, goes and sells
all that he has and buyeth that Field; The transcendent Excellency of the
Christian Religion above all things in the World, is represented: And that it is
the greatest Wisdom to part with every thing that this World can afford, all
the Pleasures, Honors and Riches of it rather than be without the inward Power
and Life of this holy Religion; which is a Pearl of so great Price, so immense
a Trasure, that nothing here below can stand in Competition with it. It Is, as
David expresses it, more to be desired than Gold, yea, Psalm. 19.10.
than much find Gold; and he professes that himself had more Delight in God's
Commandments than in all Manner of Riches. And Solomon says (almost in the
Words of these Parables) Happy is the Man that finds Wisdom, or Religion; for
the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain
thereof than of find Gold. Prove. 3.13, etc.


She is more precious than Rubies, and all the things thou can desire are not
to be compared unto her: Length of Days is in her right Hand, and in her left
Hand Riches and Honor: her Ways are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths
are Peace.

Such great things as these being spoken of Religion, by those that best knew
its Excellency; and the World being so very backward in the Belief of their
Testimony, and so foolish as to prefer every little worldly Good before this
inestimable Treasure, to which, all that the whole Creation can afford is not
comparable; and the Consequence of this Delusion being so fatal, no less than
the eternal Ruin of both Body and Soul: It highly concerns us by due
Consideration to rectify our Apprehensions in this Matter, and no longer
childishly dote upon empty Gayes and Trifles, and neglect what is of infinite
Excellency, and the most substantial Good.

It is therefore the Design of this Discourse upon the Parable above recited,
to weigh the Excellency of Religion against all that the World can afford in
the Balance of Reason, that upon a fair Experiment we may see which does
preponderate, and accordingly be convinced which of the Two is most worthy our
Choice: And then, if we still retain our Affection for the World against the
Judgment of our Reason in behalf of Religion; we shall likewise be convinced
that we act more like Brutes than Men, and that we deserve to feel the
Consequences of our unreasonable and wicked Choice, and taste no other
Happiness than what this unsatisfying empty World can afford; and in the next
World be for ever miserable, because we would not be for ever happy when we
might.

First then, let us see what the Whole that this World can afford will amount
to. All that is in the World, St. John tells us, is the Lust of the Flesh, 1
Ephesians. 2.16.
the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life; i. e. to these Three may be
reduced the Whole of what is valuable in the World: And by the Lust of the
Flesh is meant Pleasure of all Sorts; by the Lust of the Eye Riches, great
Plenty and Abundance; and by the Pride of Life, Honor, Power and Dominion.
This is that Trinity which the generality of Men adore, and impatiently desire
and place their greatest Happiness in the Enjoyment of; and of each of these
Particulars, we will now enquire what they amount to, and consequently what is
the Sum total of the World.

And first, to observe the Apostles Method, we will begin with the Lusts of the
Flesh, or the Pleasures of the World, and which are generally first in Men's
Esteem, and for which they are often content to part with the other Two. Now
these may be ranked in this Order, viz. the Pleasures of Lust and Uncleanness,
of luxurious Eating and Drinking, and of great Jollity and Mirth; all agreeing
in the Character of the Lusts of the Flesh, that is, all highly grateful to
the Desires and Appetites of the Body. And in the first Place I observe this in
general of all worldly Pleasures, that the longer a Man lives to enjoy them,
the more insipid still they grow to him; and that, not only upon Account of
their own empty Nature, but by Reason of the Decays of our own Faculties, and
consequent Disability to enjoy them. As old Barzillai said to David; 2 Samuel
19.35.
Can I discern between Good and Evil? etc. when he invited him to the Pleasures
of his Court. And what Happiness can be expected from that which is very
unsatisfying in its own Nature, and which, were it not after a few Years we
shall be incapable of enjoying? But to be more particular: As for the Pleasures
of Lust and Uncleanness; whatever Men's Expectations may be of receiving great
Satisfaction from them, they cannot but find by their Experience, that there is
much of Disappointment in 'em, and the Pleasure much greater in Imagination
than Reality: They are indeed deceitful Lusts, and often make Men miserable,
even here, but never happy. And for the Truth of this (that it may not be
looked upon as a thing only said, not proved, and the cinical Conclusion of a
frozen dispirited Student, whose narrow Course of Life has made him a Stranger
to such Sort of Enjoyments, and caused him to give a worse Character of them
than they deserve) I shall vouch the Testimony of Solomon; who filled the
Throne of a rich and flourishing Kingdom, and was accountable to none but God
for Actions of this Nature, and his Desires perfectly without any humane
Restraint; and who made it his Business to find out what was the greatest
Happiness of Man in this World, and whatsoever his Eyes desired he kept not
from them; he withheld not his Heart from any Joy; and who, amongst other
Delights, had great Numbers of Wives and Concubines, to the Number of Seven
Hundred Wives that were Princesses, 1 Kings 11.3.
and Three Hundred Concubines, and these the fairest, doubtless, that could be
met with: Variety enough, one would think, to take off all Possibility of
loathing and Desire of Change. But now, what says Solomon after so full and
uncontrolled Enjoyment of these carnal Pleasures? Why truly in the very
Beginning of his Book of Proverbs, Chap. 2.18, 19. he tells the World, that the
House of the Strange, or Whorish Woman inclines unto Death, and her Paths unto
the Dead: None that go unto her return again, neither take they hold of the
Paths of Life. And Prove. 5.3. The Lips of a strange Woman drop as an honey Comb,
and her Mouth is smoother than Oil; but her End, or the End of having to do
with her, is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two edged Sword. Very frequent are
his Invectives against this Vice, and delivered with more than ordinary
Earnestness: And in the 7th. Chapter of Ecclesiastes (the Book of his
Recantations) he publicly declares, that he finds (as by his own Experience)
He finds more bitter than Death, the Woman whose Heart is Snares and her Hands
as Bands; whosoever pleases God shall escape from her, but the Sinner shall be
taken by her. Verse. 26. As if 'twere a peculiar Providence of God, to protect a
good Man from falling into so great a Mischief, and that he suffers the wicked
to be ensnared by it as a severe Punishment and great Expression of his
Displeasure. And in the next Verse, Behold, says the Preacher, this have I
found, counting one by one to find out the Account, which yet my Soul seeks,
but I find not: One Man among a Thousand have I found, but a Woman among all
those have I not found. That is, he did at last meet with a Man that answered
his Expectations as a Friend or faithful Servant: But among all his Concubines,
not one but who balked and disappointed his fond Hopes of Happiness from the
Enjoyment of her, and deprived him of more Satisfaction than she gave him.

And thus we see, from the Confession of Solomon himself, who gratified his
carnal Appetite to the full, and experienced the utmost of what Lust and
Wantonness could afford; that this Sort of Pleasure amounts to no more than
this, Dishonor and Disappointment always, and not seldom Diseaes and Death.

Let us now proceed to enquire what the Pleasures of luxurious Eating, and
intemperate Drinking will amount to. All that it can pretend to is the
Gratification of the Taste and Palate: For, as for true Nourishment, High
Feeding falls far short of more ordinary Diet; and as for refreshing and
cherishing the Spirits, a moderate Quantity of Wine is sufficient, and what is
more than that, ends in a Fit of Madness, and impoverishes Nature. Now, the
Pleasures of the Palate make the best of them, are of very short Continuance,
no sooner tasted but they vanish; and the Stomach will not bear a long
Repetition of this Pleasure, and is soonest cloyed and surfeited with what is
of the richest Gust and Relish: And the Inconveniences that attend this
short-lived and very imperfect Pleasure, are great and of very long
Continuance. For, suppose a Man's Revenues to be so large that he can bear the
Expense of Luxury, without weakening his Fortune in the least, and so that very
usual ill Consequence of it, cannot in this Case be charged upon it, yet others
full as great may. As first, the more a Man indulges his Palate, the harder he
will find it to be pleased, and at length 'twill grow so troublesomely nice,
that its Disgusts will be more frequent than its Pleasure; and so, instead of
procuring a constant Gratification of the Palate, Luxury is the ready Way to
make a Man disrelish almost every thing: Which must needs make his Life a
continual Vexation and Uneasiness; and a Plowman with his coarse Fare, and no
other Sauce to it but a good Stomach, will experience far greater and more
lasting Pleasure in eating and drinking, than the greatest Epicure in the
World. And therefore, Luxury is indeed the wrong Way to procure an entire
Gratification of the Palate, and destroys what it pretends to create. Another
very ill Consequence of Luxury is, that it mightily weakens and impairs Health,
and makes a Man a living Hospital, full of Diseases, and very often cuts his
Days off in the Midst. And thus does an over-Indulgence to the Body cruciate
and destroy it, and by an extravagant Care to please the Palate, Men bring upon
themselves a Necessity of taking such medicinal Compositions as are abundantly
more nauseous to it, than ever the most artificial Dishes or richest Wines were
grateful.

And by this Time we perceive what luxurious Eating and drinking amounts to;
truly no more than this, a very short imperfect Pleasure, attended with great
and durable ill Consequences, which abundantly outweigh the Pleasure, and would
do so were it Greater and more lasting than it is.

Another Desire of the Flesh is Mirth and Jollity, a thoughtless Course of
Life, spent in Recreations, in Laughter, and an aerie facetious Way of
Conversation; and this is very taking with Abundance of People, and he counted
the happiest Man that can spend his Days in this Manner, and has little else to
do. Well then, suppose a Man so entirely disengaged from the Fatigues of
Business, as to have his Time wholly at his own Disposal; suppose him to be of
a brisk lively Temper, and free from all Care and Trouble, and that he has the
Conversation of such as are as sprightly as himself, so that the Day seems too
short for their Mirth and Pleasantry, their Pastimes and Recreations: Suppose
all this, that is, suppose a Man to have all of this Kind of Pleasure that the
World can afford, we shall find upon a nearer View, that there is as great an
Alloy here as in the Instances before mentioned.

Solomon, who was a very competent Judge in this Matter, and for a considerable
Time made Jollity his Business, and tasted as much of it as it is possible for a
Man to do; was so much of this Mind, as to pronounce it not only Vanity, but
Vexation of Spirit. He gave himself wholly up to Mirth (as he tells us, Prove.
2.1. etc.) and the Pleasures of Wine, with agreeable Company: He planted
beautiful Gardens, Vineyards and Groves, interwoven with artificial Streams; to
improve the Relish of those his Delights; and as the Crown of all, he had all
Sorts of Music attending him, both vocal and instrumental; so that he had
whatever his Heart could desire to make himself happy this Way if this could do
it. And what was the Result of all this? Why truly, a few serious reflecting
Thoughts discovered to him, that All was but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. I
said of Laughter, it is mad, and of Mirth, what does it? And what does it
indeed? It Is profitable for nothing, and when excessive, and attended too
extravagantly, it is naturally as well as morally an Evil; It unmans and
effeminates the Soul, and dispirits and hebetates the Body. The most profuse
Laughter ends in a Sigh, and Uneasiness, and looks much like Madness, and is a
certain Indication of Folly. A decent cheerfulness is commendable upon many
Accounts; but to make a Trade of Jollity, to be always upon the Laugh, and
spend the greatest Part of a Man's Time in Recreations and Diversions; as it is
a very childish thing, and looks much like the Behavior of Naturals and
Changelings, so it is a very uneasy thing too, and grows from a Pleasure into a
Toil and Burden. Witness such Persons frequent shifting and changing one
Diversion for another, how at a Loss sometimes they are, how to dispose of their
Time, and what Sport to go to next, and how quickly tired they are with their
idle Employment? And, it may be very truly said, there is less of Pleasure in a
Course of Life that is always hunting after Pleasure, and intent upon nothing
else, than in a more severe serious Way of living, which but now and then, and
sparingly, tastes of Mirth and Recreations, and soon returns to things of more
Weight and Concern. And the Reason is, those light Sort of Enjoyments are so
empty of what will gratify a rational Soul, that they presently grow flat and
insipid, and become tedious rather than diverting, when too long dwelt upon,
and sucked too dry. A short transient Enjoyment is most agreeable to their
fading, perishing Nature; and as he enjoys the Fragrancy of a Rose both more
and longer, who smells of it gently and with frequent Intermissions, than he
that uses it more roughly, and presses it too constantly and too hard; so he
experiences much more of the Sweet of Mirth and Pleasantry; who but seldom and
moderately uses it, than he that makes it his Business, and follows it as close
as others do their Callings. Even in Laughter (when extravagant) says the wise
King, The Heart is sorrowful, Eccles. 7.2.
and the End of that Mirth is Heaviness: Nay, he says, it is better to go to the
House of Mourning than to the House of Feasting; for that may have some
substantial good Effect upon a Man, Death being the End of all Men, and the
living, at such serious Times, may be inclined to lay it to Heart; whereas
Jollity and Mirth wholly evaporate into Folly, and leave nothing behind them
that is any Way profitable, unless it be Repentance. Sorrow and Seriousness
make Men consider, and become receptive of wise Instructions; but a light,
frothy Temper, both exposes a Man's Folly, and fatally prevents his growing
wiser: It shows that he is a Fool, and that he is like to continue, so. For, as
the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, so is the Laughter of a Fool; there is
much of Noise in it, but it serves to no other Purpose than to shame himself.
And thus we have seen what the Height of Mirth and Jollity amounts to; namely,
Disappointment, Vexation and Uneasieness, Shame and Vanity, Madness and Folly.

Having thus summed up the true Value of one of the Three things in which
consists the Happiness of the World, the Lusts of the Flesh, or those things
which more immediately gratify our bodily Appetites; let us now look into the

Second, which is called by the Apostle, the Lust of the Eyes; that is, Riches
and great Abundance of this World's Good, such as ample Possessions,
magnificent Structures, a splendid Equipage, glorious Apparel, and the like:
Which are called the Lusts of the Eyes, because it is the Sense of seeing that
these things affect with the greatest Pleasure.

Now, suppose a Man to have all of this Nature that the World can help him to;
suppose he has Riches enough to answer all these things, to provide all this
Splendour and Magnificence, and to support and maintain it: What more will it
amount to, than, as Solomon expresses it, Eccles. 5.11.
the beholding of it with our Eyes?

For, as for great Treasures of Gold and Silver, though they may procure many
things to delight the Eye and please the Fancy, yet the Man that has 'em
remains still as Nature made him, none of the Powers or Faculties either of his
Soul or Body receive any Improvement nor Alteration unless it be for the worse.
But Money will erect magnificent and stately Buildings, 'twill purchase rich
Furniture, and all that Art can do to adorn and beautify them. It Is true, it
will so; but, will those stately Structures preserve a Man better from the
Injuries of the Air and Weather than more ordinary Houses? Shall a Man sleep
better in a costly than a meaner Bed? And, will a Fever handle him more gently
that lies within Curtains of Velvet, and has his Chamber adorned in the most
costly Manner, than one that is contented with a cleanly Meanness? If not,
still it is the Eye that receives all the Pleasure.

As for the splendid Equipage of the Men of great Possessions, a Crowd of
Attendants following them, in gay Liyeries, glittering Coaches, and the like;
this may please the Eye too; but what more does it effect? It Is but Two or
Three of those Attendants that can be serviceable, the rest are owned to be for
State only, and are kept for little else than to eat and drink and be
troublesome; and the Experience of all Men will tell us, that he is the
happiest Man that stands in need of the fewest Servants, and retains no more
than he stands in need of. As for fine Coaches and glorious Apparel, if Gold
upon a Coach, and costly Trappings would make a Journey more safe and easy, and
if rich Clothes would keep one Warmer, or last longer, or be less troublesome
than a more ordinary Habit, there might be something said for them: But, since
there is nothing of this in them, nay, rather they are less serviceable to the
Ends they were at first designed for, and that over-Niceness and Curiosity in
Dress or any thing else is the Occasion of much Disturbance and Uneasiness: The
beholding these gay things with the Eye, is all that is considerable in them.
And, what does the beholding of all these splendid Sights amount to? Is there
any through and lasting Pleasure in it, any thing that will make a Man happy,
or so much as promote his Happiness? Why truly, Solomon, 1 Kings 10.
who experienced all of this Nature to the full, gives us this Account of it;
Eccl. 2.4.
He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves
Abundance with Increase: -- 11. Eccl. 5.10.
When Goods are increased they are increased that cat them, and what Good is
there to the Owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their Eyes? A
Pleasure very empty and unsatisfying (for the Eye is not satisfied with seeing)
and which their meanest Servant may have as well as they.

Content is least of all in the Breasts of Persons of the highest Rank; he that
has much would still have more, and is in frequent Fears of losing what he has;
for Riches are known to be very uncertain, and unaccountably take to themselves
Wings and fly away: and to be in fear of losing Riches, and yet dissatisfied in
the Possession of them, carries much more of Uneasiness with it, than the
beholding of them with ones Eyes does of Pleasure; and a Stranger or a Servant
may take not only as much, but more Pleasure in the Sight, that has none of the
inward Discontent, than the Proprietor and Master that has. So true is that of
the Apostle. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
They that will be rich fall into Temptation and a Snare, and pierce themselves
through with diverse Sorrows; and Contentment with only Food and Raiment is a
much greater Happiness. To so very little in reality does arise the Second
thing, in which consists the Happiness of the World, the Gratification of the
Lust of the Eyes; even to nothing but Dissatisfaction and Disquiet, Vanity and
Vexation of Spirit.

Come we now to examine the third Part of this World's Treasure, the Pride of
Life, or, Honor, Power and Dominion. And very fitly is this styled the Pride
of Life, it being the Aim of most men to be great, to command and govern, and
to have much of Honor and Respect paid to them; and in this they pride
themselves more than in any other worldly Good that they possess. But, what is
there in all this that a Man can justly value at so high a Rate? Suppose a Man
to be Monarch of the whole World, to be without Control from any one on Earth,
and to give Laws to every Man besides; suppose many inferior Princes tributary
to him, and that he is honored like a mortal God; suppose all this, yet,
however glorious it may appear at a Distance, we shall find, upon a closer
Inspection that this likewise is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

For, as for even an universal Dominion, unless the Subjects were as willing to
obey, as the Monarch is desirous to govern, a Catholic Crown would sit as
uneasy, nay, more so, than that of lesser Princes. The further a Man's
Dominion extends, the more Difficulties in Government will occur; the more
ambitious and discontented Spirits will there be to tame and keep in order; the
more secret Conspiracies and Underminings of Men aggrieved and disobliged, and
that are as desirous of Government as he that sits in the Throne can be: And
which, will often break out to shake and discompose, if not to overturn the
present Establishment. And the more extensive a Princes Dominions are, the more
must there be employed in the Government of them, and those, Men of different
Interests and Inclinations, jealous of one another, and envious at the Supreme,
and more ready to carve for themselves and advance their own Families, than
sincerely to endeavor the Prosperity of their Master. This is found very true,
and the Occasion of much Trouble and Disquiet, to Princes that have Affairs
more in their own View than this universal Monarch can be supposed to have; and
therefore much more dangerously must he sit than they, and receive much more
Disquietude and Trouble if he takes Notice of the Motion of his great Orb; and
if he does not, where is the Pleasure of governing?

So that the most ample Dominion is thickest set with Thorns and Briars while
enjoyed, and in continual Danger of a Ruin; which must perplex him that is
sensible of it, with numberless Fears and Jealousies, and anxious Thoughts how
to secure his Throne: And he that is careless and unsensible, and leaves the
Fatigues of Government to Others, and spends his Days in nothing but Ease and
Luxury; is an Emperor in Title only, and may soon, for any thing he knows, be
not so much as that. The one leads a Life of Vanity, the other of Vexation of
Spirit.

That it is easier to obey than to govern, is an usual and very true Saying; and
would be so, were Thrones not near so slippery as they are; and I am sure it is
very much happier for a Man never to have had such Height of Power and
Dominion, than ever to see himself thrown down and laid in the Dust. The very
Danger of so great a Fall, is enough to fill ones Breast with great. Disorder,
so great, as that all the Gauderies of Grandeur shall lose their Taste, and
become insipid to him, and actually to fall (as many glorious Princes have
already done) is the greatest Misery that can be experienced upon earth.

The short is, Empire and Dominion, fancy it how great soever, is at best very
troublesome and disquieting; and so uncertain, as that it not seldom ends in
the very Depth of Ruin. And as for the Honor that goes along with it, glorious
Titles, low Obeisance, and the like; all of this Nature is so perfectly empty,
and utterly ineffective of any thing that is truly good and Profitable to a Man,
that it is of all things the most despicable and of least Regard: And though
it is fit Inferiors should pay it where it is due, yet unless an inward
Veneration of the Mind, attends that outward Respect of the Body, a great Man
is so far from being honored by it, that it is the greatest Mockery and Abuse
that can be. And because no great Man can tell whether he is inwardly
reverenced or no, neither can force any Man so to honor him against his Will;
it is a very great Weakness for him to set any great Value upon outward Respect,
which for ought he knows, nay, in all likelihood may be, an Affront rather than
an Honor to him. And this is what Honor, Power and Dominion amount to.

Having thus given in an impartial Account, and that confirmed by the
Experience of Solomon, who enjoyed it all to the Full, of the Sum Total of what
this World can afford, that can pretend to be of any Worth and Esteem; by
examining the Three Particulars in which is contained all that is valuable in
it; namely, the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life:
Let us now weigh Religion against it, and see which does preponderate, which is
the most weighty and substantial Good, and consequently, whether the Merchant
in the Parable did wisely or no, in selling all that he had that he might
purchase this Pearl, and be Master of this Treasure? And we shall consider
Religion in a twofold Respect, with Relation to this World as well as the other.

And first, as for the Value of Religion with Relation to this World; what is
of greater Esteem than Peace and Quietness, Contentment and Satisfaction of
Mind, a Long and Healthy Life here, and a comfortable expectation of a much
better endless Life in the Regions of Glory? And all this, Religion is the only
sure Way to attain.

What the World it self affords we have seen cannot make us happy in it; its
Riches, and Pleasures, and Honors, and Power, and Dominion are empty and
unsatisfying; and indeed, the Parent of nothing but Vexation of Spirit: And
therefore I shall wave the Enquiry how far Religion is conducive to these
things; though it might be made apparent, that this is the surest Way even to
become rich, to live Pleasantly, and with Honor and Respect: and as for
Dominion, to govern a Man's self, which Religion only teaches, is more than to
govern the World.

Now, as to Peace and Quietness, which are Blessings of the first Magnitude,
and indeed give a Relish to every thing else; for without them neither Riches,
nor Honor, nor even Health and Life it self sits easy: That Religion is the
only sure Way to procure these great Blessings, and that both in Private and in
Public, Abroad with others, and at Home in a Man's own Breast, will soon be
evident.

As for Peace and Quietness in our Intercourse with others, Religion does
manifestly tend to procure that, upon these two Accounts. (1.) Because it
forbids the offering any Injuries. (2) Because it forbids returning any. Now
that which embroils the World, and is the Occasion of all Contention, being the
doing and Retaliating Harms and ill Turns, and Religion so strictly commanding
us to love our Neighbors as our selves, to do to others nothing but what in
like Circumstances we would be willing to receive from others; and to forgive
if any have done injuriously by us, as we hope to be forgiven by God at the Day
of Judgment: It Is plain that were our holy Religion sincerely embraced, and had
its due Influence upon the Minds of Men, the World might (in the Literal Sense
of the Words) beat their Swords into Plough-Shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks, and need not learn War any more; nothing would then hurt in
God's holy Mountain: And the World would be what God at first designed it; a
Paradise of Happiness, and Mankind a Family of Love. And as for Peace and Quiet
at Home, in a Man's own Breast, and without which all other Peace would lose its
Relish, Religion is the only Way to attain that Blessing. For as long as there
is such a thing as Conscience (which there will be as long as a Man is in any
Possibility of Salvation) it will do its Office freely and impartially, and
lash the Soul that sins, as often as it sins, and fill it full of Horror and
Confusion and dreadful Apprehensions of the just Vengeance of God at the Day of
Retribution. There is no Peace, says my God, to the wicked; but their Souls
are like the troubled Sea which cannot rest, and whose Waters cast up Mire and
Dirt. But a good Man's Breast is quiet and serene, full of the Joys of
Innocence, and the Applauses of a Conscience void of Offense both toward God
and Man.

And as Peace and Quietness, so Contentment and Satisfaction of Mind, is the
natural Product of Religion, and of that only.

Without Contentment of Mind, no Condition how good soever in its self, is
pleasing, and with it, every Condition is: For Happiness consists in the
Proportion of the Object to the Desire, and he that has the whole of what this
World can afford, if he desires still more, and thinks his present Condition
not good enough; is by many Degrees less happy than he that must drudge for his
living, but yet is contented with his Lot. Happiness consists not in Abundance;
he only is indeed a happy Man, that is so wise as to enjoy his present Portion,
and knows how patiently to endure a worse Condition, and dreads a base and
wicked Action, however gainful and advantageous it may be, even worse than
Death. And he will for ever be a Slave that cannot be satisfied with a little.

But the contented Man is always easy under his present Lot; and if his Fortune
will not rise to what he could desire, he will bring his Desires down to his
Fortune; and so be sure of Happiness, because by this means his Desires and his
Fortune bear a due Proportion to one another. And truly, so various are the
Turns of Fortune here, so many unexpected Accidents that make great Changes for
the worse in Men's Circumstances of Life, and which it is utterly out of their
Power to have any Influence upon so as to amend; that were there not this
Remedy of making our Minds comply with the Event, and taking out the Sting and
Venom of it by Acquiescence and Contentment and Contraction of our Desires, Man
would be the most miserable Creature upon the Face of the Earth. But he that
has learned and can apply this Remedy, whatever he may suffer from without, has
a Power still ready of turning it into Good; and though he cannot prevent the
Accident, yet he can prevent its doing him a Mischief.

Now this excellent Remedy for the Calamities of Life, Religion best of all
teaches us. For in the first place it teaches us that God is the great
Governor of the World, and with the exactest Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness
disposes all things; and consequently, that all Events are as they should be,
and upon the whole Account ordered for the Best: For there is no Possibility of
amending what is done with infinite Wisdom, and Justice, and Goodness. And
secondly, it teaches us that our Interest does least of all lie in this World,
where we are but Strangers and Foreigners, and are to continue but for a little
while; and that our Treasure and Inheritance is in Heaven, which is our native
Country, and to which e're long we shall be recalled, and our Glory and
Happiness there be the more increased, as we have more patiently and
contentedly submitted to God's Pleasure here upon Earth. And a hearty thorough
Persuasion of these two things, will certainly teach a Man to know, with St.
Paul, How to abound and how to want, and in every Condition to be content. And
for this, Christianity gives the clearest Evidence, even the Word of God
himself, who cannot lie; as no Man can be to learn that has read the Scriptures.

But Irreligion on the contrary, is the great Destroyer of Content, and fills
the Soul with continual Vexations, and makes every cross Accident doubly evil
by Impatience. For first, the ungodly have not God in all their Thoughts, are
wholly taken up with second Causes, and look upon things as the Effect of
Chance and Fortune; and so when Crosses come upon them, or ill Fortune, as they
call it, they grow querulous and out of all Patience; and as for divine
Providence, that is wholly unregarded, unless it be to revile it and impiously
to call in question the Goodness and Justice of its Disposals. And so, that
which in Affliction is the greatest Cordial of all, Irreligion either wholly
deprives the Soul of, or turns it into Poison; and instead of disarming a
Misfortune by humble Submission to the infinitely wise, and just, and good
Disposals of the great Governor of all things, adds a thousand sharper things
to it, and makes that become intolerable, which Religion would have made to sit
light and easy.

Again, Content is destroyed by Irreligion, because it persuades Men that their
whole Interest lies here below; either by making them believe there is no such
thing as another World, or else by engaging them so fast to this, as to hinder
their attending to any thing beyond this Life: And the Effect of this is great
eagerness in acquiring these lower Goods, impatient Desires of still more and
more of the World, as that in which is concentred their whole Happiness. And
what else can be the Consequence of this amidst the great uncertainties that
attend these sublunary things, but a World of Trouble and Discontent,
answerable to those numerous cross Accidents and Disappointments which every
Condition is full of from the highest to the lowest? Every unlucky Hit to such
Men is like a Dagger stabbing to the very Heart; for that which a Man looks
upon as his chief Good he can by no means endure to have lessened and impaired:
And the World being so full of such vexatious Mishaps, how full of Wounds must
be the Spirit of an ungodly Worldling!

And as Content, so Satisfaction of Mind, which is much more than a submissive
Acquiescence in our present Condition, and supposes a Happiness that is
complete and full. This is a Blessing which nothing but sincere Religion can
ever make the Soul experience: And he only that has learned to make God the
chief Object of his Affections and Desires, can indeed know what Satisfaction
is.

For every thing besides God is unsatisfying, because flitting and momentary,
and very imperfect, and empty of that infinite Good which is the only adequate
Object of that infinite Desire of Happiness which is in the Soul of Man. This
is the Reason that Men are so constantly disappointed in their Expectation of
Happiness from the Enjoyment of this World's Good; let them continually have
what they desire (which yet is too much to be rationally supposed of any Man)
and enjoy it fully and without Control, yet still there will be something
wanting to complete their Happiness, something that they desire still further;
and so the Soul is continually balked of her Expectation, and still at a Loss
for Happiness, and continual Longings and Desires, and as continual
Disappointments, are her Portion in this World. And what is more uneasy and
vexatious than such a Condition as this? What more deplorable than even by
Fruition it self to be made unhappy? What other Refuge has the miserable Soul
in this Case, than to take off her Affections from these empty Nothings here
below, and as Religion directs, fix them upon him who is the supreme Good, and
will abide the Test of an eternal Fruition. In the Enjoyment of him must needs
be infinite Satisfaction, because there is no real Good that we can possibly
desire, but is in the divine Nature in the highest Degree of Excellency and
Perfection; and that not only for a Time, but to all Eternity. All the
Capacities of the Soul must needs be filled with an infinite Good, and entirely
rest in it as in the very Center of Happiness.

Thirdly, Religion is of very great Value with Respect to this World, because
it is so greatly conducive to a long and healthy Life in it.

Long Life and Health is that which all People naturally covet, and is indeed a
very great Blessing; and that not only because the longer Men live and the more
vigorous they are, the longer and more fully they enjoy, or at least hope to
enjoy the good things of this World (which yet with too many is the main
Consideration) but likewise and chiefly because they have more Time and greater
Opportunities to provide for the Happiness of the eternal Life to come, and
heap up still greater Treasures of Glory in the Kingdom of Heaven. Now this
great Blessing nothing is more likely to help a Man to than Religion. For,

First, it engages Men to live regularly and temperately, moderates the
Appetites of eating and drinking, and curbs the exorbitant Desires of the
flesh; and by allowing no more than is necessary to the Comfortable Support of
Nature, makes no Provision for those many destructive Diseases which are always
the Attendants of Excess. How many of the meaner Sort by Labor and course Fare
protract their Days, than of the Rich who live in Ease and Luxury? And the
Reason is plain, because the poor Man's scanty Fortune will not allow him to
exceed, but keeps him within the Bounds of Moderation and Temperance, and
forces him to be content with a little; whereas the rich have many and great
Temptations to Luxury and Excess, and seldom are so religious as to resist
them, and so too frequently feel the sad Effects of Intemperance and live out
but half their Days. But now, Religion is a kind of voluntary Poverty, and
helps Men to all the Blessings of a mean Condition, though rich and out of
Danger of the Sting of it; and by introducing Temperance and Moderation into
the Families of the wealthy, brings with it Health and long Life, which
otherwise would seldom be found but in the Cottages of the Poor.

Again, Religion is greatly conducive to a long and healthy Life, because it
regulates the Passions, keeps the Soul quiet and in a Calm; which has no little
Influence upon the Health and Welfare of the Body. That the Passions of the
Mind do very much affect the Body, is undeniable; and when they are excessive,
nothing more shakes and discomposes the whole Man. Even Joy, which one would
think should be innocent enough, has sometimes been so violent as to overcharge
Persons and leave them dead, and Grief has been often fatal, and Envy is the
worst Sort of Consumption, and leaves visible Tokens of it upon the
Countenance, and Love has had many Martyrs, and Anger is a great Impoverisher
of the Animal Spirits, and oftentimes makes a Man his own Executioner, and
engages in such Scuffles and hot Inconsiderate Actions, as not seldom end in
Wounds and Death. Every Excess of Passion of what kind soever, is naturally a
great Impairer of Health at least, and the often Repetitions of it, the ready
Way to destroy it; Nature not being able to bear such violent Concussions long,
without being much weakened and shattered by them: Like the Walls of a Castle,
which, how strong soever, will receive Damage by every furious Battery, and
unless relieved, must at length fall before the Cannons Irresistible Force.

But now, Religion prevents all this Mischief; and by regulating and reducing
to Moderation these Passions of the Soul, makes the Mind calm and quiet, and
keeps the Spirits in an Aequipoise; and the Body consequently is undisturbed,
feels no Violence, nor is hurried on to dangerous and destructive Actions; but
Nature goes on evenly in making Provision for its Health and Support, and it
enjoys its Strength and Beauty as in the Times of Quietness and Peace.

In the last Place, a comfortable Expectation of a much better and endless Life
in the Regions of Glory, can spring from nothing but sincere Religion; and
therefore Religion is of very great Value with Respect to this world. For what
can be of greater value and more to be desired in this Valley of Tears, this
World of Sin, and Sorrow, and Ignorance, Vexation, and Disappointment, than to
have a well grounded Hope that 'twill not be always so with us? That there will
be a Time when all Tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, and Sin and Misery be at
an End for ever? That we shall one Day be disentangled from the Clog of Flesh,
the Prison Doors set open, and our captived Souls set free, and with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, return to the great Father of Spirits, and with
the full Vigor of all their Faculties contemplate and enjoy the only
satisfying Good? That instead of Floods of Years, there shall then be Rivers of
Pleasures flowing in upon us to all Eternity; Halleluia's instead of Groans and
mournful Accents; the triumphant Rejoycings of eternal beatified Spirits
instead of the bitter Complaints of miserable Mortals; and in a word, Love in
its Perfection instead of Quarrels and Discontents, Envy, and Hatred, and
Malice, and Revenge, and all the dire Attendants of them? That instead of
spiritual Blindness and Ignorance of the most concerning Truths (for here we
know but in Part, and see through a Glass darkly) we shall e're long, be
admitted to contemplate Truth it self, and know as we are known, and shall see
God as he is, and in him all things? For God is Light. What can be more
valuable than such a chearing Expectation as this! How will it sweeten all the
Troubles of this Mortal Life and be a sensible Foretaste of the Glory that
shall hereafter be revealed!

But now, nothing can create such a Hope as this but sincere Religion; for God
is infinitely pure and holy, and into his Presence no unclean thing can enter.
And it is expressly said in the Revelations of his Will, That without Holiness no
Man shall see the Lord. A wicked Man's Breast that is not seared, can be full of
nothing but the dire Reflections of an enraged Conscience, and dreadful
forebodings of the Wrath to come. The Miseries he feels in this World are but
as the Beginnings of his eternal Sorrows; and while he continues in his
Rebellion against God, he can expect nothing but new Expresses of his
Indignation here, and to be doomed to the Portion of the Devil and his Angels
at the Day of Judgment. He only that has lived piously in this World can with
any Comfort think upon a future State: But to him that has led this First Life
by the Rule of Religion, and served his Maker in Sincerity of Heart, no Joy
comparable to that which he experiences when he thinks of being dissolved, and
conducted to the Embraces of his Savior, in the Kingdom of Heaven, where he
shall be for ever with him, and unspeakably happy in the Joy of his dear Lord.

And thus much for the Value of Religion with Relation to this World. It is the
Parent of the most perfect Peace and Quietness, Content and Satisfaction of
Mind, of a long and healthy Life here, and of a comfortable Expectation of a
glorious Immortality in the Regions of Blessedness. And were this all that
could be said of it, I question not but to any considering Man, it would appear
to be a Jewel of inestimable Price; that nothing the whole World can afford is
comparable to it; and that he is the wisest Man, who, with the Merchant in the
Parable, immediately parts with all that stands in Competition with Religion,
and would hinder him in the Performance of the Duties of it.

But this is far from all; Godliness has not only a Promise of the Life that
now is, but also, and chiefly of that which is to come: And, if it appears to
be so inestimable a Treasure when we look no further than this Life, what shall
we think of it when we contemplate that exceeding Weight of Glory which shall
be its Reward in Heaven!

The Happiness that will crown Religion in the other World, springing from the
same Fountain from whence do flow the Felicities of God himself; (i. e.) it
consisting in an intimate View and full Enjoyment of the Beauties and
Perfections of the Divine Nature (for so St. John, 1 John 3.2. We shall see God
as he is.) It must needs be inexpressible: Nay, the very Contemplation of it is
too bright for Minds darkened with Flesh, the Splendors of it flash too strongly
upon our feeble Sense now we are in the Body, and too long and closely gazed on
will rather dazzle than enlighten our Understandings. No Mortal Man can see
God's Face and live; and therefore most true is that of the Apostle, Eye has
not seen, nor Ear heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive the things that God
has reserved for those that love him. Indeed, this includes all that can
possibly be imagined of Excellence, and much more than we poor ignorant
benighted Creatures can imagine.

For God is the Fountain of Being, and consequently of Perfection: All that is
charming and truly desirable in Nature, to our Senses, or to our
Understandings, in the visible or invisible Creation; is but a Stream from this
divine Fountain, and is in him ininfinitely greater Excellency. For, he is
Beauty, and Goodness, and Harmony it self. And therefore, since Religion will
bring us to such a Happiness as the Vision and Enjoyment of this chief Good;
what can compare with it for Value? The Depth says, it is not in me, and the Sea
says, it is not with me; Man knows not the Price thereof, neither is it found
in the Land of the Living. It cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the
precious Onyx or the Sapphire; no mention shall be made of Coral or Pearls, for
the Price of Wisdom is above Rubies, Job 28.13. etc.

Such then being the Excellency of Religion, that it is above all things
conducive to the Happiness of Man in this World, and will bring him to the
Enjoyment of God himself to eternal Ages, when this short Life is ended; and
the whole that the World can afford, amounting to no more, by the Confession of
one that enjoyed it all to the Full, than Emptiness and Disappointment, Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit here; and if the Word of God be true, an eternal
Banishment from the supreme Good shall at last be their Punishment, who love
this worthless World, more than Religion and their Maker: These things being
duly weighed and considered, let any Man in his Wits say, which is of greatest
Value, Religion or the World? And which is the wisest Man, he that ruins his
Soul for the Gain of even the whole World, or he that counts all these
sublunary things as Dung in Comparison with Religion, and is ready to part with
all that this Earth can afford him for the Joys of a good Conscience here, and
the Glories of Heaven hereafter? He that prefers the World in his Choice,
deprives himself of the greatest Comfort of this present Life, and parts with
the certain Reversion of eternal Happiness in Heaven, for Pleasures that don't
deserve that Name, they are so empty and unsatisfying; he brings most exquisite
and everlasting Misery upon his whole self Soul and Body, for a very short
lived imperfect Gratification of his brutal Part only, and purchases the
Torments of the other World by making himself unhappy in this.

In a Word therefore, as much as to be like God in Holiness and Happiness is to
be preferred before being like the Devil in Sin and Misery; as much as
Satisfaction is better than Disappointment, Peace, and Quietness, and Content,
than Vexation and continual Disturbance and Perplexity of Mind, a confirmed
Health and long Life, than the Diseases and hasty Death that follows
Debauchery, and the comfortable Expectation of being for ever happy with Saints
and Angels, and the blessed God in the Celestial Paradise, than the
confounding Dread of the Judgment of the great Day: As much as Immortality is
more to be prized than a Life of a Span long, and the Enjoyment of the chief
Good, than the Pleasures of a Swine; of so much gerater Value is Religion than
all that this World can afford, and indeed the only desirable Treasure, and a
Pearl of inestimable Price.

And now, if what has been hitherto discoursed be true, the Application is
easy. If Religion be of all things the most precious, let us make it more and
more our Endeavor to enrich our Souls with this Treasure, to adorn our
rational Nature with this Pearl of great Price; and with the Merchant in the
Parable, think nothing too much to part with, that we may purchase that
Heavenly Wisdom which will make us wise to Salvation. For, sound Wisdom, as the
wise King expresses it, Prove. 3.18.
is a Tree of Life to those that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that
retains her. She shall give to thine Head an Oranment of Grace, Prove. 4.9.
and a Crown of Glory shall she deliver to thee.

But, he that would have this Wisdom, and find this Pearl, must not only wish
and desire, but, with the Merchant in the Parable, diligently seek it; seek and
ye shall find, says our Lord; Pro. 2.4, 5.
and Solomon assures us, That if we seek Wisdom as Silver, and search for her
as for hid Treasure, then shall we understand the Fear of the Lord, and find
the Knowledge of God.

Religion is not acquired without Diligence; for though it be the Gift of God,
yet the Soul must be prepared to receive it; all evil Habits must be broke and
rooted up, and pious Dispositions planted in their Room, and the Temper of the
Mind changed by Repentance, and all the Powers of the whole Man become pliable
to the Motions of the Spirit of Holiness before the divine Likeness can be
formed in the Soul. And though it is the Grace of God that enables us to go thus
far (for without it we can do nothing) yet our own Concurrence and Cooperation
with his Grace is necessary to bring the blessed Work of Regeneration to
Perfection. An obstinate Resistance of preventing Grace will grieve and quench
that Life-giving Spirit; and such a Soul shall know no more of Religion, than
that it was invited to it, but rejected the Offer, and might have been happy in
the Enjoyment of so great a Treasure, but it would not. But, when a Soul with
Joy embraces the Motions of the holy Spirit to a new Life, and makes it her
great Endeavor to remove all Obstacles out of the Way, that they may make a
due Impression, and hungers and thirsts after new Degrees of Righteousness;
This Soul shall be filled with the Treasures of the divine Grace, and the Power
of Godliness will be visible in all Manner of holy Conversation. But this cannot
be performed without a watchful persevering Diligence; there is so much
Opposition from within and without to this great Business, that like Nehemiah's
Laborers, Neh. 5.17.
we must work with our Swords in our Hands, and fight and strive, that we may
carry on the Building of a living Temple for our God, and make our Souls Houses
of Prayer, adorned with religious Affections, and sit to receive him that hates
Iniquity. He that is thus diligent shall grow rich toward God, and daily
increase in the Knowledge and Love of him, 'till Mortality shall be swallowed
up of Life; and then all the Labors of Religion shall for ever be at an End,
and nothing remain for the happy Soul to do but to enjoy to all Eternity the
glorious Rewards of it.

Let us all therefore be steadfast unmovable, and always abound in this Work of
the Lord, for as much as we know our Labor shall not be in vain; and to our
diligent Pursuit of this inestimable Treasure of Religion, let us add frequent
and earnest Prayer to God, who is the only Giver of every good and perfect
Gift, that he would send down Wisdom from his holy Heaven, that being present,
she may labor with us, that we may know what is pleasing in his Sight, and set
our selves to do it with all Alacrity, running with Diligence and Patience the
Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our
Faith; who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising
the Shame, Heb. 12.1, 2.
and is set down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God. remembering that we
also shall reap in due Season if we faint not: And if we part with all the vile
Affections for the Sake of Religion in this World, and are ready in Preparation
of Mind to suffer any worldly Loss, even to that of Life it self for the Sake
of Jesus and his Truth; we shall find such a Recompense of Reward in the
Kingdom of Heaven, as will abundantly compensate all our Sufferings here; for
our light Affliction which is but for a Moment, works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal Weight of Glory.

Happy is the Exchange of all that this World can afford for a Jewel of so
great Price as Religion, and for such inexhaustible Treasures of Bliss as are
reserved to Reward it in the Presence of God. What is our greatest Interest
therefore let us before all things pursue, and where our Treasure is, there let
our Hearts be also.

The PRAYER.
I.
O Merciful Jesu! Who have prepared for us a Treasure in Heaven, and taught us
the Way to attain it, and warned us of the Emptiness of this World's Good, that
we may not be allured by its Temptrations to leave the Way to Life; enable me I
entreat thee so steadfastly to attend thy divine Instructions, that I may more
and more daily take my Love from that which does not, cannot satisfy, and is
indeed but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit, and fix it upon that which is above
all things valuable: That so, I may be convinced by a happpy Experience, that
true Pleasure, and Freedom, and Happiness, is only to be met with in thy
Service; and that I am so little designed for the Delights of the World and of
Sense, that the longer I live to prove them, the less capable I shall be of
their Enjoyment. O may that Peace and Tranquillity within my own Breast, that
Quiet with others, that Health and Length of Days which is in the Right Hand of
Religion, and the durable Riches and true Honor that is in her Left, and that
chearing Expectation of Heaven when this frail Tabernacle shall be dissolved;
may this which is the natural Offspring of true Piety leave so lovely an Idea
of it upon my Soul, that I may value it as indeed the greatest Treasure, and a
Pearl of inestimable Price! And may I be so wise, as where my Treasure is,
there to fix my Desires, and thither to direct my Endeavors, and part with
every thing that is my Hindrance in the Acquisition of it! And since this Pearl
is not cast before Swine, and this Treasure must be diligently sought for e're
it be found: Do thou so purify and refine my Affections, that I may above all
things, hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and diligently search for this
saving Wisdom as for hid Treasure; and may thy blessed Spirit, which leads
into all Truth, so guide and direct me in my Search, that seeking I may find,
and having found, never more part with that inestimable Jewel, though for the
Gain of the whole World, but rather sell all, even Life it self to secure my
Possession of it. And this Wisdom I earnestly beg of thee O Lord, who art the
Giver of every good and perfect Gift, through the Merits of Jesus thy beloved
Son, our only Savior. Amen.

PARABLE IV. Of a merciful King, and his unmerciful Servant.
Matthew. xviii. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. The Kingdom
of Heaven is likened unto a certain King, which would take Account of his
Servants.

And when he had begun to reckon, one was brought unto him which owed him Ten
Thousand Talents.

But forasmuch as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his
Wife and Children, and all that he had, and Payment to be made.

The Servant therefore fell down and worshipped him, saying, Lord have Patience
with me and I will pay thee all.

Then the Lord of that Servant was moved with Compassion, and loosed him, and
forgave him the Debt.

But the same Servant went out, and found one of his Fellow Servants which
ought him an Hundred Pence: And he laid hands on him and took him by the
Throat, saying, pay me that thou owe.

And his Fellow Servants fell down at his Feet, saying, have Patience with me
and I will pay thee all.

And he would not; but went and cast him into Prison, till he should pay the
Debt.

So when his Fellow Servants saw what was done, they were very sorry, and came
and told unto their Lord all that was done.

Then his Lord, after that he had called him, said unto him, O thou wicked
Servant, I forgave thee all that Debt because thou desiredst me:

Should not thou also have Compassion of thy Fellow Servants, even as I had
Pity on thee?

And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should
pay all that was due unto him.

So also shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your Hearts
forgive not everyone his Brother their Trespasses.


THIS Parable was spoken upon St. Peter's asking our Lord, Verse. 21.
how often shall my Brother sin against me and I forgive him? Till Seven Times?
To which Question the compassionate Jesus first answers directly, Verse.
I say not unto thee till Seven Times, but till Seventy Times Seven: And then
illustrates that his Answer, and shows how great Obligation we have to forgive
Injuries, and how sad will be our Punishment if we do not; in the Parable above
written. In which Parable, there are two things in general to be considered.

First, The merciful Example of God's Dealing with us miserable Sinners, who
lay under a vast Debt to his Justice; expressed by a King's taking Account of
his Servants, etc. and forgiving, etc.

Secondly, His great Displeasure against those that will not imitate that his
compassionate Example, in forgiving such as have been injurious to them,
expressed by the King's being wroth with his unmerciful Servant, who, though he
received so much Kindness himself, would show none to his Fellow Servants who
owed him a Trifle in Comparison; but, without the least Compassion, threw him
into Prison till he should pay it; upon which his Lord delivered him over to
the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due unto him.

Under The first General, there are three Particulars to be considered.

First, the Greatness of the Debt which by Sin we have contracted to the Divine
Justice, expressed by Ten Thousand Talents.

Secondly, The Impossibility of our ever clearing this Debt, and the sad
Consequence if it still should have remained upon Account; expressed here by
the King's Debtor having nothing to pay, and the King's commanding that
therefore he should be sold, and his Wife, and Children, and all that he had,
that so Payment might be made.

Thirdly, The wondrous Compassion of our good God, in pitying our miserable
Condition, and forgiving us all our Debt; expressed by that King's being moved
with Compassion at the deplorable Condition of his insolvent Servant, and
loosing him and forgiving him the Debt.

Under the second General there are likewise three Particulars to be considered.

First, What it is to forgive one another as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us, and the great Obligation we have to imitate this Example of our
merciful God.

Secondly, Our great Baseness if we do not; and

Thirdly, The miserable Consequence that will attend that Baseness, we shall
provoke God to recall his Pardon to us, and be delivered over to the Tormentors
till we shall pay all that is due unto him.

The first General to be considered in this Parable, is God's Example in
dealing with us miserable Sinners, who lay under a vast Debt to his Justice;
expressed by a King's taking Account of his Servants, and freely forgiving one
that was deeply indebted to him. And the first Particular to be considered
under it, is, the Greatness of the Debt, which by Sin we have contracted to the
Divine Justice.

By contracting a Debt to the Divine Justice is meant the having violated the
just and holy Laws of God, and thereby becoming obnoxious to his just Anger,
unless we satisfy his Justice some other Way. As a convict Criminal, we say,
has not satisfied, or is indebted to the Law, till he has suffered the
Punishment for his Crime which the Law thinks fit to inflict; or else finds
Favor and has it remitted him.

As for the Greatness of the Debt which Mankind by his Sin has thus contracted
to the divine Justice, it is expressed in this Parable by ten thousand Talents;
which, according to our Way of Reckoning, is above a Million of Pounds. A vast
Sum this, but yet far short of what we owe to the Justice of God by Reason of
our Iniquities; which are, not only Millions, but Innumerable, even as the
Stars in Heaven, and the Sand upon the Seashore: Nor are they only numberless,
but very great; not only many Thousands, but many Thousands of Talents. Every
Sin, as it is a wilful Violation of the Laws of God, has Weight enough (if God
should be extreme to mark what is done amiss) to sink a Soul into eternal Ruin:
And the Reason is because God's is the highest Authority, and his Laws most
just and equal, and we have an infinite Obligation to obey him, both as his
Creatures and Dependents, who live by his Favor and Bounty, and have received
numberless and inestimable Blessings from him; and likewise as rational
Creatures, that we may perfect our own Nature, by the Practice of those Virtues
which will conform us to the Image and Likeness of God himself. And therefore,
Sin being an Opposition to the highest Authority, a Violation of the best Laws,
a Breaking through the strictest Bonds, those of Submission to the Author of
our Being, and of Gratitude to the Giver of all the Blessings we enjoy; and
likewise of Self-Love and Preservation, in rejecting the Means of advancing our
own Nature to the Similitude and Enjoyment of God, which is our chief
Happiness: Sin being all this, must needs be exceeding sinful, and indeed the
greatest Evil, and in no case eligible. And therefore, the oftener it is
repeated, and the more of Choice there is in the Commission of it, and the more
heinous the Instances of it are, and the greater Obligations Men are under by
Reason of God's Bounty and Goodness to them (whether as to natural or spiritual
Endowments) to serve and obey him; the higher, proportionably rises the Guilt
of Sin. And he that often and wilfully commits great Impieties, notwithstanding
infinite Obligations to the contrary (which was and is the Case of every
Sinner) is indebted to God's Justice, not only Ten Thousand Talents, but Ten
Thousand Millions of Talents; i. e. his Debt is infinite, and unless some
Miracle of Mercy intervene, the divine Justice cannot be satisfied but by his
undergoing an infinite Punishment. And all the World must acknowledge it just,
that Sin being the greatest possible Evil, should be repaid with the greatest
Possible; that is, eternal Punishment.

So vast a Debt then, lying upon all Mankind by reason of their Sins; it is
most true in the

Second Place, That 'twas utterly impossible for them of themselves ever to
clear this Debt, and make Satisfaction to the divine Justice; and the sad
Consequence, should it have still remained upon Account, would have been no
less than eternal Misery. Which is represented very lively in the Parable, by
the King's Debtor having nothing to pay, and the King thereupon commanding that
he should be sold, and his Wife, and Children, and all that he had, and Payment
made. According to the Custom of the Jews in so using Debtors that were not
able to pay. 2 Kin. 4.1.


It Is utterly impossible for Mankind of themselves ever to have paid this vast
Debt, because every individual mere Man is deeply engaged and always will be so
in the same Account; so deeply, that he can never clear himself, much less make
Satisfaction for others: Nor is there any thing valuable enough in all the
Treasures of Nature to buy off this Sentence, just, though sad, The Soul that
sins it shall die. Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Mic. 6.6.
says the Prophet Micah, when he had a Controversy with the People for their
Sins, and wherewith shall I bow my self before the high God? Shall I come
before him with Burnt Offerings, with Calves of a Year old; will the Lord be
pleased with Thousands of Rams or Ten Thousands of Rivers of Oil? Shall I give
my Firstborn for my Transgression, the Fruit of my Body for the Sin of my
Soul? As if he had said, what is all this to him that is the Creator of every
thing, the Lord and great Proprietor of all already; and whose Glory and
Happiness is infinitely above even our most exalted Thoughts and Conceptions?
He is an Idiot that does not confess that all the Riches of the Universe are
utterly insufficient, as the Psalmist expresses it, to redeem the forfeited
Souls of Mankind, so that that must be let alone for ever: All therefore that
is in Man to give being, far from sufficient to commute for the Punishment his
Sins has deserved; God's Justice must be satisfied by his undergoing that
Punishment; that is, eternal Death; for ever dying yet never dead, extremely
miserable and for ever so. A Punishment so inexpressibly great, that
Annihilation is much to be preferred before it; for who can dwell with
everlasting Burnings! Who can bear an eternal Banishment from the supreme Good,
and Confinement to the dire Abodes of the Devil and his Angels, those merciless
Executioners of the divine Justice, who will exact the Pains we are to suffer
with the utmost Cruelty! Who can bear the Gnawings of that never dying Worm,
Remorse of Conscience, for forfeiting such infinite Happiness, and plunging our
selves headlong in such a bottomless Misery, and that for the Sake of what was
always empty and unsatisfying, even when we did enjoy it! And who can bear the
Horrors of Despair of ever seeing an End of such Torments as these, which yet
might have been entirely avoided if we would! This is indeed an unconceivably
miserable Condition, and all Men that ever lived must have been involved in it,
had not the Wisdom and the Goodness of God found out a Means both to satisfy
his Justice, and at the same Time to be merciful to his miserable Creatures: To
forgive the Debt to those that had nothing to pay, and yet to have full
Satisfaction made him for it. It Is what could never have entered into the Heart
of Man to conceive; it is the great Mystery of divine Love, which even the
Angels desire to look into, and it is that which is and shall be the Subject of
eternal Hallelujah's in Heaven.

Thirdly therefore, let us consider the wondrous Compassion of our good God, in
pitying our sadly deplorable Condition, and forgiving us all that Debt which we
could never have paid, though we had suffered the Pains of Hell, for those
shall never have an End; and this is expressed in the Parable by the King's
being moved with Compassion at the miserable Condition of his insolvent
Servant, and loosing him and forgiving him the Debt.

The King in the Parable was very merciful, who, upon the humble Entreaty of
his poor Servant, and his Promise if he would have Patience with him at length
to pay him all, was moved to Compassion and forgave him: But God is infinitely
more merciful in compassionating our Condition, and forgiving our great Debt,
as will appear from the following Considerations.

For First, our Debt is infinitely greater. Ten Thousand Talents, in Comparison
of the numberless Number of the heinous Sins of Mankind, are but as the Sand of
an Hourglass, compared with that of the Seashore; and one wilful Violation of
our Obedience to God, is a far weightier Debt to the divine Justice, than
Millions of Talents would be from one Mortal to another. And the Reason is
plain, because the Distance between God and Man is infinite; and for a Beggar
to spurn at a Prince, is certainly a Crime of much higher Aggravation, than to
do the like to one of his own ragged Gang.

All that is culpable (as was said) is met together in a wilful Sin; and
therefore infinite and amazingly great must be the Guilt of all Mankind, who
have heaped up Transgressions without Number; and have no Way left of paying
this great Debt, but by suffering without End the Pains of Hell. And such a
dreadful Punishment as this, being annexed to Sin by him who is infinitely good
and just; is Argument sufficient, that there is no Debt comparable to that
which a guilty Sinner owes to the Justice of God. And therefore, when God gives
Mercy, so great an Exaltation as to forgive so vast a Debt as this; it is
Compassion impossible to be paralleled.

Secondly, God's Compassion in forgiving us is infinitely greater than that
good King's in the Parable, because we less deserve God's Favor than that poor
Servant did his Lord's. He acknowledged his Debt, and was grieved for his not
being able to discharge it and humbly submitted himself to his offended Lord;
but it is quite otherwise with us, we add Obstinacy and Pride to our long Score,
are still in actual Rebellion against God, and daily more and more provoke him
by new Impieties: We make what Haste we can, as the Prophet expresses it, to
fill up the Measure of our Fathers Iniquities and our own, rather than by
Repentance and better Life to lessen the great Account that is against us.

And this is to inflame God's Anger rather than to move his Compassion, and
does indeed deserve quick Vengeance rather than Forgiveness. And yet, so
boundless an Ocean is the divine Goodness, even in this rebellious State God
pities his poor unhappy Creatures, and is full of Compassion, long-suffering,
and of great Kindness, and repents him of the Evil; and when we deserve
nothing but the severest Punishment, thinks upon Mercy and forgiveness; and
proposes very easy Conditions of Reconciliation and Readmittance to his
Favor, and even courts us to accept them: Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
Ways, for why will ye dye O House of Israel!

Now for the great and infinitely happy God, to treat such hardened Rebels at so
tender and compassionate a rate; to be so ready to forgive those who not at all
deserve it, but rather the utmost Expresses of his Vengeance; is doubtless a
Mercy infinite and beyond Comparison.

Thirdly, The poor Debtor in the Parable, humbly besought his Lord's Pity and
Forbearance, he fell down on his Face and worshipped him, and by that his
humble Behavior and earnest Entreaty, inclined his Lord to commiserate his sad
Condition. But instead of this, we are not so little sensible of, or afflicted
with any thing, as that great Debt we owe to the divine Justice. So far from
passionately begging for our Pardon, that we spend but very few Thoughts about
it, and most of us are very little, and some not at all apprehensive of the
Need we have of being again received into God's Favor, and the sad Consequence
if we are not: And are far more sollicitous about promoting some petty Interest
in this World, than about the Pardon of our Sins, which is the One Thing
necessary in Order to our Escape from Hell.

And this is so great a slighting and undervaluing God's Forgiveness, expresses
so much Indifferency whether he does it or no; that one would think it should
be enough to provoke God to resolve the Destruction, and swear in his Wrath
that they shall never enter into his Rest.

And yet, so wondrously compassionate is our good God, unsought to, undesired,
he of his own mere Tenderness, entirely forgave the past Offenses of his
thoughtless Creatures, and for the Future still promised Forgiveness to such as
should offend anew, upon this only easy Condition, that they should no more
wilfully break his holy Laws, and immediately repent when through Surprise or
Inadvertency or the Force of Temptation they should do amiss. And to be thus
merciful notwithstanding so much Provocation to the contrary, is Compassion
that has no Parallel.

Fourthly, God's Goodness in pitying and forgiving Sinners, is infinitely
greater than that of the King in the Parable in forgiving his poor Debtor;
because the Misery Mankind is delivered from by this Mercy of God, is
infinitely greater, than that which the poor Wretch in the Gospel escaped by
the Compassion of his Lord.

His Punishment, had his Lord dealt rigorously with him, would have been, that
he should be sold, and his Wife, and Children, and all that he had, that so, in
some Measure at least Payment might be made; and the utmost that this could
amount to was Poverty and Slavery, both of himself and all his Family, all the
Days of his Life: Which though indeed a very sad Condition, and such as no
Submission could be too great, no Entreaties too earnest to avoid; yet
certainly, comes infinitely short of these eternal Miseries in the Regions of
Darkness, and in the Society of the Devil and his Angels, which would have been
the Portion of the whole Race of Mankind, had not God's merciful Forgiveness
prevented it, and given us better Hopes.

Now the greater the Necessity, the greater the Charity that relieves it; the
greater and more general the Danger, the more valuable the Rescue; the more
extreme the Misery, and the greater the Number of those that were condemned to
suffer it, the greater the Compassion that relents and delivers from it. It
being therefore absolutely necessary that God should pardon Sinners, that they
might escape the Punishment due to Sin (for they had nothing to pay) and the
Danger of those Punishments being imminent, the Measure of Men's Iniquities
rising to so great a Height; and the Misery that would have involved all
Mankind, had God's Vengeance had its free Course, and Sin its due Reward,
being no less than that of Hell, and that for ever too: That Compassion of God
that inclined him to forgive so many wretched Debtors as the whole Race of
Mankind, and prevented such otherwise unavoidable, endless and unconceivable
Misery; was certainly infinite Compassion, wonderfully great and beyond
Comparison.

Fifthly, The Consequence of God's forgiving Sinners is infinitely happier than
that of the Forgiveness of the poor Debtor in the Parable.

He, after his Lord's loosing and forgiving him, was out of Fear indeed of that
sad Misfortune which otherwise must have fallen upon him; he enjoyed his Liberty,
and that of his Wife and Children, and continued still in Possession of what he
had, 'till he forfeited all again by his Cruelty to his Fellow Servants, which
was no mean Comfort; but then this was all: We read of no new Favors conferred
upon him, or that he was entrusted with any more of his Lord's Revenue, or the
like.

But now, the compassionate God, has to Forgiveness of Sinners, added
innumerable and inestimable Faziours; dignified them with the Title of his
Sons, communicated to them fresh Assistances of his blessed Spirit to help and
guide them in the Way to Happiness; and promised them Crowns of eternal Glory,
and everlasting Inheritances in Heaven, and an intimate Vision and Enjoyment of
himself (who is the Center of Felicity) provided they continue sincerely
obedient to him for the Time to come. There is no Happiness which a rational
Creature is capable of, but God, in his infinite Mercy freely and bountifully
confers upon Mankind, now that his Compassions have reconciled them to him; 1 Timothy 6.17.
and in the Words of St. Paul, He gives us richly all things to enjoy.

And for God, not only to forgive obstinate Rebels against his divine
Government, to pass by their vile Ingratitude to him their greatest Benefactor,
and base Abuse of his Blessings to his Dishonor; but to confer upon 'em
Favors of the greatest Value, to receive 'em into his own Bosom, and make 'em
Coheirs with his eternal Son, and advance 'em to his heavenly Kingdom: This is
such an admirable Expression of the divine Goodness and Love of Mankind, as
could never proceed from any other but him who is Goodness it self.

In the last Place, that which exalts the Compassion of God to the highest
Degree, and makes it indeed miraculous, is the amazing Course he took thus to
show Mercy in the Pardon of Sinners, and yet satisfy his Justice too.

The King in the Parable was at Liberty to dispose of his own as he pleased,
and he might have forgiven, without further Regard to any thing of Justice in
that Case, a greater Debt if it had been owing to him: But in the Case of God's
forgiving Sinners it was otherwise. God had before solemnly declared to our
first Parents, and very often afterward, that the Soul that sinned it should
die; and his Justice was concerned to see that Sentence executed; and in the
Nature of the thing likewise 'twas perfectly just that the Violaters of God's
holy and good Commands, ungrateful Rebels against their Creator and greatest
Benefactor, should receive a due Recompense for their Wickedness.

Now Justice is as essential to God as Mercy; and though his infinite Goodness
moved him to have Compassion upon Sinners, yet his Justice pleaded for their
Punishment; Mercy would remit the Debt, but Justice required Satisfaction. A
Difficulty this, which mortal Wit could never solve. But God, who is infinitely
wise as well as good and just, that the Work of his Hands might not perish, nor
his Image and Likeness be for ever miserable, and that his Justice likewise
might be fully satisfied; contrived a wondrous Way for the Redemption of
Sinners, by freely forgiving 'em their vast Debt, and yet making full
Satisfaction to his Justice for the Sins of the whole World. And that was, by
the Incarnation of his blessed Son, and substituting him in our stead, to
suffer, as the Representative of Mankind, the Punishment due to their
Iniquities, and by his spotless Blood to make an universal Atonement, and
through the Merit of that his precious Sacrifice (for what is above the Merit of
the Blood of the Son of God?) To purchase for them Pardon and Forgiveness, the
Love and Favor of God in this World, and the eternal Enjoyment of him in the
next. And by this means, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 3.26.
to declare his Righteousness, that he might be just; and the Justifyer likewise
of him that beleiveth in Jesus.

Thus Mercy and Truth are miraculously met together, and Righteousness and
Peace have kissed each other. And for ever blessed be that infinitely wise and
just Compassion, which in so wondrous a Manner contrived the Forgiveness of our
vast Debt, and the Satisfaction of the divine Justice too! What Love can be
greater than this, that God should send his eternal Son into the World to be
the Propitiation for Sinners! And that while we were Enemies, Christ should dye
for us, and bear our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that through his Stripes
we might be healed! Wonderful art thou, O Lord, in thy Doings toward the
Children of Men, and thy Mercy is over all thy Works! And O that our Hearts
might be warmed with the same divine Flame, and we might love much, to whom so
much has been forgiven!

And thus much for the first thing to be considered in this Parable; namely,
the glorious Example of Forgiveness that God has set us, in his dealing thus
mercifully with us miserable Sinners who lay under a vast Debt to the divine
Justice, and had nothing to pay; and how infinitely this Compassion of God to
Sinners exceeds the greatest and most generous Expression of Forgiveness, that
can be shown by one Man to another. It Is greater than the King's forgiving Ten
Thousand Talents to his poor Servant in the Parable, because he entreated him
and had nothing to pay.

I proceed now, to the second General to be considered in this Parable, which
is, God's great Displeasure against those that will not imitate this his
compassionate Example, in forgiving such as have been injurious to them; but
like that wicked Servant to whom the King had been so gracious, rigidly
requiring full Satisfaction for little Trifles and Punctilios. As he, no sooner
out of the Presence of his compassionate Lord, but took his Fellow Servants by
the Throat, who owed him an Hundred Pence, and though entreated to have
Patience, as earnestly as he had but just before entreated his offended Lord,
yet without the least Pity, threw him into Prison till he should pay the Debt.
The Consequence of such a revengeful Temper will be like that of this cruel
Servant, who was not only severely rebuked for his Wickedness, but had the
Pardon his Lord gave him recalled, and was delivered over to the Tormentors
till he should pay the uttermost Farthing. So likewise shall my heavenly Father
do unto you, says our Lord, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his
Brother their Trespasses. And under this General there are likewise, as was
said, Three Particulars to be considered.

First, What it is to forgive one another, as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us; and the great Obligation we have to imitate this Example of our
merciful God. To forgive one another in Imitation of the Divine Example, is
first to forgive such as have injured us, freely and without Reserve; and that
though they still continue to show themselves our Enemies, and are ready to do
us fresh Mischiefs when it lies in their Power. For thus, as we have seen, God
dealt with us miserable Sinners; he first loved us, and while we were yet
Sinners, and consequently in open Hostility and Rebellion against him, even
when he sent his Son to dye for us, and be the Propitiation for our Sins: He
took pity upon us when we were still adding new Wickednesses to our long
Account, and when we deserved nothing but eternal Misery, thought upon Mercy.

And in Imitation of this, our Lord commands us to love our Enemies; not to
render Evil for Evil, but contrariwise Blessing; that so we may be the Children
of our Father which is in Heaven. For, to use our Saviors Enforcement of this;
if those only share in our Affections or Esteem, who are as beneficial and kind
to us as we to them, what Thank have we? Self-Love and Interest may there be
the Motives, and very little of True Piety and Goodness; nay, even the very
worst of Men may be as eminent for such Sort of Charity as the best, Publicans
and Sinners, as our Lord observed, doing the same. But Christians should be of
a more Godlike Temper, their Charity more free and disinteressed; the greater
and more frequent their Injuries, the more ready should they be to pardon and
forgive; and not only be reconciled after a sevenfold Wrong, but after one
repeated seventy times seven. And our Savior has likewise further enforced
this by his own Example, who with his last Breath prayed for the Forgiveness of
his cruel Murderers.

Secondly, We must not only forgive such as but little deserve it, but
likewise, in Correspondence to our divine Pattern, whether they desire it or
no: For thus it was in God's Forgiveness of Sinners, he prevented us by the
Riches of his compassionate Goodness, and entreated us his rebellious
Creatures, first by his Prophets, then by his only Son, to be reconciled to
him, and embrace their Pardon. And thus, those that will be Imitators of God as
dear Children, must likewise do. Rather than Enmity should continue we must
seek to our Enemies to be reconciled, though they were the first that offered
the Offense. And this, however hardly it may sound, is not only our Duty, by
Virtue of that general Con^^^d of forgiving one another as God has forgiven us,
but is expressly commanded by our compassionate Savior, Mat. 18.15. (which
occasioned that Question of St. Peter, Verse. 21. How often shall I forgive my
Brother? Upon which our Lord delivered this Parable) his Words are these, and
deserve our serious Attention. Moreover, if thy Brother trespass against thee,
go and tell him his Fault between thee and him alone. If thy Brother trespass
against thee, or as we usually express it, first did the Injury, or gave the
Affront, go thou to him; stay not till he comes and acknowledges his Fault to
thee, for that is a thing Men are very backward in doing, either for fear or for
Shame, or out of Pride and Greatness of Spirit, as it must be termed, or for
other Reasons; and Time usually widens such Breaches, and increases Strangeness
and Aversion: But go thou therefore to him in Meekness and the Spirit of
Forgiveness, and with Resolutions of passing by all further Unkindnes^^ and it
may be reproache^ for your good Will calmly tell him his Fault, expostulate the
Case with him, and in all Likelihood he will hear thee, a right Understanding
between you will ensue, and thou shall gain thy Brother. This is indeed to be
like God in this great Excellence of forgiving Injuries, and is, as a most
noble Expression of christian Charity, so we see very plainly commanded by our
Lord, and should be taken into our serious Consideration in order to our
agreeable Practice.

Thirdly, We must not only so far forgive as not to revenge, but in Imitation
of the divine Pattern of Forgiveness set before us, be ready to do all Acts of
Kindness, and Beneficence to our Enemy, as Occasion shall serve, and his Needs
require: Remembering the Words of our great Master, Do good to them that hate
you, and pray for those that despightfully use you and persecute you, for so
s^^ ye be the Children of the Highest, who is (...) to the unthankful and to
the evil. And we must endeavor to confirm the new made Agreement, by more than
ordinary Expressions of good Will, that we may heap Coals upon our Enemies Head
to melt him into a Correspondent Charity; and likewise that there may be no
Place left for our Enemy or our selves to doubt the Sincerity of our
Forgiveness. For the smoothest Words may be rotten and deceitful, and the not
revenging an Injury may be for want of Power or Opportunity; but when to good
Words beneficial Actions are added, then may a Man well be thought to love and
forgive, not in Word only, but in Deed and in Truth.

This is Christian Forgiveness of Injuries, or, Ephesians. 4. ult.
in the Apostle's Words, the forgiving one another if any have a Quarrel
against any, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us: i.e. freely and
entirely, though their Malice still cotinues against us; nay, to go and offer
'em Forgiveness and Reconciliation though they neither desire nor deserve it, and
to accompany our Forgiveness with Acts of Kindness and good Turns.

But what has been said upon this Account must have a Limitation; lest it bound
indiscriminately upon all Men and at all Times, that is, in all Instances of
Wrong, it thwart and run Counter to other Duties of our holy Religion. Now in
order to our being informed of the just Limits of this great Duty, we must
consider that Injuries may be of three Sorts; affecting either Men's Persons,
their good Names, or their Estates: And each of these may be either in Danger
of Ruin by the Injuries of a wicked Man, or only greatly damaged; or the Injury
may be but small and trifling, and such as brings no considerable and lasting
Ill Effects along with it. Now such Injuries as threaten Ruin to a Man in any
of those Respects, ought not to be silently let pass, nor the Man so forgiven
as to have no Notice taken of him; and such a legal Prosecution of him as is
necessary to secure a Man's Person, or to vindicate or recover his blasted
Reputation, and to preserve his Estate, all or either of which would be ruined
by the injurious Person if tamely let alone; a legal Prosecution in such Cases
as these, is allowed by the Law of God and Nature as well as that of the Land.
And the Case is proportionably the same as to Injuries that greatly endamage a
Man in any of those Respects before mentioned: And were all Wrongs, how great
soever, to be submitted to and put up in Silence by Christians, by Virtue of
the Command of forgiving Injuries; 'twould be to betray the Sheep to the
Wolves, to expose the Disciples of Christ to the Malice of all the wicked
World; which is not consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, Christ Jesus. And St. Paul says expressly, He that
provideth not for his own House, i. e. for the comfortable Subsistence of his
Family, has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel: i. e. Acts contrary
to the Obligations both of Nature and Religion. But he will soon ruin, instead
of supporting his Family, who suffers ill Men, without Interruption, to make
what Havoc they please of his Person, Reputation or Estate.

But now as for smaller Injuries in any of these Respects, such as make no
great Alteration in our Circumstances, and may be born without any great
Inconvenience; these are to be passed by, and the Injury forgiven according to
the Measures before described: And it is observable that the Instances our
Savior makes use of in this Matter, are of the lesser Sort of Injuries, such
as a Blow on the Cheek, the taking away of a Garment, and the like; and 'twas
for being rigorous about a few Pence, that the King in the Parable was so wroth
with his Servant: And rather than a Christian should embroil himself in
Lawsuits, and run the Hazard of losing the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit
for such small Matters, he should suffer a Repetition of such Injuries. And
indeed, as Religion is in all Respects the greatest Prudence, so particularly
in forbidding litigious Quarrels, unless a Man's whole Interest, or at least a
great Part of it be at Stake; for Law is now become a boundless Ocean, and
generally very rough and Stormy, and swells Men's Passions to an exorbitant
Height, and shipwrecks their Charity as well as their Estates.

And as to those greater Injuries our Savior mentions, Mat. 5.44. of Men's
being our Enemies professed, and hating, and cursing, and despitefully using,
and persecuting us; Neither he nor his Apostles, there or any where else forbid
Christians endeavoring in a legal Manner to secure and defend themselves, and
recover their own; but only not to return Evil for Evil, and to be so far from
Purposes of Revenge or retaliating, such Injuries, as rather to love and bless
and pray for, and do good to upon Occasion, those that deal so maliciously by
them; and to manage the Suit or Contention with them with Charity, having no
Rancour or Malice in their Hearts against the Person of their Adversary. That
is, in short, our holy Religion does oblige us in lesser Injuries entirely,
both to pass by the Offense, and forgive the Offender according to the Measures
before described; but in greater Injuries of any Sort, where Ruin or
insupportable Damage will follow, though it permits, nay, obliges to endeavor
a legal Reparation, and so not to forgive the Offense, yet Christians must as
entirely, and according to the same Measures forgive the Offender, as in the
smallest Instances of Wrong. And by this Means they will become the Children of
their heavenly Father, who though in infinite Mercy he forgave the World of
Sinners, and moreover bestowed on them richly all things to enjoy; yet in the
Person of his blessed Son their Representative, he severely expressed his
Displeasure against their Sins, that they might be detered from persisting in
them afresh, to the Ruin of their immortal Souls.

Besides those Injuries that terminate upon a Man's self and his own Concerns,
there are others done to our Neighbor and the Public, which must not be
passed by without animadverting upon them according to their Deserts. As for
Instance, if a bloody Villain murders a Man's Friend or Neighbor or Relation,
and he knows who is the Murderer, it may be he only; in this Case, whatever
Inclination he may have to conceal it, whether out of natural Compassion, or
Unwillingness to be the Occasion of the Man's Execution, since nothing can
recall the murdered Person to Life, and the Murderer may live to repent, or the
like: Because he is a Member of Society, and obliged, as much as in him lies,
to promote its Safety and Happiness, which by such Villains is much disturbed
and lessened, and would be ruined should such Men pass unpunished; it is his
Duty to endeavor by all lawful Means to bring so heinous an Offender to
condign Punishment, that so corrupt a Member being cut off from the Community,
the Health of the whole may be better secured. And so in all Cases of the like
Nature. Always remembering that if any thing of private Revenge be intermixed,
it pollutes the Action, and makes the Man doubly guilty of Malice and Hypocrisy.

What has been hitherto said concerning the Limits of forgiving Injuries,
concerns Men only as private Persons: As for Magistrates and Governors, they
being constituted by God to be a Terror to evil doers, Romans 13.3, 4.
to be Revengers to execute Wrath upon them, and to praise and encourage those
only that do well; the Measure of their Forgiveness of public Injuries, is the
public Good; so far as is consistent with their Obligations as Magistrates, as
is conducive to the common Weal, according to the Judgment of Prudence and
unprejudiced Reason, they may, and do well to incline to Lenity and Compassion;
but a foolish and a mercenary Pity is a betraying their Trust, a bearing the
Sword in vain; and such Magistrates, instead of being Fathers of their Country,
are indeed the Perfidious Destroyers of it. And thus much for the Nature of
christian Forgiveness of Injuries, in Imitation of the divine Pattern God has
set us, with its general Limits.

As for the great Obligation we have to copy after this admirable Pattern of
our merciful heavenly Father; it is twofold. (1) With Respect to God, (2) to
our Selves.

First, With Respect to God, our Obligation to forgive one another as he has
forgiven us is very great, because it is what he has declared will be highly
pleasing to him, as a Resemblance of that Perfection of his Nature which he
seems most of all to take Delight in. For so, Exodus 33.19. when Moses desired
to see his Glory, he told him he would make all his Goodness pass before him;
and Chap. 34.6. The Lord passed by before him and proclaimed, The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, longsuffering, abundant in Goodness and Truth,
keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. And
accordingly, St. John gives the Definition of him, God is Love.

Now certainly, those that have received such infinite Favors from this good
God, and have been forgiven so vast a Debt, as we sinners have; have the
greatest Reason in the World to endeavor to the utmost of their Power, to
please this their greatest Benefactor in every thing: And nothing being more
pleasing to him than to see the Image and Reflection of his divine Love and
Philanthropy upon the Souls of his Creatures, to see 'em love and compassionate
one another according to his glorious Example; we are infinitely obliged to
imitate his Pity and Forgiveness toward us, in passing by the Offenses of our
Fellow Servants. Further, those to whom God has forgiven so vast a Debt as that
which miserable Sinners owed to the divine Justice, are questionless bound, and
that with the strictest Ties to love him infinitely again; but now St. John
says plainly, 1 John 4.20, 21.
that he that loves God must love his Brother also, and if a Man say, I love
God, and yet hates his Brother, he is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him: For
as he says, Chap. 3.17. He that shuts up his Bowels of Compassion from his
Brother, how dwells the Love of God in him? And therefore, as much as we are
bound to love our good God, who has forgiven us our numberless Iniquities, so
much are we bound to manifest that our Love to him, by being pitiful and gentle
to our brethren that have injured us, and ready to forgive them: For so says
our Lord, shall ye be my Disciples, and so shall ye be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven. And doubtless that wicked Servant in the Parable,
had not so due an Apprehension of his Lord's great Compassion to him, nor so
grateful a Sense of it as he ought to have had, who could immediately forget
the miserable Condition he was so lately in himself, and how much he dreaded
lest his Lord should rigidly exact his great Debt of him, and how importunately
he begged that he would have Patience with him:; and yet use so much Cruelty to
his Fellow Servants for a Debt very inconsiderable. He could not but know that
such Barbarity would be very contrary to the compassionate Temper of his Lord;
and therefore was bound in Gratitude, if upon no other Account, to imitate his
Lord's Example, and not immediately act what would be so displeasing to him.
And so it is in our Case; God is Love, and has wondrously manifested his Love
in forgiving us miserable Sinners; and therefore we are bound, in Gratitude,
and because 'twill be pleasing to him, were that all, to imitate that his
Charity, and mutually to love and forgive one another. But when besides, we
have our Savior's express Command for it, Mat. 5.44. and Luke 6.37. and that,
not until seven times only, but until seventy times seven, as in the Verse
before this Parable: As much as Men are obliged obliged to obey the Commands of
God their Savior, so strong is their Obligation to forgive Injuries with
Respect to God.

Secondly, Our Obligation is very great to imitate God's compassionate Example,
with respect to our selves. For it is the best Way to secure Quiet, and Peace
and Happiness; and as much as every Man is bound to provide for his own Quiet,
and the Peace and Happiness of Society, and of his own Soul too in the other
World; so much is every Man bound not to be malicious and revengeful, but of a
Temper ready to forgive.

For however sweet Revenge may seem to be to malicious Spirits in the
Execution, it must needs make the Mind very uneasy before it is executed, and
bring great Calamities along with it afterward, and is the most base devilish
Temper in the World, and makes a Man a Fiend incarnate. Whereas an Aptness to
forgive, is a Godlike Disposition, for God is Love, the Spring of Kindness and
Compassion, of Mercy and Forgiveness; and as his Happiness is the Result of the
Excellencies and Perfections of his Nature; so those who resemble him in the
most glorious of those Perfections, must needs likewise enjoy a great Share of
Tranquillity and inward Bliss. But if God be the great Exemplar of Forgiveness,
how groundless is the usual Objection against this excellent Virtue of
Christianity, that it betrays a mean servile Spirit, and is a thing much below
a Gentleman! Can any Man of common Sense think it a Disgrace to be like God,
and that in his most glorious Perfection too? If God be the Fountain of Honor,
we must allow it to be rather, the most noble generous Action in the World.

It is the best Way likewise of ending Strifes, and overcoming our Adversaries
by rendering Good for Evil. It eases the Mind of those great Disquietudes that
constantly attend Desires of Revenge; it prevents all the Mischiefs that follow
it, such as fresh Injuries from the Party we revenge our selves upon, if we
leave him his Life, and the Stroke of Justice if we pursue him to the Death.
But besides these evil Consequences of Revenge, and many others which
Forgiveness prevents, there is more true Pleasure and Sweetness in the Act of
Forgiveness and Reconciliation, as was hinted above, than in that of Revenge.

For however the Devil may hurry Men on in an eager Persuit of Revenge, and
flatter 'em with the Hopes of great Satisfaction when it is perfected; yet there
is a secret Horror and Aversion to it from within, which, as 'twere pulls back
the Hand when going to strike; or what other way soever it be expressed,
endeavors to hinder it, and makes the Heart recoil and repent of the
Undertaking, and execute it with trembling and misgivings of Soul; and
immediately after, come dire Forebodings of the Venge ance of him to whom
Vengeance belongs, and a Kind of Hell upon Earth. But Forgiveness is attended
with Applauses of Conscience, and the Approbation of Reason, and Cheerfulness
of Spirit: There is an inward Pleasure and Satisfaction of Mind quite
throughout the Action, and when it is completed, no Man can express the silent
Joy that runs through the whole Soul, and it seems a Foretaste of the Joys of
the Blessed in Heaven.

Even that Part of Forgiveness which seems most of all impracticable, and
contrary to Flesh and Blood, that of suing to a Man to be reconciled that has
done the Injury, and still continues to be one's Enemy; this does of all yield
the greatest Pleasure to the Soul: And that, not only because it is the nearest
Resemblance to the Mercy of God, who sent his Son to mediate between him and
us, and by his Death to reconcile us to himself, when 'twas we miserable
Wretches that had offended, and were then in actual Rebellion against him; but
from the Nature of the thing it self. For it is a kind of surprising a Man into
Charity before he is aware. When Men do Injuries, they generally stand upon
their Defense and expect to receive Injuries again; but when a Man finds,
instead of this, Acts of Friendship and Good will, and Readiness to forgive,
and Peace and Quietness offered so freely, and upon such easy Terms, without
the Shame and natural Regret in seeking it, and asking Pardon, and making
Satisfaction, and the like: How pleased must the Man needs be, to find a
Friend, when he feared and expected an Enemy? Few Men love Strife for Strife's
Sake, and many a Man injures another in sudden Heat and Passion, and in cooler
Blood repents of it, though he cannot prevail with himself to ask Forgiveness:
And sometimes a Man injures another in retaliating something that he took amiss
from him, though perhaps far otherwise intended; and it may be false Reports
may have made the Difference. But now, this Way of Reconciliation presently
sets all right again; it creates a right Understanding between Party and Party,
it nips Quarrels in the very Bud, and leaves no Room for further Malice and Ill
Will. And what a holy Triumph will there then be in the forgiving Soul, thus to
have softened his Enemy, and overcome Evil with Good!

And such happy Effects of Forgiveness of Injuries as these, methinks should
engage every considering Man to put it in Practice, were this all; but when
besides all this so great a Mercy as the perfect Recovery of the Favor of God,
the Forgiveness of our own vast Debt, and the Enjoyment of the Glories and
Felicities of Heaven shall be the Reward of it; Surely no Man in his Wits, but
must think himself as much obliged to forgive Injuries, as to make himself
eternally happy if he can. And that this exceeding great Reward shall attend
the hearty Practice of this Virtue, is plain from our Lord's own Words, Luke
6.37. Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.

And, as it appears from what has been said, that we have upon all Accounts
great Obligation to imitate the compassionate Example of our merciful God; so
in the

Second Place, Our Baseness will be very great if we do not: And that both with
Respect to God and Man. With Respect to God, not to forgive a petty Injury from
our Brother, when God has forgiven such infinite Provocations as ours against
himself, is the vilest Baseness, because, as was said before, it is the vilest
Ingratitude, and Forgetfulness of his great Mercy to us. I say a petty Injury
from our Brother; for every Injury, how great soever, that one Mortal can do to
another, is indeed, but of no regard, in compare with those mountainous Heaps
of Wickednesses which we have been guilty of against God; and bear not so great
Proportion to them, as an Hundred Pence does to Ten Thousand Talents; as the
Parable expresses both Debts, that which the compassionate King forgave his
Servant, and that which that wicked Man would not forgive his Fellow Servants.
The infinite Goodness of God to us, if it has made its due Impression upon our
Spirits, will leave so charming an Idea of Forgiveness upon our Souls, as will
incline us to a suitable Practice upon all Occasions, especially since we know
from God's great Compassion toward us, how pleasing to him Compassion is in
others. But, notwithstanding God's unspeakable Kindness to us, to cherish a
Temper of Mind which we cannot but be sensible he infinitely Hates, and
endeavor to make those miserable as far as our Malice will reach, to whom God
has forgiven as much as he forgave us, and for whose Redemption Christ dyed,
and for whom are reserved Crowns of Glory in Heaven, through the wondrous Mercy
of God; and all this unmercifulness for a small Matter, for the Debt of a few
Pence: This shows the basest of Ingratitude, and weak Sense of God's Compassion
shown to us, that is possible. Well may our Lord say to such Men, with a little
Variation, as the King in the Parable said to that cruel Servant of his; O thou
wicked Servant, I forgave thee all that Debt, and that though thou did not
desire it of me; should not thou also have had Compassion on thy
Fellow Servants, even as I had Pity on thee? Obligation sufficient there was no
Doubt; and that his Ingratitude, and Forgetfulness of God's Favor, and his
cruel hardened Temper was very provoking will appear in the Sequel. But,

Secondly, To be revengeful and implacable after such Mercy received our
selves, is the greatest Baseness with Respect to Men.

For we are all Fellow Servants of the same great Lord; and his Mercy has been
the same to all of us; we are all of us through Christ, under the same Covenant
of Grace and Reconciliation: Now this methinks should endear us to one another,
and our mutual Joy for each others Happiness, should put an End to all other
petty Quarrels and Animosities between us. But instead of this, to hate and
mischief one another, to endeavor by all means to make one another as unhappy
as we can here below, and with him in the Parable, pluck out Throats for
Trifles, and become inexorable to any that have injured us; this is such an
unnatural Piece of Barbarity, and betrays so much devilish Baseness of Spirit,
as that every sensible Man, when he considers it will abominate. It Is as if a
Man should escape to Shore from a Wreck at Sea, and there meet one whom
Providence had blessed with the same Deliverance; and instead of congratulating
his Safety, and joining with him in praising and blessing the Mercy of their
great Deliverer, endeavor to knock out his Brains in Persuance of some old
Grudge. Nothing can be more base than this, nor more justly provoking to the
God of Mercy and Compassion. Which leads me in the

Last Place to consider the miserable Consequence of this Baseness, viz. We
shall thereby provoke God to recall his Pardon to us, and deal with us as the
King in the Parable did with his wicked ungrateful and cruel Servant, and
deliver us over to the Tormentors, till we shall have paid all that is due unto
him. For so likewise, says our Lord, shall my heavenly Father do unto you, if
ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses.

God's Pardon to Sinners, though it be very full and free, and given in
infinite Mercy; yet is not passed in such a Manner as that it can never be
revoked; 'twas given at first upon Conditions, and may be again forfeited if we
fail of performing what God requires, in order to his final ratifying it.

Now Forgiveness of Injuries is expressly mentioned by our Savior, as Part of
what God expects from us in order to his comfirming his Pardon to us; for thus,
Mat. 6.14, 15. If ye forgive Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will
also forgive you; but if ye forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive your Trespasses; but, as it is in the Parable, his Wrath
will again wax hot against you, and he will make void his former Pardon, and
deliver you over to the Tormentors till you shall pay all that is due unto him.
That is, will consign you to the Portion of the Devil and his Angels, Spirits
of like malicious and revengeful Tempers, who, as the merciless Executioners of
God's Vengeance, will not for ever spare to torment and cruciate those wretched
Souls, who might have escaped those Miseries, and had their Pardon sealed with
the Blood of their Redeemer, but forfeited it again by indulging to that
devilish Temper of Malice and Revenge.

Wherefore, to conclude this Parable. If we are touched with a due Sense of the
wondrous Compassion of God to us miserable Sinners in forgiving us the vast
Debt we had contracted to the divine Justice by Reason of our Sins, and which
'twas impossible for us ever to have discharged our selves; whereby we are
delivered from the intolerable and endless Punishment of them; and moreover
made Sons of God, and Heirs of celestial Glory: If we are duly touched with a
Sense of this infinite Goodness of God to us (which to effect was the Endeavor
of the first Part of this Discourse) let us express our deep Resentment of his
gracious Forgiveness of us, by imitating so excellent an Example, and forgiving
one another. Let us consider the great Happiness, that both here and hereafter
will attend the Performance of this Duty; and reflect upon the endless Misery
that will closely follow the contrary. We must forgive, if we would be
forgiven; we must show Mercy and Compassion to our Brethren that offend us, if
we hope to find any at the Hands of God. And let us remember, that, how sweet
soever we may fancy Revenge to be now, we shall find the Consequence of it, if
not speedily repented of, to be eternal Damnation.

From which sad Condition, and that hellish Temper that will bring us to it,
let us pray earnestly that the good Lord would deliver us, through Jesus Christ
our merciful Savior. The PRAYER.
I.
O Holy and most merciful King of Heaven, who have forgiven a World of
miserable Wretches an infinite Debt, and delivered those who had nothing to pay
from the extremest and eternal Misery, and have commanded that in Return we do
to others as thou have done to us; I who am a happy Sharer in thy wondrous
Compassion, do praise thee from the Bottom of my Soul, and earnestly entreat
the Assistance of thy Grace, that I may never be wanting in a sincere and
cheerful Imitation of thy blessed Example, but delight to copy after so lovely
an Original, and freely and entirely forgive, nay love and do good to my most
inveterate Enemies. And since thou lov'dst us first, and did prevent us with
the Riches of thy Goodness, O that I could in this resemble thee too, and even
court my Injurers to Peace and Reconciliation, and with a Christian Bravery of
Spirit, offer them that forgiveness which they will not ask! This is indeed a
hard Saying to my depraved Nature, and Revenge seems sweeter far to Flesh and
Blood; and though my Reason, I confess, is satisfied of the great Excellency of
the Performance, yet my Passions, I must with Shame own likewise, run violently
the contrary Way, and bear me down with their rapid Course. Thy Aid I therefore
beg, Almighty God, and that thy Spirit may enable me to stem this dangerous
Current, and strenuously to resist and master all Motions to revenge,
remembering that this is the Condition of my open Forgiveness at thy Hands, and
that Judgment without Mercy shall be my Portion if I show no Mercy.

II.
Convince me daily more and more of my base Ingratitude to thee, and inhumane
Barbarity to my Brethren, in bearing Malice and Rancour for trifling Injuries
(such as are the greatest we can offer to each other, in Compare with what thy
Mercy has forgiven us:) And do thou, O meekest Jesus, sweeten our Tempers, and
turn all Bitterness of Spirit into Love and mutual Endeavors to promote each
others Happiness; and may we all conspire in offering up our joint Praises to
our merciful God, who has remitted to every one of us infinitely more than Ten
Thousand Talents. O that this thy Mercy may be imprinted in lively and
everlasting Characters upon my Soul, so as powerfully to incline me to
transcribe it in my Intercourse with Men! Then shall I experience the blessed
Influence this thy Commandment will have upon my Happiness even here, and in
the most acceptable Manner express my Thankfulness for thy Pity showed to me;
and at last by bearing this thy Badge upon my Soul, be owned by thee as thy
true Disciple, and received into the Joy of thee our dearest Lord. Which grant
O most compassionate Jesus for thine own Mercies Sake. Amen, Amen.

PARABLE V. Of a King that made a Marriage for his Son.
Matthew. xxii. 2, 3. Luke xiv. 18, 19, 20. Matthew. xxii. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto a certain King, Mat. 22.2.
that made a Marriage for his Son,

And sent forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the Wedding: And
they would not come.

And they all with one consent began to make Excuse: Luke 14.18.
The first said unto him, I have bought a Piece of Ground, and I must needs go
and see it; I pray thee have me excused.

And another said, I have bought five Yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them: I
pray thee have me excused.

And another said, I have married a Wife, and therefore I cannot come.

Again he sent forth other Servants, Mat. 22.4.
saying, Tell them which are bidden, Behold I have prepared my Dinner: my Oxen
and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the Marriage.

But they made light of it, and went their Ways, one to his Farm, another to
his Merchandise:

And the Remnant took his Servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew
them.

But when the King heard thereof, he was wroth: And he sent forth his Armies,
and destroyed those Murderers, and burnt up their City.

Then says he to his Servants, the Wedding is ready, but those that were
bidden were not worthy.

Go ye therefore into the Highways, and as many as ye shall find, bid to the
Marriage.

So those Servants went out into the Highways, and gathered together all, as
many as they found, both bad and good: and the Wedding was furnished with
Guests.

And when the King came in to see the Guests, he saw there a Man that had not
on a wedding Garment:

And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
Garment? And he was speechless.

Then said the King to the Servants, Bind him Hand and Foot, and take him away
and cast him into outer Darkness: There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

For many are called, but few are chosen.


THIS Parable, I suppose, was in its first Intention, designed to reprove the
hardened Infidelity of the Jews, their obstinately rejecting the Mercy of God to
them in Christ Jesus, and their vile Ingratitude to him for his peculiar Care
of them, in so ordering it, that the Gospel should be first preached to them
(to which Purpose also was spoken the Parable of the wicked Husbandmen in Mat.
21.33. which, for its great Affinity to the first Part of this Parable, and
entire Relation to the Jews, I thought fit to pass by) and it was likewise
intended to show God's great Anger against them for that their Stubbornness and
malicious Treatment of Christ and his Apostles, and how sad the Consequence of
it would be, both in this World and the next: And withal, to declare God's
Purpose of receiving the Gentiles into the Fold of Christ, upon their despising
and rejecting that inestimable Favor, and moreover, that whoever makes
Profession of Christianity, must live agreeably, and be conformable to all its
holy Laws, or else their Condition will be more deplorable than ever. This, I
think was the first Intention of this Parable.

But besides this, it has another Aspect which is entirely Christian, and is
full of Reproof and Instruction to us that have already embraced the Discipline
of Christ, and is very aptly expressive of these Four things, which I shall
make the Subject of the following Discourse.

First, It is lively expressive of the Nature of the Gospel or Christian
Religion, as representing it by the Marriage of a King's Son, and the poor and
the maimed, the halt and the blind being called in to partake of the Wedding
Supper.

Secondly, of God's great Care in having this Religion published and made known
to all Men, and his repeated Invitations to all Men to embrace it; represented
by that King's sending forth his Servants to call them that were bidden to the
Wedding, and again sending forth other Servants, and commanding them to tell
those that were bidden that he had prepared and made all things ready, and
therefore to urge them to come unto the Marriage.

Thirdly, It very aptly expresses, what kind of Reception, this holy Religion,
and the Teachers of it are like to meet with in the World; represented here by
Men's making light of the Invitation to the Marriage of the King's Son, and
offering Excuses, such as, of having bought a Piece of Ground, and a Yoke of
Oxen, and of having married a Wife, and that these things would engage their
Time, and therefore they could not come: And accordingly, going their own Way,
one to his Farm, and another to his Merchandise, and the rest taking those
Servants that came to invite them, and entreating them spitefully, and slaying
them.

Fourthly, It expresses how sad their Condition will be, that either when they
are invited to, yet reject this holy Religion, and abuse the Preachers of it;
or else, though they do profess it, yet live not agreeably to it. The latter of
which is represented by the King's finding a Man at the Marriage Supper that
had not on a Wedding Garment, and saying unto him, Friend, how came thou in
hither not having on a Wedding Garment? And the Man's being speechless upon it,
and the King's commanding his Servants to bind him Hand and Foot and take him
away, and cast him into outer Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
Teeth: And the former is expressed by the King's being wroth with those that
stighted his Invitation, and pronouncing them not worthy of it, and resolving
that they should not taste of his Supper, and sending his Servants to invite
others to the Wedding, and commanding his Armies to go forth and destroy those
Murderers, that had spitefully entreated and slain his Servants, and to burn up
their City.

And then after all, there is a general Observation drawn from hence, namely,
That many are called, but few are chosen. Of each of these I shall discourse in
their Order.

First, this Parable does very lively express the Nature of the Gospel or
Christian Religion; represented here by the Marriage of a King's Son, and the
poor and the maimed, the halt and the blind being called in as Guests to
partake of the Wedding Supper.

St. Paul, in his Epistle to Titus, Chap. 2. Verse. 14, says, that Christ gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar or purchased People (as it is in the Original) zealous of
good Works; and Ephesians. 1.14. Christians are called the purchased Possession: In
Allusion, I suppose, both to the Jewish Custom of the Man giving a Dowry to her
whom he made his Wife, thereby purchasing her to himself as his own Peculiar;
and likewise to a Custom of the Graecians, who had an Officer on purpose to
educate, and form, and refine Women designed for Marriage, and then to present
them to those that were to be their Husbands: Agreeable to which is that of St.
Paul, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you
as a pure and chaste Virgin unto Christ. And accordingly, our Lord often
compares himself to a Bridegroom, and his Church to the Bride, and his
Disciples to the Children of the Bride-chamber, or the Friends and special
Attendants of the Bride and Bridegroom. And Ephesians. 5.35. Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the
washing of Water by the Word, that he might present it to himself, a glorious
Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be
holy and without Blemish: And then, Verse. 30. we are Members of his Body, of
his Flesh, and of his Bones (according to what is said of Man and Wife, Genesis
2.24. They two shall be one Flesh) and Verse. 32. This is a great Mystery; but I
speak concerning Christ and the Church.

The Gospel then, or Christian Religion, being likened to a Marriage made by
God, the glorious King of Heaven, for his eternal Son; and Christ the Promulger
of this Gospel, the first Teacher of this Religion, being that Son of God, and
that divine Bridegroom, and the Church, or those that believe this Gospel, and
embrace this Religion, being the Bride; it informs us in general, that the
Nature of the Gospel, or Christian Religion, is like that of Marriage, and
makes the same Relation between Christ and Believers, as Marriage does between
a Man and his Wife; and intitles to like Privileges, and obliges to like
Duties, and is productive of like Effects.

First, the Gospel or Christian Religion makes the same Relation between Christ
and Believers, as Marriage does between Man and Wife, i. e. the nearest, the
dearest, and likewise an inseparable Relation: For, that Marriage is the
nearest Relation, is evident from what is said Genesis 2.24, that a Man shall
leave Father and Mother, and cleave to his Wife; it is the dearest Relation,
because a Man's Wife is as himself, Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh,
as Eve was of Adam, and no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh (as St. Paul has
it) but nourishes and cherishes it; and Men ought to love their Wives as
their own Bodies; and he that loves his Wife still loves himself: And it is an
inseparable Relation likewise; for though God permitted Divorce to the Jews for
the Hardness of their Hearts, and Christ, in some Cases, and for the same
Reason permits it to us Christians, yet from the Beginning it was not so; and
those whom God had so nearly joined together, were not at first intended ever
to be put a sunder but by Death.

In like manner, the Gospel or Christian Religion does (1.) create the nearest
Relation between Christ and Believers; it makes us Members of his Body, of his
Flesh, and of his Bones; and as was before quoted from St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.30.
i. e. it makes us as near to him as the Members are to the Head, the Flesh and
Bones to the Body; or as our Church expresses it, it makes us one with Christ
and Christ with us; it is so near a Relation that nothing can sufficiently
express it but what expresses an Union. It creates likewise (2.) the dearest
Relation, for thus our Lord, John 14.21. He that has my Commandments and
keeps them, he it is that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved of
my Father, and I will love him and will manifest my self unto him; and Verse.
23. We will come unto him and make our Abode with him; and Chap. 15.14. Ye are
my Friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. And Rev. 3.20. Behold, says our
Lord, I stand at the Door and knock; if any Man hear my Voice and open the
Door, i. e. by Faith and Obedience, I will come in unto him, and sup with him
and he with me; he will show the greatest Expressions of Dearness and Affection
to him. And as the Gospel makes the nearest and dearest Relation between Christ
and Believers, so that Relation is (3.) inseparable; i. e. unless we wilfully
divorce our selves from him by Apostasy or Disobedience. Thus a little before
his Ascension he tells his Apostles, and in them all faithful Believers that
observe whatsoever he has commanded, that he will be with them always, even to
the End of the World: And because he was to ascend to his Father and their
Father, to his God and their God, therefore says he, I will not leave you
comfortless, but will pray to the Father, and he shall give you another
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, John 14.16. and in the 2. and
3. Verses of that Chapter, I go to prepare a Place for you, and if I go and
prepare a Place for you, I will come again and receive you to my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. And John 10.27, 28. My Sheep hear my Voice
and I know them and they follow me; and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my Hand. And St. Paul
with great Assurance asks this Question, Romans 8.35. Who shall separate us from
the Love of Christ? and after enumerating what in the Esteem of the World was
most likely to do it, he concludes, Verse. the last, that nothing shall be able
to separate us from the Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And he
is likewise in a spiritual Manner always with us in the Reception of those
Mysteries which he instituted in Remembrance of him.

The Gospel then, effecting so near, so dear, and so inseparable a Relation
between Christ and Believers, that nothing can so fitly resemble it as the
State of Marriage; we may from hence collect in the next place, what Privileges
the Gospel intitles Believers to, by reason of this their so intimate Relation
to Christ.

As first, it intitles to the peculiar Love and Tenderness of Christ, such a
Love as will incline him to promote the Happiness of Believers, and to pity and
compassionate their Infirmities, Failures and Imperfections; for Love covers
a Multitude of Faults* Thus the Apostle, Col. 3.19. Husbands love your Wives,
and be not bitter against them; be not extreme to observe every little Defect
and Failing in them, but consider 'em as the weaker Vessel, and bear with their
Infirmities. And accordingly the Author to the Hebrews says of our Lord, he is
not one that cannot be touched with a Sense of our Infirmities, but knows and
pities them, having been in all Points tempted as we are, though without Sin,
Heb. 4.15. And as for his Tenderness and Care of our Happiness, it is
miraculously evident in that he gave himself for us, sacrificed his very Life
for our reconciliation to his offended Father, that he might sanctify and
cleanse us, and present us to himself a glorious Church, not having Spot or
Wrinkle or any such thing, but that we should be holy and without Blemish; as
the Apostle expresses it in the before cited Ephesians. 5.26. etc. And he does
continually nourish and cherish us by the Communications of his Grace in the
blessed Sacrament (that spiritual Body of his, which whosoever eats of shall live
for ever) and by the Comforts and Assistances of his holy Spirit. And to lie
thus in the Bosom of the Son of God, to have such great Degrees of his Love
and Tenderness to us expressed in such amazing Instances; to be thus pitied and
commiserated, and our Failures excused and past by, by him that is to be our
Judge; and our Happiness in all Respects so carefully endeavored by him who is
the Fountain of it: This is such a Privilege as can never be enough valued, and
is infinitely above the Reach of any Comparison.

Another Privilege the Gospel intitles Believers to upon their so near Relation
to Christ, is Christ's Protection of them from Dangers, and Defense against
Assaults of Enemies. For, as in Marriage, the Husband is the Shield and
Guardian of his Wife, so Christ is the Protector and Defender of the faithful;
he covers them from the Rage and Malice of unreasonable Men, and arms them
against the Attacks of the Spirits of Darkness, by the Supplies and Aids of his
blessed Spirit; who helps our Infirmities, and strengthens us mightily in the
inner Man, so that the Gates of Hell, all the infernal Powers shall not be able
to prevail against us. And accordingly, says St. Paul, I can do all things
through Christ that strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. Romans 8.37. In all these
things, Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, Famine, Nakedness, Perilor Sword,
in all these things we are more than Conquerers. By what means? Why, through
Christ that loves us. And our Lord says expressly in the forecited John 10.27.
my Sheep that hear my Voice shall never perish, neither shall any pluck them
out of my Hand. And if the Almighty Son of God be for us, and takes us into his
own Protection, and shields and guards us as a Husband does the Wise of his
Bosom; who then can be against us? We shall be hid under his Wings, and safe
under his Feathers, his Faithfulness and Truth shall be our Shield and Buckler.
And, to dwell thus under the Defense of the most High, and abide under the
Shadow of the Allmighty, is, no doubt, an inestimable Privilege.

Again, as the Husband confers Honor upon his Wife, intitles her to have a
Share in that Honor that is due to him; so Believers, by their intimate Union
with Christ, are advanced to the highest Step of Honor that Mortals can arrive
at: For, what more honorable than to be in so near a Relation to the most
glorious Son of God! Accordingly the Scripture exhorts us to walk worthy of our
holy Profession, Ephesians. 4.1. Phil. 1.2^.
and to have our Conversation as becomes the Gospel of Christ. And agreeably
said our Lord to the Seventy Disciples, whom he sent as Harbingers to the
Places whither he himself intended to come, he that despises you despises me;
and it is in some Proportion true of all other sincere Believers. Christianity
is a most honorable Profession, and what David said to Saul, when he offered
him his eldest Daughter to Wife for his great Services; ^ Sam. 18.18.
who am I, and what is my Life or my Fathers Family in Israel, that I should be
Son in-law to a King? may with infinitely greater Reason be said by every true
Christian, who am I, and what is my Life, that I should be taken into the
nearest Relation to the eternal Son of the Majesty of Heaven and Earth! No
Title comparable to this, no Relation so much to be glori'd in, nor any Care
too great to live up to so august a Character. But,

In the last place, the Gospel intitles Believers, as to a Participation in
some Degree of the Honor of Christ, so likewise of his Glory and Happiness.
And, as a Husband is to provide for his Wife suitable to his own Quality, and
make her a Sharer in his Happiness and Prosperity; so will Christ confer upon
sincere Believers a plentiful Share of his Glories and Felicities in Heaven.

Thus, John 14.2, 3.
a little before his Passion, in my Father's House, says he, are many Mansions,
and I go to prepare a Place for you; and if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again and receive you to my self, that where I am there ye may be
also. And in that solemn Prayer to his heavenly Father, John 17.22. The Glory,
says he, which thou gave me I have given them; and Verse. 24. Father, I will
that they also whom thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold thy Glory which thou have given me, i. e. may share in the Beatifick
Vision, which is the Summit of all Happiness. And Romans 8.17. St. Paul says we
are joint Heirs with Christ, and if we suffer with him, i.e. still continue
faithful Believers notwithstanding the Discouragements and Temptations of the
World, we shall be glorified together. And 1 Cor. 14.23. Christ is called the
first Fruits of a glorious Resurrection to immortal Bliss, which supposes a
general Harvest to follow Christ the first Fruits, afterward those that are
Christ's at his coming. For the Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a
Shout, with the Voice of the Arch-Augel, and with the Trump of God, and the
Dead in Christ shall be raised first; then we which are alive and remain shall
be caught up together with them in the Clouds, and so shall we ever be with the
Lord, 1 These. 4.16.17. And if to all this we add, that this intimate Union of
Believers with Christ, as of a Wife with her Husband, and these immense
Privileges that are consequent upon it, will be everlasting; that nothing can
put a-sunder whom God has in infinite Mercy joined thus close together, but our
wilful Unfaithfulness to this our divine Husband: As it will make up the
Account of the Wonders of God's Love to the Children of Men, and should in
Return, make us all over Love and Gratitude to that good God who has done such
great things for us; so it should make us exceeding careful upon no
Considerations whatever to divorce our selves from this our glorious Husband,
but for ever pay all possible Love and dutiful Obedience to him. Which brings
me in the next Place to show, that as the Gospel effects the same Relation
between Christ and Believers as Marriage does between a Man and his Wife, and
intitles to the like Privileges; so it obliges likewise to the like Duties.

And first, As a Wife is bound to bear unspotted Love and Fidelity to her
Husband, so is every Believer bound to demean himself toward Christ. That is,
to love him above all things, and to be entirely his; not to suffer his
Affections to wander after strange Loves, such as the World and the Vanities of
it; not to be debauched by the Devil and his Temptations, and share his Heart
between Christ and Belial: But, since his Maker is his Husband, Isa. 54.5.
as the Prophet Isaiah expresses it, to be entirely faithful to him, and admit
no Creature to that Dearness of Affection which he alone should have

For this is that Crime which the Scripture calls spiritual Fornication and
Adultery, and which St. Paul told the Corinthians, he began to fear they were
guilty of; I am jealous over you, says he, with a Godly Jealousy, for I have
espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto
Christ: But I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted from the Simplicity, or Purity and
Integrity, that is toward Christ, 2 Cor. 11.1, 2. This is that Fornication for
which Christ will give us a Bill of Divorcement, and for ever put us away from
him; depart from me ye cursed, etc. Mat. 25.41. This is in a spiritual Sense,
to take the Members of Christ and make them the Members of an Harlot; and these
spiritual as well as carnal Whoremongers and Adulterers, God will judge. And
therefore, as much as it concerns us to continue in this near and dearest
Relation to Christ, which is attended with such inestimable Privileges; so much
it concerns us to bear an entire and unspotted Love to him; for he has hought
us with a Price, therefore we should glorify him in our Bodies and our Spirits
which are his.

Secondly, As a Wife is bound to submit her self to her Husband, to comply with
his Government, and reverence his Person and Authority; so, and much more is
every Believer bound to do to Christ. That is, to be satisfied with the
Disposals of his Providence, to submit to his Guidance and Conduct, to
reverence all the Expresses of his good Pleasure, to be in Subjection to his
holy Discipline, to have one Will with him, the same Likes and Dislikes, and in
no Case to oppose or resist his Sovereign Authority.

This is no more than what the Apostles command from a Woman to her Husband,
(as every one that has read their Writings knows very well) and that though
they are both alike, frail sinful Mortals, much more then ought we to be
subject, and bear the profoundest Reverence to Christ our Savior, who is the
King of Glory, the Son of God, who upholds all things by the Word of his Power
and sits on the right Hand of the Majesty on high; whom all the Angels of God
worship, and who besides, is most tender and affectionate to us, and his
Government directed by infinite Wisdom.

Thirdly, As a Wife ought not only to be subject to the Disposals of her
Husband, and passively obedient, but likewise actively so, and ready cheerfully
to obey his Commands; so ought every Believer to be to Christ.

Indeed, this is the main Trial of true conjugal Affection, and is the best
Demonstration of the Sincerity of all other Shows of Love and Fidelity, and
Reverence and Submission. For where true Love, Reverence and Submission is, a
cheerful Obedience will surely follow; and on the contrary, where there is no
willing cheerful Obedience, there is but very little, if any sincere Affection.
And therefore, says our dear Lord, if ye love me keep my Commandments: And why
call ye me Lord, Lord, and do not the things that I say? And of Sarah it is
said, she obeyed Abraham as well as called him Lord. And St. John agreeably, 1
John 2.5. whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the Love of God perfected;
and hereby know we that we are in him. And therefore, Obedience to the Commands
of this our glorious Husband, is above all things necessary to continue that
our near Relation to him; and his Commandments are not grievous, but his Yoke
is easy and his Burden light: And 'twould be strange if we should not obey
him, who commands us nothing but what is in its own Nature necessary in order
to our Happiness in both Worlds.

In the last place, the Gospel is productive of like Effects to those of
Marriage, and from this so near Relation of Believers to Christ proceeds the
Increase of such as shall be the Children of God, a numerous Progeny to inherit
the Kingdom of Heaven, and fill up the Vacancies left by the Fall of the
rebellious Angels.

Thus our Lord calls the becoming Christian's a being born again, John 3.3. and
teaches us when we pray to God to say Our Father. And St. Paul agreeably, in a
Quotation from the Prophet Jeremiah, says, as in the Person of God, I will be a
Father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Allmighty. 2 Cor. 6.18.
And the Jerusalem which is from above, or the Christian Church, is said to be
the Mother of us all, Gal. 4.26. and Chap. 3.26. we are all the Children of God
by Christ Jesus. And if Children then Heirs, Heirs of God and joint Heirs with
Christ, of that glorious Kingdom of his which is not of this World, but eternal
in the Heavens. Well therefore may we cry out with Admiration, as St. John
does, 1 John 3.1.
Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us that we should be
called the Sons of God! And every Man that has this Hope in him, of being
received into the Bosom of his heavenly Father, and seeing him as he is; must
purify himself even as he is pure: And having such glorious Expectations,
cleanse himself from all Filthyness, both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting
Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

This then is the Nature of the Gospel; it is as a Marriage between Christ and
Believers. There is one thing more to be considered under this first General,
namely, who they are that are admitted to the Joys and Happiness of this
blessed Condition? They are described in the Parable by the poor and the
maimed, the halt and the blind. And truly, just such was Man's Condition,
before God was pleased to call him to this happy Marriage. Despicably poor we
were, and destitute of any real Excellency that could recommend us to the
Favor of God; our Souls were like a parched and barren Wilderness, burnt up
with vile Lusts and Passions, no Fruits of Holiness appearing, but drawing
still nearer and nearer to everlasting Perdition. Maimed we were in all our
Faculties by our frequent desperate Falls from our Obedience to God, and full
of Wounds and Bruises and putrefying Sores; and our best Performances very lame
and imperfect, like the Haltings of a Cripple; and our Understandings withal
blinded by the Deceitfulness of Sin, which put out that Candle of the Lord, and
made it incapable of directing us in the right Way that leads to Happiness, so
that we lay groping in the Dark, surrounded with Terrors, racked by
Uncertainties, miserably poor and indigent, and utterly unable to help our
selves. When lo! There arose up a Light in this Darkness, and through the
infinite Mercy of our God the Dayspring from on high did visit us, we were
pitied and commiserated by the Father of Mercies, and in this forlorn
Condition, called to partake of the ineffable Joys and Felicities that attend
the nearest and dearest Relation to the Son of God. The Lord anointed him to
preach the Gospel to the poor; he sent him to heal the brokenhearted, to
preach Deliverance to the captives, and Recovery of Sight to the blind, and to
set at Liberty them that are bruised, Luke 4.18. And accordingly, he enriched
our Poverty, restored our Sight, healed our Bruises, and confirmed our
Strength, and of his Fullness have we all received; and nothing for the Future
can ever make us miserable but our selves

Wherefore, as we should adore and magnify, with all our Souls, the wondrous
Goodness and Compassion of God and our Savior, in receiving such wretched
polluted Creatures as we were by Nature, into so intimate a Relation to
himself, and making us Partakers of the Comforts of his blessed Spirit in this
World, and providing Crowns of Glory for us in the next: So above all things
should we dread to fall back into the same Condition again, and work out our
Salvation with Fear and Trembling. For otherwise, 't would have been better for
us never to have tasted of the divine Compassion in so extraordinary a Manner
as we have done, and our latter End will be worse than our Beginning.

And thus much for the first thing to be considered in this Parable, namely,
the Nature of the Gospel or Christian Religion, represented by the Marriage of
a King's Son, and the poor and the maimed, the halt and the blind being called
in to partake of the Joys and Festivities of that great Solemnity. I proceed
now to the

Second thing to be considered, namely, God's great Care in having this Gospel
preached, this Religion published and made known to all Men, and his repeated
Invitations to all Men to embrace it; represented by that King's sending forth
his Servants to call those that were bidden to the Wedding, and again sending
other Servants, and commanding them to tell those that were bidden, that he had
prepared and made all things ready, and therefore to urge them to come unto the
Marriage.

How great God's Care has been that this Gospel should be published, and how
repeated his Invitations to Men have been, that they would embrace it; is
evident from the whole Story of the first planting of the Gospel, and from the
Course, that by God's Appointment, has been taken ever since. At first, many
were endowed with very extraordinary Abilities for this Purpose, such as the
Gift of Tongues, whereby they were enabled wherever they should go, to preach
the Gospel to Men in their own native Language; and a Power of working Miracles
to confirm the Truth of their Doctrine; and with this Message and these
supernatural Abilities, were they sent to the most remote Corners of the Earth;
even our Britain, as little known, and as barbarous as then it was, received,
and that very early, the glad Tidings of the Gospel. And for a Supply of the
Cortality of the first Teachers of this holy Religion, that no Age might want
those that should instruct Men in, and invite them to it, there was an Order of
Men set apart on purpose for this great Work, and empowered to ordain others
that should tread in their Steps when they were gone, and those likewise
others, and so down successively till Time shall be no more; and as so many
Ambassadors from the great King of Heaven to persuade Men to hearken to the
Proposals of Reconciliation made to them through the Merits and Intercession of
his Son, and to partake of the infinite Happiness that will follow upon that
blessed Agreement.

These, like the King's Servants in the Parable, are to let Men know, what
Bliss will be the Result of their coming to this spiritual Marriage, and
entering into so near a Relation to the eternal Son of God; that all things are
ready to complete that glorious Solemnity, the Feast prepared, the Oxen and
Fatlings killed, i.e. Heaven and the ineffable Pleasures of it ready to receive
those that shall sincerely enter into this near Relation to Christ, and
continue always faithful in it; and in the mean time the secret Joys of a good
Conscience, and the enravishing Expectation of the Time when those Felicities
shall be enjoyed, shall unspeakably cheer and refresh the Soul, and be as so
many Antepasts of Glory.

This is like the Course that the Lord took with the obstinate Jews, mentioned
Jer. 25.4. He sent unto them all his Servants, the Prophets rising early and
sending them, they cried, Turn ye again now every one from his evil Way, and
from the Evil of your Doings, and dwell in the Land that the Lord has given to
you, and to your Fathers for ever; for why will ye dye O House of Israel! Many
the like pathetick Expressions there are in Scripture of God's great Desire of
the Happiness of Mankind, and as earnest Entreaties that we would accept of
those inestimable Favors he would confer upon us, if we were to confer the
Favors, and he to receive them.

Now, when we consider the infinite Distance between God and us, what
despicable Creatures comparatively the best of us are, poor and maimed, halt
and blind, as the Parable expresses it; how infinitely perfect and happy the
divine Nature is, and would for ever be, though the whole Creation were
annihilated; so that our Righteousness will not reach to him to make any
Addition to his Felicity, nor will it be in the least profitable to him that we
make our Way perfect; and if we consider likewise our great Rebellions against
him, obstinately persisted in even until now, the little Desire we have of his
Favor, the many Slights that we have made of his Overtures of Peace and the
like: We shall soon perceive, that his Mercy is indeed over all his Works, and
that his Compassions fail not as long as there is any Hopes of our complying
with his gracious Intentions for our Happiness. And such stupendous Goodness
as this, to Creatures in our vile Circumstances, can never be enough adored and
magnifyed. Only let us remember, that the greater the Expressions are of God's
Love and Tenderness to Sinners, the greater will be his Anger, the more severe
his Vengeance to such as finally reject it, and obstinately persist in their
Rebellion against him.

The Third thing expressed in this Parable, is what Kind of Reception the
Gospel and the Teachers of it are like to meet with in the World, represented
by Men's making light of the King's Invitation to the Marriage of his Son, and
offering frivolous Excuses, such as of having bought a Piece of Ground, and a
Yoke of Oxen, and of having married a Wife, and that these things would engage
'em so that they could not come; and accordingly going their Way, one to his
Merchandise, another to his Farm, and the rest taking those Servants that came
to invite them, and entreating them despightfully and slaying them.

In general, slighting and undervaluing the glad Tidings of the Gospel, was,
and is still and is too like to be the Reception of it; Men's Lusts and vile
Affections dissuading them from embracing so holy a Religion, and the Evil of
their Deeds making them love Darkness rather than this glorious Light, which
will discover and reprove them. And Men having so little Relish for the
Religion, have as little Respect for those that preach and enforce it, and
endeavor to silence and discourage them by their malicious ill Treatment of
them; like those in the Parable, who took the King's Servants and entreated
them spitefully and slew them. And, as in this Case it seems very strange, that
those who came upon so friendly an Errand as to invite to the Pleasures and
Festivities of so great a Marriage as that of a King's Son, should be treated
so inhumanely in Return; so methinks, it is as strange, that those whom God has
sent to invite Men to their Happiness, and to prepare them for the Enjoyment of
himself in Glory, should be used like so many Enemies, and despised as the
Pests of Society, and the Offscouring of the Earth.

But so it is too generally, and the Reason must be this, as St. Paul expresses
it, we are therefore looked upon as Men's Enemies because we tell them the
Truth. Because we tell 'em they must love God above all things, and not be too
fond of the World, and deny and mortify the unruly Passions and Desires of the
Body, and lead this present Life in Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness, if
they hope to partake of the Joys of Heaven; therefore we are the Troublers of
Israel, as King Ahab said to Elijah, and as such, made the Object of Men's
Scorn and Hate. But, as our Lord takes all the Kindness, Reverence and Respect
which his Ministers receive as done unto himself (the Treatment of an
Ambassador being looked upon as the Treatment of the Prince that sends him, and
we are the Ambassadors of Christ) so on the contrary, he that shall treat
despightfully the least of these his Servants, 'twere better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he cast into the Midst of the Sea. But
of this something more in the Sequel.

Let us now consider the Excuses those in the Parable made for their not going
to the Marriage of the King's Son (and which are offered still by irreligious
Men) and the great Weakness and Invalidity of them.

The first two, of having bought a Piece of Ground, and a Yoke of Oxen, and
going to see the one and prove the other are much the same, and so shall be
considered together, and they both amount to thus much, that they preferred the
minding their own petty Affairs (and which might have been as well let alone
till another Time) before that great Honor the King did them in inviting them
to the Marriage of his Son: And they might well believe such Excuses would
serve to no other Purpose but to provoke the King to Anger, when he should see
his Favor made thus light of, and Men's common Business preferred before it.

In like manner, too many now-adays are so weak as to plead Business, and the
Affairs of the World, in excuse of their great Neglect of the things of
Religion: Our Callings must be followed, Business must be done, our Families
must be maintained, and therefore it cannot be expected that we can be much at
Leisure for Religion at the present; when the Fatigues of this World begin to
be over, and we draw near the other, then we'll give our selves up to the
making Provision for it. And this, though few Men will speak it out, is the
Sense of too many as is evident from their Practice; and truly some make no
Scruple to declare this openly. Now, though it be very true that Business must
be minded, and our Families maintained, and Industry is as much a Christian
Duty as any other, and is it self a Part of Piety; yet it is but a Part, and
will not commute for a Neglect of all the rest; nay, this Sort of Industry we
are speaking of, is one of the least Parts of Piety, and provided the
Necessaries of Life are secured, it is not only lawful, but very commendable to
abate of our Industry in the Persuit of this World's Good, and lay it out upon
the greater Concerns of the next. Thus when Jesus came to the House of Martha
and Mary, and Martha, out of a commendable Zeal to entertain him well, was
busied in making ready Provisions for him, while Mary set at his Feet listening
to his divine Instructions; when Martha complained to him that her Sister had
left all the Trouble to her, and desired him to order that she should help her:
Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art careful and troubled
about many things, but one thing is above all needful, and Mary has chosen
that good Part which shall not be taken from her, Luke 10.40. etc.

And accordingly, in his divine Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 6.24, 25. ye cannot
serve God and Mammon, says our Lord; therefore take no Thought, i.e. no
anxious, over eager Concern, for your Life, what ye shall eat or drink, or
wherewith be clothed, but Verse. 33. seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you, for your heavenly
Father knows that ye have need of all these things. Seek ye first the Kingdom
of God and his Righteousness, let it be your principle Care and Endeavor to be
rich toward God, and abound in good Works, and then a moderate Care for the
things of this Life, will, with God's Blessing, which alone can give
Prosperity, be sufficient. And therefore, to do as is too commonly done in the
World, and first provide, with great Care and Industry, for Abundance here, and
then at last think a little of the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, is
such an ungodly and unreasonable Course, as can never end in any thing but
bitter Remorse at last, and utter Confusion; so vain and frivolous is this
first Excuse Men offer for their not entertaining Religion so affectionately as
they should do, namely, that they have bought Farms and Oxen and must look
after them, i. e. are deeply engaged in the Affairs and Business of this Life.

The other Excuse offered in the Parable for absenting from the Marriage of the
King's Son, was the having married a Wife; the Man was so taken up with the
Pleasures of his own new Condition, that he had no Appetite for those at the
King's Son's Wedding.

And this, as little of Validity as it has in it, is in Effect very often
pleaded by Men, against their meddling with Religion at least at present. They
are young they say, and in the Age of Pleasure and Jollity; the Enjoyments of
the World are very sweet to 'em, and Religion is too austere for them as yet;
what Pleasures are said to be in it are of a Nature contrary to their
Propensions and Inclinations; and therefore they desire to be excused if they
don't leave these present Satisfactions but enjoy them while they can, and
afterward it is likely they may advert to the Pleasures of Religion, which,
though they have heard so much Talk of, they cannot frame any so lovely Idea of
them, as to incline them to leave what by Experience they find so grateful to
them. And this, not only the Practice of most younger Persons expresses, but
many are so forsaken of Reason as to own it plainly.

But, since they talk of Experience, I dare appeal even to themselves, whether
they have not met with more Disappointment than Satisfaction, from the greatest
sensual Pleasures they have enjoyed? The thing is too notorious to be denied;
and they tacitly confess it by shifting Pleasures so often as they do, for
where there is Satisfaction, what need of Change? And I may likewise boldly
assert this, from the Experience of very many that have tasted both Sorts of
Pleasures, those of the World as well as of Religion, that there is no
Comparison between the one and the other, and that the Satisfaction that flows
from a sincere Religion, is infinitely to be preferred before the most studied.
Gratifications of Sense; nay, even those Pleasures of Sense relish much better
for being seasoned with Religion: So that to neglect Religion out of a Fondness
for Pleasure, is as if a Man should run from a Fountain because he is parched
with Thirst. No Pleasures certainly like those of Religion, and he that once
drinks of those Rivers of Delight that flow from her, will never thirst again
after the tainted Puddles of brutal Enjoyments, for her Ways only are Ways of
sincere and unmixed Pleasure, and all her Paths are Peace.

But supposing the Pleasures of this World to be indeed as great, as some Men,
after all their Baulks and Disappointments, will still fancy them to be; and
that Religion is an austere and rugged thing, and but little or no Delight and
Satisfaction to be met with in the Practice of it; yet, since the Pleasures of
the World, how great soever, are very short and momentary, and must certainly
die with us, and generally leave us long before we die; and since Religion, how
unpleasant soever here, will secure to us the Enjoyment of unconceivable
Pleasures that are for ever in the Presence of God: No rational Man but will
think it a very childish Excuse for the Neglect of Religion to plead our
Fondness of the Gaieties and Enjoyments of this World. It Is like a Child's
slighting a Wedge of Gold, and rather persuing an empty Bubble because it
shines and glitters.

So utterly without Excuse are those who despise and reject the Offers of the
Gospel and the Invitations to Religion, upon Account of the Riches and
Pleasures of the World; or indeed upon any other Account whatever: For,
Religion is our chief Interest, and therefore nothing can stand in Competition
with it. Those that put by the Thoughts of it till a more convenient Time, that
is, till they are fit for nothing else, are no doubt very highly displeasing to
the great Author of it; but those are much more so, who totally and insultingly
reject it. To defer the great Business of Religion is a very heinous
Provocation; but atheistically to oppose and vilify it is certainly much
worse. Which leads me to the

Fourth thing expressed in this Parable, namely, the Sadness of their
Condition, who, when they have heard of, either totally reject this holy
Religion, and abuse those that invite them to embrace it; or else, though they
profess it, are negligent of its Duties, and live not agreeably to it. The
first of these is represented by the King's being Wroth with those that made
light of and complied not with his Invitation to the Marriage of his Son, and
pronouncing them unworthy of that Favor, and that they should not taste of his
Supper, and sending his Servants to invite others to the Wedding; and
commanding his Armies to go and destroy those Murderers, that had spitefully
entreated and slain his Servants, who brought the gracious Invitation to them,
and to burn up their City.

And indeed, well may God's Wrath be kindled against those that reject these
wondrous Expressions of his Love, and trample under Foot the Son of God, and
despise and vilify his holy Religion, and undervalue all his Condescentions,
and use his Ambassadors despitefully, and call the whole a Trick, a State
Juggle, and glory in their Infidelity, and too often blaspheme that blessed
Jesus, by whom alone comes Salvation.

These Men will do well to consider, that if it should prove true, that there
is no other Name by which we can be saved but that of Jesus, their Case will be
infinitely miserable who have not believed in that Name, but made it their
Business to profane and ridicule it as much as was possible; but should it
prove not true, their Belief in it will not at all be injurious to them either
in this world or in the next should there be any after this. And therefore,
since the wittiest Infidel in the World cannot prove but that it is possible,
and may be true, that Jesus is the only Savior of the World, and the
Consequence of not believing in him, being so sad should it at length prove
indeed to be true; certainly it must be the most prudent Course to be of the
surest Side, and embrace that Faith, which if true, is the only Way to
Happiness; and if false, will not however leave a Man in any Respect in a worse
Condition than it found him.

How sad the Consequence will be of not believing in Jesus as the only Savior
of the World, and of rejecting the Religion he taught, is expressed in this
Parable by the King's pronouncing those that would not come to the Marriage of
his Son, to be unworthy of that Favor, and resolving that they should not
taste of his Supper, and sending his Servants to invite others to the Wedding:
Which was literally verifyed upon the obstinate Jews, and will be as
effectually upon all other Infidels. That is, Men's obstinate Infidelity shall
at length be repaid with God's withdrawing that Favor which he so long
tendered them and they refused, and putting an End to their Day of Grace and
Salvation, and sealing 'em up (as irreclaimable) to Destruction. Because I have
called and ye refused (says Solomon, personating Christ or the Divine Wisdom) I
have stretched out my Hand and no Man regarded, but ye have set at naught my
Counsel, and would have none of my Reproof; I also will laugh at your Calamity
and mock when your Fear comes; when your Fear comes as Desolation, and your
Destruction as a Whirlwind; when Distress and Anguish comes upon you, then
shall they call upon me but I will not answer, they shall seek me early but
they shall not find me, Prove. 1.24. The things that belonged to their Peace,
which once were tendered and made known to them, shall then be hid from their
Eyes. And no Condition can be so miserable as theirs, who by obstinate
Infidelity, put themselves out of all Possibility of Salvation.

The sad Consequence of using those spiritual Persons contumeliously and
despitefully who come as Ambassadors from God with these glad Tidings of
Salvation, is expressed in the Parable, by the King's sending forth his Armies
to destroy those Murderers and to burn up their City; which was likewise
literally fufilll'd in the Destruction of Jerusalem, and shall be as
effectually verified upon those wicked Men who vent their Spleen against the
Religion upon those that preach it, and vilify and abuse and trample upon the
one because they hate the other. But Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord; and a fiery Destruction, even that of Hell, shall (without a deep
Repentance, which we beseech God to grant them) be the Portion of those whose
Malice was so inveterate against Men sent from God to invite them to Salvation.

This is the Case of such, as when they have heard, totally reject this holy
Religion, and abuse and vilify those that persuade them to embrace it. And
theirs is as bad, who, though they profess it, are negligent of its Duties, and
live not agreeably to it: Which is expressed in the Parable by a King's finding
a Man at the Marriage Supper that had not on a Wedding Garment, and saying unto
him, Friend, how came thou in hither not having on a Wedding Garment? And the
Man's being speechless upon it, and the King's commanding his Servants to bind
him Hand and Foot and take him away and cast him into outer Darkness, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

This is in Allusion to what was customary in those Eastern Countries, the
having peculiar florid Sort of Garments, on purpose to grace such festival
Solemnities, and none being permitted to taste of those Feasts, but who had
such Garments on.

So in Christianity, Repentance and Reformation of Life are the Wedding
Garment, without which none, let them make never so specious Professions, shall
taste of that Happiness which is proposed as the Reward of believing in Jesus.
Faith without Works is dead; the Soul without Repentance is polluted, whatever
it professes to believe; and without real and substantial Holiness no Man shall
see the Lord. And when at the great Scrutiny in the last Day, God shall take a
View of every Man, of the State and Condition of his Soul, that every Man may
be disposed of according to his Deserts; and shall ask those formal Professors
who have lived like Heathens, or as if Faith alone could save them, and took no
Care of good Works, How came you in hither? How came you into this Society of
Christians not having on the Wedding Garment? What will they be able to say in
their Excuse? Will they not be like him in the Parable, confounded and ashamed,
and utterly speechless! What will they have to plead in Bar of that dire
Sentence which will then be past upon them, bind them Hand and Foot and take
them away, etc. certainly nothing, but with inexpressible Horror and Despair
and Self-Condemnation must submit to their sad Punishment.

From all this, there is in the last Place this general Observation drawn, that
many are called, but few chosen. The plain Meaning of which, I suppose, to be
this.

That though the Gospel is preached to Myriads of People, and all that hear of
it are invited alike to embrace it, and it is God's good Pleasure that all
should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: Yet the most will make
a very ill Use of their Liberty of Choice; and many utterly reject this
Invitation; and more, though they do embrace it, yet become never the better
for it, by not leading their Lives agreeably to their holy Profession. And by
this means, among the many that are called, there will be but few that will
approve themselves to God as elect or choice and right good Christians, and but
few consequently, that will enter into the eternal Joy of their Lord; according
to what our Lord said in another Place, strait is the Gate and narrow is the
Way that leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.

Wherefore, to conclude this Parable. As we have all of us been called and
invited to a sincere Faith in, and entire Obedience to the holy Jesus, and do
make open Profession of such Faith, and Show of such Obedience; it concerns us
as much as our Souls are worth, and as we would avoid that outer Darkness where
is eternal weeping and gnashing of Teeth; to take all possible Care that our
Faith be so sincere and lively as to produce good Works, such as may make our
Calling and Election sure. Not to rest contented with the Form of Godliness, or
outward Profession of Christianity, but to endeavor after the Power of it and
lead our Lives according to our Belief; to imitate our Lord's most blessed
Example, and obey all his holy Precepts, and submit to the Disposals of his
Providence cheerfully, and bear unspotted Love and Fidelity to him through the
whole Course of our Lives. And by this means shall we be reckoned among his
choice Jewels, elect and precious, and be received into the nearest and
dearest, and even an inseparable Relation to him; and when this Life's at an
End, be conducted by his Angels into his glorious Presence, there to share in
his Happiness to eternal Ages:

The PRAYER.
MOST blessed God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who in infinite Mercy,
and amazing Condescension have invited me miserable Creature (though poor and
maimed, halt and blind, and destitute of every thing that may recommend me to
thee, except it be my Wretchedness) to the most intimate Union with thy
glorious Son; and as the Bride of that divine Bridegroom to enjoy his Love, and
be blessed with his tenderest Regard, his Protection and Desence, and to
partake of his Honor and Glory and Happiness: How can I enough praise and
magnify this thy wondrous Goodness! And with what Transports of Joy should I
embrace so inestimable a Favor! But I alas! stupid as I am, and bewitched with
the Cares and Business and Gain and Pleasures of this World, have hitherto
stood in the Way of my own Happiness, and disregarded this gracious Offer, and
preferred every thing before this spiritual Marriage with the Son of God; or at
best have deferred it still till another Time, provoking thereby most justly
thy Wrath and Indignation against me, and deserving to be for ever excluded thy
blessed Presence as infinitely unworthy. But now, O Lord, I do earnestly
repent, and am heartily sorry for so ungratefully sliting such infinite Mercy:
The Remembrance of this Vileness is grievous unto me, the Burden of it is
intolerable; and with the utmost Earnestness of a troubled Spirit I beg thy
heavenly Aid, that now without the least Delay I may cheerfully embrace the
blessed Invitations of the Gospel, and love and honor the Messengers which
bring me those glad Tidings; and since my Maker is my Husband, be always
mindful of my Duty to him, and bear him unspotted Fidelity and Love, be his
entirely, and for ever submit without Reserve to his heavenly Government,
reverence his Authority, and glorify him with my Body and my Spirit which are
his. And grant, O merciful God, I humbly entreat thee, that the Spirit of
Infidelity may never possess my Soul, lest I totally reject this blessed
Invitation, or having embraced it, and entered into so near a Relation to my
Savior, again divorce my self from him by entertaining strange and forbidden
Loves. And since I am so highly honored by the Son of God, O may I always be
careful to preserve the Dignity of so high a Calling, and not debase my self by
low sunk brutish Actions; but, as befits the spiritual Spouse of Christ, be
clothed with the wedding Garment of sincere Purity and Holiness, that so I may
never be separated from my dearest Lord, but ever enjoy the unconceivable
Happiness of his heavenly Kingdom. Which grant, O merciful Father, for the Sake
of that blessed Jesus. Amen, Amen.

PARABLE VI. Of the Ten Virgins.
Matthew. xxv. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Then shall the Kingdom
of Heaven be likened unto Ten Virgins, which took their Lamps, and went forth
to meet the Bridegroom.

And five of them were wise, and five were foolish,

They that were foolish took their Lamps, and took no Oil with them.

But the wise took Oil in their Vessels with their Lamps.

While the Bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept.

And at Midnight there was a Cry made, Behold, the Bridegroom comes, go ye out
to meet him.

Then all those Virgins arose, and trimmed their Lamps.

And the foolish said unto the wise, Give us of your Oil; for our Lamps are
gone out.

But the wise answered, saying, not so; lest there be not enough for us and
you, but go ye rather to them that sell, and buy for your selves.

And while they went to buy the Bridegroom came, and they that were ready, went
in with him to the Marriage, and the Door was shut.

Afterward came also the other Virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.

But he answered and said, verily I say unto you, I know you not.

Watch therefore, for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour, wherein the Son of
Man comes.


THough the first Intention of this Parable, as may be probably collected from
the foregoing Chapter (which is a Description of the sad State that was ever
long to overtake Jerusalem for the Jews obstinate Infidelity, and their
murdering their Savior) was to urge the Jewish Christians to a Preparation and
watchful Care against that Time of Sorrows; and that they would be so wise as
to make Provision for their Safety by being very careful that that Time
surprise them, not in wicked Courses; but that living, like faithful Disciples
of Christ, in all Obedience to his holy Commands, his Providence might watch
over them and secure them from perishing in that dreadful Destruction: Though
this might be the first Intention of this Parable, yet I suppose it designed
likewise to represent the Necessity of Men's constant Preparation for Death and
Judgment, by a sedulous Care and Watchfulness over themselves, and diligent
Practice of all religious Duties and Obligations; Because it is very uncertain
when God will summon any of us to leave this World and appear before his just
Tribunal, and his Call may be very sudden and unexpected; and because the
Consequence of being unready and not fit to obey it, will be inexpressibly
miserable. Watch therefore, says our Lord in the Conclusion of this Parable,
for ye know neither the Day nor the Hour when the Son of Man comes,

In my Discourse upon this Parable thus understood, I shall do two things.

First, I shall give a particular Interpretation of the Parable, and show how
aptly expressive it is of the Sense our Lord couched under it. And

Secondly, I shall urge that upon the Practice of Christians which is expressed
by it; namely, that they would watch and be ready, because they know not the
Day nor the Hour.

First, I shall give a particular Interpretation of this Parable, and show how
aptly expressive it is of the Sense our Lord couched under it.

The Parable is an Allusion to a Custom among the Jews, of the Friends and
Neighbors of the Bridegroom when there was a Wedding, conducting him to the
Bride-chamber with Songs and burning Lamps, and partaking of an Entertainment
that was prepared for them, and shutting the Door when the Bridegroom was
entered, to keep out the intruding Rabble, and afterward admitting none that
were not ready to attend him at the Hour he came, which was uncertain. And the
Sense which our Lord couched under this Representation is this: That it is
highly necessary every Christian should be always ready and prepared by a holy
Life, to attend the Call of Christ whenever he shall summon him out of this
World by Death, in order to his final Judgment; because the Time of that great
Summons is so very uncertain; and eternal Happiness or Misery respectively
depends upon Men's being prepared or not prepared for it. Now, how aptly and
movingly expressive this Parable is of this Sense will appear from the
following Interpretation of it.

By the Virgins in the Parable is represented the Society of Christians, those
that profess to believe in, and to be Disciples of the holy Jesus; who, like
Virgins; ought to be pure and spotless, innocent and modest and humble, sol^
and temperate in all things, pious and devout, and the like: And as the Want of
these or any of these good Qualifications, is to a Virgin the greatest
Blackening and Disparagement, so the Want of them in Christians is likewise the
greatest Dishonor to them; exposes them to the Scorn and Contempt of God and
all good Men; renders them unworthy of that holy Name by which they are called,
and defiles and stains those Souls which Christ purified with his precious
Blood, that they might be his own Peculiar, zealous of good Works.

By half of those Virgins being wise and half foolish, is represented the great
Difference there is among those that go under the same general Character of
Christians; some vain and idle, careless and unthoughtful, taken up with the
Gaieties and Follies of the World, lavish of their Reputation, and loose in
their Conversation and Behavior, while others are so wise as to consider the
Character they bear, and live as those that make Profession of Holiness; that
is, with Care and Circamspection, Watchfulness, and a diligent and attentive
Piety: That so they may preserve their Honor and the Dignity of their
Profession, inviolate and unstained, and be presented as chaste Virgins unto
Christ, that divine Bridegroom, whenever he shall come.

By the Lamps of those Virgins, is expressed the Souls of Christians, which are
to burn with holy Fires of Love and Devotion to God and their Savior, and make
them as so many Lights in this dark and benighted World; for ye are the Light
of the World, says our Lord to his Disciples, therefore let your Light so shine
before Men that they may see your good Works and glorify your Father which is
in Heaven, Mat. 5.14, 16. That is, as the Souls of Christians are illuminated
by the Spirit of him who is the Father of Lights, and in whom is no Darkness at
all; as they are warmed by his Influences who descended upon the Apostles in
the Likeness of Fire, and have divine Affections, by his holy Breathings
inkindled in them; so they should influence the whole Man, and make those that
name the Name of Christ like so many burning and shining Lights in the Midst of
a crooked and perverse Generation, so many eminent Examples of Piety and real
Goodness; such, as by these own Practice should recommend their most hloy
Religion, and set before Men's Eyes the Beauty of Holiness by their own
Conversation.

By the Bridegroom, whom these Virgins with their Lamps went forth to meet, is
represented our dear Savior, that heavenly King's divine Son, for whom he made
so glorious a Marriage in the Parable I last discoursed of; where the Reasons
why the Gospel is compared to a Marriage and our Lord to a Bridegroom are
particularly insisted on. And by going forth to meet this divine Bridegroom is
signified our preparing against his calling us from this World by Death, and
providing against his Advent to Judgment; that is, by frequently contemplating
our Mortality, reflecting on the Shortness and Uncertainty of Life, and
therefore making the best Use of our Time while we have it, as not knowing how
soon our Breath may be required of us; and because after Death comes Judgment,
therefore endeavoring to make ready our Accounts by frequent Self-Examination,
and from the serious Consideration of the Terrors of that great Day, and the
severe Scrutiny into our Thoughts as well as Words and Actions that we must
then undergo, collecting with S. Peter, 2 Pet. 3.11.
what manner of Persons we ought to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness,
that we may be found of the great Judge in Peace, and, as Virgins, without Spot
and blameless.

By the Oil in the Virgins Lamps, and which they took with them in their
Vessels when they went to meet the Bridegroom, is represented the Graces and
Virtues of Christianity, which are the proper Nourishment of the Soul (that
Lamp of the Lord, as Solomon calls it) and will brighten and enliven it as
Plenty of Oil does a Lamp, and make the Way of the Just like a shining Light,
shining more and more unto the perfect Day; and which, when they fail,
spiritual Darkness will follow as in a Lamp gone out: And if the Light that is
in you be Darkness, says our Lord, how great is that Darkness! But the
Christian Virtues were very aptly represented by Oil upon these further
Accounts.

First, Because Oil was generally reckonen in the eastern Countries as a great
Part of a Man's Riches; and when they would express great Wealth, they do it by
magnifying the Plenty of Oil. Thus Job, when he reflected, in his Affliction,
upon his former opulent Condition, the Rock (or the stone Jar that was made use
of to preserve Oil in) says he, poured me out Rivers of Oil, Job 29.6. And the
Prophet Micah, when he represented the Impossibility of appeasing his offended
God, even by the most rich and costly Offering, will the Lord be pleased, says
he, with ten Thousand Rivers of Oil? Micah 6.7. and in Abundance of Places of
Scripture the Increase of Oil signifies the Increase of Riches. And therefore,
to have a Soul plentifully stored with divine Graces and Virtues, whereby we
lay up a Treasure in Heaven and become rich toward God, being the greatest and
only true and durable Riches; is very aptly represented by having Oil in our
Vessels and our Lamps.

Secondly, Oil was likewise among the Easterns a Symbol of the greatest
Honors, as is evident from the whole Story of the Bible, where we read that at
the solemn Consecration and Inauguration of Kings and Priests Oil was always
used, and that among the Jews by the Appointment of God himself; and is still
in Use with us at the Coronation of our Kings, And therefore, very fit to
represent those Christian Virtues which so highly enoble the Soul as to render
it like to God, holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure, perfect as he is
perfect; and whereby through the Merits of Christ we become Kings and Priests
to God, Rev. 1.6.
and shall reign with him for ever.

Thirdly, Oil was an Emblem of Joy and Pleasure, and much used therefore in
Feasts and Entertainments, as is evident not only from heathen Writers, but
from holy Scripture. There we read of the Oil of Joy and Gladness; and our Lord
in his Directions concerning fasting, bids his Disciples not make a vain
glorious Show of it by an affected Sullenness and Down Look, disfiguring their
Faces as the Hypocrites did: But thou, when thou fastest, says he, anoint thy
Head that thou appear not unto Men to fast; i. e. make Semblance rather by this
means, as if thou were going to a Feast. And David, when he recounts God's
Goodness to him, says amongst other things, thou have prepared a Table for me,
thou have anointed my Head with Oil and my Cup runs over, Psalm. 23.5. which
signifies the Happiness of his Condition in general as well as his being
advanced to the Throne of Israel. Many other Places there are of this Nature;
but these are sufficient to show how fitly those Christian Graces are expressed
by Oil, which cause the greatest Joy and Satisfaction to a holy Soul, and the
Practice of which is full of Pleasure and unspeakable Delight. Sincere Religion
is the most chearing thing in the World, and a good Conscience a continual
Feast: Indeed, to rejoice is only proper for a good Christian, whose Mind is
clear and undisturbed, and in constant Hope and Expectation of the Happiness of
Heaven. But he, whose Mind is racked with a Sense of his deep Guilt, and feels
the Lashes of an enraged Conscience, and is terrified with the unexpressible
Fears of Damnation, has little Reason to have Joy or Comfort in any thing. Oil
therefore, or the Emblem of Joy and Cheerfulness, is of nothing more aptly
expressive than of the Graces of our holy Religion, whose Ways alone are indeed
Ways of Pleasantness and Joy.

By the Virgins all slumbering and sleeping while the Bridegroom tarried; is
signified the Inadvertency and Frailty of even the best of Men. Because this
divine Bridegroom delayeth his Coming, we are all of us too apt to lay aside
the Thoughts of it; to think but little upon Death and Judgment as things a
great Way off, and for which there will be Time enough to provide hereafter:
And for want of due Advertency to these rousing Subjects, we are apt to grow
heavy in our Religious Performances, and suffer spiritual Drouziness to creep
too much upon us. This made holy David call upon God so often to quicken him in
his Righteousness; and St Paul to exhort his Corinthians to awake to
Righteousness, and thus to rouse the Ephesians, awake thou that sleep: Ephesians.
5.14.
And in this spiritual Slumber (though the unavoidable Frailty of humane Nature
will in Part be accepted as our Excuse by our merciful Savior, who knows and
pities our Infirmities, yet) even the best of us indulge our selves too much,
and enter into the Number of the foolish Virgins, and endanger the Extinction
of our Lamp through the Decay of our Virtues, and expose our selves to many
Dangers and Temptations, and frequent Falls. For this Inadvertency to that
great Truth, that the End of all things is at hand, is one great Reason why
even the righteous fall seven times a Day; whereas would we oftener set our Lord
before us as coming to judge the quick and the dead, and reflect, that perhaps
the next Hour our Soul may be required of us by him that gave it, and so an End
put for ever to our State of Probation, and an irreversible Sentence soon after
be passed upon us according to our Deservings; we should not dare to be so
often moved from our Duty, but be careful and circumspect and always upon our
Guard, lest that Day surprise us unawares, and while we drouze away our
Opportunity our Lamps go out, and the Bridegroom call before we are ready to
enter with him into the Marriage Chamber, and so the Door be shut.

It therefore highly concerns even the best of us, not to sleep as do others,
but to watch and be sober, having our Loins girded about, and our Lights
burning, as our Lord expresses it, and our selves like unto Men that wait for
their Lord when he will return from the Wedding, that when he comes and
knocks we may open to him immediately. Blessed are those Servants whom the
Lord when he comes shall find thus watching; I verily I say unto you, Luke
12.35, etc.
that he shall gird himself and make them sit down to Meat, and (after the
Manner of Bridegrooms) will come forth and serve them; i. e. will impart to
them the Joys and Felicities of his heavenly Kingdom. And if he shall come in
the second or third Watch, that is, in the Time most addicted to Vanity and
Inadvertency, as is Youth and Manhood; Blessed in a more especial Manner are
those Servants. And what the Angel said to the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.2. is
very necessary Advice even to the best Man living, be watchful, and strengthen
the things that remain which are ready to die; for I have not found thy Works
perfect before God. And what our Lord says, Rev. 16.15. deserves to be
seriously considered; Behold I come as a Thief, blessed is he that watches and
keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked and they see his Shame.

By a Cry being made at Midnight, behold the Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to
meet him; is very lively and movingly represented, how unexpectedly the Day of
Judgment shall surprise the drouzy World, and how sudden, for any thing we can
tell to the contrary, the Time of our Death may be, which is to us the
Forerunner of it.

Midnight is a Time of great Silence, and destined to Rest and a Forgetfulness
of the Toils and Troubles of the Day; and then, sudden Outcries and Alarums
are doubly scaring and affrighting, and seize with an inexpressible Confusion,
Horror and Consternation. And thus, when Men are in the Midst of their
Wickedness, that spiritual Night, employed in Deeds of Darkness, given up to
Ease and Luxury, and forgetful of the great Business of working out their
Salvation; then shall that Time of Sorrows steal upon them as a Thief in the
Night, the terrifying Cry shall be made, behold, the great Judge of the World
comes, go ye forth to meet him: For when they shall say Peace and Safety, says
the Apostle, Then sudden Destruction comes upon them as Travail upon a Woman
with Child, and they shall not escape, 1 These. 5.3. Then shall the Kings of the
Earth and the great Men and the rich Men, those that were thought happy upon
Earth, instead of going out to meet this Judge, hide themselves in Dens, in
Rocks and Mountains, and say to the Mountains and Rocks, fall on us and hide us
from the Face of him that sits on the Throne and from the Wrath of the Lamb
for the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand! Rev.
6.15, 16, 17.

And no wonder if a guilty Wretch dreads to go meet his angry Judge; and all on
the sudden, with all his Stains and Pollutions about him, appear before his
Tribunal who hates Iniquity, and into whose Presence no unclean thing can
enter: And, who is a consuming Fire, to those who by their obstinate Impieties
have provoked him to become their Enemy.

And since all this is so, a Man of any Thought, and that has any Apprehension
of the sad Condition of being thus surpised and hurried into the other World
by so quick and unforeseen a Summons (which no Man is sure shall not be his
Case, since many have been called away with little or no Warning, that have no
more expected than we do now) a Man of any Thought and Apprehension of things
will surely be moved by such Considerations to shake off that fatal Drouziness
which too easily besets him, and by a constant Attendance to his Duty and
Preparation for his Departure hence, be ready cheerfully to obey his great
Master's Call, whether at Even or at Midnight, or at the Cockcrowing, or in the
Morning, lest coming suddenly he find him sleeping.

By the wise Virgins arising and trimming their Lamps when that Midnight Cry
was made, is represented the more than ordinary Care that even good Persons
ought to take when by Age or the Violence of any Distemper the Time of their
Departure hence seems to be near approaching, to enliven their Piety; and by
putting a Recruit of Oil into their Lamps, acquiring new Degrees of Sanctity,
and warming their Souls with greater Ardors of Devotion and holy Love, prepare
to go cheerfully to meet their Lord. Then is the Time, when every sincere
Christian should endeavor to adorn his Soul with all the Graces of the holy
Religion he professes, to improve every remaining Minute of his Time to this
best of Purposes, to redeem the many Hours formerly misspent in Vanity and
Folly; and by frequent Contemplation of the infinite Glory, Sanctity and Bliss
of that heavenly World to which he then so sensibly draws near, inflame his
Defires of being at the End of his wearisom Journey to it; and fit himself for
the spiritual unspotted Enjoyments of that happy Place by having as little
Commerce as is possible with this World below, and have his Conversation in
Heaven, which will so quickly be the Place of his everlasting Abode.

By the foolish Virgins saying to the wise; give us of your Oil for our Lamps
are gone out, is represented the Want of Preparation among the careless and
inconsiderate for this so great and sudden Change; and their mighty
Consternation upon it, and the vain and insignificant Courses they will take in
their Surprise, to make up, if possible, their own Defects, by borrowing of
others that have Souls better furnished with Piety than theirs. And by the wise
answering, not so, lest there be not enough for us and you, and bidding them go
rather and buy for themselves; is shown that it is utterly groundless to expect
at that great Day of Retribution, when every Man shall be rewarded according to
his own Works, to fare the better for the Sanctity of others, and that every
Man has enough to do to work out his own Salvation, and must keep his Lamp
alive with his own Oil, must nourish his Soul with his own Virtue; for there
was never, nor ever shall be any mere Man so holy and excellent but must return
this same Answer as the wise Virgins did, to such as should beg them to bestow
some of their Virtues or Merits upon them, not so, lest there be not enough for
our selves and you.

And if this be true, what will become of the Popish Doctrine of Works of
Supererrogation? If the best Man in the World has but Virtue enough to secure
his own Condition (and that through infinite Mercy too, and upon Account of the
all-sufficient Merits of Christ) where is there any left for him to bestow upon
others? But this is one of those doctrins that bring much Money into their
Coffers, and therefore, right or wrong, they will be sure to maintain it.

By the Bridegroom's coming while those foolish Virgins went about so unlikely
an Employment as then immediately to furnish their Lamps with Oil, which before
were unregarded and suffered to go out, and the Door before they were provided
being shut; is represented, the Invalidity, generally speaking of a Deathbed
Repentance; that it is too late to begin to be good when the Bridegrom comes,
and those that would enter with him into the Marriage Chamber must be ready and
prepared by a previous Course of holy Living, and that for some considerable
Time.

This Hurry of the foolish Virgins at that Time to get Oil for their Lamps, was
only the Effect of the Terrors of that Midnight Call; had it not been for that,
they would have drouz'd on still in their thoughtless Way of living, and in all
Probability, had it proved a false Alarm, they would have returned again to
their Dream of Vanity, when this their Fright was a little over. And so it is
with those that think not of Repentance till Death and Judgment stare 'em in
the Face; they are then wondrous sorry for having offended God, because they
see they are like to be for ever punished for it with the Devil and his Angels;
and wish they had lived better, and beg God to forgive 'em, and promise
Amendment for the Time to come: But all this very seldom proceeds from Love to
God or his holy Religion, as appears by their being as bad as ever, when God
has been pleased to restore them to their former Health. But, such Repentance
as this is but a Piece of Mockery, and will not be accepted; it must be a real
and thorough Change of Mind expressed in an entire Reformation of Life and
Manners that will incline God to pardon and forgive. Notwithstanding all the
Hurry of the foolish Virgins to get Oil for their Lamps upon this sudden
Notice of the Bridegroom's coming; because their Lamps were before suffered to
go out, we see the Door was shut upon them.

By the wise Virgins that were ready, their going in with the Bridegroom to the
Marriage Feast; is represented the great Happiness of the sincerely good, who
by holy living are ready, and prepared for their Departure hence into the World
of Spirits. That is, as there was great Preparation made to receive the
Bridegroom among the Jews and other Easterns, great Joy and Festivity, and
which the Children of the Bride-chamber, or those that attended the Bridegroom,
did partake of, singing Epithalamiums or nuptial Songs in Praise of the
Bridegroom and his Bride, and rejoicing in their Happiness and wishing them
long Prosperity: So, the Joys of the highest Heavens (which are the Marriage
Chamber of this divine Bridegroom our Savior) in the Society of innumerable
Saints and Angels and glorified Spirits, are prepared for those that love our
Lord Jesus in Sincerity; and by a constant holy Life, are ready to leave these
earthly Habitations, and enter with him into that holy Place: Where they shall
enjoy a most blisful Eternity, for ever singing Halleluja's to the Praise and
Honor of that glorious Name, in which all the Nations of the World are
blessed; praising God and saying, Rev. 19.7, 9.
Let us be glad and rejoice and give Honor to him, for the Marriage of the
Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready; and blessed are they which
are called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb. And well is that Care and
Watchfulness and holy Preparation repaid, which will procure an Entrance into
that holy Place, where Christ is sitting at the right Hand of God; and make us
Sharers in the Joys of Angels, and in the Happiness of our dear Redeemer!

In the last place; by the foolish Virgins coming after the Door was shut, and
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us, and his answering, I know you not; is
expressed the sad and remidiless Condition of those whom Death and Judgment
surprise unawares, and that are not prepared by a holy Life. They may cry,
Lord, Lord, long enough in the Bitterness and Anguish of their Souls, and
profess that they believe in him and are his Disciples, and called by his Name,
that they have eat and drunk in his Presence, and that he has taught in their
Streets, and the like: but yet, for all this, without a constant persevering
Piety, Christ will tell them I know you not whence you are, depart from me all
ye that work Iniquity.

And, what inconceivable Agonies will those excluded Wretches then be in! What
Horror and Despair will then take Seizure of their Souls! What Outcries, what
hideous Wailings will there be! How will some frame fruitless Excuses, Lord, we
have eaten and drank in thy Presence, and thou have taught in our Streets, etc.
while others, with deep Sighs in vain beg Pity and Commiseration, of him who
never before denied it. What intolerable Anguish will they feel, to see those
whom they hated and despised on Earth, then entered into the glorious Marriage
Chamber of the Son of God; and they themselves, they who are prosperous here,
and to all Appearance the Friends and Favorites of the divine Bridegroom,
eternally shut out from his Presence and the Joys of those celestial Regions,
and left behind in unconceivable Torments, and in the Company of malicious
Fiends and Devils, to linger under an Eternity of Misery! No Words can ever
reach those Horrors, nor can our Thoughts conceive them; and may none of us
ever be so unhappy as to feel them! But be so wise as to watch and be ready,
and have our Lamps burning, and our selves always prepared for this great
coming of our Lord, for we know not the Day nor the Hour.

And thus have I given a particular, plain and practical Interpretation of this
Parable of the Ten Virgins, whereof five were wise and five foolish; and shown
as I went along how aptly expressive it is of the Sense our Lord couched under
it.

I proceed now to the other thing to be done, which is to urge that
Watchfulness and Preparation by all manner of holy living against this coming
of our Lord, which is necessary to our being admitted into his Joy; and to
show, how great the Wisdom of so doing is, and how great the Folly of the
Contrary: For those that were ready and trimmed their Lamps are called wise
Virgins in the Parable; and those that were not ready, and their Lamps out are
called foolish.

As for the Folly of not taking Care to be ready and prepared against that
great Change of Death shall come; it is a thing justly to be wondered at, that
Men who know that one Time or other they must surely die, and are wholly in the
Dark as to the precise Time of their Death, and that they must die but once,
and that, without any any further Probation, after Death comes Judgment; it is
much to be wondered at that those who know all this to be true, as Christians
are supposed to do, should live so much at random, and be so foolishly careless
in managing their last Stake, so heedless in doing that well which admits of no
Repetition, and which, if done ill they are for ever miserable. It Is the very
Height of Folly this, and which, one would think, a Man of any Sense could not
be guilty of. There is nothing that Men are more afraid of than dying, and yet,
so strangely contradictious are they to themselves, they make the least
Provision against this greatest Evil. In other Matters Men are so wise as to
endeavor to secure themselves against their Fears; they provide against
Poverty by Diligence and Parsimony, against Pain and Diseases by proper
Antidotes and Preservatives, against the Approach of Enemies by the best
Defense they are capable of making, and the like; and this many times when
there is only a Probability of these Evils coming upon them: And yet against
Death, though they dread it above all things, and know that it will certainly
come and are uncertain how soon, they make as little Provision as if they were
immortal as the Angels in Heaven, what a Bundle of foolish Inconsistencies is
here? They look upon Death as the greatest of Evils, and yet regard it the
least of all things; they know it highly concerns 'em to make Preparation for
it by a good Life, and they know the sad Consequence if it surprise 'em
unawares, and they are not sure they shall not be surpised the next Hour or
Minute; and yet for all this they put the evil Day far from them, and by all
Arts endeavor to remove such melancholy Thoughts as if they were resolved not
to avoid but suffer what they fear, and secure to themselves the Miseries
consequent upon an untimely and unprepared Death. And what is this, but just
the same Piece of Folly and Madness, as for a Man because he greatly dreads the
Plague therefore to run into an infected House, because he is afraid of Poverty
therefore to grow prodigal and squander away what he has? And what can be more
strangely foolish and contradictious than this? Indeed, a Sinners whole Life is
the greatest Folly and Contradiction, but it is most gross and palpable with
Relation to dying; for, because a Man loves his Body, therefore so to indulge
it in this World as to make it become eternally miserable in the next, and live
in such a Course of sinful Pleasures as will be repaid with a double Death, is
unaccountably foolish and against all the Dictates even of natural Reason.

I need not say more I think to expose the Folly of not making Preparation for
so great a Change as Death will effect in every Man's Condition; or (in the
Phrase of this Parable) of not keeping Oil in our Lamps, nor watching against
the divine Bridegroom's coming, but slumbering in a careless Inadvertency to
those great things of Religion, Death and Judgment, till they overtake us as a
Thief in the Night. And from what has been said of the Folly of not preparing
for that Time of Terrors and greatest Concern to every Man, we may in a few
Words collect the great Wisdom of being always in a Readiness to obey the
Summons of our great Lord with Cheerfulness.

For in short, to be ready and prepared to die when God shall please to call
us, has all the Wisdom in it of making a constant due Provision against the
greatest and most concerning Change that can befall us; and which we must
certainly undergo, and how soon we know not, and that but once neither, and
which will be followed by the final Judgment without any new Opportunity being
afforded, wherein to amend the Errors of our then irrecoverably past Life: It Is
to make such a Preparation for this great Change as may render it advantageous
to us whenever it shall come, than which no greater Piece of Wisdom can be
imagined: For that certainly is the greatest Wisdom that makes a Man wise to
Salvation.

Wherefore, to conclude this Parable. Since it is appointed to Men once to dye,
and after that the Judgment; or, in the Style of this Parable, since Jesus the
divine Bridegroom will one time come to summon every particular Member of the
Christian Church, his mystical Spouse, to leave this World and attend him in
the World of Spirits, there to partake with him (if ready and adorned with the
Wedding Garment, and their Lamps burning with the Oil of Righteousness) of the
everlasting Felicities of this heavenly Kingdom; or else, if not prepared to
appear before him then, to be for ever excluded his Presence, and thrust into
the dire Abodes of the Devil and his Angels: Since this is so, let us all make
it our sincere Endeavor, by a serious and hearty Observation of those holy
Rules of living which our Lord has marked out to us as the Way to Immortality
and a Preparation for his Appearance, to be always ready to go out and meet
him; that we may enter with him into the Marriage Chamber before the Door be
shut, and not hear that dismal Sound, I know ye not, depart from me ye Workers
of Iniqutity.

And because this great Coming of the Bridegroom will be but once, for it is
appointed to Men but once to dye, and after that but one final Judgment; let us
by no means trifle away this only Opportunity of working out our Salvation in
Folly and Impertinency, much less in Wickedness and Vice; but often reflect
upon the Agonies we shall feel when we shall find this one only Life which we
have so wretchedly misspent, drawing to a Conclusion, and no Hopes of any
further Opportunity to recover our selves in, but just as we then are in that
deplorable unprepared Condition, be hurried away to give Account of our Works.
Lord! What Confusion must such wretches feel, what horrid Tortures must needs
pierce their Souls, to see Hell gaping to receive 'em, and no Possibility of
Escape or so much as a Reprieve, but plunge they must into those Lakes of Fire
and Brimstone, which yet they might have avoided if they would?

If this be a Case infinitely deplorable (and if this be not, certainly nothing
is) then it nearly concerns us all while we have Time, that is, while this one
only Life does last, to make Provision for a happy Departure out of it, by a
more holy and circumspect Conversation in it. And because the Time when this
one only Life shall end is wholly in the Dark to us, and we know not the Day
nor the Hour when our Lord will come; let this awaken us into serious Thoughts
and Resolutions of making the best Use of the remaining Portion of our Lives,
and break off immediately our sinful Course of living, lest the Opportunity for
so doing be gone before we think of it, and we be surpised into endless Misery
e're we are aware. Let us always keep our Lamps burning, our Souls employed in
holy Meditations, and our selves in a Readiness by a good Life; and then,
though it is appointed for us all to die, and that but once, and after that the
Judgment, and we know not the Day nor the Hour when the Summons shall be given:
We may with Comfort wait for our dear Lord's appearing, and say, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

The PRAYER.
I.
O Glorious Jesus! The Savior and the Judge of Mankind, before whose just
Tribunal we must all certainly appear, but when we, know not, and there give
Account of our Works, and be rewarded according to them; assist me, I beseech
thee, with thy Grace, that I may make it my chief Care with Cheerfulness and
Comfort to obey thy Summons to this great Audit whenever thou shall call. And
to that End, grant I may be frequent in the Contemplation of my Mortality; how
short and frail my Life is here, how inevitably and closely Judgment follows
Death, and how certainly the one will find me as the other leaves me. Thou holy
Jesus, though a stern Judge to obstinate Rebels to thy Father, art yet the
Bridegroom of thy Spouse the Church, and infinite is thy Love to those that
preserve inviolate their Fidelity to thee; and happy will they be beyond
Expression, who at thy glorious coming to receive thy Bride into thy Kingdom,
shall be admitted into thy Marriage Chamber, and be for ever where thou art,
and behold and partake of thy Glory. O may I therefore, like a wise Virgin,
preserve my Innocence untouched, be clothed with Humility, and adorned with a
meek and quiet Spirit, and sober and temperate in all things, having my Lamp
full of Oil, my Soul replenished with Virtue, and constantly burning with the
Fires of Piety and Devotion; that so when the Cry shall be made, Behold the
Bridegroom comes, go ye forth to meet him; I may be ready to obey thy Call,
though it be made at Midnight, and be found of thee our dearest Lord, as a
Virgin in Peace, without Spot and blameless.

II.
I must confess with Shame and Sorrow, O merciful Jesus, that I am too prone to
slumber and sleep, and forget to advert as I ought, to this thy glorious Second
Advent, and the Forerunner of it, Death; and am apt foolishly to put that Day
far from me, and to think thou delayest thy coming; whereby my Oil is wasted,
and my Lamp almost gone out.

O do thou therefore quicken me in thy Righteousness, blessed Redeemer, and
grant that the Consideration of the surprising Suddainness of thy Appearance
upon the Throne of Judgment, and the great Uncertainty of the Time when I shall
be called from hence and bound over to that great Assize, there to give Account
of my Works and how I lived and how I died: Grant that this Consideration may
put an End to my spiritual Drouziness, and engage me in Prayer and
Watchfulness, and pious sober Conversation, because I know not the Day nor the
Hour. And when by the Decays of Age or Violence of Diseases my Departure into
the World of Spirits seems to be near approaching: O then enable me with thy
prevailing Grace, to trim my Lamp with an extraordinary Diligence, to enliven
my Religion, and not be to seek for Oil, then when my Lamp should be best
replenished with it, and burn most vigorously. O let me never trust to the
great Uncertainty of a Deathbed Repentance, nor vainly depend upon the
redundant Merit of others except that of my Savior which is my only Hope, but
now in Time of Health provide for a happy Death, lest my Lamp being out when
thou shall call me to attend thee, Amazement and Horror seize me, and the Door
be shut upon me. And well will my wakeful Preparation be rewarded, dearest
Jesus, when I shall be admitted into thy glorious Presence, and enjoy the
endless Blisses of thy heavenly Bride-chamber. O therefore grant me thy Grace
not to sleep as do others, but to watch and be sober, and so much the more as I
see that Day approaching. Amen. Blessed Savior, Amen, Amen.

PARABLE VII. Of the good Samaritan.
Luke x. 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. A certain Man went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among Thieves, which stripped him of his Raiment, and wounded
him, and departed, leaving him half dead.

And by chance there came down a certain Priest that Way, and when he saw him,
he passed by on the other Side.

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the Place, came and looked on him, and
passed by on the other Side.

But a certain Samaritan, as he journyed, came where he was: And when he saw
him he had Compassion on him,

And went to him, and bound up his Wounds, pouring in Oil and Wine, and set him
on his own Beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took Care of him.

And on the morrow when he departed, he took out Two Pence, and gave them to
the Host, and said unto him, take care of him, and whatsoever thou spendest
more, when I come again, I will repay thee.


THIS Parable was spoken upon occasion of a Lawyer's asking our Lord, What he
should do to inherit eternal Life? Who, upon Christ's referring him to his own
Law, and his Repetition of the two great Commandments of loving God with all
our Hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves, and Christ's returning to him,
this do and thou shall live; being willing to justify himself, as an Observer
of all this, asked this further Question, and who is my Neighbor? That so
knowing our Savior's Sense in that Particular, he might the better make it
appear to him, that he not only loved God with all his Heart, which he thought
he could safely affirm, but likewise his Neighbor as himself; and therefore
stood fair for eternal Life. To this latter Question Jesus answered by the
Parable above recited, and then asked the conceited Lawyer, Which now of these
Three think thou was Neighbor to him that fell among the Thieves, the
Priest and Levite that were his Countrymen, Children of the same Abraham, who
yet took no charitable Notice of him, but passed by on the other Side; or the
Samaritan, who though a schismatical Stranger to the Common Wealth of Israel,
and an Enemy to every Jew, yet had Compassion on him and relieved and succored
him with Charity suitable to his Distress? To this the Lawyer answered as he
could not choose but do, he was his Neighbor that showed Mercy on him. Then
said Jesus immediately to him, Go and do thou likewise. Which Words struck home
upon his Conscience, that they put a Stop to his intended Justification of
himself, and we hear of no further Intercourse he had with our Lord; and may
imagine how he sneaked away ashamed and confounded.

The Design therefore of this Parable is to give us a true Notion of Charity,
or Compassion and Relief of such as are in Distress; and that both with Respect
to the Object of it, and the Manner and Measure of expressing it to such
Object. And therefore in discoursing upon this Parable I shall do three things.

First, I shall show who are the proper Objects of this Sort of Charity,
according to the true Sense and Meaning of our holy Religion.

Secondly, How we are obliged to relieve them, in what Manner and in what
Measure.

Thirdly, What great Encouragement we have to this excellent Duty, with respect
both to this World, and that above; or what a Blessedness it is to be able thus
to give rather than receive.

First, As for the proper Objects of this Charity, they are in general the
really Indigent and Calamitous, and such as are unable to help themselves. And
that (without excepting any) whether they be Strangers and Foreigners, or
Enemies, or Heathens, or Heretics, or wicked Persons: All that are indeed
necessitous and helpless, are made by our holy and most merciful Religion, the
Objects of our Compassion and Relief. Thus the Apostle, As we have Opportunity,
let us do good unto all Men, Gal. 6.10. and our Lord, Do good to them that hate
you, Mat. 5.44. and Romans 12.20. If thy Enemy hunger feed him, if he thirst give
him Drink; and in this Parable our Lord proposes to our Imitation the Example
of a Samaritan taking great Care of an unfortunate Jew, though there could be
no greater Enmity than between the Jews and the Samaritans, and that grounded
upon what of all things makes Ill Will the most inveterate, Diversity of
Opinion in Religion. And indeed, 'twould be a barbarous Piece of Cruelty and
Inhumanity, if I should let a Man perish, without any Commiseration or Help
from me when I am able to give it him, because he has formerly, it may be, been
unkind or injurious to me, or is of a different Religion, and of a Nation that
is in Hostility with that to which I belong. This certainly is not doing as I
would be done to, nor loving my Neighbor as my self, for every Man in a
religious Sense is my Neighbor; it is more like the Rage of a Tiger than the
Bowels of a Man, or the Malice of a Devil than the Charity of a Christian. As
for Charity to Strangers and Foreigners, that is expressly commanded in several
Places of Scripture, particularly 1 Pet. 4.9. where what we translate use
Hospitality one to another, is in the Original, (...), Be kind to Strangers;
Hob. 13.2.
and by the Author to the Hebrews, the Probability of receiving Angels unawares
in that Disguise (as Abraham and Lot did, Genesis 18.3. and 19.2.) is made the
Motive to it. And how excellent a Piece of Charity this is, and how conducive
to the Prevention of much Sin and Misery, I need not spend much Time to prove:
There are few that have lived any considerable Time in the World, and have seen
more Parts of it than one, but have some Time or other, either tasted the
Comfort of an hospitable Disposition or smarted for the Want of it; and such
Men are the fittest to tell their Thoughts of either: That is, how inhumane
it is to be without Bowels to an indigent Stranger, and how happy Mankind would
be in every Place, were the Orders of the great Governor of the World duly
observed in this Matter. And as for wicked-Persons, who deserve the least
Compassion of any, if they are in other Respects real Objects of Charity, their
Wickedness must not put a Bar to it; for we are to imitate the Example of the
merciful God, who is kind and Beneficent to the unthankful and to the evil.

But all this is to be understood with Respect only to the really necessitous
and helpless, whose Wants and Calamities are not feigned; and who are unable to
help themselves to better Circumstances.

For there are a very vile Sort of People, who make a Trade of going about from
House to House and with doleful Accents, and a forlorn Appearance and formal
Complaints endeavor to melt People into Compassion toward them; who yet are
far from being Objects of this Sort of Charity; their Necessities being
counterfeit, or at least they being very well able to supply them by their own
Labor if they would: It Is well known how gainful they make this lazy Course of
Life, how unwilling they are to work when any would employ them; how much
abominable Debauchery there is in those vagrant Societies, and how great a Pest
they are to the Public; they being no better than a Band of Villains and
Robbers, and unprofitable idle Drones, that live upon the Labor and Spoil of
others, and are no Way useful or serviceable themselves: And therefore to
relieve their pretended Necessities, is to encourage the worst Men living in a
Course of Life highly dishonorable to God, injurious to the State, and ruinous
to their own Souls. Nay further, it is to deprive those that indeed deserve our
Charity of considerable Supplies, which are, though insensibly bestowed upon
those vile Wretches; and were it computed, what some charitable Persons give in
a Year in Money to common Beggars at their Doors or otherwise, 'twould amount to
a Sum big enough to cheer the Hearts of many Fatherless and Widows, and decayed
Houskeepers that are in greater Want than those Vagrants, though not so whining
and so affectedly nasty and ragged. And 'twould be worth while for a Person
that has used hitherto to scatter his Charity among those counterfeit Objects
of it, to try the Experiment what such Gifts would amount to in a Twelve
Month's Time, by laying aside what he would otherwise have bestowed that Way,
whenever he is importuned by such Wretches for an Alms; and then see whether he
cannot dispose of it to better Purpose.

Indeed, Labor and Correction is the best Sort of Charity to such Kind of
Beggars. And would Men in Authority resolve to do their Duty in this Matter,
and other Persons resolve to send such Vagabonds away empty, and with Reproof
and Shame, the Case would soon be altered, and they would find it better to
work than starve, and look upon honest Industry more eligible than the Lash.
Much Wickedness would by this Means be prevented, and it would be a double and
treble Charity; 'twould provide for the Happiness of both Body and Soul of such
as should be reformed by it from such a hellish Course of Life; 'twould be a
great Benefit to the Public, and Men would find themselves more able to
support such as are really oppressed with Want, and utterly unable to help
themselves. And such Behaviors as this to sturdy Vagrants, however harsh and
severe it may seem to some indiscreetly compassionate Persons, is plainly
commanded by the great Apostle, 2 These. 3.10. He that will not work, neither
let him eat. He that Will not work, that is, that appears to be able to labor
but rather chooses an idle wandering Life; and there is not One in Twenty of our
common Beggars, but are of this Sort, hail and lusty and strong, and in more
Heart and better fed than many honest and industrious People: And they that can
travel as they do around the Kingdom, we cannot suppose, whatever they may
pretend, to be incapable of Labor.

Indeed, sometimes a real Object of Charity may present it self at ones Door or
Abroad, such as the blind and aged and maimed, and the like, and these, no
Question, ought to be relieved; but there being so many Counterfeits, and the
ill Consequence of misplacing ones charity upon them being so very great; He is
very indiscreet in bestowing his Alms that will not be first very well
satisfied whether they are what they pretend to be, and deserve his Charity or
no.

But this Severity must be used with Prudence, and he that does deserve
Correction as a Vagrant, may yet by some calamitous Accident in following his
lewd Trade, be at present in urgent Necessity of Relief; and here the Way is,
first to supply the Necessity, and afterward in due Time to superadd the
Correction. For I must let no Man, how wicked soever, perish if I can prevent
it; and as I am in Charity bound, by Severity when the Man is able to bear it,
to provide for the Safety of his Soul, so by a timely Relief likewise when
there is urgent Need of it to support his Body.

So that upon the Whole, all that want are to be releiv'd, but it is after a
different Manner, and the Charity must be adapted to the Necessity; to the
Widow and the Fatherless, the Naked, the Hungry, the Sick and the Helpless must
be ministered Comfort and Support; but to sturdy lazy Travelers (as they call
themselves) the Lash and Labor and rough Treatment; and this, however harshly
it may sound, is the greater Charity of the Two.

And thus much in general for the first Enquiry occasioned by this Parable,
viz. who are the proper Objects of this Kind of Charity, according to the
Intent of our holy Religion, or in the Words of the Lawyer to our Savior, who
is our Neighbor in this Respect? I proceed to the

Second Enquiry, How we are obliged to express this Charity to the proper
Objects of it, in what Manner and in what Measure? And in general, as to the
Manner of relieving, it must be adapted to the Necessity to be relieved; and as
to the Measure, it must likewise be suitable to the Degree of the Necessity,
and to the Ability of the Person that relieves it. But, to do Justice to this
Enquiry, we must be more particular, and shall therefore reduce the Necessities
of the Objects of our Charity to these three Heads; Poverty, Sickness, and Loss
of Liberty, and show the Manner and Measure of relieving each.

As for Poverty, it may be of several Kinds, and may consist either in Want of
Meat and Drink, or of Clothes, or of a Habitation, or in a forlorn Widow-hood,
and Loss of Parents; i. e. in such an urgent Want of Necessaries for Life as
the Persons are utterly unable, at least for the present, to supply themselves
withal, and such a Loss of Husband or Parent, as leaves destitute of such
Necessaries, and of Means to procure them.

Now in case of such Poverty, the Relief must be suited to the most urgent
Necessity; he that is hungry must be supplied with Meat, and the thirsty with
Drink, the naked with Clothing sufficient to keep out the Injuries of the
Weather, Strangers and distressed Travelers with Lodging, and Widows, and such
as have been House keepers but are fallen to Decay, with convenient
Habitations, and a competent Subsistence; and the Fatherless with good
Education, and a Paternal Care in disposing of them to Trades and Employments,
whereby they shall be enabled to provide for themselves. And if any should be
so destitute of all Comfort as to want most or all of these Necessaries, they
must be supplied with all, beginning with that of which there is the most need;
or else with a competent Piece of Money, Eccles. 10.19.
which, as the wise Man says, answers all things. But this last must be
understood only with respect to a poor Man that is in such Circumstances, as
that, he can, without any great Inconvenience, shift for himself; and with the
Money given him provide what is necessary: But when a Man is in such present
urgent necessity, whether of Food, or Drink, or Raiment, or Lodging, or the
like; that he will be in great Danger of perishing, if his Wants be not quickly
supplied, and the Distance from public Places of Entertainment great, and the
Season extreme; in these and the like Circumstances, 'twould be but a mock
piece of Charity to give Money and take no farther Care of him; there must be
particular Provision made for such a Man's particular Wants, and that
immediately and without Delays. Thus for Instance, suppose a poor Man should
come to any one's House in a sharp Winter, and dark Night approaching, cold and
faint, and hungry and weary, and beg for Admittance, and that Pity might be had
of his sad Condition, and some Releif afforded him; and suppose the Master of
the House should refuse to take him in, or let him refresh himself with him,
but withal give him a Piece of Money, and tell him that two or three Miles off
there is a Town, where for that Money he may have Supply of his Wants, and so
send him away; and suppose this poor Wretch should either faint by the Way or
miss of it, and in the weak Condition he is in, be forced to lie abroad, and by
the Morning be found quite overcome by the rigorous Season, and starved to
Death: In this Case what will the Man's dry Charity avail him? Or rather, shall
he not answer for the Death of that distressed Creature, when he could have
prevented it but would not?

The Manner of the good Samaritan's relieving and succouring the unfortunate
Jew in the Parable, though by his different Way of Religion, quite estranged
from the Jews, is a remarkable Example of a thorough Charity. When he came near
and saw what a sad Condition the Thieves had lest the poor Man in, despoiled of
his Money and his Clothes, and wounded and left half-dead; he first applies
himself to the Relief of the greatest Necessity, and binds up his Wounds,
pouring in Oil and Wine. And then, not thinking that a sufficient Charity to a
Man in his Condition, he set him on his own Beast, and brought him to an Inn,
and took farther Care of his Refreshment, and stayed there with him till the
morrow to see that he had what was convenient for him; and because his perfect
Recovery would be a thing of Time, he leaves Money with the Host, and a Charge
to look well after him, and promises that whatever was spent more upon that
poor Man's Account, when he came again he would repay. This was indeed a
complete Relief, and managed with as much Discretion as Compassion, and our
Lord's Application is, Go and do thou likewise. In all Cases of this Nature,
the Circumstances of the poor must be considered, and the Relief suited
accordingly.

2. As to the Manner of expressing our Charity to the sick, it is in short to
make frequent Visits of Comfort to them, to refresh their Spirits by Pious
Discourses of the Power and Goodness and Wisdom of that God who sends the
Affliction, who can remove it if he thinks fit, and whose chastning is an
Argument of his Love; and that if he still continues it, his Wisdom sees it
will be for the best at last; that so they may be inclined to hope and trust in
God, and patiently submit to his good Pleasure: And it is to supply likewise
what is necessary for their Attendance and Recovery. The poorer sort should
express their Charity in this Instance by personal Attendance and Service; and
the more wealthy by providing things necessary, and overlooking and directing
to what is convenient. And this is a most noble Piece of Charity, and provides
for the Health of the Soul as well as the Body, and nothing can be more
seasonable and well-tim'd. For in Time of Sickness the whole Man is dejected,
and the Spirit which should bear up his Infirmity, is then it self, for the
most part, wounded; through the near Prospect of the other World and the bold
Accusations of Conscience, which then, unless quite seared is loud and
clamorous. Then the Man is least of all able to help himself, and the Charge of
Sickness is great, and he that was poor in Health, when sick is doubly poor;
and indeed there is no greater Object of Pity and Compassion than a poor sick
Man. And as all Charity must be universal without excepting even Enemies; so in
this case, our Enemies should be the Objects of our Charity to choose. For upon
a Sickbed it is most likely that they will be reconciled, and it is highly
necessary than then they should be; for Sickness often ends in Death, and no
Man can tell but that Sickness which his Enemy then lies under may be his last:
And it is a miserable thing to die in Enmity. And therefore, before it be too
late, whoever is at variance with a sick Man should go to him and endeavor a
Reconcilement; if he has injured the sick in any respect he should ask his
Pardon, and make him Satisfaction and Restitution; and if the sick Man has
injured him, he should go to him to let him know that he freely forgives him,
and desires that all Ill Will may be at at End for the future. And at that
Time, when the Spirit is usually more softened and compliant than in Health, and
the Soul more awakened and sensible of her Duty, it is very probable he will
hearken, and the Man will gain his Brother. And it is a great Charity indeed to
ease a sick Man's Mind of the devilish and tormenting Passions of Malice and
Revenge; it provides for Peace and Amity for the future should he recover, and
should he dye, it makes his Account much easier at the Day of Judgment.

3. As for Charity to such as are deprived of their Liberty, the Manner of it
consists in visiting and discoursing comfortably to them, and in endeavoring
by the best Methods we can to procure their Enlargement; and in the mean time,
in helping them to Necessaries, and persuading their Keepers to be kind to
them, and use them tenderly. And if they are imprisoned for Grimes, it is to
endeavor to make them sensible of the Guilt of them before God, and that
unless they sincerely repent of them, an eternal Bondage in Chains of Darkness,
and in the lowest Hell, shall come in the Place of the Dungeon, their Iron
Shackles, and temporary Confinement. And the Objects of this Piece of Charity
are as before all, Enemies as well as Friends, Strangers and Foreigners, as
well as Neighbors and Acquaintance.

Under this Head of the Manner of expressing our Charity to the Necessitous, it
is proper to enquire what Preference may be made of one Object of Charity
before another, if more should offer themselves than one Man can relieve, at
least at the same time? For our Direction in this matter, St. Paul has left us
two general Rules, the one, Gal. 6.10. where he says, as we have Opportunity
let us do good unto all Men; but especially to those that are of the Household
of Faith, in which we are taught to prefer Christians before Heathens and
Infidels, when there is no Help but one must be preferred; and among
Christians, to prefer in like Circumstances the pious and sincerely good,
before such as live not agreeably to their holy Profession, for such only as
have the Power of Godliness, are properly of the Household of Faith. The other
Rule is in 1 Timothy 5.8. in these Words, If any provide not for his own,
especially those of his own House, or Kindred, he has denied the Faith, etc.
and here we are directed, if a Preference must be made, to make it in Favor of
our Friends and Relatives before such as are Strangers to us.

But these Rules must be thus explained. As first, where it is impossible for us
to comply with all Opportunities of doing good, there this Preference is to be
made; but when we can we must do good to all. And secondly, When the
Necessities of pious Christians, and our Friends and Relations are equally
great and urgent with those of the impious and Strangers to us, there likewise
our Charity should begin at Home: But thirdly, when the Distress of an Ill Man
or a Stranger is greater and more urgent than that of a good Man or my Friend
and Relative, so that the former will be in danger of perishing unless
immediately relieved, and the latter will not, but may safely tarry longer:
Then there must be no Respect of Persons, but the greatest Necessity,
wherever it be found, must be first relieved.

I shall add but one thing more relating to the Manner of expressing our
Charity, and that is what St. Peter advises, 1 Pet. 4.9. that it be done
without grudging. The Word in the Original is (...), which signifies murmuring,
or an unwillingness in doing any thing, as if 'twere torn and forced from one,
rather than proceeded from a free Inclination. And this hateful churlish way of
Almsgiving, St. Paul likewise expressly forbids, and says, our Charity must not
be shown grudgingly, 2 Cor. 9.7.
or as of Necessity, and Romans 12.8. He that shows Mercy, let him do it with
Cheerfulness; according to the Example which God himself has set us, Who
gives to every Man liberally, Jam. 1.5.
and upbraideth not.

And here, I cannot but admire and adore the infinite Goodness of God; who has
not only obliged us to the Substance of this Duty, but has so ordered the very
Circumstantials of it; that the necessitous may be relieved with as much
Decency and Ease to themselves as can be, and the Alms of others look rather
like their own Propriety, as the Payment of a Debt, or restoring of a Pledge,
or bestowing a Reward; and that their Souls might not be grieved by Frowns and
Taunts, and unkind Language, when they receive Supply for the Needs of their
Body! For Man as well as God loves a cheerful Giver; and a Benefit that comes
hardly, and with Shows of Unwillingness, is much lessened in its Value; and a
Man of a generous Spirit would prefer a Mite given with a free Heart and Words
of Kindness, before the Largess of an Emperor, if he must suffer Upbraidings
for it, and opprobrious Treatment. Super Omnia, Vultus accessere Boni, says
Horace: All the Delicates at his Friends Entertainment would have relished but
very indifferently, had not a cheerful Countenance assured him of his Welcome.
And if a free Charity be given in secret too, Mat. 6.4.
as our Lord himself directs, the poor Man will not be so much as put to the
Blush for what he receives; and will come short of the rich in nothing that is
necessary, and be free from the Vexations that attend an opulent Condition; and
the Advantage of the Wealthy over the Poor would then consist chiefly in this,
That they are by God's Providence enabled to be the Supporters of the weak; it
being according to the Words of the Lord Jesus, Acts 20.35.
more blessed to give than to receive: Especially if we in the

Next Place, consider the Measure of this Charity. And in general, it must be
equal to the Necessities of the Poor, or at least agreeable to every Man's
Ability. A great Necessity must have a great Supply; as suppose a whole Family
be in want, the Relief ought to be greater than to a single Person: If a
Forreigner is distressed and has not wherewithal to carry him to his own
Country, he should be more plentifully relieved than a Traveller that is in his
Native Country and has comparatively but a little Way to go. He that is a
Prisoner or Captive for a great Debt or Ransom, should receive more liberally
of our Charity than one that may be released for less; the Necessities of a
poor Man that is sick being doubly great, the Relief that is given him should
bear Proportion, and be more liberal than ordinary: And the more dangerous and
lasting, and consequently chargeable the Sickness is, the Charity should rise
the higher still, and greater Care be had of him, and Visits oftener made to
him. He that is utterly helpless and incapable of working, ought to receive
more largely of our Charity than one that is in some Measure able to help and
provide for himself. In these and all other Cases of this Nature, he that has
the greatest need must have the greatest Supply; and he that has the greatest
Ability, his Charity must be answerable, and he must give most. But to prevent
all unnecessary Scruples in this Matter, we should remember, that Charity does
not consist in an Indivisible Point, less than which shall not be accepted; for
a Mite given with a free Heart and good Intention by a poor Widow that could
afford no more, was not only accepted, but the Charity highly commended by our
Lord himself, and no doubt but was crowned with a great Reward. The general
Rule in this Case is that of the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4.11. As every Man has
received the Gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards
of the manifold Grace of God. That is, every Man's Charity must be
proportionable to his Ability; he that has much must give plenteously, and he
that has little must cheerfully give of that little; and no Man that has any
Share in this World's Good, must wholly shut up his Bowels of Compassion from
his Brother that has need. Remembering, That he that sows sparingly, 2 Cor.
9.6.
shall reap sparingly, and he that sows plenteously shall reap also
plenteously. So that according to the Order of our good Creator, we see Riches
are like our Blood, to circulate, and ought to be conveyed in due Proportions
to every Part of the great Body of Mankind: The greater Channels are to supply
the lesser, and the fuller they are the more they must communicate: And none
must presume upon Pain of the worst of ill Consequences to stop this Course, or
divert it to unprofitable Uses.

When our own Needs and those of our Relatives, are modestly and reasonably
satisfied and provided for, all the rest God gives us to bestow upon the poor
and needy, it is their Inheritance; and we shall be unjust in our Stewardship if
we withold it from them. And, in the Words of the excellent Bishop Tailor,
Certainly there is not any greater Baseness, than to suffer a Man to perish or
be in extreme want of that, which God gave me for him, and beyond my own Needs.
And it must ever be remembered, That as Men's Estates increase, their Charity
must in due Proportion increase likewise; it must not lie an useless Lump in a
Chest, or be improved only to increase the Hoard, or minister to Luxury and
Excess, or the Extravagancies of a prodigal Heir; but this Blessing of God must
be distributed according to the Will of God, to sweeten and alleviate the
Miseries of Man.

And now, would Men but act according to this their Duty, what abundant Supply
would there be for the Necessities of every one? That of Isaiah 49.9, 10. would
then be literally fulfilled, Say to the Prisoners, Go forth, to them that are
in Darkness, show your selves; they shall feed in the Ways, their Pastures
shall be in all high Places. They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall
the Heat nor Sun smite them; for he that has Mercy on them shall lead them,
even by the Springs of Waters shall he guide them. How many bitter Complaints,
how many Sighs and Tears, how much Misery, and how much Sin would by such
Charity be prevented? How many more might most Men relieve than they do? How
very many might a Man of a large Estate take care of, and what vast Numbers of
poor might have a very comfortable Subsistence, if all such Men would
conscientiously perform their Duty in this Matter? And with what Ease might
this be done too? That which is every Day squandered away to no Purpose, or
consumed in Vice and Vanity, could it be computed, would amount to a prodigious
Sum; and were but so much bestowed in Charity by every rich Man, as heedlesly
and unaccountably slips from him, how many would enjoy a comfortable
Maintenance, who now want Necessaries, and are ready to be starved, and all the
while the rich Man be not discernably the poorer for it? And if so little when
rightly disposed of would go so far in this blessed Work, what happy Effects
should we soon see, if Men of large Possessions would be persuaded to obey
their great Benefactor, and give largely of their Abundance! And in order to
this they would do well to remember, that Riches are not properly and entirely
Men's own, but Talents committed to them by God to improve, and lay out to his
Glory. That it is he that is the great Lord and Proprietor of all, and Men, how
opulent soever, no other than his Stewards; enriched on purpose that they may
supply those that have need, and take care that none in this great Family of
the World perish for want of what is needful for their Support: And that, of
the Discharge of this their Steward-ship, they must render an Account at the
Day of Judgment, the general Audit of all Mankind; and then, the faithful and
good Stewards, that have fulfilled their Lord's Command, and gave the poor of
this great Family, their Portion of Meat in due Season, shall be received into
their Master's Joy: But the unfaithful and wicked Stewards, that were cruel and
hard-hearted to their Fellow Servants, and only feasted and pampered
themselves, grew excessive and luxurious with their Lord's Allowance, and did
eat and drink with the Drunken; their Lord will come in a Day when they look
not for him, Luke 12.42.
and cut them asunder, and appoint them their Portion with Unbelievers, where
shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken to the second Enquiry, How we are to
express our Charity to the proper Objects of it, in what Manner, and in what
Measure?

But before I proceed to what remains to be done according to the proposed
Method, I think it will not be amiss to enquire whether in the Expresses of our
Charity to the sick, Danger of infection will not excuse from visiting them?

To this I answer, first in general, that Danger of Infection will not excuse
all from visiting the sick: For 'twould be strangely inhumane, and contrary to
this Christian Pity and Compassion which we are now discoursing of, to desert a
poor helpless Creature in his greatest Necessity, only because there is a
Probability of falling into the like Calamity: And would any Man be willing to
be served so himself? Some then ought, even in Case of Contagion, to visit and
attend the sick; but who are they, for every one will be ready to shift it from
himself?

In the first place, I think the nearest Relations of the Party ought to do it,
for they have a double Tie upon them, that of Nature as well as of Religion;
and among these Relations, those that are the most disengaged from Business and
the Affairs of this World, and have therefore the least Obligation to come into
other Company where there may be Danger of spreading the Infection further; and
likewise such as have the fewest Dependents upon them: That is, Private and
single Persons are obliged to this Duty before those that are of more public
Callings, and have Families; and among these, he that is most free and
disengaged, and capable withal, is the most obliged. If there be no Relations
of the infected Person (whether he be Poor or Rich, Friend or Enemy, Good or
Bad, the Case is the same) or none that will venture upon such hazardous
Attendance; I think the nearest Neighbors are obliged to do it; i.e. the
single, and disengaged from a Necessity of public Converse: For those that
have Wife and Children and Families, their Charity must begin at home, to take
care of their own Relatives is the prime Obligation; and the Safety of a whole
Family is in most Cases to be preferred to that of a single Person. And those
whose necessary Employments call them into much Company, are bound to avoid
what would endanger their bringing Infection to that Company, and that for the
same Reason as before, because the Safety of many is generally to be preferred
to that of one: And those upon whose Life depends, under God, the Maintenance
and Support of diverse Persons, for the sake of those Persons, should be very
careful to preserve themselves. Only this ought to be observed by such as upon
these and the like Accounts, cannot personally visit and attend the infected
Person, viz. That they take great care to procure others that may do it; and,
according to their Ability, and the Wants of the Person, to send Supplies of
all things necessary. And there are very many, who, though they will not
venture their Lives for Conscience sake, and to gain the Reward of being
merciful in the other World, yet for Money they will do it; and therefore such
Encouragements must not be wanting from those that are of Ability.

As for Physicians and Clergymen, whose Professions engage them to converse
with great Numbers of People; how far they are obliged in this Matter, I think
may be resolved thus:

If only one Person in a Parish or Neighborhood, or but a few in comparison
with the whole Body of Men, be contagiously sick; to me it seems, that neither
Physician nor Divine are in such case obliged personally to visit them, but
rather to forbear, and only to convey to them, by other Hands, what is needful
for their Bodily and Ghostly Health respectively. The Reason is, because the
Physicians and Divines being often sent for to diverse Families, must either not
go after they have visited an infected Person, and so neglect their Duty, and
many suffer, and some perish for want of their Assistance; or, if they should
go, would very probably endanger the whole Neighborhood: And therefore, the
Safety of great Numbers of People being to be preferred before that of one or
but a few, they ought, I think, in this Case to keep at distance.

But when a Contagion spreads so that it becomes epidemical, and the greater
Number of Persons are seized with it, then the Case is altered, and then I
think both Physicians and Divines are bound to visit personally. For in such
Case, to send Relief by other Hands, whether Medicines or ghostly Comfort and
Advice; would, by reason of the Numbers of the sick, become impracticable; and
'twould be unreasonable for the sake of a few that were well, to deprive a
greater Number that are sick of the great Benefit of personal Visits of
Physicians, which for many Reasons prove more effectual than prescribing at a
Distance; and of the Comfort of the Prayers, and more close and particular
Discourses of Divines, which no doubt are much more beneficial, and make a
deeper Impression upon the Soul, than several Advices and Exhortations sent in
Writing.

And Divines in this Case seem to be more obliged than Physicians (though the
Obligation is very strong upon Physicians too) and that because the Safety of
the Soul is infinitely to be preferred before that of the Body, And if it
perishes it perishes for ever, and will at length involve the Body too in the
same eternal Ruin. And, for a Shepherd to desert his Flock in their greatest
Necessity, to leave the Care of their Souls when there is the greatest Need of
his Help, and the infernal Lion roaring about seeking whom he may devour: This,
I think, is the greatest Barbarity, and most base betraying that great Trust,
that is possible.

The good Shepherd, says our Lord, gives his Life for his Sheep: And he, the
great Shepherd, and Bishop of our Souls, set the Example; but the Hireling
flees because he is a Hireling, and cares not for the Sheep, and the Wolf
catches and scatters and devours them, John 10.12, 13. We should remember,
that God is infinitely powerful, and can protect, even from the noisome
Pestilence, if he thinks fit; and nothing more intitles a Man to the peculiar
Protection of the Allmighty, than a faithful Discharge of his Duty. And,
however it may fare with us here, there is a glorious Recompense reserved for
so great a Charity in a better World.

Proceed we now to the third and last thing to be done upon this Subject, which
is to show, what great Encouragement we have to this excellent Duty of Charity,
or what a Blessedness it is to be able thus to give, rather than to Receive;
and that both with Respect to this World and that to come.

For, in the first place, with Relation to this World, What can be a greater
Pleasure to a Generous Spirit, than to be the Happy Instrument of rescuing
others from Misery and Want, from perishing with Hunger, or by other
Calamities, and restoring 'em to Life and Comfort, and Health and Liberty? What
Delight more high and noble, than that which will arise from our changing the
Sighs, and Groans, and Laments of the Miserable, into Rejoycings; and the
Curses and horrid Blasphemies, and impious Reflections upon Providence, uttered
by those whom Extremity of Poverty has made desperate; into Praises and
Blessing of God, and Acknowledgments of his Goodness and Care of the Children
of Men?

What can cause greater Complacency and Satisfaction in the Soul, than for a
Man to be as a Father to the Fatherless, not only in maintaining them, but in
providing for them good and pious Education, and honest Trades, whereby these
very Children become Men of Probity, and useful to the State, who otherwise, if
left at loose and unregarded, would in all Probability have been the Pests and
Disturbers of the Community: Miserable themselves, and the Occasion of much
Misery to others? And what more grateful to a pious Man, than to relieve the
forlorn Poverty of such as are at once deprived of their Husbands, and the
Means of providing for their Families, and to be blessed by those that were
ready to perish, and cause the Widows Heart to sing for Joy? Job 29.31.
This is pure and undefiled Religion, says St. Jam. 1.27.
James, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction; nay, it is a
near Resemblance of the Charity of God himself, Psalm. 146.9.
who preserves the Strangers, and relieveth the Fatherless and Widow.

And indeed, every Expression of Mercy and Compassion resembles us to God,
whose Mercy is above all his Works; and to the Compassionate Jesus, who so
pitied the miserable Estate of Mankind, as to leave his Father's Glories, and
take on him the Form of a Servant, and suffer in our stead, that we might be
Partakers of Life and Pardon, and Immortal Happiness, and who went about doing
Good all the Days of his Humiliation. And certainly, to be like God, and the
great Redeemer of the World, Christ Jesus, and that in the most Amiable and
Glorious Persection, must needs fill a Man's Breast with Heavenly Joy, since
the Happiness of that blessed place consists in the Souls being transformed
into the Divine Image and Likeness from Glory to Glory, 1 John 3.2.
2 Cor. 3.18.

But Secondly, (and which, with some may be the most prevailing Argument) there
is great Encouragement to Charity, with Relation to this World, because it is
the most thriving of all Christian Graces, and is always attended with
Prosperity, and a Blessing.

David says expressly, Psalm. 37.25. I have been Young, and now am Old, and yet
saw, never the Righteous forsaken, nor his Seed beging their Bread, i. e. as it
follows in the next Verse, the Righteous Man that is ever merciful and lends:
And not only himself, but his Posterity is blessed. And this, a learned Author
of our own, Dr. Hammond, Pract. Cat. Lib. 3. Sect. 1.
Extends to all Ages, and challenges any Historian of Past, or Observator of
present Times to give one Instance of any Christian Alms Giver, that ever
brought himself or his Posterity to Want, nay, that did not thrive and prosper
the better by that means. And this is confirmed by Solomon, Prove. 11.24, 25.
There is that scatters and yet increases, and there is that withholdeth more
than is meet, and it tends to Poverty: The Liberal Soul shall be made fat,
and he that waters shall be watered also himself. That is, as the same Author
has it, unless by Negligence or Suretiship, or some other Sin that he lives in,
he brings a Curse and Poverty upon himself, and Mercifulness prove not Antidote
sufficient against all other Poison.

And he that is thus assured of the peculiar Care of God concerning him, and
that he shall always have a comfortable Provision as long as he lives, in
Recompense of his liberal Charity to the Poor and Needy; has questionless very
great Encouragement to perform the Duty. And as for the unavoidable Troubles of
this Life which will mix with the most perfect Prosperity here, as Sickness,
Vexation and Disappointments, and Temporal Losses, and such like; Psalm. 41.1, 3.
The Lord will deliver him that considers the Poor, says David, in the Time
of Trouble, and strengthen him upon the Bed of Languishing, and make all his
Bed in his Sickness. And though many may be the Troubles, even of the thus
Righteous, which God may permit them to be exercised with for many excellent
Purposes, yet he will surely deliver them out of all.

As for the Encouragement to this Charity, with Respect to the next World, it
is thus expressed by our Savior, Mat. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful for they
shall obtain Mercy; that is, at the Time when every Man will stand in the
greatest Need of Mercy, the Day of Judgment. For then there will be particular
Enquiry made into the Discharge of every one's Stewardship, in Point of Mercy
and Compassion to the Indigent and Calamitous; and the great Judge of all the
World, has declared, that when he shall come in the Clouds of Heaven, to render
to every Man according to his Works; he will esteem the Expresses of our
Charity to his necessitous Servants as done to himself, and will reward the
Merciful, not only with a public Commendation, at that General Assembly of all
the World, but will receive them to a Participation of the Glories and
Felicities of his Eternal Kingdom: Saying, Come ye Blessed Children of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Beginning of the World,
Mat. 25.34. And surely no Man can want Encouragement to the Duty when it shall
be rewarded in such a Manner as this.

I shall now infer some few things from the whole, and so conclude this
Argument. And first, from the strict Charge that God has given, in the
Revelations of his Will, to every capable Person, to supply the Necessities of
all that want Relief, and that according to the Wants of the Needy, and in a
Measure suitable to his Ability, and enforced this Charge with the most
prevailing Motives that can be made use of. From hence I infer the great
Unreasonableness, as well as Impiety, of charging God with the Miseries of
Mankind in this Instance.

For, what would they have God do more in this Matter than he has already done?
Would they have him exercise his Omnipotence in wholly preventing Poverty? That
is, would they have him interpose in all the Contingencies of this Mortal Life,
and immediately command the Sea, for Example, to be calm, when a Vessel is in
Danger, whose Wreck would be the undoing of several; or send an Angel to steer
her from Shelves and Quicksands, to preserve her from Pirates, and conduct her
in Salety to the Haven? Would they have the Land miraculously secured from all
Misfortunes too, from the Villainies of Men, from Casual Fires, from Inundations
and Earthquakes; and would they have Men forcibly withheld from being guilty
of such Vices as ruin Thousands, such as Pride and Luxury, and Wantonness and
Excess?

Or if (as well they may) they think this too unreasonable to be desired, would
they have God, when Men are thus reduced to Poverty, immediately work Miracles
for their Relief? Would they have Ravens bring Food to the Hungry as they did
to Elijah; 1 Kings 17.6.
or would they have every Poor Widows Cruise of Oil, and Barrel of Meal be as
lasting as the Widow's of Sarepta was; -- 16.
or would they have Water spring from Rocks, and be immediately turned into
Wine, to cheer and refresh such as are parched with Thirst? Would they have our
Lord come down a second Time from Heaven, to heal Diseases, or an Angel always
set open the Prison Doors when good Men are confined and macerated, or the like?

That such extraordinary things have been sometimes done, is sufficient to
evince, that God is not an idle Spectator of Humane Affairs; but to expect it
should be always so, is foolishly presumptuous.

But, it may be, those that are ashamed of this, would yet, by all means, have
God take a severer Course with his unfaithful Stewards than he does; and at
least displace them, and give their Riches to others, that Men might see and
fear, and do no more wickedly. Thus Man will be replying against God, and the
Clay saying to the Potter, Why have thou made me thus?

But, I would fain know, whether these Counselors of the All-wise God, would
have all that are unfaithful in their Stewardship, used in this Manner, or only
some for a Terror to the rest? If all the World would quickly be in Confusion,
by such frequent Changes in States and Governments, and Private Families, as
would then be made; if some only, in Terrorem, and to affright the rest into a
more Conscientious Discharge of their Duty, why that is often done; nothing is
more common than the Rise and Fall of Men and Families, and sometimes their
Decay is made very remarkable by some extraordinary Accidents. Which, if Men
would observe it, is warning enough to them to be faithful in their
Stewardship: but if they will be thoughtless and regard it not, the Blame ought
to be their's, not God's, and their's will be the Punishment too at the long
Run, when he shall call every Man before him to make up his Accounts.

Wherefore, let no Man any more, for the future, pass Impious and Rash Censures
upon the All-wise and Good Governor of the Universe, because his Servants
neglect their Duty in this Matter; but rather, humbly and earnestly entreat him
to incline their Hearts to a better Observance of his Holy and Just, and
Merciful Commands. And if the Poor shall still go unpitied and unreliev'd, let
us commit their Cause unto him, who, if with Patience they persevere in
well-doing, will at length abundantly recompense their Sufferings here, with
Glory, Honor and Immortality in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, From what has been said, I infer, the great Baseness and Ingratitude
of those who thus wickedly betray their Trust, and thereby bring such Odious
Aspersions upon their great Benefactor, and so much Sin and Misery upon Mankind.

Good God! That ever Men should be so low sunk, so vilely brutish and
degenerate, as to prefer a Shining Coach and Gay Livery's, and Vanity and
profuse Folly in many other Instances, before the Honor of their God, and the
Comfort and Reward of a Poor Afflicted Christian! That they should be contented
to hear the Groans of the Distressed, and the Blasphemies of Atheists, against
that God who gave them all they have; rather than by retrenching any thing from
their Excessive Way of Living, to silence either! It Is a Monstrous Complicated
Impiety this, and will at last pull down a Heavy Vengeance.

Wherefore, from the whole, I infer, in the last place, how highly it concerns
us all to imitate the Example of the discreetly and thoroughly charitabe
Samaritan in the Parable, and be more careful of this our Duty for the future.
For if we prove ill Stewards of the Talents God has committed to our Trust for
the Relief of the Calamities of our Brethren, we shall not only have the Sins
of Unfaithfulness and base Ingratitude to answer for; but the Profane Flouts
and Cavils of the Atheistical, the Curses and Imprecations of the desperately
Miserable, the Thefts and Murders, and other Villainies of such, whose
Unrelieved Poverty forced to be thus wicked; and the Blood of such as died for
want of Succor: All this will be charged upon us, and overwhelm us with
Eternal Horror and Confusion.

Wherefore, to conclude; while we have Time, let us do good unto all Men, but
especially to those of the Household of Faith; let us make Friends with the
Mammon of Unrighteousness, that when all this World's Good shall fail us, we
may be received into Everlasting Habitations. Let us lay up for our selves a
good Foundation against the Time to come, and be Faithful Stewards of the
manifold Grace of God committed to us; lest our great Lord should come in a
Time when we think not of him, and place us on the Left Hand, and pass this
Dismal and Irreversible Sentence upon us; Depart from me ye cursed into
Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For I was Hungry and
ye gave me no Meat, Thirsty and ye gave me no Drink, a Stranger and ye took me
not in, Naked and ye clothed me not, Sick and in Prison, and ye visited me not.

From which terrible Condemnation, and that hardened Disposition that deserves
it, and will inevitably bring it down upon us if not speedily amended, the
Merciful and Good Lord deliver us all, for the Sake of his Compassion in Jesus
Christ our Savior. Amen, Amen. The PRAYER.
O Most Compassionate Jesus! The great Pattern of Charity, who in the Days of
thy Flesh wentest about doing Good to Mankind, relieving the Necessities both
of Body and Soul, and have commanded thy Disciples to go and do likewise; give
me the Grace, I beseech thee, according to my Ability, to be charitable to all
that are really Necessitous, without excepting any, but always to guide these
good Works with Discretion: Lest by my ill-plac'd Alms, I encourage Debauchery
and Sloth, and have the less to give to those that truly want. And since the
Poverty and Sickness of the Soul, is of all, the most dangerous and deplorable,
O that I may be so happy, as by Fraternal Correption, and Seasonable wholesome
Counsel and Advice, according to my Opportunities and Capacity, to relieve the
Spiritual Necessities of my Brethren, and convert a Sinner from the Error of
his Way, and save a Soul from Death! And may I always cheerfully perform this
Godlike Duty, and take Delight in being Instrumental in the Blessed Work of
chearing the Hearts of the Distressed, and making light the Burdens of the
Afflicted, and thereby vindicating thy Providence from the Vile Aspersions of
Wicked Men, and occasioning much Thanksgiving unto God. O may I never forget
that I am the Steward only of that Portion of this World's Good, with which
thou have entrusted me, for the Good of thy great Family: And that thou will
one Day call me to give an Account of the Discharge of this my Stewardship,
particularly enquire into my Acts of Charity, and infinitely reward me if I be
found Faithful in this Trust, and for ever punish me with the Devil and his
Angels if I be not. And that I may abound the more in this excellent Grace of
Charity: Assist me effectually and immediately to cut off all Excesses and vain
Superfluities of Life, and never let me be so forsaken of all Piety and
Humanity, as to suffer my poor Fellow Servants to want Necessaries, rather than
retrench my vile Extravagancies! May this most excellent and royal Law of thine
be always present with me as my Rule, to do to others as I would be done by in
like Circumstance; and in all the Expresses of my Charity, let thy Glory, and
the Good of my Brethren and the Public, be my sole End; and remove far from me
all Pride and Vainglory, for thy Mercies Sake. This and whatever else is
necessary to the Perfection of this great Duty, grant me, I beseech thee, O
most Compassionate Savior Jesus. Amen.

PARABLE VIII. Of the Talents.
Matthew. xxv. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30. The Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man traveling into a far Country, who called
his own Servants, and delivered unto them his Goods.

And unto one he gave five Talents, to another two, and to another one; to
every Man according to his several Ability, and straightway took his Journey.

Then he that had received the five Talents went and traded with them, and made
them other five Talents.

And likewise he that had received two, he also gained other two.

But he that had received one, went and dug in the Earth, and hid his Lords
Money.

After a long time, the Lord of these Servants comes, and reckons with them.

And so he that had received five Talents came and brought other five Talents,
saying, Lord, thou deliver'dst unto me five Talents; behold, I have gained
besides them five Talents more.

His Lord said unto him, Well done, thou good and faithful Servant, thou have
been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things: enter
thou into the Joy of thy Lord.

He also that had received two Talents came and said, Lord, thou deliver'dst
unto me two Talents; behold, I have gained two other Talents besides them.

His Lord said unto him, Well done, good and faithful Servant, thou have been,
etc.

Then he which had received the one Talent came and said, Lord, I know thee,
that thou art an hard man, reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering
where thou have not strewn.

And I was afraid, and went and hid thy Talent in the Earth; lo, there thou
have that is thine.

His Lord answered, and said unto him, thou wicked and slothful Servant, thou
know that I reap where I did not sow, and gather where I have not strewed:

Thou ought therefore to have put my Money to the Exchangers, and then at my
coming I should have received mine own with Usury.

Take therefore the Talent from him, and give it unto him that has ten Talents.

For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance; but
from him that has not shall be taken away even that which he has.

And cast ye the unprofitable Servant into outer Darkness; there shall be
weeping and gnashing of Teeth.


THE Interpretation of this Parable may be this. By a Man traveling into a far
Country, is represented our Savior's leaving this World, and Ascending into
Heaven after he had finished the great Work of our Redemption; and by his
calling to him his own Servants, and delivering to them his Goods, is signified
his enabling his Disciples with sufficient Grace and the Assistance of his Holy
Spirit, to perform that Duty and Service which he requires of them in his
Absence.

By his giving to one Five Talents, to another Two, and to a third but One,
according to their several Abilities, is expressed, that God affords his Grace
according to Men's natural Capacity of serving him, (for there is a previous
Ability first supposed, and suitable to that is the number of Talents that are
given) and to the Kind and Degree of Service that he thereupon expects from
them. He that by the previous Gift of God in his natural Endowments, is capable
of doing him great Service, and of being an excellent Example to others; and is
therefore by the Providence of God designed for, or actually placed in an
eminent Station, and employed in a Service of great Weight and Difficulty; to
him is given greater Aid from Above, because he is more capable of improving
what he receives to God's Glory and the Good of the Church; and has likewise
greater Need of the Divine Assistance, by reason of the Difficulty of the Duty
he is to perform. And he that naturally is not so capable, receives
proportionably less Aid from Heaven; but yet such as is sufficient to enable
him to discharge that Duty which, according to his natural Capacity, is
required of him.

By His Trading that had received Five Talents, and gaining other Five, and his
gaining other Two that had received but Two; is shown, that according to the
Measure of Grace and supernatural Assistance that Men have received, so should
their Improvement be, and that faithful Christians will be careful to make such
Improvement: And by His hiding his Talent in the Ground that had but One, is
represented the inexcusable Sloth and Idleness of wicked Men, who will not take
so much Pains as to improve, tho but One Talent, in order to their Salvation.

By the Lord of those Servants coming after a long time and reckoning with
them, is represented the Coming of Christ to Judgment at the End of the World,
then to enquire into every Man's Works, and Reward or Punish as there is just
Occasion.

By His receiving the Diligent into his Joy, is expressed the Reward of the
Righteous in the Blissful Kingdom of Heaven; and by the Slothful and Wicked
Servant, (who was therefore Wicked because Slothful) by his bringing his One
Talent to his Lord unimprov'd, and excusing his Unprofitableness by saying,
that he knew him to be a hard Man, unreasonably griping, expecting to reap
where he had not sown, and the like; and that therefore he brought him his own
again as he gave it him, fearing to employ it, lest he should have lost it, and
yet been obliged to make it good to his Lord: By this is represented the Base
Thoughts too many have of God and Religion, as if it were impossible to bear
his Yoke, and keep his Commands, he exacting such unreasonable Services from
us; but this is only to excuse one Wickedness by another, and shows what
wretched Shifts Ill Men are put to, to palliate their great Neglect of their
Duty to their Master; as appears by his Lord's answering and saying, Thou
wicked and slothful Servant, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, thou
ought therefore to have put my Money to the Exchangers, that at my coming I
might have received my own with Usury: By which is represented the Necessity of
Men's improving their Talent for that very Reason (were it true) which they are
apt to plead in Excuse for their slothful Negligence. For to him that looks
upon God as so austere a Being, there is more than ordinary Obligation to
improve what he has committed to his Trust for that Purpose: And because a Man
esteems God as an hard and severe Master, therefore to be idle and negligent in
his Service, is a very preposterous Course, and looks as if he had a mind to
provoke his Anger against him.

But indeed, This is the Truth: God is so very far from being an unreasonably
severe Master, that He is a most indulgent Parent, and commands nothing but
what is very practicable, and highly conducive to the Good and Happiness of his
Creatures; which should create a Filial Love and Reverence in us toward him,
rather than a slavish Dread. But however, he is not so unreasonably fond
neither, as to pass by the Provocations of obstinate irreclaimable Rebels, and
clear those that are Impenitent as well as Guilty, that have heinously offended
him, and yet take no care to amend and recover his Favor. Though he does not
reap where he did not sow, nor gather where he did not strew, yet he expects a
due Improvement of what he commits to our Charge, and is ready likewise
proportionably to reward our Industry. And this is apt indeed to quicken and
encourage us in our Duty, but by no means to scare and affright us from it: For
nothing can be more reasonable, than for God to expect we should improve what
he bestows upon us for that very end, and that we should obey those Commands of
His which are so highly reasonable in themselves; and which he likewise assists
us to perform. Let no Man therefore say, God is an unreasonably rigid Master,
and his Commands intolerable Burdens; for it is abominably false, (as will
appear more fully in the Sequel:) But were it true, it would be no Excuse for
Sloth and Idleness in his Service, much less for wholly deserting it; but
rather, an Argument for double Care and Diligence in it.

By the Lord of that Slothful Servant commanding his One unimprov'd Talent to
be taken from him, and given to him who by his Industry had improved his Five
Talents to Ten; is represented God's depriving those of his Grace and the
Assistances of his Holy Spirit, who so much neglect it, and make no use of it
to the great Enas for which it was given them, (viz.) His Glory and Their own
Happiness; and making still greater Additions of his Grace to such as have well
improved their former Stock. And by his commanding the Unprofitable Servant to
be cast into Outer Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth; is
expressed their Deplorable Condition in the Regions of eternal Misery and
Despair, who make no Improvement of the Talents committed to them; the
Deprivation of Grace in this World, being a certain Forerunner of Perdition in
the other. It nearly concerns therefore, every Man carefully to improve the
Talent committed to him; because unto every one that has shall be given, and
he shall have Abundance, but from him that has not, shall be taken away, even
that which he has.

This Parable, thus interpreted, affords us these Six Heads of Discourse.

First, That God gives sufficient Grace to every sensible Christian wherewith
to work out his Salvation.

Secondly, That God expects from every Man, that he should improve what Grace
he has received, and that proportionably to the Measure in which it was given
him, and make use of it to the Ends for which it was given.

Thirdly, That there will be a Time, when our Lord will come to take Account of
Men's Improvement of the Grace that was given them, and reward every Man
according to his Deserts.

Fourthly, That there shall be Degrees of Men's Happiness or Misery in the
other World, according to the Degrees of their Improvement or Negligence and
Carelessness in this.

Fifthly, That it is abominably False and Impious to charge God, as being
unreasonably rigid and severe in taking this Account of Men's Improvement, and
expecting to find a Good Use made of what he committed to their Trust. And,

Lastly, That the Condition of the Diligent will be unspeakably happy, and that
of the Unprofitable unspeakably miserable; and that both in this World and the
next.

First, God gives sufficient Grace to every sensible Christian, wherewith to
work out his Salvation. I say to every sensible Christian, because I would
confine my Discourse to the State of such as are Christians; and such of them
as have the Use of their Senses and their Reason: For as for those that are out
of the Pale of Christ's Church, though Charity will incline us to hope well of
them, and that God's Mercy will extend even to Heathens that never yet heard of
the Gospel of Christ, and his Spirit assist them to live according to that
Natural Law written in the Heart of every Man; yet we can determine nothing in
this Case with Relation to them, and have nothing else to do, but to leave them
to the Infinite Mercy of God, and pray for their Conversion. And as for such as
have been received into the Fold of Christ, and have afterward proved Idiots,
and without the Use of their Reason, their Case is likewise wholly in the Dark
to us; and though we need not question, but God's Infinite Goodness, will
incline him to pity their Deplorable Condition, yet which Way he will express
his Mercy to them we must not presume to say. Hidden things belong to God; the
revealed are for us and our Children: Among which I take this to be one, That
God gives sufficient Grace to every sensible Christian, wherewith to work out
his Salvation.

And here not to enter into the Endless and most Abstruse Dispute about
Predestination (which the less Men trouble their Heads about, the better it is
for 'em in all Respects) I shall only urge two or three plain Places of
Scripture to confirm this Position, and add to 'em one as plain Reason.

The Places of Scripture, are first, that in 2 Pet. 3.9. where the Apostle
says, that God is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come
to Repentance; to which is agreeable that of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Epist. 2.4.
God will have, or desires, that all Men should be saved, and come to the
Knowledge of the Truth; Now, the next Scripture I will quote, which is 2 Cor.
3.5. tells us, That we are not sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as
of our selves, but our Sufficiency is of God; and Phil. 2.13. it is God that
works in us, to will and to do of his good Pleasure; and accordingly, says
John the Baptist, speaking of our Lord, of his Fullness have we all received,
and Grace for Grace, John 1.16. and Ephesians. 4.7. To every one of us is given
Grace according to the Measure of the Gift of Christ. Which Scriptures put
together make this Argument.

God is desirous of the Happiness and Salvation of every Man; 2 Pet. 3.9. 1 Timothy 2.4. 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil. 2.13.
but, without his Assistance, and the Aids of his Grace, and Holy Spirit, no
Man can arrive at that Happiness:

Therefore, Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 4.7.
he gives sufficient Grace and Assistance to every Man, wherewith, if he be not
Idle and Wanting to himself, he may work out his Salvation. For, we cannot but
allow, that what God desires for every Man, and which no Man can attain without
his Aid and Assistance, he will give every Man sufficient Assistance with his
own Industrious Concurrence to compass. Otherwise, he would desire that for
some, i. e. those to whom he should deny his Divine Assistance, which he knows
it is impossible for them to attain to; which I think cannot be consistent with
his Infinite Wisdom.

This seems to me to be sufficient Scripture Proof for this Position. And to
this I shall add this one Plain Reason.

For, because the Commands of Religion, in order to the attaining the Rewards
of it, are given in General, to every Man, and there is no Exception made, but
every one that names the Name of Christ must depart from all Iniquity;
therefore, every Man must be supposed able to keep and observe those Commands,
unless we will be so Blasphemous as to say with the Unprofitable Servant in the
Parable, that God is so unreasonable as to reap where he did not sow, to
command Impossibilities; and then so unjust and cruel, as to punish Men
Eternally for not obeying them. But now, that no Man is of himself able to keep
the Commandments, is evident from the whole Tenor of Scripture, and from the
sad Experience of even the Best of Men; and consequently, this Ability must be
allowed to proceed from the Aid of some other, namely, from him who is the only
Giver of every good and perfect Gift, and who gives to every Man liberally,
and upbraideth not. Indeed, he gives to every Man severally as he pleases, to
some more, to some less, to some five Talents, to some two, and to others but
one; according to Men's Ability to improve them, and as in his Infinite Wisdom
he sees most conducive to his own Glory, and the Edification of the Church; but
he is wholly wanting in this Divine Gift to no Man that is capable of improving
it, but bestows upon every sensible Christian, Grace sufficient, wherewith if
he makes good Use of it, to work out his Salvation.

And this should have this fourfold good Effect upon us. It should make us
unfeignedly thankful to the Infinite Goodness of God, for this his unspeakable
Gift; looking upon the Grace he has bestowed on us, as an Earnest of our
Salvation. It should put us upon begging devoutly and earnestly and frequently
at the Throne of Grace, for still greater Degrees of this Heavenly Aid, in
order to his greater Glory, and our more perfect Happiness; remembering that
this is of all the greatest Treasure; and what a Frail Sinful Creature, should
above all things hunger and thirst after. For though every Man at first,
receives as much Grace as he is able to improve; yet he that has improved what
he at first received, is by that his Diligence grown capable of more, and able
to make a suitable Improvement: As he in the Parable that had improved his Five
Talents to Ten, was capable of Receiving and Improving still more; and
accordingly had his Talent given to him who buried it in the Ground, and
brought it without any Improvement to his Lord. Five Talents was at first
proportionable to his Ability, but by duly improving them, his Ability was
much enlarged, and he became capable of, and received more. And to God should
all the Praise be given, of all the good Things we perform by means of this his
Divine Assistance; reflecting upon the Words of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who
makes thee to differ, and what have thou that thou did not receive? And
finally, because to all of us is given Grace sufficient to our Happiness;
therefore to work out our Salvation with it in fear and trembling, lest by our
Negligence and Sloth we fail of this Grace of God, and it be withdrawn and
taken from us.

For in the second Place, God expects that every Man should improve the Grace
he has received, and that proportionably to the measure in which he has
received it, and make use of it to the Ends for which it was bestowed upon him.

For thus we see in the Parable, how angry the Lord was when his Servant
brought him the Talent he committed to him, unimprov'd; he calls him slothful
and wicked Servant, and deprives him of his Talent, and gives it for an
Encouragement, to him that had made the greatest Improvement, and sentences the
Unprofitable Servant to outer Darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of Teeth.
And agreeably says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal. Christianity is not an idle lazy
Profession, does not consist in fine Words and specious Pretenses, but in an
active lively Piety, suitable to every Man's several Ability. He that has
received much Grace must be eminent for much Holiness; his Piety must arise
proportionably to the Communications of the Holy Spirit which he enjoys, and
his Diligence be commensurate to his Strength. He that has received five
Talents, must gain other five with them; and he that has received two, other
two; and no Man must be without some Increase, though he has received but One.

The End for which God bestows his Grace upon us, is threefold. (1) For the
Advancement of his own Glory; (2) For the Good and Edification of the Church;
(3) For our own Happiness and Salvation. And therefore, the more Grace and
Assistances from Above a Man has received, the more should he endeavor to
glorify God with it, to edify the Church, and by a holy Life, to secure his
own Salvation. And he that either makes no use of the Grace that God has given
him, like him in the Parable, who instead of trading with his Talent, hid it in
the Earth; or else abuses it to vile and wicked Purposes; is a wicked and
unprofitable Servant, and shall be cast into outer Darkness.

To know when a Man has received plenty of this Divine Grace, and to what
Improvement he is consequently obliged; is, for him in the first place to
reflect upon his natural Parts and Abilities, upon his Capacity for
understanding and considering the great Truths of Religion; and then, what
Instruction he has met with in the School of Righteousness; what plenty of
Religious Discourses and Exhortations he has enjoyed; and how frequently he has
felt Motions from within to a still more and more holy and exemplary Life: He
that has experienced all this in a great degree, that has had his pregnant
natural Capacity well cultivated by an early and excellent Instruction, and had
the whole of Religion plainly laid before him in all the Doctrines, Duties,
Rewards and Punishments of it; and been often and affectionately exhorted to
live accordingly in all holy Conversation and Godliness, and has frequently
felt secret internal Motions and Persuasions to it; this Man has received much
more than One Talent at the hands of God, and God will expect from him a
proportionable Improvement; and he must abound in every good Word and Work: For
unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall be much required; and to whom Men
have committed much, of him they will ask the more. But because all Men are not
of equal Abilities naturally, neither have the same Opportunities of
Instruction and Improvement, nor the same immediate Impulses of the Blessed
Spirit; where there is any defect in these Respects, God will abate
proportionably in his Expectations; and he that received the One Talent, had he
gained but One other with it, would have been called a good and faithful
Servant, and been received into the Joy of his Lord.

Let us all therefore, endeavor to grow in Grace according to the measure of
this unspeakable Gift; to perform our Duties, each in his Station, and
according to his Ability, faithfully and industriously; that when our Lord
comes to make Enquiry into each ones Improvement of his Talent, and call for
every ones particular Account, we may all, from the least to the greatest,
cheerfully give it up, and receive the immense Reward of a sincere Diligence:
For,

In the third Place, There will most certainly be a Time when our Great Lord
will come to take Account of every Man's Improvement of the Grace that was
given him, and reward every Man according to his Deserving.

That there will certainly be a Day of Judgment both of Quick and Dead, when
every Man shall be rewarded according to that he has done in the Body, whether
it be good or evil, is a Truth so evident from Scripture, that those who have
read, and do believe those Writings, can make no doubt of it: And the Proof of
this from Reason, has been so convincingly managed by several Learned Pens,
particularly of late by Dr. Sherlock in his Excellent Discourse upon Judgment,
that I think nothing can be added to it; I shall only therefore Collect such a
Description of that Great Day, and the Proceedings in it, out of the
Revelations (where it is the most movingly represented) as may incline us all
with the greatest Diligence, and immediately, by self-Examination and Amendment
of every evil Way, to prepare for that great Audit, that we may give up our
Accounts with joy, and not with grief. In the 20th Chapter of the Revelations,
ver. 12. after the divine Apostle had given a Description of the Appearing of
the great Judge upon his Throne, I saw a great White Throne, says he, and him
that sat on it; from whose face the Earth and the Heaven fled away, and there
was found no place for them: He proceeds, I saw the dead, small and great,
stand before God, and the Books were opened. And another Book was opened, which
is the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of those Things that were
written in the Books, according to their Works; and the Sea gave up the dead
that were in it, and Death and the Grave delivered up the dead which were in
them; and they were judged every man according to their Works: And whosoever
was not written in the Book of Life, was cast into the Lake of Fire.

That is, The Records shall then be laid open wherein every Man's Receipt of
Grace is entered, and those whose Works shall be found proportionably good
according to the Assistance they have received from Above; or, in the Style of
the Parable; that have made an answerable Improvement to the Number of Talents
committed to them, their Names shall be written in the Book of Life, and they
received into the eternal Joy of their Lord. But those who can then give no
good Account of their Talents, show no suitable Improvement in Holiness
according to the measure of Grace they have received, shall never see Life, but
be cast into the Lake of Fire, which is the second Death. And because so very
few will be so wise, as to make due Preparation for this great Day of Account,
by improving the Grace God has given them to the great Ends for which it was
designed; therefore, as it is described Rev. 3.15. The Kings of the Earth, and
the great Men, and the rich Men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty Men,
and every Bondman, and every Freeman, many of all Qualities and Conditions,
from the highest to the lowest; shall hide themselves in Dens, in Rocks, and
Mountains, and say to the Rocks and Mountains, fall on us, and hide us from the
face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb; for the
great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand! May these
Terrors of the Lord persuade us to provide in this our day, for the Things that
belong to our Peace, before they be hid from our eyes! looking for, by frequent
Meditation, and hastening unto, by a diligent Improvement of our Talents, the
coming of this dreadful day of God; and being above all things careful, That we
be found of him in Peace, without spot and blameless; for God will bring every
secret Thing into Judgment, whether it be good or evil, and exactly adapt every
Man's Recompense to his Work. Which brings me to the next Thing I am to
consider in this Parable; namely,

Fourthly, That, at that great Day of Account, when every Man's Work is fully
known, and his Improvement compared with what he has received; the Diligent
shall not only in general be received into the Joy of their Lord, and the
unprofitable cast into outer Darkness; but the most Diligent, those that have
made the greatest Improvement, shall receive the greatest share of Happiness:
And those that have been most careless and Unprofitable, shall be doomed to the
greatest misery. That is, in short, there will be degrees of Happiness or
Misery respectively, awarded to Men according to the degrees of their Holiness
or Impiety.

I know this has been much questioned by some, and wholly denied by others; and
their main Reason against it I conceive to be this: That since the Happiness of
the Just in Heaven consists in the Vision of God, or the Excellencies and
Beauties of the Divine Nature, which will fill a holy Soul with eternal and
inexpressible Delight; for so St. John expresses the Bliss of Heaven, by seeing
God as he is, 1 John 3.2. and St. Paul, by seeing him face to face, and knowing
him even as we are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. And since the Misery of the Wicked in
Hell consists in an eternal Banishment from his Divine Presence; for so the
Sentence runs that shall be passed upon them at the Day of Judgment, Depart
from me ye Cursed, etc. Upon these Accounts it seems to them most agreeable to
Truth, that All the Just, being admitted to the Beatifick Vision of God, should
be equally Happy, and All the Wicked being for ever exiled to him, should be
equally Miserable.

But this Argument, in my Apprehension, is so far from destroying the Doctrine
of the Degrees of Happiness and Misery in Heaven and Hell, that I think it is
rather the best Supporter of it. For, since it is very true, that the Happiness
of Heaven consists in the Beatifick Vision of God, and the Misery of Hell in an
eternal Banishment from him; and since it is as true, that some good Men in this
Life, approach nearer to him, and see more of his Excellencies, and bear a
greater Resemblance to him than others, and so become capable of a more
intimate Vision of him in Heaven; and some bad Men, on the contrary, wander to
a greater distance from him here, and become more unlike him by their great
Impieties than other Sinners do; and so become more incapable of that pure and
holy Vision, than others that are less wicked: Since this is so, methinks it
should be most agreeable to Truth, that those that were the Holiest Men here,
should be the Happiest Saints in Heaven, as bearing a nearer Resemblance to the
Divine Nature, and consequently capable of a more close and intimate Vision of
him; and that those who by their great Impiety beyond other Men, were most
estranged from God here, should be banished farthest from him in the Regions of
Despair and Darkness, as being the most hateful to him, because the most
unlike, nay contrary to him, and the most incapable of seeing and enjoying him;
and consequently feel the most exquisite Pangs of Horror and Despair, the
hottest Boilings of Rage and Impatience, and most bitter Remorse of Soul, for
bringing this most miserable Condition upon themselves; when once they might
with much Ease and Pleasure have avoided it, and been for ever happy in the
Vision and Enjoyment of God.

Indeed, as to plain Proof from Scripture of the Degrees of Misery in Hell, I
must confess I cannot recollect any, and would by no means strain God's Word
beyond its due Extent; but as to Degrees of Glory and Happiness in Heaven, I
think there are several Places of Scripture that plainly enough establish that
Doctrine; of which I shall mention but one, and that because it is part of a
Parable exactly the same in the concealed sense of it, with that I am now
discoursing upon, only something differently related by S. Luke. It Is in the
19th Chapter, the 15th and 4 following Verses; where we find, when the King
came to take Account of his Servants Improvement of what he left in their Hands
to trade with in his Absence, he exactly proportioned every Man's Recompense to
the Increase he made of what was committed to his Charge; to him that had
gained Ten Pounds, with the Pound his Lord left with him, was given Authority
over as many Cities; and so to him that had gained Five, proportionably
Authority over Five: Which I think can mean no less than this, that where there
is different Degrees of Men's Improvement of Grace in this World, there shall be
as different Degrees awarded of Glory and Happiness in Heaven; and there being
great Difference between the Degrees of Christians Improvement here, there will
be as great Difference in the Degrees of their Happiness hereafter. And though
every Saint in Heaven shall have as clear and intimate Vision and Enjoyment of
God as he is capable of, and partake in an agreeable Measure of the Happiness
that will flow from such Vision and Enjoyment, and be as Happy as it is possible
for him to be; yet the Capacity of every Saint will not be equal: Some Souls
will be more enlarged than others, and able to receive more Rays of the Divine
Glory; and so, though every of those Vessels of Honor shall be full, yet all
will not hold alike; and one Star there, will differ from another Star in Glory.

It Is true, indeed, that the Mind of every good Man shall then be clarified and
refined, purged from the Dross and Soil contracted during its Residence in the
Flesh, and rendered more agile and expedite in the Exercise of its several
Faculties, and its Knowledge and Love of God vastly improved: But that Souls of
less Improvement here, shall immediately upon their Departure from the Body,
receive extraordinary new Additions, to equalize them to those of higher
Seize, is hard to imagine; and would mightily discourage the generous
Endeavors of Heroic Piety and Exemplary Religion. But, when every Man shall
in that glorious Kingdom above, be rewarded according to the Degrees of his
Piety; and a great Love to God, and zealous Prosecution of the Interest of
Religion, and an eminent Sanctity, shall be crowned with a more than ordinary
Glory and Felicity in Heaven, 'twill mightily encourage a holy Soul to forget,
with St. Paul, the things that are behind, and press on to what is still
before, always aiming at still greater Degrees of Perfection, till Mortality
shall be swallowed up of Life.

The Improvement of this Speculation to Practice is this; That since the
Degrees of Glory and Happiness in Heaven, shall be answerable to the Degrees of
Men's Holiness, and Improvement of their Talents upon Earth; we would run with
Diligence the Race that is set before us, and gird up the Loins of our Mind,
and set our selves to the Performance of every thing that is well-pleasing in
the sight of God with Cheerfulness; and not pretend Difficulty, when the Reward
is so exceeding great, and shall be proportioned to the Degrees of our Virtue.
For can we be too happy? Can we be too like God? Can our Crown be too glorious
and resplendent? Away then with that mean-spirited Religion which thus lessens
and confines our Happiness; let us unfold our Hands, and pluck them out of our
Bosoms, and encourage our selves in a vigorous Pursuit of an excellent Piety;
forasmuch as we know, that our Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

Fifthly, In the next Place, I am to show, that it is abominably false and
impious, with the Unprofitable Servant in the Parable, to charge God with being
unreasonably rigid and severe, in taking so strict an Account of Men's
Improvement of his Divine Grace and Assistances, and expecting to find a good
Use made of what he committed to their Trust.

That God is often charged with such unreasonable Severity, by Men that care
not to perform their Duty, is too true to be questioned; and such as love to
indulge their vile Affections, and cannot afford to take any pains to be
Religious, are frequently heard to say, They serve God as well as they can, and
they can do no more; and that such a Religion as we urge Men to, is much too
hard for Flesh and Blood: It Is a Law fitter for Angels than Men; and tho they
wish they could observe and do it, and cannot but consent to the Excellency of
it in the Inner Man, yet they find a Law in their Members warring against the
Law of their Minds, and bringing them into Captivity to the Law of Sin; and so,
the good that they would they do not, and the evil that they would not that
they do And they take up with this as a sufficient Excuse; and because God is
infinitely merciful and good, they think he will accept the Plea of the great
Hardship of his Commands, and their Inability to perform them, instead of
Obedience to them. But, (as the Lord in the Parable said to his slothful
Unprofitable Servant) Out of their own Mouths will I judge those wretched
Persons, that thus mock and abuse God, and deceive their own Souls into Ruin.
For, if God be infinitely good and merciful, then certainly, he will not expect
any Thing from Men beyond their Ability, nor command their Service and
Obedience any farther than they are able to pay it: And consequently, what this
merciful and good God commands by All Men to be done without any Exception or
Dispensation, and threatens Eternal Misery to such as shall dare wilfully to
disobey him; this, Every Man, no question, is able to perform, through the
Divine Grace and Assistance; which, as I have before proved, is in sufficient
measure given to every Man. And to deny this, is, in effect, to charge God with
the greatest Cruelty, Oppression, and Injustice that is possible. For what
less, is the giving Men such Commands as they are not able to perform, and
withal threatening, and actually inflicting, unconceivable Torments (for such
are those of Hell) upon all that shall be found disobedient to the
impracticable Law? This would be, indeed, to require Brick without Straw, as
the Egyptian Taskmasters did, and then to lay on Stripes for a Failure in the
Work; nay, 'twould be infinitely worse, because the Punishment for Irreligion,
and not improving our Talents, is infinitely greater, and shall be inflicted to
all Eternity.

Since therefore, God knows whereof we are made, and remembers that we are but
Dust, and can tell how difficult his Commands will be to us, and how
proportionable our Ability is to keep and do them, better than we our selves,
(for it is he that has made us, and gave us our natural Powers and Faculties,
and the Superadditions of Grace and Aid from Above;) since he is infinitely
good, and will not overload his Creatures, nor exact impossible Tasks, or such
as are extremely difficult, and but one degree below impossible; since he is
likewise infinitely just, and will not damn Myriads of poor Wretches to all
Eternity, for not making an impossible Improvement of their Talents; and
expects only that they should give a reasonable Account, according to what they
have received from him: From all this it will follow, Not that therefore a Man
shall be excused for pleading Inability, but, that every Man is Able, through
the never deficient Grace of that good God to such as heedfully attend to it,
to keep his holy, just, and good Commands, and make Improvement suitable to the
Talents he has received; and if, for all this, he perish, his Blood will be
upon his own Head.

Wherefore, let no Man, for the future, be so Impious, as to charge God with
expecting impossible Services from his Creatures, or think to palliate his
Irreligion by crying out of the extreme Hardship of living like a Christian;
but let every Man set heartily and sincerely about his Duty, and he will find,
that God's Grace will be sufficient for him to his daily Improvement, and that
the Ways of Religion are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

I come now to the last Thing to be considered in this Parable; which is, That
the Condition of the diligent Improvers of their Talents will be unspeakably
happy, but the Condition of the Unprofitable, beyond Expression miserable; and
that, both in this World and in the next.

First, The Condition of the diligent Improvers of their Talent, will be
unspeakably happy, both in this World and that above. In this World, a quiet
and serene Conscience will be to them a continual Feast; the Sense of having
performed their Duty according to their Ability, of having been good Stewards
of the Grace of God bestowed upon them, and that they can give a sincere
Account, though not a perfect one, to their great Master, when he shall come to
look into their Behavior in their Stewardship; this, will fill their Breasts
with unspeakable Satisfaction, their Soul will be calm, and their Thoughts at
Rest in Conscience of their Fidelity, their Life not embittered with anxious
Fear and Dread of a sad After Reckoning; but, like that of a faithful Servant
who is in his Master's Favor, steady and easy, and moving cheerfully in the
Circle of his Duty, and in joyful Expectation of the Reward of his Diligence,
when his great Lord shall advance him from the State of a Servant to that of a
Friend and Bosom- Favorite; nay, of a Coheir with himself of the Joys and
Felicities of the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven.

And besides this Serenity and Satisfaction of Mind, and comfortable Prospect
of so glorious a Recompense of Reward, (which are Blessings of the first
Magnitude, and to which, nothing in this World is comparable) the improving
Christian shall have more Talents given him, more Grace shower'd down upon his
Soul; what the Slothful have forfeited, shall be conferred upon him, and he
shall abound still more and more in every good Word and Work. And what
Condition can approach nearer to the state of Heavenly Glory, than that of a
holy Soul thus plentifully stored with the divine Grace? And if Grace and Glory
differ only in degree, and the One be but the Completion and Perfection of the
other; a Soul so filled with Grace as the improving Soul will be, must needs
live a Heaven upon Earth, and have frequent Antepasts of Glory.

And in that other World, when the Glory shall be revealed, that is prepared
for them that love and serve our Lord Jesus in Sincerity; then will their
Happiness be as ineffable as endless. It is expressed in this Parable, by
entering into the Joy of our Lord; that is, partaking of his Glories and
Felicities in the Presence of the Immortal God.

They shall be conducted (after having given a good Account of their
Stewardship) by the Blessed Angels, into the Presence of the great King of
Heaven, where they shall see him face to face; and with wondering Eyes and
enravish'd Hearts, behold his Glory, gaze upon his Splendors, and nearly view
his Beauty, who is the Fountain of Perfection. He, who is Light it self, and in
whom is no Darkness at all, will hide nothing of his Glory from the Eyes of
their pure and prepared Minds; but communicate the Knowledge of his most
Excellent Nature, to the utmost Capacity of their Beatified Souls, and make 'em
full of Divine Gladness, with the Joy of his Countenance. Their Apprehensions
shall be cleared and brightned, their Faculties act upon this best of Objects
vigorously, and without any Hindrance or Distraction; and every View of the
Divine Beauty shall discover new Graces and Perfections (for God is an Immense
and Fathomless Ocean of Beauty, as Plato excellently expresses it) and their
Capacities by every such View shall be enlarged, and made still more and more
capacious, for the Reception of a following greater Manifestation. And so,
their Love and Admiration of this Divine Being always increasing, and their
Enjoyment of him complete and sull, to the utmost of their Capacity, their Joy
and Happiness will be, like that of God himself; because springing from the
same Fountain, Unspeakable and Eternal.

And since the Reward of a Pious Industry, will be such an Exceeding and
Eternal Weight of Glory; methinks we should take off our Affections from these
lower Goods, and dote no longer upon these vain and worthless Trifles, nor
throw away our Love upon that which satisfies not, and spend our Labor for
that which is not Bread; but make it our great Endeavor to be rich toward
God, and by improving the Talents he has given us, lay up a Treasure in
Heaven. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Remembering, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither can it enter into
the Heart of Man, to conceive the things which God has prepared for them that
love him. And certainly, that Diligence is well bestowed, which shall be
rewarded with a Crown of Glory, Eternal in the Heavens.

But with the Unprofitable and Slothful Servant it is not so, neither in this
World nor in the next. In this World, the Lashes of a guilty Conscience will be
unto him a Continual Torment; the Sense of his having carelessly neglected his
Duty, and not performing, according to his Ability, the Just Commands of his
great Lord; but being an Unfaithful Steward of the Grace of God bestowed upon
him, and that he is far from being able to give in a good Account, when his
Lord shall come, expecting the Improvement of his Talent: This will fill his
Breast with unspeakable Trouble and Perplexity, and imbitter all his Worldly
Enjoyments with the Mixture of Anxious Fear, and Dread of a severe
After-Reckoning; and the terrifying Expectation of his sad Fate that will
ensue, will be to him, even like a Hell upon Earth; and cruciate his Soul with
unspeakable Pangs and Agonies. And, which is much worse still, the Grace that
has so long lain unimprov'd, shall at length be taken from him; and the Man, as
desperate and irreclaimable, be given over, and as 'twere sealed up to
Remediless Misery. And in the next World, at that great Day, when he shall be
actually called to give Account of his Works, the Dire Sentence of Depart from
me ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels,
shall strike him through with Horror and Confusion; and he shall be driven into
Outer Darkness, where he shall Eternally bewail his Miserable Condition, and
gnash his Teeth in bitter Remorse for bringing himself to that Place of
Torment, by slothfully neglecting the Improvement of that Divine Grace; with
which he might, if he would, have worked out his Salvation. Crying out to
Eternal Ages in utter Despair, and most tormenting Agonies of Soul, O that I
had considered in that my Day, the things that did belong unto my Peace; but
now, they are for ever hid from mine Eyes!

And now, for a Conclusion of this Discourse. Here is in this Parable we see,
on the one Hand, all the Encouragement in the World to Diligence and Industry,
and a Lively Improving Piety; such as more and more Abundance of Grace, with
all the Blessed Attendants of it in this World, and a full Enjoyment of God
himself in Heaven. And on the other side, here is, what if duly considered,
will make any Man afraid of Spiritual Sloth and Idleness, and not dare to
neglect the Improvement of his Talent; for if he does, he shall be deprived of
God's Grace here, and doomed to Eternal Misery at the Day of Judgment.
Wherefore, let us seriously consider what has been now commented upon this
Parable; and beg of God so to bless it to our Good, that we may be inclined by
it to make a due Improvement of the Talents he has committed to our Management,
to his Honor and Glory, and our own Eternal Salvation.

The PRAYER.
MOST Glorious God, the Fountain of Perfection, whom I humbly acknowledge to be
the Giver of every good and perfect Gift; I beseech thee assist me with thy
Grace, that according to thy Just Expectation, I may make a suitable
Improvement of the Talents I have received from thy Bounty, to thy Glory and
the Public Good. And may my Industry be excited by this great Consideration,
That thou will certainly call me to give an Account of my Improvement, and very
speedily perhaps; and wilt proportionably reward or punish me in the Eternal
World. I thankfully own, most merciful Father, that thou have given me
sufficient Grace wherewith to arrive at the End of my Hopes, and art not at all
wanting to me in this unspeakable Gift; O may I not be wanting to my self, and
neglect and bury this Precious Talent, but with Diligence and Carefulness
endeavor to work out my Salvation with it in Fear and Trembling: Remembering
what Confusion I shall be in, how utterly without Plea or Excuse, when for my
Wicked Slothfulness thou shall consign me to outer Darkness, since thou did
enable me to perform all thou expectedst from me And may the unspeakably Happy
Condition of the Diligent, encourage me to an Active Persevering Piety, and
always to abound in the Work of thee, my Lord; since I know my Labor shall not
be in vain; but be rewarded with still larger Additions of thy Grace in this
World, and with the Participation, in great Degrees, of thy Glory in the next.
O God, assist me more and more with this thy Heavenly Grace, and may I always
gratefully acknowledge from whom I have received it, and return thee all the
Praise of what I shall do well by thy Assistance, and always fear, lest by my
Negligence I forfeit it: That so, faithfully improving the Talent thou have
here committed to my Trust, I may, at the great Day of Retribution hear these
Blessed Words, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into the Joy of
thy Lord. Which grant, O Gracious God for the Sake of Jesus, thy Beloved. Amen.

PARABLE IX. Of the Covetous Rich Fool.
Luke xii. 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And Jesus spoke a Parable unto them, saying,
The Ground of a certain Rich Man brought forth plentifully.

And he thought within himself, saying, What shall I do because I have no Room
where to bestow my Fruits?

And he said this will I do: I will pull down my Barns and build greater, and
there will I bestow all my Fruits and my Goods.

And I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many Years;
take thine Ease, eat, drink, and be merry.

But God said unto him, Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of
thee, then whose shall those things be which thou have provided?

So is he that lays up Treasure for himself, and is not Rich toward God.


THIS Parable was spoken upon Occasion of one of our Lord's Followers, desiring
him to Arbitrate between him and his Brother, in a Difference about dividing
their Patrimony; for so Verse 13. of this Chapter, one of the Company said unto
him, Master, speak unto my Brother, that he divide the Inheritance with me. To
this our Lord answered in the 14. Verse, Man, who made me a Judge or a Divider
over you? And takes Occasion from that Request to him, rather to advise those
that were with him, and all that should hereafter be his Disciples, to take
Heed and beware of Covetousness, and that because a Man's Life or Happiness
consists not in the Abundance of the Things which he possesses; as it is in
the 15. Verse. And to make this his Excellent Advice sink deeper into their
Minds, he spoke the Parable I am now to discourse upon.

The Design of it, as we see from the Context, is to draw Men off from
Covetousness, or a too eager Desire of heaping up Riches; and to expose the
great Folly of being wholly intent upon laying up Treasures in this Life, and
taking little or no Care to be rich toward God. For, as that Rich Man in the
Parable, whom God had blessed with an extraordinary Increase of the Fruits of
the Earth, even to more than his Barns could hold, did entertain Covetous
Thoughts of building new ones to hoard it up in, and promised himself much
Happiness from that Abundance, Take thine Ease, eat, drink, and be merry, for
thou have Goods laid up for many Years: As this Covetous Rich Man was surpised
with a sudden Summons into the other World, and snatched away from the midst of
this Abundance, and upbraided with Folly, in trusting in such uncertain Riches;
so, and for the very same Reasons, is every Covetous Rich Man an Egregious
Fool, that confides in Wealth, and neglects Religion.

In my Discourse, therefore, upon this Parable, I shall do these Four things.

First, I shall give a short Description of the Vice of Covetousness;

Secondly, Endeavor to expose, both the great Folly and Vileness of this Vice;
together with all the Ill Consequences that attend it;

Thirdly, I will answer the Rich Fool's Question which he proposed to himself
upon the great Increase he had, What shall I do, because I have no Room where
to lay my Fruits? And,

Fourthly, Show the great Wisdom of not setting our Hearts upon, nor eagerly
pursuing Wealth, and of bestowing it as Religion does direct, should it please
God in an extraordinary Manner to bless us with it.

And after all, I will urge this upon Men's Practice, and so conclude this
Argument.

First, I am to give a short Description of the Vice of Covetousness, that we
may know what it is that this Parable would incline us to avoid.

The Covetousness this Parable warns against (for there are several Sorts of
it) is an Immoderate Desire of heaping up Riches, or of having still more and
more Wealth, after we have sufficient for the Comfortable Support of our selves
and Relatives; that we may for the Future, live in greater Ease and Luxury.

First, This Covetousness is an Immoderate Desire of Riches; for all Desire of
Riches is not Criminal, and a Man may very lawfully desire, and as lawfully, by
all due Means, endeavor to procure so much Wealth as is needful for his own
and his Families Comfortable Maintenance, and will enable him to be kind to the
Poor. But, to desire even this with Impatience, and overgreat Solicitude, is
the Sin of Covetousness; and the Sin is very much aggravated when a Man
greedily desires still on, when his Comfortable Subsistence, and sufficient
Provision for his Family is already provided for.

Again, immoderately to desire to heap up Riches is Covetousness, though we may
inten^ afterward to enjoy them, to eat, and drink, and be merry, and take our
Ease the more, as the Rich Man in the Parable purposed to do; for this
distinguishes Covetousness from extreme Parsimony and Niggardliness. They agree
indeed in this, that they are both an extreme Desire of Riches, but they differ
likewise in this, that the Covetous may eagerly desire to get Riches with a
Design afterward as prodigally to spend them, but the Niggard hoards up what
he has got, and endeavors to scrape more to it with a Purpose not to make use
of it himself, nor to let any body else touch it, as long as he can help it.
And these, though they are both very great Vices, yet Niggardliness is, I
think, by much the greater of the Two. But it is the extreme Desire of heaping
up Riches, though with a Purpose to enjoy them, that is the Vice this Parable is
levelled against; for the Rich Man there intended to enlarge his Barns, and lay
up his Increase in them, that he might take his ease, and eat, and drink, and
be merry; which is a Kind of Covetousness, that though very many are guilty of,
yet few think it deserves to be called by that hateful Name.

There is one thing more to be explained in this Description of Covetousness,
namely, What is meant by such a Proportion of Riches as is sufficient for the
Comfortable Subsistence of a Man and his Relatives? And the Answer to this must
be in General; (for to Particularize in this Case would be endless) that is
sufficient for the Comfortable Subsistence of every Man and his Family, which
will secure them, according to their Station and Degree, from Want; and provide
Plenty of what is necessary to Life, and health, and decency, though it does
not arise to the Pomps and Vanities of the World: For he that has this, has,
no question, what is sufficient for a very comfortable Subsistence to any
Reasonable Man. And he that is not satisfied with such a Degree of Wealth as
this, will never be satisfied with any, be it never so great.

He therefore, that at all desires Riches impatiently, much more, he, that when
he has a Reasonable Sufficiency of Wealth, covets still more, that he may
ingross it to himself, and the more indulge his Luxury, to the Neglect of
better things, and builds his Hopes of Happiness upon such a Multitude of
Riches; is guilty of the Covetousness this Parable was spoken against: And the
Folly and Vileness of which Vice, I am in the Second Place to expose, and show
what very Ill Consequences do attend it.

And first, All Immoderate Desire of Riches, upon what Account soever, is a
very great Folly. Immoderately to desire any thing is questionless a Folly; for
all Immoderation is foolish and unreasonable, as must be acknowledged by every
Man at first sight: And immoderate Desire is a kind of Rack and Torture to the
Mind, which for a Man in any Case to bring upon himself, is certainly a Folly,
and therefore in General, it must be allowed to be a great Piece of Folly,
immoderately to desire Riches. But more Particularly it is so upon the
following Accounts.

First, Because it is so very uncertain, whether a Man shall attain his Desire,
or no. There are so many cross Accidents incident to the Pursuit of Riches, let
Men take what Course they will, that it is generally the most precarious thing
in the World. If a Man crosses the Seas for Wealth, as uncertain as the Winds
and Waters are, as numerous as the Rocks and Quicksands, and Sea-Robbers; so
great is the Uncertainty, whether that way he shall have what he desires, and
heap up Wealth, or no. If, for more Security he stays at Home, and by Domestic
Employments endeavors to be rich; whatever his Employment is, he is not sure
he shall have Health to pursue it; or if he has, that his Endeavors will be
successful; Ten Thousand unforeseen Accidents may destroy a very hopeful
Beginning, and one Month may set him further back than he has advanced in
Twenty Years; and one unlucky Hit may reduce him to Poverty, after he has
arrived almost to the Completion of his Desires. In other Cases, there are some
certain Means that seldom fail of their respective Ends; as Learning, where
there is an Aptitude for it in Nature, may certainly be acquired by Ingenuous
Education, Diligent Study, and Good Conversation; and when there is a Natural
Genius likewise, Men seldom fail by Good Instruction and Industrious Practice,
of becoming Artists in their several Professions. But Riches do ebb and flow
unaccountably; sometimes the greatest Industry fails of them, and they fall
unexpectedly upon the Idle and the Negligent; and as often, when Men think they
are within their Reach, they make themselves Wings and fly away they know not
how. As, when a Child would catch a Grass-hopper, its Motions are so very
irregular, that he finds it a very difficult Matter at all to come near it; and
when at length, after much Pains, he thinks he has gained his Prize, and
eagerly puts forth his Hand to seize it, the nimble Insect leaps to a further
Distance from him than before. And even just so (how rustic soever the
Comparison may be) is it very often with Men that immoderately desire, and
eagerly pursue Riches; there is no regular Way of proceeding that a Man may
securely depend upon in the Case; The Ebbs and Flows of Wealth are as various
and unaccountable as the Motions of that little Insect, it is as hard a matter
to come within reach of them, and men are as often balked when they think they
have them in their Possession. And this cannot but have been the Observation of
every Man, that has lived any while in the World, and taken Notice of the
Proceedings in it; and has been the costly Experience of very many. Now, for a
Man immoderately to desire, and impatiently to pursue, what there is no sure
and steady Way of attaining; and when, for any thing he can tell, after all his
Pains, and the Uneasiness consequent upon his eager Desire, he shall miss of
his End; nay, when it is a Thousand to One but he shall miss of it (for of a
Thousand that immoderately desire great Riches, there is, modestly speaking,
scarce One that attains them) for a Man to suffer the Torment of an immoderate
Desire of what there is so little Probability of attaining; is certainly a
great Piece of Weakness and Folly; and almost as bad, as if a Man should
endeavor eagerly all his Days to enclose the Wind in his Fist.

And this Comparison, as extravagant as it may seem, is countenanced by the
wisest of Men; who, in the 5th. Chapter of Ecclesiastes, 16th. Verse, after he
had, for Five or Six Verses before, exposed the Folly of an immoderate Desire
of Wealth; asks this Question, What Profit has he that has labored for the
Wind? All his Days (as it is Verse 17.) he eats in Darkness, or Uncertainty of
the Event, and has much Sorrow, and Wrath with his Sickness; i. e. as it is
expressed elsewhere by the same wise Preacher, the deferring of his Hope makes
his Heart sick, and much is his Trouble and Vexation in pursuing what is Vanity
of Vanities. And therefore with great Reason does St. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Paul warn Men, not to trust in uncertain Riches, or the Uncertainty of Riches,
which a Man is as uncertain of getting, as of keeping when he has them. And to
reassume the former Comparison, as the Wind blows where it lists, and we
hear the Sound of it, but cannot tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes;
so unaccountable are the Motions of Wealth: For all any Endeavors of ours,
Wealth will take its own course and change masters or servants rather as it
lists; and though there is a great deal of Noise made with it and about it,
yet no Man can certainly say whence it comes, by what Methods he may be sure
to procure it, nor whither it goes, by what Means it is lost by one, and
passes another.

And this is the first Reason why an immoderate Desire of Riches is a great
Folly, because it is so strangely uncertain whether a Man shall have that Desire
of his gratified or no, nay, a Thousand to One that he shall not. A moderate
Portion of this World's Good may be moderately desired by a wise Man, because
there is no great Fear of his being disappointed, and Industry is generally
rewarded with a Comfortable Subsistence: but impatiently to thirst after great
Riches, is an Egregious Folly, because it is great Odds, but 'twill be to no
Purpose.

But secondly, should it be to some Purpose thus eagerly to desire and
endeavor after great Riches, and the Man gains what he would have; yet, after
all, the Purchase is not great, nor will it countervail the Uneasiness the
whole Man endures in the immoderate Desire and earnest Pursuit of it. What
toilsom Days and restless Nights, what Servitude and Drudgery do those go
through who resolve, if possible, to raise large Estates, and greater Families?
How many low pitiful things are they fain to truckle to, nay, what is worse,
how much cheating and underhand dealing, how much Violence and Oppression is
there committed by those that make haste to be rich? What Discontents and
repining at (as they think) their slow Progress, how does every Rub and
Hindrance go to their very Heart, and their frequent Baulks and
Disappointments, pierce them thorough with more and more pungent Sorrows, than
all their Wealth, though they have Hearts to enjoy it, will ever make amends
for?

If abundance of Gold and Silver would certainly make a Man wiser and better,
if 'twould clear his Apprehension, or strengthen his Memory, or improve his
Reasoning; if 'twould make him more prudent and discreet and of a riper
Judgment; if 'twould increase Piety and Religion, and promote a Godlike Frame
of Spirit; nay, if 'twould but so much as refine a Man's Temper, and make him
of more sweet and obliging Behavior, or regulate the Passions and Affections
of the Soul, and help him to Tranquillity of Mind, and cure Anger, and Pride,
and Envy, and Lust, and Revenge, or the like; if abundance of Riches would work
any of these good Effects, 'twould be worth while earnestly to desire them, and
industriously to endeavor to procure them: But, when it is so far from this,
that the direct contrary is general observable in those that have greatest
Riches in Possession; it must, I think, be allowed to be a very great Piece of
Folly, for a Man to endure so much for what, when he has it, will not
countervail.

But, though greedy Worldlings may own, that great Riches have little or no
Influence upon the Happiness and Improvement of the Inner Man; yet, because a
Man has a Body as well as a Soul to take care of, they are thus greatly
desirous of much Wealth, because 'twill help them to the Enjoyment of much of
this World's Happiness, and acquire what will highly please and gratify the
Body; as the Rich Man in the Parable said, they may take their ease, eat,
drink, and be merry, when they have much Goods laid up for many Years. I shall
therefore in the

Second Place show, the folly of expecting even this World's Happiness from
Abundance of Riches.

For besides, that the Appetites of the Body are generally observed to be more
sickly and depraved in rich than poorer Persons; their Sleep, worse rather than
better than other Men's; Eccl. 5.12.
the Abundance of the Rich will not suffer him to sleep, says Solomon, but the
Sleep of the Laboring Man is sweet, eat he little or eat he much; and that
Health is much more a Stranger to the Rich than to the Meaner sort, and the
Pleasures of having a Body Vigorous and Active, without the Encumbrance of
Weakness and Diseases, almost engrossed by the Laboring Poor; Besides this,
(which yet alone is enough to prove, that it is a folly to expect even this
World's Happiness from Abundance of Riches, for without Health, which Luxury
destroys the most of any thing, there is no Taste or Relish in any other of its
Enjoyments;) there is this One Reason more, among others, that will farther,
and I think evidently prove, that it is a very great Folly to expect to be
happier even in this World, by growing Richer; and it is this, That Riches are
of all Things the most unsatisfying, and the most perplexing.

Other Good Things of this World do in some sort satisfy; and Men are often
cloyed with Pleasures, have enough of Mirth and Jollity, of Recreations and
Diversions, and the like; and the Mind is, for a while, eased and refreshed by
them: But as for Riches, as they increase, the Desire of still more, increases
proportionably, nay, rather disproportionably with them; and 'twas never yet
known, that a worldly-minded Man ever thought he had enough, but that his
Appetite grew keener after Wealth, the more 'twas fed with it: And it is not
unusual, to hear the greatest Complaints, Murmurings, and Repinings from the
richest Men. And as for the Perplexity that attends Abundance of Wealth, that
likewise is as evident to common Observation. The more a Man has, the more
Care he must take to preserve it, the more Quarrels and Lawsuits will he be
embroiled in; and when there are Troubles and Commotions in the State, and
Times grow dangerous and uncertain, then are the greatest Worldlings fullest of
Fears and dreadful Apprehensions; and not only real, but imaginary Dangers,
terrify their Unmanned Souls; Things always appearing with the worst Aspect to
their troubled Fancies, who have made Gold their Deity, and tied up their
Happiness in their Bags. And nothing, certainly, can be more perplexing to a
Man's Mind, than such great Fears of losing That, in the possession of which
his whole Happiness is concentred.

And accordingly, Solomon, who had great Possessions, above All that were
before him, and gathered him Silver and Gold in such Abundance, that Silver was
in Jerusalem common as the Stones in the Street; 1 Kings 10.27.
after all, says he, Eccles. 5.10, 11. He that loves Silver shall not be
satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves Abundance with Increase. And what
Good is there to the Owners thereof, saving the beholding of it with their
Eyes? And even the Eye is not satisfied with seeing neither. And St. Paul says
very plainly, That the Love of Money is the Root of all Evil, and they that
will be Rich, fall into Temptation and a Snare, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
and pierce themselves through with diverse Sorrows; and that Contentment, with
only Food and Raiment, is a far greater Happiness. And therefore, good Reason
had the Wisest King to say, after all his Increase, and the Abundance he had
amassed together, that it was, not only Vanity, but Vexation of Spirit, Eccles.
2.11.

Now, that which can never satifie, and as it increases, increases a Man's
Trouble and Perplexity (which is true, we see, of Riches) is, no doubt, far
from conducing to a Man's Happiness in this World; and therefore, it is a very
great Folly, for any Man to depend upon Abundance of Wealth for Happiness, for
it is rather, the Cause of much Trouble and Disquietude. Or however, God may
suddenly deprive a rich Worldling of all he has by Death, and say, as in the
Parable, Thou Fool, this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee, then whose
shall those Things be which thou have provided? For, As we brought nothing into
the World, so it is certain we can carry nothing out. And thus much for the
Folly of Immoderate Desire of Riches, in Expectation of a Happy Life from
Abundance. I proceed now to show,

The Vileness of this sort of Covetousness, and of placing the Happiness of
Life in great store of Wealth.

That it is a very vile Thing for a Man immoderately to covet Riches, and place
the Happiness of his Life in Abundance of them, will be very evident, if we
briefly consider what a Man is, and what Abundance of Wealth is, and what
little or no proportion the one bears to the Dignity of the other. A Man is a
Creature endowed with a Rational and Immortal Soul, capable of Knowing,
Admiring, Loving, and Enjoying God, who is the Supreme Good and the Center of
Felicity. As a Christian, he is an adopted Son of God, Coheir with Christ of a
Crown of Glory in the Eternal Kingdom of Heaven, and designed to participate of
those Rivers of divine Pleasures that are at God's Right Hand for ever and
ever. As for Riches (or Abundance of Gold and Silver, in which nowadays we
esteem Riches chiefly to consist) they are really no better than Heaps of Earth
of different Colors, impressed with different Stamps, and made of different
Sizes, and to which Men have given a different Value and Esteem, according to
their different Color, Size, and Impression; and which in themselves, are good
for little but to be looked on, and which he that would live must part with
when he has them, in Exchange for other Things that are necessary for his
Subsistence.

Now, what can be more vile and base, than for so Noble and Excellent a
Creature as Man, so far to degrade himself, as to employ his greatest Love, and
Admiration, and Desire, upon a Piece of Earth, which was originally made for
him to tread upon, and produce Things for his Food and Pleasure! To make that
his Master, nay his God, which was made to be his Servant! For a Rational Soul
to dote upon a senseless Clod, to neglect the Contemplation of the Excellencies
of his infinitely perfect Maker, and admire one of the lowest of his Creatures;
to desire a Piece of Earth with the greatest Application, and have no Value for
the Immortal Glories of Heaven; to place his Happiness in what is so very much
inferior to him, and upon that which is indeed his Happiness to bestow no
Thoughts; what can be more vile and abject than this! what more unbecoming the
Dignity of the Rational Nature, and of a Creature that has such glorious Hopes!
Where is the Reason of a Man, that lays out all his Endeavors to acquire a
Trifle, and in the mean time disregards that which is his chief good? and where
is the Religion of a Christian, that has been redeemed, not by Corruptible
Things, such as Silver and Gold, but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without Blemish and without Spot; where is his Religion, that
notwithstanding this, makes Silver and Gold the chief Object of his Affections,
and treads under foot the Son of God, and counts the Blood of the Covenant,
wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy, or common, Thing, and does despite to
the Spirit of Grace, and loves and admires Mammon more than his Savior? What
more vile and brutish than this, what more stupidly ungrateful! This is, to
come down to a Level with the Beasts that perish; nay, it is to sink much lower;
for They act according to their Natural Instincts, and choose as they are
directed by their Great Creator, and serve him obediently in that Rank of Being
in which he has placed them: But that Man, much more that Christian, that makes
perishing Riches the main Object of his Desires and Endeavors, acts directly
contrary to the Reason that God has given him, degenerates many degrees below
the Dignity of his Nature, disobeys the Orders of his Creator, slights the
Heavenly Counsel of his Savior, despises the Glories and Felicities of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and of a Man and a Christian makes himself a vile Muckworm,
delighted in nothing Noble and Excellent, but grovelling upon the Earth, as if
that were the Center of his Happiness. And what can more vilify and degrade a
Reasonable Soul, made after the Image of God, than such base Affections as
these? It Is certainly a most vile Degeneracy, and renders a Man the most
contemptible Creature in the Universe, both to God and Angels, and all wise and
good Men.

And thus much may suffice to expose the Folly and Vileness of an immoderate
Desire of Riches, as in them placing the Happiness of Life. I shall now show

The ill Consequences that attend it; which (besides that great Perplexity of
Mind they cause, mentioned before) are chiefly these two: (1) It mightily
hinders a Man's Progress in Religion, which is the one Thing necessary. (2.) It
exposes a Man more than any thing, to the Danger of Apostasy, or falling from
the Truth.

First, An immoderate Love of Riches does mightily hinder a Man's Progress in
Religion, which is the one Thing necessary. We may remember, our Lord, in his
Interpretation of a Parable (before discoursed of) Matt. 13.22. says, that the
Cares of this World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, like Thorns that spring
up with Seed, choke the Word of God, and render it unfruitful; and in another
Parable of a great Supper made at the Marriage of a King's Son, Matt. 22. Luke
14.18
by which (as was discoursed upon that Parable) is represented the glad Tidings
and Invitations of the Gospel; he tells us, That that which detained Men from
it, was likewise the Cares of the World and the Love of Riches; they had Ground
to look after, and Oxen to prove, and therefore they could not come to the
Wedding Supper. And accordingly, says our Savior, in as express Words as can
be, Matt. 6.24. No man can serve two Masters, ye cannot serve God and Mammon.

Now the Reason of this is twofold: For first, Nothing so much distracts a
Man's Thoughts, as an eager Desire and Pursuit of Wealth; for Riches are so
difficult to be acquired (as has been said) and so very slippery when gained;
that, as to get them will exercise all a Man's Contrivance, employ all his
Thoughts and Attention, and consume his whole Time; so to keep them when once
gotten, will, to a Man that knows the Hardship of getting them, and how soon
they are lost again, engage him in constant Care and Solicitude to watch his
Idol, lest he be deprived of it; and so, his Mind becomes distracted with
continual Apprehensions of Danger, and at leisure for no other Thoughts than
how to secure his Riches. And this, those that are acquainted with Men much
wedded to the World, may soon perceive by their careful anxious Looks, and
distrustful Timorous Discourse. Now, the immoderate Love of Riches thus
engrossing a Man's Soul; and the great Business of Religion, or making
Provision for Another World, and laying up a Treasure of good Works in Heaven,
being a Thing that likewise requires Time and Diligence, and a close
Application of all our Faculties to the Performance of it; and it being
impossible for a Man to attend closely to two Things at once; and the Love of
this World, and of the next, being not only different, but contrary the one to
the other: How can it be, but that he that eagerly loves Riches, and has his
Soul prepossessed with a strong Desire of them, and all his Faculties before
engaged in their Pursuit; must move very slowly in the Way of Religion, if he
moves at all; nay indeed, rather move backward than forward; and the more he
loves the World, grow colder still in his Affections to God.

Another Reason of this is, Because an Immoderate Love of Money is a kind of
Fascination and Enchantment; it casts a Mist before a Man's Understanding, and
makes him less sensible and apprehensive of the great Obligation to a Religious
Life, and so dulls and stupifies the Soul, that it becomes very little moved
with the Sermons of the Gospel. What else should be the Reason of that strange
Unconcernedness in the Worldly-minded, though pressed never so home with the
Necessity of minding Religion more and the World less, of endeavoring, before
all Things, to be rich toward God, and to give of their Abundance to the
Relief of the Poor, and not to trust in uncertain Riches, and the like? They
give us the Hearing perhaps, and that is All, and go on still in their own
Course as earnestly as ever; and if they offer any thing in their Defense, it is
so strangely weak that a Man cannot but admire at it. Sometimes we shall hear
them say, they don't know what Streights they may be reduced to yet before they
dye, and therefore they think it but Prudence to provide for the worst;
forgetting all the while, that our Lord expressly forbids all such anxious
Solicitude for the Morrow, and commands an humble Trust in the Providence of
God, who never forsakes those that are moderately industrious, and depend upon
him for a Blessing; and never reflecting upon the miserable Straight they will
be in at the Day of Judgment, if destitute of good Works, and not able to give
a sincere Account of their Stewardship.

Sometimes these Men will quote Scripture, and tell us, the Apostle says, He
that provides not for his own House, is worse than an Infidel, forgetting in
the mean time the Words of the same Apostle in another Place, that the Love of
Money is the root of all Evil; and those of our Savior immediately before this
Parable, Take heed, beware of Covetousness, for a man's Life consists not in
the Abundance of the Things which he possesses. And in Matt. 6.32. Seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these Things shall be
added unto you, for your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these
things; 1 Cor. 6.10. Ephesians. 5.5.
and that the Covetous are in the number of those that shall never see the
Kingdom of Heaven. Of all Vices that we reprove and warn Men against,
Covetousness and Worldly-mindedness we find to be most stubborn and
irreclaimable; and it is very seldom indeed, that we can stop a Man that is in a
hot pursuit of Wealth; so strangely bewitching is this Love of Money, and more
than ordinary destructive of a true Sense of Religion in the Soul. And
accordingly says our Lord, How hard is it for a rich man (one that makes a God
of Riches, and confides and trusts in them) to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven! it is easier for a Camel to pass through the Eye of a Needle. It Is next
door to an Impossibility, and nothing but the Almighty Power of God changing
his Heart, can make him capable of that Happiness. And St. Paul agreeably, Not
many rich, not many mighty are called, and the God of this World has blinded
the Eyes of those that believe not. And the Pythagoreans, by the mere Light of
Nature, were sensible of this, and taught their Scholars a Separation from the
Affairs of the World, if they would Philosophize well, and find out pure Truth,
and the Secrets of Wisdom. Wherefore, we see it highly concerns us, to take no
such Thought for the Morrow, but endeavor to lay up a Treasure in Heaven;
because, Where our Treasure is, there will our Hearts be also.

Another very sad Consequence of an Immoderate Love of Riches, is, that it
exposes a Man, more than any Thing besides, to Apostasy, or falling from the
Truth. St. Paul, 1 Timothy 6.9. says, They that will be rich, fall into Temptation
and a Snare; and more expressly in the next Verse, The Love of Money is the root
of all Evil; which, while some have coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith: and the Event has often proved this true; and the Hopes of gaining, and
the Fear of losing Riches, has prevailed with Thousands to turn Apostates to
the Truth. For the sake of a little Money 'twas, that Judas betrayed his Master
and Savior; and to tempt with Money, is a way of proceedure so very
successful, an Engine so almost irresistible, that it is made use of by all
sorts that would gain Proselites to a Party; and the great Tempter, with much
Confidence, after his other Stratagems failed him, made Offer of Riches to our
Lord Himself (as his best Reserve) when he would persuade him to Fall down and
Worship him. And so unreasonable a Love have Worldly-minded Men for Wealth, as
to be and do any Thing at the Frowns or Promises of him who has Power to give
or take away Riches. This has been the Experience of all former Ages, and too
much of our own too, and will still be so, till Men grow so wise as to know how
to be content with Food and Raiment, and believe our Lord's Words, that a man's
Life consists not in the Abundance of the Things which he possesses, and
that Godliness with Contentment, is the greatest gain. And therefore, as much
as it concerns Men to be constant in the Profession of the Truth of God, that
is, as much as their Salvation is worth, so much it concerns them to take heed
and beware of Covetousness. For it is very true, in more Senses than one, that
it is Idolatry. Colos. 3.5.

Having thus shown, the great Folly and Vileness of an Immoderate Desire of
Riches, and of expecting the Happiness even of this Life from Abundance of
Wealth, and mentioned two very ill Consequences of this Covetousness; I proceed
now to the

Third Thing I intended to do; which is, to Answer the Rich Fool's Question
that he proposed to himself, upon the great Increase he had, What shall I do
because I have no room where to lay my fruits? And show, how many good Ways
there are of Disposing of Abundance.

Of all the Ways of bestowing what was more than his Barns would hold (by which
I suppose is expressed his having more than was needful to his own comfortable
Subsistence) Covetousness would let this Rich Man think of none but of Building
New Barns wherein to lay up his Abundance, and then to take his Ease, and eat,
and drink, and be merry: He looked no farther than Himself; and the more God's
Blessings increased upon him, the more he purposed to live in Luxury and
Excess, and Epicurize away that which God gave him to a quite different, and
much better Purpose.

Quod superat non est melius quo insumere possis?
Cur eget indignis quisquam te divite? quare
Templa Ruunt Antiqua Deum, cur improbe chara
Non aliquid Patriae tanto emetiris Acervo?
Horat. Sermon. Lib. II. Sat. 2. For, every Man whom God has blessed with
Abundance, is God's Steward of that Abundance, and must bestow it according to
the Will of his great Lord; for so St. Peter, in his first Epistle, chap. 4.
ver. 10. As every man has received the Gift, even so minister one to another,
as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. Now the Duty of a good Steward
is thus represented in the 42d Verse of this 12th of Luke, Who then is that
faithful and wise Steward whom his Lord shall make Ruler over his Household to
give them their portion of Meat in due season? That is, To give the Family
their Portion in due Season, is the Duty of a Faithful and Good Steward. Now
the Race of Mankind is God's great Family in the World, and some of the Members
of this his Family he has made Choice of as his Stewards and Purveyors to
provide for the rest, and has according entrusted them with such a share of his
Revenue, to some more, to some less, as in his infinite Wisdom he has thought
most fit, and ordered them to expend it to the Advantage of his Household, that
every one be provided for according to his Needs, and that no Man be suffered,
as much as in them lies, to be miserable and perish: And this he requires
should be done faithfully, after a moderate Provision first made for themselves
and Relatives, as they shall answer it at that great Audit, when every Man must
give Account of his Stewardship.

The Rich Man then in the Gospel, being (as every other Rich Man is) God's
Steward, to provide for such as were in Necessity and Want, according to the
Abundance God had given him, it is an easy Matter to answer the Question he
proposed to himself upon his great Increase, What shall I do because I have no
room where to lay my fruits? Why, act like a good Steward for thy great Master,
and let the Houses of the Poor be the Granaries for the Abundance of thine
Increase. Charity to the Necessitous is the best Way of bestowing Abundance;
and as many Ways as there are of expressing that Charity (which are
innumerable) so many Ways are there of disposing of what is more than needful
for our own comfortable Support. To Feed the Hungry, to give Drink to the
Thirsty, Harbor to distressed Strangers, Clothes to the Naked, Visits of
Comfort and Relief to the Sick, and Freedom to Prisoners; to be a Father to the
Fatherless, and a Husband to the Widow, and the like; this is to discharge a
good Stewardship; this is what every Rich Man ought to do with his Abundance:
And Blessed is that good Servant whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so
doing; Of a truth, says our Lord, his Master will make him Ruler over all that
he has; he will commit still more of his Revenue to his Management, bless him
with greater Prosperity and Increase, and at last he shall be received into the
Joy of his Lord, and Reign with Christ his Great Master, in Glory for ever.
Whoever therefore has Abundance, needs not much to perplex himself how he shall
bestow it, for the Poor are always with us; and for the Relief of their
Necessities, not the Gratifying our own Luxurious Desires, must God's
Extraordinary Blessings be laid out.

Let us now, in the Fourth Place, consider the great Wisdom of not setting our
Hearts upon, nor eagerly pursuing Riches, and disposing of them as Religion
directs, if it shall please God in an extraordinary Manner to bless us with
them.

If Riches increase, set not your Heart upon them, is excellent Advice of the
Royal Psalmist, Psalm. 62.10. and very true is that of St. Paul to Timothy,
Ephesians. 1.6, 10. that while some have coveted after Money, they have erred from
the Faith, and pierced themselves through with diverse Sorrows; and that
Godliness with Content is great Gain; and therefore, wise indeed is that Man,
that knows how to be content with his present Portion, and by setting his
Affections upon more noble Objects, escapes the Snare of coveting after Wealth.
He is free from the most dangerous Passion, the Love of Money being the root of
all Evil; and is secure of Quiet and Satisfaction amidst all the Turns and
Varieties of Fortune, the great Uncertainties of a false and fickle World: If
Poverty should become his Lot, he is prepared for it; he knows there is no
Stability in this World's Good, and therefore values it accordingly, and
remembers that he has a much greater Treasure in a better Place, of which none
can deprive him, and which he shall enjoy to Eternity, and upon that fixes his
Affections, and longs for the Happy Time when he shall take Possession of it.
While he has a plentiful Fortune, he acts like a good Steward of his great
Lord, and enjoys the Comforts of it by letting those share with him that want a
Supply, and thanks God that he is so blessed, as to give rather than receive;
and in every respect makes the best use he can of what he has, to the
Advancement of the Glory of his great Patron, and the Good of his Brethren; and
then can step securely, though Dangers and Misfortunes threaten, if God thinks
fit to divert them, and continue to him what he has, he knows he can do it; if
not, he knows that all will end for the best at last, and so, cheerfully
resigns what God before had lent him: he is satisfied that Happiness does not
consist in Abundance, and that a good Conscience is a continual Feast, and
therefore, his main Endeavor is to preserve a good Conscience, a Soul clear
and unspotted, and with that coarse Fare will relish well, and a homely Garment
sit easy upon him; and such Necessaries as these, he that feeds the Ravens;
and clothes the Lillies, will surely provide for him. And he that is thus
disposed, must needs be in perpetual Tranquillity and Peace; and very wise
consequently in taking that Course, which helps him to those inestimable
Blessings.

As for the Wisdom of disposing of abundance (when God thinks fit to bless a
Man with it) according to the Direction of Religion in the Relief of the Poor
and Needy; there needs nothing more to recommend it to Christians, than for
them to read the latter Part of Mat. 25. where we are informed that the
Expresses of Men's Charity shall at the great Day of Judgment be particularly
inquired into, and the Charitable rewarded infinitely with Glory and Happiness
in Heaven; and the Uncharitable doomed as accursed Persons to depart from God
the Fountain of Bliss, into Everlasting Torments, prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. And, if so to direct our Steps in this World, as to avoid the
Miseries of Hell, and arrive at the unspeakable Happy Kingdom of Heaven, be the
greatest Wisdom, then is it the greatest Wisdom, by a Charitable Disposal of
Men's Abundance to the Poor, to make Provision against that great Day of final
Retribution, when Charity shall be so particularly enquired into, and so highly
rewarded.

There remains nothing now to be done, but to urge what has been said upon Men's
Practice. We have seen in this Discourse how great Folly it is eagerly to desire
and pursue Abundance of Wealth, that it is very uncertain whether ever such
Desire shall be gratified or no, and that there is no Satisfaction in the
greatest Riches when possessed, and that they are often very suddenly lost
again, and then the Grief for being deprived of them will fill the Soul with
abundantly greater Trouble than the Enjoyment of them did with Pleasure; and we
have seen, as the Folly, so the Vileness of Covetousness, how much a Christian
is debased by thus grovelling on the Earth, and placing his Happiness in what is
so much beneath him, and neglecting that which is the only proper Object of his
Affections, and is of infinitely greater Value than all the Riches of Ten
Thousand Worlds; we have seen likewise the ill Consequences of Covetousness,
what a great Hindrance it is to, nay, Destroyer of Religion, how it indisposes
a Man for the Service of God, and endangers, more than any thing, his steady
Adherence to the Truth; we have been directed to much better Ways of disposing
our Abundance when we are blessed with it, than either in hoarding it up, or
wasting it in Luxury and Excess; namely, in relieving the Necessities of the
Poor, which will entitle us to the Reward of a good and faithful Steward, even
the Eternal Joy of our dear Lord; and we have seen the great Wisdom of a
contented Mind, the Blessedness of not overvaluing Riches, and the great
Advantage that will be made by the Charitable Disposal of them, when Christ
shall come to take Account of Men's Works at the great Day of Recompense.
Wherefore, to conclude all in the excellent Exhortation of our Lord immediately
after my Text; let none of us take Anxious and Perplexing Thought for our Life,
what we shall eat; nor for the Body, what we shall put on, for the Life is more
than Meat, and the Body than Raiment, and he that gave the Greater, will, no
Question, provide the Lesser. Let us consider the Ravens, for they neither sow
nor reap, have neither Storehouse nor Barn, and God feeds them; how much
better are we than the Fowls: And which of us by taking thought, can add one
Cubit unto his Stature? If we then be not able to do what is least, why take we
thought for the rest? Let us consider the Lillies, how they grow, they toil
not, they spin not, and yet, Solomon in all his Glory, was not arrayed like one
of these. If then, God so cloth the Grass, which to Day is, and to Morrow is
cast into the Oven, how much more will he cloth us, who very much betray our
little Faith in doubting it?

Wherefore, let us not immoderately seek what we shall eat, or what we shall
drink, or wherewithal be clothed, neither be of doubtful, or anxious and too
careful Mind, for our Father knows that we have need of all these things; but
seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and all these things
shall be added unto us, in such a Proportion as Infinite Wisdom and Goodness
knows to be best for us. Remembering, that as the Covetous Rich Fool in this
Parable, that trusted in his Riches, and proposed to himself much Happiness
from a Luxurious Enjoyment of them, was suddenly snatched from them to give
Account of his Stewardship; so shall it be with every one that lays up
Treasure for him. self, and is not rich toward God.

The PRAYER.
OEternal God, the great Creator and Governor of all things, and whose Wisdom
and Goodness in all the Disposals of thy Providence is Infinite; grant me the
Wisdom to be contented with my present Lot, and satisfied with a moderate
Proportion of this World's Good, and not to be too careful and solicitous in my
Pursuit, even of that. For ever preserve me, I entreat thee, from the great
Folly and Sin of Covetousness, and may I be so thoroughly convinced of the
Uncertainty of Riches, both in the getting and the keeping, how unsatisfying
they are when possessed, and the many Snares and Temptations that attend them;
as always to preserve a great Indifferency to them, and make it my chief
Endeavor to attain the real Happiness of a contented Spirit. Grant that I may
be more and more sensible how vile a thing it is to place my Felicity in what
is so much beneath me as these Perishing Riches are, and which instead of
improving me in what is really valuable, tend to betray me into many vile and
hurtful Lusts, retard my Progress in Religion which is the one thing necessary,
and too often betray into Apostasy from thy Truth. O grant that I may act like
a Man, and a Christian, and make it my chief Aim to be rich toward thee my
God, and to lay up a Treasure in Heaven; and if through thy Bountiful Goodness,
Riches here increase, give me grace, I entreat thee, not to set my Heart upon
them, but to dispose of them so as may most conduce to thy Glory, and the Good
of the Community; that making Friends with the Mammon of Unrighteousness
according to thy Blessed Will, when these fading Riches shall fail, and be left
behind me, my Charity may procure for me a Reception into these Everlasting
Habitations, where I shall have a glorious Inheritance that fades not away;
where neither Rust nor Moth does corrupt, and where Thieves break not through
and steal, and where my Happiness shall be ineffable, fully satisfying and
Eternal. Amen. Blessed God, Amen, Amen.

PARABLE X. Of the Barren Fig Tree.
Luke xiii. 6, 7, 8, 9. A certain Man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard,
and came and sought Fruit thereon, and found none.

Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard, Behold these Three Years, I come
seeking Fruit on this Fig Tree, and find none; cut it down, why cumbereth it
the Ground?

And he answering, said unto him, Lord let it alone this Year also, till I
shall dig about it and dung it:

And if it bear Fruit well: And if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.


THIS Parable was spoken upon the News that was brought to our Lord of the sad
Fate of some Factious Galileans, whom Pilate the Roman Governor had set upon
and destroyed, mingling their Blood with the Sacrifices they were offering. To
this, our Lord first made this Answer; Suppose ye that those Galileans were
Sinners above all the Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you
nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Or those Eighteen,
upon whom the Tower in Siloam fell and slew them (another sad Accident that had
lately happened) think ye that they were Sinners above all that dwelt in
Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.
And then he added this Parable, that he might further enforce the Necessity of
a speedy Repentance and Amendment of Life in all Men; in order to their
escaping the Just Judgment of God in this World, and the Eternal Punishments of
Sin in the next.

From what our Lord said to his Disciples upon the sad Fate of the Galileans,
and those slain by the Tower in Siloam, think ye that they were Sinners above
all, etc. we may, before we proceed to consider the Parable, learn this short,
but excellent Lesson; namely, That when sudden ill Accidents befall our
Neighbors, we do not presently make Conclusion, as is too often done,
(especially where there has been any Enmity or Difference between the Parties)
that God has met with them by his Judgments for some Extraordinary Wickedness
of theirs, and pronounce them worse Men than our selves, or others that escape,
because they suffer such things; for this is a very rash and uncharitable
Sentence, and may be far from Truth: But rather, by God's Severity upon others,
be inclined to reflect upon our selves, and humble our selves before him for
our own Iniquities; and entirely resolve to forsake every Evil Way, lest we
likewise fall under the like Expresses of his Vengeance in this World, or of
infinitely worse in that which is to come.

In the Parable it self, is represented God's Method of Proceeding with Sinners
now under the Gospel from first to last; and it is this.

First, He plants them in his Vineyard, the Church of Christ; that there, by
the good Cultivating of the Ministers of his Kingdom, and the refreshing
Influences of his Blessed Spirit upon their Souls, they may become Fruitful of
such good Works, as may fit and prepare them for the Enjoyments of his Heavenly
Kingdom; to which in due season, they are to be transplanted. After they are
thus placed in his Vineyard, and Cultivated by the Sermons of the Gospel, he
looks for a proportionable Fruitfulness from them; and that after all his Care
and Goodness to them, they would for their Part make him a due Return of the
Fruits of Evangelical Righteousness: As, when a Tree is removed from a Poorer
to a Richer Soil, and much Care and Husbandry used about it, it is expected it
should grow and flourish accordingly, and bring forth more and better Fruit.
After God has, with much Patience and Forbearance, yearly sought for Fruit from
them, and is as often disappointed; his Wisdom and his Justice prompt him to
rid his Vineyard of the Encumbrance of those Unprofitable Trees, to remove from
the Society of his Faithful Disciples, those that are a Trouble and a Scandal
to them; and as Barren Trees are laid aside to be burnt, so to consign them to
those everlasting Burnings prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But, though
in Justice he purposes the Destruction of the Unfruitful, yet his infinite
Mercy, through the Intercession of the Compassionate Jesus (the Dresser of this
his Vineyard, the Head and Governor of the Christian Church) inclines him to a
still farther Forbearance till they shall be cultivated and manured afresh, by
the again repeated Instructions and Exhortations of his Servants the Ministers
of the Gospel, and the reiterated Motions of the Blessed Spirit of Life and
Holiness. And then, if they bear Fruit well, Happy will it be for them; but if
not, after that he will cut them down, and utterly destroy them. Of each of
these Particulars we shall now discourse in their Order.

The first is, God's wondrous Care and Tenderness of Sinners in Planting them
in his Vineyard, as the Parable expresses it; that is, receiving them into the
Church of Christ, where they are cultivated by the Ministers of his Kingdom,
and their Souls watered with gentle Showers from Above, the blessed Influences
of the Holy Spirit, that they may Flourish and become Fruitful of such good
Works as may prepare them for the Felicities of Heaven, to which in due time
they shall be Transplanted.

Before the Coming of our Savior, the Jewish Church was God's Vineyard, his
peculiar Enclosure, and the Subject of his more immediate Care and Government;
and all but the Seed of Jacob were excluded as wild uncultivated Trees, and
left to Themselves in the Wilderness of the World: For so, in a spiritual
Sense, was all but the Land of Jewry, the Lot of their Inheritance. Afterward,
when the Fullness of Time was come, that God would take Pity upon the whole
Race of Adam, and receive all Mankind to his Favor; he then enlarged that his
Vineyard, and gave a Free Admittance to all that would submit to the Culture
and Government of his Eternal Son; whom he sent to break down the former
Enclosure, and make it more capacious, even as large as the World it self, and
committed it to his Management, made him the great Dresser of this Vineyard,
the Head and Governor of this Universal Church; that through his excellent
Directions, and the Care and Industry of his Servants, and the Decrees from
Above of his Divine Grace and Assistance: And above all, through the wondrous
Efficacy of his Precious Blood, with which he plentifully enriched this his new
Plantation, it might thrive and flourish, and bring forth Fruit meet for him by
whom it was dressed, even the Fruits of the Spirit, and such as are meet for
Repentance, such as may advance the Glory of God by the Salvation of
innumerable Souls, that none made after his Image might perish, but all come to
Everlasting Life.

God's Vineyard then being thus enlarged, and his Church now no longer confined
to a Corner of the World, but by the Coming of Christ made Universal, that all
men might come to the Knowledge of the Truth; Man is again, as 'twere, seated
in Paradise, and reconciled to God: It Is again put into his Power to continue
in his Makers Favor, and after a Happy Life in this World, to be transplanted
into that Heavenly Country, where is the Residence of the Divine Majesty, and
Rivers of ineffable Pleasures which flow for evermore. As through the
Disobedience of the first Adam Mankind was driven out of Paradise, and doomed
to Live and Labor amongst Briars and Thorns, as under the Displeasure of his
Creator, and then to Dye and Return to his Dust; so through the Obedience of
the second Adam, even to the Death of the Cross, through the Merits of his
Blood, and the Atonement of his Sacrifice, all that sad Sentence and
Condemnation is, in a spiritual Sense, reversed, and we are again planted in
the Vineyard and Garden of God, recalled from the Portion of Thorns and Briars,
and restored to the Favor of our Creator, and at length to change this
Corruptible for Incorruptible, this Dishonor and Weakness for Glory and Power,
this Natural for a Spiritual Body, this Mortal Life for Immortality; and by
this means is brought to pass the Saying that is written, 1 Cor. 15.
Death is swallowed up in Victory.

O Blessed Alteration! O happy Change of Misery and Shame for Happiness and
Glory! O the Miraculous Love and Goodness of God to Mankind, in thus
commiserating our deplorable Condition, and delivering us from the Power of
Darkness, and translating us into the Kingdom of his Dear Son, and making us
meet to be Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light! Happy are they
who have heard of these Glad Tidings, and are planted in this Spiritual
Vineyard, and under the Care and Cultivation of the great Dresser of it Christ
Jesus, who have such great Helps and Assistances to bring forth fruit unto
Holiness, and consequently such full Assurance of Hope, Heb. 6.11.
that the End will be Everlasting Life.

Let Them give Thanks from the Bottom of their Hearts, whom the Lord has thus
Redeemed, and delivered from the Hand of the Infernal Enemy, and be telling of
his Salvation from Day to Day: And let us of these Happy Islands, in the first
place, magnify him for this his Infinite Goodness; for none have had a greater
share of it than we, none better Planted nor better Cultivated, than the
Members of this Church of England; and (which does much advance the Blessing)
none were in a more sad and deplorable Condition than the Inhabitants of these
Islands before the Preaching of the Gospel. And indeed, what the Prophet Isaiah
says of God's dealing with the Jewish Church, which was then his Vineyard, Isa.
5.4.
may be very truly said of his gracious Dealing with this our Church, What
could have been done more to his Vineyard that he has not done in it? He has
planted it in a very fruitful Hill, and fenced it by his Providence from the
Incursions of its Enemies, and gathered out the Stones thereof, purged it from
scandalous Heresies and Superstitions, which are Stones of Stumbling and Rocks
of Offense, and built a Tower in the midst of it, guarded it with the Civil
Power, making Kings its Nursing Fathers, and Queens its Nursing Mothers, and
made a Wine Press in it, furnished it with all Necessaries of Holy Instruction,
and the Service of an Excellent Ministry, to enforce the great Truths of
Religion, and lay all the Beauties and Excellencies of it before the People.
And now, what could have been done more for this Church than the Lord has
already done for it? And what an inestimable Happiness is it that we enjoy, who
were Born in this Church, early Consecrated to God in Baptism, and thereby
planted in this Vineyard, and sed with the sincere and unmixed Milk of the
Word, plainly and without Reserve, or the cunning Craftiness of Men that lie in
wait to deceive: We are invited to a Frequent and Entire Reception of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, that great Conveyance of the Divine Grace and
Aid, and have as many, and as moving Exhortations to live up to our Holy
Profession, as are enjoyed by any Part of the Christian World. What an
inestimable Happiness is this! And what great Reason have we, as to bless God
for this his unspeakable Goodness to us, so to bring forth the Fruits of
Righteousness in great Abundance? It Is but Just and Right that we should do it,
and God expects it from All that are Planted in his Vineyard, much more from
such as have had extraordinary Care and Cultivation bestowed upon them, as we
have had. For so, in the

Second Place, we find in this Parable, that the Owner of the Vineyard came to
the Fig Tree he had planted in it, expecting Fruit from it.

The Fruit that God expects from Christians that have enjoyed the Means of
Grace and spiritual Improvement, is that which is called Fruit meet for
Repentance, and the Fruits of the Spirit. Fruits meet for Repentance, are the
Advances to a New and Spiritual Life, such as shall demonstrate a sincere
Renovation and Change of Mind, a Turning from a Course of Rebellion against
God, and Hatred of him, to entire Obedience to him, and hearty Love. But he
that to the Profession of Christianity adds Debauchery of Manners, and instead
of bringing forth the Fruits of the Spirit, such as Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-Suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, and such
like; Drudges in the Works of the Flesh, such as Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings, Murders,
Drunkenness, and such like; such Men as these are, as St. Jude expresses it,
Trees, Jude 12.
whose Fruit withers, without Fruit, twice dead, or dead a second Time after
they were enlivened by the Grace of Christ, and planted in his Vineyard, where
they might have lived and flourished and brought forth much Fruit, well
pleasing unto God; and by this their Barrenness, are as 'twere plucked up by
the Roots, and to whom is reserved the Blackness of Darkness for ever, and
whose End is to be burned.

When our Lord, as he was returning from Bethany to Jerusalem, saw a Fig Tree
at a Distance, very promising and full of Leaves, and went to it, expecting to
find Fruit upon it; but finding nothing thereon but Leaves only, cursed it and
said unto it, let no Fruit grow on thee henceforward for ever; he plainly
enough told the World, that the Profession of Christianity must always be
attended with the Fruits of Piety, that he expects to find it so, and will
severely punish where he finds it otherwise. The Leaves of a Fig Tree are broad
and strong, and hang thick, and are of a lovely Color, and therefore very apt
to represent the Profession of Christianity, which makes the fairest Appearance
of any Religion that was ever taught the World, and the Title of a Christian
does include all that can be supposed excellent and good in a Man. But, as the
Fig Tree, besides flourishing Leaves, bears a Delicious Fruit, and has always
upon it Fruit coming to Maturity; so Christianity must not be all Show and
Profession, but the Fruits of Holiness must appear as well as the Leaves of
Fair Speeches, and the outward Performance of some of the more Customary and
Public Duties of it; and, as is observed in the Fig Tree, there must always be
some Fruit growing to Ripeness and Perfection: God expects to find it so, and
where he is disappointed, the Fate of the Barren Fig Tree will be their Portion.

We are all of us too apt with our first Parents, to cover our Spiritual
Nakedness with Fig Leaves, and by tacking together a few External Observances
of Religion, think to hide our Shame, and pass for good Servants and Disciples
of the Lord Jesus: But this is too thin a covering to conceal our Vileness from
his Eye, to whom all things lie naked and open, and who knows the very Secrets
of the Heart. He that is indeed a Follower of Christ, and loves him in
Sincerity, must walk as he walked, imitating his Example, and treading in his
Blessed Steps, departing from all Iniquity, denying himself and all his vile
Lusts and Affections, obeying cheerfully the Holy Commands of his great Lord,
and giving all diligence to add to his Faith Virtue, and to Virtue Knowledge,
and to Knowledge Temperance, and to Temperance Patience and to Patience
Godliness, and to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly Kindness
Charity; 2 Per. 1.5, 6, 7, 8.
for if these things be in us and abound, they make us that we shall be neither
Barren nor Unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; And he only
that has thus his Fruit unto Holiness, shall in the End attain Everlasting Life.

It Is Fruit then, God expects from Christians, not Leaves; not the Form of
Godliness, but the Power of it; not to be called Lord, Lord, but to have his
Commands Obeyed. But, since God is infinitely full already, and can receive no
Addition to his Inexhaustible Store; since our Goodness extends not to him,
neither is it any Profit to him that we make our Way perfect: It will not be
amiss to enquire upon what Accounts God so strictly and indispensibly requires
that we should be Fruitful? And it is upon our own Account that we might be
happy in this World, and made capable of enjoying the Glories and Felicities of
the Kingdom of Heaven.

First, God expects the Fruits of Righteousness from all that name the Name of
Jesus, and are planted in his Vineyard, that they may be happy in this World.

It Is the great Design of our good God to make his Creatures happy; and because
we are placed in this World to fit and prepare our selves for Heaven, and are
to spend a Life here below; he has given us a Rule, which, if we walk by, we
shall be happy here as well as in the world above; and which, if we disregard
and deviate from, a double Misery will be our Portion. And in this God deals
with us as a wise and good Parent with his Children; he keeps them close to
what will conduce to their Happiness, though he himself receives no other
Benefit by it, than the Hope of seeing his Off spring happy.

It Is for this Reason that our Savior, the great Dresser of God's Vineyard,
and his Servants, the Apostles, so often press the Observance of such Rules as
have chiefly Relation to the Comfortable Living in this World; as with Relation
to others, Mercifulness, Charity, Meekness, Forbearance, and Forgiveness of
Injuries, Peaceableness, Compassion and Pity, together with exact Justice and
Honesty; without which there would be be no Comfort of Society; and Men would
be like so many Wild Beasts, preying upon and devouring one another. And with
Relation to our selves, we are taught Temperance, and Sobriety, and Chastity,
and Moderation in all things, Contentment of Mind, Patience, and the like;
without which, neither a Man's Mind or Body would be at Ease, nor taste any
Comfort and Happiness in Life. Indeed, God has been pleased to annex the
Rewards of Heaven to the sincere and constant Practice of these Virtues, as a
further Encouragement to Men cheerfully and diligently to set about them; but
it is the Happiness of this World that they have a direct Influence upon, and
are therefore commanded, and therefore encouraged, that much Sin and Misery
might be prevented, and Men might be happy in this lower World.

For, as for the contrary Vices, as Cruelty and Unmercifulness, Rage and
Intemperate Anger, Uncharitableness and Revenge, Strife and Envy, Injustice and
Oppression, and the like; these would make a Hell upon Earth, and quite destroy
Society and all the Comforts of it, and make the World like a Desert, and force
Men to the Shelter of Rocks and Mountains, and Dens and Caves of the Earth: And
wherever they should go, if Intemperance and ungoverned Lust, and Inordinate
Desire and Use of the Gratifications of Sense, Discontent and Anxiety of Mind,
Impatience, and the like, should follow them; their Misery would be endless,
and Happiness an utter Stranger to them.

And therefore, as much as the Happiness of Life is to be valued, so much are
we bound to praise and adore the Infinite and Disinteressed Goodness of God,
who has given us such Rules of Living as if observed, will procure that
Happiness; and who besides, that we may not fail to observe them, has over and
above proposed to us ineffably Glorious Rewards in Heaven if we do, and
threatened as great a Misery in Hell if we do not. That is, he has done all that
is possible to be done to make a free Agent happy in the World that now is, as
well as that which is to come; and therefore it is highly reasonable that we
give all possible Praise and Thanksgiving to that his Infinite Goodness, and
use all possible Diligence to cooperate with his Gracious Intentions for our
Good; for it is our Happiness that will be promoted by it, not his. And this is
the first Reason why God so indispensibly requires of us the Fruits of
Righteousness, because it is impossible we should be happy even in this World
without them.

A second Reason of this is, because otherwise it is impossible we should be
happy in the next Life.

The Happiness of the next Life, we are well assured, consists in an intimate
Vision and Enjoyment of God; who is the Fountain of Excellency and Perfection,
and consequently of Bliss; and God being an infinitely Pure and Holy Being; and
it being necessary to Enjoyment, that there should be a Correspondence and
Agreeableness between the Object and the Faculty; no Soul but what is Pure and
Holy, is capable of enjoying a Pure and Holy God.

The Soul therefore of every Man, being, since the Fall of Adam, stained and
polluted, full of vile Affections and Lusts, such as render it incapable of so
pure and Divine a Happiness; it is necessary that it should be refined and
purified, and have Heavenly Affections and Desires planted in the Room of those
Vile and Brutish ones, and recover the Divine Likeness which has been so
shamefully defaced, that so at length, by the Actual Exercise of the Divine
Life here, we may become, in some Measure, capable of enjoying the Celestial
Happiness that flows from the Contemplation and Love of the Supreme Good. Or,
in the Words of St. John, that being like him in this State of Probation, we
may be prepared to see see him as he is, in the Regions of Glory.

And this, an Observance of the Precepts of our Holy Religion will effect; and
they were therefore given that they might effect it. We are exhorted to be poor
in Spirit, humble and resigned to the Will of God, that so we may be conducted
safely to the Kingdom of Heaven; to hunger and thirst after Righteousness, that
we may be filled with Grace here, and Glory hereafter; to mourn for our former
Vileness, and Degeneracy, and Estrangement from God, and flee from all
Wickedness, and sincerely endeavor a Reformation, that so we may be comforted
in the Day of Retribution, and, as good and faithful Servants, be received into
the Joy of our Lord. We are urged to Purity of Heart that we may see God, to be
holy as he is holy, perfect as he is perfect, pure as he is pure, because he
hates Iniquity, and into his Presence no unclean thing can enter, and without
Holiness no Man can see the Lord. So that the Reason why God requires that we
should bring forth Fruit unto Holiness, is, that the end may be everlasting
Life. These are the Reasons why God so strictly and indispensibly requires that
we should be fruitful of good Works, after he has planted us in his Vineyard,
and cultivated us by his Blessed Son, and his Servants the Apostles, and their
Successors, the Bishops, and other Inferior Ministers of his Kingdom. O that
Men would therefore praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders
that he does for the Children of Men! Psalm. 107.8.

The third thing this Parable informs us of, is God's Long-Suffering toward
Sinners, and that, though he does indeed expect the Fruits of Righteousness
from those that are planted in his Spiritual Vineyard, the Christian Church,
yet he expects it with much Patience and Forbearance; and is not so extremely
rigid as to punish for the first Disappointment he meets with, but waits still
further to see if Time will work Amendment: And this is expressed in the
Parable, by the Lord of the Vineyard, his coming three Years seeking Fruit on
his Fig. Tree, and still finding none.

Of this Long-Suffering and Forbearance of God, every Sinner that is yet alive
is an Argument. Which of the best of us have not been less fruitful than we
ought to have been, and then God may with the greatest Reason expect from us,
considering the Means of Improvement that we have enjoyed; and this not only
for three Years, but for three many times repeated? How many have been wholly
unfruitful, and that for Scores of Years, notwithstanding all the Care and
Cultivation of God's Ministers; and have been all the while in the Service of
the great Adversary of God and Man, doing Despite to the Holy Spirit, Slaves
to their vile Passions and Lusts, without Thought of Religion, and without God
in the World: And yet, through God's Infinite Mercy and Long-Suffering, are
reprieved from Destruction, and still in Possibility of Salvation, upon their
entire Repentance, and bringing forth Fruits meet for it for the Future! As
many Years as a Sinner has lived since he could discern between Good and Evil,
so long has God expected Fruit from him, and so often been disappointed, and so
long patiently forborne him; and considering how hateful Sin is to God, how
highly provoking it is for his Creatures that have received their Being from
him, and all the Blessings they have since enjoyed; nay, for whom his only Son
in wondrous Love, shed his most Precious Blood, that he might purchase to
himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works; and who have been so long
planted in his Vineyard, and dressed with the greatest Public Care and
Tenderness, so that nothing on God's Side is wanting to their Happiness;
considering how provoking it is for Creatures, under such strong Obligations, to
serve and obey him to the utmost of their Powers, obstinately and continually
for so many Years to rebel against him: It Is indeed a Miracle of Divine
Forbearance that any wilsul Sinner is on this Side Hell. But, to our
unspeakable Comfort, and our unspeakable Shame too, so it is; and still this is
the Voice of the Father of Compassions, Turn ye, turn ye, from your evil Ways,
for why will ye die O House of Israel!

It Is indeed of the Lord's Mercies only that we are not consumed, and because
his Compassions fail not, but are new every Morning; but, though to him belong
Mercies and Forgivenesses, yet to us nothing but Shame and Confusion of Face;
who have turned our Backs so long upon such Infinite Long-Suffering and
Forbearance, and have resus'd to be entreated to our Happiness. But let us not
be deceived, God's Spirit will not always in this Manner strive with us; and he
that still despises the Riches of this his Goodness, Romans 2.4, 5, 8.
and is not by it led to Repentance, but after his Hardness and Impenitent
Heart, treasureth up to himself Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation
of the Righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every Man according to his
Deeds: Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, shall at length (as
slowly as it moves) certainly overtake him, and crush him into Ruin.

For so, in the next Place we are told in this Parable, That when the Lord of
the Vineyard had long expected Fruit from his Fig Tree, and still found none;
he said, Cut it down, why cumbereth it the Ground?

And indeed, God's Forbearance and Long-Suffering of Sinners, is so far from
being an Encouragement to them to go on still in their Wickedness; that, if
they rightly consider it, it is a prevailing Motive to a speedy and sincere
Repentance. For Forbearance does imply a preceding Guilt and Obnoxiousness to
Punishment; which, though respited for a Time, is not wholly remitted; but if
it be ineffectual to the Reformation of the Sinner, will be at length poured
down in full Measure upon his Head. And therefore, when a wicked Man reflects
upon his evil Course of Life, and withal sees himself as yet forborne by the
offended Majesty of Heaven, and that he lives as securely as better Men; if his
Lusts have not quite blinded his Reason, he must needs conclude that this
Forbearance of so Just and Holy a God, who infinitely hates Iniquity, and is
resolved to punish it, and has declared that he will not finally spare the
guilty; is only in order to his Amendment, that so he may have Time to review
the Actions of his past Life, and attend to the Miserable Consequences of them,
and so be inclined to return to that Obedience to God which hitherto he has so
shamefully neglected; because, if he still persists in his Rebellion against
his Maker, and is Incorrigible, Mercy shall be turned into Judgment,
Destruction shall overtake him like an armed Man, and he shall not escape.

The Divine Justice in this Case may be compared to the Course of a River; it
may be damm'd up and its Progress hindered for a Time; but unless its Stream be
diverted some other Way, 'twill swell till at last it bear down the Obstacle,
and rush on with greater Violence for being interrupted in its Way: So here,
the great Benignity and Compassion of God's Nature may sometimes interpose
between the Stroke of Justice, and the wretched Offender, to see if he will
repent and do no more wickedly, that so the Divine Nemesis may steer another
Course; but if all this prove at length to no Purpose, if the Man refuse to
return and seek after God, he will whet his Sword and make ready his Arrows
against the Face of him, Vengeance shall then have its free Course, and
Torrents of God's enflamed Anger shall overwhelm his Soul for ever. There are
many Places in Scripture to this Purpose, and which are so obvious to every
Attentive Reader, that they need not be here recited: And truly, irreclaimable
Sinners are so great a Dishonor to God, and Disparagement to Religion, and
like a Contagious Pest to Society, that they deserve to be removed to a Place
more proper for them, the Habitations of the Devil and his Angels.

But still the Compassionate Jesus is our Intercessor; and when, after God's
long abused Forbearance Justice is ready to strike, he pleads in Virtue of his
Blood for a still longer Reprieve: Hoping that at length the Sinner may be
awakened by the Sermons of the Gospel, and the inward Motions and Excitations
of the Spirit of Life and Holiness, and see and fear his Danger, and return by
Repentance, and do no more wickedly. For so in the next Place it is said in the
Parable, that when the Lord of the Vineyard gave Order that the Barren Fig Tree
should be cut down, the Dresser of the Vineyard, by whom our Savior is
represented, answering, said unto him, let it alone this Year also, till I
shall dig about it and dung it.

Christ is our merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God,
Heb. 2.17, 18.
to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People, for he knows our
Infirmities, and in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able
also to succor those that are tempted, and ever lives to make Intercession
for us. Heb. 7.25.
He moves for a still longer Respite, and promises to use new Methods that we
may become fruitful of such good Works, as will be well pleasing in his
Father's Sight, and accordingly cultivates and manures our Souls with repeated
Exhortations to Repentance, presses the Discourses of his Ministers still more
home upon Men's Consciences, and gives new Aids and Assistances of his Blessed
Spirit; provides new Happy Circumstances by his Providence for our Good, such
as a Faithful Instructor, Good Conversation and Example, Pious Books and
Discourses which may warm and enliven a Sense of Religion in the Soul, and
awaken Attention, and soften the Heart of Stone, and render it penetrable by
the Arguments of the Gospel, and receptive of the Blessed Impressions of the
Spirit of God: That, as loosening the Mould about the Roots of a Tree, and
cherishing it with the kindly Warmth of Dung, is very conducive to the
spreading of its Fibers, and making it flourish and grow fruitful; so, these
gracious Methods of the great Dresser of God's spiritual Vinevard, Christ
Jesus, may so influence the Souls of Christians, as to make them bear much
Fruit, to the Glory of God, and their own everlasting Salvation.

This is the last Course that can be taken for a Sinner's Safety; and if this
will not prevail with him to take care of his Happiness, there is no longer
Hope. It Is like the Intercession of a Favorite for a Condemned Criminal, upon
Condition of his better Conversation for the future; but if he again returns to
his old vile Courses, his Friends then abandon him, as one that deserves to
perish. And so here in the Parable, Christ the Beloved Son of God intercedes
for a miserable Sinner ready for Destruction, and begs a Reprieve for him, to
see if Time and farther Care, will cure his Wickedness; but if this proves
ineffectual, there remains nothing but a fearful Expectation of Judgment and
fiery Indignation. His Intercessor will then give him over for Desperate, and
suffer Justice to take its Course; for so said the Dresser of the Vineyard to
his Lord, If after I have dug about it, and dung'd it, it bear fruit well;
but if not, then after that thou shall cut it down.

And this, in the last Place, represents to us the deplorable Condition of
such, as after all the Methods of Grace for their Reformation, are still
hardened in their Wickedness; Christ will no more appear in their Behalf, no
more Thought shall be taken for their Safety, but their Compassionate
Intercessor shall then become their stern and inexorable Judge.

And, when the dreadful Day of Doom shall come, and the miserable Wretches
appear before his Throne, to receive the just Recompense of their obstinate
Impieties; then shall That Jesus who once so earnestly pleaded with God in
their Behalf, pronounce the Dreadful Sentence, Depart from me ye Cursed into
Everlasting Fire. Depart from me your Savior, and once compassionate Mediator
between God and You; Be from henceforch and for ever deprived of all Hope of
Redemption and Reinstatement into the Favor of my Father; Be banished for ever
from all Intercourse with Heaven, without any Intercessor, any propitiatory
Sacrifice, any Advocate to plead their Cause, and without any Place for
Repentance to Eternal Ages: Depart to the Regions of Endless Horror and
Despair, in the Society of the Devil and his Angels. And this is but the just
Demerit of your Obstinate Wickedness, who despised the Goodness of God that
should have led you to Repentance.

This is the sad End of Irreclaimable Sinners; this is the Punishment of an
unfruitful Profession of Christianity: Wherefore, let those consider this that
forget God, before it be too late, lest he pluck them away, and there be none
to deliver them; Let them no longer turn the Grace and Forbearance of God into
Lasciviousness, but work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling. For God
is just as well as merciful; and though slow to Wrath, and of great Goodness,
repenting him of the Evil, yet he will by no means clear the obstinately
guilty, but to such is a Consuming Fire.

The PRAYER.
I.
O Merciful God, who have planted me in the Vineyard of thy dear Son, the
Christian Church; and by the Culture of thy Ministers, and the enlivening
Influences of thy Blessed Spirit, have taken tender Care of my Growth, and that
I thrive and flourish in all spiritual Excellencies till I be fit to be
transplanted to thy Heavenly Paradise; I bless thy infinite Goodness for the
Enlargement of this thy Vineyard, so as to extend even to us, though so remote
from thy first Plantation; and for those extraordinary Helps we of this Church
have, in order to our Increase in all the Fruits of the Spirit: And earnestly
beg, that we may not produce Leaves only, the mock Appearances of Christian
Virtue, but the Fruit of a sincere Religion, in all the Instances of Holy
Conversation.

II.
I acknowledge, with Admiration at thy infinite Love to Mankind, that it is Our
Happiness thou respectest, in thus indispensibly requiring Fruit of us, not any
Acquisition to thy self, who art infinitely full already, and the overflowing
Fountain of all possible Good: Thou command that our Fruit should be unto
Holiness, because we shall otherwise be incapable of the blessed End of
Everlasting Life, and spend our Days in Misery in this Lower World. O Lord, as
is thy Majesty, so is thy Mercy! O make me duly sensible of thy tender Care of
my Happiness, and may it never, through my wretched Obstinacy, be in vain! And
in vain it would be, were not thy long-suffering wonderful. With what amazing
Patience do thou wait to see if at length I shall be Fruitful! How often have
I disappointed thy just Expectations, and yet thou have still forborne me
through thine own Compassions and the Intercession of my dear Redeemer, the
Dresser of thy Vineyard, who has plied me with new Methods of Conversion,
fresh Applications to invigorate my Piety, that at the last I may return thee
acceptable Fruits, and escape the sad Punishment of Barrenness. Thou have done
all, O blessed God, that can be done to secure the Happiness of Rational and
Free Agents: I therefore beg, with all the Earnestness of an awakened Soul,
that thy Goodness, Long-suffering, and Forbearance, may soften my Spirit, and
lead me to Repentance, and melt me into Shame, and Tears of Penitential Sorrow,
for having so long abused the tender Kindness of so good a God. O let not thy
Lenity ever extinguish the Dread of thy Vengeance, which though slow is sure;
and may I seriously consider, that if this thy Mercy is not effectual to my
Reformation, 'twill but add weight to the Eternal Ruin I deserve. May these
Considerations, most gracious God, never depart from my Mind till Fruit be
added to my Leaves, and I experience the Power of True Godliness; which Thing
if thou will grant me, then will I praise thee without ceasing, and magnify
thy Goodness for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.

PARABLE XI. Of the Prodigal Son.
Luke xv. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. And Jesus
said, a certain Man had two Sons:

And the younger of them said to his Father, Father, give me the portion of
Goods that falls to me. And he divided unto them his Living.

And not many days after, the younger Son gathered all together, and took his
Journey into a far Country, and there wasted his Substance in riotous living.

And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty Famine in that Land; and he
began to be in want.

And he went and joined himself to a Citizen of that Country, and he sent him
into his Fields to feed Swine.

And he would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks that the Swine did eat;
and no man gave unto him.

And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired Servants of my Fathers
have Bread enough, and to spare, and I perish with Hunger!

I will arise and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven and before thee,

And am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants.

And he arose, and came to his Father. But when he was yet a great way off, his
Father saw him, and had Compassion, and ran, and fell on his Neck, and kissed
him.

And the Son said unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and in thy
sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son.

But the Father said to his Servants, bring forth the best Robe, and put it on
him, and put a Ring on his Hand, and Shoes on his Feet.

And bring hither the fatted Calf and kill it, and let us eat and be merry.

For this my Son was dead and is alive again; he was lost and is found.


THIS whole Chapter, from the Third Verse to the End, is intended to represent
the great Tenderness and Compassion of God toward Sinners; his great Desire
that they should Repent, and turn from their wicked Courses; and how highly
pleasing to him it is, when they sincerely do so. And this is expressed in
Three Parables; The First, of a Man's seeking diligently a Sheep that he had
lost, and leaving the rest of his Flock till he had found it; and then
rejoicing greatly, and telling his Neighbors the good News, and inviting them
to partake of his Joy. The Second is, of a Woman's having lost a Piece of
Silver, and seeking very carefully till she had found it; and then, in like
manner, rejoicing with her Friends for her good Success. And the Third Parable
is, that of the Prodigal Son: And because they are All to the same purpose,
'twill be sufficient to discourse of One of them only; and the Last being the
most full and comprehensive, I shall consider That.

The Occasion of Our Lord's speaking these Parables, was, The Scribes and
Pharisees finding fault with him for Instructing and Conversing with Publicans
and Sinners; for they looked upon it as very scandalous, and a kind of
Pollution, to have any Familiarity with those worst of Men, as they thought
them, and murmured against our Savior, saying, This Man receives Sinners, and
eats with them, ver. 2. To this Objection of theirs against him, he answers
in the Parables before mentioned, and shows, how unreasonably uncharitable they
were, to think much of his Teaching and Conversing with those, who because the
vilest of Men, had therefore the most Need of his holy Instructions and
excellent Example, that they might be Reformed and Reclaimed from their wicked
Practices. For, as he said elsewhere, the Whole have no need of a Physician,
but those that are Sick; and therefore he came to Seek and to Save those that
were lost, and Not to call the Righteous but Sinners to Repentance. Nay more,
he tells them in the 7th and 10th Verses of this Chapter, that There shall be
more Joy in Heaven, in the Presence of the Angels of God, over One Sinner that
Repents, than over Ninety and Nine Just Persons that need no Repentance; or
such a total Change of Mind as is in a Sinner that breaks off his vile Courses
by Repentance. And farther to explain and enforce this great and most
comfortable Truth, and represent it more lively to their Apprehensions, he
spoke the Parable of the Prodigal Son; and therein, very naturally and
movingly, expresses these Four Things.

First, The great Extravagancy of Wicked Men, when they give themselves up to
the Conduct of their own Wills and Affections, and are weary of the Government
of God their Heavenly Father.

Secondly, The sad Condition such Men quickly reduce themselves to by that
their Extravagancy and loose self-willed Course of Life, or in other Words, the
miserable Consequences of Debauchery and Riot.

Thirdly, The sharp Remorse of Conscience that attends such Courses, the Shame
and Sorrow for them, and the Resolutions of an awakened Sinner to return again
to his Obedience to God. And

Fourthly, The great Tenderness and Compassion of the Father of Spirits to such
as Repent in earnest, and keep their Resolutions; His Readiness to receive them
again to his Favor, and great Joy for their Return, Because they were dead but
are alive again, were lost but are found. Which last Particular is the Reason
of the greater Joy that is in Heaven over one Sinner that Repents, than over
Ninety and Nine Just persons that need no Repentance; and is a very
satisfactory Account of our Lord's so often Conversing with and Instructing
Publicans and Sinners: For they had the most need of that great Physician of
Souls, and consequently their Salvation would cause the greatest Joy in Heaven;
and therefore our Compassionate Savior so industriously endeavored their
Conversion, And, had the Pharisees had any of that Goodness in them they so
much pretended to, they would have rejoiced at our Lord's Charity, and admired
and loved him for it, rather than have murmured at it as they did, and used it
as an Objection against him.

The first Thing expressed in this Parable is the great Extravagancy of Wicked
Men when they give themselves up to the Guidance of their own Wills and
Affections, and are weary of the Government of God their Heavenly Father. It Is
represented here, by a Prodigal Young-Man's leaving his Father and rambling
into a far Country, and there wasting his Substance with Riotous Living.

Impatience of Government and Restraint, and a Desire of being Free, and at
Liberty to follow their own Inclinations and Propensions; is that which first
prompts Men, with the young Prodigal in the Parable, to leave their Heavenly
Father, and get as far from his Government as they can; and when they have laid
aside the Thoughts of Religion, then to take their Swing, and do what seems
good in their own Eyes. And with this fancied Liberty they are at first
mightily pleased, and wish it could be always so; that is, that there were no
God, or no Religion to awe and confine their Desires; but that they might be a
Law unto themselves, and their own Will the sole Measure of their Actions: For
so the Foolish Young Man in the Parable, we read could not be satisfied till he
had his Fortune in his own Hands, to dispose of as he listed; Father, give me
the portion of Goods that belongs to me; and as soon as he had it, he got as
far from his Father as he could, and then, denied not his Soul whatever it
desired, or as the Parable has it, Not many days after, the younger Son
gathered all together, and took his Journey into a far Country, and there
wasted his Substance with Riotous Living.

And just so it is with a Sinner. He finds Religion will oblige him to a
serious and circumspect Conversation, and that if he continues in the Family of
the Faithful, he must live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
World, and deny his Bodily Appetites and Desires, and keep them under
Subjection to the Spirit; and imitate the Excellencies of his Heavenly Father,
be holy, pure, and perfect, as he is, because he abominates Iniquity, and into
his Presence no unclean Thing can enter. But these are hard Sayings; this is a
Servitude that he looks upon as unsufferable; and he has (as he thinks) a much
easier and pleasanter way of Living in his Eye, and which he longs to
experience; and therefore resolves, once for all, to shake off the galling Yoke
of Religion, and get as far from the Government of his divine Parent as he can,
and become his own Master; and then he thinks he shall be happy. So blinded are
Sinners by the Deceitfulness of Sin, as to shun Happiness and embrace Ruin; to
look upon the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God as the greatest Slavery, and
exchange it for the vile Drudgery of Vice; to run from that blessed Being who
is the Fountain of Perfection and Happiness, and insist in the Track that leads
to Eternal Ruin! An unfortunate End is always the Consequence of lawless
Liberty; and as a Ship without a Helm or Governor, instead of arriving at the
Haven, is soon split upon Rocks, or overwhelmed with Quicksands; such is the
Case of a Sinner, that impatient of the gentle Restraints of Religion, is
resolved to quit it, and take his own Course.

But why should Men be so weary of the Government of God, and desire so
earnestly to be at their own Disposal? Is not Religion the most Reasonable
Service? And should it not be the greatest Pleasure to a Rational Creature to
act according to the best Reason. Is not God the wisest, the most powerful, and
the most kind and indulgent Being too? And is it not more eligible to be
governed by infinite Wisdom, and directed in the right Track to Happiness by
infinite Goodness, and shielded from Dangers by infinite Power; than to be
hurried on by the blind Force of brutish and unruly Passions to our Unhappiness
and Destruction, and expose our selves to all the Malice of Hell, by yielding
to the Temptations of the Devil, and forfeiting the Protection of the Almighty?
Certainly, if Men would but consider, instead of desiring with the Prodigal
Son, to be free from the Government of this our Heavenly Father, and to take
their own Course at a Distance from him; they would say with Holy David, One
Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand, I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of Ungodliness; and confess in
the Words of our Church, that his Service is perfect Freedom. And the silly
young Prodigal in the Parable soon found by a costly Experience, the Difference
between living under the mild and prudent Government of his Father, and being
left to the Conduct of his own ill instructed and green Head. But before I
proceed to this Consideration, I shall briefly show how fitly Vice is
represented by Prodigality.

Prodigality, in the Words of this Parable, is wasting a Man's Substance or
Estate, in riotous or profuse and extravagant Living; or without any Regard to
the future, squandring away what he has in excessive Luxury: And therefore a
wicked Man is certainly the greatest Prodigal in the World, because he wastes
and destroys what is of the greatest Value and Esteem, and that in the most
profligate Manner, without any thought of what shall be hereafter, only that he
may gratify his present Appetites and Desires. For,

First, Nothing is a more substantial Good, and more to be prized and carefully
preserved than the Grace of God, or those Blessed Motions and Inspirations of
the Holy Spirit, whereby Men are inwardly inclined to pursue what will make for
their Eternal Happiness, and dissuaded from, and warned to avoid what will
bring them to endless Ruin. Now this Grace of God a Sinner turns into
Lasciviousness; despises and neglects, nay resists the Motions of the Spirit of
Life and Holiness, and closes with the Temptations and Suggestions of the
Spirit of Vileness and Impurity; and does this so continually and with so much
Obstinacy, that he daily wastes that inestimable Treasure, and more and more
grieves that Blessed Spirit, and forces him to withdraw his Influences, till at
length they are quite extinguished in his Soul, and a desperate spiritual
Poverty succeed, an utter Want of that Divine Grace, which they so profligately
wasted when they had it. And no Poverty certainly so miserable as that which
will starve and famish the Soul, and bring it to Eternal Death; and therefore
no Prodigality like that which squanders away that which is the only
Nourishment of the Spiritual Life: Especially if we consider for what it is
that a Sinner is thus prodigal of so great a Treasure, namely, the gratifying a
few Brutish Lusts, and the acting such Vices as bring no true Satisfaction
along with them, but are full of Vexation and Disappointment in this World, and
will at last sink the Soul into the lowest Hell.

Secondly, Time is likewise a very substantial Good, and highly to be valued,
and carefully improved, because it is the only Opportunity we have of securing
our main Interest, the Happiness of Eternity; and when Time shall be at an End,
that is, to every particular Person when Death shall put a Period to this Life,
then comes that Night in which no Man can work, then the Opportunity shall be
for ever at an End, and according as Men have improved or wasted their Time in
this World, so shall their Eternity be happy or miserable in the next. And
therefore, he is indeed very foolishly prodigal, who without any Thought of
hereafter, wastes this precious Treasure, this only Opportunity of making
himself for ever happy, in Vanity and Folly, in pleasing and humouring his
Body, and neglects the Improvement of his Soul; and instead of working out his
Salvation with Fear and trembling, secures to himself Eternal Misery. And this
does every wilful Sinner, when, with the Prodigal in the Parable, he wastes
this his Substance in Luxurious and Riotous Living, and studies nothing but how
to gratify the lower Life, looking no further than this present World for
Happiness, 'till his Opportunity be quite lost, and he is surpised into an
unchangeably Miserable Condition, because when 'twas put into his Hand to make
himself happy if he would, he neglected it, and chose the Track to Ruin.

Thirdly, The Glorious Reversion of our Heavenly Inheritance, is a Treasure
likewise that can never be sufficiently valued; for Eye has not seen nor Ear
heard, neither can it enter into the Heart of Man to conceive, the Felicities
and Glories of it. Now this, we are assured by him that cannot lie, and whose
it is to bestow, shall be the Reward of Virtue and sincere Religion; all this
is laid up for them that love God and keep his Commandments. And therefore, for
a Man that knows all this to be so, prodigally to throw away all Expectation
of, and Title to such a Reversion as this, upon such low and profligate
Accounts as the wallowing in the filthy Pleasures of a Goat or a Swine, or the
heaping up Treasures of Gold and Silver which are as unsatisfying as they are
uncertain and perishing, or for the Sake of a little empty Honor, or the like:
This is the very Highth of profligate Extravagancy, and such, as one would
think, no sensible Man should ever be guilty of.

Upon these and many other, nay, indeed all Accounts, it is very true that a
wicked Man is the greatest Prodigal in the World; for he wastes and throws away
what is of highest Value to a Man; and that, for what is no better than Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit.

And thus much for the first thing expressed in this Parable, viz. the great
Extravagancy of ungodly Men, when they give themselves up to the Guidance of
their own Wills and Affections, and grow weary of the Government of God their
Heavenly Father: Like the Prodigal Son, they waste their most precious
Substance, in riotous and profligate living.

The second thing expressed in this Parable, is the sad Condition such Men soon
reduce themselves to by that their Extravagancy and loose self-willed Course of
Life; or in other Words, the Miserable Consequences of Debauchery and Riot, and
of following so Blind a Guide as Men's unruly Passions and Lusts. For so in the
Parable, when the prodigal Young Man had spent all, there arose a mighty Famine
in that Land, and he began to be in Want, and went and joined himself to a
Citizen of that Country, who sent him into his Fields to feed Swine: And he
would fain have filled his Belly with the Husks that the Swine did eat, but no
Man gave unto him.

The first ill Consequence then of this Prodigality or Lawless Extravagant
Living, is Spiritual Want; or a Scarcity and Famine of the Divine Grace in the
Soul; which is by so much more to be dreaded than a Famine of Provisions for
the Body, as Eternal Misery and Death is more terrible than Temporal. The Grace
of God, is questionless the Nourishment of the Divine Life; and which, if once
withdrawn, will leave the Soul dead in Trespasses and Sins: Now an obstinate
Course of Disobedience to the Divine Will, drives out that Life-giving Power,
and makes the Soul incapable of Vital Union with so pure a Spirit; and, as a
Humane Soul is forced to leave a Body rotten and wasted, and unapt any longer
to entertain it, so this Divine Spirit is thrust out from a corrupted sinful
Soul, And consequently, there must be a famine in that Soul of that Heavenly
Bread which is absolutely necessary to eternal Life; and the Consequence of
that is Eternal Death.

And certainly, no Man that considers what a Dismal Condition that Soul is in,
which is reduced to such Extremity of Spiritual Want as this; how full of
Horror and Despair as doomed to endless Misery, and sealed up to Destruction,
which he sees daily nearer and nearer approaching, and no way to escape, but
(like a Wretch immured between two Walls, there to be starved to Death) in
continual Expectation of her sad End: No Man that considers this, with that
Seriousness he ought, but will be very careful not to waste what is so
necessary to his Spiritual Subsistence; i. e. by no means grieve, or resist, or
quench that Life-giving Spirit, by whom all true Religion lives, and moves, and
has its Being, and which if neglected and opposed will be withdrawn, and that
perhaps for ever. If like Esau, we sell this inestimable Blessing for a Mess of
Pottage, forfeit the Food of our Souls that we may indulge our Sensual
Appetites, we may fear that a Spiritual Famine will be our Punishment, and no
Place left for Repentance, no Blessing remaining for us, though we seek it
earnestly with Tears. As the Prodigal in the Parable, when, after he had wasted
his Substance in riotous Living, and then wanted, and was ready to perish with
Hunger, so that he would have been glad of the meanest and coarsest Fare, would
fain have sill'd his Belly with the Husks that the Swine did eat; even that he
could not obtain, for no Man, says the Parable, gave unto him.

Another ill Consequence of this Spiritual Prodigality, and loose wicked Course
of Life (and to name no more amongst a numerous Train of them) is, that it
extremely degrades and debases a Man, and engages him in the vilest Drudgery
imaginable, the serving Bestial Lusts, and Devilish Passions. This is expressed
in the Parable by the Prodigal's being sent into the Feilds to feed Swine; a
thing the most abject in it self, and the most detestable to the Jews (to whom
our Lord spoke the Parable) who were taught by their Law to esteem that
Creature among the most unclean. And as low or lower than this does he debase
his Nature, who, neglecting the Noble Precepts of Religion, makes his Sensual
Appetite the Rule and Measure of his Actions. For what more Beastly and
Detestable than ungoverned Lust? The wretch himself that is guilty of it is
ashamed publicly to commit it, and takes Advantage of Holes and Corners, and
the Night to hide his abominable Wickedness, and his own Blushes that attend
the Commission of it

What puts a Man upon more pitiful and unmanly Shifts to attain his Desire?
What sneaking and cringing to a base Strumpet, and her baser Servants, before
Access can be had to a Neighbors Bed, or a Virgin Innocence defiled?

And as much may be said of the Shame of Drunkenness, that Swinish Vice, which
makes a Man more vile and despicable than the foulest of Brutes. It Is a Vice
every Way odious and unmanly, and full of the most detestable Consequences, and
branded with the basest Character, even by Infidels: And so of all other
Sensual Vices, the Shame and Baseness is notorious.

These Devilish Passions likewise, to which Men become subject that throw off
the Government of Religion, such as pride, Vainglory and Hypocrisy, Envy,
Hatred and Malice, and such like; do greatly defile our excellent Nature, and
are the greatest Disparagement to those that suffer their Minds to be infested
with them; as would be soon apparent, could we but persuade them to so much
Seriousness as to recollect with themselves how odious these Vices have
appeared when they have met with them in other Men. And if they look so ill in
others, certainly no Man can be so besotted as to think them amiable
Qualifications in himself; but must confess, that whoever is so foolishly
prodigal as to waste and squander away what is of real Excellency, as Virtue is
in the Eyes of all Men, and gives himself up to such Devilish Passion as those
before mentioned, and the Service of such vile Lusts; Debases himself much
lower than that vile Office of serving the vilest of Brutes. Great Reason
therefore have such Men seriously to bethink themselves, and attend to the
Remorse of their Consciences, which goes along with such Courses, and being
once awakened, resolve to return again to their Obedience to God. Which is the

Third thing expressed in this Parable, by the Prodigal Son's coming to
himself, and thus reasoning. How many hired Servants of my Father's have Bread
enough and to spare, and I perish with Hunger! I will arise and go to my
Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired
Servants.

Misery, and Shame, and Repentance always tread close at the Heels of
Wickedness; and indeed, so much Misery and Shame, as Sin is the Occasion of,
must needs make any Man that considers and is not hardened in his Iniquity, to
repent and be sorry that ever he committed it. When ye were the Servants of
Sin, says the Apostle to the Romans, Romans 6.20, 21.
ye were free from Righteousness; ye had what ye desired, and lived without God
and Religion in the World, and were a Law unto your selves (as the Prodigal,
weary of his Father's Inspection over him, desired his Portion and went into a
far Country, and there lived riotously and without Control) But what Fruit had
ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed? For the End of these things is
Death. And this the young Prodigal found too true likewise by a sad Experience,
and wasted what he had and was ready to perish with Hunger, and glad to submit
to the basest Servitude for Sustenance, and at last was fain, with much Shame
and Repentance, to return to his Father, and humbly confess his Folly and
Unworthiness to be called any more his Son, and desired only the Favor of
being made as one of his hired Servants. The Works of Darkness, as St. Paul
says, are always unfruitful of any thing that is really satisfying and good;
but bring forth Briars and Thorns in Abundance, many Troubles and Vexations,
wherewith to tear and torment the miserable sinful Soul.

Let us consider a little more particularly this Resolution of the Prodigal to
return to his Father, and when it was that he took it up.

The Parable says, he made this Resolution, when he came to himself, and
considered how many of his Father's hired Servants had Bread enough, and to
spare, while he that was his Son was ready to perish with Hunger.

Indeed, every wicked Man is beside himself, out of his Reason and his Wits;
Quem mala stultitia and quaecunque inscitia very
Coecum agit, insanum Crysippi porticus and grex.
Horat. Sermon. Lib. II. Sat. 3. -- ubi parva
Stultitia, hic summa est insania: Qui sceleratus,
Et furiosus erit, --
Horat. ibid. For what Man of a sound Mind would act so strangely and make such
disadvantagious Choices, as a Sinner does? Who with his Wits about him would
take all Ways possible to make himself miserable to all Eternity, and when at
the same time too, he might with less Trouble make himself eternally happy?
Who, that could make use of his Reason, would choose to enjoy the Happiness of a
Brute, a Goat or a Swine for Instance, rather than that of a Man or an Angel,
nay, of God himself? Who but a Fool or a Madman would part with the certain
Reversion of a Crown and Scepter, for the present Possession of a Bag of
Counters? And yet, this does every obstinate Sinner do, and therefore may well
be said to be void of Reason, and beside himself; but, because he is wilfully
so, and will not make use of his Reason to the Purposes for which it was given
him, his Madness is his Fault rather than his Misfortune, and the Extravagances
of it will be without Excuse.

In this moral Frenzy was the Prodigal in the Parable, when he left his Father
and wasted his Substance afar off in Excess of Riot; till at length the sad
Consequences of his Extravagancy, brought him again to his Reason; and when he
came to himself, he resolved to arise and return to his Father, etc.

A Man's coming to himself, in a Religious Sense, is the making use of his
Reason in reflecting upon the past Errors and Miscarriages of his Life; in
considering the many sad Consequences of Vice, and the great Obligation we have
upon all Accounts to live religiously, and fully purposing upon such
Consideration, to break off all evil Courses, and live for the Future as
becomes Men and Christians. For a Man is never more himself, than when he
exercises his Reason upon the best of Objects, Religion; and considers how he
may best conform himself to the Holy Rules of Christianity, and purposes to do
accordingly: And he that suffers himself to be hurried on by impetuous Passions
and unruly Lusts, to commit vile Actions, and neglects to make use of his
Reason to govern and keep in order his Affections, acts more like a Brute than
a Man, and is not yet come to himself.

Consideration is indeed the Life of both speculative and practical Religion;
and then it is, that Men believe and live amiss, when they cease to consider as
they ought. For, there is so much of Truth and Evidence in the things a
Christian is to believe; and the things he is to do, are so excellent in
themselves, and so conducive to entire Happiness both here and hereafter; that
no Man, that duly considers and attends to either, but will be powerfully
inclined to assent to the one, and practice the other, and be no longer an
Infidel or Heretic, or live a vicious irreligious Life.

'Twas Consideration made the Prodigal Son resolve to return to his Father, and
humble himself before him; and could the Sinners of this Age be persuaded
seriously to consider and weigh things together, they would soon see Reason
enough to convince them that it is their wisest Course to live at another Rate
than formerly, and put an End to their Extravagances by Repentance.

But what did this Prodigal consider when he came to himself, that so
powerfully inclined him to return to his Father with such an humble and
shameful Confession of his Extravagancy? 'Twas this; How many of my Father's
hired Servants have Bread enough and to spare, and I perish with Hunger? He
found by a woeful Experience, that however uneasy 'twas to him formerly to be
under his Father's Eye, and in Subjection to his Commands; 'twas by far a
happier Condition than that, which by his Prodigality he was then reduced to:
The meanest of his Father's Servants was in happier Circumstances than he, and
therefore he thought it his wisest Course to arise and return to his Father.
And so would it be with a Sinner, would he but compare a Virtuous and Vicious
Course of Life together. He would find by his own sad Experience if he would
but attend to it, that all his Extravagances, from which at first he expected
to reap so much Happiness, are not only Vanity, empty and unsatisfying, but
likewise Vexation of Spirit; full of Troubles and Misfortunes, attended with
Shame and Disgrace, inward Remorse and Gripings of Conscience, and dire
Forbodings of the Wrath to come. And this would soon convince him of the much
greater Happiness of Obedience and Submission to the Will of God; for that has
none of all this Misery, but Peace of Conscience, inward Contentment and
Satisfaction of Mind, and the comfortable Expectation of Eternal Happiness in
the Presence of God. And the Conclusion of such Considerations, would be, his
Resolution to arise and go to his Heavenly Father, and with much Humility and
sincere Contrition say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven and
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired Servants. And indeed, the poorest good Man that is a diligent and
faithful Servant of God, is in an infinitely happier Condition than the
greatest wicked Prince; he experiences more true Happiness even in this World,
and when he shall hear the joyful Sound at the Day of Judgment, Well done good
and faithful Servant, enter into the Joy of thy Lord, and wicked Emperors be
thrust away, with I know you not, depart from me ye Workers of Iniquity; then
shall all the World discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him
that serves God, and him that serves him not: The former shall have Bread
enough, and to spare, their Happiness shall be complete and full; while the
latter shall perish with a keen Hunger after what they shall never enjoy, and
for ever be sent empty away.

After the Prodigal had considered himself into a Resolution of returning to
his Father, he put his Resolution into practice, and arose and came to his
Father, and said, Father, I have sinned, etc.

And truly, it is not bare resolving that is sufficient to Amendment of Life; we
must act agreeably, and that immediately too, or else our Resolutions, though
never so earnestly made, will vanish into nothing, and the Breach of them still
more increase our Guilt. For, when a Man has proceeded so far toward a new
Life, as to resolve to forsake every Evil Way, and no longer to insist in his
former Vile Courses; it is a sign that his Soul is roused and awakened from its
spiritual Sleep, that his Eyes are opened, and that he discerns his Error; and
if after all this, he still persists in it, he then sins against clear Light
and Knowledge, which is the highest Aggravation of a Fault.

As a Sinner therefore should, as soon as he is become sensible of his Sin,
immediately resolve to forsake it, and return to his Obedience to God; so must
he immediately put his Resolution into Practice: for otherwise, he does but
mock God, and deceive his own Soul, and will only increase his Damnation. A
well-grounded Resolution is a good Preparative to Amendment, but it is but a
Preparative; and to resolve to do a Thing, and actually to do it, are two very
different Things. We all of us, I hope, that pretend to be Christians, so far
consider, as to grieve and be ashamed for having offended our Good God; and are
at that instant resolved never willingly to transgress his Holy Will again: Let
us but keep our Resolutions, and we shall be Happy; for, such as with the
Prodigal, actually return to their Heavenly Father, and humble themselves
before him, he is ready, with the greatest Expressions of Kindness, to receive
to his Favor. Which brings me to the

Last Thing expressed in this Parable; (viz.) The great Tenderness and
Compassion of the Father of Spirits to such as repent in earnest, and perform
their Resolves of Amendment; his Readiness to be reconciled to them, and
extraordinary Joy for their Return, because they were dead but are alive again,
were lost but are found. For so it is said in the Parable, That when the
Returning Prodigal was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had
Compassion, and ran, and fell on his Neck, and kissed him, and said to his
Servants, Bring forth the best Robe, and put it on him, and put a Ring on his
Hand, and Shoes on his Feet, and bring hither the fatted Galf, and kill it,
and let us eat and be merry.

While he was yet a great way off, his Father had Compassion, and ran to meet
him. By this is expressed God's great Desire that a Sinner's Repentance should
be completed; he will meet him, and that with more than ordinary Assistances
of his Spirit, lest any Temptation should so far prevail as to divert his
Return, and make him change or defer to put in practice, that good Resolution
he had taken up. He prevents a real Penitent with the Riches of his Grace, and
while he is yet a great way off, laboring with the Difficulties that attend a
thorough Change of Life; he, with infinite Charity and Compassion, comes forth
to meet him, that by his Divine Aid he may secure his Retreat from the
Endeavors of the Devil and his own vile Affections, to bring him back to his
former vain and wicked Courses, which by God's Grace he has resolved to break
off by Repentance.

And when a Sinner's Repentance is completed, and he is actually returned with
Shame and Sorrow to his Heavenly Father; what rejoicing is there! With what
endearing Kindness does the Divine Goodness entertain a miserable
self-condemned Wretch, that sees his Error, is ashamed and grieved for it, and
returns with hearty Purpose to obey him better! It Is represented in the
Parable, by the highest Expressions of Joy that were in those Eastern
Countries; the Prodigal's Father ran to meet him, fell on his Neck, and kissed
him, commanded the best Robe to be put on him, and a Ring on his Hand, and
Shoes on his Feet, and made merry with Feasting, and Music, and Dancing.

One would have thought, his wild Extravagancy should have met with rougher
Entertainment, at least at first Interview; and Reproof have been given to his
Folly, which brought him to so much Misery. But his Father's Compassion was
above his Anger; and because he whom he thought was dead and lost, was alive
again and found, he forgot all Resentment, and embraced him with Tenderness and
Endearment. And thus it is with God when he sees a Returning Sinner: Though the
Sinner has indeed deserved nothing but the Expresses of his Wrath and
Indignation, and to be for ever rejected by him; yet he who gives freely to
every man, and upbraideth not, and whose Mercy is over all his Works, will not
break the bruised Reed, nor quench the smoking Flax; but in infinite Goodness,
not only give Admittance to, but receive with joy his Returning Prodigals.

And how can we enough praise and admire these Wonders of the Divine Compassion
and Love, to poor miserable and polluted Creatures! It Is an Abyss that can
never be fathomed; our Thoughts are lost and swallowed up in the Contemplation
of it, and silent Admiration does best express that which no Words can reach.

And now, for a Conclusion of the whole; Since Vice and a Lawless Course of
Living, is the Parent of so much Misery, and has so many ill Consequences
closely attending it even in this World, and is, as the most extravagant, so
the most unhappy Prodigality; and since the Miseries of a wicked Life here, are
but the Beginnings of unconceivable and eternal Sorrows hereafter; and since
there is but one Cure for this great Evil, and nothing but sincere Repentance
will save us from Destruction; and since God is so infinitely good, as greatly
to desire we would Repent, and return to our Obedience to him, and affords us
all possible Helps in order to it, and greatly rejoices to see a Sinner
penitent, and receives him with the highest Expressions of Tenderness and Love;
since all this is so, let us put off no longer, what, if we would be happy,
must be done at last; but, with the greatest Thankfulness, embrace the
inestimable Favor of being again received into the Arms of our merciful God
and Savior. Let us immediately turn from every Evil Way; and that we may do so
effectually, let us lay to heart how vexatious, and full of Shame, and utterly
unprofitable a wicked Course of Life is, and how full of Pleasure and
unspeakable Delight it is to advance from Grace to Grace, and to perfect
Holiness in the fear of God. And having resolved well, and fully purposed our
Return to the wise and good Government of our Heavenly Father, without Delay do
as we have resolved, and arise and go to our Father, and say, with all Humility
and Confusion of Face, and sincere Contrition, Father, I have sinned against
Heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; and he
whose Compassions never fail, will embrace us with the Arms of his Mercy, and
forget our former Provocations, and take us to his Favor and Protection in
this World, and at length make us Partakers of the Joys of his Heavenly
Kingdom; where there shall be Rejoicing in his Presence for our Happiness and
Salvation, Because we were dead but are alive again, were lost but are found.

The PRAYER.
I.
ALmighty and most merciful Savior, whose Government is directed by infinite
Wisdom, and proceeds in infinite Goodness, so that happy are they in whose
Hearts are thy Ways, and that turn not aside from thy Commandments; I confess,
with Shame and Confusion of Face, and I hope with a truly humble, penitent, and
obedient Heart, that my vile Extravagancy and Impatience of thy blessed
Restraint, and Foolish Desire of Liberty, and following the Bias of my own
brutish Inclinations, has hitherto been too notorious, and sad have been the
Consequences of my Departure from thee. I have prodigally wasted thy Divine
Grace, and turned it into Wantonness; I have squandered away my Time in Vanity
and Folly, which is the only Opportunity of securing my Salvation; and, without
Infinite Mercy, have forfeited my Reversion of my Heavenly Inheritance; and all
this, for what is below the Affections of a Rational Creature, and indeed, as I
have found by a costly Experience, no other than Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.
And just it is, thou should withdraw thy Grace, which I have so slighted and
abused, and leave my Soul to starve and famish, and daily draw nearer and
nearer to Eternal Death. But thou, O Father of Mercies, whose Compassions fail
not, and who desire not the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should
repent and live; look graciously upon thy Returning Prodigal.

II.
I now am sadly sensible of my deplorable Condition, and beg importunately,
that I may so effectually hearken to the inward Shame and Remorse that now I
feel, for my past inexcusable Madness and Folly, as that I may immediately
return to my Obedience, to thee my infinitely wise and indulgent Parent, who
art ready, I know, to stretch out thy Arms to receive me, and to whose
preventing Grace I owe these pious Resolutions of humbling my self before thee.
Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to
be called thy Son, make me but as one of thy meanest Servants: I am now fully
sensible, that one Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand, and had rather
be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God, than to dwell in the Tents of
Ungodliness. O continue to strengthen these good Affections in me, and send out
thy Light and thy Truth, even thy Blessed Spirit, that he may conduct me to thy
Dewlling Place, and secure my Retreat from the Kingdom of Darkness. O may I
never defer what, if I would be happy, must be done at last, but instantly
Return to thee, O Father of Compassions. Then shall I experience the happy
Exchange of Misery and Shame, for Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; and
instead of being the Triumph of Malicious Fiends in Hell, occasion
extraordinary Joy in the Presence of thee my God, and thy Holy Angels, because
I was dead but am alive again, was lost but am found. O Blessed God, verify
this Bliss upon me, for thy Mercies sake in Jesus our Redeemer. Amen.

PARABLE XII. Of the Rich Man and Lazarus.
Luke xvi. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. There was a
certain Rich Man, which was clothed in Purple and Fine Linen, and fared
sumptuously every day;

And there was a certain Beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his Gate, full
of Sores,

And desiring to be fed with the Crumbs which fell from the Rich Man's Table:
moreover, the Dogs came and licked his Sores.

And it came to pass that the Beggar died, and was carried by the Angels into
Abraham's Bosom: the Rich Man also died, and was buried.

And in Hell he lift up his Eyes, being in Torments, and sees Abraham afar
off, and Lazarus in his Bosom.

And he cried and said, Father Abraham have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that
he may dip the tip of his finger in Water, and cool my Tongue, for I am
tormented in this Flame.

But Abraham said, Son remember, that thou in thy lifetime received'st thy
good Things, and likewise Lazarus evil Things: but now, He is comforted, and
Thou art tormented.

And besides all this, between Us and You there is a great Gulf fixed, so that
they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to us
that would come from thence.

Then he said, I pray thee therefore Father, that thou would send him to my
Father's House;

For I have five Brethren: that he may testify unto them, lest they also come
into this Place of Torment.

Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them.

And he said, nay Father Abraham, but if one went unto them from the Dead they
will Repent.

And he said unto him, if they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded though One rose from the Dead.


THIS Parable seems to be designed to inform us of Three Things:

First, That from a Man's Prosperous or Adverse Condition in this World, there
is no Judgment to be made concerning his Condition in the next; and that it is
not seldom that the Happiness Men meet with in this Life, is changed for Misery
in the other, and that Affliction here ends in Happiness hereafter.

Secondly, That whatever Alteration is made in the State and Condition of the
Soul, after its Departure from this World, shall be from thenceforth for ever
unalterable. And

Thirdly, That every Man may be sufficiently assured of this that reads the
Scriptures and powerfully enough inclined to avoid that Future Misery, and
secure his Eternal Happiness; without any more extraordinary Ways of Conviction
of the Truth of this, and Persuasion to act accordingly: And that those who are
not satisfied with what has been hitherto revealed in this Matter, will never
be satisfied, though One should come from the Dead to assure them of it. Of
each of these Particulars I shall discourse in their Order.

The first thing this Parable informs us of is, that from a Man's prosperous or
adverse Condition in this World, there is no Judgment to be made concerning his
Condition in the next; and that it is not seldom, that the Happiness Men meet
with in this Life, is changed for Misery in the other; and on the contrary,
that Affliction Here ends in Happiness Hereafter. And this is expressed in the
Parable by a Poor Beggar, that was full of Sores, and begged but the Crumbs that
fell from a Rich Man's Table, his being carried by Angels into Abraham's Bosom
when he died, or received into that Place of Happiness which is prepared for
them that live and dye in the Faith and Fear of God, as Abraham did; while the
Rich Man that was clothed in Purple and fine Linen, and fared sumptuously
every day, after he died was Tormented in the flames of Hell.

'Twas the Observation and Complaint of Solomon, and might have been made (if
it was not) long before, even from the Infancy of the World, that no Man
knows either the Love or Hatred of God, by All that is here in this World
before him; nay, that there are Just Men to whom it happens according to the
Work of the Wicked, Eccl. 9.1.
and Wicked Men to whom it happens according to the Work of the Righteous; i.
e. That Wicked Men are often observed to be prosperous here, as if they were
the Favorites of Heaven, and rewarded for their Virtue, and Good Men
calamitous and afflicted, as if they were hated of God, and punished for their
great Impieties.

Job makes a very pathetical Complaint to this purpose, and was indeed, Job.
21.5.
himself a deplorable Instance of what he then complained of; and he introduces
what he would say with the greatest Solemnity, Mark me, and be astonished, says
he and lay your Hand upon your Mouth; Even when I remember I am afraid, and
Trembling seiseth my Flesh. Wherefore do the Wicked live to become Old, yea are
mighty in Power, and their Seed is established in their sight with them, and
their Offspring before their Eyes? Whereas I, might he have said, (and
questionless he alluded to it) I that have the Testimony of God himself, that
there is none like me upon Earth, a Perfect and an Upright Man, one that
fears God, Job 19.9.
and escheweth Evil, am on a sudden stripped of all my Glory, and my Children
All together snatched from me, by a dreadful Accident, and my self smitten with
sore Boils, from the Sole of my Foot unto my Crown, so that I am weary of my
Life, and think I have reason to curse the Day of my Birth. They spend their
Days in Wealth and Mirth, and in a Moment, with a quick and easy Passage, go
down to the Grave; whereas I, miserable though innocent, am clothed with
Worms, and Scabs, and Clods of Dust; my sighing comes before my Meat, and my
Roarings are poured out like the Waters, and I long for Death, but it comes
not.

Holy David Psalm. 73.21.
likewise, very feelingly complained of this, and the Prophet Jeremy Jer. 12.1.
; and indeed, this so seemingly strange Method of Providence is the Observation
of every Man, and the Wonder of most. And what Conclusions Men will be apt to
draw from such Observations, is easy to imagine. The Best of Men will be apt
to be discouraged, and tempted to say with David, Verily, I have cleansed my
Heart in vain, and washed my Hands in Innocence: And as for Sinners, no doubt
but they will be emboldened by it to strengthen themselves in their Wickedness;
and either persuade themselves that their Actions are not so odious in the
Sight of God as has been represented to them; or that, because they Thrive and
Prosper more than Better Men, the Threats of Religion are but Scare-Crows, and
because not speedily, shall never be inflicted; or, if there be another World,
that they shall fare as well in that as they have done in this. And the more
indifferent sort of Men, that are neither very Bad nor very Good, if they
prosper here, will be apt to think it is an Argument of God's Favor to them,
that they perform an acceptable Service to him now, and that it shall therefore
be well with them hereafter; and if they do not Thrive, they will be inclined
to follow the Course of those that do, as looking upon Prosperity to be an
Argument of the Favor and Blessing of God.

But All this is throughout a great and dangerous Mistake; and Worldly
Prosperity is neither a certain Argument of God's Favor to Men in this World,
or of their Happiness in the next: Neither is Affliction a certain Sign of
God's casting Men off here, or a sure Forerunner of Eternal Misery hereafter;
but frequently on the contrary, the Good are calamitous in this World, but
received into Abraham's Bosom in the other, and those that are Prosperous and
Happy here, too often have their Portion in the Flames of Hell hereafter.

Prosperity is in it self indeed a Blessing, and promised as a Part of the
Reward of Godliness; and accordingly, many good Men are Happy even here; and
were All truly good, All would be Prosperous and Happy; for it is Sin only that
makes the World miserable: And on the other side, Affliction is in it self a
great Evil, and by no means joyous but grievous, and is always the Punishment
of some Offense. But, oftentimes Worldly Prosperity is sent as a Curse rather
than a Blessing, and is the Effect of God's Displeasure, and the only Happiness
that some shall ever enjoy. And Adversity proves a great Blessing, and is an
Expression of God's Favor and Paternal Regard, the only Misery some shall ever
feel, and an Introduction to Eternal Happiness; some, in mercy, being corrected
here for their Faults, that they may escape the everlasting Punishments of the
other World, and others fatted up here, as to a Day of Slaughter, and suffered
(since they choose it) to have their Portion in this Life. As Abraham in the
Parable, said to the Rich Man, (who through the Excess of his Torment, begged
that he would send him who was once a poor Lazarus, but then in a Place of
Happiness, to dip his Finger in Water, and come and cool his Tongue) Son,
remember that thou in thy Lifetime receivedst thy good Things, and likewise
Lazarus his evil Things, but now, he is comforted and thou art tormented.

And indeed, it is no wonder that it should be so, and that Prosperity in this
World should so often end in Misery in the next, and the Afflictions Men meet
with here, be turned into Happiness hereafter. For Worldly Prosperity, however
charming it may appear to us, is a State so full of Dangers, so beset with
Temptations to Vice, so apt to divert Men from attending to Things of
infinitely greater moment, and laying up a Treasure in Heaven; and Adversity on
the contrary, though very uneasy to Flesh and Blood, yet is so apt therefore
to wean Men from the World, and the fading Vanities of it, and make them out of
Love with what is so fickle and uncertain, and full of Trouble; and is a State
that humbles Men much, and increases Devotion and Trust in God, and puts 'em
upon Repentance, and a Desire of enjoying that Heavenly Treasure which shall
never be taken from them: That for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, seems by far the greater Difficulty, and more likelihood is there of
the Calamities of this World bringing a Man to that happy Place, than the
prosperous Enjoyment of its Pleasures. And accordingly says the Apostle, Not
many Rich, not many Mighty are called, and that Riches are a Temptation and a
Snare, and drown Men in diverse hurtful Lusts, and bring them to Destruction and
Perdition; and therefore exhorts Men to count it all Joy when they fall into
diverse Temptations or Afflictions.

The Use then, that we may make of this first Part of the Parable, is this; not
to be dejected under Adversity, as if cast off by God, and utterly deprived of
his Favor, nor puffed up by Prosperity, as if peculiarly dear to Heaven; but
in every State to make it our greatest Care and Endeavor to secure our main
Interest, and with Fear and Trembling, in the one Condition as well as the
other, to work out our Salvation, by the Practice of that Holiness, without
which no Man, whether Rich or Poor, Calamitous or Prosperous, shall see the
Lord; and with which any Man, in whatsoever Circumstances he is in this Life,
shall be sure of a glorious Eternity in the Presence and Enjoyment of his
Maker. If Riches increase by honest Industry, and conscientious Dealing, and
prudent Management, we ought to esteem it as a Blessing, and humbly thank God
for it; but by no means should we set our Hearts upon them, nor grow
highminded, and conceited of our selves, as if greatly in Favor and Esteem of
God, and our Prosperity the Reward of our extraordinary Virtue; nor despise the
Poverty of others, looking upon them as less Holy because not so prosperous as
we. Neither should we grow vain and luxurious, or covetous and sordid, but make
Friends, with the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and act like good Stewards of the
manifold Grace of God, being given to Hospitality, and ready to relieve the
Necessities of such as are in want; remembering always, that many have all their
Share of Happiness in this Life, and while they dote immoderately upon the
World, and place their chief Good in being prosperous here, forfeit their
Glorious Reversion hereafter: And always fearing lest our Prosperity become a
Snare to us in this Matter, and we turn it into a Curse by our ill Use of it,
and become such Fools, as for the Gain of a little of the World, to lose our
Immortal Souls. What Comfort had the Rich Man in the Parable of all his former
Prosperity, when he lay weltring in the Flames of Hell? All his Purple and Fine
Linen, and Sumptuous Fare, because he abused 'em to Luxury and Excess, and
grew negligent of laying up a Treasure of good Works in Heaven; ended at length
in the Want of a Drop of Water to cool his inflamed Tongue.

If Affliction and Poverty should be our Lot, it is then our Duty to endeavor
to be contented, and not despond as if utterly rejected of God, but to remember
that there is a better World, in which those shall be unspeakably and for ever
happy, that are patient and resigned in this Valley of the Shadow of Death; that
the Lord loves whom he chasteneth, and that if we comply with the Ends of his
Correction, and amend under his Paternal Rod, our light Affliction, which is
but for a Moment, shall work for us a far more exceeding and eternal Weight of
Glory. Lazarus in the Parable, we read, was miserably poor, desirous, though
but of the Fragments that fell from the Rich Man's Table, and full of noisome
painful Sores, a sad Spectacle both to himself and others; and yet, when he
died, was carried up by Angels into Abraham's Bosom. It Is not a Man's outward
Circumstances that God respects, but the inward Temper of his Mind, and often
makes his outward Condition calamitous, 1 Samuel 16.7.
that his Mind may grow better; and if a Man be as poor and despicable in the
Eye of the World as Lazarus, yet if he is of a contented resigned Soul, and
make it his Endeavor to be rich toward God; he at length shall be filled with
Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, while many rich that have their Portion in
this Life shall be sent empty away.

And thus much for the first thing this Parable informs us of, namely, that
from a Man's prosperous or adverse Condition in this World, there is no
Judgment to be made concerning his final Condition in the next.

The second thing it informs us of is, that whatever Change is made in the
Condition of the Soul, after its Departure from this World, its State shall be
from thenceforth for ever unalterable. For so in the Parable, when the Rich Man
being in Torments, lifted up his Eyes, and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in
his Bosom, and cried and said, Father Abraham have Mercy on me, and send
Lazarus that he may dip the Tip of his Finger in Water and cool my Tongue, for
I am tormented in this Flame; Abraham, after he had told him that he had in his
Lifetime received his good things, and Lazarus his evil, things, and that then
there was a great and unexpected Change, and Lazarus was comforted and he
tormented; he adds, moreover, that between him and them there was a great Gulf
fixed, so that those which would pass from thence to him could not, neither
could any pass from him to them.

What is meant by this Gulf fixed between Heaven and Hell, which hinders any
Comfort or Relief coming from thence to that miserable Place, or any Trouble or
Annoyance from that Place to Heaven; so that the Condition both of the Wicked
and the Righteous, remains unchangeably happy or miserable respectively: Has
been much controverted, especially amongst the Schoolmen. But it tending to
very little Edification to relate their Opinions, most of which are very
frivolous; I shall only say what is the most received Opinion in our Church. By
the Gulf fixed, we suppose is only meant God's irreversible Decree that those
whose Wickednesses made them incapable of the Vision and Enjoyment of God, and
sunk them down to Hell, shall for ever remain there without any Hopes of
Comfort or Relief, and that the Righteous likewise shall be received into Life
and Happiness everlasting, and such as all the Powers of Hell shall never be
able to lessen or disturb. And this methinks to any sensible Man, should appear
to be an Opinion the most reasonable and most agreeable to the Holy Writings.
Now here 'twill be worth our while, since the rich Man's Punishment is
expressed by his being tormented in Flame, and doomed to be for ever so, to
satisfy two Queries usually put in this Case; as first, Why the Torments of
Hell are expressed by Flames and Burning? And secondly, How it can be
consistent with the Divine Justice to punish the transient Acts of Sin, with
such an endless Misery?

To the first I return this Answer as to me the most satisfactory. Though I
believe that at the general Conflagration, when the Heavens shall be shrunk up
as a scorched Parchment, and the Elements melt with fervent Heat, and the World
and all that is in it be burned up; though I believe that God will then take
Vengeance of his Enemies in real Flames of Fire, which shall for ever encircle
and prey upon their Bodies: yet I think, that will be the least Part of their
Torment, and that the Extremity of it will consist in the inward Trouble of
their Minds; arising from an impatient Appetite, and continual Thirst after
that Felicity, which they know, through their own Default, they shall never
come to enjoy. And that such vehement Desires, and the Passions consequent upon
the disappointment of them, should be called Flames and Burning, is no more
than what is usual in our common Manner of speaking; and the Expression of
fervent and ardent Desires, is often met with in the holy writings too,
particularly, where David says, My Soul breaks out with the very fervent
desire it has always to thy Commandments. And Rage, and Fury, and Impatience,
and the like, which attend unsatisfied Desires, are likewise frequently
attended with the Epithet of Fire; as every one must needs have observed.

Now, Man having an innate uncontrolable Thirst after Happiness, and which is
always equally intense, and that to the highest Degree; when, (as the
Punishment of his Rebellion against God, his foolish and wicked Choices here,
his Pursuit after lower Good, and Neglect of the supreme) he shall be for ever
banished to an infinite Distance, not only from the Fountain of Happiness, but
from every Stream and Participation of it (which here below cooled his Heat a
little, and for the present gratified that his Desire) and yet the Appetite and
Thirst after it continuing as great as ever, and the Wretch withal sensible of
the utter Impossibility of attaining it; and that, not so much as one Drop from
that Fountain of Bliss shall ever be given to allay his Thirst, and cool his
parched and inflamed Tongue: His Desire must for ever be to the highest Degree
craving and importunate in vain; and being continually thus disappointed, his
Impatience will still grow hotter and hotter, and his Remorse for bringing this
upon himself, turning to eternal Rage and Fury, and boiling up like Rivers of
enflamed Brimstone, the Fire will be everlasting. And what a Calenture, think
we, will the whole Man be in; when without the fiercest material Flames shall
prey upon the Body, and hotter Fires within torment the Soul! And this Notion
of the Flames of Hell, seems to me not obscurely hinted, in the Rich Man's
lifting up his Eyes in his Torment, and when he saw the happy State of Lazarus
in Abraham's Bosom, begging him to impart, though but one Drop of that Bliss he
enjoyed, to cool his parched Tongue. His Desire of that Happiness was in the
greatest Degree of Ardency, and when he saw Lazarus in Abraham's Bosom, then he
cried out, Father Abraham have Mercy on me, for I am tormented in this Flame.
Thus much for the first Query. To the second I return this in Brief; That since
Sin is the greatest Possible Evil, (it being a Violation of the strongest Ties
and Obligations, an Opposition and Contrariety to the Supreme Good, and in no
Case eligible, as every considering Man must needs confess) it cannot be too
rigorously dealt with, even by the Infliction of the greatest possible
Punishment; for there is the same Proportion between the greatest Evil and the
greatest Punishment, as between a lesser Evil and a lesser Punishment: And
therefore, unless we'll say, there can never be any Proportion between a Fault
and its Punishment, I think we must own, there is Proportion here.

Now the Use we may make of this second Part of the Parable is this. That,
since the Consequence of a Life of Wickedness, is so dreadful and remediless a
Ruin, and the Wages of Sin this eternal Torment and Death; we would be above
all things careful to avoid this Place of everlasting Torments, and make use of
our Time and Opportunity while we have it, in providing for a happy Eternity.
The End of every Man's Life is the Beginning of Eternity to him; then Time
shall be no more, no more Space for Repentance and working out our Salvation,
and after the great Change that Death will make in our Condition, no more
Changes from thence forward for ever, no intermediate Purgatory to cleanse our
remaining Filthiness; but as Death leaves a Soul, so shall Judgment find it,
and an irreversible Sentence be passed upon it. And this great Truth can never
be too often called to Remembrance; and there is so much of Terror in it to a
wicked Liver, that whoever thinks at all, must needs be inclined by it to
husband well this his only Opportunity of making himself for ever Happy, and
immediately endeavor to clear himself from that Guilt, which, if he dies in,
will make him for ever miserable, and that without the least Alleviation.

The last thing this Parable informs us of is, That every Man may be
sufficiently assured of this great Truth, that reads the Scriptures; and
powerfully enough inclined to avoid that future Misery, and secure his eternal
Happiness, without any more extraordinary Ways of Conviction in this Matter, or
Perswasives to act accordingly: And that those who are not satisfied with what
has already been revealed of future Rewards and Punishments, in all Probability
will never be satisfied, though one should come from the Dead to assure them of
it.

This is expressed in the Parable by the Rich Man's desiring (after he was
sadly assured by Abraham, that there was no Remedy for himself) that he would
send Lazarus to his Father's House (for I have five Brethren, says he) that he
may testify unto them, lest they also come into this Place of Torment. To this
Abraham answers, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. But this
would not satisfy the miserable Rich Man, and he said, nay Father Abraham, but
if one went to them from the Dead they will repent. To this Abraham gives this
final Answer; If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one arose from the Dead. As if he had said, There is all the
Assurance given to Men by the Holy Writings of the Truth of these things, that
any reasonable Man can desire; and the same Obstinate and Atheistick Infidelity
and Debauchery of Manners that makes Men disbelieve what the Scriptures affirm
of another Life, would make them still disbelieve it, though one arose from the
Dead to assure them of it.

And if this was true before the Gospel, when these things were but darkly
revealed in comparison of what they are now, and the Jews might then be
sufficiently assured of them by attending to the Writings of Moses and the
Prophets; it is a much more confirmed Truth to us Christians, the Scriptures of
the New Testament assuring us of it in the most plain and express Terms that
can be: According to what the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 1.8. that our Lord has
brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel.

And yet, some are so unreasonable, as when we discourse about Judgment to
come, and the Rewards and Punishments of another Life, not to tremble at it as
Foelix did, but with perverse Infidelity, question the Truth of the thing, and
ask us how we can be sure it is and shall be so, and whether we have been told
it by one that came from the other World, and has experienced what we say to be
true: And that nothing less than such a Proof shall ever make them believe it.
And when they are urged with the Testimony of Moses and the Prophets, and of
the Son of God himself; they have the Confidence to laugh at this as an
Invention of Churchmen, and no better than a Religious Cheat. They are not
ignorant, they say, that the Writings which we affirm were divinely inspired,
do very plainly and expressly assert, That there shall be a Judgment to come,
and that every Man shall be raised from the Dead, and placed before the
Almighty Judge, and consigned to eternal Happiness or Misery, according to what
they have done in this Life, whether it be good or evil: But they deny the
Truth of those Writings, and consequently the Reality of what they assert of
this Nature. Our Business therefore must be to prove the Truth and Divine
Authority of those Holy Scriptures, and then 'twill follow, that he that still
disbelieves the Doctrine of future Rewards and Punishments, and is not inclined
to live accordingly, will neither be convinced nor persuaded in this Instance,
though one rose from the Dead

The Opposition Anti-scripturists make against the Holy Writings is in short
this. Either they will deny that those Books were written by the Men whose
Names they bear; or, if they are forced to grant that, they will deny the Truth
of the Matters of fact which they set down, and endeavor to pick out
Inconsistencies and Contradictions in their Relation; and, if beaten from that
Post, they will deny that the Writers were Men divinely inspired, and affirm that
the Doctrine they wrote was merely the Product of their own Brains, and what
strange Occurrences they record of their Master Jesus (as of his Resurrection
from the Dead, as an Argument that there shall be another Life after this is
ended, and all Men then arise likewise, and be called to give account of their
Works) that this and the like strange Passages they record of Jesus, supposing
them to be true, were not done by a Divine Power, but by Art Magic and the
Power of the Devil. And this, could it be made good, would be a shrewd Blow
indeed, and all revealed Religion soon sink into Ruin: But in short (for to
enlarge here, would far exceed the Bounds of a single Sermon) a Christian's
Defense of the Truth and divine Authority of the Holy Writings may be this.

First, Though some have denied that the Books of the Old and New Testament
were written by the Men whose Names they bear, yet no Man ever yet could prove
it; nay, on the contrary, they have been received as Genuine for many Hundreds
of Years, and by Men of very different Religions and Persuasions, and that were
bitter Enemies to the Religion there taught, and the Professors of it, and
would have been extremely glad to have proved the Whole a Forgery if they
could. But since they did not, when 'twas so much for their Interest to have
don't, it is plain they could not; and since they are, to this Day, approved by
all Sorts of Religions as genuine, it is as much as can be said in the Case, and
as much as can be said for any other Book in the World: And we must either
throw aside all Books as spurious, or believe this which we call the Bible, to
be genuine. Well, but though this may be true, yet they object further, that
there is no Truth in the Matters of fact which these Men set down; and
particularly that the whole Story of our Savior's Life, and Death, and
Resurrection, is a Falsehood, and that their Relations are contradictious. But
to this we may return, That though this has been by some Men said, yet it has
never been proved; nay, on the contrary, several Heathen Writers, as Pliny,
Tacitus, Lucian, Suetonius, and others of great Antiquity, quoted by De
veritat. Christ. Rel. Lib. 2.
Grotius and Demomsta^. Evangel. Propos. 3. prope Initium.
Haetius, have given in their Evidence as to the Matters of fact on the
Christian Side; and though they have made it their Business to vilify the
whole Story of our Lord's Life and Death, yet they could say, much less prove,
that there were no such Occurrences are as recorded by the Evangelists. And
truly, the Evangelists are so punctual in all Circumstances of Time and Place,
so particular in naming of Persons concerned, and that were Eyewitnesses of
those Transactions, and those too, Enemies as well as Friends, Jews and
Heathens as well as Christians; and those Transactions were so public, and in
the Face of the World, and the Account of them was written so soon after they
were done; that it would then have been a very easy Matter to have detected
the Falsehood of the Whole, or of any Part of the Story, if there had been any,
and both Jews and Heathens were very much concerned to do it if they could, and
no doubt, they endeavored it to the utmost of their Power. But yet, after all,
we find that neither then nor since, any thing of this Nature has been fastened
upon these Writings, but rather the Truth of them has been approved by the
Confession of the Enemies of Christianity, than which no better Argument can be
produced for the Truth of any Ancient History in the World.

And as for the Contradictions and Inconsistencies, which, they say, are in the
New Testament; though to Men unlearned, or else deeply prejudiced, some things
may at first sight seem to clash a little, yet upon a closer View of any
competent and unprejudiced Person, they will be found to be far from being
irreclaimable: And these seeming Differences are likewise in things not
material; in the main there is an unquestionable Harmony: Which, considering
that four several Men were the Writers, and that they writ in different and
distant Places, is no mean Argument, that what they so punctually and agreeably
relate, is true. And indeed, those little Differences that are taken Notice of,
are rather an Argument for the Truth of their Relation, than any thing to the
contrary; for had it been a packed Business, they would have been careful not
to have differed in a Title. As for their last Reserve, that supposing the
Matter of fact to be true which they relate, yet those strange things that are
recorded of Jesus, might be performed by Art Magic and the Power of the Devil:
And that, what he or his Apostles have delivered by Way of Precept and
Doctrine, was merely the Product of their own Brains, and no Inspiration of
God: To this we may return in this Manner.

It Is certain that the coming of Jesus Christ into the World, was to destroy
the Works and Kingdom of the Devil, as is evident from his casting so many evil
Spirits out of possessed Persons, and from their trembling at his Presence, and
crying out for Dread; and from his teaching so Holy and Heavenly a Religion,
than which, nothing can more weaken his Infernal Kingdom: And to attest the
Truth of this his Doctrine, and that he was sent by God to teach it to the
World, he wrought diverse and very amazing Miracles, and those highly
beneficial ones too; such as giving Sight to Men that were born blind, and
curing long and desperate Diseases, and raising to Life those that had been
dead, and one of them four Days buried, and this only with a Word or with his
Touch; John 11^ 15.
which is Part of those Matters of fact, set down by the Evangelists, which we
before proved to be true.

Now, can any Man in his Senses think, that the Devil, were he able, would so
far assist one that come on purpose into the World to destroy his Kingdom? It Is
our Lord's own Answer to the foolishly masicious Pharisees, who, when they saw
him work a stupendous Miracle upon one possessed with a Devil, both Blind and
Dumb, insomuch that the Blind and Dumb both spoke and saw; objected presently,
This Fellow casts out Devils by Beelzebub the prince of the Devils. And Jesus
knew their Thoughts and said unto them, every Kingdom divided against it self
is brought to Desolation; and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against
himself, How then shall his Kingdom stand? A Demonstration this, that 'twas not
by the Power of the Devil that he wrought his Miracles, but by the Power of
God. For though deluded Men may be so foolish as to frame such an Objection,
the Devil is too wise to put the thing in Practice.

As for the other Part of what is objected, That what our Lord, and the Writers
of the New Testament, the Evangelists and Apostles, have delivered by Way of
Precept and Doctrine, was merely the Product of their own Brains, and not the
Inspiration of God; I might only appeal to the Precepts and Doctrines
themselves, which are of so Exalted and Heavenly a Nature, and far above any
thing, that either before or since was ever written by Man, that they
themselves will prove their Original to be Divine. But there is a farther Proof
of this, the many and great Miracles that were wrought, both by Christ and his
Apostles, in Confirmation of the Doctrine they taught, and of their being
commissioned by God in an extraordinary Manner, to declare it as the Rule of
their Obedience to him, and of their Conversation in the World. For, no
reasonable Man can think, that God would have so wondrously assisted those
above all other Men, had they not been his peculiar Messengers, to make known
his Will to Mankind.

And this, in short, may be sufficient to prove, to any reasonable and
unprejudiced Man, the Truth and Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures; and,
consequently, we have sufficient Assurance, that there shall be another Life,
when this is ended, wherein Men shall be for ever recompensed according to
their Works: For this is very plainly and expressly asserted in those Writings,
as every Man knows that has read them. And therefore it is as plain, that it is
an unreasonable Obstinacy, and too great Love of the sinful Enjoyments of this
World, that makes Men deny their Assent to so great a Truth, and hinders them
from being inclined by it, to lead a more Innocent and Holy Life. And the same
Obstinacy and Infidel Hardness of Heart, and Vileness of Manners, would make
them still disbelieve that there is a suture State of Eternal Rewards and
Punishments, according as Men live well or ill here below, and still keep them
from being persuaded by it to Amendment, though one came to them from the Dead
to assure them of it. For, what an easy Matter would it be for them to say,
that the Apparition was but a melancholy Fancy, or a Dream, and regard it as
if no more, and laugh at all things of that Nature, as too many now adays are
apt to do?

And he that will shut his Eyes aganst so much Reason, and Evidence, as there
is, for the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, is Proof against any other
Sort of Conviction whatever, even that of a Messenger sent on purpose to him
from the other World. For so our Lord in the Parable, If they believe not Moses
and the Prophets (we may add, and our Savior, his Evangelists and Apostles)
neither will they be persuaded, though one arose from the Dead.

Wherefore, it becomes us all to be very careful, lest the Spirit of Unbelief
enter into us, and we grow so blinded by the Deceitfulness of Sin, as either
not to believe, or not duly to attend to this great and strongly confirmed
Truth, of the Certainty of another Life after this; and of the eternal Rewards
and Punishments then to be awarded to every Man according to his religious or
impious Behavior here.

It Is in vain to expect any further extraordinary Proof of what is already
plainly declared by him that cannot lie, in those Writings which we have all
the Reason in the World to believe, were written by his Divine Inspiration. Let
us rather so serioussy consider and attend to what is there revealed to us, as
by those Terrors of the Lord relating to a future Judgment, to be persuaded to
a sincere Revisal of our Ways, and deep Repentance of what we shall find to
have been amiss, and immediate Endeavors to do no more wickedly. Let us have a
care how we are charmed with the Pomps and Vanities of this World, as if here
were our Happiness and our Heaven, and we looked for no other Life when this is
done; and let us be chiefly employed in making Provision for that other endless
Life which will succed this, that then we may be happy, when, if we are
miserable, we shall be always so. Remembering that the Rich Man in the Parable,
who in this Life received his good things, and was wholly intent upon the
Enjoyment of them, and looked no further, made no Provision for what was to be
hereafter in that other State; aster he died was tormented in the Flames of
Hell, and wanted a Drop of Water to cool his Tongue: While the poor, despised,
and seemingly miserable Lazarus, that begged for the Crumbs which fell from his
Table, and was taken little Notice of by any but the Rich Man's Dogs; because
his Poverty made him Religious, and think of and provide for better things in
an everlasting World, was, when he died, conducted by Angels into Abraham's
Bosom, that Place of Eternal Happiness, Rest and Peace, which is prepared for
the Righteous.

These things, if we consider thoroughly and seriously, there will be no need of
one from the Dead, either to convince us of the Truth of them, or to persuade
us to an immediate Repentance, that we may escape that Place of Eternal
Torment, reserved for the obstinately wicked, and be received into that happy
State which shall for ever crown the pious Endeavors of the Good. Wherefore,
for the future, may we all so meditate upon these things, and give our selves
so entirely to them, that, through God's gracious Assistance, our profiting may
appear in all things?

The PRAYER.
O God, infinitely wise and Good, the Disposals of whose Providence here below,
though always for the best, are yet often the Cause of Wonder to us Mortals;
especially in the Prosperity of the Wicked, and the Afflictions of the
Righteous: Teach me the Wisdom, I beseech thee, to look beyond this World for
Happiness, and never to make vain Conclusions of thy Favor or displeasure to
my self or others, or concerning mine or their Condition in the other World,
from the Circumstances of this our present Life: But rather in all things to
acknowledge thy Providence to be good and just, and be careful to secure my Duty
in whatsoever Station thou shall please to place me. Grant that in Prosperity I
may be Humble, Thankful and Charitable; in Adversity Contented, and resigned
under thy Paternal Rod; and may make that good Use of every Condition which
thou designest I should, and carefully avoid the Snares of each; and make it my
great Endeavor, whilst I continue here below, to secure a happy Eternity in
the World of Spirits, where my Condition, whatever it then shall be, will be
unchangeable. And, may my Belief of future Eternal Rewards and Punishments, be
daily more and more strengthened and confirmed, by a serious and unprejudiced
Attention to the plain Assurance thou have given me of it in the Holy
Scriptures; so as not to be vainly desirous of any more extraordinary Evidence
in this matter, but believing these great Truths without wavering. Grant that I
may immediately endeavor to reform my Life before it be too late: That so,
when I go hence, I may be received into Abraham's Bosom, the happy Portion of
the Faithful, and escape the Place of endless Torment, prepared for the Devil
and his Angels. Grant this, O Gracious God, for Jesus Christ his Sake.

PARABLE XIII. Of the Importunate Widow.
Luke xviii. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, And Jesus spoke a Parable to this End, that Men
ought always to pray and not to faint;

Saying, there was in a City a Judge which feared not God, neither regarded Man.

And there was a Widow in that City, and she came unto him, saying, Avenge me
of mine Adversary.

And he would not for a while; but afterward he said within himself, Though I
fear not God, neither regard Man;

Yet because this Widow troubles me, I will avenge her, lest by her continual
coming she weary me.


THE Force of this Parable, in order to the persuading to a constant and
importunate Devotion, lies in this, That if Importunity will prevail with a
sinful Man, that neither fears God, nor has any Compassion for the Miseries of
his Fellow Creatures, to grant Petitions offered to him: How much more
prevalent will it be, with the infinitely good God, to relieve the Necessities
of such as devoutly and earnestly implore his Help? And to the same Sense is
another Parable, Luke 11.16. Which of you shall have a Friend, and shall go to
him at Midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three Loaves, for a Friend
of mine in his Journey is come unto me, and I have nothing to set before him;
and he from within shall answer and say, Trouble me not, the Door is now shut,
and my Children are with me in Bed, I cannot rise and give thee. I say unto
you, Though he will not rise and give him because he is his Friend, yet,
because of his Importunity, he will rise and give him as many as he needs.
And the Application of this Parable is, Ask and it shall be given you, seek and
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. And the Reason why our
Lord applies the first Parable to God's certainly avenging his Elect, which cry
Day and Night to him, though he bear long with them; I suppose to be (with Dr.
Hammond) the great Discouragements his Disciples were then under, by reason of
the Malice of the Jews, which made it necessary for him to keep up their
Spirits by assuring them, that God's not immediately hearkening to their
Prayers by manifestly appearing in their Cause to protect them and punish their
Enemies, was no Argument that he wholly disregarded them, but that if they
persisted in their grateful Importunity, he would at length answer their
Desires. For, if Importunity be so prevalent even with Wicked Men, how much
more will it be so with the God of Mercy and Compassion?

It Is plain then, the chief Design of these Parables, though differently worded
and applied, is to enforce the Necessity of frequent and earnest Prayer; and
therefore, without any farther minute Explication of them, (they being so
plain, that they neither need nor will bear it) I shall address my self to
discourse upon what is couched under them, and endeavor to evince the
Necessity of Praying frequently, and with Earnestness and Importunity.

That Prayer, or a Liberty of making our Requests known unto God, is a
Privilege and Happiness inestimable, no one that considers the Nature of God
and the Nature of Man can question. The latter, a poor dependent Creature,
helpless and weak, shortsighted and ignorant, full of Wants and Necessities,
obnoxious to innumerable evil Accidents, of unruly Passions and Affections, the
Hate and Envy of the Spirits of Darkness, strongly prone to what is Evil, and
averse to what is Good; the former, a Being of infinite Fullness and
Perfection, infinitely wise, and powerful, and good, the Maker of the Universe,
whose is the whole Creation, and to whom, every Thing that is obeys. Now, that
this indigent helpless Creature should have such a Patron to make his Wants
known to, a Patron so inexhaustibly full, so wise, so able, and so willing, to
direct and guide him, to support and comfort him, to protect and defend, to
relieve and succor him; to have Freedom of Address to such a Patron as this,
is, without all doubt, a Privilege and Favor that no Man can sufficiently
esteem.

And yet, (so unaccountably stupid and thoughtless are Men for the Generality)
What is more neglected, nay despised, than this invaluable Privilege! As if
they were full, and had need of Nothing, or were self-sufficient, and could be
their own Helpers; when indeed, they are wretched and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

In pity to this our doubly Forlorn Condition, our Blessed Savior, the God of
Compassions, that if possible we might receive the full Benefit of so great a
Favor and Divine Condescension; has made this Privilege become our Duty, and
bound it upon us by the Commands of his Holy Institution; encouraged our
Practice of it by his own Example, and by Himself and his Apostles left such
Directions for the more effectual Performance of it, that every Man for the
Future might be without Excuse, if he either Prayed not at all, or to no
purpose.

Among which Directions, the Importunity recommended in this Parable, and in
that other beforementioned so near of Kin to it, is greatly to be regarded; as
that which will certainly, if other Requisites are not wanting (for there are
others) bring down a Blessing. But because there are other Things required both
by our Lord and his Apostles, in order to our Praying successfully, besides
Importunity; I think it will not be amiss, if I discourse more largely of this
great and concerning Duty of Prayer, than I could do if I strictly confined my
self to the Bounds of this Parable; and endeavor these three Things.

First, To prove that Prayer is not only an inestimable Privilege, but the Duty
of every Christian.

Secondly, To show how far the Obligation to this Duty does extend. And,

Thirdly, What are the necessary Requisites, that this Duty may be performed
successfully.

First, Prayer is not only the Privilege, but the Duty of every Christian.

Watch and pray, Mat 26.41
that ye enter not into Temptation, was Our Lord's Charge to Peter, and the two
Sons of Zebedee, in the Garden of his Agony; and not to them only, but to all
others that are in their Circumstances, (i. e.) in great Danger of being
tempted, and weak and unable of Themselves to make Resistance; and that, God
knows, we all of us are, and therefore to all of us is this Command directed.
Ask and ye shall have, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened
unto you, says the same Blessed Jesus immediately after one of the Parables
before mentioned; as if he had said, God will be gracious and relieve your
Necessities, but it is upon Condition you will lay your Wants before him, and
implore his Help; according to that of S. James, chap. 4. ver. 2. Ye have not,
because ye ask not. In the Sixth of Matthew our Lord has set us a Pattern of
Prayer, and commanded us to use it, When ye pray, say Our Father, etc. And he
spoke the Parable we are now discoursing on, to this very purpose, That men
ought always to pray, and not to faint; and he himself was our Example too in
this Matter, and continued whole Nights in Prayer unto God; and his Example in
Things within our reach, as assiduous Prayer is, we are upon innumerable
Accounts obliged to follow.

And as our Lord, so his Apostles bind this upon us as our Duty. Phil. 4.6.
Col. 4.2. Ephesians. 6.18. 1 Timothy 2.8. 1 These. 5.17.
Thus S. Paul bids us in every thing by Prayer and Supplication with
Thanksgiving, to let our Requests be made known unto God; and to continue in
Prayer, and watch in the same with all Perseverance, and to Pray every where,
and without, ceasing.

The Duty, we see, is sufficiently bound upon us by our Holy Religion: It Is
plain and express, and must as carefully be observed as any other Command; so
sollicitous is our good God for our Happiness, as by all Means to bring us to
the Practice of what will be so highly beneficial to us: And where the Love of
a Thing, upon Account of its own Excellency, and Serviceableness to our Selves,
will not attract our numbered senseless Souls, there to goad and prick us on,
and even force us to it, by Threats of Punishment if we refuse. Good God! That
Men should need haling to Felicity! And that God should be so desirous of it,
as thus to take all Measures to bring us to it! O the unaccountable Stupidity
of Man, and the unsearchable Riches of the Goodness of God!

And what a miserable Wretch is he, unnatural to Himself, and Ungrateful to his
God, who by his Obstinacy shall frustrate so great Tenderness of God as this,
and break through so many Obligations to his own Ruin! and with Devilish Pride
and Sullenness starve and famish his Soul, rather than Pray to God to Relieve
and Help him! How many of those that call Themselves Christians are thus
wretchedly miserable, God and their own Consciences know best; but let not any
Man be deceived; it is not only a Privilege now, but is become a necessary Duty,
and by the Neglect of it we shall not only lose the Benefit consequent upon the
Peformance of it, but receive the Punishment due to the Breach of the Laws of
God; which, in all probability, will be so much the more severe, as the Benefit
would have been great: For nothing is more provoking, than to have great
Favors and Condescensions (such as is this) slighted and despised. And thus
much may suffice to prove, that Prayer is not only the Privilege, but the Duty
of every Christian. I proceed in the

Second Place, to show, How far the Obligation to this Duty does extend. Our
Lord in the Proeme to this Parable, says, That Men ought always to pray; and S.
Paul, 1 Timothy 2.8. says, I will that Men pray every where, (...), in every
Place; and Ephesians. 6.18. (...), upon every Occasion, with every Opportunity; and
1 Thessalonians. 5.17. he joins both together, and commands that we pray (...), without
Intermission. So that it is a Duty that extends to all Times and Places, to all
Seasons, and States and Conditions of Life; and as at all Times we stand in
need of the Favor and Blessing, the Protection and Support, the Mercy and
Forgiveness of God; so it is at all Times our Duty to beseech it of him. But
this will need a farther Explication.

For this Praying without ceasing or Intermission, cannot be understood in the
strictest Sense, as if there were to be no Cessation of the Act, for that would
be impossible; and there are many other Things that we are as much obliged to,
which will take up great Portions of our Time. Many Necessities of Nature there
are that must be adverted to and supplied, many honest Employments that must be
followed, many other Christian Graces that must be exercised, and sometimes
even innocent Recreations must take place; there being, as Solomon says, a Time
for all Things, a Time to Weep and a Time to Laugh, a Time to Mourn, and a Time
to Dance. This, as well as other Affirmative Commands, does, Obligare semper,
as the Schools distinguish, but not pro semper; that is, There is no Time, or
Season, or Place so exempt, but that in due Circumstances we are obliged to
this Duty, but it does not oblige as Negative Commands do, to every Moment,
without any Exception. There is no Minute of our Life, but the Commands, Thou
shall do no Murder, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Thou shall not Steal, and
the like, do oblige us to observe them; but there are very many Portions of our
Time wherein such Precepts as these, Be Afflicted, and Mourn, and Weep, and the
contrary to it, Rejoice evermore, and Pray without ceasing, and the like,
neither do nor can oblige. To keep our Minds in an habitual Frame and apt
Disposition for the Performance of these Duties in proper Circumstances, is all
that is expected from us. But more particularly, to Pray always, or every
where, and without ceasing, is to do these Three Things:

First, It Is to be very frequent in offering up pious Ejaculations, or short
mental Prayers, as Occasion shall offer, which will be very often; and the most
usual and common Occurrences of Life may be improved to this sort of Devotion,
without the least Hindrance or Encroachment upon any other Employments. In the
Field, in the Shop, in the Bed when Sleep departs, in a Journey, every where,
and at all Times, this may be done, without Expense of Time, without Show or
Observation; and is a Service highly acceptable to God, and keeps the Mind in
an excellent Frame and Temper, and is out of Danger of being polluted by
Hypocrisy and other base and little Ends; which too often mingle with our more
set and public Prayers. And the Soul may more vigorously dart forth these
short Accidental Breathings, and storm Heaven more successfully by these quick
lively Efforts, than by whole Armies of Words and Legions of long-breathed
Petitions, which are rather apt to tire the Soul, and rebate the Edge of her
Devotion.

Of this Nature is the Prayer which our Lord has taught the Church; the whole
far from long, and the particular Petitions very short, but withal full and
comprehensive to Admiration: In Imitation whereof, have the wise Compilers of
our Liturgy divided the Service into short Collects, and comprised their Sense
in as few Words as is possible; that so the Mind may be more intent and
recollect, and have time to breath as 'twere between each of them, and return
with fresh Vigor and Spirit to the succeeding parts; according to our Lord's
express Advice, Use not vain Repetitions when ye pray; and that of the Wise
Preacher, Eccl. ^.2. Be not rash with thy Mouth, and let not thine Heart be
hasty to utter any Thing before God, for God is in Heaven, and thou upon Earth,
therefore let thy Words be few. And this way of Ejaculatory Devotion comes very
near to Praying without ceasing in the strictest Sense, and much resembles that
Heavenly Employment of those, Rev. 4.8. Who rest not Night and Day, saying
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come. But,

Secondly, To Pray always, is never willingly to omit the Morning, and Evening,
and Noonday Returns, of our more set and solemn private Addresses to the
Throne of Grace; the Morning and Evening especially, which is the least Homage
we can pay to the Almighty, and which are Seasons the most of all in our power,
to employ as we think fit.

The Morning and Evening Sacrifice was constant among the Jews; the Fire was
ever Burning upon the Altar, and never was suffered to go out. David prayed
Morning and Evening, and at Noon, and God heard his Voice; yea, seven Times a
Day did he praise him because of his Righteous Judgments: and Daniel made his
Petition three Times a Day toward Jerusalem, as the Jews Custom was.

The Morning and Evening are the two Extremes of the Day, and the Noon is like
an intermediate Link between them, that is joined to both, and so makes one
continued Day; so that, he that prays Morning and Evening, and at Noon, may not
improperly be said to spend the Day in Prayer, and to continue instant in it.
And how very fitting it is, that these Returns should without any wilful
Intermission be observed, will soon appear to any one that considers.

For First, As for our private Morning Devotions, our Preservation from the
Dangers of the Night past, God's careful watching over us while we slept, and
lengthning out our Opportunity for Repentance, and making Provision for a
Better Life; ought certainly to bring us upon our Knees, in humble Adoration of
that Good God in whom we live, and move, and have our Beings; in humble
Submission to his Providence for the Future, and devout Oblation of our whole
Selves and our whole Time, to His Service, who has continued to us Life, and
Health, and all Things. And, since all our Sufficiency is of God, and we can do
no good Thing, nor so much as think a good Thought, without him; to beg his
Blessed Presence with us, That he would work in us to will and to do according
to his Good Pleasure; That he would guide and protect us, and bless and prosper
our honest Undertakings, and still continue to watch over us for Good; That we
may be undefiled by the Temptations of the Day, and look back with Comfort upon
our Actions, when we cast up our Accounts at Night.

2. As for our Midday Devotions, because we are then in the midst of the
Dangers and Temptations of the Day, beset on every side with Allurements to do
Evil; 'twill highly concern us afresh to beg the Divine Aid and Support, that
we may stand upright. If we have passed securely the former part of the Day, it
becomes us to pay our humble Acknowledgments to our Divine Guardian and Guide;
and if we have fallen, it becomes us with Shame and Sorrow to confess our
Vileness, and deprecate God's Anger, and beg his Grace, that we may be more
circumspect the Remainder of it. And besides, the Works of the Creation, the
wonderful Order of the Universe, the Variety, Beauty, and Usefulness of the
Creatures, and the plentiful Provision God has made for all our Necessities;
will then be very proper to engage our Thoughts, and will minister abundant
Matter for Devotion, and be very apt to fill our Breasts with Holy Breathings
and Aspirations toward that inexhaustible Fountain of Beauty and Perfection,
and Power infinite, who by his Word spoke all this into Being.

3. And for Prayer at Evening, our Protection from the many evil Accidents, and
the many great Blessings of the Day past; the Miscarriages likewise and
Failures of it, if no worse, and the Dangers of the approaching Night, are
sufficient Motives and Engagements to renew our devout Addresses to the
Almighty.

And as private Prayer ought to be thus constant, and without wilful
Intermission; so, and more especially, no Opportunity of praying to God in the
public Congregation should be omitted: For, this Attendance upon the public
Worship of God, is that which is chiefly and primarily intended by the Apostles
in what they wrote about this Duty of Prayer. Most part of the first Epistle to
the Corinthians, is spent in giving Directions for the more decent Management
of the public Service of God; and 1 Timothy 2.8. the Command of Praying (...) in
every place, and that Ephesians. 6.18. (...) upon every opportunity, must primarily
relate to the public, as any capable Person may perceive, by considering the
Context.

And accordingly, those Converts made by S. Peter, Acts 2.42. Continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking Bread and
in Prayers; and v. 46. They continued daily in the Temple with one Accord; and
on the Day of Pentecost we find them all with one accord in one place, Acts
2.1. And thus it was in all Ages of the Church, till Iniquity abounded, and the
Love of many began to wax cold. But methinks, the Consideration of the great
Advantages of these Public Devotions above the Private, should have some
Influence upon us, in order to our more constant Attendance at the places of
Divine Worship; for our Lord has expressly promised his peculiar Presence there,
and that the Prayers there offered shall be successful. Thus Matt. 18.19. I say
unto you, says he, that if two of you shall agree on Earth as touching any
thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in
Heaven; for where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in
the midst of them. The Church is an Emblem of Heaven, and the Congregation of
the General Assembly of the Firstborn which are written there; whose happy
Employment is, to Admire, Adore, and Extol the Infinite Mercy and Majesty of
God, for ever and ever; and as there, so here, the Devotion of others will
raise our Affections, and their Zeal and Fervor quicken our Devotion. To which
purpose is that of the Apostle Heb. 10.24, 25. Not forsaking the Assembling of
your selves together, as the manner of some is, but exhorting one another, and
provoking to Love and Good Works, by pious Example and devout Behavior in the
Church. And the Blessing pronounced by the Minister at the Close of those
public Offices, was in the Primitive Times thought a Thing of no mean Regard,
whatever low Thoughts Men nowadays may have of it.

To this Head of Public Prayer, may be reduced the Assembling of a Family
together to offer up their joint Petitions to God; whether by the chief of the
Family, or by some Minister of Religion, if present: And this has been a
Practice of very long standing, and is of excellent Use.

It keeps a Family in a serious Sense of Religion; it accustoms Youth to it
betimes, and is an excellent Example to Children and Servants, who are apt to
mark and imitate their Parents and Masters Steps more than they are aware of;
and Young People will be inclined to think, there is something more than
ordinary in Religion, when they see those, of whose Prudence and Experience
they have an Opinion, so seriously set about it.

The Returns of these Family-Devotions at the Beginning and Close of the Day,
ought not without good Reason to be omitted; for they naturally tend to make
People more Industrious and Just in their Dealings in the World, as keeping up
in their Minds a sense of their being in the Sight and Presence of a Just and
Holy God, and to prevent Abundance of Folly and Levity, and Looseness of
Manners, and make the Days Sober and Honest, and the Nights Innocent and
Chaste. And this appears evidently to be true, in the great Difference any Man
may discern between Families where this Holy Custom is, and is not observed;
Idleness and Laziness, Pilfering and Cheating, Swearing and Lying, Lewdness and
Intemperance, and Debauchery of all sorts, generally where it is neglected; and
good Order, Modesty, and Sobriety, Diligence and Faithfulness where it is
observed: For, it tending so much as it evidently does, to the making Men Good
Christians; it consequently, must needs tend to the making them good in every
Relation.

These solemn Family Devotions, are likewise a very good preparation for the
better performance of the more public Offices in the great Congregation. For
they tend to create that habitual Seriousness and Recollection of Thought,
which our Public Prayers command, and without which, we shall offer but the
Sacrifice of Fools. The more Men are affected with the Prayers of a Family at
home, the more sacred and awful will the public Service in the House of God
appear to them; if attentive and devout there, much more so here; and the more
they feel the Comfort of joint Devotions in their own Houses, the more desirous
will they be of, and the more benefited and refreshed by, the Harmony of a full
Choir of Saints in the Holy Temple.

I Am afraid this pious Custom is nowadays too much neglected; some grudging
to take so much Time from their other Employments as this Duty requires; and
others, on Evenings especially, making themselves unfit for the Performance of
it by tarrying long at the Wine, and enflaming themselves with Strong Drink;
and some truly, thinking it too precise and puritanical a Thing, to be
practiced nowadays. But these last should have a Care how they throw ill
Names upon what our Religion has made our Duty, and what has all along been
observed by the best Men in the World; and they would do well to consider those
Words of our Lord, Mark 8.38. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my Words
in this adulterous and sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father and of the Holy Angels.

Is it a fitting Reason, that a thing so excellent as this should be despised
and disused, because those that in other Matters dissent from us, are so
careful to observe it? Let their Piety in this Instance, rather shame us into
Amendment, that we may be behind them in no Good Work, and leave them no
Occasion of Caviling and making Objections against our Church, by reason of the
careless indifferent Religion of some that are of our Communion. In particular,
this Neglect of Family-Devotions is often thrown in our Teeth; and the best way
to take off the Aspersion, is heartily to set about the Practice of the Duty.

It Is our great Happiness, were we duly sensible of it, that we are Members of
the most Primitive Church in the World, and the greatest Encouragers of True
Piety and Religion; and methinks we should be very careful, had we any Love for
this Church, any desire that it should flourish and prosper, not to disparage
it by our so disagreeable Conversation. Other Sects and Parties we see
extraordinary diligent to gain Honor and Reputation, by all means, to their
Profession, that their Antagonists may discover no Flaw or Indecency, no Breach
of the Orders and Customs they have embraced; while we, that have the best
Cause, are generally the worst Managers of it. For Shame, let us at length grow
wise, and live up to what we profess in this and every other Particular; and
transcribe the excellent Rules of our Church, in our Conversation; let us act
like true Sons of the Church of England, as well as talk as such; and then no
Doubt but God and his Truth will prevail. We are as a City built upon a Hill, a
Light set in an eminent Place, many envious Eyes are upon us, and rejoice to
see our Taper burn dim, and our City defiled by Wickedness and Impurity;
wherefore we should be the more careful to trim our Lamps, and purge out our
Stains, and shine brightly, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Generation:
That these Men seeing our good Works, may at length glorify our Heavenly
Father, by a Hearty Union and Communion with us, and return to the Fold which
they have so groundlesly deserted.

As for such as grudge Time for this Duty of praying in their Families, let
them consider, whether they can indeed improve it more to their Advantage;
whether the Gain of a little Money is to be compared to having the Blessing of
God, and the Guidance and Protection of his good Providence: And whether their
Time was not chiefly given them to worship God in, and to make Provision for
another World.

And as for such as make themselves unfit for this Holy Duty, by Night Revels
and Intemperance, they cannot but be sensible that that is a very ill Excuse,
such as they should blush and be ashamed of, and a Fault which it highly
concerns them speedily to amend; remembering that Drunkards are in that black
List, of such as shall not enter into the Kingdom of Christ and of God, 1 Cor.
6.10.

Having thus shown that Prayer is not only the Privilege, but the Duty of a
Christian, and how far the Obligation to this Duty does extend, I proceed to the

Third and last thing to be done, which is, to show what is required in order
to the effectual Performance of this Duty; and what St. Paul says, 1 Timothy 2.8.
added to the Importunity recommended in the Parable we are now discoursing
upon, will doubtless make our Prayers to be availing. The Apostles Words are
these, I will that Men pray every where, lifting up Holy Hands without Wrath
and doubting; and of these Requisites I shall first discourse, and then of
Importunity.

First, If we would be accepted at the Throne of Grace, we must lift up Holy
Hands. The Word in the Original signifies pure and undefiled, (...)
and it is an Allusion to the Custom of the Jews, who constantly used the
Ceremony of washing before they prayed; which was intended to signify the
Necessity of a clean Heart, in order to Acceptance with God. For God is a Being
infinitely Pure and Holy, and that cannot behold Iniquity, and into whose
Presence no unclean thing can enter; and therefore, the Sacrifice of the
Wicked, as Solomon observes, must needs be an Abomination to him, and bring
down a Curse rather than a Blessing; and the Prayer of the Upright only his
Delight. Prove. 15.8. More particularly, by this Expression of lifting up Holy
Hands is meant these three Qualifications.

First, That the Suppliant be one of a good Life, or if he has not formerly
been so, repents, and is sincerely resolved to live as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, for the future. For how can he that is a Rebel to God, a Traitor and
Judas to his Savior, and that will obey none but the Devil and his own vile
Lusts; how can such an one think that God should hearken to his Requests, who
consumes God's Blessings upon his Lusts, Jam. 4.3.
as St. James expresses it, and as S. Paul, Turns the Grace of God into
Lasciviousness, and sins still more that Grace may still abound; and is
encouraged by God's Goodness to persist in his Wickedness? He only can with
Reason expect to be heard by a Holy God, who is either actually pious and good,
or heartily desires and intends to be so.

Secondly, By lifting up Holy Hands, is meant Purity of Intention, unmixed
Desires of advancing the Glory of God, and of the Supply of our real Needs, and
of promoting our Eternal Salvation.

That is, no Man must dare to play the Hypocrite in his Devotion, and have
other little sinister By-Ends, such as the Praise of Men, that his Vanity may
be tickled by being esteemed more Righteous and Heavenly-minded than his
Neighbors; and that under the Covert of more Religion than ordinary, he may
the more securely bring to pass some wicked underhand Design. That there have
been such sort of Devotionists as these, is evident from what we find recorded
of the Pharisees, Men to all Appearance extraordinary Religious, Fasting and
Praying frequently and long, and very Exemplary in other Instances of Piety;
when, after all, our Lord who knew their Hearts, has told us, they did it to be
seen, and to have Praise of Men; and under Pretense of long Prayers, to
insinuate into Wealthy Widows Esteem, that at length they might have an
Opportunity to devour their Houses. How many of this sort there is nowadays,
God and their own Consciences know best; but this is certain, that wherever the
Guilt lies, it is a great Abomination to him, who is Truth it self, and
infinitely hates a Lie; especially in Matters of Religion, where his Honor is
so nearly concerned.

Wherefore, let those who find themselves pricked by what is now said, take
care that their Religion be more pure and sincere for the Future; lest our
Lord's Woes to the Pharisees fall upon their Heads, and they be doomed to the
Portion of Hypocrites, where is Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

Thirdly, The Word, (...), sometimes signifies Just and Upright, without Fraud
and Cheating Arts and Oppression; and he that would be heard when he prays,
must cleanse his Hands from these, must do as he would be done to, and provide
things honest in the Sight of all Men; and despise the Gain of Oppression, as
Isaiah phrases it, Chap. 33. Verse. 15. For God is Just as well as Holy, and
hates the sly Windings of Deceit and Fraud; He is about our Path, and spieth
out all our Ways, and will be a swift Witness against those that oppress,
instead of turning a gracious Ear to their Petitions. 1 These. 4.6.
Wherefore, let no Man go beyond or defraud his Brother in any Matter, for God
is the Avenger of all such; but take care that his Hands be not defiled with
unjust Gain, lest it make them incapable of receiving a Blessing. Thus much for
the first Requisite to our praying effectually, the lifting up Holy Hands.

A second is, That this be done without Wrath, that there be a Freedom from
Strife and Revenge, and a Readiness to Reconciliation and Forgiveness.

For as for a hot angry Disposition, nothing more unfits a Man for Devotion
than that; it makes the Mind continually in a Storm, breaks the Order and
Connection of Thoughts, puts the whole Soul into a Hurry, and makes it like a
Troubled Sea that cannot rest. And therefore, no wonder if it cast up Mire and
Dirt, Desires impure and displeasing to God, rather than the sweet smelling
Savor of an acceptable Sacrifice.

As our Religion in general, so Prayer in particular, is a reasonable Service,
and requires as great Freedom of Thought, and recollected Presence of Mind, as
any thing whatever. The Object of Prayer, is a Being of infinite Sanctity, and
transcendent Majesty, and this should move us to approach him with the most
awful and sedate Temper of Mind; and that which is prayed for, is, or ought to
be of the greatest Value, and which it most of all concerns us, to have
bestowed upon us; and therefore it concerns us to have our Reason and Thoughts
at Command, lest our Petition should be rejected for our ill Management of it.

Now, nothing more discomposes the Mind, and deprives it of the Use of Reason,
than the Passion of Anger: It puts the Spirits into such a violent and
unnatural Motion, as makes all the Powers of the Soul for a Time unserviceable.
Things are apprehended in strange Confusion and Disorder, and remembered with
much Imperfection, and foolish and ridiculous Choices are made by the Will; and
all the Affections, consequently, out of Course: Just as is the Condition of
Mad Men, only the Fit is sooner over. And is this a fitting Temper of Mind to
approach the Throne of the great God in, and prefer Petitions for the greatest
Blessings? Let a Man, after he has been brawling with his Neighbors, consider
if he were to go immediately to beg a Boon of his Prince, whether he should not
then do it with great Disadvantage; how apt he should then be to commit
Indecencies, and to omit Matters of chief Concern in his Request, and the like;
and then let him say what he thinks of addressing to the great King of Heaven
in such an ill Disguise of Soul? And whether he does not believe that he might
speed much better, if his Mind were calmer and more it self? Now, the Returns
of Prayer being so frequent, and angry Men's Brawlings and Quarellings so
frequent; it must needs often be, that such Men, unless they omit praying,
which is still worse, must pray to God with Minds greatly discomposed, and and
unfit for the Performance of so Holy a Duty, at least with any Success.

As for a Revengeful Temper of Mind, that is a thing so contrary to him, whose
Definition is Love, and who has so freely forgiven us so infinite a Debt, that
no Desires breathed from such a Soul, but must needs stink in his Nostrils, and
be utterly rejected by him. His Divine Son, the only Mediator between him and
us, who presents the Prayers of the Faithful, and intercedes for their
Acceptance; will be so far from appearing in an implacable revengeful Man's
Behalf, that he has declared (in a Parable before discoursed of, Mat. 18.23.)
he will deal with such with the utmost Severity. God will accept nothing at our
Hands without Charity, and a Gift, though brought to the Altar, must not be
offered there, till he that is at Variance with his Brother be reconciled to
him; he must leave his Gift before the Altar, and go his Way, and first be
reconciled to his Brother, and then come and offer his Gift, Mat. 5.23, 24.

A third Requisite to our praying successfully, is, that our Prayers be without
doubting, or as it is expressed, Heb. 22. In full Assurance of Faith. According
to what our Lord said upon Occasion of the Barren Fig-Tree's being dried up
from the Roots at his Word, which, when St. Peter and the rest of the Disciples
wondered at; Mark 11, 2^.
Jesus answered and said unto them, have Faith in God, for verily I say unto
you, whosoever shall say unto this Mountain, be thou removed and cast into the
Sea, shall not doubt in his Heart, but believe that those things he says,
shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he says. Therefore, I say unto
you, what things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them. And elsewhere, Mark 9.23.
All things are possible to him that believes. To which agrees that of St.
James, If any Man lack Wisdom, let him ask of God; but let him ask in Faith,
nothing wavering, for such a Man shall not receive any thing of the Lord, James
1. 5, 6. The meaning of all which I suppose to be this, That, as the Apostles,
upon their firm Belief of the Truth of our Lord's Promise of enabling them to
work Miracles for the Advancement of the Christian Religion, and of his Power
to do accordingly, should, when they prayed for his Help, be enabled to do as
they desired; so all other Believers, if their Prayers are accompanied with a
strong Belief of his Veracity in promising to hear the Prayers of the Faithful,
of his Ability to relieve and help them, and of his infinite Goodness and
Willingness to grant them their Desires, if it be expedient for them, they
shall certainly speed well and receive a Blessing at the Hand of God.

The very Petitions they offer up, if for their Good, shall be granted them;
and if not for their Good, God in his infinite Wisdom will bestow something
else upon them, that shall be more for their Advantage: And, they may depend
upon it, they shall not be sent away empty.

But, he that wavereth, and is of doubtful Mind in these Particulars, and prays
with great Diffidency, and distrust of prevailing; as his Prayers must needs be
very cool, and without that Life, and Fervor, and Importunacy (which we shall
see presently is likewise necessary to our Success) so his Mind must be in
strange Agitation, and tossed between the Waves of two contrary and very
perplexing Passions, Hope and Fear; and the latter having manifestly the
Advantage with such a Man (for if his Hope were stronger than his Fear, he
would be more fixed and steady than he is) it is a Thousand to one, but at
length, after intolerable Disquietudes and Anxiety of Mind, he will split upon
Despair or downright Atheism. So true is that of St. James, Chap. 1. Verse. 6,
8. He that wavereth, is like a Wave of the Sea, driven about and tossed; a
double minded Man is unstable in all his Ways; and so necessary is it, that we
should firmly believe, and be actually persuaded when we pray, that our
Petitions, if for our Good, shall be granted us by our Heavenly Father.

There is yet one thing more required if we would succeed in our Devotions, and
which is of very great Avail in this Matter; and that is, a Holy Earnestness
and Importunity: And it is a thing so much to be observed, that our Lord
delivered two Parables (cited at the Beginning of this Discourse) to this very
Purpose, That Men ought always to pray and not to faint. In both there is a
Delay and Denial for a Time, but at length, the Importunate prevail.

Now, though the Reason why our Savior directs to this Importunity, cannot be
the same with that mentioned in the Parables; God's Quietness and Happiness
being not to be disturbed, nor he teas'd and weari'd into Compliance, as those
in the Parables were, yet there may be several other Reasons given for it.

It Is a Manifestation of our earnest Desire of prevailing, and that we indeed
highly value what we thus importunately beg for; it is a means to make us prize
a Blessing the more, which we so hardly come by; and to be the more thankful
for it when we receive it, and the more careful not to lose or forfeit it. It Is
a Trial of our Patience, an Exercise of our Faith and Hope, and Dependence upon
God; it teaches Humility and Self-Denial, and Amendment of our Faults, lest
our Continuance in them render us unworthy of God's Favor; it makes Devotion
burn bright and vigorously, and is of great Advantage to all the Purposes of
Religion.

For these, and such like Reasons it is, that our good God, who gives to all
Men freely, and upbraideth not, has made Importunity a Condition, in order to
the obtaining our Requests, and indeed, the Blessings God encourages us to ask,
and bestows upon us, are so great, that the utmost Earnestness, and most
importunate Addresses, and the longest Attendance, will be abundantly repaid
with a Grant at last.

Having thus done what I at first proposed to do upon the Parable of the
importunate Widow, and proved that Prayer is not only the Privilege but the
Duty of every Christian, and shown how far the Obligation to this Duty does
extend, and what those Requisites are, which are necessary to the effectual
Performance of this Duty, viz, Purity of Life and Manners, Sincerity of
Intention, Just and Upright Dealing with one another, expressed by St. Paul, by
lifting up Holy Hands; and likewise a quiet peaceable Temper of Mind, not given
to Strife and Wrath, but apt to be reconciled and to forgive; together with a
full Assurance of Faith in the Veracity, and Power, and Goodness of God,
accompanied with a Holy Earnestness and Importunity: It remains only that we
all of us be exhorted, diligently and heartily, according to the Measures
before described, to put in Practice this so beneficial a Duty.

There is no Place, no Time but we have need of God's Favor and Protection,
and we may always, and in every Place beseech it of him; and he has promised to
hear and accept us, whenever we address to him as we ought. It Is Prayer that
sanctifies Prosperity, and makes light the Burdens of Adversity, and brings a
Blessing upon our Business and Callings, and is the greatest Cordial upon the
Bed of Sickness; wherefore, Let us pray every where, lifting up Holy Hands
without Wrath and doubting; and by an Importunity not to be denied, do a
pleasing Violence to Heaven; For every one that thus asks, Matthew. 11.10. etc.
receives. If a Son shall ask any of us that is a Father, Bread, or a Fish, or
an Egg, will we give him a Stone, or a Serpent, or a Scorpion? If we then being
evil, know how to give good Gifts to our Children, how much more shall our
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit, and all other needful Blessings to them
that ask him?

The PRAYER.
MOst Gracious God, who not only permittest, but do encourage, nay command us
to make our Requests known unto thee, and have promised by thy Blessed Son,
that whatever we ask in his Name, if it be expedient for us, we shall receive;
assist me with thy Grace so to advert to the All Sufficiency and Almighty
Goodness of thy Divine Nature, and the miserable Indigency of my own, that I
may have a due Value for this inestimable Favor, and be so much my own Friend,
as often to bend my Knees before the Throne of thy Grace, and lay my
Supplications before thee. I humbly confess, O Lord, and deplore my hitherto
great and stupid Backwardness in this Heavenly and most beneficial Duty, and
earnestly beseech thee, that for the time to come, thou would prepare my
Soul by the Inspirations of thy Blessed Spirit, that it may become a House of
Prayer, and a fit Habitation for thee my God. May I be frequent in pious
Ejaculations, and Mental Breathings toward thee my chiefest Good, and constant
in the more solemn Returns both of Public and Private Devotion: And that I may
be successful, and my Prayers bring down a Blessing, Grant that I may list up
Holy Hands to thee without Wrath or Doubting, be pure in my Intentions, careful
to practice these Graces that I pray for, and in all my Conversation pious and
just, free from all Strife, and Malice, and Revenge, and every Thing that is
displeasing to thee, remembering, that the Prayer of the Wicked is an
Abomination. And may a full Assurance of Faith and Holy Importunity always
accompany my Addresses to thee, that so I may not be sent empty away, but
receive a greacious Answer to my Petitions, to the Relief of my Necessities,
and the Advancement of thy Glory, through the Merits of our Blessed Savior
Jesus, in whose Name we present all that we beg of thy Bounty, and hope to be
heard through his prevailing Intercession. Amen.

PARABLE XIV. Of the Pharisee and the Publican.
Luke xviii. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Jesus spoke this Parable unto certain which
trusted in themselves that they were Righteous, and despised others.

Two Men went up into the Temple to Pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a
Publican.

The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee that I am
not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this
Publican.

I Fast twice in the Week; I give Tithes of all that I possess.

And the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his Eyes unto
Heaven, but smote upon his Breast, saying, God be merciful to me a Sinner.

I tell you, this Man went down to his House justified rather than the other;
for every one that exalts himself shall be abased; and he that humbles
himself shall be exalted.


THIS Parable of our Lord's, we see from the Introduction and Conclusion of it,
is levelled against Spiritual Pride; or the being highly opinionated of ones own
Righteousness, and so puffed up by it, as to despise others as vile profane
Persons, whose Religion is not with Ostentation, and who pretend not to such
extraordinary Sanctity: And is intended to show, that an humble self-condemned
Sinner, who though he has been wicked is sensible of it, and with Shame and
Sorrow confesses his Guilt before God; is more acceptable in his sight, and
shall be sooner pardoned by him, and advanced to his Honor, than he that
vaunts of his Virtue and the Performance of the External Duties of Religion.
His Pride and Exaltation of himself shall abase him, while the others Humility
shall exalt him.

And this is very lively represented in this Parable, in the Persons of a
Pharisee and a Publican, and their going up into the Temple to pray. The
Pharisees were a Sect among the Jews, that made the greatest tensions to
extraordinary Holiness, and strict Observance of every Punctilio of their Law;
they wore a peculiar Garb, and used a different sort of Gait from other Men, as
Persons always busied in the serious Contemplation of the best Things; they
were of very reserved Conversations, and of very morose Countenances, as
greatly mortified, and Strangers to the World; their Prayers were public and
long, their Fasts severe and often, their Search of the Scriptures diligent,
and their Contribution to the Maintenance of God's Ministers exact and very
liberal; they paid Tithes of All that they possessed; and by this Means were
highly reverenced by the People, and as highly conceited of Themselves. The
Publicans were Men of quite another Character and Estimation; they were
officers that gathered up the Roman Customs and Tribute, and hired or farmed
them of the Emperor, and then raised Estates to themselves by Exaction and
Oppression: And their Lives were so busy, and so constantly taken up with such
vile Affairs as these, that they thought but little of Religion, and pretended
to as little, and therefore were looked upon by the Jews as the very worst of
Men, and called Sinners by way of Eminence.

These two so very different sort of Men, went up into the Temple to pray. To
see a Pharisee in the Temple was no Wonder, they were the greatest Frequenters
of that Holy Place, and as constant at Divine Service as the Priests that
ministered; but to meet a Publican there was a great Rarity: the Receipt of
Custom was all the Temple they generally frequented, and Mammon was the God
they worshipped in it; and how to gripe, and overreach, and oppress, was the
subject of their Thoughts, and their Devotion.

But however unusual it might be, yet we see a Publican went up into the Temple
to pray; as Scandalous as his Profession was, as full of Hurry and Application
to the World, yet he found Time for the Exercise of Religion: And indeed, no
lawful Profession, of how ill Repute soever, but may be very consistent with a
Sense of Piety; and Men of the most busy Employments, may, if they please,
find time, and that daily too, to go up into the Temple to pray. And that
Employment, whatever it be, and however gainful, that is a Hinderance to
Religion, public as well as private, is for that very Reason unlawful, and
ought to be given over; For what shall it profit a Man, if he shall gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul? There are many Callings or Ways of getting
a Livelihood nowadays, which have an ill Repute, and that deservedly, through
the ill Behavior of some that follow them, which yet are very Lawful, and very
necessary in a State: And therefore, Let not those that have such Employments
plead them in Excuse for their Profaneness and Irreligion, as if their
Employments were the unavoidable Occasion of their being Wicked: For if their
Employments are neither against the Laws of God or Man, they may
Conscientiously and Religiously discharge them; and if they are upon either
Account unlawful, they must immediately leave them, and betake themselves to
some other honest Profession.

The Employment of a Publican, was of all the most scandalous among the Jews,
and that not without Reason; and yet we find a Publican at Prayers as well as a
Pharisee, and the more acceptable Suppliant of the Two: And if One, why not the
whole Order if they had pleased? And accordingly, when the Publicans came to
John the Baptist, (a Person of the severest Sanctity) to be Baptized of him,
and said unto him, Master, what shall We do? He did not charge them immediately
to leave their Profession, but only, Not to exact more than was appointed them:
'Twas Exaction made their Office hateful both to God and Man, and if that were
amended, the Employment was as Innocent as others. And when the Soldiers (Men
generally, of all Men, the most Loose and Wicked) demanded of him likewise, And
what shall We do? He does not condemn their Profession, but bids them do no
Violence to any Man, nor Accuse any falsely, and be content with their Wages,
Luke 3.12, 13, 14. A Man that considers Things, would not choose to be of an
Employment that carries great Temptations along with it to Wickedness; but if
he were brought up to such an Employment, and knows not how to subsist in any
other Way, his Business is, to consider wherein lies the greatest Temptation
and Danger of it, and arm himself diligently against that, and then he may live
as Innocently, and serve God as Acceptably, as his Neighbors. But to live
wickedly in such a Calling, and then lay the Blame upon the Temptations that go
along with it, is too slender an Excuse to do any Service: for if the Calling
be lawful, no doubt but it may be innocently managed if the Man pleases; and if
it be unlawful, he must for no Considerations whatever continue in it. And a
Soldier or a Publican, for Instance, though of the worst of lawful Professions,
yet we see may keep a good Conscience, and live orderly and repent, and serve
God as acceptably, nay, perhaps more so than others of higher Pretensions; for
the Publican as well as the Pharisee went up into the Temple to pray, and the
Publican went away justified rather than the Pharisee.

But what was the Reason of that? One would think a Man of so great Sanctity as
a Pharisee should be more acceptable to God than so vile a Sinner as a
Publican? Why, the Reason of this was, that the Publican, notwithstanding the
ill Character, his Profession threw upon him, and the high Pretensions of the
Pharisee, the Publican was the Better Man of the Two. The Pharisee, with much
Pride and Self-esteem, advanced high into the Temple, and then, vauntingly
insisted in his own praise, I Fast twice a Week, I give Tithes of all that I
possess; and utterly devoid of the Fundamental Grace of poverty of Spirit, he
looked upon his Righteousness as too much his own, and uncharitably judged the
Publican for the sake of his Profession, and then haughtily scorned him, as
vile and profane in comparison with himself; God, I thank thee that I am not as
other Men are, or even as this Publican. He that is not so wicked as other Men,
ought indeed to give God Thanks, for it is he that made him to differ; but then
it ought to be with Humility, and a due Sense of his own natural Vileness and
propensity to Vice, and of those remaining Wickednesses which still too easily
beset him; giving God all the Glory of what is good in him, and reserving to
himself only Shame and Confusion of Face for the Sins which do still too easily
beset him, and for his not making so good use of the divine Grace and
Assistance as he might and should have done. But there was nothing of this in
the Pharisee's Thanksgiving; 'twas only full of Pride, and Vainglory, and
Selfconceit; and that unhallowed every Thing else that was Good in him, and
rendered him and his Prayers abominable in the sight of God, who resists the
proud, and gives Grace only to the humble: Such as was that Publican whom he
so haughtily despised.

For he, in an humble Sense of his former Wickedness, and deep Shame and Sorrow
for it, stood afar off, as not worthy to come near the Holy Majesty of God; and
would not so much as lift up his polluted Eyes to Heaven, the place of perfect
Holiness and Purity: but, like a true self-condemned Penitent, smote upon his
Breast, and in bitter Remorse of Soul said, God be merciful to me a Sinner! And
for this his humble Penitence, He went down to his House justified rather than
the Pharisee; for every one that exalts himself shall be abased, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted. A truly humble Temper of Mind is better than
all the outward performances of Religion; and a penitent Publican, that is
indeed poor in Spirit, is far more esteemed of God, than he that makes Long
Prayers, and Fasts often, and Tithes all his Substance, and is proud of this
when he has done, and despises those that make not so much Ostentation of
Religion as he does. Without Humility, all is Vainglory and Hypocrisy; and
the seemingly most sanctified Person that has it not, is like a painted
Sepulcher, beautiful without, but full of Rottenness within.

By what has been hitherto said by Way of Comment upon this Parable, and from
the Introduction and Conclusion of it (as was said) it is very plain that it is
designed to recommend the great, nay, fundamental Grace of Spiritual Humility,
or Poverty of Spirit with relation to Virtue: And to show, that let a Man have
never so much of Virtue or Religion, if he is proud of it, it renders all
abominable in the Sight of God; and that none but the humble Soul is his
Delight. In my Discourse therefore upon this Parable, I shall endeavor three
things;

First, To show what the Grace of Spiritual Humility is;

Secondly, How excellent and beneficial a Grace it is, and how vile and
mischievous the contrary Vice is; and

Thirdly, How highly this Virtue shall be rewarded.

As for the first, What the Grace of Spiritual Humility is; I in the first
place think in the Negative, that it cannot be a thinking worse of a Man's self
than he really deserves; for no Man certainly can be obliged by Religion to be
mistaken in himself, it being one of the chief things that we learn in
Christianity as well as Ethics, rightly to know ones self: And when there is
any thing in a Man that is indeed Praiseworthy, I cannot see why the Man
himself may not be sensible of it as well as others; and innocently please
himself with reflecting upon it, and love what bears so much Resemblance to,
and is an Emanation from the Eternal Fountain of Goodness and Perfection. Nay,
He that dwells much with himself, and heedfully reflects upon his Actions, and
the Bent and Inclination of his Mind, as every Man ought to do; cannot be
conceived to be ignorant of what is good in him, any more than what is evil;
and the same Attention which is requisite that a Man may know his Errors and
Miscarriages, will likewise inform him of what is virtuous in him, and of good
Report. And further, How can a Man be thankful to him who is the Giver of every
good and perfect Gift, for the intellectual Favors he bestows upon him (of
which Grace to live virtuously is the chief) who is not first conscious that he
has received the Blessing? The Elders in the Revelations that took their Crowns
from their Heads, and cast them before the Throne, as an Acknowledgment from
whom they had received them, first must be supposed to know that they had them
on; And if there be such a thing as St. Peter calls the Answer of a good
Conscience toward God, a Man must first be sensible of his good Actions,
before he can feel that inward Approbation of them.

I thought fit to say thus much in the Negative about Spiritual Humility,
because it has been taught by some that pretend to the most extraordinary
Religion, that we ought to entertain none but vile and abject Thoughts of our
selves, to be conscious of nothing that is good in us, but to call our selves
the vilest of Sinners, and the worst of Men; according to St. Paul's Example,
who calls himself the chief of Sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. But since it cannot be
true, for a sincerely pious, sober, and chaste Man for Instance, to call
himself the most profane, the most intemperate and debauched Wretch living,
for he must needs be sensible that is not so; therefore a more discreet Way of
Humiliation and Confession of our Faults should be introduced in its Room, for
nothing that is untrue can be pleasing and acceptable unto God: And, as no Man
ought to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, so neither should
he untruly vilify and miscall himself, but think and speak soberly, according
as God has given to him the Measure of Faith. It Is the same St. Paul's Advice,
Romans 12.3. whose Example is urged for so extremely debasing a Man's self in his
own Esteem; and therefore, when he said of himself, That he was the chief of
Sinners, it must look back to his former Wickedness in persecuting the Church
of Christ, and could not be true as to his present Condition when he spoke it,
for he was then a chosen Vessel, and not inferior to any of the Apostles. And
whatever good Man will use that Expression after him, its Signification must be
restrained, either with Reference to past Wickednesses, or some particular Vice
which too easily besets him; and cannot be true in its largest Sense, of any
sincerely good Man. And it is a strange kind of Humiliation, that is made up of
the Confession of Faults which a Man never knew himself to be guilty of; which
yet is much in Vogue with some sort of People, but does indeed look too
Stage-like to be thought real by any discerning Man.

Poverty of Spirit therefore does not consist in a Man's making himself worse
than he is, (and truly there is no ne^^ he should do so, every Man living
having enough of real Vileness to humble him before God) and in overlooking
every thing that is commendable in him; and the Pharisee in the Parable might
very innocently have thanked God that he was not as other Men, Fornicators,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as a Publican; had there not been something much
worse than this, mixed with his Thanksgiving: And it was this. He was proud of
his living more circumspectly than other Men, he arrogated much of the Praise
to himself, and despised one, who, by reason his Profession, he thought was a
more loose and careless Liver; and never reflected upon his Failures and
Imperfections, but was wholly taken up with admiring himself, and vaunting of
his Virtue, and did not return, as he ought to have done, all the Glory to God.
So that it is not all thinking well of ones Conversation and Virtuous Living
that is Spiritual Pride, but only when we think better of it than we should do,
and forget our Sins and Imperfections, or arrogantly ascribe the Praise to our
selves, not remembering who made us to differ, and neglecting to return the
Glory to him, and are so exalted in our own Conceits, as to despise and contemn
others, because their Religion is not with Show and Ostentation.

Spiritual Humility then, as it is opposed to this Spiritual Pride, consists in
two things.

First, In not overvaluing our spiritual Excellencies, nor our selves by reason
of them, but returning all the Praise and Glory to God, who is the Author of
every good and perfect Gift.

It Is to remember that he made us to differ, and that we have nothing, not so
much as a good Thought, but what we receive from him, in whose Divine Aid is
all our Sufficiency.

It Is to reflect upon the Imperfections and Defects of even our best Actions,
and how much Need there is of God's Mercy and favorable Judgment, after we
have done all that we can in his Service. It Is to remember likewise, that with
such great Assistances from above as we have received, we might have been much
better than we are, and have practiced more Graces of Christianity, and that in
higher Degrees of Perfection.

And when there arises any inward Complacency in our Breasts from a Virtuous
Action, or we meet with any commendation from others; it is then immediately to
give God the Glory, and transfer all the Praise to him, and suffer no vain
Tumors to remain upon our Minds, nor look down with Scorn upon others that
have less Esteem and Reputation in the World: But rather to humble our selves
before God at the Thoughts of the Pollutions that are still upon our Souls, and
reflect how great a Debt of Gratitude lies upon us to our great Benefactor, who
has given us (unworthy as we are) such great Measures of his Grace; and resolve
to make him a due return, of a daily increasing Praise, and Obedience, and Love.

Secondly, Spiritual Humility consists in a due Apprehension of the Vileness of
our Sins, and the great Aggravations of them; and as we must not overvalue our
Virtues, nor our selves by Reason of them, so neither should we undervalue our
Vices, i. e. endeavor to palliate and excuse them, and give them more
favorable Names than they deserve, such as unavoidable Frailties, pitiable
Infirmities, the Effects of Surprise, and the like: Nor think our selves to be
less abominable in the Sight of God for our Commission of them, than indeed we
are.

There is no Manliving, how good soever, but is still a Sinner; and not only
Imperfections and Frailties may be laid to his Charge, but God knows, too
often, Sins of a deeper Dye; as David and Peter, we know, fell into the very
worst of Wickednesses, though the one, otherwise a Man after God's own Heart;
and the other an Apostle of our Lord and Holy Martyr for his Truth Now
Spiritual Humility will give a Man a due Sense of his Spiritual Vileness, and
represen this Sin (whatever it be) as indeed the greatest Evil, a Violation of
the highest Authority, and of a most Holy, and Just, and Good Law, and the very
height of Ingratitude too, as being a Resisting the Will of our greatest
Friend and Benefactor: And 'twill show him the Aggravations of his Guilt, as
being contracted against sufficient Light and Knowledge, and when he had
sufficient Aid likewise from Abve to enable him to resist the Temptations to it
if he would. These, and the like Considerations, which a Man truly humble in
Spirit will call to mind, will humble him still more, and render him as vile in
his own Eyes as he thinks he is in God's; and make him prostrate himself before
the Throne of the Divine Majesty with Shame and Sorrow, and Confusion of Face,
confessing his Guilt, condemning himself for it, and humbly imploring
Forgiveness of his offended God, and that he would turn away that fierce Anger
from him, which he is very sensible he has but too much deserved.

Thus David framed a Psalm on purpose to confess and bewail his great
Transgressions in the Matter of Uriah: He then forgot all that was good in him,
and did not expect that his former excellent Piety should cover and make Amends
for those foul Sins: He did not search for Excuses, and endeavor to extenuate
his Guilt; but, like a truly humble Penitent, changed his usual Strain of
Praise and Thansgiving, for the Accents of Grief and Shame, and better Remorse,
acknowledging his Transgressions, and having his Sins ever before him, and with
the most pathetick Earnestness of a broken and contrite Heart, begging God's
Forgiveness, and that he would again Great in him a clean Heart and renew a
right Spirit within him: As if those his great Wickednesses had not only
polluted all that before was good in him, but quite destroyed the Rectitude and
Integrity of his Soul.

And as David, so S. Peter, when he reflected upon the great Baseness of
Denying his divine Master and Savior, his Spirit was so truly humbled, that
without endeavoring in the least to conceal or palliate his Fault, he went out
and wept bitterly.

And so the Publican in the Parable, would not so much as lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, but stood afar off, in the Court of the Gentiles, which was the lowest
of all, and with great Compunction of Spirit smote upon his Breast, and said,
God be merciful to me a Sinner!

And thus much for the First Thing to be done upon this Parable, which was, to
show what the Grace of Spiritual Humility is; (viz.) a not Over-valuing our
spiritual Excellencies, nor our Selves by reason of them, nor despising others
as less Holy, but returning all the Glory to God, who made us to differ; nor
undervaluing, or endeavoring to excuse and extenuate our Wickednesses; but an
impartial considering the Vileness and great Aggravations of them, and sincere
humbling our Selves for them at the Throne of God.

The Second Thing to be done is, to show how excellent and beneficial this
Virtue is in our Christian Course, and how vile and mischievous the contrary
Vice is.

It Is a sufficient Argument that this Virtue is very excellent, and of great
Benefit to Christians, that our Lord has placed it in the Front of his
Beatitudes, which he begins thus, Blessed are the poor in Spirit. Like a wise
Master Builder, he lays the Foundation low of a Building that was to reach so
very high; and Humbleness of Mind must be the Groundwork of that Religion
which will advance a Man to Heaven.

Piety without Humility is very apt to make Men top-heavy, and over-set like a
Ship without her Ballast; it is this that preserves the Soul unshaken amidst the
Temptations of the World, as that makes a Ship sail sure and steady amidst the
mighty Billows. The House in the Gospel that was founded upon a sandy Surface
of the Earth, soon yielded to the Fury of the Tempest, and great was the Fall
of it; our Lord therefore begins with poverty of Spirit, as the Basis and great
security of all his other Building; which he foresaw and foretold was to
undergo the Shock of many a furious Storm, and contend with all the Powers of
the Prince of Darkness. But more particularly, this Grace of Spiritual Humility
is so excellent and highly beneficial, that nothing more conduces to a Man's
Spiritual growth, and Increase in Virtue, nor renders him more dear both to God
and Man.

First, Nothing more conduces to a Man's spiritual growth, and Increase in
Virtue. For, it is very true in Religion as well as in Worldly Affairs, That
nothing makes Men more industrious than a due sense of their Wants, and the
poorness of their Stock; whereas, when a Man thinks he has Abundance, he is
generally Slothful and Careless, and Impoverishment becomes his Lot rather than
a farther Improvement: An humble Sense of a Man's Imperfections and Sins, will
make him doubly diligent, and consequently to improve greatly in the School of
Righteousness; but haughty Conceitedness will certainly make him grow worse and
worse. Nay, there will be no End of the humble minded Man's Improvement; for
it is always found in the pursuit of Virtue as well as of Knowledge, that the
more real Virtue increases in the Soul of a Good Man, the more and greater the
Defects of his Virtue appear to be, and consequently, the more will his
Diligence be quickened and spurred on; as St. Paul, the farther he advanced in
the Christian Race, the more conscious he grew that he had not yet apprehended
what he endeavored after, and was not yet perfect, and that made him forget
what was behind, his former Seize, and reach out to what was still
before, what he had not yet attained to, and eagerly press forward to the Mark,
the Prize of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus. Now the Consequence of
this extraordinary Diligence must needs be an extraordinary growth and
increase, and so still onward in a quick and vigorous Motion, till he finishes
his Virtuous Race, and is perfect as his Father which is in Heaven is perfect.

And as this spiritual Humility makes a Man move swiftly in the Christian
Course, so it makes him tread surely too; it balances him, and keeps him upon
his Center, and secures him from those dangerous Falls which too often are the
Fate of the high-minded and proud; for 'twas Pride and Haughtiness of Spirit,
we know, that ruined the Prince of the Fallen Angels, and his Accomplices. But
poverty of Spirit is the great Security of a Christian against the subtle Arts
of the Tempter; it is the proper Mark and Character of a Disciple of the meek,
lowly Jesus; and is a disposition of Mind the most of all apt for Repentance,
which is a Grace of infinite Value, as being absolutely necessary to Salvation;
and entitles a Man, in a peculiar manner, to the Divine Aid and Assistance; for
God gives Grace to the Humble.

Secondly, As this spiritual Humility is of the greatest Benefit to a
Christian, so does it render him highly dear both to God and Man.

All Men love an humble Man, and look upon him as a Wise and Extraordinary
Person; and he that is pious and circumspect in his Conversation, and yet is
not proud of it, nor despises or haughtily reflects upon others that live more
at large than he does, but advises them better, seasonably, and with Meekness
and Humility; such a Man is esteemed as a Person sent from God to do Good to
Mankind, that seeing his Good Works mixed with poverty of Spirit, they may be
inclined to imitate so lovely an Example, and glorify their Father which is in
Heaven, by treading in his Steps. And as for God, S. Peter and S. James, and
the Wisest of Men all agree, that he resists the proud, but gives Grace to
the humble. And our Lord himself, at the end of the Parable we are now
considering, says expressly, He that exalts himself shall be abased, and he
that humbles himself shall be exalted; and the humble Publican went down to
his House justified, rather than the haughty Pharisee; so beneficial and highly
valuable, both with God and Man, is Humility of Spirit.

But on the contrary, to be opinionated and proud of ones Virtue, is a great
Misfortune as well as Fault, and brings a great deal of a peculiar sort of
Trouble and Uneasiness along with it: It Is a Thing hated both by God and Men,
and is despised and disgraced by every Body. To what would otherwise be really
praiseworthy, it brings the greatest Disparagement in the World; and if a
Man's Conversation be but indifferent, and like other Men's, then, nothing makes
him more ridiculous, than much to value himself, upon what is of so little or
no Excellency, And what a Pain it is for Men that look upon themselves as
extraordinary Persons, to see others so far from that Opinion, as rather to
slight and deprecate them; may easily be imagined. And indeed, it is the Mishap
of this sort of People, always to meet with such kind of Entertainment as this;
Men setting themselves on purpose to tease and worry 'em, that if possible,
they may make them ashamed, and weary of a thing so generally hated.

But besides this peculiar sort of Vexation and Uneasiness that attends
spiritual Pride, there is something much worse to be said of it, viz. that it is
almost impossible for Men infected with this Vice ever to improve in Religion
and grow better. For in the Nature of the Thing, nothing slackens Diligence and
Industry more than this, without which no progress can be made in any thing, or
at best a very slow one, especially where there are such Difficulties to be
struggled with as in Religion; and what signifies Instruction or Reproof
(unless it be to gall and enrage him) to a Man that thinks his Virtue very
extraordinary if not complete already? And besides, God, from whom we derive
all our Sufficiency, resists the proud; and therefore, as Solomon says, no
wonder if when pride comes then comes destruction, and a haughty Spirit be
the forerunner of a fall.

Besides, as the Condition of Mankind is now, to be proud of Virtue is to be
proud of Imperfection; for such is the Virtue even of the best Men upon Earth:
nay, it is to be proud of that which is not; for no Man that is proud of his
Virtue is indeed Virtuous, that poverty of Spirit being wanting which gives the
Value to all Religious Actions, and renders them acceptable in the Sight of
God. And it not only pollutes and unhallows what might otherwise deserve the
Name of Virtue, but (as was hinted before) it keeps a Man from growing better;
it blinds him, that he cannot discern his Faults; and he is so taken up with
admiring his Excellencies, and (with the Pharisee) thanking God that he is not
as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or the like, that his great
Defects pass unobserved by him: And with the Man in the Fable, he is so busy
in gazing upon things above himself, that he perceives not the Dangers under
his feet till he falls into them.

Having thus endeavored to show what is the Grace of spiritual Humility, and
how excellent and highly beneficial a Grace it is, and how vile and mischievous
the contrary Vice is, destructive of all Religion, and hateful both to God and
Man; I proceed now in the Last Place to show, how highly this Virtue shall be
rewarded; which is expressed thus in the Close of this Parable, He that humbles
himself shall be exalted.

That is, in short, Men's Humbleness of Mind in point of Virtue, their
Self-Annihilation, and returning all the Glory of their Good Actions to God, as
the Author of whatever is commendable in them; and without priding themselves
in their present Seize, pressing on still to greater Degrees of
Perfection and Heavenly Life: This shall, in the World of Eternal Felicity and
Glory, be rewarded with the Impression of a near Resemblance to that Divine
Fountain of Holiness and Perfection, whom here they acknowledged to be the
Giver of every good and perfect gift. They shall then see him as he is, and
they shall be like him; No Failures, no Slips or Imperfections, no Avocations
from the happy Employment of Admiring and Loving God, shall be There, which in
this Life are the perpetual Clogs and Vexations of a Holy Soul; but with their
Faculties free and vigorous, they shall fully enjoy this supreme Good, without
Interruption, to all Eternity. This is that which makes a Heaven; this is to
enjoy the Happiness of God himself; and this Heaven and this Happiness shall be
the Portion of the poor in Spirit, who here ascribe to God the Praise and Glory
of their virtuous Actions.

And their Humbling themselves before his Majesty, in a deep Sense of the
Vileness and Ingratitude of their Sins (which the best Man living is not wholly
without) shall be rewarded with the Pardon of them; they shall be lifted up
from their Prostration at the Feet of their God and Savior, and be received
into his Bosom; and Joy, extraordinary Joy, shall be in Heaven in the Presence
of the Holy Angels for their Repentance. They shall be exalted from the State
of Penitents to that of Friends, nay Sons of God, and all Tears for the Future
shall be for ever wiped from their Eyes, and they shall participate of the Joy
of their Lord from Everlasting to Everlasting. And such an Exaltation as this,
is, no doubt, an abundant Recompense for all the Pains of spiritual
Mortification; and a Repentance so rewarded, will never be repented of.

To conclude therefore; If we hope to have a share in that ineffable Felicity
which shall be the Reward of this Humility of Spirit we have been discoursing
of, we must make it our Endeavor to tread the Path that leads to it: We must
humble our selves before God according to the Measures above described, that he
may exalt us in due time. And (as without whom we can do no good Thing) we must
with all Earnestness and Importunity beg his gracious Assistance, who was meek
and lowly in Heart; that we may follow his Steps, and return him all the Glory
of our pious Advances, who works in us to will and to do of his good
Pleasure; and be so duly affected with Shame and Sorrow for our Wickednesses,
as with the Publican, in bitter Remorse, and with sincere Purposes of
Amendment, to smite upon our Breasts, and say, God be merciful to us miserable
Sinners.

The PRAYER.
O Meek and Lowly Jesus, who resistest the Proud, and give Grace to the
Humble, and have placed Poverty of Spirit in the Front of thy Beatitudes, as
the Foundation and Groundwork of thy Holy Religion; Teach me this excellent
Grace, I humbly beseech thee, and grant that I may hate and shun Pride above
all Things, as the most dangerous and destructive Vice, which defiles every
thing however otherwise commendable and excellent, and naturally tends to the
Pit of Destruction. And to allay all vain Tumors that shall arise, give me, O
Blessed Savior, a true Sense of the Corruption of my Nature, my many heinous
Violations of my Duty, my vile Ungratitude to thee, my greatest Benefactor, and
the great Imperfections of even my best Services, and that whatever I have done
that is praiseworthy, is owing to thy gracious Assistance, and that of my self
I can do nothing that is good. O may I therefore never arrogate to my self what
should be wholly thine, nor despise any Man, like the haughty Pharisee, who
have nothing my self but what I have received from thee; but in sincere
Humility of Spirit return thee all the Glory, saying, after I have done all
that I can, I am still an Unprofitable Servant, and have done but what was my
Duty to do. And grant, that in an humble Sense of my still great Defects,
considering what vast Assistances I have had, I may smite upon my Breast, and
say with the Publican, God be merciful to me a miserable Sinner. Grant this,
thou meek and humble Lamb of God, for the sake of thine own Tender Mercies.
Amen, and Amen.

FINIS.

