A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of St. Martins Ludgate, SEPT. 12. 1695.
Before the Incorporated Society OF Apothecaries of London.

By Nicholas Brady, M. A. Minister of St. Catherine Cree-Church, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Request of the Society.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker, at the Unicorn, under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange. 1695.

To the Worshipful, the Master and Wardens, the Court of Assistants, Gentlemen
of the Livery, and Freemen, of the Ingenious Society of Apothecaries of London.
Gentlemen,
THis discourse, as it was preached at your kind request, so it is now, however
unfit for the general view, in compliance with your obliging importunity, made
public: nor could I in justice refuse you the disposal of that, which was
purposely composed for your entertainment. The subject of it, Unity, is
(Blessed be God) as fully exemplified in your Society, as in any Corporation
throughout the City; and therefore the motives to it, which the following
discourse offers, are rather to be taken for tacit commendations of your
laudable performance, than reflections or remembrancers for your omission of
this Duty. That you may still continue eminently remarkable, for an intimate
Union and agreement amongst yourselves, and influence others by your good
Example, to the happy composing of all Divisions among them; shall be the
constant hearty Prayer, of,

Gentlemen, Your Obliged Servant, and Sincere Well-wisher, N. Brady.

Psalm. CXXXIII. 1, 2. 1. Behold how good and pleasant it is for Brethren to
dwell together in Unity!

2. It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, which ran down upon the
beard, even Aarons beard that went down to the skirts of his garments.


THere is nothing, in my opinion, in which the Wisdom of this City is more
eminently conspicuous, nothing that more effectually contributes to the
supporting of its grandeur, and to the maintenance of its prosperity, than the
regular destribution of its several members into distinct Societies and
Corporations: By this means, the peculiar conveniences of each are much better
consulted, their various interests more closely united, and mutual offices of
brotherly affection performed more frcquently and more easily, than if they
were left after a looser manner, under the inspection only of a general
Magistracy: For that, being obliged to have a public influence, and sustaining
a character that is universal, cannot be supposed to pry so nicely into private
concernments, to understand them so thoroughly, or to watch over them so
successfully, as those, who acting in a narrower sphere, being qualified by
Education, and engaged by Interest, are both enabled and concerned to promote
the advantages of those particular Societies, whose Guardianships they manage,
and of which themselves are incorporated members.

It Is in pursuance of this wise and commendable constitution, that the several
members of this present Society, which justly deserves an honorable mention
among the most eminent of this City, are this day unanimously assembled; and
it is in conformity to a religious custom, of hallowing such meetings with a
mixture of devotion, that we are assembled together in the house of God. Love,
then, and Amity, and Brotherly kindness, have been your conducters to this
place, and they are like to be your entertainment in it: Since nothing appears
to me more natural, than upon the Prospect of an Assembly so cordially united,
by all the bonds of interest and affection, to break out into the Psalmists
rapturous exclamation, Behold, how good and pleasant it is, for brethren to
dwell together in Unity! It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, that
ran down upon the beard, even Aarons heard, that went down to the skirts of his
garments!

In my following discourse upon which words, I shall make use of this easy
method.

First, I shall examine the duty here enjoined, and press its practice, from
such motives to it, as are contained in the words of my Text. Behold how good
and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unit.

Secondly, I shall consider the elegant allusion, which the Psalmist makes use
of to illustrate and recommend it, and shall observe its agreeableness with the
present occasion. It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, which ran
down upon the beard, even Aarons beard that went down to the skirts of his
garments.

First, then, I shall examine the duties here enjoined; and press its practice,
from such motives to it, as are contained in the words of my Text. Behold how
good and pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

Unity is that invisible band and cement of Souls, which makes the designs and
interests of several persons, become inseparable, and of a piece; from hence
results that agreeable Harmony of actions, which causes all their affairs to be
amicably transacted, without any disorder or confusion: from this arises that
complacency and satisfaction, which one takes in the advantages of another,
which by this happy temper are made his own: This banishes all murmurings and
repinings at the enjoyments of our neighbor, roots out all dissentions and
animosities, and introduces in their stead, an affectionate regard for the
concernments of others, a tender fellow-feeling of their several conditions,
and an industrious willingness to promote their happiness, and to consult it as
carefully, as if it were our own This is that commendable disposition of mind,
to which the Psalmist exhorts us in the words of my Text, where he advises us
to dwell together in Unity; and wherein he recommends to us the practice of it,
by these three considerable motives.

1st. Upon the account of Duty.

2dly. Of Interest.

And 3dly, Of Pleasure

1st then, The Psalmist exhorts us to dwell together in Unity, upon the account
of our duty; and this seems couched in the word Brethren, behold how good and
how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity!

The Relation of Brethren is so close and intimate, that we find it generally
made use of to express the strictest tie of tenderness and affection; and
Brotherly love throughout the whole Gospel, is used to signify the most
perfect Union, attended with all offices of kindness and endearment: and
therefore wherever this Relation is found love and agreement should be its
necessary consequences; but the engagements of this nature are too numerous and
too pressing, for us ever to be able to disentangle our selves from them; every
person in the Holy Trinity, seeming with a sort of Rivalship to contend, which
shall lay upon us the strongest obligations, to dwell together in Unity, as
Brethren.

God the Father, who is the God of Unity and Love, being desirous to unite the
whole race of mankind, in indissoluble bonds of Amity and Friendship, made at
first of one blood all the nations of the earth; that by so near a relation he
might fasten their affections, and tie and rivet them to one another: Thus we
are all the children of one common parent, we are all the workmanship of one
great Creator, and the equalcare of one watchful Providence; and therefore for
us to be unwilling to perform mutual offices of love to one another, would
appear as unreasonable and unnatural, as if the several branches of some large
family, should refuse to keep up an amicable correspondence, and renounce all
expressions of tenderness and affection: for such and so great is our
obligation, jointly to consult one another advantages, if we consider our
selves as Brethren by Creation.

But farther, God the Son, the great Example and promoter of Union, when he
perfected the work of our Redemption, did closely incorporate all his
followers, and make them members of one mystical body: Thus all of us are bone
of one another bone, and flesh of one another flesh; that so whether one of
us suffer or be honored, the rest of us might mourn or rejoice along with him:
and therefore for some of us to divide our selves from the rest, or to seem to
be acted by different interests, is every whit as strange and unaccountable, as
if the hand should refuse to provide for the belly, or the eyes deny to direct
the feet; as if every member should set up for it self, and act independently
from the others: For equal is the obligation that lies upon us to be mutually
beneficial to one another; since we are all members of that body of which
Christ is the head, and are most nearly related as Brethren by Redemption. But
farther yet, God the Holy Ghost, who is the great inspirer of love and concord,
and whose chief and peculiar employment it is, to advance the strict fellowship
and communion of Saints, has united us more closely than into one Body, by
joining us together in one Soul and Spirit: Thus all of us should be acted by
the same affections, all of us should be sensible of the same impressions, and
the same mind should be in every one of us, whether to will or to do: and
therefore to estrange ourselves from one another, or to be unwilling to
discharge due offices of affection, is a proceeding as preposterous and absurd,
as if the Understanding should refuse to guide the Will, or the Judgment deny
to give assistance to the Memory; as if some of the faculties of the soul
should neglect to contribute to the advantages of the others: for no less
binding is our obligation, to be mutually serviceable to one another, since we
are all partakers of the same Spirit, and most strictly united as Brethren by
Sanctification. Thus every person in the Blessed Trinity lays upon us a
distinct and particular engagement, to be conversant in the duties of a
Brotherly affection, twisting together a threefold cord of love, which the wise
man tells us, is not quickly to be broken.

These are those large and spreading obligations, by which we are engaged to
live like Brethren, either as we are Men, or as we are Christians, or as we are
influenced by the Spirit of God: but there are some additional considerations,
of an extent more narrow and contracted, which give yet greater weight to the
Psalmists exhortation, and more forcibly exact the performance of this duty;
and that is, when particular persons have formed themselves into one common
Society; mutually covenanting with one another, heartily to promote each others
advantages, and carefully to advance the interests of that Brotherhood: the
several members of such a Body, have to their Natural and Spiritual affinity,
superinduced a fresh Relation as civil Brethren; and therefore cannot
transgress against this duty of dwelling together in Unity, without adding to
the violation of their other obligations, the breach of their voluntary
stipulation and agreement. And thus much shall suffice for the first motive to
Unity laid down in the Text, which is drawn from the consideration of our duty,
as we are Brethren.

(2dly) A second motive which the Text affords us, is taken from the
consideration of our true interest, Behold how good and how pleasant it is

The word (...) which we render good, has a double signification, either of
excellency or advantage; and which way soever we consider it, we shall find it
our interest to be conversant in it; for as the meanest and most grovelling
Souls will readily confess, that it is our interest to practice that, from
whence we may reap some sensible advantage; so any generous Spirit will
acknowledge, that it is our truest interest to be employed about that which is
excellent in its nature.

First then, it is our interest to dwell together in Unity, because it is a
duty so excellent in its nature.

When Brethren are acted by the same interests, and mutually animated with the
same designs, they make that earthly society a transcript of heaven, and are
possessed of a condition that is purely celestial: Those eternal mansions of
peace and happiness are only filled with consenting minds, whose inclinations
tend to the same object, who are ravished with the contemplation of each others
felicity, and who rejoicing in the joy of their fellow-angels, multiply and
increase their own enjoyments, by the share which they take in the happiness of
others: and what greater excellency can humane nature aim at, than an exact
resemblance to those Angelical beings? What exercise can appear more eminent or
illustrious, than that which makes us live here like those blessed Spirits, and
qualifies us hereafter for their society and conversation. For as this is the
great entertainment of heaven, so it is the strait road that leads directly
thither; our Savior has assigned it as the character of his followers, the
mark by which he has distinguished them from the rest of mankind: This is that
livery of the Prince of peace, by which we are acknowledged to be of his
family; by this (says he) shall men know that ye are my disciples, if ye love
one another. This plains all the ruggedness and unevenness of our nature, and
implants in us an obsiging benignity of mind; it roots out of our Souls those
perverse principles of self-love and self-interest, and gives us in their room
that God-like quality, of being diffusive and communicative of good. Thus does
this great and excellent duty dignifie and exalt our corrupted nature, toward
the ancient standard of its original perfection; nay, seems to advance it to a
higher level, even to a partial resemblance of God himself, For God is Unity in
its most absolute perfection. But

Secondly, It is our interest to dwell together in Unity, because it is a duty
so very advantageous.

There is no part of our Christian duty, which reflects greater profit upon its
practitioners, or pays their obedience with more advantages, than that which my
Text recommends to our performance. Besides its conformity to the divine will,
by which it qualifies for eternal rewards, it is attended with such blessings
even in this life, as may powerfully enforce the practice of it. As dissension
is the ruin of all Societies, so Union and agreement are the supporters of
them: by this so many Kingdoms and Commonwealths have crept on from weak and
inconsiderable beginnings, to the highest pitch of majesty and splendor; by
this they have been raised, by this upheld; and when this has ceased, they have
sunk down into destruction. By this, Men, who otherwise, like Bears and Tigers,
would converse with fear, and at a distance, become not only useful and
sociable Creatures, but so many Angels, ministering to the happiness of one
another: If imminent dangers are to be resisted, united forces are best able to
oppose them; if blessings are to be implored, or judgments deprecated, united
prayers will intercede most successfully; if important designs are to be
carried on, united counsels will complete them most effectually. How shall he
fall, that has a multitude of supporters! or suppose he slip, how shall he be
kept down, who has so many hands to lift him up again! Unity either obviates
all inconveniences, or administers to them a speedy remedy; and therefore he
that consults his own true interest, will be probably induced to be conversant
in it, upon the account of its advantage. And thus much for the second motive
to our performance of this duty, drawn from the consideration of our interest,
because it is a good thing to dwell in Unity But

(3dly) A third motive which the Text affords us, is borrowed from the
consideration of our pleasure and satisfaction: Behold how good and how
pleasant it is.

No circumstances can be more desirable, no condition more alluring, than the
calm estate of that happy man, who has made it his business to dwell in Unity.
He enjoys all the advantages and satisfactions, which are possessed by those
with whom he is united; He is enriched with their wealth, he is advanced with
their honor, he is diverted with their pleasure, and becomes happy by their
felicity: he is free from all that sowrness and bitterness of Soul, which palls
the relish of the most eminent enjoyments, and dashes them all with gall and
wormwood: Envy, that restless racking passion, is an utter stranger to his
quiet breast, which is only ^^led with the blessed fruits of the spirit of
Unity, Love and joy and peace. If he looks abroad, he views no objects, but
such as administer to his satisfaction; he loves and is beloved with equal
ardour; he studiously endeavors to promote the good of others, and sees them
as eager in the advancement of his: if he turns his eyes into his own bosom, he
sees nothing there but calmness and tranquillity; and finds within himself an
abridgment of that happiness, which his darling (Unity) would settle in the
world: There, as in a regular and affectionate society, no tumults or disorders
are to be met with; there is no clashing of different interests, no violent
engagements of contending passions, to disturb the native quiet of the place,
and introduce disorders and confusions; but the superior powers rule easily,
and the inferior ones obey willingly; and all things are managed with that
agreeable sweetness, as sufficiently convinces the happy possessor of these
advantages, how pleasant a thing it is to dwell in Unity. But the greatest and
most solid satisfaction, which arises from the due performance of this duty, is
yet behind; and that is, the assurance which such a man has, that while he is
busied in so delightful an employment, he is also consulting his everlasting
happiness; and recommends himself effectually to the favor of his God, while he
makes himself thus easy to others and himself: That the pleasures which he now
feels in the discharging of his duty, are but so many tastes and prelibutions
of those raptures which shall reward it; and only prepare him for the
fellowship of those United Souls, who in the presence of God, have fullness of
joy, and at his right hand are possessed of pleasures for evermore. And thus
much shall suffice for the third motive laid down for the performance of this
duty, drawn from the consideration of its delightfulness; because it is a
pleasant thing to dwell in Unity. I might here attempt to set off the great
value of this duty, by reckoning up the inconveniences of the contrary Vice,
and showing the ill effects of discord and division; but that I think it is
lovely enough, considered in it self, and needs no foil, no Painters are of
shades and darker colors, to give these lighter ones more briskness and
vivacity: if the obligations of Duty, if the engagements of Interest, if the
allurements of Pleasure, which use to be the strongest and most persuasive
motives, can influence our Souls to the practice of any Virtue, they all appear
in behalf of this: and oh! that all these considerations could work upon this
whole Nation in general, and upon every one of us in particular, to be duly
conversant in the performance of it! to lay aside all hatreds and animosities,
all contrary designs of parties and of factions, and to be intimately sasten'd
to one another, with the bands of amity and brotherly love! Then should we all
be convinced, by an experience the surest and the happiest of any, how good and
how pleasant it is, for brethren to dwell together in Unity; and the most lofty
comparison would scarce seem sufficient to shadow forth the happiness of such a
condition. And this leads me to the second General Head which I proposed to
discourse upon, namely,

Secondly, To consider that elegant allusion, which the Psalmist makes use of
to illustrate this duty, together with its agreeableness to the present
occasion. It is like the precious Ointment upon the head, which ran down upon
the beard, even Aarons beard, and that went down to the skirts of his garments.

And here, the first thing that seems worthy of our observation, in this
elegant allusion of the Psalmist, is the value and excellency of that thing, to
which he compares the Unity of Brethren. It is like the precious Ointment.

This precious Ointment, to which the Psalmist alludes, was that which was
prepared by Gods express command, and set apart for the anointing of the
High Priest himself; together with such other persons and things, as were to be
accounted most holy; it was not to be applied to any common use, under the
severest and most heavy penalties; whosoever compounded any like it or
whosoever put any of it upon a stranger, was even to be cut off from his
people, as you may see at large in the 30th of Exodus. It was reckoned amongst
the choicest and most estimable treasures; thus we are informed in the 39th of
Isaiah, that when Hezekiah had received Ambassadors from Merodach-Baladan, King
of Babylon, he showed them the house of his precious things, the Silver, and
the Gold, and the Spices, and the precious Ointment: Nothing of low price was
allowed of in its composition; but it was made up of the choicest and most
costly ingredients, of pure Myrrh, sweet Cinnamon, sweet Calamus, Cassia, and
Oyl-Olive: such was the excellency of this precious Ointment, to which the
Psalmist compares the Unity of Brethren; and it may suffice to convince us how
venerable an Idea the Royal Prophet entertained of the eminency of that
blessing, which he endeavors to illustrate by so valuable a comparison: Unity
then, is indeed like this precious Ointment, with which only those are anointed
whom God desings peculiarly to favor; it ought to be esteemed amongst our
chiefest treasures, and find a place amongst our most valuable possessions; and
its composition ought to be of such only who are qualified by their intrinsic
value, and have a character of worth to recommend them. But

2dly, Another thing observable in this Allusion, is the delightfulness of that
thing, to which the Psalmist here compares the Unity of Brethren.

If we will look back and consider the ingredients of which it was compounded,
we shall find it made up of Perfumes and Oil; the former are proper to delight
the senses not only of our selves but of others too, by spreading abroad their
grateful odor; the latter was made use of to refresh and exhilerate, to cause
the face to shine, and to give a cheerful countenance: and therefore from the
consideration of this we may infer how due a notion the Psalmist had, of that
pleasure which resulted from the Unity of Brethren, by comparing it to that
which was so very delightful: Unity then is indeed like an odorous Ointment,
whose grateful sweetness entertains both our selves and others; and whose
balmly softness, not only spreads upon the face the joyful livery of mirth and
cheerfulness; but fills the heart too (like the Oil of gladness) with a large
measure of briskness and alacrity. And to these two qualities of this Ointment,
its preciousness and delightfulness, the Psalmist undoubtedly refers in his
character of Unity, when he tells us how good and how pleasant it is. But

3dly, There is yet another thing observable in this Allusion and that is a
description of the dissusiveness of this Ointment.

We are told, that this precious Ointment, tho it was poured upon Aarons head,
yet was it not confined wholly to that, but ran down upon his other parts, (his
beard for instance); nor only so, but was communicated, in some measure, to
such things as had the remotest relation to him, it went down even to the
skirts of his garments. And this may serve to let us understand, how just an
apprehension the Psalmist had, of the largeness and extensiveness of those
benefits, which are the necessary consequences of this Unity of Brethren. Unity
then is indeed like that precious Ointment, which, tho it enriches the head,
the uppermost and governing members, with the largest stock of refreshing
moisture, tho it imparts to them its most considerable advantages; yet has it a
due and proportionable respect, to the benefit and interest of subordinate and
inferious ones, it runs down upon them also; nay, it has a regard even to all
such as have any distant dependence upon them, and are therefore compared but
to the skirts of their garments; and this consideration should have a double
good effect; first, upon the superiors and governors in a Society; to inform
them, that they must not think to engross to themselves the entire advantages
of such a Union; that they have indeed a just pretension to those that are
greatest and most considerable, but not so as to exclude their inferior
brethren from such meaner benefits as are justly their right; but they ought to
understand, that this precious Ointment is poured upon them, not to rest there
and proceed no further, but to descend from them upon the rest of the Society.
Secondly, This consideration should have a good effect upon such as are the
inferior members. They ought to reflect how just it is, that there should be
differences of advantages as well as of degrees, that a ruling member is worthy
of double honor; and therefore should never repine nor murmur, that that is
not poured immediately upon them, which is only designed to run down to them;
but should rather rejoice, to see this precious Ointment shed largely upon
their Governors, that so the greater proportion of it may descend upon
themselves.

And these are the things which seem most observable in this elegant allusion
of the Psalmist, its excellency, its delightfulness, and the diffusiveness of
its advantages.

I shall conclude this discourse, by endeavoring to make out the agreeableness
of this Allusion with the present occasion.

As this Allusion, considered in its general extent, is justly applicable to
any body of men, who are met together with amicable intentions, for the
advancement of Unity and brotherly love; so, if we will examine it a little
more particularly, we shall discover some circumstances which more nicely
appropriate it to that worthy society of ingenious Artists, of whom the present
assembly is principally composed. If we will look back to my former quotation,
in Exodus 30. we shall find the precions Ointment which is mentioned in my Text,
there termed an Ointment compounded after the art of the Apothecary; the
Allusion (my brethren) is borrowed from your own calling, and therefore seems
to enforce the duty which it resembles, more homely and pressingly upon
yourselves: If therefore the justest comparison of brotherly love, be taken
from your profession; let the highest example of it be made visible in your
practice; let not the works of your vocation rise up in judgment against you,
and upbraid you for neglecting the duty they represent; your constant
employment reads a daily lecture to you of unity and love; and you will be
wholly inexcusable if you attend not to its kind instructions. Let not then, I
beseech you, a Society, so justly recommended to the good opinion of the world,
by the worth and learning of its ingenious members; by the usefulness and
honourableness of the Art it professes; by the importance of that end to which
its studies are directed, (the preserving or restoring the greatest temporal
blessing, Health;) Let not this (I say) be defective in the main qualification
which can make it valuable as a Society, that of Unity or brotherly love: You
are not only obliged to it, with the rest of mankind, as ye are men, with all
professors of the Faith as ye are Christians, with the whole number of the
elect, as influenced by Gods Spirit; but as ye are a distinct corporation, who
have entered into a covenant for the performance of this duty; and as ye are
the particular Society of Apothecaries, out of whose profession it has pleased
God to choose the most apposite similitude of an affectionate Unity. In order to
engage you to it, be pleased to consider, that it is with lesser Societies as
it is with Kingdoms, That which is divided against itself cannot stand: the
most deserving persons are generally the objects of envy, and therefore this
Society being made up of such, cannot be supposed to be exempted from it; It is
not long since we have experienced the truth of this observation; and what so
secure a defense against the envy and malice of others, as a happy Union
amongst yourselves? The government of these Kingdoms has lately been pleased to
fix a distinguishing mark of favor upon you; and it lies in your power to over
pay this obligation, by setting an example of Unity and Concord to the whole
Nation. Thus much I offer to your consideration, as you are a Society, a body
of men; give me leave to add a word or two, as you are particular Members of a
Society.

We are told, in the composition of this precious Ointment, this Ointment
compounded after the Art of the Apothecary, that all the ingredients were very
valuable; each of them by themselves had an intrinsic worth, which made the
Union of them be so very considerable: Let this, I entreat you, persuade every
one of you, to qualify yourselves in your private capacities, with such
peculiar virtues and abilities, as may make you both useful and worthy members
of that Society, into which you are incorporated: Sometimes it is usual to mix
together such Drugs as are of different and contrary natures, and some of them
such as would be noxious of themselves, unless they were corrected by the
wholesomeness of others; and this kind of prescription may do well for Physic,
but will never serve to make up such an Ointment, as may fitly represent the
Unity of brethren: all the Ingredients here should be of a salubrious nature,
should have an amiable mixture of softness and of sweetness; since where the
case is otherwise, and the dispositions turbulent, they are so far from being
sit to advance the good of a Society, that they rather corrupt, and make it
noisome; they resemble not the compounds of this precious Ointment, but are
like the dead flies (of which the wise man speaks) that cause this precious
Ointment, this Ointment of the Apothecaries, to send forth a stinking savor.
Nulla est amicitia inter malos, says the Aphorism; I may add, nec inter male
moratos; Friendship, the foundation of all Societies, is supported by Virtue,
and by sweetness of temper; and the ill and ill natured are both excluded from
it.

Let this then be a caution to every one of you, to bring along with you upon
all occasions, especially upon those wherein the Society is concerned, such
easy and complying tempers of mind, such sound and unprejudiced designs and
resolutions, of consulting the public good of the whole Corporation, rather
than any narrow or contracted interests; as may fitly resemble you to those
precious Ingredients, which God prescribed for the compounding of that
Ointment, which was to be the Emblem of Unity and Love.

May thus all of you in general, and each of you in particular, be conversant
in all offices of brotherly affection; and by resembling your expressions of
it, to the commendable qualities of your own precious Ointment, may you be
sensible yourselves, and demonstrate to all others, How good and how pleasant a
thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.

Consider what has been said and the Lord give you the will and the ability to
practice.

To God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor power might,
majesty and dominion, henceforth and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

