A PRAESENT FOR CAESAR, Of 100000 l, in hand and 50000 l. a year.

By Thomas Bradley D. D. and Minister of Nettlebed, in the County of Oxford.

Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's.

Luke 20. 25. LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold by Stephen and
Thomas Lewis in Shooe-lane, at the sign of the Book-binders.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, with the Dominions thereunto belonging, etc*
My Lord,
IT is not my business, nor intention in this Paper-praesent, to set out all
Caesar's dues, or duties; but as a Subject under your Highness government, and a
friend and servant to the Commonwealth, whereof I am a Member, to do mine own.
It is a business concerning which I have formerly acquainted your Highness with
some things in the Col. Goffe, Lieut. Col. Worsley, and Mr. Scobel Clark of the
Council.
general; and since that, some others appointed by your Highness to take the
cognizance of it in particular; and it is at this present before the
Commissioners for discoveries at VVorcester-house: But as the presence of the
Sun obscures all other lesser lights, and makes them burn more dimly, so the
assembling of the present Parliament does in a manner suspend and supersede all
vigorous actings of derivative and infeour powers: And therefore I have made
bold to make this address immediately unto your self, and to present unto your
Highness own hand and view, in short, and yet in full too, the whole substance
of the matter, with the grounds and reasons of it; showing the legality,
equity, justice, and necessity of it, that you may at your leisure deliberately
consider of it, and the more confidently resolve what to do in it. It is the
unhappiness of great Princes, that they must see with other men's eyes, and hear
with other men's ears; In this I desire your own may be Judges. And now, my
Lord, I shall humbly crave your favorable protection in the offer of this
proposal, and the further pursuit of it, if any further pursuit be made in it:
For although it speaks nothing but Law and Reason, Equity and Antiquity; yet
what entertainment it may probably meet with when it comes abroad, both the
title and the subject of it may promise and presage, even such as all subjects
of this nature do usually find, to be unwelcom; yet truly there are none of
those that are most concerned in it, but upon conference, when they have
rightly understood my mind in it, and their own Case, they have gone away
wellsatified; but, my Lord, they will be better satisfied, if in consideration
of those great sums your Highness is to receive out of the Church-revenues, so
freely and so firmly by law conferred upon you, your Highness will be pleased
to protect them in all the rest, and to settle upon the Church, and confirm
unto it her ancient portion and patrimony, the Tithes, and to put them into a
better capacity of demanding and receiving them, than now they are in, when men
will pay them but what they list, and if they do but demand their dues of them
in a legal way, presently they are threatened with ejectment, which (as things
now stand with them) is no hard matter to compass, considering the many pins
upon which their standing does depend, and the world of exceptions, which the
Commissions, Proclamations, Orders, and Ordinances made concerning them (if
stretched upon the tenters, to the extremity of them, and acted upon with
rigor) make them liable unto; besides, many of those which are their Judges in
these cases being of different judgments from them in matters of Religion, and
ways of worship, and directly principled, not only against their persons, but
even against their very callings and the payment of Tithes, out of which their
livelihood, and your Highnesses revenue should arise, the continuance whereof
is the only way of perpetuating the Ministry, in the Church; and which once
taken away, it will inevitably follow, that in short space the Ministry will be
utterly ruined and rooted out of the Church of England, and that once down, all
other Ordinances fall with it, which it is your highest honor to protect, and
to uphold; but leaving those matters to your Higness wisdom and care, with the
contribution of my prayers to the great God of Heaven and Earth, the high
dispoof all things, for his blessed protection, direction, and assistance, to
be ever present with you in all your Great, Noble, High, Wise, and Religious
undertakings, I pass to the businese intended, and subscribe as above,

Your Highnesses and the Commonwealths, to serve you in all good ways, Thomas
Bradley.

A PRAESENT FOR CAESAR.
THere is no man that looks upon this Commonwealth, and considers it in the
posture that now it stands, but he will confess that it would require even the
golden mines of Peru to defray the charge of it, and to carry on the businesses
in which it is engaged; hence it is that the supreme Magistrate, upon whose
shoulders the government of it lies, is forced to raise vast sums of money by
such ways and means as reason of state puts him upon, (as by contribution,
excise, decimation, and the like) for the managing of them, which lie heavy
upon the people, and are resented as grievous burdens: for let reason of State
speak what it will, and necessity be never so pressing, men are not willing to
part with their money, it is ease and freedom from burdens that they look for,
which when they sensibly feel, then they will sit down satisfied and
contentedly acquiesce in their condition. What was it that kept the 10 tribes
so close to Jeroboam, and his successors, after the rent from Judah, that
through the reign of 18 Kings they kept constant to them, and never returned
again, But that he did that which Rehoboam should have done, and which the
people sued for, and the grave Counselors advised him to, in making their
yoaks easier, and their burdens lighter? The nearest way I mean not as to the
form of it, but as to the charge of it.
for us to do so too, is to alter the chargeable posture that we now stand in,
if with honor, justice, and safety, that may be done: but if that cannot be,
the next way is to supply it with treasure, by such ways and means as are most
clear and smooth, and least liable to exceptions; and what more clear than what
Law has determined? what more just than for a man to demand his own? what more
equal than for men to pay their debts which they owe? it is not a courtesy, but a
duty, not a gratuity, but the payment of a just and due debt, To render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. And such is that which here I offer, which
if it may be managed by such hands as I have ready to commend, of men of known
worth and integrity, fidelity and ability to undertake, and to perform it, It
shall bring in to the Treasury for the Praesent 100000l. and to the Revenue
50000l. yearly, and clearly, without any charge to the State in the gathering
of it, or trouble, or just cause of grievance to any other that are most
concerned in it, whose good is principally aimed at in this design, which is as
follows.

I Do propose, that the Statute of the 26. of Henry the 8th. and of the first
of Qu. Eliz. for payment of firstfruits, and tenths, may be put into due
execution, which require that they be paid in to the true value of them, and
not as they stand partially rated in the late Kings books, by an ancient
inquiry made above 100 years since, which gives them not in to the 5th. nor to
the 6th. nor scarce to the 8th. part of the true value of them, throughout the
land.

Some reasons showing the reasonableness, equity, justice, and seasonablenesse
of this Demand.
Hen. the 8. and the 1. or Qu. Eliz.

besides these a full Convocation of the Clergy sitting, and unanimously
assenting to it,

values of them, that so the first fruits and tenths may be paid in
accordingly. And against those would I have put in my information in the
Committee for discoveries, if my Council had not otherwise persuaded and
overruled me.

Melius Inquirendum, the Condition whereof runs as follows.

THe Condition of this Obligation is such, that if the Rectory of A. in the
County of B. be hereafter proved to be of more yearly value than ten pounds,
then if C. D. Incumbent there, do answer the Keepers of the Liberties of
England accordingly within one month after Certificate of due proof thereof
had, and delivered unto him, without fraud or further delay* then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to stand and remain in full
force and virtue.

I Have taken some pains, and been at some cost in this Inquiry, and I find
this ten pound, commonly to be an hundred, seldom less than fourscore; as for
instances, the Rectory of Alsford in Hampshire, stands in the late Kings Books
at 29l. and some odd shillings: I have known this Rectory to be let at 450l.
communibus annis, and besides the Dr. Healinge.
incumbent reserving to himself the house, with the accommodatious about it,
with some gleab land, and other advantages, to the value of 30l. a year, and
upward. I could multiply instances of this kind, if it were necessary.

withal (as Synodals, and procurations) and good reason for it; for the duties
upon which they were charged being laid down, which were the calling of Synods,
and visitations of the Churches, which were to be done at the Procurabit
Hospitia, and Synodalia.
charge of the Ministry, it will follow rationally, that the charge, occasioned
by these duties, should die with them, as also the contributions usually given
to the Bishops at their first entrance upon their Sees by way of gratuity.



Kings and Commonwealths than in great exigencies of affairs, as in their
chargeable wars, etc* to supply their wants out of the Revenues of the Church,
by receiving sometimes a tenth, sometimes a fifteenth part throughout their
Dominions, and that where they have no such Law for it as we have, but only
raggione del Stato, as the Italian speaks?

upon the Preface that ushered in this Act when it was first made, in the 26.
of Hen. 8. you shall find it speaks as strongly for his Highness, and the
present affairs of the Commonwealth now, and they do as necessarily require it,
as then they did.

of them, by such ways and means as reason of state puts him upon, as by
contribution, decimation, excise, and the like; and is it fit that such sums as
these are, which are clearly due by Law, should lie asleep, and be waved the
while?

melius Inquirendum should be now set on foot: The Lord Treasurer Buckhurst was
setting it on foot in his time, as his Secretary Gurney told me about eight and
twenty years ago, at my return out of Spain, where I had been with the Lord
Cottington, Ambassador* extraordinary, upon the treaty of the peace between
the two Kingdoms, then and there honorably concluded, ever since which time I
have had it by me.

late Kings time, and for that purpose acquainted the Archbishop of Canterbury
with it, but he kept it off, and charged me upon my Canonical obedience I
should not stir in it, neither did I while I owed him any.

by it; It is the only way to settle them in their tithes, and to confirm them
upon them, and to engage his Highness to protect them in the possession and
enjoyment of them, which before, and as yet do stand but upon tottering terms;
most of the Counties in England having petitioned against them; let them pay
their dues, and they may with the better confidence demand and require them:
But in the mean time, while they pay their dues to his Highness in such an
inconsiderable proportion, what if the Parishioner should take the advantage of
it to pay his tithes by the same proportion; and being required to pay them to
the full value, shall answer, that he pays his tithes in to the Incumbent,
after the same proportion, that the Incumbent pays them in to his Highness and
the Commonwealth, both being equally due? How this will stand good in Law I
know not; but I am sure it is good in equity.

Lastly, were the revenues yet left unto the Church distributed in any
indifferent or reasonable proportion, with due respect had to the different
worth, gifts, and parts, of those that are employed in the glorious work of the
Ministry, and the different Congregations under their several charges, there is
yet left means abundantly sufficient for the maintenance and encouragement of
an able Ministry throughout the land, cheerfully paying out of it his
Highnesses dues too, which the Law requires in testimony of their
thankfulness to him for protecting them in all the rest. For besides all the
defalcations and deductions that have been made out of it, both in the time of
Hen. the 8. and of the late Parliament, there is yet left unto it full half a
million a year, and if course were taken, that this might be prudently
proportioned, so as the greater livings might help the lesser, there would be
found abundantly sufficient for both; and so all the revenues of the
first fruits Office, would come in clearly unto his Highness, which now goes
all out in augmentations, and does not serve the turn neither; And if all the
revenues of the Church will not now be sufficient for the maintaining of the
Ministry, now they are all set a part, and appropriated to that use, how did it
serve the turn anciently, when they had scarce a fourth part of it, the other
three being distributed to other uses? for if you look back into antiquity, you
shall find, that primitively these revenues were not shared amongst the Clergy
parochiatim, by Parish meal, as now, it was many hundred years since Christ,
before the Land was so divided, and cantoniz'd into Parishes; but all the
tithes and oblations, and other revenues of the Church were put into several
Church Treasuries, in every Diocese one, those treasuries committed to the care
and trust of faithful and prudent men, by whom they were to be distributed to
pious and charitable uses, as need did require; those men by whom they were to
be thus distributed, were the Deacons, according to the primitive institution,
Act. 6. Those uses unto which they were distributed, were principally these
four. First for the maintenance of the Ministry. Secondly, for the relief of
the poor. Thirdly, for the building and repairing of Churches, and Religious
houses. And 4thly, for the redemption of Christian Captives, the relief of
persecuted Christians, and the like, so that of all these revenues there was
not above a 4th. part fell to their share; nor that neither, but with these 2
limitations.

freely. Qui bonis Parentum sustentari possunt Clerici, si quod pauperum est
accipiunt, sacrilegium committunt; Clerks or Hieron. cap. Clericos, 1. and 2.
Clergy men which may be sustained by the goods of their Parents, or (as I
conceive he means) by maintenance left them by their Parents, if they take any
thing of the poors patrimony, they commit sacrilege; and what they meant by the
poors patrimony, appears by the same father in another place. Quicquid possidet
Ecclesia, vel in fundis, vel in pecunia, pauperum est patrimonium; Whatsoever
the Church possesses, either in lands, or in money, it is the patrimony of the
poor, they only had the honor and the trust of the distributing of it, or
overseeing the distributing of it by the Deacons, in which regard most properly
they were Episcopi, which signifies overseers; And good reason that
themselves, and the rest of the Clergy having not otherwise wherewith to
sustain themselves, should be supplied out of the treasury; And so they were,
but (which was the second limitation) that so sparingly, and so frugally, that
there should be no allowance for any vain, or unnecessary expenses, much less
for purchasing of lands and houses, for raising of families to greatness, least
of all for Princely pomp, and state; for what the pomp and state of Bishops
Council. Aquil.
was in those days, appears by that modest Canon made in the ancient Council of
A quileia, in these words The motto of my house at Nettl^bed.
Episcopus non procul ab Ecclesia habeat hospitiolum, vilem mensam, and
supellectilem; Let the Bishop have near unto the Church a little house or
Hospital, and in it a mean table, with mean houshouldstuff. That grave Council,
even by the Spirit of prophecy foreseeing, and prudently endeavoring to
prevent that which after followed in the Princely pomp of Prelates.

Wherefore these things duly considered, I hope no man will be offended at me
for what I here offer and present; but rather that I shall deserve thanks from
all parties concerned in it respectively; from his Highness for endeavoring
the augmentation of his Treasury, and the increase of his Revenue* in a legal
way, whereby he may be the better enabled to defray the charge, and to carry on
the great businesses of the Commonwealth, committed to his care and trust; from
the Commonwealth, whose affairs shall by this means be the better administered,
and they in due time eased from other burdens, now lying upon them; and from my
brethren in the Ministry, whose portion and patrimony shall by this means be
settled and confirmed upon them, and his Highness engaged to protect them in the
enjoyment of them, together with his own interest, and in all other their
ancient duties and immunities, now miserably invaded. In three words, Me thinks
it should be satisfactory to all, that there is nothing here proposed but what
there is Law for, what there is reason for, and what there is bond for. If his
Highness will be pleased to remit all these his dues now he knows them, he
shall therein do a very noble, and gracious Act, and I shall have my share in
the benefit of it; but if (the exigencies of the time so requiring) he shall be
pleased to demand them, we have no more reason to be offended with him for
taking his own, than the people have to be offended with us for taking ours.
The way for us to improve this payment to our own advantage, is to do it
freely, and cheerfully, and out of our sense of the pressing necessities of the
time, and our thankfulness to his Highness for our protection in them, to offer
it up to him as a free will offering; though there were no Law at all to
require it. Were the Clergy of those times so sensible of the great burdens of
the Commonwealth, and so thankful to the King for his care and pains in
managing the affairs of it in troublesome times, as to make such a Law when
there was none, and shall we be so insensible of the greater burdens of the
present times, or so unthankful to the supreme Magistrate, upon whose
shoulders the weight of them lies more heavy than ever it did upon that King,
as not to observe it now it is made? surely, as the Clergy of those times did
show their sense of the one, and their thankfullness to the other, in their
free offer of this their assistance, in making such a Law; so the Ministry of
these times will be much more forward to do their parts to assist, enable, and
encourage the Magistrate in his government by keeping it, and every one to put
to his little finger, to the easing of him of the heavy burden of it lying
upon his shoulders; so as I trust I may generally in the name of them all, as
well as of my self, tender this present unto him as to our Patron, Protector
and Benefactor. And although that servant which does no more than his duty
cannot plead merit, nor challenge any extraordinary reward; yet upon this our
readiness and cheerfullness in the performance of it, we may undoubtedly
promise unto our selves from his Highness such Acts of grace, in reference to
our calling, and protection in the exercise of it, in reference to our
maintenance by tithes, and that competent and certain, and in some indifferent
manner proportiond unto us, and of our restoration to all other privileges,
immunities and exemptions belonging to us, as may abundantly recompense the
cost of our obedience in this matter. In order to all these things, and of
settling all things into a right posture, concerning the Ministry, there was a
paper drawn up with a great deal of care, pains, study, and circumspection, and
offered to the late Parliament, though their multiplicity of business would not
permit them to peruse and to consider of it within the time limited; which
although it were presented by inconsiderable hands, Mr. Bakers and my own, yet
there were other hands and heads used in the composing and perusing of it much
more considerable; which if his Highnesses greater businesses would but permit
him to peruse, or this present Parliament now convened to consider of, or to
appoint some grave Committee to take the cognizance of it, it would be found to
be of special use unto them, and to give them much light and many hints as to
this business, not to be despised, in which we shall be ready at all times to
serve them with our best endeavors, if it be required.

In which (as also in any thing else that I have written, as touching the
settling of Ministers in their dues, and their payment of their dues, I humbly
crave to be heartily interpreted on both hands, my intentions in reference to
both, being honest, just, and good, that Caesar may have his due, and that they
that pay it may have theirs too, with an earnest desire and hope, that as they
are to pay with one hand, so they may receive with the other; that in
consideration of these great sums by their own voluntary Act, so clearly coming
to the public treasury, for the public good, some Act of Grace may be past
for them, or something done in favor of them, which may so balance the
payment of it, as that they may resent it, not as a burden, but a benefit, not
as a damage, but an advantage; if it shall please his Highness as freely to
remit the payment unto them, as they did at first grant it unto him, and so
engage the Pulpit to him that way, what is that to me? why should my eye be
evil because his is good? he shall therein do an act both of bounty and policy;
but what will the rest of the Commonwealth think the while, when (reason of
State and necessity so requiring) he shall raise such great sums of money from
them by all the ways and means he can rationally and prudentially devise, and
in the mean time gratify these with such great sums of his own, so clearly by
Law and reason due unto him? may his Highness be pleased but to take his own
dues of them, and to grant them theirs in their ancient portion, and patrimony,
with all those privileges, immunities and exemptions, in which the Law has
indulged them, custom confirmed them, and all the Kings of this Nation, not
only since the conquest, but since the first reformation have protected them
in, his Highness dues may be paid, his treasuries supplied, the Commonwealth
eased in good part in some other burdens, and in all this they no losers but
gainers by the bargain.

FINIS.

