The Qualifications requisite, toward the Receiving a Divine Revelation. A
SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St. PAVL; January the 2d. School/9.
Being the First, for this Year, of the Lecture, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire; By SAMUEL BRADFORD, M. A. Rector of St. Mary le Bow.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Crowns and Bible in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1699.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, Thomas Lord Archbishop of Canterbury; Sir
Henry Ashhurst, Baronet; Sir John Rotherham, Sergeant at Law; John Evelyn
Senior, Esquire;
Trustees appointed by the Will of the Honorable Robert Boil Esquire;
Most Reverend and Honored,
I Humbly present to you this, with the following Discourses, which I Publish
in Obedience to your Order, and with my thankful acknowledgment of the Honor
you have done me, in appointing me your Lecturer for the Year ensuing.

The best way of establishing any Truth is, by making a fair and just
Representation of it, Truth being to the Mind, what Light is to the Eye, always
discernable, where there is no defect in the Organ. My design therefore is, to
endeavor so to represent the Christian Revelation, that it may appear by it is
own Light, and by that means, as far as may be, to prevent Objections, before
they are raised. And because I am fully persuaded, that the true Cause of
Infidelity, where the Gospel is published, is some vicious Indisposition in the
Minds of men, I thought it expedient to begin with laying down the
Qualifications, which are necessary for such Persons, as shall concern
themselves about this Subject.

I am very sensible of my want of Ability, proportionable to this Undertaking:
but I humbly beseech that God and Savior, in whose Cause I am engaged, to
enable me in some measure to promote the pious and generous Design of our
Honorable Founder, a Person who convinced the World, that Christianity is
consistent with excellent natural Parts, and great Learning; as well as with
noble Birth, and good Breeding. After this I have nothing farther to do, but to
rely upon that Goodness which so freely employed me, favorably to interpret
the Endeavors of,

Most Reverend and Honored, Your most obliged and humble Servant, Samuel
Bradford.

JOHN vj. 45. It is written in the Prophets, And they shall be all taught of
God. Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father,
comes unto me.


THE Honorable Founder of these Lectures having appointed them for proving the
Christian Religion against notorious Infidels, viz. Atheists, Deists, Pagans,
Jews, and Mahometans, my design is, by God's Assistance, to direct my following
Discourses principally against the second sort of these Adversaries to our
Profession, the Deists I mean, properly so called, those who are not sunk so
much below humane Nature, as to call into question the Author of their Beings,
or to deny that Providence by which the World is governed, and themselves and
all things in it preserved and taken care of: but yet pretend to disbelieve, or
at least doubt concerning the Christian Revelation.

It must needs seem strange to those who are thoroughly convinced of the Trutho
of Christianity, and discern very plain and strong Evidence for the
confirmation of their Faith in all the parts of it, that there should be any,
who being educated where this Religion is professed, should either remain or
become Infidels; especially if at the same time they seriously own the
Principles of natural Religion, to which those of revealed are so very
agreeable.

How far such men are in good earnest, is best known to God, and to their own
Consciences: but if there be any such, it is certainly worth the while to
convince them; and I should hope it would be no great difficulty to do it,
provided they may be prevailed upon to do what is absolutely necessary, and
highly reasonable on their part, in order to their receiving and owning such
conviction.

For which reason I have chosen to begin with these Words, wherein we are
informed by our Lord himself, what sort of Persons those are, who are qualified
for receiving him and his Doctrine, viz. such as are taught of God, such as
have heard and learned of the Father.

The occasion of the Words was this. Our blessed Savior had been saying, Ver.
38,
that He came down from Heaven; at this some of the Jews murmured, saying, 41,
Is not this Jesus the son of Joseph, whose Father and Mother we know? 42,
How is it then that he says, I came down from Heaven? To which our Lord
replied, not by proposing at that time any Arguments to convince them, that he
really did come down from Heaven; but by hinting to them the true cause of
their unbelief, and letting them understand, that considering their temper,
which he very well knew, Ver. 43, 44.
he was not at all surprised at their rejecting him. Murmur not, says he,
among your selves. No man can come to me, except the Father, which has sent
me, draw him. But may not the Father draw men, and they not follow him? Yes
certainly, Ezekiel. 24.13.
as well as he might be said to have purged Israel, and yet that Israel was not
purged; and therefore it follows in the next Words, It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has
heard, and has learned of the Father, comes unto me.

It is written in the Prophets, that is, this is a Prediction you may find in
diverse places in the Books of the Prophets, in the Old Testament; They shall be
all taught of God, that is, in the days of the Messiah, the World shall be
blessed with more plentiful Instruction from Heaven, there shall be a greater
measure of Divine Knowledge imparted by God to Mankind, together with a larger
Effusion of the Divine Spirit upon the Members of God's Church, whereby they
shall be taught the Will of God more plainly and fully, than in times past.
Particularly the Prophet Isaiah, foretelling the state of the Church in the
days of the Messiah, has these very words which our Lord cites, All thy
children shall be taught of the Lord. Isa. 54.13.


Every man therefore that has heard, and has learned of the Father, comes
unto me; as if he had said, Whosoever therefore will come unto me, that is,
receive me for the Messiah, and acknowledge my Doctrine to be of God, must be
taught of God, according to the prediction of the Prophets; and on his part he
must both hear and learn of the Father, he must attend, that is, to his
Instructions, and comply with them. For if he shall refuse to hear the Father,
he can never acknowledge me, who came from him: but if he will hear and learn
of him, and consequently be taught by him, he will readily come to me also.

So that the Words contain, as I have already observed, the Character of those
Persons, who are qualified and disposed to receive the Christian Doctrine, when
it is published to them.

And this I judge a proper Argument to begin with. For should I be able to
produce never so convincing proofs of the Truth of Christianity; yet if those
who hear me should be utterly indisposed to consider and receive them, all my
discourse must be necessarily lost upon such men. And therefore it is
remarkable, that our Savior, in diverse other places as well as this, does
ascribe the Infidelity of his Hearers to the Indisposition of their Minds, as
the true cause of it; and that too an Indisposition proceeding from some fault
either in their Tempers or Practices: as on the contrary he declares who were
in a fair way to become his Disciples, namely, such as were of a Temper capable
of considering and receiving Truth, when it should be proposed to them. Thus,
Joh. 8.47.
He that is of God, hears God's words: ye therefore hear them not, because ye
are not of God. And again, To this end was I born, Joh. 18.37.
and for this cause came I into world, that I might bear witness to the Truth.
Every one that is of the Truth hears my Voice.

Neither is this asserted by our Lord, without evident Reason, as will appear
to any one, who considers this matter fairly.

Christianity lays it is claim to a Divine Original. Both our Lord himself, and
all who call themselves his Disciples, affirm that it is a Revelation from God.
The Adversaries of this Reliligion say on the contrary, that it is the Product
of Superstition or Design, and consequently that both its Original and Progress
are wholly owing to humane Weakness, or Policy, that is, Wickedness; (for such
would a Policy to invent and propagate a false Religion, and thereby to impose
upon the Understandings and Consciences of men, be justly reputed.) How then
must this Controversy be decided? Why by such Evidence as a matter of this
nature is capable of; by such Proofs as are fit to be alleged for the truth of
a Divine Revelation, and proper to convince the judgment of a reasonable
Creature. But who shall Judge of this Evidence? Why every man must be allowed
to judge for himself, and every man to whom such Evidence is proposed, is
without question obliged, at his utmost peril, to judge impartially. But the
Man that is ignorant of Almighty God, or estranged from him, especially
whosoever is an Enemy to God, as being of a disposition and temper opposite to
that of the Divine Nature, must necessarily be unfit to judge of this kind of
Evidence. If this Religion should prove to be divinely revealed, as it
pretends, such a man would probably think it his Interest, to be sure it would
be his Inclination, to make all the Objections, and to raise all the Cavils,
that he could possibly invent, to invalidate the Proofs of it. At least he
would not easily, nor clearly discern the force of the Arguments alleged for it.

Whereas on the other hand, Whosoever has been taught of God, whosoever has
heard, and learned of the Father, whosoever has attained to right conceptions
of him, and is reconciled in his Mind to him, such a Man is well prepared to
attend to whatsoever it shall please God farther to make known to him, he will
easily and clearly discern the force of any good Evidence which shall be
produced for a Revelation which is truly Divine, and will be naturally ready
and forward to embrace it.

But to come to the Words themselves, in treating of which, it will be proper
to consider these three particulars.

In what way and manner God may be said to teach Men,

Who they are, to have heard, and learned of the Father, in order to the same
end.

What Qualifications are requisite both to the hearing and learning of the
Father, coming to the Son.

Let us consider in what way and manner God may be said to teach Men, It is
written in the Prophets, They shall be all taught of God.

The teaching of God which the Prophets, and particularly Isaiah, in the place
before-cited, refers to, seems, as I have already hinted, to be that more plain
and plentiful Instruction, which was to be communicated to Men, in the days of
the Messiah. But our Savior, in applying this Prophecy, seems also to take in
all that previous Teaching of God, whereby he had prepared Men for the
receiving him, when he should come. For the same God, who by his Providence had
reserved so large a communication of Divine Knowledge, for the times of the
Messiah, had from one Generation to another, been disposing the World for such
farther communications as he should think proper for it; not having in any age
or place, left men without witness of himself. It may be reasonable therefore
upon this occasion, to consider the several ways, in which men might be said to
be taught of God, in order to their receiving any farther Revelation from him.
And I shall name these four.

Men were taught of God, in order to this end,

By the Suggestions and Dictates of their own Consciences.

By some extraordinary, Persons raised up by Providence,

By the secret Motions and Influences of the Divine Spirit upon the Minds of
Men.

I shall only take a short view of each of these.

Men may be said to have been taught of God, by the Works of Creation and
Providence.

From that vast number of Beings, which have been formed by God, their Variety,
Excellency, Beauty, and Order, together with the constant care he takes of all
that he has formed, and the abundant Provision he has made for every Being,
suitable to it is Nature there are plain Intimations and Instructions given by
the Deity, to those Creatures whom he has made capable of observing and
contemplating his Works. And this I may take for granted, without any farther
proof, will be allowed by those, for whose use I principally design my
following Discourses, such I mean as seriously own the Being and the Providence
of the Almighty. And I need not labor to express my self farther upon this
head, than in the Words of the Psalmist, which a Deist will subscribe to as
true, though not as spoken by an inspired Author. Psalm. 10.1,
The Heavens declare the Glory of God: and the Firmament shows his handy
work. And this is a way in which God has taught all Mankind at once; for as it
there follows, Ver. 3,
There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard. Their line is
gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the World. And
therefore the Apostle justly pronounces them inexcusable, who have not by this
way of instruction attained to the knowledge of God. That which may be known of
God, Romans 1.19.
says he, is manifest among them, that is, among the Heathens; for God has
showed it unto them. 20.
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal Power and
Godhead; so that they are without excuse; those namely who do not by this
instruction from the visible World, discern the invisible things of God.

God has taught men also by the Suggestions and Dictates of their own Minds.

Nor will this be denied by any, who seriously own a God and a Providence; viz.
that there is in man a power of Understanding and Reasoning, which he has
received from God in the very frame of his Nature, whereby he is enabled to
discern the Being, and in some measure to know the Will of his Maker; as also a
Conscience, whereby he reflects upon his own behavior, and is either pleased
or displeased with himself, and filled with Hopes or Fears, according as he
acts agreeably or disagreeably to the judgment of his own Mind.

Whether there are innate Ideas in the Souls of Men; or whether only we are
capacitated in the use of our Faculties to form such conceptions as these, and
so framed that we naturally do it, is not material, as to the subject I am now
upon. It is enough, if this be any way the result of our Frame and
Constitution; for then it must be one of the ways in which God, who is the
Author of our Beings, has given us Instruction. And this again cannot be
expressed better, than in the words of St. Romans 2.14,
Paul; When the Gentiles, says he, which have not the Law, do by nature the
things contained in the Law, these having not the Law are a Law unto
themselves, Ver. 15.
which show the work (or matter) of the Law written in their hearts, their
Conscience also bearing Witness, and their thoughts between themselves accusing
or else excusing one another.

God may be said farther to have taught men,

Such we Christians believe the Patriarchs, together with Moses and the
Prophets to have been, namely Persons raised up on purpose, and some of them
sent with a special Commission from God, to teach men. But because in these
Discourses we are to take no more for granted, than those we have to do with
will allow, I shall assert no more under this head, than what will be
acknowledged by every serious Deist, viz. that there have been in all ages
Persons of more enlarged and improved Understandings, and more refined Morals
than the Vulgar, who have both by their discourses, and writings, and practices
instructed other men with respect to Divine and Spiritual Matters. Such
particularly we know there were, not inconsiderable for their Number, and of
very great Reputation, both among the Greeks and Romans, some of which have by
their Writings transmitted to us their conceptions concerning God and
Providence, and the difference between Moral Good and Evil, as also the
spirituality and immortality of the humane Soul, and at least the high
probability of a future state of retribution, of all which they have discourst
admirably well.

And of this rank we may at least reckon the Patriarchs mentioned in the Old
Testament, who practiced, and taught the Worship of the One true God, the Maker
of Heaven and Earth, and gave an Example of Virtuous Lives and Conversations;
as also Moses, the great Law giver among the Jews, who particularly inculcated
this prime Doctrine of Religion, that there is but one God, the Creator and
Governor of all, and gave abundance of Excellent Moral Precepts, besides the
Ceremonial, to that People; as likewise the Prophets which appeared in that
Nation, and made it their business to preach up the Doctrines of Piety, and
Virtue. Whoever owns a Providence, and allows the difference between Moral Good
and Evil, must and will grant that such men as these, wherever they were to be
found, were the Instruments of Providence, for instructing and improving their
fellowcreatures, and consequently that this was another way of God's teaching
men.

God may also be said to have taught men, by the secret Motions and Influences
of his Holy Spirit upon their Minds.

This I am well satisfied the Holy Scriptures do assert throughout, and it is,
in part at least, this kind of teaching, which those passages in the Books of
the Prophets, referred to by our Savior in the Text, seem to mean; neither is
it any more than what I think those whom we have to do with in this
Controversy will allow.

There is indeed nothing more reasonable to be believed of God, even without a
Revelation, than that he who formed our Spirits, which are finite, and entirely
dependent upon their Maker, should be at all times ready to influence them in a
way proper to their make, conversing himself intimately with them, enlightening
those understandings which he has given us, by rays darted from himself, the
Fountain of Light, secretly admonishing and assisting our Souls, according as
they apply themselves to him, and become capable of receiving Influences from
him.

This is well expressed by Elihu in Job, who being supposed not to have been of
the race of Israel, may be reckoned to have spoken in the person of a Deist;
Job 32.8.
There is, says he, a spirit in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives
them understanding. But we need not search nicely for a Proof, that this has
been the sense of those, who have been only under the dispensation of mere
Nature, and nor enlightened by Revelation. It Is well known to all that are
acquainted with the Writings of the Philosophers, that this is frequently
acknowledged by them. Cic. de not. Deor. l. 2.
Nemo vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu divino unquam fuit, is a famous saying of
Cicero's, There was never yet any great Man, but who had something of divine
Inspiration, in which he delivered not his own sense only, but that of Mankind.
Socrates is likewise famous for his pretending to a constant, at least very
frequent direction and influence from the Deity, who I think, if any other
among the Pagan Philosophers, may be fairly allowed such a pretense.

And it is no Objection against this way of God's teaching, that we cannot tell
in what manner he influenceth our Spirits, any more than it is against his
having made us, that we are wholly ignorant how we were formed by him.

This may suffice to be spoken to the first particular I proposed, I proceed to
the next, viz. to consider,

Who they are, heard and learned of the Father, in order to their receiving any
new Revelation from him. Every man therefore that has heard and learned, etc.

To this I answer in the General, Those men have heard and learned of the
Eather, in order to this end, who have attended to the Instructions given them
by God, in any of the four ways abovementioned, and have improved them to the
benefit of their Spirits. But more particularly they may be reduced to these
two following sorts.

Those who have attained to worthy apprehensions concerning God and natural
Religion.

Those who have together with these apprehensions fixed in their Minds an honest
purpose and resolution to act agreeably to them.

By taking a short view of these two particulars, we shall easily perceive,
both that these are the results of God's teaching men, and that they are each
of them preparatory to the receiving farther communications from him.

Such men have heard and learned of the Father,

By worthy apprehensions of God, I meah, that they should conceive of him, as a
Being infinite in all Perfection, and particularly in those we call the Moral
Perfections of the Divine Nature, commonly expressed by the general term of
Holiness, comprehending the Truth, the Justice, and the Goodness of God; that
they should think of him, as the Original of all Being, the great Maker and
Preserver of the World, and the Supreme Lord and Governor of it; that they
should look upon him as the great Parent of the intellectual part of the
Universe, who has a tender care of and concern for this his Offspring; that
they should apprehend him to be a Being infinitely good to all his Works, and
especially propitious to those his Creatures, who have always retained, or are
willing to return to the temper of dutiful and obedient children; who, as on
the one hand he will not suffer his Laws to be violated, and his Authority
contemned, without making the Transgressors sensible and afraid of his
displeasure; so on the other hand also he will be ready to compassionate in all
compassionable cases, and to make all such allowances as are proper to be made
by a Creator to his Creatures.

By worthy apprehensions of natural Religion, I mean, that they should see and
acknowledge the eternal and immutable difference between moral good and evil,
together with the necessary and indispensable Obligation a reasonable creature
is under to choose the one, and refuse the other; that they should discern the
fitness of yielding Reverence, and Love, Worship, and Obedience to our Maker;
of exercising Justice and Charity one toward another; of subjecting our Flesh
to our Spirits; and reducing our Appetites and Passions under the direction and
government of Understanding and Reason; of improving our Minds, as our
principal part, and using our several Faculties according to the nature and
design of each of them. These I take to be worthy apprehensions of God and
natural Religion, and such as will be entertained by all those, who are taught
of God, and have not only heard, but learned of the Father.

And whosoever has these Apprehensions well settled in his Mind, will be
always ready to embrace a Doctrine which comes from God, and approves it self
to be worthy of him; he will be apt to entertain a Revelation as Divine, which
renders all the Attributes of God conspicuous and illustrious; he will
diligently listen to, and easily believe a fair account of the Goodness of God
to the apostate children of men, reconciled with his Wisdom and Justice in
governing the World; and he will heartily approve an Institution, which
thoroughly explains and heightens the Obligations which reasonable Creatures are
under to all that is truly good and praiseworthy; that is, he will be well
disposed to become a Christian, these being (as I hope hereafter to show) the
just Characters of Christianity.

Upon this ground it was, that our Lord gave his approbation to the Judgment of
the Scribe, upon his saying there was one God, Mark 12.32, 33, 34.
and that for a Man to love this God with all his heart, and to love his
Neighbor as himself, was more than all whole burnt-offerings and sacrifices.
The Text says, that when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, i. e. when he
discovered so just apprehensions of God, and the nature of Religion in general,
he said unto him, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God; as far as his
Judgment went at least, he was almost a Disciple of Christ, being well disposed
to entertain the Doctrine which he taught. But then,

There must be added to this, heard and learned of the Father, have together
with these Apprehensions fixed in their Minds an honest purpose and resolution
to act agreeably to them.

The perfection of a reasonable creature consists in the regularity of his Will
and Affections, as much at least, if not more than in the improvement of his
Understanding. Nay the very use of any information given to the Understanding
is, that it may direct and influence the Will and Affections of the Man; and
consequently the great design of all God's teaching, which is without question
intended to perfect our Natures, is to improve the temper and disposition of
our Souls; so that no man can be said to have heard and learned of the Father,
till he have formed his temper by the knowledge which is imparted to him from
God, and reduced his Notions to practice. All the Truths of God are to be
received in the love of them, and the end of their communication is, that we
may yield our selves to be directed by them; and he that is arrived thus far,
has heard and learned of the Father, in the full sense of that Expression; and
after this, can want nothing more toward the entertaining any new Revelation
from God, than a fair proposal of it to him.

This is agreeable to what our Savior has told us, and what is evident from
the nature of the thing, that If any man will do the will of God, Joh. 7.17.
he shall know of his Doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether he spoke of
himself. And this it is likely was wanting in the Scribe beforementioned, whom
our Savior declared not to be far from the Kingdom of God. Had he added to his
just apprehensions of Divine truths, a full purpose of mind to yield to their
influence, he would not only have approached, but entered into the Kingdom.

And here in truth lies the main difficulty with most men. Their Apprehensions
would be more easily set right, if their Wills and Affections were but subdued:
but this latter requiring some pains, they too often make their Judgments
comply with their Inclinations, and suffer their Wills and Affections to
conduct their Understandings.

It may therefore be worth the while enquire once more, What Qualifications are
requisite, both to the hearing and learning of the Father, and coming to the
Son, which was the last particular I proposed to be considered.

I shall mention only the three following.

A serious and composed temper of Spirit.

A good degree of Humility.

Purity of Heart.

A serious and composed temper of Spirit.

This is a Qualification necessary in order to proficiency in any other sort of
learning, that is of considerable use; and much more is it so, where God is the
Teacher, and Religion the Subject of the Enquiry.

God is a great Being, infinitely above us; the thoughts of his Majesty are
sufficient to strike an awe into our Minds. He is perfectly pure and holy, he
has full Authority to command us, and an irresistible Power, as well as an
undoubted right to govern and control us; and our Happiness depends entirely
upon his favor.

Religion is the solemn Obligation we acknowledge our selves to be under to
this excellent Being, whereby we are instructed in his Will, and engaged to
comply with it; and the Christian Religion in particular pretends to be an
improvement of that which is natural.

Now these are matters of the greatest Weight, and highest Concernment to us,
and consequently such as require the most sedate temper of Mind in those who
are conversant about them.

Besides that the ways in which God teaches men are such as make a very
serious attention necessary. It Is remarkable, that when our blessed Savior had
in the Text mentioned hearing and learning of the Father, he adds in the very
next words, Not that any man has seen the Father, intimating thereby that we
do not learn of God, as one man learns of another. No, it is by serious
contemplation of his Works; by frequent retiring into our own Souls, exercising
and consulting the best of our Faculties, those I mean of Understanding, and
Reason, and Conscience; it is by looking out for those who are wiser and better
than our selves, and attending to what they shall impart to us of their
knowledge in Divine matters; and finally it is by cherishing and improving the
secret Motions and Influences of the good Spirit of God, and in a due exercise
of our Faculties, together with a serious application to God, preparing our
selves for the reception of his communications.

How then is it likely, that a man of a fantastical, airy and unthinking
temper, should hear and learn of the Father, or come to the Son! It Is not in
the least probable, that such an one should apply himself to the consideration
of these serious Subjects, or give that attention of Mind which is proper; nor
can it be thought, that the Holy Spirit of God should attend such light and
unsettled minds.

Another Qualification for hearing and learning of the Father is,

It becomes a Learner in general to give a deference to the judgment and
authority of those who instruct him; much more is it fit that those who would
learn of God, should attend to his Instructions with the greatest Humility that
is possible. They should have those mean thoughts of themselves which become
Creatures, when they are learning of their Maker. They should remember that
their Minds are finite and narrow, that their apprehensions of things are very
imperfect at the best, that they are fallible, nay exceeding liable to be
mistaken of themselves, and consequently do stand in need of the constant
direction and guidance of the first and great Mind. They should consider
farther, that they are altogether unworthy of such a favor, as to be taught of
God, forasmuch as they cannot but be conscious of very great disorder in their
Natures, too much indisposition to do, and consequently to know the Will of
God. All these considerations will be apt to make them humble, and thereby
dispose them to hear and learn of the Father.

For by this means they will be brought to acknowledge the reasonableness of
those great duties, which natural Religion enjoins, viz. submitting and
resigning their Wills entirely to the Will of their Sovereign Lord; being well
contented with his disposal, and fully satisfied with that share of the good
things of life, which he is pleased to allow them; depending upon him, and
acknowledging him in all their ways; as also demeaning themselves toward other
men with a regard due to those of the same nature with themselves, however they
may differ from them in some accident respects.

And by the same means they will be disposed also to come to the Son of God,
whose Institution lays before us abundance of humbling considerations, drawn
from the weakness and corruption of humane Nature, as well as from the guilt we
have contracted; and gives us in charge such Precepts as cannot possibly
consist with pride or haughtiness of spirit, such as condescending to those of
the lowest rank for their good, bearing affronts, forgiving injuries, returning
good for evil, and the like; upon which account our Lord saw it fit to forewarn
those that pretended to be his Disciples, that one necessary condition of being
so, was to humble themselves, Mat. 18.3, 4.
and become as little children.

Nay farther, this Humility will dispose those who are endued with it, to
allow, that God may possibly reveal to us some Truths of concernment and use,
which we could not have found out our selves, and which when discovered in
part, we may not be able fully to grasp and comprehend; as well as he may
oblige us to some Duties, which may lie cross to certain inclinations and
propensions that we may have contracted, which duties may notwithstanding be
very reasonable in themselves and good for us. A competent degree of Humility
will dispose us to think on this manner; and consequently will render us
capable of Divine Instruction.

Which it will yet farther do, by qualifying us to partake of the Illumination
and Assistance of the Spirit of that God, who, as we are assured both by
Scripture and Reason, Pet. 5.5.
resists the proud; but gives Grace to the humble.

The last Qualification I mentioned was Purity of Heart;

It Is acknowledged by every serious Deist, that as God is a pure and holy
Being, so the design of true Religion is to render us like to him, and
consequently to refine and purify our Spirits, by raising us above the things
of sense and this present life. And this we Christians affirm to be the great
design of that Religion which we profess. Now nothing can make us more
indisposed to hear and learn either of the Father or the Son, than strong
habits of Vice indulged by us, or, which comes to the same issue, being deeply
immerst in the sensual and animal life. This was the reason why Aristotle
pronounced young men unfit to hear Lectures in moral Philosophy, namely because
of the vehemence of their sensual inclinations and passions. Christianity, in
confidence of its reasonableness, together with the assistance and strength it
offers, proposes it self to every age, as well as each condition of men: but
still this must be owned, that by how much the more sensual or worldly-minded
any man is, by so much the more he is in danger of having his Understanding
byas'd in his enquiries after the truths of Religion. It Is an uneasy thing to
own a truth, which directly opposes it self to the bent of our inclinations;
and therefore a man that is resolvedly vicious, will rather choose to have his
understanding mifled, and his judgment bribed, than yield his assent to such
truths, as he very well knows would prove a constant vexation to his Spirit.

Besides, that as in the former instances, so here also, it cannot be expected
that the Holy Spirit of God, by whom the minds of all good men are illuminated
and assisted in their searches after divine knowledge, should co-habit or
cooperate with a soul grossly impure and vicious.

Thus I have dispatched the three particulars I at first proposed, and the sum
of what I have been saying is in short this; That whosoever will take upon him
to judge of the truth of revealed Religion, or that which pretends to be so,
ought to be a man, who has first well considered, and yielded to the
convictions of that which is natural; and that there are certain Qualifications
necessary in order to the considering and entertaining either natural Religion,
or revealed.

The application I would make of the whole shall be only in two words.

I infer that if any person, with the Qualifications abovementioned in a good
degree, and for want of them has not been taught of God, shall yet take upon
him to deny the truth of the Christian Religion, he is to be neglected as one
that is no competent Judge in this dispute. Jesus Christ may be the Son of God,
and the Savior of Mankind, and his Religion may have had its original from
Heaven, as we Christians profess heartily to believe, for any thing such a man
knows, or can know to the contrary.

It Is therefore remarkable what I hinted in the beginning of this discourse,
that our blessed Savior does upon all occasions ascribe the unbelief of his
Hearers to the indisposition of their tempers, to their pride and vainglory,
their sensuality and love of the present World, their ignorance of God and of
the nature of Religion in general, to their affected blindness, and the wilful
hardness of their hearts; and the Apostles likewise do the same.

And in like manner, if Infidelity has prevailed in a high degree in the Age
and Nation in which we live, we may by a very little observation find out the
true grounds and reasons of it.

A considerable number of those who reject Christianity, do at the same time
openly express their contempt of all Religion in general; and not only so, but
even of every thing that is serious and of weight in humane life. They are men
of light and inconsiderate tempers, who very hardly admit of any serious
thoughts even about the common affairs of the World; Such whose time is wasted
in sport and luxury, who have never improved or exercised their higher
Faculties, according to the design of their Natures, nor furnished their Heads
with any solid materials to think upon.

There are others who are not it may be altogether so airy and unthinking; but
yet being thoroughly vicious, violently addicted to the gratifying their sensual
Inclinations, or deeply engaged in the love and pursuit of this vain World,
however serious and composed they may sometimes be, when they concern
themselves about secular affairs, they put the thoughts of God and Religion far
from them; as creating uneasiness to their Minds, disturbing and interrupting
them in their Enjoyments, and raising continual scruples and doubts and fears
within them.

There are some few besides, not to be reduced to either of the former ranks,
who yet by their supercilious, and scornful way of treating revealed Religion,
discover such a degree of haughtiness and self-conceit, such a vain opinion of
their own Understandings and ways of thinking, and such a scorn and difdain
with respect to all that shall presume to differ from them, as plainly shows
them not at all to be under the government of that Religion which is natural.

Now whenever the Question is concerning the truth of Christianity, it cannot
with any show of reason be referred to these men's Judgments. They are either
wholly unconcerned in the matter, or too evidently prejudiced to judge
impartially; so that there lies an Appeal from them to the more serious,
modest, humble and honest part of Mankind.



It Is altogether unreasonable for them to pretend to pass their censure upon
what is not within their cognizance, what they either never have at all
considered, or never yet were in a temper fit to think of.

And it is extremely dangerous, because that temper which renders them unfit to
consider and judge in this case is vicious in a notorious degree. Levity and
Pride, Impurity and Dishonesty, are some of the grossest stains, and vilest
reproaches of humane Nature. If any man apprehend, not aright of God, and of
natural Religion, especially when he has had great advantages for his
instruction, if he have refused or neglected to exercise his Faculties upon
these subjects, or if having attained to just apprehensions, he yet withholds
the truth in unrighteousness, such a man lives and acts besides the great
design and end of his Nature, and must necessarily be accountable to his Maker,
first for not approving himself a Man; and in the next place because by that
means he failed of becoming a Christian.

To conclude, it seems not in the least unworthy of God, to offer such a
Revelation to Men, and in such a way and manner, as that it shall prove a Test,
to try and distinguish their Tempers, so that if they are but tolerably
serious, humble, and honest, they will be apt to discern it is evidence and
follow it is directions, they will (according to our Lord's expression) justify
God, Luke 7.29,
by complying with his design; but if they are of the contrary temper, they
will frustrate the counsel of God, 30.
intended for their good: if they are of the (...), the well-dispos'd toward
eternal life, Acts 13.48,
they will be glad, and glorify the word of the Lord; but if they are
otherwise disposed, Ver. 45, ^
they will perhaps contradict and blaspheme, at least they will put away the
word of God from them, and judge themselves unworthy of everlasting life. This
I take to be the case of the Christian Revelation; so that it is of great
concernment to those who will enquire into the truth of it, to examine well
what Spirit they are of.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel.
FOrty Nine Sermons on the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Colossians
by Monsieur Daille, Minister of the Reformed Church in Paris. Folio.

A Treatise of Knowledge and Love in Two Parts. By Mr. Richard Baxter, Quarto.

The Poor Man's Help, and Young Man's Guide. Octavo.

An Argumentative and Practical Discourse of Infant Baptism, in which the
Lawfulness is demonstrated, Objections answered, Usefulness asserted, the
Sinfulness of Re baptizing manifested, Nonnecessity of Dipping evidenced, and
the Practical Use of Infant Baptism Urged and Enforced. Both by William
Burkitt, M. A. of Pembrook Hall in Cambridge; now Vicar of Dedham in Essex.
Octavo.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects. By the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.
Folio.


