Mr. BRADY's SERMON AT WHITE HALL, Upon occasion of the Queens Death.

A SERMON Preached at WHITE HALL, March 3. 1694/5. Upon Occasion of Her Late
Majesty's Death;

BEFORE THE Right Honorable the Countess of Derby, and the rest of the
Mourning Ladies.

By Nicholas Brady, M. A. Minister of St. Catherine Cree-Church, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Request of that Honorable Audience.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Parker, at the Unicorn, under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1695.

To the Right Honorable ELIZABETH, Countess of DERBY, Groom of the Stole to
her late Majesty, etc.
Madam,
THe many undeserved favors I have received from your Ladyship, and the
dependence which I have upon your Illustrious Brother, exact the largest
acknowledgments that I am capable of making, and give you a just title to
whatever I can call mine. But you have still a more peculiar right to the
following Discourse, which was preached and published by your express command,
occasioned by that loss in which you share so greatly; and designed to assuage
that excessive Sorrow, which a reflection upon it was too apt to excite, in so
true a Mourner as your Ladyship. I question not, but that greatness of Soul,
and firmness of Mind, which are natural to the blood from which you are
descended, together with that exemplary and unaffected Piety, which recommended
you to the Friendship of the best of Princesses, will now give you their
Assistance when you most need it; and enable you to support that Trial with
moderation, which would oppress a weaker Courage, and break a Spirit less
resigned. For your Ladyship has not so learned Christ, as to struggle
ineffectually under the Cross, when he is pleased to lay it on; or to think,
that infinite Wisdom and unbounded Goodness can deal hardly by us, let the
temptations which encompass us be never so great; such indeed was that
unspeakable affliction, with which God has lately been pleased to visit us: the
sudden and unexpected loss of a Princess, who was not only the delight of the
Eyes, but the Joy too of the Hearts of all her Subjects; a Princess whose
Character I dare not attempt, for fear of lessening it; in whom the Conjugal
affection of the first Edward's Eleanor, the undaunted magnanimity of the third
Edward's Philippa, with the Religious Zeal, and prudent Government of our late
famous Elizabeth, were happily united and improved; and to whom King Lemuel's
Eulogy might justly be applied, Many Daughters have done Virtuously, but thou
excellest them all. But whither is my indiscreet Zeal transporting me? faintly
to enumerate some few of those Graces, with which your Ladyship were so
intimately acquainted, in all their Variety and Perfection? My present business
is that of a Comforter, not a Condoler. And if the following discourse can
furnish your Ladyship, with some Weapons to combat the greatness of your
Grief, (which in such Hands cannot but be successful) it will highly contribute
to the joy and satisfaction, of

Madam, Your Ladyships most Obedient, and most Obliged Humble Servant, N. Brady.

James I. 2. My Brethren, count it all joy, when ye fall into diverse
temptations.


LEst the sharpness and severity of our late affliction, which is not confined
within the bounds of these Kingdoms, but sheds its influence over the greatest
part of Christendom, and takes them in for our Fellow-mourners;) Lest this (I
say) should tempt us to murmur and repine, to exceed the just bounds of
moderation and prudence, and to quarrel at the unsearchable dispensations of an
all-good and all-wise Providence; I have therefore chosen to entertain you at
the present, with some such seasonable and useful meditations, as may direct us
to be easy under the most grievous circumstances; and by a happy kind of
Christian Alchymy, to turn Judgments themselves into Blessings. And indeed,
there is nothing in which men are more generally mistaken, than in the wrong
Notions they usually entertain, concerning the various dispensations of
Providence in this world: because Prosperity carries with it present
Satisfaction, and is set off with a little Tinsel bravery, they are apt to
magnify and admire it; and are as prone to decry and vilify Adversity,
because it is accompanied with some sensible uneasinesses, and has no gay
Pageantry to recommend it. Whilst men will thus take up with outsides and
appearances, and suffer their Judgments only to play upon the surface of
things, it will be hard to persuade them, That the former of these is commonly
a snare, being followed by a train of most dangerous consequences; and that the
latter is frequently a Blessing, being happily attended with considerable
Advantages: Yet to him that examines things calmly and impartially, this
seeming Paradox will be evidently made out; and the Apostle will appear to have
very good grounds, for exhorting all Christians to rejoice and triumph, when
they find themselves encompassed with manifold afflictions; not only to undergo
them with such a steadfast firmness and serenity of mind, as some of the Heathen
Philosophers applauded and attained to; but to carry their Resignation to a
pitch much higher, to which nothing but Christianity could ever yet arrive, by
finding just matter of Joy and Consolation, in those misconstrued occasions of
Sorrow and uneasiness: My Brethren, says he, count it all joy, when ye fall
into diverse temptations.

The words afford us this single proposition, which I design for the subject of
my following Discourse, namely, That whatsoever afflictions may at any time
befall us, if we consider them duly as Christians should do, they afford just
matter of Joy and Consolation.

The truth of this assertion will undeniably appear, from these three following
considerations.

First, From the Nature of our Temptations or Afflictions.

Secondly, From Gods design in Exposing us to them.

Thirdly, From the Consequences which attend them.

First Then, from the Nature of our Temptations or Afflictions it will
evidently appear, that whenever they befall us, if we consider them duly, as
Christians should do, they afford just matter of Joy and Consolation.

Indeed, if we are unassisted by Grace and Religion, if we are left to our
selves to wrestle with afflictions, the Natural Man is unable of himself to
extract Honey out of Wormwood, or to make such Bitter Potions become sweet and
palatable; but if we bring them to the Bar of Religion, and try them by the
Laws and Maxims of Christianity, we shall find all their uneasiness to drop off
and fall away, and to be happily succeeded by comfort and satisfaction. All
those troubles and afflictions which touch men most sensibly, and are the most
likely means to disturb and discompose them, may be reduced under these six
heads; The Loss of Reputation, the Loss of Riches, the Loss of Liberty, the
Loss of Friends or of Relations, the Loss of Health, and the Loss of Life:
Under these may be comprehended all manner of Temptations; and if we examine
them severally and distinctly, we shall see this Doctrine verified in each
particular of them, that they afford us just matter of Joy and Consolation.

I. Then as to the Loss of Reputation; This indeed is looked upon by the
Natural Man, as a very sharp and grievous misfortune; it makes him mean and
contemptible in the eyes of the World, to which he chiefly desires to recommend
and approve himself; it exposes him to slights and disrespects; all men shun
and avoid his society, as if his Infamy were infectious, and think it base and
scandalous to be seen to converse with him: he is the common theme of abusive
Tongues, the mark of malicious Eyes, and the putting forth of the finger; and
the best that he can hope for, is to be so far despised, as at length to be
forgotten and disregarded: This is a condition which seems so deplorable, that
we have reason to call Christianity to our aid, to enable us to support it with
any tolerable satisfaction; but how soon will that plain all the roughness and
unevenness, and make this rugged prospect appear smooth and level! That will
represent to us, That Credit and Reputation in this world, are generally the
portion of the children of it; That if we were of this world, the world would
love us, and speak well of us; That all the malicious Reflections it can cast
upon us, are but so many proofs of our estrangement from it; and shall we then
be sorry, that the lot is fallen to us in a fairer ground, and that we are
entitled to a more goodly heritage? For this very reason it is, that our
Savior commands us to rejoice and be exceeding glad, when men revile us and
persecute us with their Tongues, and speak all manner of evil against us,
because this was the condition of good men in all ages, so dealt they with the
Prophets which were before us; a Christian will consider when he is thus
afflicted, that he either suffers by his own fault, or by that of others; if by
his own, he may be sorry for his fault, but ought to rejoice and triumph in his
sufferings; since these are his attonements to God for his offenses, and the
means of removing his anger from him; if his Credit is impaired by the fault of
others, he will pity and forgive his malicious Enemies, and rejoice in the
opportunity of exercising his Charity: were he too much wedded to worldly
applause, it might engage him to conform himself to the fashions of this world,
to make Fame and Reputation the end of his actions, and to terminate his
desires and expectations there; and therefore he has all imaginable reason to
rejoice, that the world does not use him well enough to make him grow fond of
it; he will satisfy himself with the sense of his own Innocence, till God
shall think fit to vindicate his Reputation; and shall establish his Credit
with his own Euge, with a well done good and faithful Servant, before the whole
Theater of Heaven and Earth. Thus will the good Christian comfort himself under
the Loss of Reputation, rejoicing in the mean time that he is made like unto
his Savior, who was despised and rejected, slandered and reviled; yet
cheerfully committed himself to God, who judges Righteously. But

Secondly, As to the Loss of Riches: These are much dearer to most men than
their Reputation, and therefore the loss of them is more tedious and
insupportable. To these the Natural man is indebted for all the pleasures and
conveniences of Life; for the gratifying of his Senses, and the pleasing of
his Lusts; and for such a man to be deprived of his wealth, is to lose that
upon which he has his only reliance, for making his Life comfortable and
delightful; this is the purchaser of all his Enjoyments, the grand purveyor
that makes provision for the flesh; neither can feast his appetites, nor keep
up his grandeur, nor preserve his esteem, if this great support of them all be
once removed: The Epicure must fast from his delightful Entertainments, and the
profuse Indulging of his sensual appetites; the Ambitious must be stripped of
his numerous Train, and the expecting crowd of bare-headed Clients; the Vain
glorious must part with his darling Applause, and that Incense of Praise which
was offered daily: All these were the inseparable Companions of their Riches,
and therefore will not fail to drop off with them: and how miserable must the
condition of that man be, who has no taste of any pleasures but what this world
affords, and is at once dispossessed of all the Enjoyments of it! But if we
turn the Perspective, and look upon Riches with the Eye of a Christian, how
little will these magnified objects then appear, and how truly will they shrink
to their own narrow dimensions! He puts not his trust in uncertain Riches, and
therefore loses not his dependence when they make themselves wings to fly away
from him; he considers that they are nothing but a little Earth, which the Sun
has put a price upon by giving it a color; that they are clogs and
encumbrances to the aspiring Soul, which cannot so easily take its flight, and
raise it self to Heaven, with so much dross about it: he is glad that he is
freed from those grand incentives to carnal pleasures, those harbingers of Sin,
and instruments of Destruction; That the snare is removed which is so usually
an occasion of falling; and that wealth placed out of his reach, which is
oftentimes laid out to buy Repentance: If his Table is adorned less plentifully
or artificially, he is thereby less liable to intemperance and excess; if the
crowd of visitants is not so great as formerly, he is thereby less exposed to
Vanity and Pride; if he finds less respect paid him now than before, he thereby
learns how slight a foundation the worldling builds upon, and is taught to
endeavor at more durable advantages: Thus does he make his loss beneficial to
him, by improving in Godliness, which is the greatest gain; he has learned
(with the Apostle) in whatsoever state he is, therewith to be content; and
therefore knows how to be abased, as well as how to abound; how to suffer need,
as well as how to be full: In a word, he can bless the Lord with Job, for
reducing him to that state, in which he came into the world, and in which he
must go out of it; and who by withdrawing the conveniences and advantages of
this Life, has happily obliged him to contend for a better. But

Thirdly, As to the Loss of Liberty: Reputation and Riches are things
independent of us, and for which we must be beholding to something without us;
but Liberty is the Birthright of every man, we bring our title to it into the
world with us, and the loss of it is a most sensible affliction, to him that
considers it as a Natural Man. To be shut up from all delightful society, and
to converse with nothing but Walls and Grates; to forego all our pleasing
Assignations, our divertive Journeys and entertaining Walks; to be wholly
confined to the narrow prospect which a Prison window can afford us, and to be
blind in a manner to all the world besides; to see no grateful vicissitude of
Seasons, no cheerful variety of the works of Nature: Nay, perhaps to be
Fettered and Chained down to the ground, as if we were one piece with the Earth
we lie upon, and were growing again to our original Clod. These are
considerations sufficient to distract any one, that is not furnished with the
assistances of Grace and Religion; but let us reflect upon them according to
their Dictates, and we shall find the case to be very different: Those Walls
and Bars which shut in the Christian, shut out the temptations and allurements
of the World, and are rather his defenses than impediments; to him, his Prison
is his bulwark, that secures him from those enemies, which would else press in
upon him; his mind, whose freedom he only values, enjoys by this a greater
liberty; it has nothing to obstruct, or to divert its flight, but can range in
contemplation, without the least disturbance; his Body indeed is shackled and
confined, but does not that it self fetter and tie up his Soul? and therefore
he that has put that under restraint, has only made a prisoner of his Jailer.
How well may he rejoice, that his time is all his own, that he is freed from
the necessity of impertinent visits, from the dangerous temptations of idle
Company, and has leisure to take himself to task without any interruption, and
to try and examine the very bottom of his Heart! how intimate a communion may
he keep up with God, who is secured against all things that may withdraw him
from it! and how happily may he convert a Dungeon into a Temple, by making it
the house of Prayer and of Praises, and having it constantly Illuminated with
the light of Gods countenance! Thus will the Christian turn this affliction
into matter of Joy; since the confinement of his Body is the enfranchisement of
his Soul, and gives that opportunity to act with greater freedom. But

Fourthly, as to the Loss of Friends and Relations. This is a Calamity
extremely piercing, and which seems to justify a sensible concern; because it
appears to act generously on the account of others, and does not openly
discover that Principle of Self-Love, to which however it truly owes its
beginning: When this affliction surprises the Natural Man, he judges himself
without Comfort, because without Remedy; lost Reputation may be re-established,
lost Riches may be Recovered, lost Liberty may be Regained, but the loss of a
Friend or Dear Relation, is beyond all possibility of being Retrieved. Must he
never more enjoy that delightful conversation, that agreeable commerce and
familiarity with his Friend? Shall he never more be blessed with the tender
caresses of his careful and indulgent Parents? Must he for ever be banished
from the charming society of his Wife, and the pretty dalliances of his hopeful
Children? are they passed into the Land from whence they never must return? and
has the inexecrable Grave shut its Mouth upon them for ever? thus will he
complain in the anguish of his Soul, who has no other Antidotes against so
great a misery, but what bare humane reason is capable of administering; he sees
nothing beyond the Grave; Death and the Pit terminate his prospect; and
therefore make up an object all black and melancholy. But the Christian, whose
Eye can pierce much farther, who can look through this Darkness into the land
of Light, considers his departed Friends with joy and satisfaction: He knows
they have got the better of the exchange by being taken out of a miserable
World, to be admitted into a state of Happiness and Perfection; he prefers
their advantage before his own enjoyments, and rejoices at their removal into
bliss, tho he pays dearly for it by his own want of them; he looks upon them as
so many Harbingers which are gone before him to prepare his way; he longs to be
dissolved, and to go to Christ and them, but cannot be so selfish or
uncharitable, as to wish them back again with him; he is glad that his
Companion is in a better Society, and that his Friend is preferred into an
Angel; he considers that they are got out of the prison of the Flesh, and
cannot repine at their Releasement, tho he is still forced to drag the Chain,
and bear about him his earthly Fetters; he has nothing so Dear, which he cannot
resign to God, or which he can desire to be better disposed of; he reflects
upon the mortality of their condition, and by daily meditating that they must
once dye, he is enabled to acquiesce in it whenever it happens: And since he
is certain that God orders every thing for the best, he cheerfully submits to
his dispensations, and joyfully concurs with the workings of his Providence.
Thus will the Christian comfort himself, for the loss of his Friends or his
dear Relations, by considering that they are in the hands of a merciful
Creator, and letting his own loss be swallowed up in the just consideration of
their advantage. But

Fifthly, as to the Loss of Health. This is an Affliction of such extraordinary
sharpness, that it was reserved by the Tempter, as his last Engine, to batter
down the constancy of righteous Job; when he had stood the loss of his
Substance, and Relations with an unshaken patience, yet this he supposed would
shock his Resolution: Skin for skin, says he, yea all that a man has will he
give for his Life; but put forth thy Hand now, and touch his Bone and his
Flesh, and he will curse thee to thy Face. And indeed this maxim (tho uttered
by the Father of lies,) carries too much truth with it in Relation to the
natural man; for, can any object be more lamentable, than to see such a one
confined to his sick Bed? to see all outward Comforts withdrawn from him, and
nothing within to support or sustain him? when his very Bed becomes a Rack, and
he lies there, as if stretched upon the Engine of his Torture; when an Ague
chills his Blood, and turns it into Isicles, or a Fever makes it glow like
Liquid Fire; when his Body is covered over with Rottenness and Putrefaction,
and Coruption has taken possession of it on this side the Grave! how will he
then roar for the disquietness of his Soul, and knows not whether to apply
himself for Ease and Refreshment! Comfort is as much a stranger to his heart,
as sleep is to his eves; and the words of consolation are as tasteless and
insipid, as Music to his Ears, or rich Wines to his Palate: But to him who has
the art of sanctifying afflictions, and of breaking their force by a Christian
Resignation, all things will put on another semblance: Sickness, to such a man,
is but a different way of mortifying the flesh, which must otherwise have been
done by humiliation, abstinence, and such other methods of self-denial; a means
to make us weary and out of conceit with this world, to which we are wont to be
too fondly devoted: It is a mark of Gods care and paternal love, the correction
of a tender and indulgent Father; a sign that he has not utterly cast us off,
but is willing to draw us to him by one way or other. Here it is that the
Christian disengages himself wholly, from the blandishments and allurements of
this present Life; that he gets loose from every thing that stands between him
and heaven, and shakes off all the hindrances of his Union with God; his
vigorous Soul is just upon the wing, and waits impatiently for death to give it
its general discharge; and while he is thus panting and longing after God, God
cannot be supposed to absent himself from him; he makes his bed in all his
sickness, supplies with his own presence all other advantages, and by the
comfortable Refreshings of his Spirit, he causes him to hear of joy and
gladness, and makes the bones which he has broken to rejoice. These
Considerations will support the Christian under the great temptation of
sickness and infirmity: Since he is then but treading a rougher path to
happiness, and is still upon his way toward God and Heaven, though the
circumstances of the Road may be tiresome and uneasy. But,

Sixthly and lastly, As to the Loss of Life. This is to the Natural Man the
most distracting and confounding of all afflictions; it for ever puts an end to
all his enjoyments; it divorces him from the world, to which he is fastened and
rivetted by all the ties of Interest and Inclination; for all the beauteous
entertainments of his Senses, it only presents him with a universal blank; it
tears him from his Possessions, his Friends, and his Relations; he must now
leave all the engaging entertainments, all the agreeable societies and
diversions, to which he has been accustomed and familiar from his Cradle; and
has no prospect of any suitable compensation for them: To such a Man as this,
Death comes arrayed in all his pomp of terror; if he looks upon this world,
which he is about to take leave of, he finds that he is parting with his
dearest Companion, the delight of all his senses, and the comfort of his soul;
if he looks upon that world which he is about to go into, he has made no
acquaintances there, secured no interests, engaged no friendships to make his
future abode delightful and agreeable; if he is so stupid and inconsiderate, as
to have no prospect of the misery that awaits him, yet at best he sees nothing
before him, but darkness and confusion, a Land of Silence, where all things are
forgotten: But the dying Christian who examins things duly, finds sufficient
cause of triumph and rejoicing; he has no such intimate engagements with the
world, as may render it insupportable to him to part from it; he has nothing of
Earth to hang heavy upon his Soul, or to weigh it downwards to this dull center
of corruption; it is long since that the world and he took leave of one
another, he has a long time been dead unto that, having mortified his members
which were upon the earth; he can have no regret for parting with that, of
which he never entertained any tolerable good opinion, all whose advantages he
has found to be but Vanity, and all its entertainments Vexation of Spirit:
Nay, he reflects upon what he is to leave with comfort and satisfaction; he
parts with nothing but an inveterate Enemy, which has all his Life long been
endeavoring to destroy him, has still put stumbling Blocks in his way to
Heaven and Happiness, and has been misleading him from the Paths of everlasting
felicity; the warfare is accomplished, the difficulties overcome, with which he
has always been obliged to encounter, and he is now going to receive the reward
of his labors; he is lying down in Peace to take his rest, with assurance of
waking to a Joyful Resurrection; and that King of Terrors appears no otherwise
to him, than as a grim Messenger that comes upon a welcome Errand, or a rough
gust of Wind, that blows him into the harbor. After this manner will the
serious Christian disarm Death it self of its Sting and of its Terror, by
reflecting on it, as the passage out of a troublesome World, and the entrance
into another of eternal felicity.

Thus have we viewed the different aspects, which the several most grevious
Temptations put on, according to the various ways in which they may be
considered; and we may from hence conclude, that however frightful they may
appear to the natural man, yet to the thoughtful Christian they are matter of
Comfort; and if we seriously reflect upon the nature of afflictions, we have
just reason to count it all Joy, when we fall into diverse temptations. But

Secondly, from the consideration of Gods design in exposing us to afflictions
it will evidently appear, that whenever they befall us, if we reflect upon
them duly as Christians should do, they afford just matter of Joy and
Consolation.

Afflictions are often thus expressed by the name of Temptations, because they
are trials which God vouchsafes us with a gracious intention of promoting our
advantage: for either he sees something in us which ought to be corrected, and
then God lays his heavy hand upon us, in order to make us reflect upon our
errors, and consequently to qualify our selves for pardon and forgiveness; or
else he has a mind to exercise our faith and our patience, in order to fit us
for the great recompense of reward; and both of these designs are so very
beneficial, that they are abundantly sufficient to make us rejoice, in the
midst of our troubles and afflictions.

First then, God is sometimes pleased to chasten and correct us, in order to
our amendment.

Whilst all things go on successfully with us, and we meet with no rubs in the
course of our affairs, we are apt to be careless and neglectful of our duty;
but when it pleases God to awaken us by adversity, we then begin to reflect
upon our ways, to examine wherein we have offended, what particular
transgression God is visiting us for, and what method we should take to regain
his favor: It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes; pious as he was, and cautious of his ways, yet wanted
he sometimes such a severe Remembrancer; Before I was afflicted (says he) I
went astray, but now I have kept thy word: It is the natural effect of
prosperity, to make us secure, to kick with Jeshurun, to be puffed up and
proud, and to say in our hearts who is the Lord? But when we are exercised with
trials and afflictions, then we are induced to call upon the Lord, and to get
our selves unto our Lord right humbly; then we are for putting away the
accursed thing, for parting with every thing that sets us at enmity with him;
for devoting to the slaughter our darling Iniquities, for bringing forth his
enemies, that would not have him reign over them, and slaying them openly
before his face: And this is one of the great ends which God aims at by
afflicting; he does not delight to grieve the sons of men, he takes no pleasure
in the miseries of his Creatures; but inflicts a less punishment to secure us
from a greater, and chastises us in mercy, to lead us to Repentance. And how
then should he rejoice, that is under these circumstances, when he contemplates
upon the tenderness which God expresses herein? how ought he to kiss the Rod
that is laid on with so kind and fatherly an intention? how cheerfully should
he endeavor to answer the blessed end of his inflictions, that so God may be
entreated to withdraw his heavy hand, who notwithstanding that he seems to hide
his face from him, yet has not forgotten to be gracious, nor has shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure. But

Secondly, God sometimes is pleased to chasten and correct us, for the trial of
our Faith, and the exercise of our Patience. It is easy to pretend that we
will rely upon God, that we will put our whole trust and confidence in him,
when nothing more is required to prove that we are real, but our own bare
affirming that we are so; it is easy to believe that God will seed and cloth
us, when our Faith is supported by a plentiful Estate; it is easy to believe
that God watches over us, when we enjoy the great advantages of health and
prosperity; but when God shall strip us bare of all these comforts; when hunger
and nakedness, and sickness and adversity beset us round, then to have a Faith
that is steadfast and unmovable in all these changes, this is praise worthy, and
acceptable with God: we may think we are willing to depend upon him, but our
hearts which are deceitful above all things, may delude us; and we cannot be
sure of our own Integrity, till we have gone through a Temptation of this
nature; he that has passed this fiery Trial, and has been thus refined in the
furnace of adversity, has then been examined by the truest Touchstone, and has
sufficiently demonstrated that his Faith is not counterfeit. But as afflictions
are sent for the Trials of our Faith, so also are they for the exercise of our
Patience: This is a Grace which can never be practiced but in the rough
Tempests of Adversity; it rppears (like the Rainbow) only in Storms; but is,
like that, a sign of Mercy, and the happy forerunner of a Calm. When we are
possessed of an influence of all things desirable, and have nothing that
pinches or contradicts our humor, it is easy for us to comply with the will
of God, because we find it so conformable then with our own; it is easy to be
contented with the Divine dispensations, because our affairs are then carried
on, as if we our selves had the disposal of them; but to have our wills
resigned to Gods good pleasure, when that thwarts all our Interests and all our
Desires; to submit cheerfully to whatsoever he imposes, how contrary soever to
our own Inclinations; this is such a patience as becomes a Christian, and which
God will not fail abundantly to reward: for this is another of his designs in
visiting us with afflictions, to wean us from our selves, to break our stubborn
wills, and bend them to the yoke which he would put upon us; and then he will
take care, when this end is obtained, to make his yoke easy and his burden
light, and the brightest Crown of Glory shall be then set apart, to reward this
faith and patience of the Saints. These considerations of Gods gracious designs
in all his Inflictions, either to work our amendment by a sense of our
unworthiness, or to increase our recompense for the exercise of fresh graces,
should buoy up our Spirits under all our Tribulations, and should forcibly
persuade us to count it all joy, when we fall into diverse temptations. But,

Thirdly and lastly, From the consideration of those consequences which attend
our afflictions, it will evidently appear, that whenever they befall us, if
we meditate upon them duly as Christians should do, they afford us just matter
of Joy and Consolation.

A good Christian is always bettered by afflictions, he is improved by
sufferings, and made perfect through trials; he is purified (like Gold,) by
passing through the fire, his dross is purged away, and his value made
unquestionable: Pride, which was the destruction of our humane Nature, can find
no place in the midst of Sufferings; and Humility, which is the Ground work of
all Christian Graces, is most successfully advanced and cultivated by them;
when the heart is made soft and tender by adversity, then is our Charity most
likely to be enlarged, and we are never more apt to compassionate our Brethren,
than when we our selves are objects of Pity: This gives us a fellowfeeling of
the miseries of others, and convinces us how inhumane it is to be unaffected
with them, by the sense which we have of the bitterness of our own: This
withdraws our dependence from the things of this world, and makes us throw our
selves for succor entirely upon God, because it gives us a sensible
Experience, that he only is able to administer Relief; then is our hope most
quick and lively, when it has so large a field to range in, and that we find
our selves possessed of nothing but all things lie open to our expectations;
then will the Flesh be most manageable and submissive, when all the Delights
and Entertainments of it are utterly withdrawn; then will the World be least
able to seduce us, when we are least involved in its bewitching vanities, and
most fully estranged from its inviting allurements: Thus will afflictions
refrain our Souls, and keep them low, even as a Child that is weaned from its
Mother; and a constant disposition to Innocence and Purity, will be one happy
consequence of these Temptations. But a greater consolation than any we have
mentioned, is the blessed result of these Calamities, and of that devout temper
which is produced by them; and that is the favor and protection of our God; if
he takes away from us all other supports, it is that we may fly to him only for
succor and affistance; and what can more fully recommend us to a merciful
Creator, than a view of the miseries which his Creatures lie under, and that
submiss frame of mind to which those have reduced them? they have had their
evil things in this world, and therefore shall (like Lazarus) be comforted in
the other; whilst those who (with the Rich Glutton) had their good things here,
have, unless they have used them with extraordinary care, the less to expect of
happiness hereafter. Blessed then are those that mourn, for they shall be
comforted; their heaviness may endure for a night, but joy shall come to them
in the morning; they may sow in tears, but they shall reap in joy; and he that
now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall doubtless come
again with joy, and shall bring his sheaves with him. These Considerations
therefore, of the happy consequences which attend our afflictions, that they
make us better in this world, and prepare us to be happier in the next, should
powerfully engage us to count it all joy, when we fall into diverse temptations.

Let us all then, in the name of God, whenever it shall please him to try us
with afflictions, and particularly in that heavy one which he has laid upon us
at present, submit to them with that willingness and cheerfulness of Spirit,
that becomes professors of our most holy Religion; let us never be distracted
as the Natural man is, who being destitute of the helps of Grace and Religion,
finds nothing in them but sorrow and distress; but let us consider that other
things are expected from us, suitable to the advantages we stand possessed of:
Let us reflect upon the nature of them, as Christians should, and that under
all their several circumstances, whether loss of Reputation, of Riches, or of
Liberty, of our Friends, our Health, or Life it self, and we shall find them to
be matter of Joy and Consolation: Let us examine the design of Gods inflicting
them, and we shall find them directed to those comfortable ends, of our being
exemplarily penitent in this world, and eminently happy in that which is to
come: Let us reflect upon the consequences which necessarily flow from them,
and they will appear to be these great advantages of Constancy and Perfection
in all Christian Duties, and a reward proportionable to such performances: So
shall we learn to value afflictions as we ought to sanctify and improve them
to our comfort and advantage, and to place them amongst the instances of Gods
favor and affection; so shall we be qualified to count it all joy, when we
fall into diverse Iemptations. Consider what has been said, and the Lord give
you a right Understanding; To him, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, three
persons but one God, be ascribed all Honor, Power, Might, Majesty and Dominion,
henceforth and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

