The sleepy Spouse of Christ alarmed: Or, a WARNING To beware of DROWSINESS
When Christ Calls, Lest he withdraw in a discontent.

BEING The Sum of some SERMONS upon Cant. 5th, and the beginning.

By J. B. Minister of the Gospel.

Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand at the door, and knock: If any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me.

Matthew. 23.37, 38, 39. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not? Behold, your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you, Ye
shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in
the Name of the Lord.

Psalm. 95.7, 8. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.

Recommended in a Preface by M. Nath. Vincent.

LONDON: Printed (...) Samuel Crouch, at the Princes Arms at (...)

To Mrs. J. D. the Author wishes all increase of Grace and Peace.
Honored Friend,
IT was at your request, and the earnest request of some of your Friends, that
I was induced to publish these following Sermons. The reason whereof I suppose
to be, because your heart was (in some measure) opened to, and affected with
the voice of Christ in his Word, when you heard it. I must confess, the matter
or subject herein treated of, is very sweet and precious, and such as may well
warm the frozen heart of any, that has the least dram of sincere love,
either of complacency in, or commiseration to Christ. To see how ready Christ
is to condescend to the requests of his Spouse, how sweetly, and with what
melting (...) irresistible Arguments, he wooes her; ho^^^^^ and plentiful he is
in the emanations of his Grace and Kindness toward her: And then on the other
hand to consider, how slightly she looks upon him, how little account she
makes of him; and how she makes him dance attendance at her door, with many
other circumstances of her unkindness: and withal to consider the danger and
hazard which she runs, by her unkind behavior toward Christ: These
Considerations (which are the subject of the ensuing Discourse) being seriously
weighed by a Soul that has any love for, or breathings after Christ (among the
number of which, I hope, I may truly reckon you) cannot choose but in some
measure awaken the sleepy Soul, and warm the cold and frozen Affections. This
effect I perceive the Word had upon you; for which you owe the thanks and
praise to the Spirit of Grace, which accompanied the Word to your heart, and
gave it entertainment there. For man speaks only to the ear, it is God that
speaks to the heart: You having therefore tasted the sweetness of this Word
your self, desired the communication of it to others, who had not the
opportunity (with you) to hear it; and in order thereunto, the publication of
it. Your design I must own to be good: for Grace (where it is in truth) is not
only of a diffusive nature, (spreading it self through the whole man) but also
of a communicative nature; wishing that all bystanders might likewise taste
that sweetness, which it self is much delighted with. Grace desires not to eat
its morsels alone, but if any Banquet be given in by Christ, or any refreshment
by his company, the Soul cries out to bystanders, O taste and see how good the
Lord is! He is altogether lovely. Come, therefore, and I will tell you what he
has done for my Soul. But (though your design be good, yet) the weakness and
insufficiency of the Author, might well have pleaded an excuse. For it is pity
that such a sweet and precious subject should be rendered despicable, by being
handed into the world by so weak, rude and unpolished an instrument, as I must
of necessity confess my self to be. For I am sensible, that many times the
Truths of Christ suffer in the world, through the weakness of the Instruments
that hand them to us. However, yet (sometimes) it pleases God, By the mouths
of babes and sucklings to perfect his own praise; that the work may appear to
be not of men, but of God. Leaving therefore the work in Gods hand (who is able
to do what he pleases with and by it) and waving the consideration of mine own
weakness, I condescend to your request, and make bold to cast this my poor mite
into Gods Treasury: Saying to you and to all courteous Readers, as Peter to the
Cripple, Acts 3.6. Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have, give I unto
you. I hope the food is wholesome, though it be but plainly and meanly dressed.
And though it may fall into the hands of some, whose curious stomachs may loath
such plain and homely diet; yet possibly it may fall into the hand of some poor
creature, who is hungry, humble, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at Gods
Word. Some poor hungry Soul may (perhaps) here meet with meat, though there be
little sauce to he had: And if any poor Soul shall reap benefit by my poor
labors and endeavors (I hope) I shall bless God for owning such a worthless
creature, in so glorious a work. And (if it do good) the less of the
instrument, the more will there be of God seen in it. I beg of you therefore,
and of all candid Readers, into whose hands this small Treatise may come, their
and your serious perusal of it, with their Prayers to God for a blessing upon
it: what you find of humane weakness in it, pardon and pass it by: whatever
you find of God in it, mind it and apply it. And the very God of Heaven
powerfully influence it with his blessed Spirit, that it may do your Souls
good, and that you may readily open to Christ now, that he may open to, and own
you, at Death and Judgment. Which is the humble and earnest Prayer of

Yours, In and for Christ my Lord and Master, James Bradshaw.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THe Spirit of Slumber exceedingly prevails at this day; as great security is
to be found in this Nation, as was in the old World and in Sodom, before the
one was Drowned, and the other Burned. God has used several ways and means to
awaken us; but our Spiritual Lethargy proves a very stubborn Malady. 'Twere
bad enough if only profane persons were fast asleep in Sin. It Is worse that
Professors are so too. But it is worst of all, that the Wise Virgins slumber as
well as the Foolish. What may be the Issue of our carnal Security, we may
tremble to think of. When men say they shall have peace, though they walk on
after the imagination of their evil Heart, the Lord confutes their presumption,
by threatening all the Curses written in his Book, and that he will blot out
their names from under Heaven. Promising safety to themselves, is the
forerunner of Sinners sudden destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 5.3.

I am persuaded that the design of the worthy Author of this ensuing Treatise
is to prevent that ruin which is likely to follow upon that drowsiness and
security which does so generally prevail. And in wishing that he may accomplish
his design, is to wish well to the whole Nation. If a word spoken in season be
like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver, there needs no enlarging in the
commendation of this Treatise. The Lord make it as profitable as it is
seasonable! This is the desire and prayer of

Thy Servant for Jesus sake, Nathanael Vincent.

The sleepy Spouse of Christ alarmed OR, A Warning to beware of Drowsiness
when Christ Calls, lest he withdraw in a discontent.
CANTICLES 5.2, 3, 5, 6. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks, saying,
Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, etc.


THis Song, which is an excellent part of Divine Scripture, contains in it much
sweet, Heavenly, and Divine matter, profitable for our Edification and
Consolation. But the great difficulty lies in the right understanding of it, in
order to the drawing out from thence that sweet and Heavenly matter, so
profitable to our Souls edification. For the helping us to a right knowledge of
the Divine matter herein contained, it is necessary to consider, 1, The Nature.
2. The general Scope. 3. The Persons speaking and spoken of.

1. As touching the Nature of this Book, it is wholly an Allegory, or
Figurative, discourse, under the mask of Similitudes and Resemblances; holding
forth to us great, divine, and most excellent Mysteries. And therefore in the
understanding of it, we must not acquiesce in the immediate literal Sense, I
mean, in the immediate or Grammatical sense which the words bear; but must look
through them to the mediate, literal, or spiritual Sense that is couched in
them. For the literal Sense of the Scripture is, that Sense which the Holy
Ghost immediately and primarily intends in that portion of Scripture, whether
delivered in Proper, or Figurative Expressions. And therefore the Literal and
Spiritual Sense are here one and the same.

2. As touching the general Scope and design of this Book; it is to set forth
the mutual Love, spiritual Union and Communion between Christ and his Church;
and their mutual carriage and deportment toward each other in several
conditions, and under various dispensations; brought in, and carried on by way
of Dialogue and discourse between several persons.

3. The persons speaking and persons acting their parts in this Dialogue or
Discourse, are principally three. First, The Bridegroom, by which we must
understand the Lord Jesus Christ. 2. The Bride or Spouse, by which understand
the Church, either in general or particular Believers. 3. The Daughters of
Sion, and Jerusalem, etc. by which we may understand either young Converts, or
visible Believers.

The persons spoken of, are, 1. The Bridegroom, which is Christ. 2. The Bride,
the Church. 3. The Friends of the Bridegroom; which are the Ministers or
Messengers of Christ. 4. The Virgins, or Daughters of Jerusalem; young
Candidates in Religion, and Professors of Religion. 5. The Brides Mother, the
Church, wherein young Converts are begotten, nourished, and brought up.

The particular knowledge of the Persons speaking and spoken of, or to, in
every place; will give much light for the discovery and right understanding of
the thing or matter that is spoken; and therefore this is necessary to be
observed in every part of this Book.

The persons here speaking in this Chapter and discoursing of and with each
other, are Christ and his Spouse. In the Text we have a rehearsal by the Spouse
of Christ; his speech to her, and of her carriage and deportment toward him.

If you cast your eye back to the last Verse of the foregoing chapter, you
shall find the Spouse making her request to Christ for the revival of her
Graces, and the return of Christ into her soul. That Christ would prepare and
make ready her Heart, by quickening, inlivening, and enlarging Grace, and
putting it into a posture fit for Exercise, for the entertainment of him; and
being thus prepared for his entertainment, that he would please to come in and
taste of that Feast which himself had prepared. Hereupon in the first Verse of
this Chapter Christ makes answer to her request, telling her that he was come,
and had brought his Friends with him, to wit, his Ministers, that they, as well
as he, might be delighted with that Feast. For it is no small refreshment unto
the Friends, or faithful Ministers of Christ, to see and taste of the
flourishing Graces of the People or Spouse of Christ. Yea, he invites her also
to taste of the sweetness of his Grace in her self, that she might be refreshed
with what he had revived and refreshed in her. But she (possibly being weary
with waiting so long and late for him, not expecting his company at that time
of the night) was gone to bed, and fallen asleep, as she her self confesses,
Verse the 2. But as late as it was, Christ comes and knocks, and she hears, and
knew his voice, and gives us an account what he said to her. As she had but now
made her suit and request to him, desiring him to come: so he being come, makes
another kind and loving motion to her, and such a one as was very reasonable,
and (one would have thought) would have been readily embraced. She had begged
of him that he would come; and now being come, and finding her in bed, he begs
of her that she would open to him, and let him in. But alas poor Spouse! as if
she had forgot her respect to her Husband, the benefit and desireableness of
his company, and her own request so lately made, she gives him a flat denial,
couched under some complemental excuses, Verse 3. I have put off my coat, how
shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? She could
wish to have Christ, but is too lazy to rise out of her bed to open to him. She
would have Christ and his Comforts, but would not be at the pains to perform
any duty of obedience unto him, would not open to him by faith: but Christ
having a more warm Heart and Affection for her than she had for him, resolves
not so to be put off; and being resolved to speed in his request, will not so
let her alone; and therefore powerful (yet sweetly) makes an assault upon the
Door of her Heart, so effectually moving upon her Affections, and awakening her
Graces, that she can no longer deny, but arises to open to him, and by arising
and coming to the door, finds a wonderful change and alteration in her self, V.
4, 5. My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my bowels were
moved for him. I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with
myrrh, and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the
lock. She no sooner begins to act faith upon Christ, but she found
encouragement enough to let him in. If Christ had thus persumed her Lock with
but putting in his Finger by the hole of the Door, Oh what would his company be
when himself came in! And therefore, without any more delay or excuse, in all
haste she opens to him, v. 6. But Christ, though he would not utterly forsake
her and cast her off, yet he would make her sensible of the affront which she
had offered him, and of her ungrateful carriage toward him; and therefore
withdraws, and makes her who (but now) was so delicate and easeful that she
could not put on her Coat, or come barefooted over the house-floor) to seek him
in the streets, and take many a wet and weary step in the dark night, and that
(questionless) with an aching Heart, having his persumes so fresh in her Breast,
and her own guilt so fresh upon her Conscience, before she find him. This was
the case between Christ and his Spouse at this time.

I shall but in a word mention those particulars in the Text, upon which I
design to ground the Doctrine, and so proceed to the Doctrine.

In the whole Conference or Relation I shall take notice of these things, upon
which I shall ground the Doctrine.

1. The Churches Prayer, chap. 4.16. Awake O North Wind, and come thou South,
etc. She prays for the breathing Influences of the Spirit, whereby her Graces
may be revived and made fit for action; and then desires Christ's company, when
she is fixed and prepared for him.

2. We have Christ his Answer to the Church her Prayer, chap. 5.1. The Spouse
no sooner calls, but Christ makes Answer; no sooner invites, but Christ comes.

3. The posture which he finds her in at his coming: gone to bed, and composing
her self to sleep. Believers do sometimes pray for that which they have no
patience to wait for.

4. Christ his Call and Proposal which he makes to the Spouse at his coming;
which is but very reasonable, since his coming was at her request, v. 2. Open
to me, my sister, etc. for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the
drops of the night.

5. We have the Spouse her unreasonable denial and excuses, v. 3. She litte
considered how wet and weary Christ was, and manifested but poor respect to
him, when she will rather suffer him to stand there, than she will be at the
trouble to put on her Coat, or defile her Feet. Oh what difference is here
between Christ's love to us, and our love to him!

6. We may observe the effect of this refusal and unreasonable denial. Though
Christ rouse up her Graces, and give her some taste of his excellency, which
may make her unweariedly to seek him: yet he will make her smart for her
lazyness and indifferency, and low value which she set by Christ. He will make
her take abundantly more pains before she find him. She shall seek him with a
fainting aching Heart, and in seeking take many a wet and weary step; feel a
little of what he endured at the door, before she find him. v. 6.

From all these considerations in the Text, I gather this Doctrine:

That it is a dangerous thing, and may cost us dear, to be lazy and secure when
Christ knocks and calls; especially when his coming and calling is in answer to
our Prayers.

This truth is not only the sense and sum of this Text, but we find the Holy
Ghost speaking the same thing for substance in other parts of Scripture. Prove.
1.24, and following verses. Because I have called, and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand, and no man regarded; But ye have set at naught all my
counsel, and would none of my reproofs: Therefore, I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes, etc. Psalm. 81.8, 9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 14. Hear, O my people -- There shall be no strange God in thee -- I am the
Lord thy God -- But my people would not bearken -- So I gave them up -- O that
my people would have hearkened -- Luke 13.34, 35. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how
often would I have gathered thee, as an hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, but ye would not -- Wherefore your city is left to you desolate -- Rev.
3.20. Behold, I stand at the door and knock: If any man open to me, I will come
in unto him, and I will sup with him, and be with me.

In the further prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall (through Gods assistance)
observe this method.

1. Speak something by way of Explication. 2. Something by way of Confirmation.
3. Something by way of Application. In the Explication of the Doctrine, I shall
endeavor to show, 1. Where Christ knocks. 2. At whose door Christ knocks. 3.
How, or with what he knocks. 4. For what end he knocks: Or what it is that
Christ would have when he knocks. 5. What are the special times of his knocking.

I begin with the first of these, Where it is that Christ knocks.

To this I answer, That Christ's Knock^ and Calls are at the door of man's
Heart. To have the Ear open to God's call signifies little, if the door of the
Heart be shut, and Christ cannot get in there. We see in the Text the Spouse
(though partly asleep) heard Christ's Knock and Call well enough, and yet she
caused him to depart from her, because she did not open to him. Wisdom cries,
Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart. Christ will have the Heart open, or
else he will not come in; and that for these reasons. 1. Because, as Christ is
no dissembler, but real in what he offers and gives: so he loves no
dissembling; but expects that the Soul should be real and cordial with him.
Now, to pretend to embrace Christ, and not to do it with all the Heart, is to
mock him, and dissemble with him. This God complains of, Jer. 3.10. And yet for
all this her treacherous sister Judah has not turned to me with the whole
heart, but feignedly, says the Lord. This is no better than flattery or lying
in God's account. Psalm. 78.36, 37. They pretended to return, and seek early
after God. Nevertheless they flattered him with their mouth, and lied unto him
with their tongue; for their heart was not right with him. Jeremiah complains
thus of the wicked, Jer. 12.2. Thou art near them in their lips, but far from
their reins. That Son was rejected, who said, I go Sir, but went not. This
dissembling and complementing with God, is abominable to the heart-searching
God: And therefore he requires that the Heart be opened unto him, and there it
is that he knocks.

2. Because the Heart is the chief part of Christ his purchase, and therefore
he knocks there. It is true, Christ is the Redeemer of the Body: but had not
that been an appurtenance to the more noble part, the Soul, Christ would never
have paid so dear a price for it. But the inward man, the Soul, or Heart, was
that which was chiefly in Christ's eye, when he made his Soul an Offering for
Sin. Psalm. 71.23. My lips shall greatly rejoice -- and my Soul which thou have
redeemed. The Soul is the Jewel which Christ has purchased; and therefore
though he ought to have the Box or Cabinet with it, yet the Cabinet without the
Jewel will not give him content. It is the Heart or Soul therefore that he
calls for, when he knocks.

3. Because the Heart is the Royal Seat, or Throne, and Christ comes not to be
a truckle-bed Guest, but to rule and reign in us: and and therefore if he have
the Heart, which is the commanding faculty, the Will and Affections, he may by
that command the whole man; but without this, it will be in vain, if not
impossible, to keep possession of the other parts of the man. The Heart is the
fountain, from whence the streams that run in every part of the man proceed; if
this be not pure, the streams must needs be filthy: And therefore Prove. 4.23.
we are commanded to Keep the Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the
issues of Life. The Heart is always full, and is continually sending forth
Legions of thoughts, words and actions, either good or bad: How should Christ
keep the outward man quietly, if the heart be not for him? Our Savior speaks
it as an impossibility, Mat. 12.34, 35. that they being evil should speak good
things; and gives the reason of it, Because that out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks: and therefore according as the heart is disposed and
qualified, such are the thoughts, words and actions. The good man out of the
good treasure of his heart, brings forth good things; the evil man out of the
evil treasure of the heart evil things: How should the fruit be good, when the
tree is bad? The heart then, if it be not for Christ, will daily be sending
forth such troops of filthy molesting enemies, that Christ shall have no quiet
abode near it; and therefore he will either have the Royal Fort delivered and
opened to him, or he will not come there. If the heart be filthy, the whole man
is defiled with what issues from thence: and see what floods of stinking
filthiness issue from the heart, and defile the man, Mat. 15.18, 19, 20. Evil
Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False witness,
Blasphemies; And how then shall the sweet breath of Christ endure near such a
sink of filthiness? if he may not come to the spring or rise of it to purge it,
there will be no long stay for him.

4. Christ will have the Heart or none, because his chief suit and request is
for our love, and this he cannot have without the Heart, because it is seated
in the heart; and though it send its servants abroad, yet it self never stirs
from thence: and therefore Christ cannot have this, unless he have the Heart.
Such is Christ's love toward his Spouse, that he earnestly desires to be
married to her; and the Terms he proposes, are Marriage-terms, wherein Love is
the chief and principal. And great reason he should have this, not only in
regard of his great Love wherewith he has loved us, and the fruits and effects
of it; but also in regard we have nothing else to give him: nor can he expect
any other thing with us that may be desirable. Portion we have none; not so
much as Clothes to our back, o^ to cover our nakedness, nor Meat for our belly,
nor penny of Money in our purse. Beauty and Comeliness we have none, till he
have beautified us with his Comeliness. Wisdom and parts we have none, for by
nature we a^^ Fools. Providence or good Housewifery w^ have none, for we had a
good portion left us and we have wasted and spent it all. Great Friends and
Allies we have none, that can d^ any thing for us, for we were cast out to the
loathing of our persons, in the day wherein w^ were born, and none eye pitied
us; and as for our descent, our father was an Amorite, and mother an Hittite, a
cursed generation, as w^ read Ezekiel. 16. beginning. What have w^ then that may
commend us to Christ, or th^^ may in any sort please him, if he have not o^^
Love? And surely, it is but reasonable th^^ he should have this; nay, since he
has nothing else, he will have this, or not mat^^ with us.

5. Christ will have the heart opened where he comes, because the Feasts and
Banquets which he has prepared and brings with him, chiefly respect the heart:
the outward man is little or nothing concerned in them, or advantaged by them,
unless it be by consequence. Christ his Feasts are Spiritual, and therefore but
little grateful to the flesh, or outward man. The word that Christ speaks is
part of his Banquet or Feast; and David says they are sweeter than Honey or
the Honeycomb. But what Refreshment or Feast would these be to the body, or
outward man, if the Heart take no notice of them, and be not affected with
them? and therefore Hos. 2.14. Christ would allure his Spouse, and take her
into the Wilderness, and there would speak comfortably to her: or, speak to her
Heart (as the word signifies.) Words yield but little comfort or refreshment,
if they be not spoken to the Heart. John 6. Christ tells us he will give his
Flesh and Blood to feed us, and this but after an imaginary way neither; for we
must not really have his Body and Blood after a corporeal manner, but
spiritually represented and adumbrated by a little broken Bread, and
poured-forth Wine. If this Feast therefore extend to, or concern nothing more
than the Body, it will prove but a poor hungry Feast: he finds it so, that
goes away from the Ordinance without finding and feeding upon Christ by Faith.
And therefore were not the Banquet Spiritual, and such as immediately concerns
the Heart, the Scripture would never call it a Feast of Marrow and Wine settled
upon the lees; nor would David say, Psalm. 63.5. that his Soul was satisfied, as
with marrow and fatness, when he fed upon this. And therefore Christ his Feasts
being chiefly spiritual, and respecting the Heart, they would be lost, and
signify nothing, if the Heart were not opened to him: And therefore the place
where Christ knocks is the door of the Heart, which he requires should be
opened to him.

2. The next thing to be enquired into is, At whose door does Christ knock?

To this I answer, That Christ knocks at every ones door, that lives under
Gospel Ordinances and Dispensations. There is no person living under
Gospel Ordinances, but at one time or another Christ knocks at the door of his
heart, requiring entrance and admission. Thou that read, or hear this
Word, whoever thou be, Male or Female, Bond or Free, Young or Old, Rich or
Poor, High or Low, whatever order, rank, or degree thou be of, in whatever
condition or state thou be at thy door it is that Christ by this word knocks,
saying, Open to me, etc. See the universality of Christ's knock or call, Rev.
3.20. I stand at the door and knock: if any man will open to me, I will come in
unto him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Rev. 22.17. The Spirit and the
Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say, Come. Let him that is athirst
come. And whosoever will, let him come, and take of the waters of life freely.
Isai. 55.1. He, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that
has no money: come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without
money, and without price. Christ knocks not only at the Hearts of his own
people, as here of the Spouse, Open my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled:
But also at the doors of others, such as are unregenerate, and know him not.
Only with this difference; at the doors of his own regenerate ones, he calls
for the awakening and ^^^^ring up the grace which he has bestowed upon them:
but to such as are unregenerate, and yet strangers to him, he calls them to
Faith and Repentance, and to come unto him, that they may live and find rest
for their Souls, Matthew. 11.28, 29, 30. To Believers he calls, to awaken their
Graces that are already implanted in their Hearts: But to Unbelievers he calls,
to awaken them out of their sleep in Sin and security. And of these, there is
not the meanest Soul nor the greatest Sinner left out of his call: and if any
man will but open to him, he will come in; though their Sins be as Scarlet, and
crimson, he will make them as Snow and Wool. Isai. 1.16, 17, etc.

3. The next enquiry is, How, or with what Christ knocks and calls?

And to this I answer, Christ does not ordinarily knock and call by an
immediate voice from Heaven, as he did upon Saul, Act. 9. but under the Gospel
God ordinarily calls some one or more of these ways.

1. Christ knocks or calls, sometimes by his Providence. Christ many times
sends some remarkable Providence or other to awaken Sinners out of their sleep
in Sin, and to awaken the Graces of his People, when they are sleepy and
sluggish: and these Providence they are of two sorts: sometimes such as we
call Mercies; (though all his Dispensations in this case are Mercies, and the
fruits of his faithfulness) but by Mercies I mean such things as are Joyous and
desirable for the present. He sometimes loads his people with Blessings and
Benefits. Hos. 11.3, 4. And every Mercy in this kind is an awakening and
quickening spur unto duty. Therefore God complains, Hosea 2.8. that they did not
consider that he gave them corn, and wine, and oil, wool and flax, silver and
gold, which they should have served him withal: and because they did not,
threatens to take them away. Therefore we find this laid down as the ground of
that God's Expostulation with his People, Deuteronomy, 32.6, 9, 10, etc. The goodness
of God should lead persons to Repentance; God expects it, and by this many
times calls. Sometimes God calls by his Corrections and Judgments, striving by
the smartness and severity of his Judgments, to awaken Sinners, that are
rather hardened by Prosperity, and to affright them out of their sleep in sin,
and to awaken his own people out of that sleep which they have lulled
themselves into by Prosperity. Thus we read, Job 36.8, 9, etc. when he lays
persons in Fetters and Irons of Affliction, Then he shows them their way and
their transgression, wherein they have exceeded. And of these two ways of
knocking, usually Mercy and Goodness leads the way; and if that will not do,
then Judgment, and the Rod follows after: For God does not willingly grieve
and afflict the children of men, Lam. 3.33. But if need be, they must be in
heaviness through manifold tribulations and temptations, 1 Pet. 1.6. Thus God
calls by his Providence.

2. Sometimes God calls by his Ordinances, reading the Scriptures, and the
Labors of his faithful Ministers: hearing the Word preached, and the like. God
has qualified and sent forth his Ministers and Messengers to call and hire
Laborers into his Vineyard, to bid Guests to his Wedding-supper, Matthew. 22.
and the beginning. And this is their work which they are sent about, and is
given them in charge, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Go, teach all nations, baptizing --
Teaching them to observe what I command you. So Acts 26.18. Paul is sent to the
Gentiles, To open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan unto God. Christ himself came and preached for this end, and his
Doctrine or Sermon was, Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand, Matthew.
4.17. And John the Baptist came with this message, Mark 1.4. Yea, the Apostle
tells us that this is the work of every Minister, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. -- Has
committed to us the word of reconciliation; so then, we are Ambassadors for
Christ: as if God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye
reconciled to God. So that every Sermon that the faithful Ministers of Christ
preach, is a call and knock from Christ to open unto him.

3. Sometimes Christ calls by the secret impulses of his Spirit, and
convictions of our own Consciences. Thus we read Acts 2.37. when they heard the
Apostles Sermon, They were pricked at their hearts, and cried out, Men and
brethren, what shall we do to be saved? Here was an inward impulse of the
Spirit upon their Consciences, accompanying the outward preaching of the Word.
Thus God secretly opened the Heart of Lydia to attend to what was preached by
Paul, Acts 16.14. And thus the Jailer was wrought upon by the Spirit of God,
Acts 16.29, 30, 31, etc. This secret impulse of the Spirit, and conviction of
Conscience sinners many times have when they are going on in their sins, though
they do not always give heed and hearken to it. And this many times the people
of God have, when they begin to be lazy, drowzy, and to fall asleep in
security: and therefore the Apostle bids us not to quench or grieve the Spirit
of God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Ephesians. 4.30. And indeed the two former ways of Christ
his knocking and calling are ineffectual, unless they be accompanied with this
last way of calling: For neither Ordinances nor Providence can awaken sinners,
unless the Spirit of God work by them. And therefore we read Job 36.8, 9, etc.
that he first binds them in Cords, and then opens their ears to discipline.

4. The next thing to be enquired into, is, For what end Christ knocks and
calls: or what it is which Christ would have when he knocks? And to this I
answer,

In general, That the end or reason of Christ's knocks and calls are various,
according to the different state and conditions of those, at the doors of whose
Heart he calls. But usually when he calls, he would have, or designs one or
more of these ends or things.

1. To awaken sinners out of their deep sleep in sin and security. Sinners are
by nature so fast asleep, in such a dead sleep of sin and security, that
nothing less than the voice of the Son of God knocking and speaking at the door
of their Hearts will awaken them: hence we read John 5.25. That the time is
coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and
they that hear shall live. Which must be meant not of a natural Death, or of
the day of Resurrection, but of a Death in sin; because he says, the time now
is. And therefore says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, i. e. by
the powerful voice of his Spirit, Who were dead in trespasses and sins. Would
you see what one of Christ's calls are in this case? read Ephesians. 5.14. Awake thou
that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee life.
This he speaks not only to the Ear by his Word, but to the Heart by his Spirit.

2. Christ his calls at the doors of our hearts many times design Repentance.
Repentance is a Gospel-duty incumbent upon every person, Acts 17.30. But now
commands all men every where to repent. And for this end he sends forth his
Ministers to preach the Doctrine of Repentance, to show the necessity of
Repentance, and that there is great reason or cause for Repentance; because we
have sinned, and thereby departed from God, and cannot come to him again but by
Repentance. It is called The Doctrine of Repentance, because Repentance is
properly a Gospel-doctrine, a Doctrine that the Law preaches not: for the Law,
or Covenant of Works, admits of no Repentance; but upon our breach of the Law,
immediately pronounces a Curse, Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues
not in all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. But the
Gospel Covenant admits of, yea calls for Repentance, as the way and means to
obtain Mercy: yea promises Mercy and Pardon upon our Repentance, Prove. 28.13.
He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy. Therefore the
Gospel tells us, that Except we repent, we shall all likewise perish, Luke 13
5. If persons be in a state of unregeneracy, then Christ knocks by his Word,
and by his Providence, by his Mercies; and his business with them is, to show
that there is a necessity of their Repentance, and that they must either
repent, or perish everlastingly. If persons be in a state of regeneracy, and
have by some temptation or other lapsed or fallen into Sin; or, it may be, have
some Sin lodging in them, not yet truly discovered, and consequently not
particularly repented of: Then and in such case Christ calls to renewed and
enlarged acts of Repentance; for Repentance is a grace that concerns us all our
lives long: And therefore the calls of Christ in this case may be such as
these: Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

3. Christ calls to reconciliation with God. When Christ comes to the door of
thine Heart, he comeS as a mediator and peacemaker, to make peace between God
and thy Soul, which are at variance with each other; and by reason of sin have
an utter enmity against each other. The cause of this enmity Christ has taken
away by his death upon the Cross, and nailed it to his Cross: The cause being
removed, he comes and calls to entreat that the enmity it self may be taken
away, and we would be reconciled unto God, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Though there be
little reason for it, yet man is hard to be wooed and persuaded to cast out of
his heart the enmity that is lodged there against God and his way^. And
therefore Christ is forced to knock and call again and again, before we will
(in this case) be persuaded to yield to his suit.

4. Christ calls for a closure with himself by Faith, as the only way and
means to obtain peace, and reconcilation with God. We by our Sins are indebted
to God, more than ever we are able to pay: are therefore in danger to be
arrested by Divine Justice, and cast into prison, where we may lie and rot, to
all eternity. Jesus Christ seeing us in this misery and distress, comes and
calls at the door of our hearts, offers to be our Surety to pay every farthing
of our debt for us; and that upon this condition only, that he may have our
full and free consent to do this for us; and that we will accept of with
thankfulness what kindness he shows herein, and rely upon him for the
perfecting of this work for us; and wherever Justice shall lay any charge or
accusation against us, we will by Faith confidently and steadfastly plead his
Satisfaction for our Discharge. This is all that he requires from us; and upon
this condition only, promises to pay our Debt, reconcile us to God, free us
from imprisonment, and seal us an absolute and full discharge, that shall for
ever stand good to all intents and purposes. And therefore Christ his calls in
this case are such as these, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and
are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Isai. 55.1. H^, every one that
thirsts, come unto the waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat;
yea, come and buy wine and milk without money, and without price. Rev. 22.17.
Let him that is athirst come: and whosoever will, let him take of the waters of
life freely: and he assures us, John 1.12. that As many as receive him (upon
these terms) to them he will give power to become the sons of God: to them that
thus believe on his Name. And surely one would think this call is worthy to be
embraced, with all readiness of heart and thankfulness.

5. Christ calls to sincere and hearty obedience to his commands, and
subjection to his revealed Will and Law: he calls to take his yoke upon us, and
learn of him, Mat. 11.29. This call is like unto that of Boaz to his Kinsman,
Ruth 4. Buy Naomi's inheritance: but know also that thou must buy it of Ruth;
i. e. buy the inheritance, but thou must take her to be thy wife also, to raise
up seed to thy kinsman that is dead. So says our Savior, Come, and take the
inheritance that I have purchased for th^^, and thou art freely welcome to it;
but know, that in the day where^in thou do this, thou must also (...) me to
be thy Lord and Husband, and (...) solemnly engage to behave thy (...) as a
loyal, faithful and obedient wife to me; thou must take me wholly, as I am,
only, absolutely and everlastingly, not only for a Priest to make atonement
for thy Sins, and to sanctify and offer thy gifts to the Father; but as a
Prophet, to teach thee such Laws. Statutes and Judgments, as are fit and
requisite for thee to observe: and as a King, to rule and govern thee by my
Law: Thy heart must be my Throne, and there must I sit, and exercise my
Authority, and have thy whole man at command. This Christ calls for: but alas!
too many that (like Boaz his Kinsman) have a mind of the benefit and
inheritance, yet here turn their backs, and will rather let the inheritance go
to another, than they will take Christ with it: Many will have Christ his
Crown, but few will take up his Cross: and therefore Christ his calls are but
slowly hearkened to in this respect.

6. Christ calls sometimes to awaken and excite his Spouse, when she is dull
and sluggish in her work: sometimes the hearts of Gods own people grow lazy and
sluggish, either laying aside their spiritual work, or performing it lazily. If
they pray, they pray heartlessly and carelessly, as if they mattered not whether
they sped or not. If they read or hear, they do it in too formal and customary
a manner, not studying to profit thereby. If they come to the Lords Table, they
come not with that appetite, and enlarged desire and expectation that they
should; though indeed their wants are many and great, yet if God should put the
same question to them, that he did to Elijah, What do thou here Elijah? it
would be hard for them to give a clear and particular answer, or a good account
of their being there. They have Sins enough to repent of, but yet the sight of
Christ bleeding and dying does but little move or affect them: They can look
upon him whom they have pierced, and yet mourn but little over him; they can
behold what Christ has done and suffered, out of pure love to them, and yet
have little stirrings of Joy and Thankfulness in their hearts. And as for their
spiritual watch, they let that fall, though in their enemies country; and
hereby they give advantage and opportunity to their enemy to tempt them, and
take them in his net. Therefore that careful and faithful Captain of our
Salvation, seeing in what danger we are, not only in regard of our enemies
watchfulness, but in regard of our lazy and sluggish posture, which indisposeth
us for our work, and gives advantage to our adversary; he therefore calls upon
us to awaken us, and quicken us to our watch, and to our work: to our watch,
lest our enemy come and take us napping; and to our work, left the night come
before our work be perfected. It is a manifest token of Christ his care and
faithfulness, thus to knock and call by awakening Ordinances or Providence,
when thus he finds us inclined to sloth, or sluggishness: and yet many times
he is forced to call aloud before he can make us hear.

7. Christ calls to open to him, and take part with him of that rich feast, or
banquet, which he has prepared and brings with him. Believers knowing their
absolute dependence upon Christ for continual supply of grace and comfort, they
make their request to Christ, that he would come and make a feast in their
Souls; that he would fill their hearts with ^ood and gladness; that his
comforts may de^ight their heart, whatever other thoughts may trouble and
cumber them: and hereupon Christ comes and knocks for opening and
entertainment, saying, (as in the Text) Open to me, my Sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled -- and promising, as Rev. 3.20. If any man will open to me,
I will come in, and will sup with him, and he shall sup with me. Christ would
not loose his feast when he has prepared it, nor does he love to eat his
morsels alone; but desires the company of his Spouse, for whom he has prepared
them; and therefore calls. This was the case in the Text. The Spouse, verse. 16.
of the foregoing Chapter, had prayed for the revival of Grace in her heart,
that she might be prepared to receive and entertain Christ; and being so fixed,
begs his company. This request is granted, for Christ according to her request
comes, and desires to have the door opened to him: when Christ comes with loads
of comfort, he many times finds the door of the heart fast shut against him,
long knocks and calls before he gain admission. The Promises and Comforts of
Christ stand many times long at the doors of our hearts before we open to, and
receive them by faith; and many an excuse and put-off will many a poor soul
make against it self, before it will be persuaded to receive the promises for
its own comfort; yea sometimes so compliment it, and plead excuses, till Christ
in an ange^ withdraw, and make the Soul long, and with an aching heart to seek
Christ in the promises before she find him. And this (I conceive) is not the
least part of the Holy Ghosts design to discover in this Text.

And thus have I showed you some of those things which Christ would have when
he knocks and calls. The last thing in the Explication of the Doctrine, is to
show what are the special times of Christ his knocking and calling.

To this I answer in general, That there is no Dispensation of God that he
exercises toward us, but it has something of a call from God in it. Every
Ordinance of God, is a call from God, and comes with some Message unto us.
Messengers are not sent, but upon some message or errand. God's Ministers are
his Messengers, sent unto us, with some word of Reproof, Instruction, Counsel,
or Comfort. And therefore the Scriptures are said to be Profitable for
Doctrine, Reproof, Correction, and Instruction in righteousness, 2 Timothy 13.16.
And it is God's word that his Messengers bring, and therefore their message is
to be heeded, because it is a call or message from God. Every secret impulse of
the Spirit, check, and conviction of thy Conscience, is a call from God, ought
to be listened and hearkened to; for Conscience is God's Deputy or Vicegerent
in the soul. Every Providence that befalls thee, whether Mercy bestowed upon
thee, or Affliction, is a Messenger sent from God, and has something of a call
in it, something that God would have thee to learn by it. Yea, even those
common providence, whether of good or evil, that befall thee in common with
others, they come with some particular message to thee. A packet of Letters may
be brought to a Town or place by one common Post or Carrier, but every ones
Letter in particular comes about his own special business, though it come by
the hand of the common Carrier. So in common Afflictions or Judgments, though
they come in a common way, and by a common hand, either Humane or Divine, or in
a common way of Providence; yet they come upon a particular errand, and about
particular business, to the particular persons to whom they are sent. If they
come to thee, know therefore that they have some particular message to thee
from Heaven; and therefore labor to understand the Voice, and learn the
Lesson. But though there be something of a call from God in every passage of
God's carriage toward us, yet there are some special times wherein God's calls
are much more remarkable: and it would be of dangerous consequence to slight
such calls, or let slip such opportunities. And they are such times as these.

1. Christ his knocks and calls are very remarkable under powerful Ordinances,
accompanied with secret strivings of the Spirit, and convictions of our own
Consciences. God qualifies and sends forth his Ministers to preach the Gospel
unto those to whom he sends them, and has promised to be with them always,
even to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.19, 20. It is his work they are about,
and they must have his assistance and direction in the Work. He must put words
into their Mouths, such as may accomplish the end and errand for which he sends
them to such persons or people. And hence it is, that the faithful Ministers
and Servants of Christ, are not only diversely gifted and qualified for their
work; but they find the Spirit of God variously directing, assisting,
restraining, or enlarging, according as God is pleased to make use of them, and
call them forth upon some particular work and design. There is scarce a
faithful Minister of Christ but may observe this in himself by frequent
experience, both in his private Studies, and public Exercises. Now when God
does by his Spirit in a more than ordinary manner raise, enlarge, and direct
his Servants in their studies; warming the Word upon their Hearts; and likewise
inliven, and enlarge, and warm them in their public work, and at the same time
the Spirit of God is busy at work, striving with the people to whom this
Message is sent, by secret impulses of his Spirit, and convictions of their
Consciences; doubtless this is a remarkable call from Christ, and it would be
of dangerous consequence to let slip such opportunities, to stifle such
Convictions, and to quench such motions of the Spirit. An eminent instance we
have of this, Acts 18. where we have Paul at Corinth, inwardly pressed in his
Spirit, v. 5. and therefore warmed in his work: and the same Spirit was also
busy at work in the Hearts of his hearers; for many believed, v. 8. God
encourages him, and bids him not fear, but go on boldly with his work, and he
will be with him, and defend him: And the reason was, because God had much
people in that City, v. 9, 10. This was a remarkable time of Christ his
calling: and the Jews opposing the Apostle, and rejecting this call, proved of
dreadful consequence to them, v. 6. for the Apostle left them, and preached to
the Gentiles. When Christ by his Spirit really warms the Heart of the Minister
in his work, and withal sends his Spirit to open thine Ears to attend, to
enlighten thy Understanding to apprehend, to convince thy Judgment of the truth
of what is spoken, and to awake thy Conscience, and make thy Bowels to stir
within thee, as here he did the Spouse, Cant. 5.4, 5. this is a special call
from Christ; and take heed how thou resistest it, or let it slip.

2. Christ his Knocks and Calls are eminent, under special and remarkable
Providence. The more eminent and remarkable God's Providence are toward
them, the more loud and considerable are his calls upon thee. As for instance,

1. Under visible danger of Christ his removal or withdrawing. If Christ show
signs and tokens of removing, it is to correct our former negligence, and to
quicken us to lay faster hold upon him. Thus in this Chapter, whereof the Text
is part, the Spouse did but too much slight Christ, in that she was so lazy
that she would not arise to let him in; and therefore he withdrew, and made her
seek him sorrowing, with an ^aking Hea^^ and guilty self-condemning conscience,
long before she could find him. Upon this account it is that Christ's
departure from a person or people is many times gradual. He does not depart on
a sudden, but by steps and degrees; that every step may be a motive to lay hold
upon Christ before he be quite gone. Thus we find he departed from the Temple
of old, as is evident in Ezekiel's vision, chapter 10.11. The glory of God
first removed to the door of the house, from thence to the Mountain, and then
quite away. If we have any business with God, it is high time to improve our
present opportunity, when God tells us by signs and tokens that he is removing,
and ready to be gone. There is a woe immediately falls upon that person or
people from whom God departs, when he is gone, Hosea 9.12. Woe unto them when I
depart from them. And therefore the signs of God's departure must needs be
strong alarms to cause us speedily to lay hold upon God before he depart.
Therefore says the Prophet, Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may be
found, call upon him while he is near.

2. When God has for some time withdrawn himself, and afterward for some
little space has returned again, and manifested his presence or nearness: this
is a loud call to improve our time, and while it is called today, to hearken,
and not harden our hearts. We read in the parable of the barren Fig Tree, Luke
13.6, etc. that when the owner had come several years expecting fruit, and
found none, he commands that the Tree be cut down, because it but cumbred the
ground: but at the request and intercession of his Servant he spares it one
year longer, and takes more pains with it that year than he had done of other
years before; and if then it bear not fruit, it must be cut down without
remedy. If after our many years barrenness in God's Orchard, and his threatening
to cut us down, he takes more than ordinary pains with us, by his Word,
Messengers, and Spirit, seeming more eminently and visibly to return to us for
some space, to dig about us, and dung us: this is a loud call from him to
improve the present opportunity, lest he cut us down, and there be no servant
to stand in the gap, or speak a word for us. God's Ministers are his
Husbandmen; and if God threaten to cut down any Tree, they cry out, Lord spare
it a little longer, let us take a little more pains with it; and if then it
will not be fruitful, we will hold our peace: and if hereupon God do for some
time spare, and yet no fruit be brought forth, that Tree will be in great
danger to be cursed, and devoted to the fire. If once God say to his Ministers
as once he did to Jeremy, Jer. 7.16. Pray not thou for this people, neither
lift up prayer nor cry, for I will not ^ear thee; such people must needs be in
a sad condition: and therefore if our time be but (...) time of probation, it
is dangerous to let it slip, lest God swear in his wrath, that we shall not
enter into his rest. We find that good and publick-spirited man, Ezra, chap.
9. v. 8, etc. sadly trembling and astonished at such a thing as this: God had
punished his people by a seventy years Captivity for their sins: and now for a
little time grace had been showed to them from the Lord, to give them a nail in
his Sanctuary, and some tokens of his favor, and visible presence; but now
they begin to fall to their old course of sinning, and misimprove this day of
grace: this makes Ezra to tremble, and sit down astonished. And see what he
says in his Prayer to God, verse. 13. If after all that is come upon us for our
evil deeds seeing that thou our God have punished us lest than our iniquities
deserve, and have given us such deliverance as this: should we again brea^ thy
commandments -- Would not thou b^ angry with us, until thou had destroyed
us, s^ that there should be no remnant nor escaping (...) Clearly intimating,
how dangerous a thing i^ is, to shut our ear against such a call as thi^ is.

3. Christ's Call is eminent under great mercies spiritual or temporal largely
bestowed upon us. The more largely God's hand i^ opened to thee in Bounties,
the more loud (...) his Knock and Call to thee to open to him the Psalmist
makes this a strong argument to his soul to return to his God, Psalm. 116.7.
Return unto thy rest (i. e. unto thy God, for God is the only true and perfect
rest of the Soul) O my soul: for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And
if in this case thou shut him out, or turn a deaf ear to his call, the greater
will be thy sin: we find therefore the Spirit of God often aggravating the
sins of men from this consideration; as in the case of David, 2 Samuel 12. when
he had sinned in the matter of Vriah, God sends Nathan to him, who thus speaks
to him from the Lord, ver. 7, 8, 9. I anointed thee king over Israel: and I
delivered thee from the hand of Saul: I gave thee thy masters house, and thy
masters wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah:
And if that had been too little, I would moreover have given thee such and such
things: wherefore then have thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do
evil in his sight? -- This made David's sin wonderfully great; and so is it a
most sad aggravation of any man's sin: See how God pleads with his Church, Deuteronomy.
32. upon this account, Do you thus requite the Lord? Why, what had God done for
them? See verse. 9, etc. he had chose them for his portion: His Providence had
been wonderful about them, his Presence had been wonderfully with them, and his
Goodness had been wonderful toward them; and that therefore they should grow
fat and kick, was an heinous and intolerable affront, and would be dreadful in
the issue, and therefore wishes that they would be wise to consider their
later end: let us therefore think of this, whom God has so (every way) loaded
with blessings.

4. Christ's calls are remarkable, when his judgments are terrible; when the
terribleness of Gods Judgments do manifest the heat of Gods wrath, then it is
high time to know the voice of the rod, and who has appointed it. We read Amos
4. God threatens to draw them forth with fish-hooks, and cast them out of their
own land, because of their incorrigibleness under his Judgments: he had so and
so punished them for their sins, and yet they had not returned to the Lord, and
therefore he would do thus with them, verse. 12. And what follows? (mark) And
because I will do thus unto thee, therefore prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
This was a loud call, without any more delays to prepare to meet God. The same
Prophet puts this question in the Negative, which the more strongly affirms,
Amos 3.6. Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid?
When Gods Judgments sound as a Trumpet of an Enemy that has taken the City, it
is high time for the people to tremble.

5. When the meaning of Gods dealings with us is plainly and legibly written in
the forehead of Gods dispensations toward us, the more loud and intelligible
is his call. When the finger of God in his Providence plainly points at our
carriages, easy to be read and understood, this makes the call more clear, and
us the more inexcusable if we take not notice of it. Sometimes a man may
plainly read his sin that God smites at, in his punishment: as David might read
his sin of Adultery and Murder, in Absalom's Rebellion, and lying with his
Concubines. Sometimes Judgments put such a stop to us in our sin, and take away
the very occasion of our sins, or the things whereby we sin, that we may
plainly see God correcting such a sin in us. Sometimes again, the circumstances
of the puishment clearly point at the cause of them, as here in the Text.
Christ his immediate departure, after the Spouse her complemental excuse and
refulal to open to him, did most clearly point out her sin to her, and (no
question) was a most bitter and biting sting upon her Conscience. Sometimes
there comes secret convictions and intimations of the cause of Gods
cotroversie, along with the affliction. God whispers us in the ear, and tells
us that such a lash and scourge is for such a fault; and when these things fall
out thus, they are loud calls from Christ to hearken to Instruction, and to bow
our ear to Discipline. That saying of Elihu is very considerable for this
purpose, Job 36.8, 9, 10, 11. If they be bound in fetters, and holden in cords
of affliction: Then he shows them their work, and their transgression, that
they have exceeded. He opens their ear to discipline, and commands them to
depart from iniquity. If they obey and serve him, then they shall spend their
days in prosperity, and their years in pleasure. But if they obey not, they
shall perish by the sword, and shall dye without knowledge. And therefore it
must needs be of dangerous consequence, to turn the deaf ear to such a loud
call as this is. Thus remarkable Providence are a loud call from Christ to
open to him.

3. Christ his calls are remarkable, when he comes upon our calling and
invitation; when we from a sense of his absence have earnestly begged for his
coming, and he in answer to our prayers does come, and stands knocking at the
doors of our hearts for admission and entertainment; this call is very loud,
and our refusal to open, would be most unworthy. This is the very case in the
Text, and therefore I need not multiply Texts or Instances about it, for the
case is plain enough here. The Spouse had prayed that Christ would come into
the garden of her heart; Christ makes no delay, but quickly comes, and might
reasonably expect to find ready admission, being so earnestly invited; but
contrary to his expectation, he finds her in bed, the door shut, and she too
lazy to arise to open to him; and therefore he withdraws in a discontent, as
well he might. If therefore upon our earnest prayer Christ come and knock at
the door of our hearts, either by his Ordinances or Providence, let us not
stand debating whether we shall let him in or not, whatever posture we be in,
though naked in our bed: for this is a special time of his coming, and will be
unkindly taken, if he find not admission according to his invitation.

4. When Christ his calls are accompanied with a great deal of earnestness and
importunity. When Christ is in so very good earnest, that he woes and entreats,
and will take no denial; this is a loud, because an earnest call, and argues
that he is come very nigh, even to the very door. Therefore the Prophet
advises by all means to close with such an opportunity as this, Isai. 55.6.
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.
This was the case of the Spouse in the Text. Christ was come to her door, and
not only stood there knocking, but by all the friendly compellations
imaginable, endeavors to persuade her to let him in: Open to me, my sister, my
love, my dove, my undefiled. And when this will not do, he comes near to the
door, and puts in his finger by the hole of the door, as though he would make a
forcible entry; intimating his earnest desire to have admission: and therefore
it was unkindly done of her to keep him out, and cost her dear before he did
come in. And so it may be with thee.

5. When Christ his Locks are wet with the dews of the night, then are his
calls earnest and importunate, and it will be of dangerous consequence to keep
him out. This is the argument which Christ makes use of in the Text, Open to
me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for my head is filled with dew,
and my locks with the drops of the night. Many things may be included in this
argument, and all of force to persuade her to let him in; and making the
argument more strong and forcible, make the call to be so much the louder, and
the denial the more unreasonable. The words may be taken in a good sense: My
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. i. e. I come
full fraught with all manner of Blessings and Benefits, that may tend to the
chearing, refreshing, and fructifying of thy spiritual man. There is nothing
wanting in me to make thee perfectly and every way happy; only open to me, and
let me in: and then thou shall be made partaker of all that is mine, and all
that is in me. What is not wanting in me, shall not be wanting to thee, only
open to me by Faith, and let me in. And the truth is, all our emptiness and
penury arises not from any want or defect in Jesus Christ, in him all fullness
dwells; but from our selves, because we open not to him. And thus understood,
they are an answer to the Spouse her prayer, Chapter 4.16. Awake, O north wind,
and come thou south, and breath upon my garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out. She prays for the breathings of the Spirit, whereby her Graces might
be revived, and made more active, and odoriferou^. And to this Christ answers,
that the only way to obtain this in the extent and fullness of it, is to open
to him by Faith, and let him into the Heart; and if she will do so, he assures
her that he brings all fullness of grace and blessings with him, his very head
and locks are filled with them; and surely this is a most full and convincing
argument, being applied as an answer to her prayer, and might well have the
force of a loud call in her ears, sufficient to raise her, though laid down to
take her ease. But the words may also be taken in a bad sense, importing the
misery and hardship which Christ had undergone in coming to her in so dark and
wet a night, and that still he did endure by standing out of doors in the wet,
and dark, and cold. As if Christ had said, O my dearest Spouse! thou, by thy
prayer, which so lately thou did send to me, did importune my company and
help; and out of that true affection which I have for thee, and commiseration
of thy condition, I have undertaken this long and tedious Journey, wherein I am
benighted; the way has been very foul, (for I have trodden the Winepress of
God's wrath alone, have endured much persecution in my own person, and the
persons of my Ministers, and much contradiction of sinners against my self; it
has cost me my dearest hearts blood to make my way to thee) and the weather
has been very wet, stormy, and tempestuous, so that I am wet to the very skin,
not a dry hair upon my head, and the night has been and is very dark, so dark,
that it made me cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? and now I
am come, I stand at thy door in this miserable wet and weary condition,
desiring entrance and admission: Therefore open to me; and though thou be in
thy warm bed, and at ease, yet consider what a sad condition I am in, and how
bad and dangerous it is for my health to stand here in this condition; and do
not so far forget thy relation to me, thy late request, the pains and hardship
which I have endured, and do endure, and the reciprocal Affection which thou
ought to bear unto me, as to suffer me to stand here out of doors, but arise
quickly and open to me. If thou have any pity or commiseration in thine heart,
show it now to me thy beloved Husband. And what could be said more, to make the
argument pressing and cogent? and therefore must needs have the force of a
loud, a powerful, and irresistible call.

And thus I have done with the Explication; and now follows the proof and
confirmation of the Doctrine; That to be lazy and secure, when Christ calls and
knocks, may be of very dangerous consequence; especially when his coming and
calling is in answer to our Prayers, as you see here it was in the Text. The
truth of which will manifestly appear, from these following Considerations.

1. Let us consider the greatness of our ingratitude and unkindness which
hereby we manifest: nay, I may say, not only unkindness and unthankfulness,
but we hereby manifest wonderful hypocrisy and dissimulation: We importune and
entreat Christ to come into our Souls; and (if our words were to be taken in
prayer) we show our selves to be very earnestly desirous of his company, and
that we stand in great need of his help, and therefore will take no denial, but
entreat again and again. At last Christ yields, consents, and (laying aside all
other business) comes, little questioning but to find us in a readiness to
receive him; or however, willing to open to him when he knocks and calls, in
regard we have so earnestly invited him. Therefore now at his coming to find
the doors shut, we so careless of his company as not to watch for him one hour;
and when he knocks and calls, for us to answer, I have put off my coats how
shall I put them on? I have washed my feet how shall I defile them? To make
thus light o^ his pains and coming, what greater unkindness, or manifest token
of complementing dissimulation and hypocrisy can be showed Well may Christ
say, O Spouse! though thy invitations seemed to be real, yet by this carriage I
see, and plainly perceive the falsness and treachery of thy dissembling heart;
for instead of dealing plainly and faithfully with me, thou have but mocked me;
and how can thou then say, that thou love me? Well may Christ then take
this ingratitude and dissimulation unkindly from her, and take occasion
hereupon to depart. If any of you should invite a friend to your house, and
according to your earnest invitation your friend comes, but at his coming you
shut the doors against him; and though you be within, yet you refuse to open to
him, may he not well take this piece of ingratitude and mockery unkindly at
your hands, and look upon it as an high affront put upon him, and therefore
depart in a rage, and resolve to miss your door the next time he comes that
way? But if a Wife should deal thus with her Husband, would not this manifest
much dissimulation and unkindness? And may not he well take this as an high
affront, to be thus slightly looked upon by his Wife? Such is the case between
Christ and his Spouse; and therefore no wonder though he depart in a
discontent, when thus affronted, and treacherously dealt with. We find it
reckoned among the Sufferings of Christ in his state of Humiliation, Isai.
53.2, 3. that he should be slightly esteemed and accounted of among men. --
There is no beauty that we should desire him. He is despised and rejected of
men. -- We hid our faces, as it were, from him; He was despised, and we
esteeme^ hem not. So John 1.11. He came to his ow^ and his own received him
not. Thus to be despised and mocked, and that by his own, thi^ goes near his
heart, and may well put hi^ into a rage against us. This affront would far more
easily have been born, had it bee^ from an enemy; but from a friend, and so
near a relation, one that had given him so fai^^ an invitation, this cuts and
wounds to the very heart. See what David (personatin^ Christ in the treachery
of Judas) speaks Psalm. 55.12, etc. It was not an enemy that reproached me, then
I could have born it. -- Bu^ it was thou a man, mine equal, my guide, an^ mine
acquaintance: this so provokes, that he says, verse. 15. Let death seize on
them, and let them go down quick into hell, for wickedness is among them. Yea,
this struck sad upon Christ's Spirit, Psalm. 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar friend,
in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me.
Such affronts as these cut deep; they wound to the very heart: and therefore no
wonder if the effects and consequences which follow hereupon, be sad and
dreadful to the soul.

2. Consider the great damage which our Souls sustein by keeping out the Lord
Jesus Christ. If we shut him out, he may withdraw: nay, it is the next way to
provoke him to withdraw, and how shall we then live without him? We read John
15.5. Without me, ^ e. Jesus Christ, ye can do nothing, neither pleasing to
God, nor profitable to your selves. And therefore what a miserable condition
are ^ou left in, if Christ depart? Therefore says God, Hos. 9.12. Woe also unto
them when I depart from them. And assure thy self, that thou ^anst not take a
more effectual course to cause ^im to withdraw, than to shut him out when ^e
comes at thine invitation. Christ may withdraw, yea, and so withdraw as never
to ^eturn again, or call at thy door more, Psalm. ^1.11, 12. My people would not
hearken to ^y voice, and Israel would none of me; so I ^ave them up to their
own hearts lust: and they walked in their own counsels. God knocked forty years
at Isreal's door, but when no admission would be had, then He swear in his
^rath, that they should never enter into his rest. Psalm. 95.10, 11. See that
threatening against Ephraim, than which there could not be a greater, Hos. 4.17.
Ephraim is joined to I^ols, let him alone. As if God had said, There is no
hopes of reclaiming him; I have called often at his door, but to little
purpose: therefore I will concern my self no more about him, I will call no
more at his door. Read with trembling Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. Prove. 1.24, etc.

Sometimes though God may at last return and be reconciled, and call again, yet
it may be long first, and many a weary step may he cause thee to take in
seeking of him before thou find him. God threatens this, Hos. 5.15. I will go
and return to my place, and hide my self until they seek my face: in their
affliction they will seek me early. And we read in the Text, that Christ did
deal thus with his Spouse. When she arose to open to her beloved, he had
withdrawn himself, and was gone. Christ had heard and answered her at her first
call: but since she had dealt so deceitfully and disingeniously with him, she
should now call and call again before he gave her any answer, should seek and
seek him sorrowing before she should find him. She was but now so lazy,
easeful, and delicate, that she could not abide to be at so much pains as to
put on her Coat, having put it off; could not endure so much hardship as to
tread upon the floor with her naked foot, lest she should defile it: But if
Christ be so little store set by, her love to Christ shall be further tried;
she shall take a longer Journey, and not complain so much of the soulness of
the way neither before she find him. If it be so tedious a Journey to cross
the house-floor, Christ will see whether she will take a journey through the
streets, and highways, in as dark and foul way and weather as he has come,
before she find him; that so she may know something of what he has endured in
coming to her, and may now readily open to him the next time. And therefore it
is of dangerous consequence to shut out Christ, when he knocks and calls.

3. Consider the benefits and bounties which Christ brings with him into the
Soul that opens to, and entertains him: Our Savior says, Rev. 3.20. Behold, I
stand at the door and knock; if any man open to me, I will come in unto him,
and will sup with him, and he with me. If Christ will make a Feast unto the
Soul that lets him in, it must needs be ill to keep him out. The Soul has no
such store of provision within her self, as to despise the Feasts which Christ
will make her. In the Text Christ makes use of this Argument to move her to
open the door, For my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of
the night: which being taken in a good sense, (as was noted before) intimates
the fullness of Blessings and Benefits which Christ comes laden with, when he
desires entrance into the Soul. Sure I am, that he that commands that None
should appear before the Lord empty, will not himself come empty-handed, to
give his Spouse a visit, especially knowing her needs, and for what end she
desires his company. Would you see what Christ bring with him, read Cantic.
2.3, 4, 5, 6. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
pleasant to my taste. He brought me into his banqueting house, and his bann^^
over me was love. -- His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does
embrace me^ If he do but breath upon our Gardens, the Spic^ will flow out,
Cant. 4.16. He brings enoug^ with him to feast us and all our friends, Cantic.
5.1. yea, and bids both them and us heartily welcome. See John 14.18, 19. I
wi^^ not leave you comfortless: I will come to you But what will he bring with
him? He wi^^ bring life, verse. 19. Because I live, ye sha^^ live also. Where
Christ comes, he brings the which will beget life, and spirits, grace an^
comfort: He fills the Soul with mir^h an^ comfort, and abundant satisfaction
where h^ comes, Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. therefore it is dangerous not to open to him
at his call.

4. Consider our great unworthiness the Christ should come under our roof. If
Jac^ found cause to say, that he was less than the least of Gods mercies; how
much more w^ reflecting upon our own unworthiness, m^^ say with David, Psalm.
8.4. Lord, what is man, that thou art mindful of him? or the son of man, that
thou visitest him? Would we take a true view of our own state, and see how fit
we are for the entertainment of Jesus Christ, see what the Holy Ghost says of
us, Ezech. 16. there he tells thee thy pedigree, verse. 3. Thy father was an
Amorite, and thy mother an Hittite, a cursed blood, of a cursed stock. He tells
thee also the manner of thy nativity, and in what posture God found thee, verse.
4, 5. a naked and wretched infant, cast out in its goar-blood and filthiness,
none to pity or do any necessary office of kindness for ^hee; and in this
posture and condition God ^ound thee, and set his love upon thee, when ^here
was nothing to be seen that was lovely ^n thee: thou wast a poor beggar, that
had either meat for thy belly, nor clothes to cover any nakedness, nor a penny
of money in thy ^urse; in this condition he found thee, set his love upon thee,
entered into covenant of mar^^age with thee, espoused thee to be his Wife,
^ecked and adorned thee with the Jewels of his ^race, made thee comely through
his comeliness ^t upon thee, set thee up in high and honorable estate: see
Psalm. 45.9. the Queen stands Christ's right hand in Gold of Ophir, verse. 13, 4.
The Kings daughter is all glorious within, (...) raiment is of needle work,
etc. The Virgins her companions must wait upon her. All this, and more than the
tongue of Men or Angels can express, has Christ done for thee, who art a most
unworthy wretch; and therefore if now when he comes and calls, saying, Open to
me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, etc. that now thou should
make such a saucy and slight answer, I have put off my coats, how shall I put
them on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? this may justly make
Christ to repent of his match, and therefore of dangerous consequence. We read,
Luke 7.6. the Centurion, when Christ was in the form of a Servant, in his
estate of Humiliation, said, Lord I am not worthy that thou should come
under my roof. How much more unworthy are we of the spiritual presence and
company of Christ, now he is in his estate of Exaltation? And therefore the
most unworthy and disingenious act that can be, is now to shut him out when he
knocks and calls at the doors of our Hearts. desiring entertainment. Well then
may Christ take this as a most horrible affront, from such base and unworthy
upstarts as we are, who but the other day were naked and beggarly creatures.
But this will yet appear to be a greater affront if

5. We consider the great condescension o^ Christ in coming. Christ is the
eternal Son of God, and Heir of all things; he is the King of Glory, Psalm.
24.7, 8, 9, 10. His Throne is in Heaven: His Kingdom is over all: He is God
blessed for ever; needs not thee to add any thing to his happiness. It is a
condescension in him to behold the things that are done in Heaven, much more to
behold any earthly creature. And yet this King of Kings, and Lord of Lords
comes to thy poor, sootty, beggarly Cottage; knocks at the door of thy Heart,
desires admission and entertainment there, and will be content either with such
as he finds, or such as he brings. For thee therefore to shut out this King of
Glory, is a most inexcusable affront. Let me illustrate these two Arguments, of
our unworthyness, and Christ his condescension, by this similitude.

Suppose the greatest King or Emperor in the world should meet a poor, naked,
nasty, deformed Beggar, nothing but Dirt and Lice; not a rag to cover her
nakedness, not a morsel of bread to put in her mouth, not a Cottage to put her
head in, not a penny in her purse, but more in debt than she and all her
friends in the world are able to pay, and therefore cast out of her house and
harbor, nothing but the bare Dunghill to lie upon, naked, whatever weather
come, and so our of credit as that none would pity her, or let her come in:
This great Emperor casts his eye upon her, pities her condition, sets his love
upon her, promises that if she will take him for her Husband, he will pay her
debts for her, procure her a discharge, will marry her, and make her his Bride
or Queen, wash away all her filthyness, deck and adorn her with all costly
Jewels and Raiment suitable to the quality and degree of such a persons wife as
himself is, and that there shall be nothing wanting to make her happy: Hereupon
the match is concluded, and he owns her for his Spouse, decks and adorns her
according to promise, puts clothes upon her back rich and costly, and money in
her purse; yet takes her not for the present home to his Court and Palace, but
leaves her a while in her smoaky Cottage: she pretending love to him, thinks
his absence long, and therefore sends to him to entreat his company: such is
the ardour of his affection, that he comes without delay, though the weather be
wet and stormy, the way foul and deep, the night dark, and the Journey tedious;
finds her in bed, the doors shut, and therefore knocks and calls, saying, Open
to me, my dearest Spouse, for I am come at thy request, though I have not a dry
hair upon my head, or thread upon my back; therefore open to me, and let me in:
And she should say, I am gone to bed, I cannot get up, I cannot take so much
pains now as to put on my coat, I am composing my self for rest, have washed my
feet, have no mind to defile or dirty them with coming over the floor; and
therefore if you would have come in, you should have come sooner. Suppose all
this, would this answer be well taken? might not this be of dangerous
consequence to this proud beggar, and give just occasion to blast all her
hopes? Have I undervalued my self thus (may the King say) to advance a proud
beggar, and does she serve me thus? But I will leave her in the condition I
found her, and come no more at her. This is the case between Jesus Christ and
his Spouse; nay, there cannot be that inequality between the highest Prince in
the world and the meanest Beggar, that there is between Jesus Christ and his
Spouse. And therefore we may easily imagine, of how dangerous consequence it
may be, to shut out Jesus Christ when he knocks and calls, especially when his
coming is in answer to our Prayers.

6. Consider the great wrong which we do to Jesus Christ, if we do not open to
him at his call. The wrong that will fall upon Christ, by our not opening to
him, is set down in the Text, in these words, For my head is filled with dew,
and my locks with the drops of the night; which words (as we told you before)
may be taken in a bad sense as well as a good, denoting the misery, sufferings,
and afflictions, that Jesus Christ endures, in making way, and coming unto his
people: in which words I would observe (1.) the great pains which Jesus Christ
had taken to come; such was the length and tediousness of the way, so many
obstructions and lets, so many difficulties and hardships, that he was
benighted, and it was got very late when he came: and therefore pity to let him
stand any longer wet and weary. Oh, what haste would a loving Wife make to
arise and open to her Husband, in such a case as this is! And if she did not,
her Husband might well take it unkindly at her hands: And yet the Spouse here
makes an Apology, I have put off my coat, etc. Such carriage as this may well
cause him to withdraw.

2. Here is mention made of Drops and Dews of the night; which seem to denote
Afflictions, and Sufferings, and Hardships; for so we find them made use of in
Scripture: when Jacob would set forth what hardship he endured with his
Father-in-law Laban, in his service, he says, Genesis 31.40. In the day the
drought consumed me, and the frosts by night. Afflictions in many places are
compared to the Night; and so they may well be understood here, especially
considering how wet and stormy a night it was. And truly Jesus Christ had very
stormy weather to come to his Spouse: we read in Scripture what hardships he
met with in the way. See how Christ himself complains, Psalm. 102.23. He has
weakened my strength in the way, he has shortened my days. He met with the
storms of divine wrath, which made him to cry out, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? The storm was so bitter, that he prays, Father, if it be
possible, let this cup pass from me: and yet it pleased the Father to bruise
him, and make his soul an offering for sin: He bare our griefs, and carried our
sorrows; the chastisement of our peace was laid upon his shoulders, and with
his stripes we were healed: yet we accounted him stricken, smitten of God, and
afflicted. He endured hardship not only from enemies, but from friends; and
therefore says, These were the wounds which I received in the house of my
friends, Zech. 13.6. And surely this was a stormy night; that the Spouse
therefore should deny him entrance such a night as this was, especially when he
had endured all this for her sake, that he might come to her, was great
unkindness, and might well provoke him to withdraw.

3. His urging this argument seems to imply the great prejudice that might come
to him by her delay, and making him to stand wet and weary there. The force of
the argument seems to lie here, and he thus argues: O my Spouse, I have
undertaken a very sad and wearisome Journey for thy sake; I am at last (though
late) come in a weary, wet, and dropping condition to the door, it may be very
prejudicial to my health to stand long here in this condition I am in: as thou
pitiest my life and health, and have any respect for me, open and let me in,
and suffer me not to stand here and catch my death. What more forcible argument
could be made use of to a Wise that has any real respect for her Husband? and
yet in this sluggish humor she tells him, She has put off her Coats, and
cannot put them on: she will rather suffer her Husband to starve at the door,
than she will be at the pains to put on her Coat and let him in.

Indeed such unkind carriages as these, are prejudicial to Christ's health,
they wound and Crucify him afresh, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6.6. It must
needs take a deep and sorrowful impression upon the heart of Christ, to think
that this should be the requital of all his sufferings, and that from the hand
of his Spouse: well may this then cause his Jealousy to burn, and cause him in
a rage to withdraw himself. Consider this, that every denial, every delay to
open to Christ, cuts him to the very heart, and does (as it were) make his
pierced heart to bleed afresh.

4. The patience of Christ in all his sufferings, seems here to be pointed at
also. He had not only watched till he had felt a drop, but drops, yea, till
his Head was filled with drops: he was wet to the very skin, not a dry thread,
or free place about him, and therefore could endure to stay no longer: and
therefore so earnestly calls, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled; for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the
night. To refuse to open in this case, must needs be a great wrong to Christ,
and may cost us dear, if he should thereupon depart, as justly he might, being
thus wronged and affronted by us. But

5. There is one thing more in the Call which makes the wrong intolerable; and
that is, the place where he calls is his own house, the door whereat he knocks
is his own door. We told you before, that the place where Christ knocked, was at
the door of the heart. And the Spouse had before given her heart to Christ;
therefore it was his own door that he knocks at, and to his own Spouse that he
calls, Open to me, etc. And therefore what an intolerable wrong is here, to
keep Christ out of his own house, to keep his own door locked against him, in
such weather, and in such a condition as he was! it is a wonder that instead of
withdrawing, he did not fire the house about her ears, but that he is an
infinitely patient Husband. Such carriages as these are intolerable wrongs to
Christ, and therefore may cost us dear.

6. Consider the earnest and sweet perswasives that Christ at his coming and
knocking makes use of to procure his admission. There are three Texts of
Scripture which I would pitch upon, from thence to gather the sweet winning
arguments that Christ ordinarily makes use of, when he knocks and calls at the
door of his Spouse. One is the Text; another is the Parable of the great Supper
at the marriage of the Kings son, Luke 14.17, etc. and the third is Rev. 3.20.
And from these Texts I would gather these three Arguments, which Christ makes
use of.

1. He wooes and entreats from that nee^ relation that is between them. She was
his sister and spouse; as if Christ should have said thus: My dear sister and
spouse! it is thy dear Brother and Husband, that is come wet and weary to thy
door, stands here, wet to the very skin, My head filled with dew, and my locks
with the drops of the night. Can thou find in thine heart to lie snorting in
thy bed, and taking thine ease, and hear thy poor afflicted wearied Brother and
Husband stand without in all this stormy weather, knocking and calling, and not
take so much pains as to come to the door to open to me? Thou need not stir
a foot out of the doors, but only come to the door and open it. Have thou no
more of a sympathizing and commiserating spirit in thee? Will the nearness of
our relation work no more upon thee? If I were a stranger to thee, I could say
the less for my self; (though common pity should be showed to strangers) but
being so nearly related to thee, me thinks I should not need to multiply words,
but might find present admission and ready entertainment: why then do thou
not come? Now a refusal or slighty neglect in this case will scarcely be born:
the bond of Relation should double the force of the Argument. And therefore
unkindnesses from near relations, are of a more provoking and exasperating
nature, than from other persons: because better things are expected. And
therefore to deny to open to Christ, when thus he calls, and pleads such an
argument as this, must needs be highly provoking, and of dangerous consequence.

2. He wooes and entreats from the dea^ and reciprocal affection that was
betwixt them: My Love, my Dove, my undefiled. Oh, what sweet compellations! How
can these be denied? And surely Christ is in good earnest, he does not
dissemble or flatter. Does Elihu say, Job 32.22. I know not how to give
flattering titles, for in so doing my Maker would soon take me away? And do you
think that our faithful Lord and Husband Jesus Christ would flatter and
dissemble? Surely, no: He is real therefore in these sweet and heart-melting
compellations, which are expressions of Love coming from his very heart. My
love, my dove, my undefiled. As if Christ should have said, Thou art she, whose
heart is joined to mine in most sincere and cordial Affection: I have set my
love only upon thee, and have chosen thee out of the world to be my Spouse,
Have loved thee with an everlasting love, and therefore with loving kindness
have I drawn thee: and I know that thou have a real kindness and respect for
me, and that thou preferrest my Love before Wine, or any thing that can be
named: And that in thine eyes (however contemptible I may be in the eyes of the
world) I am altogether lovely. Oh therefore let not sloth and drowziness so
far prevail, and make thee to forget thy love to me, and my love to thee (which
I have given thee full and frequent assurance of) as to suffer me to stand here
in the wet and cold. And what hard-hearted Wife could resist such a
heart-melting Argument as this? Yea thou art my Dove. Doves are kind to, and
mourn sore for the absence of one another: Thy mate, O my Dove! is at the door,
and will thou not let him in? Yea further, thou art my undefiled, my chaste
Spouse; I cannot think that thine heart is in the least alienated from me, or
set upon any other Lover: I am not jealous of thee, and therefore show thy
faithfulness and loyalty by opening unto me, that I may not have occasion of
jealousy, left in mine absence thy heart should be taken with some other
Lover. If this argument will not work, what may Christ think? Would it not then
be of dangerous consequence to do that, which may give occasion of jealousy to
our Lord and Husband? and therefore the Doctrine must needs be true.

3. He wooes and entreats from the great advantage which his coming in would be
unto her. Christ seldom or never invites us to our loss, but we are sure to be
gainers by every duty or work he puts us upon: He tells her here, that his head
was filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night. Which being
taken in a good sense (as was noted before) imports, that Christ came full
fraught with blessings and benefits, not an hair of his head but would afford
some drop of comfort or benefit, which would make amends for the pains which
she should be at, in rising and opening to him. And if we read Rev. 3.20. he
tell us, that If any man will open unto him, he will come in and sup with them,
and they with him. There is Emphasis and weight in every word, he would come
in. This piece of condescension in him, was a sufficient recompense of her
pains; it was a great honor, that such a guest should come under her roof.
That such a glorious person as Christ, who is God equal with the Father, and
before whom the very Angels cover their faces with their wings, as not able to
behold his Glory. That such a glorious person as this is, should come into such
a smoaky cottage, as that of man's heart, is wonderful condescension, and
therefore honor enough put upon the Spouse, which might abundantly recompense
her labor in opening to him. But this is not all, he would come in, and
therefore she (being within) should have his company, stand in his presence, In
whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for
evermore. And surely his company is no little worth, and that she her self
being judge, or else wherefore does she so earnestly pray for it, Cant. 4. v.
16. Fruition is that which Love labors after, and which alone gives
satisfaction and rest to the motion of love. She might now enjoy her beloved,
which she had so earnestly panted after, and long looked for: and surely her
pains in rising and opening to him could not be so great, as to over-weigh the
benefit and desireableness of his company. But yet this is not all, he would
sup with her. Oh wonderful condescension! will the King of Glory take, and be
content with such a supper as can be provided for him in such a poor beggarly
Cottage as man's Heart! is there any dish there that can please or give content
to him? Have we any thing in our Hearts that will feast Christ? Oh then open
quickly, and let him have it without any delay. For, to be sure, there is
nothing there, that is worth the having, but what is of his own sending in: and
it is no better, if not worse, for coming through our hands; and therefore
stick not to let him have it.

But yet further, he will not only sup with us, that is, be refreshed with the
fruitfulness and sweetness of our Graces, as is evident Cant. 5.1. but we shall
sup with him, that is, he will feast us with his comforts and benefits. Christ
never comes empty handed, but he brings such blessings and benefits with him,
as by their excellency and suitableness, will not fail abundantly to refresh
our souls, and wherewith the Soul will be satisfied as with marrow and fatness,
as David was, Psalm. 63.5, 6. Christ never comes in unto any soul, that
sincerely opens to him, but he takes them into his Banqueting house, and his
banner over them is love: He stays them with flaggons, and comforts them with
apples, Cant. 2.4, 5. He abundantly satisfies them with the fatness of his
house, and makes them drink of the river of his pleasures; for with him is the
Fountain of Life, and in his light we shall see light. Psalm. 36.8, 9. And will
not then Christ's Feast make amends for our pains in opening to him? But you
will say, What can Christ bring with him in such dark and stormy weather? Read
but Luke 14.17. It is suppertime, Come, for all things are now ready. There is
no dish wanting that may make a complea^ Feast, all things are in a prepared
posture you need do no more but take and eat. Is i^ therefore better to lie
starving in thy bed, that to rise and eat? Will not Christ's Kingly Feast (if
it were nothing but for the rarities of it) make amends for thy pains in
rising? You see therefore what force this argument has every way to prevail
with her to arise and open to him; and can we think our denial will be well
taken?

Let me only add this consideration more from this last expression, Luke
14.17. Come, for all things are now ready. Christ has been at great care and
charges to provide a Royal and suitable Supper for us, (not suitable to our
deserts; for then it would be a miserable one; but suitable to our need and
necessity) wherein no variety is wanting, that may either nourish us, or truly
satisfy us, and make us happy; and all things are now prepared and in a
readiness; so that if you come not, and that quickly, Supper will be spoiled,
and all his labor and charge will be lost: And will he take this well at your
hands? Verily no, v. 24. None of those that were bidden shall taste of my
Supper, since they make so light of it. And yet rather than I will want guests
for my Table, and my Supper be lost, I will send into the hedges and highways,
and compel others to come in; but as for those that made so light of it, they
shall not taste it. How sad will it be with every soul that ^s thus shut out
from Christ's Supper! Is it not then of dangerous consequence to exclude Christ
when he knocks and calls, and these sweet and heart-melting arguments (flowing
from the highest degree of love and condescension) are turned back with an
unkind (though complementing) denial?

8. Argument to prove that to refuse to open to Christ when he knocks and
calls, may be of dangerous consequence, especially when his coming is in answer
to our prayers, may be taken from the unreasonableness of all excuses that may
be pretended as the reason of our sluggishness and sloth. It is true, when we
should do any thing for Christ that may cost us any pains or trouble, the flesh
is very fruitful and abundant in producing shifts and excuses to hide and cover
our backwardness and unwillingness: and indeed, so apt are we to favor our
selves, that the meanest and most unreasonable excuse, (to us) seems to carry
strength enough of reason, to render the calls and commands of Christ
unreasonable, and our refusal plausible. If we look back into the Text, we
shall find the Spouse her arguing so unreasonable, that the very arguments she
makes use of, are so far from reasonable excuses, that if right conclusions
were drawn from them, they would rather enforce Christ's request, than excuse
her sloth: And at the best, they are but frivolous shifts to excuse her
sluggishness. And (indeed) such are all the excuses which the flesh makes,
against the calls and commands of Christ. Let us a little examine them, and you
will see the weakness of them. I have put off my coats, how shall I put them
on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? Putting off the Coats,
intimates to us, the laying aside of her watchfulness, as being free from the
fear of any danger, and no longer expecting or waiting for the company of any
friend: whereas the keeping of our Garments fast girded to us, implies the
contrary. And this is the argument that she pleads, why it was an impossible
thing for her to arise and open to Christ. But is this good arguing, when
truly enquired into, and laid down in plain terms? I have laid aside my watch,
I expect no further company of Christ this night, neither do I much desire it,
but had rather take my rest.

Is this she that but now, in a sense of her want, had begged so earnestly for
Christ's company, and was so desirous to be prepared for it, that Christ might
not find her undressed? Compare this Answer with her Prayer, Cant. 4.16. and
see how those two arguings will stand together; and yet both come forth o^ the
same mouth. Was her desire of Christ then so great? and is her love to Christ
now so cold? Would she then have Christ to come (and calls him her beloved, the
beloved of h^^ soul) and will she not now watch for him one hour? but has laid
by her Coat of watchfulness, as though she never looked for him, or cared for
his company? yea, will no^ gird on her Coat of watchfulness, now where Christ
stands at the door? but her coat is off and shall not be put on again that
night. May not the Spouse be ashamed to own such an argument as this? was it
not her sin to lay aside her watch, when she had begged Christ's company? and
will she excuse one sin with another? excuse her present sloth with her
unwatchfulness? Might she not have more reasonably argued thus? I may put on my
Coat with shame enough, since my beloved Husband has found me in this careless
posture, and wretched regardlesness of his coming, when I have so earnestly
prayed for it. And thus the Argument would conclude against her, and be no
excuse for her. But again, I have laid by my watch, how shall I take it up
again? what, is the Devil, and all the Enemies of thy soul asleep? Is not the
night the time when Thieves walk about, and seek their opportunity to break
through and steal? And is this the time to lay aside all fear and watchfulness,
and to compose thy self for rest? Is the time of spiritual war and danger over?
Or rather, art not thou in greatest danger, when Christ has set thee upon thy
watch, and himself is absent from thee? Some such thoughts surely thou had,
when thou so earnestly prayed for his company. Art thou not ashamed to have the
Captain of thy Salvation to find thee off from thy watch, in such a dangerous
time? And will thou think to excuse this thy sin and fault, by telling him that
it is impossible for thee to put on thy coats, and stand to thy watch, now when
he is come? Oh unreasonable arguing! Oh shameful excuse! It is a wonder that
thou do not blush at the shamefulness and unreasonableness of thine own
arguing, and that thine own Conscience and sense of guilt does not retort back
thine own argument against thy self.

And truly the second part of her excuse is no better, but in some respects
worse: I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? The washing of the feet
in those hot Countries, was to supple them, and clear them from dust and sweat,
in order to rest and refreshment; that they might the better take their ease
being weary. So that her argument runs thus: I have been exceeding weary with
working and laboring all day, and now have laid aside all my work; and on
purpose and design, that I might take the more full and quiet rest, I have
washed my feet, and am composing my self for rest: and therefore it is
unreasonable to call me out of bed now to defile my feet. Let us a little weigh
the argument, and you shall see, how instead of making for her as an excuse, it
makes strongly against her. Is Christ's work so wearisome and irksome, that she
is now so weary of it, that she must purposely and designedly lay it aside? was
it not her sin to be weary of well-doing? And is she now so bold and daring in
sin, as to plead this as an argument to prove Christ unreasonable in calling
her to her work again? Does Christ say, Blessed are they that at his coming he
shall find so doing? And may not she be ashamed to be found idle, and that
upon deliberate thoughts? She cannot say that this sluggish fit was a surprise,
and that she was overtaken against her will: for she deliberated about it,
designed it, and in order to her more quiet rest, had washed her feet; and
therefore may be ashamed of it, since her work is not finished and perfected.
Much more may she be ashamed to plead this as an argument of Christ's
unreasonableness in calling. She might indeed be ashamed to let Christ come in
and see how little work she had done; but little reason to complain of her
weariness with doing Christ's work. But this is not all; for her refusal is
most shameless, in that she accounts it a defiling of her feet to arise and
open to Christ. And is this so? That which she calls a washing of her feet, in
reason might rather be accounted a defiling them, than her rising to open to
Christ; that was her sin, but this is her duty. That she might be ashamed of,
but this she need not. The dirt of affliction, and difficulty in duty, may
easily be wiped off; but the filth of sin is not so easily washed off: nothing
but the blood of Christ can cleanse from this, and she must open and let him
in, before this can be done. And therefore, if she had understood what she had
said, she might have been ashamed of such an argument as this; but that persons
shame at nothing that may carry the least color of excuse; when they are
mindful to do any thing, they will abuse, and miscal, and misrepresent things.
Wilful sloth and sluggish security, laying aside our watch and the work of
Christ, must be called and nicknamed a putting off our coats, and washing our
feet: whereas if this be washing the feet, I know not what is defiling them.
What horrible blindness is there in sinners, to cast that upon Christ and his
work, which he may (with greater force and shame to us) cast back in our faces!
And yet this was the Spouse her excuse, the unreasonableness whereof we do here
see. Oh! should Christ have given himself to ease, and composed himself for
rest, when he was about the work of our Redemption, tugging and toiling at it,
till he swet drops of blood and water; yea till his hearts blood was spent, and
poured upon the ground as water: and should he then have pleaded this argument
that here she pleads to him; I have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I
have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? I am well enough, and at rest in
the bosom of my Father, solacing my self in the enjoyment of him, and reposing
my self in his eternal Love: how can I leave this, and defile my self with the
rags of humane nature, and load my back with the burden of humane sins: and
though I be the King of Glory, yet endure the contradiction of sinners against
my self, and take upon m^ the form of a servant, and become obedient unto the
Law: and all to do sinful rebellio^^ man a courtesy and kindness, to bring him
out of that misery, which he could never ri^ himself of, but must have sunk and
perishe^ under, to all eternity: and nothing but just, because he had wilfully,
by his own sin, plunged himself into this gulf of misery. If (I say) Christ
should have thus pleaded, when he was about the work of our Redemption, and our
necessity called for his help, or we were undone for ever; what had become of
us? And yet we are not ashamed to plead such unreasonable excuses, when he
calls upon us to open to him. Surely, such unkind requital of Christ's kindness
to us, and such unreasonable excuses for our own laziness and sloth, may
highly provoke and disoblige him, and prove of very dangerous consequence to
us. The like may be said of those excuses made Luke 14. and indeed of all
excuses that the flesh can make against our opening to Christ at his call;
because there can be no reason given why we should keep Christ out of his own
house (our hearts) since he has so dearly bought and paid for them. But by
what has been said already, in this case, you may see the unreasonableness of
keeping Christ out of our hearts, when he calls for admission: which may be
sufficient to ^rove that it may be of dangerous consequence, and therefore I
shall no further enlarge upon this head.

9. I might draw an argument a facto, and argue ab esse ad posse; such a thing
was, and therefore it may be. It proved of very sad consequence to the Spouse
here to keep out Christ. He in a discontent withdrew, and departed, and left
her in a very sad condition; both in respect of her inward guilt, for giving
him such an unkind, ungrateful, and irrational answer; and also in respect of
the pains which she was glad to take before she found him again: before, it
would defile her feet to come over the house-floor to open to her beloved, and
was too hard and unreasonable a work for her to do; but now she follows him,
and calls after him, through the mity streets and highways, and never
complains of wearyness, nor the foulness of the way; but would be glad to find
him whatever it cost her, or whatever she endured. And being of such
consequence to her, why may it not be so to us? nay certainly it will be so, if
we, as she, refuse to open to him at his call. But I have exceeded my first
intentions, in enlarging upon the former particulars; and therefore shall speak
no more to this. The Doctrine being sufficiently proved, by what has been
already said.

And so I come at last to make Application, and the 1 Use shall be by way of
Instruction, or Information.

Is it of such dangerous consequence to be sluggish and secure, when Christ
calls? Then hence learn,

1. That it will be of blessed consequence to be watchful, and in a readiness
to open when Christ knocks and calls. Our Savior tells us, Matthew. 24.46, 47.
Blessed is that Servant, whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing --
He shall make him ruler over all his goods. And therefore by the same argument
he advises us to watchfulness, and that without weariness, or giving over till
he come, Luke 12.35, 36, 37, 38. Let your loins be girded about, and your
lights burning: and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their Lord when
he will return from the wedding, that when he comes and knocks, they may
open to him immediately. Blessed are those servants, whom when the Lord comes
shall find watching: Verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. And if he
shall come in the second watch, or in the third watch, and find them so,
blessed are those servants. Mark, that at whatsoever time he come, if he find
them about their watch, and at their work, they shall be blessed. But that I
may clear this a little further, that they are thus blessed, consider with me
these few particulars.

1. Consider the satisfaction that it will be to a gracious heart, to be at
home, and at his work, or on his watch, when Christ calls. I an intimate Friend
do but call at our door we account it an happiness that he found (...) within.
How much more will a gracious soul account it an happiness, that his beloved
Jesus, at his coming, found him within, in readiness and preparedness to give
him the best entertainment that he had? Especially considering these three
things.

1. The duty which we owe to Christ, to be always upon our watch, Matthew. 25.13.
Watch, for ye know neither the day nor the how when your Lord will come. which
shows that it is the will and command of Christ, that we should always watch
till Christ do come. Oh! says the Soul, this is my duty, never to sleep or be
secure, but always to be watching: what an happy chance was it, that I was upon
my watch when my Lord and Master came and that he found me so doing, found me
it my duty. Surely he will take this well at my hand, and I shall be blessed.

2. Considering our preparedness to receive him. He that looks for a Friend,
will have every thing in readyness against he come, to make his friend welcome.
So will a gracious Soul that expects Christ his coming, will have every thing
in a readiness for his welcome entertainment, and account it his happiness that
he had so. It will be wonderful satisfaction to the Soul, to have Christ come,
when she is in a readiness and preparedness for his entertainment.

3. Consider the Souls earnest looking for Christ his coming. When we expect a
friend coming, and have taken a great deal of pains to prepare, and make ready,
for his entertainment, and have all things in readiness; we stand at the door
and watch, and begin to think him long, and ready to think every one that comes
to the door to be our friend: when our friend does come, we are very glad, and
bid him heartily welcome, and tell him we began to think him long, and were
afraid lest any business should have prevented his coming, and therefore are
very glad to see him come, and account our selves happy that our expectation is
fulfilled. So is it with the Soul that is in this waiting posture for Christ. O
my dear Savior! says she, I thought it long that thou had been absent from
me; I gave thee an earnest invitation, being earnestly desirous of thy company,
and sensible how greatly I stood in need of it: I endeavored to prepare and
make ready for thy entertainment, and having done that, I began to think thee
long, every hour has seemed ten to me that thou have delayed: and I have
waited in hope of thy coming, and yet not without fear, lest something or other
should prevent thy coming. But thy stay so long has quickened my desire, and
now I am more abundantly glad that thou art come, by how much thy stay made me
afraid that thou would not come. O welcome, welcome, my long looked-for dear
Savior, thy coming makes amends for my long waiting: now I think my labor and
patience well bestowed; come in, my dearly beloved! for all things are in
readiness, and prepared for thy entertainment. Thus the Soul accounts her self
happy that Christ came thus seasonably, and that she was thus fitted and in a
ready posture for his reception and entertainment.

2. That they are blessed whom Christ finds in this posture will appear, if we
consider the great satisfaction that Christ will take at his coming, to find
us in a watchful, expecting, and prepared posture. This posture will so
wonderfully please Jesus Christ, that instead of sitting down, and being
attended and served by us, He will make us to sit down, and will come forth,
and gird himself and serve us. Luke 12.37. We shall be the Guest, and he will
be the Servitour. The satisfaction which this will be to Christ, may appear in
three things.

1. Finding us in this posture, he takes himself to be welcome. If at our
coming to our friends house, we find not only the door open, the house
dressed, and all in order; but we find our friend in the door waiting and
earnestly looking for us, thinking our tarrying long, we may reasonably
conclude we shall be surely welcome, now we are come. So when Christ finds the
Heart prepared, and the Spouse in the door watching, or looking in the way
wherein she expects to see him coming; he may thence conclude, that he is a
welcome guest to that soul. Surely, says Christ, I shall now be a welcome
guest to my Spouse, now she is so earnestly waiting and looking for me. And
this pleases Christ more than all the varieties that she can possibly prepare
for him. For alas! she is but poor, has no rich entertainment for him, but
only such as is of his own sending and preparing, and therefore welcome is
likely to be his best fare, and all that she can give him; and therefore Christ
expects no great matters from her, but to have the door open, and himself made
welcome when he comes. And where he finds this, he is so well pleased, that he
will suffer no want of any thing needful to be while he stays. He will be at
the charges of the Feast, and of the dressing of it too And therefore we read,
Cant. 5.1. that he not only eats, but gathers his fruits himself. I have
gathered my myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey, etc.

2. Finding us in this posture, he may expect that we are at leisure from other
company and business to entertain him with our company. Christ loves not to
come when his Spouse is in the throng, or crowd of worldly company and
business; for then he shall have no time of private conference and discourse
with her, which is the main of his business; and therefore in this case both he
and she would lose the benefit and sweetness of the opportunity. Friends
account that time lost that they cannot enjoy one another, though they be
together all the while. If by throng of company they cannot have their
discourse and conference, which they designed in their meeting, they account
their time lost: and are ready to say, What an unhappy thing was it that we met
at such a season as this, and that thus we were interrupted in our discourse?
The more intimate that friends are, the more private matter of discourse they
have, and the less they care to be interrupted with company. None more intimate
than Christ and his Spouse, an^ having matter of private conference with her
does not care to come at such a time when she has a crowd of other company
about her, but when she is alone. And therefore when he comes, if she be not
alone, he will endeavor to take her apart by her self, and then his discourse
will be most heeded, and have most effectual influence upon her. Therefore we
read, Hos. 2.14. I will allure her, (says God) and bring her into the
wilderness, and there will speak comfortably unto her, or speak to her heart,
as the word signifies. Now when Christ finds the Soul waiting and looking for
him, all alone, either in her door, or in the highway, he may well conclude, I
come seasonably, for yonder is my Spouse all alone, free from cumber and other
business, waiting for my coming, and therefore I may expect her company. And
this abundantly pleases him; for it is her company he chiefly comes for.
Christ cares not to come when the Soul is crowded with the Flesh and the World:
He desires her company alone, and is best pleased when he finds it so.

3. Finding us in a posture of Watchfulness, our clothes on, and our loins
girt, he may reasonably suppose us not to be in a drowzy and sluggish
condition; and that therefore his company will be pleasant, and not burdensome
to us, and his discourse will be better needed by us. When Sleep and
Sluggishness overtakes us, the company of our best Friends is but burdensome,
and their discourse but little regarded; we had rather have their room than
their company, their silence than their discourse, because we are desirous to
compose our selves for rest and sleep. So is it with the Spouse of Christ, when
she is in a sleepy and secure condition, his company is no whit pleasant, and
his discourse sinks but ear-deep, (if it do that) and therefore does little
good. Now Christ loves not to come and find his Spouse in such a posture as
this; but when he finds her watching, or busy at her spiritual work, in a
lively condition, Now (says he, my company will be acceptable, now in a lively
manner will she unbosome herself to me, tell me her whole state and condition:
and I shall as freely impart my counsels and comforts unto her. This therefore
is the condition that I desire to find her in; and finding her in this
condition, it yields abundant satisfaction to Christ. This therefore is a
blessed posture, wherein the Soul is in a posture to give Christ such abundant
satisfaction.

4. That they are thus blessed, that Christ at his coming finds upon their
watch will appear if we consider the honors and benefits which he will confer
upon them. He will commend and praise them, he will give them honorable
titles, Well done good and faithful servants; he will give them bountiful
rewards and a sumptuous feast, and he himself will come forth and serve them:
all which is sufficiently evident from what has been said before, and
therefore needs no further enlargement.

2. Hence we may learn the reason of the damnable and desperate condition of
many Sinners; and the mournful, drooping, and seeking condition of many Saints.
It is not because Christ seldom comes abroad and knocks at the doors of their
hearts; but because when he comes, he finds such unready admission and
entertainmet. If the question be asked, whence it is that so many sinners
perish everlastingly, and that under Gospel Light? The answer must be, not
because he never calls or knocks at their doors, but because they will not open
and let him in. Our Savior tells us the reason, John 3.19. This is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men love darkness rather
than light. So Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, -- how often would I have gathered
thee, as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings? but ye would not. So
also, Prove. 1.24, etc. Because I called, and ye refused -- But ye set at naught
all my counsels, and would none of my reproofs: I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes. How often does Christ knock and call
by his Word, by his Rod, by his Messengers, by the impulses of his Spirit, and
convictions of Conscience? and yet sinners are in a deep sleep of Security, and
will not open to him. This is the ground of their condemnation.

Again, if it be asked why we see so many Christians walking in darkness, and
seeing no light, enquiring (as here the Spouse did) Saw ye him whom my soul
loves? If ye see him, tell him that I am sick of love. I have sought him, but
cannot find him; I have called him, but he gives me no answer. If it be asked,
what is the reason why it is thus with many Believers? It may be answered,
there is cause for it, they have given Christ some unkind answer: he has
called, but they have not heard, or heeded. He has knocked, and they have not
opened. And therefore he will make them sensible of their affront and
unhandsome carriage, before they shall find him again.

3. Hence also we may learn what a gross cheat the Devil and our own Hearts
have put upon us, and the great danger we have many of us been in, by our
refusing to open to Christ at his knocks and calls. A greater cheat the Devil
could not put upon us; nor greater danger can we possibly be in, than to be
persuaded by him to refuse, or delay, to open to Christ. And yet how ordinary
is it for the Devil and carnal Reason to put this cheat upon us! and by being
so often and so long cheated, what dreadful and tremendous danger have we many
of us brought our selves into! Christ has called and called again and again,
by his Word, and Providence; by his Mercies, and Judgments; by his Spirit,
and our own Consciences: and yet from time to time, to this very day, we have
put him off with frivolous and vain excuses, and have not fully opened the door
of our Hearts to him. Christ has pressed us so far with arguments, (and those
convincing and startling ones, and of all sorts) so that we could not deny but
this has been the voice of Christ, insomuch that he may say, What could I have
done or said more than I have done? And yet what cold entertainment has he
found at our doors? May he not justly complain of us, as of Israel of old,
Isai. 53.1. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord
made bare? It would make a man to tremble to think at the loud knocks and calls
that God has given to sinners in these Nations, and yet to this day has been
shut out! few have sincerely received him into their Hearts! nay, may it not be
truly said as is complained John 1.11. He came to his own, and his own
received him not! Many that have made a large profession of the Name of Christ,
that yet have not truly received him into their hearts. Nay, may not Christ
say, I am near in their Mouth, but far from their Reins? Nay, are there not
many that (we hope) are truly the Spouse of Christ, and have many a time
prayed for the breathings of his Spirit, and his comfortable presence, and yet
at his coming have shut him out? and yet, where are there any but they have
their plausible excuses? though if they were all examined, they would prove as
unreasonable as this in the Text. But these we shall make further inquiry into
under another Use: only here let us take notice what an horrible cheat the
Devil and carnal Reason have hereby put upon us; and what a sad and dreadful
condition we have hereby brought our selves into. Which will undeniably appear,
if we consider,

1. What, and who those pretended Friends and Lovers are that we have
entertained in our hearts, while we have shut out Christ, and refused to open
at his call. Shall I tell you 1, what, and 2, who they are?

1. What they are. The Lovers which we have doted upon, and entertained in our
hearts while Christ has been kept out, they are first, False and flattering
Lovers. They do not love us really and cordially, though they make great show
and pretense of love. There is none that loves so really as Jesus Christ does.
His love was toward us while we were Enemies to him, and did him much
disservice; but these only love us while we please and gratify them. Do but
cross the Devil, the World, or Flesh, and you shall find they will hate you,
and manifest themselves your Enemies. Christ's love is pure love, without any
by-ends: but the love of these is only a pretended love for their own ends,
and the carrying on of their own designs. His love is a love indeed; and he
has by what he has done and suffered for us, in real and great deeds,
manifested the reality of his love: but their love is merely verbal and
complemental, promising much, but performing little or nothing of what they
promise. His love is chiefly manifested in adversity, in straights, in
distresses, when all others frown upon us, and we have now hither to betake our
selves but to him: but their love is only in prosperity, and when we have the
least need of them: For if ever we really stand in need of them (as at death
and at Judgment) then they will be the furthest off from helping us, of
affording any relief: nay then they will appear to be our enemies, and the
first that shall set themselves against us: And are these friends to be trusted,
and to be kept in our hearts, when Jesus Christ must be shut out? How do we
suffer our selves to be miserably deluded by these errand cheats?

2. These Lovers and pretended Friends, they are unprofitable Lovers and
Friends. Let them afford the best help they can, they can afford no such
benefit and advantage as Jesus Christ can and does. The Wiseman speaking of
worldly things says, Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is
not? Riches certainly make themselves wings, and fly, as an eagle toward
Heaven: There is no securing or holding fast these things. When the Devil would
have tempted our Savior to worship him, Matthew. 4. he shows him all the
Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them; and faith, All these will I give
thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. And yet this was not in his power
to give. But suppose these were in his power to give, and that he would be as
good as his word, and really give them; yet, What would it profit a man to gain
the whole world, and loose his own soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul? But suppose he would persuade you, that you might gain the one
and save the other: yet the Apostle tells us the contrary, 1 John 2.15. If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And I am sure, if the
love of God be not in him, he cannot save his soul: For the Apostle says, If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. and If
we love not him that is begotten, we cannot love him that begets; for the
Father and the Son are one: and therefore there is no real profit to be got by
them, but are great losers, and therefore in hearkening unto them we are
miserably cheated.

3. They are very uncomfortable Friends, if compared with Christ. They pretend
Mirth, and Pleasure, and Delight, but even in the midst of mirth the heart is
sad: no real mirth or cheerfulness can they give. But he that has but once
tasted how good and pleasant Christ's company is, he may truly say, he never
met with such a good, and cheerful, and comfortable Friend in all his life; he
may say with the Spouse, I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was pleasant to my taste. There is none of these pretended friends,
but there is much sowreness, harshness, and unpleasantness to be found in them:
but of Jesus Christ it may be said, He is altogether lovely; his very yoke is
easy, and his burden light: there is comfort in his very Cross; in his company
a Believer may sing at midnight in a prison, with his feet fast in the stocks:
but as for the pleasures of sin, they are but short, and they always end in
pain. What Paul said of sin in respect of profit, Romans 6.21. What profit had ye
in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? So may I say, What pleasure can
you take in those pretended friends, whose company will certainly end both in
shame and pain?

4. Their design is destructive. Whatever they may pretend, and however they
may flatter thee, and promise rest, and sleep, and quietness, it is but that
they may destroy thee, and that to all eternity. They are but suchlike friends
to thee as Dalilah was to Sampson; if she cause him to sleep upon her lap, it
is but that she may cut his Locks, and deliver him weak into the hand of his
enemy to torment him. If they cry Peace, peace unto thee, and lull thee asleep
in security, it is but that they may bind thee (with the Devils) in chains of
darkness, to be reserved to the Judgment of the great Day. Are these therefore
friends to be trusted? Who while they flatter thee, purposely design thy
destruction, and aim at nothing more than the ruin both of thy Soul and Body.
Oh how do persons suffer themselves to be cheated, by the flattering pretenses
of false friends, but real enemies! and in the mean while keep out Jesus Christ
out of their hearts, who would be a friend indeed. Thus you see what those are
that are entertained in the heart, while Jesus Christ is shut out. But

2. Let us see who these are, that do thus cheat us. I will in short tell thee
who they are (though by the marks which I have already given of them, thou
may easily guess who they are.) They are the three grand Enemies of thy
Soul. The Devil, the World, and the Flesh: These are they, that thou (taking
them for thy friends, and welcome guests into thy heart) art cheated by.
Enemies they are, and the greatest, and most inveterate, implacable, malicious,
and unmercyful Enemies that thou have. Yea, besides them thou have not such
Enemies in all the world; and yet these do thou receive for thy
bosome-friends: and that while thou shuttest out him that is the best and
surest friend that thou have in the world, that has done more for thee than
all the world besides. What Joab said to David when he mourned so exc^ssively
for Absalom, that may I truly say to thee: By this I perceive that thou love
thine Enemies, and hate thy Friends. For if these false, dissembling, and
rebellious Absaloms might but live, and be thy companions, thou matterest not
though Jesus Christ be starved to death at the door of thine heart. Oh wretched
cruelty! and misguided, blindfolded affection! that will thus be cheated from
time to time by the flatteries of them that seek thy life! and these must needs
be they that keep possession in thy heart; for none but these (who have ever
been mortal Enemies to Jesus Christ) would give thee counsel to keep Christ out
of thy heart. To be sure, God would not give thee this advice; for he loves and
is ever well pleased with his Son, and would have him seated in the Royal
Throne of thy Heart. Yea, he is reconciling the world unto himself by Jesus
Christ. He has appointed thy reception and entertainment of Jesus Christ as
the only way to happiness.

Surely it is not Christ that counsels thee thus; for it is he that stands
knocking at the door of thy Heart for entrance and admission. It is not the
Spirit of God, for he is also the Spirit of Christ, and is sent upon his
errand, to persuade thee to open to Christ: yea, he is heartily grieved, when
thou resistest these motions of his. And if Christ may not come in, he will not
long stay there himself striving with thee. It cannot be thy Conscience, for
that is a faithful witness and admonisher, and will speak truly when it may be
heard: and the counsel it gives is according to the will of God, whose
vicegerent it is, and whose authority it bears in the Soul; and therefore it
can be no other that gives thee this counsel, but those Enemies before
mentioned, Satan, the World, and the Flesh; for the counsel is like them, and
rightly fathers it self: and what folly is it thus to be cheated by such
Enemies to thy Soul as these are, and that from time to time?

2. The greatness of this cheat, and the wrong which we sustein by it will
appear, if we consider the advantage which these our Enemies have got, by our
harkening unto them, and suffering our selves to be cheated by them thus long.
I shall only mention these three advantages they have got, by persuading thee
to keep thy heart shut against Christ. Advantages they are to them and their
designs; but most fearful wrongs to thee, and to thy Soul.

1. They have occasioned thee to commit many a sin, which might have been
prevented if thou had long since opened to Christ at his call. I do not here
speak of thy great sin in refusing to open at Christ's call, which is every
time renewed and repeated, when thou refusest to open, whatever thine excuse be
Nor do I speak of the sins that are couched and included in the
unreasonableness of thy excuses, though these be neither few nor little But I
speak of that sinful frame of heart and course of life, that thou leadest and
live it while Jesus Christ is kept out of thy Soul. Reflect upon thy self,
and consider how long it is since Christ gave thee the first call, and consider
what course of life thou have led since how many wilful and known sins thou
has committed, one upon the back of another yea the same sins many a time over
and over again: these sins, all of them, might have been prevented, and many of
them (doubtless) had been prevented, if thou had opened to Christ at his
first call. If thou had suffered him to have come in, he would have changed
the habit, frame, bent, and inclination of thy heart, and course of thy life
and conversation he would have set thee about his work, and kept thee employed
in his business, that thou should not have had time or leisure to have
hearkened to Satan's temptations. It is Satan finding us idle, that mostly gives
advantage to his temptations. Christ would have put his Spirit within thee,
that should have helped thee against temptations, and would have purified thy
heart by faith. His grace should have been sufficient for thee, and his
strength made perfect in thy weakness: He would have kept that thy foot should
not have slidden, who is the Keeper of Israel, that neither slumbers nor
sleeps. He would have armed thee with the whole Armor of God, whereby thou
might have resisted and repelled, or quenched all the fiery darts of the
wicked. He would have renewed thee with daily renewed strength in thy Soul.
Yea, He would have kept thee by his almighty power, through faith, unto
salvation. Thou had not therefore had so many ghastly sins, to have reflected
and looked back upon with a trembling heart, and griping conscience, with
horror and consternation, as now thou have. If there were no more but this
consideration, (methinks) it might be sufficient to silence all excuses, and
cavils of carnal reason, and make the soul afraid of ever refusing to open
when Christ calls; and might fully convince us of the grand cheat and
irreparable wrong which our enemies have put upon us, by persuading us not to
open to Jesus Christ.

2. Consider the high affront and provocation which we have given to Jesus
Christ, by keeping him out so long. He has called again and again, and was
desirous to come in, but we would not: He has stood knocking till his head was
filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, and yet could get
nothing from us but frivolous and vain excuses. And what do we think will be
the issue of all this? Will his patience never be worn out? Will his wrath
never be kindled in his breast? Will the stirrings of his Spirit never have
end? Will the day of Grace never have a night? Will he never swear in his
wrath, that thou shall not enter into his rest? Tremble, O fond man! to think
at those things. It has been of dangerous and dreadful consequence, thus to
deny him admission: He has thereupon withdrawn himself and departed, and
sometimes never returned again. But if he have been found, it has been after
long, weary, and tedious seeking of him. And why may he not do so again? Nay
certainly, he will do so. And therefore the wrong and cheat which the Devil,
the World and the Flesh have put upon thee, is an unsufferable wrong, which
they can never make thee amends for; let them therefore cheat thee no longer.

3. Consider that every knock and call that Christ gives, and we refuse, does
lock the door of the heart faster against Christ, than it was locked before: so
that if ever Christ get in, he must give fiercer knocks and louder calls than
ever he did before; he must take some other course with thee, than ever he has
yet taken. Therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another while it
is called to day, lest any of you be hardened through the deceitsness of sin.
Sin deceitfully and insensibly hardens the heart, and by degrees cauterizeth or
fears the heart and conscience, that it grows brawny and past feeling: and
then Christ may call and call again, and to little purpose; and therefore it is
unspeakable wrong which thine enemies have already done thee; and it would be
wrong past recovery, if they should go on to cheat thee still.

Use 2. Is it of such dangerous consequence to be sluggish, secure, and
sloathful, when Christ knocks and calls, especially when his coming is in
answer to our Prayers? Then this may afford matter of enquiry and examination,
to enquire how the case stands between Christ and our Souls, at this day. We
profess our selves to be the Spouse of Christ; and if so, it is very probable
(...) he does now and then visit us, and comes to the door of our hearts. We
profess to be a candlestick in Christ's right hand; and if so, it is likely he
walks sometimes in the midst of the golden candlesticks. We profess to be the
Church and People of God; and if Christ has not intimacy and familiarity with,
and gives frequent visits to his Church, where can Christ be expected to be
found? We have the Worship and Ordinances of Christ, and his Name recorded
among us: and he has said, that where he records his name, there he will meet
his people, and bless them. We are under his special care and providence, about
whom he is in a special manner concerned: And therefore it concerns us to know
how we stand in his favor. And as this is the state of the Church in general,
so is it the state of every particular Member, and is the concern of every one
of us to know how matters stand between Christ and our Souls: Whether we be in
his favor, and have his pleasant company; or whether he have turned his back,
withdrawn himself, and be gone away from us in a discontent, because he has
knocked and called, and we have not opened unto him. And it concerns us the
rather to make this enquiry, because the Providence of God for some time have
been, and still are considerable toward us: and the Providence of God seem to
be near some period. Some great work or other God seems to have upon the Wheel
in the Christian world; which e're long may possibly be brought to light. And
such times of God's remarkable working, are usually trying, and shaking times.
To be sure, it is a blessed thing at such a time to be in Christ his favor,
and under his wing.

In the prosecution of this Use there are two things to be enquired into. 1.
Whether Christ have not, and do not at this day eminently knock and call. 2.
What entertainment Christ finds, and what answer we have made.

1. Let us enquire whether Christ have not, and do not at this day eminently
knock and call. Is not the voice of our beloved to be heard at the doors of our
Hearts, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my und^filed; for my
head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops of the night? We have told
you in the opening of the Doctrine, that though there be no passage of God's
providence exercised toward us, but it has something of a call from Christ in
it: yet there are some special times, wherein Jesus Christ does in a more
especial manner knock and call, requiring entrance and admission. How we might
know those times, I have endeavored there to show. It is not my business here
to assign new times of Christ's eminent calling, but by reflecting upon those,
to make enquiry whether the case be not ours: And whether, according to those
signs and marks of an eminent call, Christ do not at this day eminently knock
and call upon us to open unto him. What I have to say upon this head, I shall
sum up into these nine or ten Queries: And by them we may come to understand
how the case stands with us.

1. Has not Christ of late days eminently called, and at this day does
eminently call by his Mercies? The more largely God's hand is opened in Mercies
and Bounty unto a person or people, the more loud is his call to them to open
to him in a way of duty. God expects from us according to the Talents which he
bestows upon us. If he bestow five, he expects that we should gain other five.
In bestowing of Mercies, God does not desiredly cast them away, but expects
that he should be served with his own. The more he loads us with blessings and
benefits, the more reasonably may he expect that we should abound in ^^^^y. The
more of any good thing that God bestows, the more good he looks that they
should do with it. The Psalmist makes use of God's bountiful dealing to be an
argument to his Soul to return unto his rest, Psalm. 116.7. Christ is the rest
of the Soul, as well as he that gives rest unto the Soul, Matthew. 11.28. Come
unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls. that is, ye shall find rest in me, as well as rest by me. For in
me ye shall have peace, John 16.33. And if this be an argument to return to our
rest, because God has dealt bountifully with us, surely Christ calls loud to
us, to return to our rest. His bountiful dealing toward us, of late time, and
at this day, is eminent and remarkable: For he has compassed us about with his
mercies, and laden us with his blessings and benefits. The great Peace, the
abundant Plenty that God affords, are very considerable, if we consider the
broils that are abroad in the world, and the scarcity that has so lately
threatened us. How has God prevented our fears! been better to us than our
hopes! done great and wonderful things for us beyond expectation! We may not
unfitly apply that saying of Moses to our selves in respect of God's
providential care over us, and kindness to us, Deuteronomy. 11.11, 12. The land
whether ye go to possess it is -- a land which the Lord thy God cares for: the
eyes of the Lord thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year,
even unto the end of the year. Gods goodness in this respect has been
wonderful, even to admiration, especially if we consider the use that we have
made of all these mercies; which has been no better than what God complains of
Israel, that they made of his mercies, Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and
kicked -- Then he forsook God that made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of
his salvation. Now that God should deal thus bountifully with us, when we make
such returns as these, is wonderful, and certainly calls for other fruit from
us, than hitherto we have brought forth. But if besides these common or general
mercies which God has bestowed upon us in common with others, we consider the
particular mercies which every one of us in particular have received, we shall
find that they have not been inconsiderable, but remarkable. Have we not at
one time or other met with considerable preservations, protections, successes
in our undertakings, when it has fared far otherwise with our neighbors? Have
not every one our particular mercies to take notice of? as health, when others
have been sick; life, when others have been cut off out of the Land of the
Living; Liberty, when others have been under restraint: Preservations from
dangers which we have been obnoxious unto: Deliverances out of evils into which
we have fallen. It were endless to enumerate the various ways wherein and
whereby God has been eminently good and gracious unto us. But if we will but
seriously reflect upon Gods bounties toward us, we may be able to give a better
account of them, than any other person can dictate to us. Yea, we may observe
more heightening circumstances in them than others can. For many times the
circumstances of time and place, and our present conditions, do wonderfully
exalt and magnify mercies. May one say, I was sick, and in danger of death,
when others did die; in what a condition had I been, if I had died then! very
unprepared for death and another world: had never seriously considered my
latter end; had got no assurance of Heaven, nor indeed taken much pains about
it. If I had gone then, I know not whither I must have gone, nor what must have
become of me. May another say, My house and family were preserved, when my
neighbors was consumed in unmerciful flames. If such a thing had befallen me
at that time, (in all probability) I had been ruined in mine outward estate,
and my self and family exposed to the mercy of others. May another say, I was
in such and such a distress and affliction, and so involved therein, that I
could see no way of escaping; but the time of my necessity was God's
opportunity, and When I said my foot slippeth, then the Lord he held me up:
when I was at a loss in my self, Had viewed and looked on the right hand and
left, and could see no help nor hope, then the Lord put under everlasting arms,
and saved me. These and such like circumstances make mercies to be eminent,
when they are guided by an unseen hand beyond expectation: the more signal and
eminent these mercies are, and the more of the special providential hand of God
that may be seen in them, the more loud are the knocks and calls upon us to
duty, and to answer Gods end in them. And which of us can say but in the course
of our lives we have met with such as these, many and many a time? if so, they
have been calls from Christ; and the more eminent they have been, the more loud
has been the call.

2. Has not God loudly called by his Judgments? Judgments upon others round
about us, which have loudly called upon us to hear, and fear, and do no more so
wickedly, lest a worse thing happen unto us. Have we not seen or heard of some
that have been taken away in a very terrible manner, in the very act of
sinning, and (possibly) we as guilty of suchlike sin, as they? How may this
make us to tremble, and be a warning unto us! Has not the hand of God reached
us in our persons; relations, estates, houses, trades, callings, and the like?
And these have not only been common ordinary Providence, but we might in them
see something eminently of the finger of God pointing at us? Some aggravating
circumstances or other have made them more remarkable to us, than otherwise
they would have been. It may be, consider them in themselves, they have only
been common calamities, as Letters come to the Town by the hand of the common
Post, or Carrier: but they have been directed to them with some particular
message, and have intimated so much to thee, by the circumstances of them; this
has been a special call to thee from Christ. And doubtless, we have most of us
had such calls as these, if we have but observed and taken notice of them; and
if we have not, the greater has been our fault and our sin. If we do but look
through the Nation, as the Mercies have been great that God has undeservedly
bestowed upon us; so the Judgments that have befallen us, have not only been
various, but very remarkable, such as the hand of God has been eminently seen
in, howsoever they have been handed to us by wicked instruments: I need not to
enumerate them, they are obvious to every observant eye. But what do these
intimate and call for from us? Surely the rod of God has a voice; and he that
does not willingly grieve and afflict the children of men, does not these
things to us, but there is considerable cause for it. When God dealt so with
his people of old, we may read what cause God had for it. And certain I am,
that the blindest among us cannot but see cause enough, from the hand of God,
for all that is come upon us. Only here is the misery, that every one seeks to
excuse himself, and to lay the blame at some ones door else: and so takes no
notice of Gods particular call to him. I would desire here to set before you,
and desire the serious Reader to peruse Gods threatenings to Israel of old, and
the causes there assigned, and see how far they may concern us: read
Deuteronom. 28.15. to the end. And as for those that would lay the blame upon
others, and excuse themselves, I shall only recommend to them that dreadful
caution and intimation of Gods mind, Deuteronomy. 29.18, 19, 20. It is but too common
among us to promise our selves peace, and drink away our fears; but this will
prove in the end, an unpardonable aggravation of our sin. If we would but take
the pains to search the Scriptures, and take a view of such Judgments as God
has inflicted upon Nations, Families and Persons, and consider the sins that
have been the procuring cause of them, for which they have been sent; we should
need no Prophet to read us our destiny, nor any Expositor to show us the sins
that God points at in the evils which we labor under; nor should we, any of
us, find cause to excuse our selves. Sure I am, the voice of God in his
Judgments is eminent; and by the circuits of them, in that they meet with one
sort of men after another, and spare few or none, they plainly show the cause
to be general. And by the complication of them, and their surrounding of us,
and hemming us in on every hand, they manifest the greater displeasure, and
more unavoidable danger hanging over our heads: and therefore the voice and
call is very loud, and must either be quickly hearkened to, or else Christ may
withdraw, the decree may bring forth, and there will be no remedy. I would
seriously recommend to your perusal, that one dreadful Chapter, Isai. 24, and
desire that your thoughts and meditations may dwell a little upon every verse,
as you go along, and you will not need me to direct you how to apply it; our
present conditions, and the passages of Gods Providence will sufficiently
exemplify it. And therefore assuredly, the call of God is somewhat more than
ordinary at this day: and none of us can say, but that God speaks something
more than ordinary unto us. And know, that they which think themselves least
concerned in this call, may come to find themselves most concerned at last. I
will direct such to one Text of Scripture, which calls for their serious
observation, Isai. 28. throughout. When God's Judgments come for sin, our
Refuge of lies, and Covenant with Death and Hell, will but little avail us. But
I pass from this, which is sufficiently evident to be a loud call from Christ,
to a

3. Particular, by way of enquiry. Does not God eminently call, by the great
liberty and plenty of the Gospel, which undeservedly to this day we do enjoy?
There is a notable saying, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He has showed his word to Jacob,
his statutes and his judgments to Israel: he has not dealt so with any
nation, etc. And may not I apply this very pertinently to these Nations? for
what Nation under Heaven has enjoyed the Gospel more plentifully, more
plainly, more clearly, and for a longer time, than we have done? The doctrine
of the Gospel has not been more clearly taught in any Nation under Heaven,
than in this our British Island. No Nation has had more eminently burning and
shining lights: and many we enjoy at this day. Never Nation was better
instructed in the mind and will of Christ; (if we do not wilfully shut our
eyes against this light) so that other Nations are glad of the crumbs that fall
from our table, insomuch that we may truly say with the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.3,
4. If our gospel be hid it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the God of
this world has blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of
the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.
And does Christ thus stand knocking and calling to this day? surely his long
patience has made his call the louder, and to be the same with that, Psalm.
95.7, 8. To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts: especially
considering how emphatically, and (to our case) pertinently the Apostle applies
it, Heb. 4.7. Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in David, To day, after
so long a time, as it is said, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts. The night is far spent, and the day is at hand; it becomes not us
then (who have slighted Christ's call so long, and at whose door he has waited
so patiently) to linger any longer, but speedily to arise, and open to him,
lest (his patience being worn out) he should depart in a discontent.

4. Does not God at this day quicken his Ministers by his Spirit? and make his
Ambassadors, in a more than ordinary manner, importunate with us to open to
Christ? Do not the faithful Ministers of Christ (laying aside all
circumstantial and lesser matters) bend themselves chiefly, if not only and
wholly, to the main work of calling home sinners unto Christ; and to all to
open, and open more fully, and truly, and cordially to Christ? Is there not a
more than ordinary Spirit resting upon the Prophets, quickening and exciting
them to this work; insomuch, that they are very urgent and importunate, and
will take no denial, no excuse from sinners? but cry and cry aloud, call and
call again, We beseech you in the name of Christ to open to him, and be ye
reconciled to God? Does not God make Ministers more warm, more zealous, more
importunate in their work? So that (notwithstanding all the discouragements
they meet with, and the repulses which you give) they will take no denial, but
renew their suit? And if one subject will not work, they take another? if one
argument will not prevail, they make use of another? leave no stone, no
subject, unturned, unspoken to, that they can imagine may prevail with you?
What bespeaks all this earnestness and industry, but that Christ calls now in
good earnest upon you? for we are able to do nothing without him. It is he that
directs us to our subjects, and puts a word into our mouths. It is he that
enlarges our meditations, blesses our studies, and warmeth the word upon our
hearts. It is he that touches our Lips with a Coal from his Altar, and helps
us to deliver our message in the evidence and demonstration of the truth, and
of power. And all this is for your sakes, that the call might be more
convincing and effectual upon you. And therefore if you find a more than
ordinary spirit upon the Prophets at this day, you may conclude it is a more
than ordinary call. And therefore apply that to your selves which the Apostle
speaks, Acts 17.30. However Christ might wink at former ignorance, or neglect,
yet now (by way of eminency) he commands every man every where to repent.

5. Does not Christ eminently knock and call at the door of thy heart, by
secret impulses of his Spirit, and convictions of thy own Conscience? Does not
the word of God sometimes come within thy bosom, and not only prove a general
word spoken to all, but brings some special message to thee, and says to thee
as Nathan did to David, Thou art the man; or as Wisdom to the simple ones,
Prove. 1.22, 23. How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity, and the
scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? turn ye at my reproof,
etc. May we not say that God is not wholly departed out of his Ordinances? but
that yet he walks in the midst of his Golden Candlesticks? that his Spirit is
yet striving with us? and that yet he has compassion of his heritage? and is
loath to leave his dwelling place? Is there not now and then a secret word
whispered in your ear, that this word comes from Heaven, and is sent a
particular message to you? Are not you ready to think within your selves
sometimes, How comes the Minister to know my case so particularly, and to speak
to those things that none knows, but God and mine own Conscience? Why, you must
know, that this is God that speaks to you by us. It is he that sends us unto
you, and puts words in our mouths, and tells us what to say to you: He who
knows the secrets of all Hearts: directs us what to speak; and he by his Spirit
opens your ear to hear, and to take notice of what is spoken. And he by his
Spirit convinces your Consciences that you are the persons to whom it is
spoken. And therefore when it is thus with you, you may assuredly know that
this a special knock and call from Christ. May there not be the same inward
working in your Hearts, while this word is sounding in your ears, or
represented to your eyes in reading of it, that was in the Disciples going to
Emaus, while Christ talked with them and opened the Scriptures, Luke 24.32. Did
not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us? etc. Have you not some
secret motions, gripings, and prickings at the heart, under this or other
ordinance? this is the voice of Christ, saying, Open to me, etc. and the more
sensible and piercing these are, the more loud is Christ's call.

6. Are there no fears upon the hearts of God's people, lest Christ his stay at
our doors should not be long? Are there no signs and symptoms of Christ's
weariness and readiness to depart, seen and taken notice of? Is there not a
general fear upon the Spirits of most men, lest the Gospel should be ready to
be removed? what ground and cause men have for those fears from second causes,
I say nothing; but that there is such a fear (however it comes to pass, or what
it is grounded upon) is evident: and I am sure this cannot be without the hand
of God. This fear is an evil of affliction, it disquiets and troubles the
spirits of men; and therefore must needs proceed from the hand of God. For the
Prophet tells us, Amos 3.6. That there is no evil in the City but the Lord does
it. This negative interrogation being a more vehement affirmation. And if
Christ should not wholly depart, and take away his Gospel, yet his particular
cal^s by inward convictions and strivings of his Spirit may not last long; as
he gives you a day, so he will give you but a day; and then he will swear in
his wrath that ye shall never enter into his rest. How much of this day may be
spent, you may better guess than any one can tell you, knowing how long he has
called and waited: how clear and full convictions have been, and how they are
now: how hot the Gospel has shined, and how cool it is now; and the shadows of
the evening stretched out. And if this be gone, what will it advantage you to
have the Gospel continued? It will be but for your hardening, and the sealing
you up to everlasting destruction. Isaiah was a powerful Preacher, and yet you
see what a message God sent him to Israe^* Isai. 6.9, 10. It is a very
uncomfortable message to a faithful Minister of Christ, to be sent upon this
errand; but yet it is the message that God sends them to many an one with: and
if this be our message to you, it will be sad. However, we must go what message
our Master sends us; and if it be sad to us, it will be ten thousand times more
dreadful to you. Only our earnest desire is, that you might know, at least, in
this your day, the things that belong to your everlasting peace, before they be
hidden from your eyes. And these general fears are a loud call to delay or
linger no longer, but open to Christ.

7. Are not all these Calls, by Gospel-Ordidinances, in answer to your Prayers?
Here I speak to you that do pray: For I am not ignorant, that there are a
generation of prayerless souls in the world, and I wish they were not so great
a number. There are but too many Families that call not upon the name of God:
which the Prophet prays that God would pour his wrath upon, Jer. 10.25. and
dreadful will the wrath of God be when it comes. But I speak here to those that
do pray. Has it not been your Prayer, that God would return into his resting
place, he, and the ark of his strength? Have not you prayed, Arise, O
northwinde, and come thou south, and breath upon my garden? Let my beloved come
into his garden. Have not you prayed, that you might see and meet with God, as
sometimes you have done in his Sanctuary? That you might sit down under his
shadow with great delight, and his fruit might be pleasant to your taste? Have
not you sighed and breathed out your requests to Christ, saying, Tell me, Oh
thou whom my soul loves! where thou feedest, and where thou causest thy flocks
to rest at noon? etc. Oh that I might enjoy powerful Ordinances! and meet with
the power and presence of Christ in them! that mine eyes might see my teachers,
and mine ears hear a voice behind me, saying, This is the way, walk in it!
Suchlike Prayers as these you have been ever and anon putting up; and in
answer to these your Prayers, Christ is come, and stands knocking and calling,
Open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, and my undefiled. Those calls of
Christ, which are according to your real desires, and in answer to your
Prayers, must needs be eminent and remarkable.

8. Are not you the professed Spouse of Christ, that have professedly given up
your selves by a solemn Marriage-Covenant unto Christ; engaged and swore that
you will be his, and at his service? What deeper obligation can you lay upon
your selves, than you have done? In your Baptism and renewed covenanting at the
Lords Table, and by solemn Vows and Covenants upon several occasions: So that
none in the world can be more solemnly engaged to open to Christ than you are.
And in regard you expect his coming every hour, does it not stand you upon, to
be always upon your Watchtower, waiting when your Lord will come, that you may
presently open to him? And now when he both knocks and calls, is not this a
sufficient summons to you, to open and let him in? Every call of an Husband
(especially such an one as Christ is) should have so much weight in it, as to
command the obedience of the Wise. And therefore (if not to others, yet) to
you, this call should be sufficiently eminent and remarkable; or else your
Husband may charge you with disloyalty and breach of covenant.

9. Did ever Christ use more earnest entreaties, and sweet compellations, than
he does at this day? Does he not say (as to the Spouse) Open to me, my Sister,
my Love, my Dove, my undefiled? Do not the sweet expressions of his love, in
suffering, bleeding, dying for you, speak thus much? Does not the sweet voice,
and loving entreaties of Christ by his Word and Messengers, speak this
language? Does not his constant care about you, and providential kindness unto
you, in every respect, and according to what your hearts could wish, bespeak
you in this loving manner? Do not all these lay that Christ speaks like a most
sweet, loving, tender, and kind-hearted Husband to you? Open to me, my Sister,
etc. and surely these soft words might break the bone, and force open the doors
of our heart, without any del^^. I am sure Christ has manifested as much love,
and dealt with as much tenderness toward us, as ever he did toward a people.
And therefore his calls are loud enough to be heard.

10. Is not his head filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night?

If we take these words in a good sense, that he comes fully fraught and
furnished with all fullness and plenitude of blessings and benefits that our
Souls can desire, or stand in need of; I appeal to any of your souls that ever
did open to, and let in the Lord Jesus Christ, whether ever you found any want
in him, or were straightened in him? whether he brought not more comfort and
benefit with him, than ever you were able to contain, though you opened your
mouths never so wide? Has he not fully answered, and over-answered your most
enlarged expectations? so that you might have eaten and drunken far more
abundantly, if you had been able to contain it? Every hair of his head has a
drop of some kind of refreshment hanging at it, which you might be welcome to.
And therefore his call is loud enough, when he tells you what he has brought
with him.

But take the argument in a bad sense, for the sufferings and afflictions of
Christ; and they are a loud call. Has not Christ suffered enough in his
humiliation, in making way to receive you into favor with God, and into
covenant with himself; but you must put him to new pain and trouble, by making
him to stand waiting, and dancing attendance at your door, while you are
snorting and stretching your self upon your bed of ease and security? Was not
his once offering up himself a Sacrifice for sin, sufficient, but you must
crucify him afresh, and put him to new pain, by your slothful and sluggish
delays, and unreasonable excuses? Does not Christ suffer enough in his Name and
Honor from wicked blasphemous wretches, who rend and tear his very Name,
wilfully reject him, and will not have this man to rule over them; but must he
also be slighted and undervalued by you? must he suffer in his Ministers by the
revilings, evil-speakings, and persecutions that they endure in and from the
world? and is not this sufficient, but their Hearts also must be made sad by
your refusal to open to Christ? The weight of this Argument makes this call to
be very loud, and especially at this day, under the circumstances that we now
are. And therefore I desire it may be seriously considered.

By these enquiries we may see, that the call of Christ at this day is very
eminent and remarkable; and therefore it concerns us to enquire, what answer we
make to this call; Whether we have done, and really do open to this call, or
no: which is the

2. Enquiry which we proposed to make: and I beseech you let us be serious in
it. It is a matter that greatly concerns us, since Christ his calls are so
eminent, and his stay has been so long at the door of our Hearts. What answer
have we made to the calls of Christ? have we heartily, sincerely, and readily
opened the doors of our Hearts, that the King of glory might enter in? But
alas! if we deal faithfully in the examination of our own Hearts, and in the
account which we give in this case, it is to be feared, that Christ has had no
better (if so good) an answer from us, than he had here from his Spouse: As
will appear, if our hearts make but true and faithful answer to these following
Queries.

1. If we have truly opened to Christ, how comes it to pass that convictions
are so ineffectual and fruitless as they are at this day? We find in the
course of our Ministry the word of God sometimes working by way of conviction.
Persons are convinced by the word that they are the persons so and so guilty,
are a little startled and affrighted; are pricked at the heart, their
Consciences smite them, and tell them as Nathan did David, Thou art the man, to
whom this reproof comes, that art thus and thus guilty of sin, art in a state
of nature and unregeneracy, in the gall of bitterness and bonds of iniquity;
and that if thou die in this estate, thou art undone for ever: That there is
no way, or course left to avoid this, but by opening to Jesus Christ, repenting
of, and forsaking thy sin, turning to God with all the heart, and taking up a
new course of life. Fleeing unto Christ alone for justification, in a sense of
thine own utter unworthyness. Entering into covenant with him, taking him for
thy Prophet, Priest, and King; giving up thy self unto him, in all humble,
hearty, and sincere submission to his will, and obedience to all his commands.
This the word dictates, and Conscience sets in with it, and seconds it: And to
make up the conviction more full, the Spirit of God comes in, and tells thee,
that this condition thou art in, is not to be rested in, thou must either turn,
or die: To day if thou will hear the voice of God, then harden not thy heart;
ere long it will be too late, thy Sun will be set, thy day of grace over, and
these things will be hid from thine eyes. Hereupon thy Conscience is startled,
and thou beginnest to think with thy self what thou must do; and (it may be)
have some sudden earnest motions, purposes, and resolutions to turn, and to
break off from thine old ways and courses, to become a new creature. But alas!
how suddenly are all these vanished and gone again, and thou fallest fast
asleep again in security? Convictions wear off, Affections cool, Fears abate,
Sin looks not so terrible, thine own estate and condition not to dreadful and
hopeless, Death not so near the flames of Hell not so hot and scorching; and so
the wook is laid aside and left undone, and thou returnest with the dog to the
vomit, and the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. Or, (at most,
if these continue still) thou go with an inward griping wounded Conscience,
and do not really come out of thy self, unto Christ, for healing, Christ is
little store set by, or sought after, but thou patchest up a Plaster for thy
wounded Conscience of some pitiful, poor, and imperfect righteousness of thine
own, take up some small formal Profession of Religion: and thus stoppest the
clamours of thy Conscience, and Christ is shut out, and stands without still.

Nay, may I not say of some, that instead o^ opening to Chrst, they are hardened
in their sins, and grown Sermon-proof? the Word o^ God affects them not, takes
not hold upon them, as sometimes it has done; but the^ with less pain and
torture of Conscience ca^ turn off reproofs than formerly they could have done,
and sit more quietly and undistu^bedly under Ordinances: and that not becau^^
they are in a better condition than formerly (for they are the same both in
heart and life that they were before) but because their hearts are more
hardened, and their consciences more brawny, and their souls more sluggish and
senseless than they were before. Is this thy opening to Christ? Is this the
entertainment which Christ finds, when his head is filled with dew, and his
locks with the drops of the night? Oh consider this before it be too late,
before Christ be withdrawn and gone! We have a sad complaint which God makes
against Ephraim, Hos. 6.4, etc. O Ephraim! what shall I do unto thee? -- For
your goodness is as a morning-cloud, and as an early dew it passes away. A
morning-Cloud seems to promise rain, but as the Sun arises it vanishes away;
an early Dew seems to moisten and refresh the earth, but when the Sun comes to
be hot, the dew is quickly gone, and the grass scorcheth so much the more: so
was their goodness very vanishing and unconstant. They seemed to take notice of
Gods words, to be affected with them, and to promise and purpose amendment; but
alas, their promises and purposes quickly vanished and came to nothing,
according to what you find Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. Has it not been too much
your case? Under convictions you have seemed to promise God fair things, and
there has been some hopes of your conversion and change: But no sooner has
the heat of conviction been over, but all these things have quickly vanished
away, and come to nothing. Is this the entertainment that Christ has found?
Blame him not then, if he depart, and make you seek him before you find him.

But further; since it is the Spouse of Christ that is here spoken of, let me
carry on this Query about Conviction a little further: You who really are
Believers, and have entered into covenant with Christ, and stand in a
Covenant Relation to Christ: Have you opened to the calls of Christ? Has there
not been many strong convictions upon your spirits in many particular cases,
wherein you have been faulty, and your Consciences have smitten you? and yet
for all this, you have stifled these convictions, and have not opened to
Christ: you have many times been convinced of your Pride, Worldly-mindedness,
Vanity and Unsavoriness, Sloth, and Luke-warmness, Backwardness to Duty,
Deadness in Duty, Unbelief, and distrust of God, and of his Care and
Providence, and such like things; and yet your hearts have not been willing
fully to open to Christ in these things, and to let conviction have its perfect
work in order to your reformation: you have heard the Word, and known your
selves to be guilty of such things as the Word has reproved; Conscience has
spoken, and the Spirit of God has spoken, and yet you have not hearkened to the
counsel and dictates thereof, but have turned a deaf ear, and gone on in your
sin still. Is this your opening to him who is the wonderful Counselor, who is
your Lord and Husband, and whose commands should have influence upon you? Oh my
friends! we may all sadly complain, that in this respect we have all of us made
excuses, and kept Christ out of our hearts.

2. If the door be not shut against Christ, how comes it to pass that the
Ordinances of Christ are so little prized, so little store set by at this day?
We told you in the opening of the Doctrine, that one way of Christ his calling
was by his Ordinances. In and by them he convinces of and reproves sin;
directs in, and encourages unto duty; communicates grace, affords his company,
gives in nourishment, refreshment, strength, and comfort unto the hungry
panting Soul. These are the Wells of Salvation, and Waters of the Sanctuary,
that are for the refreshing the City of our God. Where these therefore are
slighted, Christ must necessarily be shut out, and not opened to. We have the
Spouse, Cant. 1.7, 8. enquiring where she may meet her beloved. And he tells
her, she may find him in his Ordinances, and in the assembly of his Saints:
there he records his Name, and there he meets his people and blesses them. And
therefore they that carelessly turn their backs upon the Ordinances of Christ,
turn their backs upon, and shut the door of their Hearts against him. Persons
may, and often do, frequent the Ordinances of Christ, and yet keep the door of
their Hearts fast shut against Christ: But they are utterly out of the way of
opening to Christ, yea, out of the ordinary way of Christ's call, that turn
their backs upon his Ordinances. Greater contempt cannot persons pour upon
Christ, than to despise and set light by the Ordinances of Christ, which he
has instituted as means for the enjoyment of him. And if this be so, how
ordinarily is Christ shut out! We complain of the deadness of Trade, and what a
low rate all kind of commodities carry: but I am sure Christ's trade is very
low; the commodities which Christ offers in the market of his Ordinances
(though very rich and costly in themselves, yet) are at a very low rate in the
esteem of most men. O how slight an occasion will keep persons back from the
Ordinances of Christ! If any worldly business be to be done, persons think it
unreasonable to be moved to leave that, and to attend the Ordinances of Christ;
as the Spouse here thought it unreasonable to move her to leave her warm bed,
to come to open to Christ. O how many will rise more early, travel further, and
take more pains for an earthly bargain, than to meet with Christ in his
Ordinances! these must only be attended at leisure-times, when men have
nothing else to do. If the Ordinances of Christ lose men an hour in their
shops, or a single bargain (if but to the value of a shilling) in their trades,
they think Christ bids them loss, if he move them to leave their worldly
business and attend upon him. Many value Christ and his company at a lower rate
than thirty pieces. Some (again) can spare time to attend Ordinances, but if it
must cost them any thing, these Ordinances must be forborne. In many places; and
with many persons, he is the best Minister that will be hired at the cheapest
rate, though his preaching be little to the purpose; though he seldom disturb
them with any considerable calls from Christ. Others, though they do frequent
Ordinances, yet, not as the Ordinances of Christ, which bind Conscience, but
as indifferent things, that may be done, or left undone, without any guilt or
blame: And therefore they make little matter of rushing out of the world and
worldly business into an Ordinance, altogether unprepared, and uncomposed, but
their thoughts and hearts are full of the world as may be: and as little matter
of running into the world again so soon as ever the Ordinance is ended, without
allowing themselves the least time to meditate, or beg God's blessing upon what
they have been partakers of. Is this your opening to Christ at his call? I am
very confident this is not the least reason of persons unfruitfulness under
Ordinances at this day, because the Ordinances are not conscientiously
attended. Nor do persons allow themselves time in meditation and prayer that
the Ordinance might have its soaking influence upon them. By this means, Sirs,
you do too ordinarily, if not constantly, shut out Christ. This low esteem that
the Ordinances of Christ have among us, does sufficiently manifest that our
hearts are not rightly open to Christ. It was far otherwise with the Spouse,
Cant. 2.3. She sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was
pleasant to her taste. But these have scarce time, and less minds to sit down
at all, but are in a running posture, as if Christ's bounties were not worth
the staying for.

3. If the heart be open to Christ, whence is it, that persons are so cold,
formal, and indifferent, both in their profession, practices and performances?
Surely if Christ were let in, the heart would be more warm and lively, Grace
would be more active in us than it is at this day. We read, Cantic. 5.5. that
when Christ put but in his finger by the hole of the door, though the door was
not fully opened to him, yet he left such a warming, perfuming virtue behind
him, as set the Spouse her Graces afloat; she can rest no longer in her bed,
but arises, her bowels yern toward him; and before she get the door open, her
fingers drop with myrrh; there will be a sensible alteration of the humors
(to speak so) a change of the frame and disposition of Grace in the heart where
Christ comes, and meets with ready entertainment. The Souls sleepy fit will be
over when Christ comes in, and her Graces will fall to their work; Faith will
be strongly active, Love will be inflamed, Thankfulness will be increased,
Obedience will be more exact, and universal Repentance more deep and serious,
the heart wholly and zealously engaged for Christ, when the door of the heart
is truly opened to Christ. But oh, how far otherwise is it with us! something
of the carcass of Religion, and the form of Godliness, an external profession
of the Name of Christ is left; but little of the life, and zeal, and warmth and
power of Religion left! In former days, when Christ was eminently seen in his
Ordinances, and Believers hearts were more freely and fully open to him, we see
what holy, heavenly, zealous, universally circumspect Christians were then to
be found; what wonderful works did manifest themselves in them, and were done
by them. But where have we almost any Christians of the old stamp and strain
left! Now adays we have much talking of Religion; but little holy, strict, and
exemplary walking in the ways of God, in all holy Conversation and Godliness.
Sure I am, there is a vast difference between Christians in former days, and
those that now live. Then they were humble, holy, blameless in all manner of
conversation, zealous for Gods glory, lively, spiritual and heavenly in their
Duties, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; fervent in love toward God and
the Brethren, and that not in word only, but in deed and in truth: such as
might easily be distinguished from the generality of the world. But now, how
many professors of Religion are there, who are Proud, covetous, sensual,
compliers with the fashions and customs of the world, envious, malicious,
backbiters, slanderers, having only a form of godliness, very curious about
circumstances, very careless about the substance and practical part of
Religion? This shows, that though we carry the name of Christ in our foreheads,
yet Jesus Christ is too much kept out of our hearts.

4. If the heart be open to Christ, how comes it to pass that the world has so
great a share and interest there? Surely where Christ comes, he gains the
heart, and the whole bent of the Soul is after him: Nothing more earnestly
desired, or diligently sought for than Christ. Rachels language to Jacob, upon
better grounds, and with far better reason, is the language of a gracious heart
to God: Give me Children or I die. So says the Soul, Give me Christ, or I die:
I can no longer be without him: I languish and pine away for want of him. If I
may have but one wish or request in all the world, it shall be this: That God
would bestow Christ upon me, that I may not only have an interest in him, and
title or claim to him; but that I may have his company, and communion with him;
may live in the light of his count^nance, always beholding his most lovely
face, hearing his most pleasant voice, and tasting of his most Royal dainties.
The breathings of a gracious heart toward Christ are the same (for reality,
though not for degree) that Christ his breathings are toward her, Cant. 2.14.
O my dove! -- Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice: for sweet is
thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. It was thus with David, Psalm. 27.4,
etc. If he might but have one request, it should be, that he might dwell in the
house of the Lord, and that for this end, that he might behold the beauty of
the Lord, and enquire in his Temple: and whatever became of other things, this
(as the main) would he seek after. But alas! is it not far otherwise with us in
these days? and that among those that profess love to Christ! if we look what
most men are busy about, what takes up most of their thoughts, what their
discourse is most about in all companies, what they spend most time in, and
weary themselves in the prosecution of from day to day: shall we not find it
rather to be the World, than Christ? I will not say, (as is said of the wicked)
That God is not in all their thoughts: but this may be too truly said of many;
that their most frequent, pleasant, and abiding thoughts are about the world.
These lie down with them; these rise up; these go out and come in with them, as
if these were their only business. Does this argue that these Hearts are open
to Christ? where the door is open, a man may enter in without obstruction: But
here it is an hard matter for a serious thought of Christ to get crowded in: If
it come to the door, it gets no further; has little or no admission into the
heart and affections: no abiding there. We read in Scripture of many very gross
sins that the servants of God (for some time) have been overcome by: but I do
not remember any (mentioned in Scripture) that were sincere, that were overcome
with the love of the World. Demas (indeed) is said to embrace this present
World; but whether this be to be understood of his total apostasy from the
faith, or only his deserting his public work or station, the Scripture leaves
us in the dark, and leaves this brand of infamy and disgrace upon him. We know
what the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They that will be rich, fall into
temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown
men in destruction and perdition; for the love of money is the root of all
evil: which while some coveted after, they have erred from the faith, and
pierced themselves through with many sorrows. And the Apostle John tells us, 1
John 2.15. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Evidently manifesting, that there is not room for Christ and the World to dwell
in the same heart. Christ himself tells us that we cannot serve God and Mammon.
These two contrary Masters will be encroaching upon each other, and imposing
their contradictory commands. So that from hence I conclude, that where the
world has a great share in the heart and affections, there Christ's interest is
but small, and the door of our hearts not sufficiently opened to him. I am
afraid that at the great day, when all hearts shall be tried and made
manifest, there will be many a man found, who prayed for Christ, had a desire
of him, yea and hoped that he had an interest in him, and a love for him; and
yet through the prevalency of the world, never truly opened his heart to
Christ. Examine your hearts therefore how the case stands with you. If Christ
be there, and opened to as he should be; how comes his mortal enemy, the world,
to have such an interest in you? and to bear so much sway with you? If your
hearts were opened to Christ, the world would be more despised, and Christ's
company would be more delightful, and more store set by.

5. And lastly. If the door of our hearts be open to Christ by faith, How comes
it to pass that there are so few fruits of Faith to be seen? There is no
question to be made, but where Christ the Sun of righteousness shines into the
Soul, the door of the heart being opened by Faith, but that it will be
Summer-tide with that Soul; Grace will bud, blossom, and bear fruit. And if all
other Graces be fruitful, why not Faith? If Faith therefore be fruitful where
the Heart is opened to Christ, it concerns us to examine what fruits of Faith
we find in our selves. For as Faith has a large root or foundation (having
the whole Word of God for its object, upon which it acts, and from which at all
times it fetches direction) so it has a large office and work in the soul;
its work being to purify both heart and life. Acts 15.9. Purifying their
hearts by faith. Therefore the Apostle James tells us, that Faith without works
is dead being alone. I may well compare Faith to a large and frugiferous tree,
whose root or foundation is the whole Word of God, recorded in the whole body
of Scripture. The ground or seat of Faith is the heart, (the commanding power
of the soul) the body or trunk of this tree, is the habit or principle of Faith
infused into us, and nourished in us by the Spirit of God. The several branches
of this tree spreading themselves every way, are the several emanations or
flowings forth of Faith, guided and directed by the several parts of Gods word.
The fruits of Faith are the several particular actings of the whole man, guided
by Faith according to the direction of Gods Word. Now where the ground of the
heart is made warm by the presence and influential beams of the Sun of
righteousness (being opened unto Christ at his coming) the tree of Faith must
needs flourish, and drawing in fresh supply of sap from the rock of truth,
which being digested in our hearts by Faith, must needs bring forth suitable
and proportionable fruit of all kinds in our lives and conversations. If
therefore thy heart be open to Christ by Faith, Where then are the fruits,
effects, actings and flowings forth of Faith in all the parts and passages of
thy life and conversation? Where is thy dependence upon, and embracing of his
Promises, relying upon his All Sufficiency? Where is thy universal obedience to
his commands, discharging duty in every part and condition of life, living by
and acting according to the rule of Gods Word, in every thing thou go about,
leaving the issue, success and event of all thy business and concerns to God,
to his care and faithfulness? Where is thy constant watch against the
deceitfulness of thy Heart, the temptations of Satan, the allurements and
enticements of the World? and thy faithful resistance of all Temptations? thy
deep repentance for, and faithful mortification of all sin, so far as
discovered by the Word? Where is thy sincere, cordial, constant, universal
obedience to the Word of God, making that thy Rule in all thine Actions;
squaring thy whole life and conversation, both in respect of God, thy self, and
thy Neighbor, according thereunto; giving every Duty, in thy general and
particular calling, its due time, place, and respect? Not allowing the world to
ingross to it self what properly and peculiarly belongs to God, his Worship and
Service; and putting off God with such homage and service as might better fit,
and were more proper for our worldly concernments? My meaning is, our
inverting, or going (in the course of our lives) directly contrary to that
command or advice of our Savior, Matthew. 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God
and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added. In all that
we do in our general and particular places and callings, keeping God and his
interest above, and preferring it before the world.

If these be not the fruits of Faith, wherein thy Soul in some measure abounds,
never tell me that thy heart is rightly and truly open to Christ: but according
to the measure of thy unfruitfulness, remains (in measure and part at least)
shut against Christ, notwithstanding thy pretenses to open to him. How is it
with you then, friends? In what posture do you find your hearts? are they open
or shut? It is evident that Christ his calls have been very remarkable: but
what entertainment he has found in your hearts, that is the question that is
now put to your Consciences to make answer to. And I beseech you suffer your
Consciences to speak, and to speak out what they know and can tell you in this
case. Stifle them not, bribe them not, turn not the deaf ear to what they
speak: they are God's Deputies within you. And if these condemn you, know that
God is greater than your Hearts, and knows all things. You may deceive men, you
may deceive your selves; but God you cannot deceive. Christ knows what
entertainment he has found, and he will make you to know it one day also: and
therefore deal faithfully with your selves.

And if by these things which we have laid before you, we may try our selves,
this may lead many of us (at least) to another work, which may be a

3. Use. Here lies before us matter of deep humiliation, that so eminent and
remarkable calls of Christ as we have been partakers of, have been so little
regarded by us; that Jesus Christ (notwithstanding his earnestness and
importunity) has found such cold and poor entertainment in our hearts to this
very day. But this I will not much enlarge upon, because I would keep within
some convenient bounds. It is too obvious and apparent to be denied, that
notwithstanding our great profession of love to Christ, desire of him, and
frequent imploring his company by prayer; we have in too sad and shameful a
manner shut him out at his coming, though his calls have been visible and
convincing. How may we then tremble to think how this our behavior will be
resented by him! There are many that from what they behold in the world, are
astonished at the apprehension of the danger of Christ his withdrawing for a
time, if not total departure. But from what usage Christ has found in our
hearts, without looking any further abroad, we may find sufficient cause of
fear and trembling. I am very confident, that by that time all reckonings and
accounts be cast up, (if Christ do depart) not the least part of the cause of
his departure will be found among his own professing people: Such as have
called upon his Name, cried after him, and professed themselves earnestly
desirous of his company: and yet, when (in answer to their prayers) he has
come, have not heartily and fully opened unto him. Mistake me not, I do not
here mean by these persons of whom I am speaking, only Hypocrites, and such as
make only an external profession of Religion; (though there be too many of
these in the World) but also sincere believers, who have the root of the
matter, the truth of grace within them, and shall (notwithstanding all their
blemishes) be found at Christ's right hand, at the day of Judgment; that yet
have too sadly shut out Christ when he has come and called in answer to their
prayers. Think not this impossible; for in my Text it is the Spouse, the Bride
of Christ, that thus unkindly treated him when he stood at her door. And it is
to be feared he has found no better entertainment from us. What cause then
have we to fear and tremble lest Christ should deal with us here as he did with
the Spouse! and therefore with all humility and brokenness of heart, to confess
and bewail, and (for time to come) resolve against this unworthy, ungrateful,
and undutiful behavior toward our Lord and Husband. But I pass from this to a
(...)

4. Use, viz. of Exhortation, to beseech you all in the name and fear of God to
open to the calls and knocks of Christ, laying aside all excuses whatsoever. O!
let Christ have your hearts, let him have warm and welcome entertainment there.
Do I need here to use Arguments? or summon in the Topics of Rhetoric to
quicken and persuade you to embrace this reasonable motion? or if I should use
all the arguments I could invent, or that I might collect from the mouths and
pens of other men, would these be of any force with you, if Christ his own
words and arguments cannot prevail? can I in this case, or any man breathing,
say more for Christ than he can and does speak for himself? And therefore if
Christ cannot, how shall I think to prevail with you? If either friendly
compellations, earnest entreaties, or strong arguments may prevail, none of
these are wanting in the Text; which I have been endeavoring (according to my
power and weak ability) to unfold unto you in this whole Discourse; to which I
shall refer you, and shall not here repeat the same things over again; only
beg your serious meditation upon them: And considering their weight and
importance, see whether they may not preponderate and outweigh all arguments
that your carnal deceitful Hearts, a subtle Devil, and an alluring whorish
World can bring against this duty. Only give me leave in a few words to
expostulate the case a little with you. And here let me ask you

1. How or what manner of lives you think to live without Christ, and without
his company in your hearts? Seriously meditate upon this, before you give an
answer. Do you think to live to more profit and advantage to your selves
without than with Christ? Is Christ no gain and advantage to your Souls? will
he bring no profit and advantage with him? is not his head filled with dew, and
his locks with the drops of the night? Has not he the command and dispose of
all things? and has not he promised to give grace and glory, and to withhold
no good thing? Psalm. 84.11. and does not he assure us that he that spared not
his Son, but delivered him up for us all, will also with him give us all
things, that may be good for us? Romans 8.32. Do you think to live more to your
own pleasure, contentment, or comfort? Is it not in his presence that there is
fullness of joy, and at his right hand that there are pleasures for evermore?
Psalm. 16.11. Is it not in him alone that the Soul and Conscience can have true
peace and a calm? and that when nothing but storms and tempests are without?
read John 16.33. Tell me who but Christ can put your Soul into David's frame of
Spirit, when in David's condition? Psalm. 63. banished, hunted, persecuted, in
the Wilderness, destitute of maintenance, friends, a resting place, Ordinances;
every hour in jeopardy of his life; and yet his Soul filled as with marrow and
fatness in the company and enjoyment of God: there could he sing and give
^raise. In such a condition also was he when he penned Psalm 57. and yet his
heart was fixed to sing and give praise. If you think you can ^ive more
profitably or more pleasantly without Christ, in worldly and sinful ways and
courses, let me desire you to take a view of your time, carriages, and manner
of life that that is by past: And let me ask you the same question that the
Apostle does, Romans 6.21. What fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye
are now ashamed? This I will assure you, that either in respect of profit,
pleasure, honor or comfort, no company is like to Christ's. Oh! therefore let
not him stand without, while worse company is entertained in your hearts. What
is the reason why Christians hearts are so full of guilt, doubts, fears, and
dissatisfactions of every kind? but for want of the company and presence of
Christ. If this Sun of righteousness did but with healing under his wings arise
upon, and shine into our hearts; he would quickly dispel and scatter all those
midnight fogs and terrors, that do so disturb and disquiet us, and render our
lives so uncomfortable.

2. Suppose that you could live well enough without Christ, while you live in
this world: Let me ask you what you will do, or how you will make up your
accounts at Death and Judgment without him? You know that It is appointed to
all men once to die, and after death the judgment. You know also, that we must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ: for God has appointed a day,
wherein he will judge the world by Jesus Christ, Acts 17.31. and that in that
day, We must give him account of all that we have done in the flesh, whether
good or evil, whether secret or open, whether in thought, word, or deed: there
then we cannot avoid the meeting with Christ; how then do you think that Christ
the Judge will look upon you, at that day, who have so slightly looked upon
him, when he stood knocking at the door of your hearts? Read with seriousness
Prove. 1.24, to the end, Matthew. 25.11, 12. Oh! the countenance and looks of
Christ, which to you now is despicable, (but to the Saints lovely) will to you
then be most dreadful and terrible. Then will you cry to the mountains and
hills to fall on you, and to hide you from the presence of the Lord, and from
the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who is able
to abide it?

3. Let me further ask you, What is it that hinders you from opening to Christ
at present? Is it any thing that has the color or face of reason in it? If
not, why do you suffer it to hinder you? If it have, let us examine it, and see
what strength of reason may be in it.

I can but (at present) call to mind these Three great and main hindrances,
that keep men off from opening to Christ at his call.

1. The low and mean esteem which persons have of Christ's company, feasts and
banquets. The generality of the world are clearly for some sensible good thing:
Who will show us any good thing? Psalm. 4.6 Something that may yield them some
present advantage, that may advance their estate, their credit, pleasure or
honor; something that they may see with their eyes, or handle, or taste etc.
something that is obvious to sense: but as for invisible things, an interest in
Christ, in the Covenant of Grace, a future reward in another Life, only for the
present to be received and apprehended in the promise, these things are little
store set by. If Christ would give them of these worldly good things, then they
would set store by him. But if he tell them of spiritual Feasts, of a Treasure
in Heaven, of a Crown of Glory, and such like things, these are not much taking
with the generality, of the world. And therefore Christ his Feasts Company and
Benefits, being spiritual, are little store set by, by carnal hearts; and when
they are called upon to open to him, they make light of it, as not judging him
worth the opening to. But that this is a great mistake, I might easily
demonstrate, for we have little reason to have so low an esteem and value of
Christ his Benefits and Banquets, if we do but rightly understand our selves.
We will suppose a man to have all that the world can afford him, both in
respect of profit, pleasure, and honor, and yet want true peace of conscience,
true comfort in his Soul; can these things give him this, without Christ? But
where a Soul has Christ, he may have peace in his own Soul and Conscience, in
the absence of these worldly enjoyments. David in a wilderness, Paul and Silas
in a dungeon, with their feet fast in the stocks, their stripes and wounds
unwashed, can sing praises to God with a merry and cheerful heart. Nay, my
Friends! it is impossible for me to express that quietness and serenity of
Spirit, that abundant peace of Conscience, Joy of heart, contentation and
satisfaction which a Believer enjoys in the company of and communion with
Christ: therefore it is called a Peace which passes all understanding, Phil.
4.7. It is called A Joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8. It is not
what a man has, but what gives true Peace, Satisfaction and contentment to the
Soul, that makes a man happy; and this none but Christ can do: And therefore
his company and banquets must needs be not so despicable as many men account
them. But alas! it is their ignorance, and want of experience; would they but
be persuaded to open to Christ, and make trial of the excellency of his
company, and rarity of his banquets, they would have a more venerable esteem
for Christ than now they have.

2. Another grand hindrance that keeps us off from opening to Christ, is the
urgency of other business. When Christ comes and calls, persons are so crowded
with other business, that they cannot be at leisure to open to him, or give him
any entertainment. Men are generally got plunged so deep in the cares and
cumbers of the World, that they have no leisure to open to Christ: no nor so
much as to weigh the arguments and motives that Christ makes use of to procure
admission into their hearts. Oh how busy are men in the world! head and heart,
hands and feet; yea whole soul and body as busily exercised about the world as
may be; and they think all this little enough too, they think they get little
enough by it; and how should these then have leisure to open to Christ? no
wonder though his calls be so ineffectual, when person (...) so deeply engaged
in the world, that (...) have not leisure to stand still and consider (...)
were best to be done, whether that which they are about, or some other thing.
We read in the parable of the Supper, when the Master sends forth his Servants
to invite guests, one man is busy with his Farm, another with his Merchandise;
but none of those which were bidden had leisure to come. And the reason was,
they saw a present necessity and urgency of the present business which they
were about, but they saw none so great and present need of Christ. Many in the
world are worse employed than Martha was, and yet think their time so well
spent in that which they are about, that they are loath to be taken off to wait
and attend upon Christ and his Ministry. Martha had invited the Lord Jesus to
her house, and with him many friends: and that which she was busy about, was,
to make ready provision for his entertainment; a business (one would think)
indispensible. And yet our Savior blames her for this, Luke 10.40, 41, 42. But
Martha was cumbered about much serving -- And Jesus answered and said, Martha,
Martha, thou art careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is
needful. And Mary has chosen that good part, which shall not be taken away
from her. How many are ^oth (...) employed than this! and yet have not (...) to
consider whether any thing be more necessary to be done, than what they are
about. To such as these I would speak these few words. You think your selves
well employed in your earnest and not pursuit of the world, the cares and
business that only relates to this present life, and you see nothing more
needful at present to be done. Let me ask you this question: Notwithstanding
the great business which you have to do in the world, do you not sometimes
find leisure to eat, drink, sleep, dress and adorn the body? You will say,
Yes, without these we could not live, nor have any strength to follow our
business. Well, will time be afforded for taking and feeding upon the meat that
perishes, and no time allowed for feeding upon that meat which endures to
everlasting life? Read John 6.27. Labor not for the meat which perishes, but
for that meat which endures to everlasting life. Has your Body more need of
Clothes to cover your nakedness, and keep your warm, than your Souls to be
clothed with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ as a Robe or Garment? If you did
but as really see how naked your Souls look in the sight of God, Angels, etc.
you would be as much ashamed of your selves, as you would now be to have men
see your Body naked. And therefore consider with your selves, whether there be
not as great need to take fit and convenient time for the feeding and clothing
your Souls, as there is for feeding and clothing your Bodies. And if there be
as great need, I pray you let not your precious Souls famish and starve, while
you so carefully pamper your Bodies, and that notwithstanding your great and
urgent business in the world. Again, you that are so earnest and busy about
the world, and have your time and thoughts so taken up about it, let me ask you
this one question more: Whether do you judge that your success in your worldly
affairs does principally flow from your own wisdom, care, and pains; or from
the blessing of God upon your endeavors? I believe that few or none of you
will be so audaciously impious as to affirm the former; (whatever you think)
but rather that your successive business does arise from the blessing of God
upon your endeavors. And if so, I pray you to consider upon what ground or
warrant you can expect the blessing of God upon your endeavors, when you
wilfully shut the door of your Hearts against his well beloved Son? and when
you make so light of him and his company, that every worldly trifle must take
place of him, and be preferred before him? Might not many of you succeed better
in your worldly business, if you would give Christ better entertainment in your
Hearts, and cumber your selves less about the world? Christ bids us, Matthew.
6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and the Righteousness thereof: and
promises that all other things shall be added. Intimating, that the best way
to secure a competency of this world to our selves, is in the first and chief
place to secure an interest in Christ for our Souls. We say, that he that would
drive on a Trade, must have interest and acquaintance. And I am sure we cannot
have interest in, nor acquaintance with a better friend than Christ; nor one
that can bestead us more in the carrying on of our worldly business: For It is
the blessing of the Lord that makes rich; and adds no sorrow therewith, Prove.
10.22. O spare some time therefore in the midst of your worldly business, to
open your hearts to Christ.

3. Another hinderance to our opening to Christ, may be the difficulty and
unpleasantness of the work, either in opening to Christ, or when we have opened
to him.

1. There is a difficulty in opening to Christ, which a lazy sluggish Soul is
hardly brought to grapple with and overcome. Faith and Love are the two
principal ways whereby the Soul is to open to Christ. And these are two Graces,
not without much difficulty attained unto, in the right exercise of them Many
persons, at a distance, think it an easy matter to believe in a crucified
Savior; but when they come to make proof of their Faith in particular cases,
they many times find themselves at a loss. See this in an instance, Mark 9.24.
we have a man bringing his child to Christ to be healed; his coming argued
something of Faith; but when the Disciples had failed in the cure, and the
child was rather worse than better, the man's faith begins to stagger, as
appears by his words, verse. 22. If thou can do any thing, have compassion on
us, and help us. Hereupon Christ calls him to the real exercise of Faith, verse.
23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes. The
poor man upon examination of his own heart, finding some faith, but yet this
very weak, and hardly to be raised to a firm and steadfast belief, without
wavering or doubting, cries out, I believe, Lord help thou mine unbelief: Which
manifested his sense of the difficulty of opening to Christ by Faith, as he
ought. And truly, Christians that know any thing of their own hearts (as they
ought) find this a very difficult work in cases of an easier nature than this,
here, of this man was. And therefore a lazy sluggish Soul is unwilling to be at
such pains. There are some weary steps that a believer must take to open to
Christ by Faith. As (1.) earnest Prayer to him, who is the Finisher and
Perfecter, as well as the Author and Beginner of this Grace. Faith in the act
and exercise, as well as in the habit, must be obtained of Christ by earnest
Prayer. And to tug in this duty of Prayer, as we ought, is no easy work,
especially if Christ for some time seem to hold back and deny, as he did to the
woman of Canaan. This puts the Soul sometimes into a sweat, and therefore the
easeful Soul is loath to be at this pains; his patience is worn out, and he
faints and flags in the duty.

2. Another weary step the Soul must take to get Faith into the exercise, is
the searching the Word and Promises, and rightly applying them. It is sometimes
difficult to find such promises as may rightly suit our condition: When we
have found them, it may be something more difficult rightly to understand them
according to the true intent and purport of them: sometimes it may be difficult
to get our hearts rightly affected with them; and most of all, to clear up our
interest in them. So that sometimes a Believer finds a promise, and meditating
sees it to suit his condition well enough; but yet lays it aside, can suck no
sweetness from it, because he cannot clear up his interest in it: and that by
reason of some particular condition or qualification annexed thereto, which he
finds not in himself. In this case to believe seems difficult, and therefore
the promise is laid aside, and no comfort gathered from it; upon this account a
lazy Soul sits down in unbelief, and does not open to Christ by faith.

3. Another weary step is, the overcoming that unbelieving frame of heart which
we are naturally prone unto. Unbelief is a sin which naturally flows from the
corruption of our natures, and accompanies us in some measure, more or less,
while we are in this Vale of Tears. And this part of corrupt nature poor Souls
find as much difficulty in the overcoming, as any corruption. And the reason
is, because (of all corruptions) none has more to say for it self than this;
for the object of Faith (properly) is unseen things, such as are not obvious to
sense, such as seem to thwart both sense and reason, and frequent experience;
such things as we have nothing to bottom our faith concerning upon, but the
bare Word of God, we are to believe in hope, contrary to hope. And this makes
the work difficult; hereupon few Christians are so resolved and industrious, as
to be at the pains which the Psalmist was, Psalm. 73. to search things to the
bottom, and to weigh things in the balance of the Sanctuary, and therefore they
sit down without opening to Christ by Faith.

4. Another difficulty is the griping guilt of sin and unworthiness, which so
looks them in the face when they should open to Christ by Faith, that the eye
of their Faith is dim, and they cannot with any confidence look Christ in the
face. It is an usual saying, that a guilty Conscience needs no Accuser.
Conscience will inwardly check the adulterous Spouse of Christ, and make her
blush when she should open to him and look him in the face. The Psalmist
complains, that he was so compassed about, and tormented with his sin, that he
could not look up, Psalm. 40.12. It is a mistake very common in humbled penitent
sinners, that they must not, dare not, by Faith open to, and close with Christ,
till they have attained such a measure of internal purity and Sanctity as may
make them fit for, and (in a sort) worthy of his company. But these begin their
work at the wrong end: They should first open to Christ by Faith, and then he
will help them to, and carry on in them this work of purity: For it is his work
by his Spirit to purify, and this purifying virtue we must fetch from him by
Faith: for It is he that works in us both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, because without him we can do nothing. Our work is first to believe,
and then by Faith to mortify the deeds of the flesh. Now this work is
difficult, to open to Christ, and look him in the face by Faith, with the guilt
of sin upon our Consciences. This goes contrary to the grain of Flesh and
Blood, who would gladly have something of its self and its own Righteousness in
its justification. Whereas our work is to disclaim all worthyness of our own,
and to come to Christ with Ropes about our Necks, as self-condemned persons,
lying at the footstool of pure Grace, and Christ's Righteousness for
justification and life. And therefore where there remains any measure of pride
in the Heart, according to that measure and degree of pride, Christ will be
shut out: The weary step of self-denial (in this case) the sluggish Christian
is not willing to take.

Thus you see the work it self in opening to Christ by Faith is very difficult,
and hence the lazy Christian lies down upon his bed of present ease, and
refuses to be at the pains to open to Christ by Faith. But, would the Soul but
consider the amends that Christ's company would make for all his pains, and how
easy all these duties would be made by Christ's coming in; surely the Soul
would never think his pains better bestowed than in opening to Christ by Faith.
It is he that by his Spirit helps our infirmities in prayer, and helps us by
his own strength to wrestle with himself and prevail. It is he that brings
promises to our mind, helps us to understand and rightly to apply them, and to
take the sweetness and the comforts of them. It is he that gives us a
Pisgah-sight of unseen things, and assures our Souls of the certainty of them.
It is he that helps our unbelief: And it is he, and he alone, that by his Blood
must purge away the guilt of all our sins. Oh! therefore open to Christ by
Faith, and let not these impediments hinder you.

And as in Faith, so in opening the Heart to Christ by Love, there is great
difficulty; much ado to bring the Heart to open fully to Christ by Love. These
worldly things seem so lovely, that the Heart is much stolen away by them!
These worldly things are so constantly present with us, that it is hard to get
a sight of Christ, who is at a distance, and seen (as it were) afar off. These
worldly things are so obvious and suitable to sense, (by which we too much
live) that the object of Faith is little notice taken of. To love him
therefore, and that with such a love as we ought, whom we have not seen, this
is very difficult: To open our Hearts and Affections to him that we never saw
with our eyes, but only have heard tell of; this is very difficult, and
scarcely attainable by a sluggish Soul, that is unwilling to be at the pains to
enquire after him. But let not this hinder, for we have such discoveries of him
in the Word, (if we will but be at the pains to search them out) as will render
him altogether lovely; far more desirable than the most precious thing in the
world. And therefore let not sloth hinder us from opening to Christ by love.

2. As there may be difficulty and unpleasantness in opening, so there may be
difficult and unpleasant work when we have opened to Christ, and let him in;
and the thought of this may make the Soul unwilling to open to Christ. As for
instance,

1. Christ at his coming in, may rip up our old sores, and bring our sins to
remembrance, which may renew our torment and pain. When Christ comes in, he
makes new discoveries in the Soul: many a sin forgotten, and not duly repented
of, is brought to mind; and the sting of it wounds and cuts the Soul, puts the
Soul to new sorrow, shame, and pain: and this makes the Soul afraid of opening
to Christ. There is in every one such an inde^ible sense of the holiness of
Christ, and of their own guilt, that (though the Soul may have a real desire of
Christ's company, yet) is really afraid to let him in, lest Christ should
discover there what the Soul is afraid to have seen. And therefore it argues
not only the sincerity and truth of Grace, but a considerable measure of the
prevalency of Grace, when the Soul, without inward reluctance or fearfulness,
can say as David Psalm. 139.23. Search me, O God, and know my heart: try me, and
know my thoughts. This is a work wherein the Soul would be tenderly dealt with:
and lest Christ (in this case) should deal faithfully and roundly, the Soul is
afraid to open to Christ. Though Reason will pray with us to have our Wounds
searched, yet Nature it self is afraid to have the Surgeon meddle with it. Such
is the case here; and upon this account many faint-hearted Christians are
unwilling to open to Christ; but rather shut him out.

But, oh my Friends! If this be the reason why Christ is not readily opened to
by you, let me tell you, The longer you keep him out, the worse it will be with
you: your Soul is ulcerated with sin, it is not found at the bottom; and if
Christ be not let in at all, you must unavoidably perish of this wretched
disease. And if you do let him in hereafter, he must then search it to the
bottom, and in the mean time your sin frets as a canker, eats deeper and deeper
into your heart; and will not your pain be the more intolerable, when your
wound comes to be searched? And therefore let spiritual reason prevail with you
to open to Christ, without any more delay. That which here thou make use of
as a reason why thy heart is shut against Christ, should be a strong, yea the
strongest argument to the contrary, to open to Christ quickly. It is infinite
Mercy that thou have so precious a Surgeon at hand. It would be a most childish
thing then to shut him out of doors, because thou need his help, but art
afraid lest he should see, and rip up thy sore. This flesh-pleasing easefulness
is that which ruins many thousands.

2. He may call us off from our earnest pursuit of the world and worldly
business, which is urgent upon us: He may say to thee, Come, follow me; be not
so hasty in the pursuit of the world, lay aside thy business for a while, I
have other business for thee to do; let me have thy company a little, for, for
that end am I come. This may be the language of Christ to the soul. But this is
very unpleasing unto the Soul, that is hot and earnest in the pursuit of the
world; this soul will be ready to answer as the man in the Gospel, Lord I will
follow thee, but suffer me first to go and bury my father; let me but dispatch
such or such, business that is urgent upon me, and then I will wait upon thee.
But O Soul! consider with thy self, what have thou of greater concernment to
do, than to hearken to and obey the voice of Christ? If Christ's company be no
more worth, and his feast of no greater value, he may resolve thou shall not
taste of his dainties. His business with thee may be the correcting thy faults,
the illuminating thee with spiritual wisdom, washing and spiritualizing thy
cold and carnal A^ (...) to be sure his main business with thee ^o^^tes to thy
spiritual estate, to the concern of thy (...) And this is of so much greater
and (...) ^^^port to thee, than any worldly business whatsoever, as thy Soul is
of (...) than all the world. For what will (...) thee to gain the whole (...)
and (...) precious, immortal soul? (...) give in exchange for thy soul? (...)
lost by thine earnest pursuit of (...) neglect of that spiritual work which
Christ (...) thee to.

3. Christ at his coming into the Soul, sometimes puts his Spouse or People
upon some unpleasant work which they would gladly be excused from; and this may
be an hindrance to their opening to him. Sometimes he calls to, and puts them
upon renewed acts of Repentance (as was hinted before.) Sometimes upon the
mortification of some beloved lust, which may be as painful, and as unwillingly
yielded to, as the cutting off the right hand, right foot; or plucking out the
right eye. Nay, his Word may (further) be quick and powerful, sharper than any
two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and
of the joints and marrow, discerning and discovering the thoughts and intents
of the heart, Heb. 4.12. which the Soul is not willing should be discovered, or
cut off: or at least is afraid of the pain and trouble it may be put to in this
work; and therefore lingers, and puts off Christ from time to time. Sometimes
(again) Christ may put his Spouse upon such duties, as may cross her natural
inclination, or particular, present, and visible interest. Such as denying her
self, taking up her cross, following him. Enduring hardship as a good soldier
for Christ. Enduring reproaches, evil-speakings, persecutions, and the like:
all which are unpleasing to flesh and blood: And wherein the Soul must say (as
to its natural inclination) as our Savior said when he prayed, Not my will,
but thy will be done. Here the Soul often sticks, and upon these terms, is loath
to open to Christ, the flesh having so strong an influence upon the soul. Upon
such terms as these the young man in the Gospel went away from Christ, Mark
10.21, 22. -- Go thy way, sell whatsoever thou have, and give to the poor, and
thou shall have treasure in heaven: and come take up thy cross and follow me.
And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved, etc. I am afraid there
are but too many in this age that would account these too hard terms to accept
of Christ upon.

But if men would but argue rationally, why should these be any hindrances to
our opening to Christ? for in all this Christ bids us no loss. If he bids us
part with Earthly, he promises us Heavenly treasure. If he bids us cut off a
corrupt part or member, (though it be painful, yet) it is in order to the
eternal salvation of the whole, Matthew. 5.29, 30. and is it not better to lose a
corrupt part, than lose the whole?

4. Christ at his coming may excite us to, and quicken us in our work, may call
us to be quicker, and more exact and curious in our work. He may tell us that
our work is great, and our time but short. He may bid us strive with all our
might to enter in at the straight gate; for many shall, (in a lazy and
sloathful manner) seek and wish to enter in, and shall not be able. He may tell
us, that this lazy sloathful working will not attain the end that we aim at;
for the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent only take it by
force. It will not serve our turns to read, pray, hear, meditate, etc. at the
cold and careless rate which we do. It will not do well to be such strangers
(as we are) to our own hearts; but we must examine our own hearts more deeply,
thoroughly, and effectually: must study and practice our duties more thoroughly:
must watch unto prayer, and give our selves unto prayer: Must make the Law of
God our delight and daily meditation: must in all things, small as well as
great, exercise a Conscience void of offense toward God and Men: Must set a
watch before the door of our Hearts, Lips, and lives: Must (in short)
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forward to those things
that are before, press toward the mark for the price of the high calling of
God in Christ Jesus. He may come to ask us such questions as these: What have
you been doing since the last time I was with you? what have you learned? what
have you practiced? what proficiency have you made? what account can you give
of the Talents which I betrusted you with? in what forwardness is your work?
let me see how matters stand with you? what designs have you on foot for my
glory? and what are the designs which you are now carrying on? These and
suchlike questions may be asked by Christ at his coming in. Now if the Soul
have been idle and careless, and not able in any measure to give a good account
in these and suchlike cases; no wonder though she be unwilling (at this time)
to open to Christ. The fear of having her faults discovered, and the guilt of
them to disturb the quiet of her Conscience, will make her very slow in opening
to Christ, (as was noted before.)

But if reason might take place, this should be no hinderance at all; for what
Christ tells us, is real truth, that our work is great, and our time but short,
passing on a pace, and irrecoverable when gone: and if we have slept or
loitered, is it reason that we should do so still? Is it not high time to awake
out of sleep? the night is far spent, the day is at hand. If he should let us
sleep or loiter on till his last call, to come to the Wedding, as he did the
foolish Virgins, Math. 25. in what a condition would you be when you should
awake, your lamps gone out, no oil in your vessels, no neighbor to borrow of,
every one having little enough for himself, and you must be forced to go to
buy, when you should, enter in with him, and by this means you come to be shut
out, and loose your whole expectation? Were it not better let in Christ now,
and be content to shake off sleep, while you have time to get oil into your
vessels with your lamps? We use to say, that delays in most cases are very
dangerous; and that it is bad putting off things to the last: I am sure this is
most true in this case, that so greatly concerns the eternal state of our
Souls. Nay further, if things be amiss in us, is it not better to let Christ
come in, and put all things to rights in us, then to let them go at random,
till they be past cure? I am sure there never was Soul that ever repented of
this, whatever pain it was put to in the doing of it; though many a Soul has
sadly repented the shutting out of Christ, when it has been too late. It is
better that Christ bring thy faults and sin to light and remembtance here,
while thou may repent and reform; than that thy sin should find thee out in
the guilt, shame, and punishment of it to all eternity hereafter: And be sure
thy sin will, at one time or other, find thee out, Numb. 32.23. Oh! therefore
let none of these things have influence upon you, to hinder you from opening to
Christ at his call.

I dare be bold to say, that there can be no true spiritual reason, for any
poor soul to refuse to open to Christ; all reasons produced for that end are
carnal, and therefore ought to be pulled down and destroyed; For the weapons of
our warfare are not (ought not to be) carnal, but mighty; to the pulling down
-- all imaginations; or (as the word signifies) cavils, or carnal reasonings.
One of these two causes (doubtless) both which are bad, these carnal reasonings
must proceed from; either from a secret love to some sin, or lust in the heart,
which we would not have Christ to discover or purge out; which may well call in
question the truth and sincerity of Grace in us: for the Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer: And
it is certain, He does hear the Prayers of such as are sincere; for he says,
Psalm. 145.18. The Lord is nigh unto all that call upon him -- in truth. So that
thy sincerity is questionable. Or else it proceeds hence, viz. from Pride and
Self-love. Pride, because thou would not have Christ to see things ^miss in
thee: but know, that God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble. From
Self-love, ^n that thou so much desire the ease, and gratification of the
flesh: Now if thy very life be more dear to thee than Christ, thou art not
worthy to be his disciple. O let none of these base and sinful arguments keep
thee off from opening speedily to Christ at his call.

I might tell thee also of the advantages that will come by opening to Christ,
but these I have largely spoken to before, only this one give me leave to
mention here; If thou will freely open to Christ now, He will readily open to
thee at Death and Judgment. There are few but they are convinced of the trouble
and restlesness of their present state, and not fully satisfied with the
present state they are in, but are still seeking and laboring for something
further, in hopes another condition may be better: and this they might gather
from all their experiences, that a rest is not to be had here. And consequently
all men (in this life) are but in a seeking condition, seeking for rest and can
find none, (as our Savior speaks in the Parable) they have often something
within that suggests, This is not your resting place: By daily experience they
also see, that it is appointed for all men once to die: And therefore they
might conclude, that a rest must be had in another world, or not had at all;
for here no rest is to be had. And certain it is, that There does remain a rest
for the people of God, and to them only: and who are these people of God, but
they that open to Christ here? for all power is committed into the hands of
Christ. He it is that has the key of David, that opens and no man shuts,
and shuts and no man opens: And can we reasonably imagine that he will
open to any (at that day) that will not open to him now? No; he tells us quite
the contrary, Prove. 1.24, etc. You know the foolish Virgins cried loud, Open to
us; but he answered, I know you not, depart from me ye workers of iniquity. If
therefore there be any restlessness in this world that thou art weary of, or in
Hell that thou art afraid of; or if there be any rest at death and in Heaven
desirable, open to Christ now, as ever thou would avoid the one, or
desire to partake of the other. So (that to conclude this Use) if either
sense of duty, love to thy self and thine own happiness, the love of God and
Christ, or love to God and Christ may have any influence upon thee, if any
thing either of Divinity or Humanity may work upon thee, here is fullness of
reason and motives to persuade thee to open to Christ; and therefore let reason
prevail with thee.

But thou will say, How shall I open to Christ? And what would you have me in
this case to do? I am willing to open to Christ, if I knew but how to do it,
and what is required in this case?

That I may help thee a little in this great and necessary work, I shall give
thee some directions, how to carry, and what to do, and so shall conclude this
subject. And these directions shall be of two sorts. 1. Such as may have
respect unto the Heart, and the manner or way of the Hearts opening to Christ.
2. Such as may have respect to Christ, and the several ways of his coming in,
and making himself manifest unto the Soul.

1. I begin with such directions as respect the Heart, and the way and manner
of the Hearts opening to Christ. Now that we may the better know how many ways
the Heart must be opened to Christ, it may not be impertinent to consider how
many ways the Heart may be shut against Christ. Now, it is evident that the
Heart may these several ways be shut against Christ. By Pride and
self-confidence: by unbelief: by impenitency: by want of Love, or coldness of
affection: by sloth and sluggishness either in our watch or work. A little to
open each of these, and then you shall see by them, what of the Heart, or in
what respects the Heart is to be opened to Christ.

1. The Heart may be shut against Christ by Pride, and self-confidence. Such is
the Pride and haughtiness of corrupted Nature, that though the sinner be justly
condemned for his sin, yet he seeks to justify himself, and would not seem to
be beholden to Jesus Christ nor his satisfaction for a pardon. This is evident
in our first Parents, in their shifting off their sins, and endeavoring to
transmit the guilt upon some one else. Adam when examined, rather than he would
be found faulty, lays the blame upon Eve, and in some sense upon God himself:
The woman which thou gave me, gave me, etc. and I did eat. The woman, when
examined, lays the guilt upon the Serpent: The Serpent beguiled me, etc, And
the same principle of Pride remains in some measure in the Hearts of all Adam's
Posterity; which makes them use their uttermost endeavor to justify
themselves. This is the true cause of all excuses that are made for sin, and
the reason why persons do so overmuch value their own works of Righteousness,
judging (in effect) that every small parcel of duty and obedience is sufficient
to expiate the greatest sin. And by this means Jesus Christ is undervalued, and
little store set by: For a man will never be wholly beholden to Jesus Christ
for his justification, while he has any Righteousness of his own to lean to.
And by this means the Heart is shut against Christ. As this Pride hardens God's
heart against the sinner, and makes God to resist, or set himself in
battle-array against the sinner, (as the word signifies) James 4.6. and as this
self-justifying confidence causes Christ (many times) to pass by the door of
such a sinner without calling upon him; for he tells us, that he came not to
call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, Matthew. 9.13. that is, those that
are (through Pride and self-confidence) righteous in their own eyes: So this
Pride does harden and shut the heart of the sinner against God and Christ. And
therefore the Psalmist says, The wicked through the pride of his countenance
will not seek after God. Psalm. 10.4. This therefore must be removed out of the
way, before the door of the Heart be truly and fully opened to Christ. Would
thou therefore open to Christ, get rid of all Pride and self-confidence: labor
to be humble, low, and vile in thine own eyes; and to such Christ will look,
Isai. 66.2. To this man will I look, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and that trembles at my word. And elsewhere, The poor have the Gospel preached
to them. i. e. They that are of a poor, humble, self-denying spirit, have the
glad tidings of Salvation brought unto them: to these the Son of Righteousness
arises with healing under his wings. And therefore blessed are these poor in
spirit, for they shall see God. While David justified himself and hid his sin,
the hand of God was heavy upon him: but when he humbled himself and confessed
freely his sin, God came in with pardon, Psalm. 32. Oh therefore labor after
humility and lowness of spirit; for God resists the proud, but gives grace to
the humble. Humble your selves therefore, and in due time God will exalt you
with his presence and company. Christ must do all, and have the glory, as well
as the command of all, where he comes: and therefore he is fit company for none
but those that are humble, self-denying, self-condemning sinners.

2. The Heart is many times shut against Christ by unbelief. Faith is the hand
whereby Christ is received: Faith must open the door to Christ; and therefore
where Faith is wanting, the door of the Heart must needs be kept shut against
Christ. Unbelief is one of the great Bars or Bolts, whereby the Heart is kept
fast shut against Christ. This Bar therefore must be removed, before the Heart
can be opened to Christ. The Apostle tells us the reason why the Jews were
rejected, was because of their unbelief. Unbelief is the great Gospel-sin, the
Rock upon which many a poor soul as plit. Therefore says our Savior, John
3.18. He that believes not is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotten Son of God. Beware therefore of unbelief, and
open to him by Faith. Christ gives many invitations and calls, such as you read
Isai. 55.1. etc. Believe therefore that Christ is really willing to receive
those that he makes such calls unto; and of those number thou art, if thou do
not wilfully exclude thy self through unbelief. He makes many gracious promises
of Pardon of Sin, of Adoption, Sanctification, and Life Eternal: and withal he
tells thee upon what terms and conditions these things are to be had. Therefore
by Faith embrace these Promise, apply them to thy self, thankfully close with
them, and labor to answer the terms and conditions of them; and if thou do
but on thy part manifest thy real willingness, thou shall find that he will
come in unto thee with comfort and assurance. Therefore open to Christ by
Faith: believe his word: embrace his promises: obey his commands: dread his
threatenings: give up thy self by covenant unto him, that he may be made of God
unto thee wisdom righteousness, sanctification, and redemption.

3. Sometimes the heart is shut against Christ by impenitency. It is an opinion
but too common and ordinary among Sinners, that Repentance is only needful in
some few gross cases, for some great and notorious enormity; but as for sins of
a less magnitude, they look upon them as pardoned in course, without any
considerable repentance. And therefore if they find not themselves guilty of
such great sins, they conceit that they need no Repentance. In this sense are
those words of our Savior to be understood, Luke 15.7. Joy shall be in Heaven
over one sinner that repents, more than over ninety and nine just persons
that need no repentance; i. e. that think they need no repentance: and this is
the secret thought but of too many in the world, and by this they shut out the
Lord Jesus Christ, as a person that they have no great need of, or occasion
for; they think themselves whole, and therefore see no need of a Physician. But
he that would have Christ to come into his soul, must see a need of Christ,
must see himself to be a sinner, a great sinner, lost and undone without
Christ, must see himself an enemy to God by nature, a rebel and traitor; and
this his enmity he must repent of, be heartily sorry for, must be really
willing and desirous of peace and reconciliation with God, must abhor himself
for his former enmity, and resolve (through the Grace of God) that he will
stand no longer in opposition to God, but must come with an humble, broken,
melted heart to God, begging pardon for what is bypast, and deliberately
resolving and promising new and faithful obedience for time to come; and this
he must do from a sense of the sinful and cursed nature of sin. And upon this
Repentance it is that Christ comes in, and is willing to be a Mediator between
God and man. And therefore it thou would open to Christ aright, set thy self
seriously to the work of Repentance, perform that work thoroughly, let no known
sin, or sin that thou can possibly discover in thy self, pass unrepented of.
Go therefore into secret, examine thine own heart, what sins thou can find
lodged there, meditate upon them, with all the aggravating circumstances of
them, and dwell so long upon the thoughts of them, till such time as thou have
brought thine heart to an utter loathing and abhorrence of them, and of thy
self for committing of them, and allowing thy self in them; and till thou
come to judge and condemn thy self as worthy of eternal damnation, for
hearkening to the temptation of them. And then let God hear thee bemoan thy
self, and complaining of thine own folly and wickedness, and what a sad and
wretched condition thou have brought thy self into by thy sins: and beg help of
God to turn thee, and bring thee unto Jesus Christ, and bestow him upon thee;
and when this is done sincerely and faithfully, thou shall find Christ ready
to come in unto thy soul. See this exemplified in Ephraims repentance, Jer.
31.18, 19, 20. Surely I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus: Thou have
chastised me, and I was chastised, as a bubock unaccustomed to the yoke: turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my God. After I was
turned, I repented; after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was
ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth. Is
Ephraim my dear Son? Is he a pleasant Child? For ever since I spoke against
him, I earnestly remember him still: therefore I will surely have mercy upon
him says the Lord. Ephraim by repentance opened his heart to God, and then
Gods heart was open toward him, and Gods bowels yearn toward him. Thus do
thou humble thy self to God, and in due time he will exalt thee. Open thine
heart by Repentance, and thou will be fit for the reception of Jesus Christ.

4. Sometimes the heart may be shut against Christ by decay or want of Love. It
is want of due love and respect to Christ, that is the cause why he is shut out
of the Soul: did we love Christ more, we should more readily open unto Christ;
and did we more really and fervently love him, we should have more of his
company. If Love be wanting, Christ cares not to come in that Soul; neither
indeed will there be convenient room for Christ in that Soul. If thy love to
Christ be cold, thy heart will be shut against him: for the Heart is naturally
contracted and shut where love is wanting: and it is the very nature of Love to
open, expand, or enlarge the Heart toward the object beloved. If therefore
thou would have Christ to come into thy Soul, set Love to work. Love will
make Christ precious and desirable to thy Soul, and thereupon set thee a
longing for Christ when he is absent. Love will enlarge thy desire, and make
thee impatient of his absence, and spur thee on to a more diligent seeking of
him. Love will bid Christ welcome at his coming, and therefore will endeavor
not only to remove whatever may be offensive and distasteful to him, but to
have all things in a readiness and preparedness for his entertainment. Nay,
Love makes the Soul to think no time lost in his company, nor any cost too
great for his entertainment. And therefore if Love have been cold or wanting
toward Christ, let it be so no more; but labor to get and maintain more
fervent love to Christ, and this will be the ready way to have his company: For
Love will make thee to hunger after Christ; and he has promised to satisfy
the hungry soul. We read Rev. 2. that God threatens Ephesus, that he will
depart, and remove his Golden Candlestick from the midst of her, because of her
decay in her Love toward him: she had lost her first love. And well he might;
for the less she loved him, the more was her Heart contracted and shut against
him; and therefore little room could he have in her Heart, and consequently
little heart to stay there. Take heed therefore of suffering thy love to Christ
to decay, if thou have any mind of his company: but get thine heart filled
with love to Christ, and then the door of thine Heart will be open to him, and
he may have ready and welcome entertainment when he comes.

5. The door of the Heart may be shut against Christ by negligence and sloth.
Now there is a twofold negligence which Christians are subject unto. 1. A
negligence or sluggishness in their work. Or 2. in their Watch: by the means of
both which Jesus Christ may be shut out of the Heart.

1. Jesus Christ may be shut out by our negligence and sluggishness in our
work. Slothful working and laboring in our spiritual calling, does but keep
Christ out of the Soul. When a man prays after a sluggish and slothful manner,
he does in effect say, that he matters not Christ's company; and therefore he
cannot expect to find him. For Christ will be found of those that diligently
seek him. A slothful man will scarcely be willing to wait in the way of duty
till Christ come; but, like the Spouse in the Text, will have laid aside his
work, and be gone to bed when Christ calls, and too lazy too to arise to open
to him. Some persons indeed are impatient of Christ's delays, because of their
earnest desire of his company, they are sick of love: to these Christ will
come, and will not tarry. Others are impatient under delays, because they are
weary of duty, love not to tug, and toil, and sweat in duty too long, but would
have Christ come that their work might be over; and if he come not in their
time, they leave off their work: these do shut out Christ. Would thou
therefore have thy heart open to Christ, be not slothful or sluggish in duty,
but be diligent, painful, and industrious in thy spiritual work. Be diligent in
mortifying sin, in quickening grace, in discharging duties, and those of all
sorts: that so when Christ comes, he may find thee so doing, busily employed
in thy Lords work; and then will he say to thee, Well done good and faithful
servant.

2. Jesus Christ may be shut out by our negligence and sluggishness in our
watch. The Spouse here had laid aside her watch, was composing her self for
rest, and now Christ at his coming found her door shut. When Sinners grow lazy,
and let fall their watch, they are in a fitter posture for Satan to find them
than Christ: For Satan goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour: and therefore his fittest opportunity is when he can find them napping
and secure. But Christ comes as a friend, and therefore would find us
watching: he comes as a Master, and therefore expects us to be ready to open to
him.

If therefore thou would have thine heart open to Christ, keep a constant
watch over thy self: watch and pray, that thou enter not into temptation: Watch
against the treachery, deceitfulness, and desperate wickedness of thine own
heart. Watch against the insinuations of an enticing alluring world. Watch
against the motions and suggestions of a malicious and subtle Devil. Watch thy
corruptions, that they prevail not in thee. Watch thy graces, that they neither
decay nor be idle. Watch thy Faith, that that may be ready to apprehend and
embrace Christ at his coming. And watch thy Patience, that that wear not out,
but endure to the end. And watch thy Love, that by the decays and coolings of
that, thy Heart be not contracted and shut against Christ. Keep up an
universal, constant, and faithful watch, if thou would have the door of
thine Heart open when Christ comes. Blessed is he whom his Lord when he comes
shall find upon his Watchtower, ready to open to him.

Thus have I showed in what respects the Heart may be shut against Christ, and
consequently, by directing you to the removal of them, and the exercise of the
contrary grace, have instructed you how to get and keep the Heart open for
Christ. To all which, I only add this one thing more.

Would thou have thine Heart open and in a readiness to entertain Jesus
Christ at his coming? then live always in expectation of his coming, look for
his coming: when the Servant thinks with himself, My Lord delays his coming, he
will not come yet; he grows idle and careless, and neglects both his work and
his watch: But if we would but thus judge, Our Lord and Master will come, and I
know not at what hour of the day, or watch of the night; this would be a means
to make us always to keep our Hearts open, and in a readiness to receive Jesus
Christ at his coming: whereas the want of this makes us suffer our Faith to
decay, our Love to cool, and our Hearts to be shut and contracted against
Christ at his coming.

And these are the the Directions which I intended to speak to, with respect
unto our hearts.

2. I have some directions to give thee with reference to Christ, and the
several ways of his coming into the Soul.

1. Would thou have thy heart open to Christ aright, then open thine heart
to the knowledge of Christ. The directions which here I give, is the advice and
council of Christ himself, called by the name of Wisdom, Prove. 1.20, 21, 22,
23. Wisdom cries without, she utters her voice in the streets -- How long ye
simple ones, will ye love simplicity? -- and fools hate knowledge? Turn you at
my reproof: behold, I will pour out my Spirit unto you, and will make known my
words unto you. The want of the right knowledge of Christ, is the great reason
or ground why the heart is kept so close shut against Christ. You know, that
one way of opening to Christ (which I told you of) was by faith, rolling and
recumbing upon Christ; and the Psalmist tells us, They that know his Name, will
put their trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. and the reason rendered is, because by
knowing him they come to understand his truth and faithfulness, that he never
forsakes them that diligently seek him. I^ is our ignorance of the excellency,
all sufficiency, and suitableness of Christ to our insufficiency and emptiness,
that makes our love to Christ so very cold. For the proper object of Love is
some suitable, desirable good thing. Were we better acquainted then with that
fullness that is in Christ, we should more fully and freely open our hearts to
Christ. Did we but see his loveliness in every respect, the loveliness of his
person, the loveliness of his disposition and qualifications, the loveliness of
his works and undertakings, and his suitableness every way to our condition, we
should from the inward sense of love in our own souls, cry out with the Spouse,
He is altogether lovely. Nay, our love toward him, and desire after him, would
be so fervent, that we should say with the Spouse, Tell him that I am sick of
love. If therefore thou would have thine heart more open to Christ, study
Christ better; for he has said, he will exalt, or set on high such as know his
Name, and set their love upon him, Psalm. 91.14. And how can he more highly
advance thee, than by honoring thee with his company? Our ignorance of Christ
makes us that we do not understand his voice when he calls, and therefore we
give no heed to his calls.

2. Open thine heart to the commands of Christ; search the Scriptures, to know
what it is that he requires of thee: and as he teaches thee by his Word and
Spirit, let thine heart be open to attend thereunto, as the heart of Lydia was,
who attended to the things that were spoken by Paul. Yea, let thine heart burn
within thee, while he is talking with thee, as the hearts of the Disciples
going to Emaus did, while Christ talked with them. Attend diligently to the
Ordinances of Christ, and come with the everlasting doors of thine heart open,
ready prepared to receive whatsoever divine truth God shall make known unto
thee, and resolving to practice what truths thou shall receive; let thine heart
be ready to say, when thou come to every Ordinance, as Samuel did, Speak
Lord, for thy servant hears; or as Paul, Lord, what would thou have me to
do? Or as the people to Moses, (but with a better heart, and more steadfast
resolution) All that the Lord has spoken will we do, and be obedient. Open
thine heart to the commands of Christ, and let none of his commands be
grievous; but say with David, O how love I thy Law! it is my meditation day and
night. Remember that Christ is thy Lord and Husband; it is his work to command
thee, and it is thy duty in all things to obey, and therefore take his yoke
upon thee -- for his yoke is easy, and his burden light; and, in keeping his
commands there is great reward.

3. Open thine heart to the counsels and advice of Christ: thou may assure
thy self, that Christ will advise thee to nothing but for thy good. See what
counsel Christ gives to the Asian Churches, Rev. 2, 3. chap. his counsel was
very suitable to the several states and conditions of every Church. To instance
in that of Laodicea, she was a very lukewarm Church, and yet very proud,
self-confident Church; she said, She was rich, and increased with goods, and
had need of nothing; but knew not that she was wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked. And what was Christ's counsel to her? I counsel thee
to buy of me Gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, and white raiment
that thou may be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear;
and anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see, Rev. 3.17, 18. Jesus
Christ is a most faithful Friend and Physician, will certainly give very
seasonable counsel and advice: he is called the wonderful Counselor, Isai.
9.6. Open thine heart, and listen to the counsel which Christ gives to thee; he
will instruct thee how to mortify thy sins; he will teach thee how to improve
Ordinances, to perform Duties, to exercise thy graces; he will teach thee in
all respects to order thy conversation aright, and to improve all the
Dispensations of his Providence toward thee. Take but Christ's counsel and
advice, and thou can never do amiss: for he is wise in heart, and
communicative of his wisdom, never fails any that trust and seek to him for
counsel and advice: Read James 1.5. If any of you want wisdom, let him ask it
of God, who gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth no man, and it shall be
given to him. But know this, that Christ cannot endure to have his counsel
slighted; to do this would highly displease him. Read Prove. 1.24 etc. I called
(...) but ye would have none of my counsels Therefore I also will laugh at your
calamity, and mock when your fear comes -- The^ shall they call, but I will not
answer -- for that they hated knowledge -- they would none of my counsels --
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with
their own devices. If thou will not open to Christ's counsels, thou may
follow thine own devices, and see what will be the end of it, Psalm. 81.11, 12.
write out the Text.

4. Open thine Heart to the rebukes and chastisements of Christ. Be not too
wise in thine own conceit, as to think that Christ can find no fault with
thee: But as David speaks concerning the Righteous, so do thou from thy very
heart say, Let the Righteous, Christ, smite me, it shall be a kindness; let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent oil, which shall not break my head. Though
thou know before hand that he will find fault with thee at his coming, yet
be never the more afraid to let him in, nor be thou weary of his rebukes. It is
unpleasant discourse (many times) when our Friends rip up our faults, and tell
us of them; but it is really our fault so to account it: for it is the real
part of a Friend to reprove us, and not to suffer sin upon our souls. However
it may be unpleasant, yet it is both necessary and safe. It argues a more than
ordinary love of Christ toward thee, if he deal thus faithfully with thee: for
whom he loves he rebukes and chastens, Rev. 3.19. Let thy Heart therefore be
open, ready, and willing to receive and embrace his most severe rebukes: And
take it as a kindness from him that he will rebuke thee; for it is a piece of
blessedness. Blessed is the man whom the Lord rebukes and chastens, and
teaches him out of his Law, Psalm. 94.12. David having found the benefit of
this, says, Psalm. 119.75. I know, O Lord that thy judgments are right, and
that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me. And v. 71. It is good for me that
I have been affl^cted, etc. And the Apostle tells us, that though no affliction
be for the present joyous but grievous, yet afterward it works the peaceable
fruits of Righteousness in them that are exercised thereby. Heb. 12.11. open
therefore thy Heart to the rebukes of Christ, and willingly receive them.

5. Open to the comforts of Christ. We read that when Christ came to his
Disciples when they were met together, his first salutation which he gave them
was, Peace be unto you, Luke 24.36. And truly where Christ comes into the
Soul, he brings true inward spiritual peace along with him, and freely bestows
it upon his Spouse. But yet, such is the proneness of our natures to unbelief,
that we many times refuse the comforts which Christ brings, and do not apply
them to our selves. Sinners indeed do many times snatch presumptuously at these
comforts, which do not of right belong unto them; nor indeed are they offered
by Christ to them. But the People of God sometimes, through a foolish and
sinful modesty refuse, or at least are afraid to take and apply those comforts
which Christ at his coming brings with him; insomuch that Christ is forced to
invite, and entreat them to accept of them, as his free gifts which he is
really willing and desirous to bestow upon them. This is really a fault in
pe^itent sinners; for Christ's real d^signe in coming, is to give that which may
be the surest and best ground of everlasting peace and comfort to the Soul. If
he convince of and reprove for sin, and thereby cause sorrow and sadness in the
Soul, this searching is but in order to the healing of their wound, that they
may afterward have more solid peace and comfort. If he frown, it is but to
make his smiles the more pleasant, and make us to prize them the more. If he
call us to, and put us upon more difficult, and (to the flesh) unpleasant work,
it is but that thereby he may honor us the more, and his comfortable presence
shall be with us in it. If he cast us down for a time, he will be careful that
we be not overwhelmed with too much sorrow, and will in due time lift us up;
refuse not therefore his comforts which are the design of all his carriage
toward thee whatever Christ does, and however he may seem to carry toward
thee; the ultimate end of all is to do thee good, and comfort thee; and
therefore has promised, Romans 8.28. That all things shall work together for
good to them that love God.

6. Open to the love of Christ. I did persuade you before to open and enlarge
your Hearts in love toward Christ. But now I advise you to open your hearts to
receive his love. When Christ comes and manifests real tokens and
demonstrations of his distinguishing everlasting love, do not you despise or
reject these. It is an hard matter to convince and persuade some Christians
that Christ loves them, or at least that his love is real and distinguishing,
such as he bears to his own children or Spouse. They will easily grant that
they love him, but cannot so easily believe that he loves them. But I would ask
such a Soul this question: How came thou thus to love Christ? If thy love be
real, it is only a reflex beam of Christ his love to thee; he must necessarily
love thee before thou can love him: For certainly there was a time when thou
did hate, as all unregenerate persons do; and who made thee then to differ
either from others, or from what thou thy self once was? It can be nothing else
but his love shed abroad in thy Heart. This is the argument pleaded, Ezekiel.
16.1. to the 15 v. Love is an affection not to be forced, but to be drawn, as
is intimated, Cant. 8.7. If a man would give all the substance of his house for
love, it would utterly be contemned. And it must be drawn by the discovery of
some suitable and desirable excellency in the object beloved, that may answer
the need or desire of the Soul that loves. The Soul finding it self empty or
void of something that might tend to the completing of its happiness (for
happiness consists in the fullness of the Soul when it wants nothing; while it
wants any thing it is not completely happy) upon this discovery of emptiness in
it self, seeks out where such a thing may be had; and finding Jesus Christ to
be that all sufficient object which may every way answer the need and emptiness
of the Soul, loves him, with a love of desire and earnest longing after him, as
the only person, the enjoyment of whom can make her absolutely and perfectly
happy. And so far as she can enjoy him, so far she is delighted and satisfied
with him. This is the true notion of love, and if thy love to Christ be right,
it is such a love as this.

If therefore upon the discovery of Christ's excellency and perfection,
answerable to thine indigence and emptiness, thy soul does truly love Christ.
I would gladly know, who discovered to thee this perfection and suitableness in
Christ? (who is so generally d^spised in the world). And who drew out thy heart
in love to Christ, upon this account? Surely it must, it can be none but
Christ, and if he thus with loving kindness have drawn thee, certainly it is
because He has loved thee with an everlasting love, Jer. 31.3. Thou have less
reason therefore to question the real love of Christ to thee, than to question
the reality of thy love to him: Open therefore thy heart freely to the love of
Christ, and instead of questioning the reality of Christ's love to thee, rather
study how thou may by returns of love and thankful obedience answer so great
love as he has manifested toward thee. Study to improve and highly prize his
love; for he first loved thee, or else thou could not have loved him at all.

7. And lastly, Open to the company and presence of Christ; If Christ come to
thy door, and would come in and afford thee his company, in any Ordinance, or
by any Providence, whether in public, private, or secret: Open to him, let him
in, let him have thy company, let him see all the parts of thine heart, hide
nothing from him, deal as Hezekiah did with the Babylonish Ambassadors, showed
them all that was in his house, hid nothing from them; So deal thou by Christ:
fully unbossome thy self to him, improve thy time with him, and interest in him
to the best advantage, reveal to him thy secrets, confess to him thy sins,
acquaint him with thy wants seek counsel and advice from him in all thy
difficulties, strength in all thy weaknesses, support under all thy burdens,
victory in all thy temptations, comfort in all thine adversities, a sanctified
use or and a seasonable deliverance out of all thy troubles. Beg to be guided
by his counsel here, the continuance of his presence with thee always even to
(...) end, and thy safe reception and conduct u^^^ glory. And if thou thus open
to Christ, e^^nestly desiring and being freely willing that (...) should work
all thy works in thee and for thee, he will come in unto thee, and will sup
with thee, and thou with him. Will feast thee with his Graces here, and will
crown all thy grace with Glory hereafter.

FINIS.

