A SERMON Preached at Helmingham in Suffolk, June 30th, 1694. At the FUNERAL OF
L. Genesis Tolmach.

By Nicholas Brady, M. A. Minister of St. Catherine Cre^^-Church, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published at the Request of the Friends of the deceased.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Parker at the Unicorn, under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange, 1694.

TO HER GRACE THE Duchess of Lauderdale.
May it please Your Grace,
AS nothing could excuse my Confidence, in presenting this following Discourse
to your Grace, but the great share you have in the much lamented occasion of
it; so nothing could atone for the meanness of my Present, but the eager
transports of a hasty Zeal; which rather urged me to pay this imperfect Tribute
to the Memory of so great a Man, than to consult my own Ease or Reputation, by
making the shortness of the warning my just excuse, for waving an Employment as
difficult as honorable.

To do tolerable Justice to so deserving a Theme, required a larger portion
both of Time and Ability, than I had either the good fortune to enjoy, or the
confidence to pretend to; and if I have but testified my veneration for his
Memory, which every True Englishman will join with me in doing, it is the only
Reputation that I aim at, from a performance as hearty as it is inartificial.

I question not, but your Grace will add to all your other Virtues, that of a
cheerful resignation to the will of God; and give a fresh evidence of the
firmness of that Courage, which has formerly supported you under the greatest
Trials. Especially since, to sweeten and temper the bitterness of your loss,
your Grace has the advantage of some signal consolations; to see your Son
consecrated to immortal Fame, universally regretted by all that knew him, and
embalmed with the Tears of that most Excellent Princess, in whose Service it
was his last wish to spend another Life.

If any passage in the following Discourse (as part of it is directed
particularly to that end) may be serviceable to the lessening your Grace's
Affliction, it will be matter of the greatest Joy and Satisfaction, to

May it please Your Grace, Your Graces most obedient, Most faithful, And most
humble Servant, N. Brady.

ECCLES. VII. Chapter Latter end of the 2 Verse. For that is the end of all Men,
and the living will lay it to his heart.


IF the conspiring wishes of the greatest part of Christendom, could reverse
the immutable Decrees of Heaven; if the most eminent and distinguishing
personal Accomplishments, could bribe the grim Messenger to delay his Summons;
or the most elevated Courage and Bravery of Soul, could awe the King of
Terrors into a favorable compliance; we had not now been met together, to
perform our last duties to the small remains of This Great Man; not so dearly
paid for a remarkable Instance, of the unavoidable necessity of Death to all
men; by seeing one of the noblest of our English Worthies within the short
compass of a few days shrunk into a Coffin full of dust and ashes. But since we
are convinced by too sad an experience, that nothing can exempt from that
impartial Sentence, which has passed upon all the Sons of Adam; since the Wise
and the Foolish, the Noble and the Base, the Valiant and the Coward, must
equally ly down in the bed of Corruption, and descend together unto the silent
Chambers of the Earth; since Death is thus the necessary consequence of Life,
and the living know that they must die; it will be a useful labor to enquire,
what advantage may be made by us of such a knowledge, and after what manner we
ought to lay it to our hearts, that Death is the end of all men.

And indeed it is matter of the justest astonishment, that Death, which is the
entertainment of every day, which endeavors to refresh our memory of it, by
such repeated instances of its unavoidable certainty; that speaks to us out of
the mouth of every dead man, and reads us a Lecture out of every Coffin; should
yet almost utterly be lost to our remembrance, should fall so very seldom under
our serious consideration: and therefore the wise Man had sufficient reason to
inform us, as he does at the beginning of this Verse, that it is better to go
to the house of morning than to go to the house of feasting, religious
meditations and reflections upon Death, being at all times a proper and useful
entertainment; but when we have before us such objects of Mortality, as This,
which has assembled us together at the present, contemplations of this nature
are necessary and indispensable, the solemnity of the occasion calls for them
loudly, and forcebly exacts them at our hands; and as our deceased brother
seems to preach to us this Doctrine, That that is the end of all men; so every
well instructed Christian will be ready to make this sober Application, That
the living will lay it to his heart.

That Death is the period of every Life, that we must all die and return unto
our Dust; is a truth acknowledged so universally, and so undeniably verified by
constant experience, that it is needless to produce arguments for the proof of
that assertion, which none have the confidence or the folly to deny; I shall
not therefore lose my time and abuse your patience, in the unnecessary
confirmation of this established Maxim, that Death is the end of all men; but
shall wholly confine my following discourse, to the inference which the wise
Man draws from thence, that the living will lay it to his heart; by showing
what useful deductions may be made, from a due reflecton upon the certainty of
Death, in order to influence our lives and conversations.

First, Then, from a due reflecton upon the certainty of Death, we may learn
this lesson of instruction; that, since Death is the common lot of all mankind,
and some time or other we must submit to it, we ought therefore to be always so
prepared to meet it, as that we may at any time undergo it willingly and
cheerfully.

Indeed if all our care and apprehension, if all our carefulness and concern,
could enable us to avoid the stroke of Destiny, there were then some reason for
us, to be anxious and solicitous upon that occasion; but since this is an
irreversible Decree which has past upon all the race of mankind, a wise man
will make a virtue of necessity, by endeavoring to manage himself after such a
rate, as may make this dreadful Enemy of humane nature, appear least formidable
and affrighting: He will at least attempt to disarm him of his Sting; and that
can be done no other way, but by leading a life unblameable and inoffensive: we
are assured, that the sting of Death is sin, it is that only which makes his
approaches to very terrible; let us but secure our selves upon that side, and
we may then meet him with assurance and satisfaction: Nothing will rejoice us
upon a Deathbed, so much as the Conscience of a well spent life; all outward
Consolations shall then drop a way; our Riches can purchase nothing for us, but
a Coffin and a Windingsheet; our Friends can only weep by our Bedside, attend
us to our Grave, and ly down there and lament over us; our Honors will but
serve to adorn our Hearse, and to lay us in the dust with greater Pomp and
Pageantry; but a Life that has been led Innocently and Devoutly, this will
support us under our last conflict, will strengthen and sustain us in our
mortal Agonies, and enable us to confront Death in its most ugly shape, not
only with courage but with comfort also: Every good action which we have at any
time performed, will then administer to us joy and satisfaction; and if we have
constantly persevered in well doing, we shall have nothing to ruffle or
discompose us; our passage out of this World will be easy and agreeable; we
shall ly down in Death as to a sweet repose, from whence we shall awake into
everlasting happiness; and shall close our eyes with that triumphant
exclamation, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Thus
is it the Office of true wisdom, to make that easy and familiar to us, which
we know is not possibly to be avoided; since tho we hang back never so much,
and are never so unwilling to be acquainted with it, yet still Death follows us
close at the heels, and will at last infallibly overtake us. But nothing will
more effectually prepare us for our end, than to have it continually in our
thoughts; that whenever it comes to seize on us it may not be new to us, and
add to its other terrors the fright of a surprise: Things the most terrible
and frightful in their nature, become easy and supportable by our being used
to them; and so we shall find it in Death its self: He who lives every day as
if that were his last, will never be unprovided when his last day comes; he who
contemplates upon his end frequently, will receive Death when ever it calls
upon him, as an acquaintance whom he has long conversed with, and whose nearer
appreoaches he has expected hourly: whereas that man who makes it his business,
to put off that evil hour (as he styles it) far from him, never to fix his
thoughts upon the consideration of it, will be strangely startled and
discomposed at its appearance, he will not know how to give reception, to a an
intruding rugged Guest, whose visit is as unwelcome as it was unexpected, and
yet whose distastful company he cannot possibly avoid. And indeed, when the
good man has accustomed himself some time, to a due consideration of his latter
end, he will not meet with any thing else in it, but matter of delight and
satisfaction; it will only appear, as an ill-looked Jailer, that comes to
release him out of a hard captivity; as a surly messenger, that is sent upon a
welcome errand; or as a rough gust of Wind, that blows him into the Harbor: He
has so fully reflected upon the certainty of Death, that he has made it his
business to be ready for it whenever it shall come; and can lay down his life
cheerfully and contentedly, because he has the assurance of taking it up again,
as knowing it is but hid with Christ in God. Thus a due reflection upon the
certainty of Death, will instruct us in this lesson of true Wisdom; that we
should at all times be qualified to look Death in the Face, without being
terrified at it, or unprovided for it. But,

Secondly, Another lesson of true Wisdom which may be learnt from a due
reflection upon the certainty of Death, is this; that since our continuance in
this world cannot last for ever, we should therefore wean our selves from too
great a fondness, for such things as we must certainly part with at the last.

Being rationally convinced, that all the enjoyments of this world must at one
time or other drop away from us, the common rules of Prudence will then
instruct us to disintangle our affections from them betimes; not to wed and tie
our selves too closely to them; but only to value them so far as they are
necessary to us in our present circumstances, without foolishly placing our
chiefest happiness, in the possession of those things which we must certainly
be divorced from; Riches, and Honors, and Pleasures, and all the enjoyments of
this life, are seldom so constant as to attend us to the end of it; they
generally forsake us before we reach the Grave, but it is most certain that
they cannot accompany us beyond it; and there will be no more remembrance of
them, within the Land where all things are forgotten; and how unreasonably then
does that man act, who places all his satisfaction in such transitory trifles,
as must shortly either leave him, or be left by him? Indeed if it were
probable, or but barely possible for us, to be always conversant in this Land
of the living; we had then some reason to be careful and solicitous, for the
delights and conveniences of this present life: But when we are assured, that
our years must come to an end, as a tale that is told, and that our age is even
as nothing; that we are but Travelers and Pilgrims in this world, have no sure
abiding place, no settled dwelling or habitation in it, this should teach us,
to deal with it, as wayfaring men with the Inns which they bait at; just to
make use of it for our present occasions, without ever contracting any great
intimacy with it, or being much concerned what becomes of it when we are gone.
For how dreadful must Death be to that unwary person, who so little reflects
upon the certainty of his leaving this world, that he never attempts to
disengage himself from it? How will that clog and encumber him in his flight?
and how hardly will his soul be able to get loose, with such a weight of earth
about it? To such a man as this, Death comes arrayed in all his pomp of Terror;
to take him from the world, is to tear him from himself; he is grown (as it
were) one piece with it, being rivetted to it by all the ties of interest and
inclination; and to separate him from that his beloved companion, is like
another divorce of Soul and Body: whereas that serious and considering man, who
has duly represented to himself, that Death will call upon him some time or
other, and that then he must leave behind him all the gaieties of this World;
will never be so besotted with the love of them, as to dote upon those things
which he must one day renounce; and the loss of which will be so much the more
grievous, by how much the more deeply he is enamoured of them. Thus will a due
reflection upon the certainty of Death, give to us that are living this most
useful instruction; that we should wean our selves from the vanities of this
present life, and disengage our selves from too extravagant a fondness for
them. But,

Thirdly, Another lesson of instruction which we may be taught by a due
reflection upon the certainty of Death, is this; that since that is the end of
all men living, we should therefore look back upon the occasion of it; and
seriously consider, by what means it prevails, so universally upon all mankind.

Man was created in a state of Immortality as well as Innocence; and after a
long and happy life in this world, would have been translated into another,
without any uneasy passage through the gates of Death: but when sin entered
into the world, Death also entered with it and by it; and took its original
commission for destroying, from God's primitive Curse upon our disobedience:
and indeed they are now linked together so inseparably, that they always
advance hand in hand; and as the world has daily grown more sinful, so Death
also has grown more powerful; has daily made its more near approaches; and our
life which passes away as a shadow, like that upon the Dial of Ahaz, has gone
backwards. For though Death is the most dreadful enemy of humane nature, yet our
darling sins, however they may seem to flatter and cajoll us, keep up a most
strict League and Correspondence with it; every embrace they seem to give us,
does but forward the inslaving us to this potent Adversary, and every kiss,
like that of Judas, does but betray us into Ruin and Destruction; all those
enjoyments with which they seem to treat us, are but so many inlets to the
Grave, and so many entrances into the chambers of Death: Those are they,
however gay and lightsome they may appear, which labor to deprive us of the
light of the Sun, to lay us down in darkness and in silence, to throw us
amongst mouldring Bones and putrefying Carkases, and to make us the companions
of Rottenness and Corruption: all our beloved bosom transgressions, are but so
many bewitching Dalilahs, which lull our heads in their laps, and rock us into
a Lethargy; that so they may give us up bound and settered, into the hands of
our most mortal enemy. And can we then be employed in considerations of this
nature, can we believe that Death is the wages of sin, not only a Salary that
will certainly be paid, but such a one as ought in justice to be so, as if we
had bargained and covenanted for it; without loathing and abominating those
fatal incendiaries, which have set us at enmity with our God, and have brought
Death and destruction into the world? If there be any thing in Death that is
frightful or dismal, it ought to work in us a strong aversion against sin,
which alone has laid upon us the invincible necessity, of entering into a
conflict with that formidable Adversary. This then is another piece of
prudence, which is taught us by a due reflection upon the certainty of Death;
it engages us to look back upon the cause of it, sin; and to entertain a horror
and detestation for it. But,

Fourthly, Another Lesson of true Wisdom, which may be learnt from a due
reflection upon the certainty of Death, is this; that since nothing can exempt
us from the Grave, that common receptacle of all humane kind; we should
therefore be patient and contented under Sickness, and bear the Infirmities of
this life with a cheerful resignation.

Sickness is the usual forerunner of our end, the commom road which most Men
tread, to the dark Palace of imperious Death; and therefore, to murmor or
repine under such dispensations, is as if we should be angry, at being put into
the way, which leads directly to our journe's end: Diseases are the general
Harbingers of Mortality, which come before to marck out those places, where the
great King of Terrors designs to lodge; and though some go off without any
warning, and drop out of the World suddenly and insensibly, yet whether that
may be in Mercy or in Judgment, God only knows; sure I am, that which can but
once be done, and the consequences of which are so considerable, ought to be
done very well, and sickness is the surest and most effectual remembrancer, to
put us in mind of dying as we should. It is recorded of King Philip the
Macedonian, that least his prosperous estate should too far puff him up, he
ordered one of his Attendants, each morning to remind him of his Mortality,
with this expression, O King thou must die: and how many of us should be apt to
forget our selves, did not sickness perform for us this charitable office, and
give us a kind Item of our perishing condition! How unjust then and ungrateful
a proceeding will it be, to quarrel at the Visits of an obliging Monitor, who
only comes to refresh our memory, that we may not be forgetful of our most
valuable concernments? how heavy or intolerable soever our pressures may
appear, yet Death (we are sure) whose messengers they are, will not fail
quickly to put an end to them; and can we not then bear, with a quiet
resignation, those things that bring with them so considerable an advantage,
and whose remedy is so certain, and so near? How unfit is that man to look
Death in the face, who cannot bear its most distant approaches? or to struggle
with mortal Agonies and Convulsions' that shrinks under the first assault of an
Ague or a Fever? whereas that constant and resolved mind, which cheerfully
submits to the hand of God, and breaks the force of his distemper by a
Christian patience; is by these lighter trials exercised and prepared, to stand
the shock of the grand encounter; he becomes familiar and acquainted with
Death, by conversing calmly with its friends and companions, and can never be
startled at its Personal appearance, when he has thus been used to correspond
with it, by the interposition of its Ambassadors. This therefore is a 4th
lesson, which we may learn from a due reflection upon the certainty of Death;
patiently to undergo all sicknesses and infirmities, which are the necessary
preliminaries and forerunners of it. But

Fifthly and lastly, Another lesson of instruction, which may be taught us by a
due reflection upon the certainty of Death, is this; that since that is the end
of all men and nothing can qualify us for an exemption from it, we ought
therefore to bear the loss of our Friends or our Relations, without any
immoderate or excessive sorrow for them.

For why should that violently afflict or discompose us, which we have all the
reason in the world to expect? can we suppose, that our Friends should be
peculiarly excepted, out of the common lot of all mankind? or because they are
Ours must they therefore be Immortal? It was the comfort which a father applied
to himself, to lighten the loss of an only Son, Scio me mortalem genuisse, I
know that I begot him a mortal man; by having considered that he must once die,
he was able to support his Death whenever it happened; and this will not fail
to have the same effect upon us, if we will but press it as homely upon our
selves: all our care and endeavors are necessary and decent, to assist our
sick friends in order to their recovery; a becoming sense of our own loss of
them, and a moderate sorrow for them, is natural and commendable; but to carry
our concern to an unreasonable height, to be violent or extravagant in our
expressions of grief, to let it swell beyond the limits of Reason and
Christianity; this is, as if we would arraign the providence of God, which has
appointed that Death should be the end of all men; or as if we expected, that
for our sakes, our Friends should be excepted out of that general Sentence,
which has universally past upon all mankind: We should consider, that they have
got the better of the exchange, by being taken out of a miserable world, to be
admitted into a state of happiness and perfection; we should prefer their
advantage before our own enjoyment, rejoicing at their removal into bliss, tho
we pay dearly for it by our own want of them; we may long to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ and them, but cannot be so selfish or uncharitable, as to
wish them back again with us! we should rejoice that our companions are in a
better Society! and that our Friends are preferred into Angels! in a word, we
should have nothing so dear which we cannot resign unto our God, or which we
can desire to be disposed of better: He that by considering his latter End, has
seriously imprintep printed in his mind, the unavoidable necessity of Death to
all men, that it strikes impartially and will spare none, will best be enabled
to practice this lesson; will never be too much disturbed, at such an event as
he always foresaw; and for which he has constantly been prepared, whether in
himself or in others. This then is a fifth Aphorism of Wisdom which may be
learnt by a due reflection upon the certainty of Death; that we should restrain
all excessive or immoderate sorrow, for the loss of our Friends or our dearest
Relations.

Indeed, if the loss be of an Extraordinary nature, if the Public be a
sufferer as well as Private families, (as it is in that Great man whose
Obsequies we now celebrate;) as sorrow is then most busy and importunate, so
ought we then most especially to stand upon our guard; we should Summon to our
assistance whatsoever may sustain us, against the attempts of a grief so just
and piercing. But God, who delights not to afflict the Children of men, has
generally accompanied such melancholy circumstances, with an Antidote
sufficient to combat their malevolence. The fame and reputation which such
persons leave behind them, and which always shines clearest out of the land of
Darkness, and stretches out with their dead bodies, usually administering such
additional consolation, as may serve to buoy up the spirits of their friends,
under the heavy pressure of their encroaching sorrow. And if ever that comfort
was abundantly indulged, it is now imparted in a most eminent degree, to the
surviving lamenters of this departed Hero; than whom, as none has gone to the
Grave more universally regretted; so none will live more generally or more
lastingly, in the Remembrance and respect of all that knew him. And now, as I
have performed my Duty to the Living, by showing them what advantages may
accrue to them, from a due reflection upon the certainty of Death; so give me
leave, to aquit my self in some measure of my respects to the Dead, by hinting
to you some sew of those many excellencies, by which he was elevated very
considerably, above the common rank of men. But lest too a great a variety of
matter, should make my discourse confused and rambling; I shall therefore
confine my imperfect character, to these three qualifications in which he was
most eminent, of a Gentleman, a Patriot, and a Soldier.

First. Then, let us consider him as a Gentleman; and we shall find him
possessed of all those accomplishments, which entitle a man justly to that
honorable appellation, and recommend him to universal esteem. Besides the
felicity of an illustrious extraction, of an antienter date than the Norman
conquest; (for which he afterward over-paid his family, by imparting to it
greater luster than he borrowed from it) he was singularly remarkable for those
commendable embellishments, which distinguish a man of sense and breeding, from
the less resin'd part of human kind: His conversation was familiar and
engaging, his wit lively and piercing, his judgment solid and discerning; and
all these set off by a graceful person, a cheerful aspect, and an inviting air.
his natural abilities were cultivated and improved, by the additional
advantages of Travel and Experience; to his own reputation and the credit of
his Country, much of his youthful time did he spend abroad; by which his riper
years were qualified, to become more useful and serviceable at home; he made it
not his business, (as too many have done) to glean the follies and the
weaknesses of those Nations he conversed with, and to traffic only in Bells
and Bawbles: but imported such things as deserved his application, and enriched
his mind with their most valuable Commodities: He pryed into their customs,
their politics, and their strength, without being partially biased in their
favor; returning, as he went out, a True Englishman; and valuing more highly
the constitutions of his own Country, by comparing them with the mismanagements
and irregularities which he had carefully observed in the Government of others:
Thus did he wisely endeavor to fit himself, more for Service than for show;
looking, upon Language and fashionable breeding (in which however he was versed
as well as any man) but as the becoming trappings and furniture, of his more
considerable substantial improvements: Besides all which he was particularly
taken notice of, for a surprising largeness and generosity of Soul; such as set
him above the little temptations of private intriguings and narrow designs;
being always ready to make his own interest truckle to the advantage of others,
or the service of the Public: By such methods as these he gained esteem every
where: and had the general commendation from all tongues of being, what so many
aim at, and so few attain to a complete English Gentleman. But

Secondly, Let us consider him as a Patriot; and we shall find his affection to
his native Country, to have been as disinterested, as it was firm and
exemplary: His earlier years were spent abroad in her Service, and in the
honorable fatigues of a foreign war; nor could all the allurements of royal
favor (which would largely have been showred upon so considerable a man) bribe
him afterward to forsake her cause, or to espouse a Party opposite to her
interests; he stuck close to his Honor, and to his Love to her, tho at the
expense of a valuable employment, and much more valuable expectations; he laid
down his Commission with a cheerful resignation, when he could no longer keep
it without disserving her, for whose sake and safety he accepted it before; and
exposed himself readily to a voluntary banishment, rather than he would be a
spectator to those miseries, which were about to exercise his native land, and
to which he could then apply no remedy: since that how vigoroysly did he
contribute his assistance, to our late happy Revolution! and how firm and
unalterable has his adherence been, to the best of Princes and of Governments!
and all this, without being acted by those little motives, of advancing his
fortune, or his figure in the world; but receiving all his deserved
preferments, as the favors of a Prince whom he valued more, for his personal
virtues than for his royal Bounties; and only esteeming them as the instruments
and opportunities, of being more signally and successfully useful to his
Country. How freely ever after did be expose himself to danger, whenever her
honor or advantage called upon him! till at last he sealed his tenderness for
her, with the highest expression of it that could be given, Greater love than
this has no man, that he lay down his Life! This did he for his dear Country,
fighting in her cause, against her most powerful and most inveterate enemies;
and testified a sensible concern at his Death, that he had not another life to
sacrifice, for the advancement of her interest and the service of his Prince:
and he met with a grateful return of love; since few, if any, have ever had the
happiness, to be so much the Darling of all sorts of people, or to be attended
to their grave with so general a sorrow, But

Thirdly, Let us consider him as a Soldier and here we shall find him vigorous
and active; surprizingly brave in the most dangerous emergencies; and eagerly
catching at all opportunities, in which he might signalize his Courage without
forfeiting his Judgment: If all the other actions of his life were silent,
Athlone would speak both his Valor and his Conduct; an action, in which I know
not whether was more wonderful, the Attempt, or the Execution; both of them
were admirable, and both his own. I appeal to those who were under his Command
if he ever. refused to take the first Essay of danger; or, addressed to them in
other Language than that of the great Julius, who requited, and expected
nothing more from his Legions, than that they would follow where he led the
way: and yet, with all this ardour of an invincible courage, he was not of an
uneasy turbulent disposition, or overapt to be engaged in idle quarrels; for as
the sweetness of his nature, and; the politeness of his education, hindered him
from offering an affront to any man; so the modest sense which he had of his
own just merit, would not suffer him to suspect, that he was designed upon by
others; the Fire then of his temper worked calmly and regularly, like that
vital warmth which cherishes the body, and is subservient to the great ends of
health and liveliness; whilst that of too many others, resembles the malignant
heat of a Fever, which boils up into folly and distraction: He loved all
Soldiers, he lived amongst them, and he died like one; and since he was no
less beloved by them, I have hopes that the desire of revenging his death, may
prove a sharper Spur to their future Undertakings, than even his presence
formerly and great example; that so the just anger which his loss works in them
(the loss of a Patron as well as of a Leader) may send thousands of our
Adversaries to wait upon his Ghost, and make Sampson's character be applicable
to him, that the Enemies which he destroyed by his Death, were more than those
which he slew in his Life.

Thus have I acted like that Painter, who drawing the picture of a young
Nobleman some days after he was buried, was fain to fall vastly short of the
beautiful Original, and could only copy out a very faint resemblance: in like
manner have I dealt with my present subject; giving you only some imperfect
lines, by which you may be just able to guess at the party. Such then, as fame
and your own knowledge will more fully decipher him was this Great man, who is
now but a cold neglected lump of Clay: Death, which is the end of all men, has
asserted its Jurisdiction over him also; I mean, over as much of him as could
dye; for his unblemished reputation is exempted from mortality, Death has no
farther dominion over him. Tho his carcass must be consigned to worms and
putrefaction, yet the memory of his great actions shall for ever live and
flourish; in whatsoever parts of the earth, an accomplished Gentleman, a
zealous Lover of his Country, or a deserving Commander is remembered with
respect the name of Tolmach who was eminently all these, shall never fail of an
honorable mention.

Let us then attend him to his Grave with decent expressions of a manly sorrow;
let no mixture interfere of weakness or esseminacy; nothing unbecoming the
person we mourn for: but let us take our leave of him at the Dormitory of his
Ancestors, with the Prophet's Lamentation, Alas my Brother!

And let us, who are yet living, so duly and seriously lay to heart, not only
his end but that of all men else; that whenever this common lot of mankind,
shall (as it once must) be ours in particular; we may leave behind (as he does)
the odor of a good memory, and only exchange this life for a better. Which God
of his infinite mercy grant we may all do through the merits and mediation of
our blessed Redeemer, to whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed
all honor, power, might, majesty and dominion, henceforth and for evermore,
Amen.

FINIS.

