A Persuasive to Peace and Unity. A SERMON preached before the Right Honorable
the Lord Mayor AND THE ALDERMEN OF THE CITY of LONDON; At the Church of St.
Mary Le-Bow, On Sunday January 16th 1697/School. By SAMVEL BRADFORD, Rector of
the said Church.

LONDON, Printed for Brab. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhil, School.

To the Right Honorable Sir Humphry Edwin, Knt, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, AND THE Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
THE Publishing this Discourse is purely an act of Obedience to Your Order; it
being designed to have gone no farther, than the Place in which it was Preached.

When You were pleased to come in a Body to my Church, upon so solemn an
Occasion, as that of partaking of the Holy Communion, in compliance with a Law
which makes the doing so a Test, to all who are admitted to Public Offices and
Employments, I thought it became me to lay hold on the Opportunity, to exhort
You earnestly to promote the Good of that Church, whereof by this Practice You
own Your selves to be Members.

What I have urged for our being (as far as is possible) united, not only in
Judgment and Affection; but in Communion too, is upon such Reasons as will hold
equally, where there is an Indulgence granted by Law, and where there is not;
namely, The Precepts of the Holy Scriptures, and the Nature of the Christian
Body; by both which every Christian is certainly obliged to promote the Peace
and Unity of the Church of Christ, not only for Wrath, but also for Conscience
sake; out of regard to Christ and his Church, even where he is liable to no
Civil Mulcts or Penalties for doing otherwise.

And to prevent all jealousy, as if I had the least Intention hereby to
express my dislike of Indulgence toward tender Consciences, I take this
Occasion to declare, That I heartily approve it, as being thoroughly persuaded,
that for one Christian to persecute another, who Conscientiously differs from
him, merely for his so doing, is a gross violation, not only of the Law of
Christianity, but even of Nature it self.

Nay farther, I believe it the Duty of Church Governors to insist upon no
narrower Terms of Communion, than such as, to the best of their Judgments,
regulated by Scripture, have a plain and evident tendency to maintain Truth,
promote Piety and Virtue, and preserve good Order in the Churches under their
Care. Which I mention with the greater freedom, because I am well satisfied
that this was the Principle upon which those who settled the Reformation
amongst us, in the Reign of King Edward and Queen Elizabeth, acted; and because
I doubt not but that it is the Principle also of our present Governors both in
Church and State.

But after this, the Duty of every private Christian is as plain; namely, to
comply with the Terms established, as far as he Lawfully may, valuing the Peace
of the Church much beyond the gratification of himself, and being ready to do
every thing for the maintaining its Unity, which he thinks Lawful to be done
upon any other account whatsoever.

How the Christians of this Nation came to divide themselves into so many
distinct and separate Communions, I will not now inquire: but till we can
attain to this Disposition, I can foresee nothing else, but that our Divisions
must be propagated without Reason, and without End, from one Generation to
another; which is but a melancholy Thought to any one who remembers how much
stress both our Savior and his Apostles have laid upon Peace and Unity.

The Prayer which our Lord offered up, a little before his Suffering, for all
who should believe in him, was in these words; That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us; and that
for this Reason, That the World may believe that thou have sent me. And St.
Paul, in a set Discourse occasioned by Contentions in the Church of Corinth,
concerning the Gifts with which some were endued to a greater degree than
others, prefers Charity (meaning that Charity whereby the Peace and Unity of
the Church is maintained) much before the best of Gifts, the strongest Faith,
the most profuse Liberality, and even Martyrdom it self.

Our Blessed Savior, as an Example to his Followers, constantly joined in the
Public Exercises of God's Worship, both in the Temple and in the Synagogue,
notwithstanding the many and gross Corruptions which were at that time crept
into the Jewish Church.

The Apostles in like manner, and the other Christians who dwelt at Jerusalem,
though as they were obliged by the Christian Institution, they assembled apart
from the Jews, for the performing that Worship which was peculiarly Christian,
yet we never find that they deserted either the Temple or the Synagogues, till
the final desolation of their Country. And St. Paul himself, who so often and
so vehemently, upon just occasions, asserted and pleaded for the Liberty of
Christians, as being set free from the Jewish Yoke, yet did not at all scruple
the making use of those Ceremonies, which himself had declared to be abrogated,
when ever it might serve to the benefit of the Church.

After which Considerations, it is very strange that any Christian should
entertain such slight apprehensions of the Evil and Danger of dividing the
Christian Church, as abundance amongst us have done.

Pardon me, if I seem to press this matter with Zeal upon You, who, under His
Majesty, have the Government of this great City committed to You, and whose
Examples are like to have much greater Influence than the Examples of private
Men. Whatsoever others do, it certainly becomes those who are in Public
Stations, to fulfill all Righteousness; and I think I may be allowed to say,
without Offense, that a Magistrate should be one who needs no Indulgence, but
that which is by common consent given to Humane Nature in general.

That whatsoever is truly and justly proposed in the following Discourse may be
of Use to the Public, and that we may all in our respective Stations,
zealously and constantly, promote the Honor of Almighty God, the Good of his
Church, and the Welfare of the Kingdom, is the hearty Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most Faithful, and Obedient Servant, Samuel Bradford.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, Persuading to PEACE and UNITY.
EPHESIANS 4.3. Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace.


WE are assembled at this time not only to hear the Word of God read and
preached, and to offer up our daily Prayers and Praises to the Divine Majesty;
but also to Celebrate the most peculiar and Solemn Office of our Christian
Religion, Namely the Commemoration of our Saviors Death, according to his own
Institution. By doing of which we openly profess to the World, First, our
Communion with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, by that Spirit which
proceeds from both; and in the next Place our fellowship one with another. We
declare hereby that we are Members of that part of the Christian Church which
is established in this Nation, and not of that only, but of the truly Catholic
Church throughout the World. For the Sacrament of the Lords Supper was intended
by our Lord, as a Badge and Symbol of such our Communion. And upon this
Occasion I thought I could not choose a more proper Subject, than the words I
have now read to you, wherein we are so expressly exhorted to regard, and to
promote, as far as in us lies, the Unity and Peace of the Church of Christ.
Endeavoring to keep etc.

St. Paul had been, in his preceding Discourse, putting the Ephesians in mind
of the Extraordinary Grace of God toward them, in taking them within the Pale
of his Church; that whereas they had been Gentiles, Chapter 2.11, 12, 13.
without Christ, Aliens from the Common wealth of Israel, and strangers from
the Covenants of Promise; Nay, having no hope, and without God in the World:
they were Now brought near to God by the Blood of Christ, being together with
the believing Jews adopted into his Family. He exceedingly magnifies this their
Privilege, in those Remarkable Words, v. 10, 2, 21, 22.
Now therefore ye are no more strangers and Foreigners; but fellow Citizens
with the Saints, and of the Household of God, and are built upon the Foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the Chief
cornerstone, in whom all the building, fitly Framed together, grows into an
holy Temple in the Lord, in whom you also are builded together, for an
Habitation of God, through the Spirit.

To the same purpose he goes on, throughout the Third Chapter, both to extol
this Favor of God toward them, and to pray that they might be thoroughly
Sensible of it; after which he begins this Fourth Chap. with a Serious
Exhortation to them, that they would walk worthy of this their Vocation,
particularly in the exercise of much Humility and Charity. Ver. 1, 2.
I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
Vocation wherewith ye are called, with all lowliness and meekness, with
longsuffering, forbearing one another in love; and as it follows in the words
of my Text, Endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

From which Connection of the Words we may observe by the way, That the keeping
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace (whatever that means) is
absolutely Necessary to our walking worthy of our Christian Vocation, and that
in order to this, we ought to have our minds well seasoned with Humility and
Charity, two most excellent Christian Graces, whereby we shall be best disposed
to the exercise of all other Virtues, which our Holy Religion Requires, and for
want of which it comes to pass, that the Professors of Christianity are so
miserably divided as they are at this day. But I proceed to the words
themselves; in treating of which I propose this Method.

To Explain the Duty which the Apostle here urges upon the Ephesians, showing
what it is, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bondof Peace.

To consider the Obligation which all Christians are under,

To show how we may best attain to the Practice of it.

To Explain the Duty it Self, to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace.

By the Unity of the Spirit I conceive the Apostle here means such an Unity, as
properly belongs to a Body, which is inspired in the whole, and every part of
it, by one and the same Spirit. I know, that some will have this phrase to
signify no more, than an Union of the Spirits or minds of Christians. This is
indeed contained in it; but it is by no means the full Sense of the Expression.
The Union which is between Christians, is Principally and in the first Place in
their Minds or Spirits; but I take the word Spirit here to relate to the Divine
Spirit, which, as the Apostle presently after observes, animates the whole Body
of Christ, and makes it indeed to be one. For so it follows, ver. 4.
there is one Body and one Spirit. And to the same purpose it is frequently
expressed in other places. Thus in the preceding part of this Epistle; Chap. 2.22.
In whom, that is, in Jesus Christ, you also are builded together, for an
Habitation of God, through the Spirit. And very Remarkably in the Former
Epistle to the Corinthians; 1 Cor. 1^.12, 13.
As the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one
Body, being many, are one Body: So also is Christ. For by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or
Free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit; That is, The Church of
Christ may be fitly compared to the Body of a Man, which has many Members; but
all of them united by one Spirit, which is diffused through every part, and
quickens the whole. Just so, says he, the Church consists of abundance of
particular Believers; but these are all admitted by Baptism, to the Privilege
of being put under the Conduct of the Holy Ghost, in whose Name they are
baptized, together with that of the Father, and of the Son, and whose
assistance they may constantly depend upon, if they do not resist and drive him
away from them. And they are farther constantly made to drink into the same
Spirit; that is, by partaking of the other Sacrament, that of the Lord's Supper,
Particularly of the wine there poured out, they may receive, and if they are
sincere Christians, they do so, farther communications of the same Spirit. Now
this gives a clear account of the Expression in the Text, the Unity of the
Spirit, that is, such an Unity, as becomes a Body thus animated by the same
Spirit, viz. an Unity in Judgment, and an Unity in Affection; or in other
words, an Unity in Truth and in Charity, together with all that External and
Visible Unity which is Naturally consequent upon the Former. For so it follows,
in the bond of Peace, by which is meant a Peaceable Conversation with each
other, as in all other respects, so especially in Spiritual Affairs; the
avoiding all Dissension and Division, with respect to External Communion; the
Living and Conversing together, and especially the Communcating with each other
in all the Ordinances, and Institutions of Religion, as one Body. This
peaceable demeanor is the Bond of Unity amongst Christians not only showing
them to be one, but preserving them in that state. So that you may take my
Explication of this Duty, in the Four Following Particulars.

To keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace implys, Judgment,
especially as to the main and Principal Doctrines of the Christian Faith.

It implys also the preserving and cherishing of Love and Affection amongst
Christians.

It farther implys a quiet and Peaceable, Conversation.

It implys yet more particularly a preserving entire, External Communion of the
Christian Church.

To keep the Unity etc implys the maintaining, Judgment, especially as to the
main and Principal Doctrines of the Christian Faith. 1 Cor. ^.10.
This is what St. Paul exhorts the Corinthians to; Now I beseech you Brethren,
by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and
that there be no Divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly joined together
in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment.

It Is true; Christians, as well as all other Men, may be supposed, and fairly
allowed to differ in some matters which are of no great consequence; but there
are certain Truths delivered down to us in the Scriptures, from our blessed
Savior and his Apostles, which are to be faithfully adhered to by all
Christians, even such as wherein Christianity it self is concerned, and which
cannot be denied without Subverting, or at least shaking and endangering the
Foundation; as there as likewise many others, which are necessary to be
understood and believed, if we will form any true Scheme of our Religion, or
arrive at any competent Knowledge and Understanding in it. Why else should St.
Paul require Timothy to hold fast the form of sound words which he had heard of
him? 2. Tim. 1.13, 14.
And again, to keep by the Holy Ghost, that good thing which was committed to
him? Why did he order him to abide at Ephesus on purpose, as himself says, 1.
Tim. 1.1.3. Tit. 2.1.2.
that he might charge some, that they should teach no other Doctrine? Why does
he command Titus to speak the things that become sound Doctrine? And to teach
those under his charge to be sound in the Faith? And why again does he in the
same Epistle set it down, as a Qualification of those Bishops whom Titus should
ordain, that they should hold fast the faithful word, as they had been taught,
Tit. 1.9, 10, 11.
that they might be able by sound Doctrine both to exhort, and to convince the
gainsayers, and to stop the Mouths of unruly and vain talkers and deceivers?
And lastly, what else can St. Jude mean, Jude, v. 3.
by his exhorting those to whom he writes, Earnestly to contend for the Faith
which was once delivered unto the Saints?

Now as all the Truths of Christianity, which are proposed to our belief, are
contained in the Holy Scriptures, which we Protestants assert to be the
complete Rule of our Faith, as well as our Minners; So the main and Fundamental
Articles of the Christian Faith, were at first contained in that, short
Formulary of Confession which was made by Christians at their Baptism. This
form of sound words, was, according to the Apostles Expression, committed to or
deposited with those, whom they ordained to Officiate in the Church, to be by
them delivered unto the Saints, that is, to all Christians, at their Baptism.
And accordingly the profession then made, is by the ancient Christian Writers
commonly called, the Rule of Faith; the Sum of which was, that the Person
baptized did acknowledge God the Father, as the Creator of all; together with
his only begotten Son, as appearing in our Nature, and dying for our
Redemption, rising again, and ascending into Heaven, and sitting on the right
hand of the Father, from whence he is expected to come again, and judge the
World; and also the Holy Ghost, the Sanctifier, the Guide, and the Comforter of
all True Christians; with the Resurrection of the dead, and the Life of the
World to come. This was afterward drawn up into that Form, which we have in
the Apostles Creed, which, as occasion was given, came to be farther explained
in those which we call, the Nieene, or Constantinopolitan, and Athanasian
Forms. Farther explained I say; For these last mentioned Forms do contain no
more in substance, than that which we call the Apostles Creed; as that likewise
contains the very same in Substance, with the ancient Forms of Profession made
at Baptism. So that there are no New Articles contained in any of these Creeds;
but only an explication of the ancient Baptismal Profession, according to the
Tenor of the Holy Scriptures, and agreeable to the declared Judgment of the
First and best Christian writers extant. So that it is in truth the want of a
due acquaintance with the holy Scriptures, at least the true sense and meaning
of them, as understood by those, who were nearest to the time of their being
written, and best able to judge in the case, that makes some in our days,
whilst they profess themselves Christians, yet so openly and vehemently to
inveigh against these Forms in which our Christian Faith is expressed. Which I
the rather take notice of, because there have appeared of late diverse writers,
who have in a bold and insolent, nay rude and Scurrilous manner, attackt those
Doctrines, which have so constantly from the beginning of Christianity been
owned, as some of the first Principles of the Christian Religion. Nay it is too
apparent that under the pretense of opposing the Doctrine of the blessed
Trinity, all Religion, especially that which has been revealed, has been
Struck at. So that we may in this Age repeat St. Judes complaint, that there
are certain men crept in, ungodly Men, Jude, ver. 4.
denying the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; upon which account we
ought to exhort one another, as he did those to whom he wrote, earnestly to
contend for the Faith, ver. 3.
which was once delivered unto the Saints; and that, not only against
Socinianism, and Arianism; but even against gross Skepticism, and downright
Infidelity. Now if we would keep the Unity of the Spirit, in this first sense
which I am speaking of, we ought strictly to adhere to the Doctrine which we
received, when we were baptized in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, and thereby dedicated to our great Creator, Redeemer, and
Sanctifier; we should seriously consider, and endeavor fully to understand,
the Profession of Faith we were then baptized into, settling our Judgments in
all the great Articles of our Religion, by the careful study of the Holy
Scriptures, which were indicted by men endued with a divine Spirit, and which
are therefore able to make us wise unto Salvation. We should by the daily use
of these endeavor to improve our minds, not only in the absolutely necessary,
but in all the other Doctrines of Christianity, such as will help us to
understand the true Scheme, and consequently the great worth and excellency of
that Religion which we profess; still growing and increasing in all that useful
Knowledge, which these Books are able to furnish us with. To which purpose, as
we should read them with seriousness and humility, so we should make use of all
those Methods which are proper for the helping us to understand an ancient
Book, not leaning to our own understandings to such a degree, as may hinder us
from consulting with those who are best qualified to assist us; adding withal
our Earnest prayers to Almighty God, for the aid of his Holy Spirit, to
enlighten and to sanctify out Minds in the use of them; by which means we
shall not fail to preserve that Unity of the Spirit, with respect to our
Judgments, which St. Paul may be understood here to exhort us to.

To keep the Unity of the Spirit implys also the preserving and cherishing of
Love and Affection amongst Christians.

After an honest care used for the information of our Understandings, we may
possibly differ, as I observed before, in matters of less weight and moment, as
we find some did even in the Apostles days. This may fall out from the
difference there is between the Parts and Abilities of several Men. A Serious
Study and Practice of the Christian Religion do indeed tend to enlarge the
Understandings and minds of men: but yet still there is left that difference
which Nature has made between the capacity of one Man and another. Besides that
some have much greater Advantages, and fairer Opportunitys for the improving of
themselves, than others have. Whence it comes to pass, that there are weak as
well as strong Christians; babes in Christ, such as have need of milk, as well
as others that are well grown, and are able to digest stronger meat. Even men
of equal capacities and abilities, may through their different Advantages,
through their tempers, or their Conversations, have differing apprehensions
concerning several points of Christianity it self.

But yet in this case, we may all keep the Unity of the Spirit, with respect to
our Affection and Charity toward each other. Christian Love is due to the
Christian Temper and Spirit, wherever they are to be found. The Image of God
and our Redeemer, wherever it appears, ought to engage the hearty approbation,
and cordial Love of Every one, who pretends to bear the same Resemblance.

Mutual Charity is so necessary to the Members of the Christian Body, that we
know it is made by our Lord himself the distinguishing Character of his
Disciples, this being the special and peculiar Precept which he gave them,
John. 13.34, 35. 1 John, 3, 11.
that they should Love one another, even as he had loved them. St. John
therefore calls it, the Message which they had heard from the beginning, that
they should love one another. There is indeed nothing more universally
recommended to Christians, and nothing more vehemently urged upon them than
this kind of Unity. Romans 12.16. Col. 3.12, 13, 14.
Thus St. Paul, Be of the same mind one toward another; and Again, Put on, as
the elect of God, that is, as sincere Christians, Holy and Beloved, bowels of
mercies, kindness, Long Suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one
another, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. And above all these things,
put on Charity, which is the bond of Perfectness; that is, which is the most
perfect Bond or Tie, whereby Christians are united to each other. And to name
no more, just before the Text, as an Introduction to this keeping the Unity of
the Spirit, he exhorts the Ephelsians to be long-suffering, ver. 2.
forbearing one another in love. And according to all these excellent Precepts,
it was the mutual Affection of the primitive Christians, by which they were
distinguished, and for which they were envied by their Enemies, when they could
look upon them and say, Behold! how they love one another! Nothing ought to
separate one Christian from another in this respect, but what at the same time
separates him from Christ. For whilst we are Members of the same Body, whilst
we are all united to the same Head, it is absurd not to retain a regard to each
other, suitable to such a Relation.

To keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace farther implies, whole
Conversation.

This is necessarily consequent upon the former, such a Behavior being the
natural effect of inward affection and good will; so that I need not insist
largely on this, after what I have said upon the foregoing particular. I shall
only take notice, that as it includes a meek and Gentle treatment of each
other, in all respects, so more particularly with respect to our Speech. I
mean, that we never provoke or I ritate our fellow Christians, by any rude or
undecent Language, which is so far from being allowable in a Christian, that it
is altogether unbecoming a Man. But I thought fit to mention it, both because
this is too common a fault, the Tongue (as St. (...).
Jane, expresses it) being an unruly evil; insomuch that if any man offend not
in word, he pronounces him a perfect man and able to bridle the whole body;
verse. 2.
as also because the consequences of it are oftentimes very deplorable, as the
same Apostle observes; Behold! how great a matter a little fire kindles! ver.
5, 6.
And the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity; so is the tongue among our
Members, that it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of
Nature, and it is set on fire of Hell; but especially, because too many
professing Christianity, to the great dishonor of their profession, upon every
slight difference that happens amongst them about their Opinions in Religion,
are exceedingly prone to this Evil, accounting it a Testimony of Zeal for God
and his cause, when they can express themselves in very bitter and reproachful
terms; not considering what St. ver. 16, 17, 18.
James adds in the conclusion of that Discourse, that this Wisdom (namely which
is accompanied with bitter envying and Strife) descends not from above; but
is Earthly, sensual, devilish, whereas the wisdom which is from above is first
pure, then Peaceable, Gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and of
good fruits; and the fruit of righteousness is sown in Peace of them that make
Peace. For which Reason St. Paul thus bespeaks the Ephesians, in the Chapter
out of which my Text is taken; Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and
Clamor, v. 31, 32.
and Evil Speaking be put away from you, with all Malice, and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you. Indeed for a Peaceable behavior in the general, the New
Testament throughout abounds with plain and excellent Precepts. Thus St. Paul,
1. These. 5.13, 14, 15.
to the Thessalonians, Be at peace among your selves; and Again, Be patient
toward all men. See that none render Evil for Evil unto any man: but ever
follow that which is good, both among your selves, and to all men. 2 Timothy 2.22,
24. 25.
In like manner to Timothy, Follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace, with
them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart; and a little after, The Servant
of the Lord must not strive: but be gentle unto all men; Patient, in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves; which, though it be spoken primarily to
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, yet concerns all Christians in general,
as being Servants also of the same Lord. Mark 9.50.
I shall conclude this particular, with our Saviors precept to his immediate
followers, and in them to all that should afterward believe in him; Have salt
in your selves, and have Peace one with another. That is, See that you be
seasoned with that Spiritual Wisdom, and that divine Temper of mind, which may
render you acceptable both to God and men, and particularly, in order to the
same end, maintain a constant Peace and agreement among your selves.

To keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace implies yet more
particularly, External Communion of the Christian Church.

I am sensible, that considering the divided state of the Church in the present
Age, this is a very tender point to discourse of; but as I shall speak, so I
desire to be heard, in the Spirit of meekness and Charity, which, I am sure, is
the true Spirit of Christianity.

External Communion may be very properly called the bond of Peace, in as much
as it shows to all the World, that Christians own themselves one Body, and
especially as it tends to preserve them in that State; this being one great end
and design of our being appointed to meet together, to celebrate the public
worship of God, that when we glorify God and our Redeemer with one Heart and
one Mouth, our Charity toward our Christian Brethren may at the same time be
Inflamed. And that it is apt to have this effect, I dare appeal to the
experience of all that are serious and constant in the public worship
according to the Institution of the Gospel. And there can be no doubt, but that
abundance of that uncharitableness, which is to be observed in Christians
toward each other, proceeds from their having first divided Communions, and
refused to worship God and their Savior together. How many unchristian
Contentions among our selves in this Nation, may be attributed Solely to this
Cause, I leave all that hear me to judge. For after all that men may talk of
the Duty, and the Possibility of Christians, who are of different Communions,
Loving one another, such is the Weakness of humane Nature, and the coldness of
Christian Charity, that, as experience convinces us, men are easily carried
from difference in communion, not only to a coolness in affection, but as the
consequence of that, a distance, and a shyness in conversation. First the
differing parties admit unkind thoughts of each other, then often proceed to
hard words, to uncharitable censures, either of the opinions, or which is
worse, of the Intentions of those that differ from them, and it may be at last
come in good earnest to strive for Mastery, to struggle for superiority and
preeminency, to contend for Power and Dominion.

But besides all the Benefits, which result from keeping the Unity of the
Spirit, etc. in the sense I am now speaking of, and the Mischiefs which
evidently flow from breaking it, (which are more than I can have time now to
enumerate) that which I would propose to your impartial consideration is, that
the Nature and Frame of that Religion, which we all profess, obliges us to be
One in this respect. The First Christians assembled in one place, offering up
their Devotions daily together, under the Direction and conduct of the
Apostles, as long as their number would permit them so to do. Thus we read, in
the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts 2.1. ver. 44, 45.
At the day of Pentecost, they were all with one accord in one Place. And
afterward in the same Chap. All that believed were together; and Again, They
continuing daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from House
to House, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart; that is,
they worship God together in the Temple, at the Hours of Prayer, and then
withdrew into some more private apartment to celebrate the Lords Supper
together (the peculiar Christian service) doing all with great simplicity, ver.
42.
Integrity, joy, and Charity; and once more, They continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and Prayers. Thus
did the first Christians, and then it is observed that the Lord added to the
Church daily such as should be saved; ver. 4^.
the unanimity of Christians, together with the Blessing of God which is ready
to attend it, having a mighty tendency to the increasing their Number.

When the Number of Christians was by this means increased, and the Religion of
our Savior was spread through many distant Citys and Countries, they were then
indeed necessitated to assemble in distinct places, to which Purpose the
Apostles ordained and fixed Bishops and Lastors in every place where they
formed a Church; but still they were one in heart and Soul, a fair
correspondence was kept up between all these particular Churches, and when any
Christian traveled from one city to another, he immediately joined with, and
was received by the Church settled in that place to which he came, as may be
easily discerned in the Sequel of that History of the Acts of the Apostles.

Every Christian is in truth a Member of the Catholic Church of Christ, and
consequently disposed, if he be rightly instructed in his profession, to join
with any sound part of the Church throughout the World, wherever his business
or occasions shall lead him. But forasmuch as the Catholic Church must be
distributed into several particular Churches, for the good of the whole, and
the Edification of every particular member of it, each particular Christian is
by consequence of right, a member of that part of the Christian Church, in
which providence has cast his lot; and where his ordinary abode and residence
is, there in all reason ought his Stated and ordinary Communion to be, provided
always, that no unchristian, no unlawful Terms of Communion are imposed upon
him.

If any particular Church impose any unlawful Terms of Communion, then a good
Christian is discharged of this obligation; that will be a sufficient plea for
his separation from it. For which reason, if the Romish Communion were
established among us (which God forbid it ever should be) we, who have been
Instructed in the principles of Christianity, as reformed from the Errors and
Corruptions of that Church, ought not, we could not Consistently with our
Principles Communicate with it. But wheresoever here is a Church established,
under the conduct of Bishops and Pastors regularly called and appointed to
guide and govern it, and if the State be Christian, with the concurrence of its
Authority also, in which a good Christian may worship and serve his Maker and
Redeemer, without professing or complying with any thing contrary to the
precepts of Christianity, I can see no just reason for separation in such a
case.

Shall the mere pretense of prefering some confessedly indifferent modes or
Circumstances of worship and discipline excuse a Christian from holding
Communion with that Church, to which he otherwise of right belongs? But where
then will be any end of Division? What bounds or limits can be fixed to it? How
is it possible there should be any order, any Peace, in the Christian Church,
if every one is at Liberty to break the Unity of the Body merely for this
reason, because he could better approve of some other Modes or Circumstances,
whilst yet he allows those which are in present use to be Lawful?

Who is it, in all other Bodies and Societies of Men, that orders such matters,
but the Governors of each society? And who in a Christian Nation should
likewise order them, but the Governors in Church and State? And when they are
so ordered, what has any private Member of the Christian Body farther to do,
but to consider whether he can comply with a good Conscience, or not. And if he
can, surely the Peace of the Church, the keeping the Unity of the Body of
Christ, the promoting concord and Charity and Edification amongst its Members,
are strong obligations upon him to do it.

If any thing plainly unlawful be required, then that reply of the Apostles to
the Sanhedrim takes place; Acts. 4.19.
whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto
God, judge ye. But if nothing unlawful by Gods Word, nothing unlawful according
to our own Judgment and Confession, be made a condition of Communion; I dare
appeal to your selves, in a like form of words, Whether it be right in the
Sight of God, to break the Unity of the Church of Christ, Judge ye.

I should now, according to the Method I proposed,

The Word he uses in the Text it self is very observable. Endeavoring we
render it; (...).
but it denotes (as is well known) no slight and ordinary Endeavor; but a very
diligent one, a studious and Earnest care to keep the Unity of the Spirit,
which plainly shows the weight of the Duty, and the strict Obligation, which
lies upon all Christians to practice it. And no less can be inferred from what
immediately goes before, and follows the words.

In the First verse of this Chapter (as I have already observed) the Apostle
intimates, that it is a walking worthy of our Christian Vocation, that is, it is
a behaving our selves Suitably to the design and Nature of the profession we
make; it is what Christianity requires of us; and that it is so appears more
particularly by what immediately follows the Text, ver. 4.5, 6.
There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism; one God and Father of all, who is
above all, and through all, and in you all. What can be offered more persuasive
than this? Let us take a short View of each particular.

There is one Body, that is, (as I said before) the Christian Church throughout
the world is but one Society, Distributed into Several particular Churches, as
its parts, of which particular Churches, if sound in Doctrine and worship, and
imposing no unlawful Terms of Communion, each single Christian is of right a
Member, in the place in which Providence has cast his Lot; and consequently is
bound to maintain and promote the Unity and Peace of the particular Church of
which he is a Member, in order to preserving the Unity and peace of the whole
Body.

One Spirit; every sound part of the Christian Church, and every genuine Member
of it, is under the Influence and Conduct of the Holy Spirit of God, to which
if he yields himself tractable, using all those means which he has appointed
for the attaining his Assistance, he will not fail to have his Judgment duly
Settled, and his mind inspired with a sincere Love to all who are under the
Influence of the same Spirit; the effect of which will certainly be a Peaceable
Conversation, and especially a readiness to join with all his fellow Christians
in every part of the worship of God and his Redeemer. It follows,

As ye are called in one hope of your Calling. We all expect the same reward,
even the Resurrection of our Bodies at the last day, and the everlasting
Happiness of the Life to come; we all hope to meet in the same Region of Bliss,
and to join and live together for ever in one Body, in Heaven. How then can we
fall out in the way thither, or refuse to walk together in the same path of
Life? One Lord; whose Authority we all equally own, whose Laws we profess to
submit to, and consequently have the same Rule to walk by, and the same
obligation to make us observe it. As fellow servants we cannot disagree,
without disowning the Authority of our Common Master. As Fellow Members we
cannot be disunited, without relinquishing so far our common Head.

One Faith, One Baptism. We all profess to adhere to that Faith, which was once
delivered unto the Saints, agreeing, at least in the fundamental and necessary
Articles of it; this profession we undertook at our Baptism, when we were all
initiated into the society of Christians in the same manner, being washed with
water, in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, declaring our
belief in, and our resignation to these three Divine Persons. And how then can
we afterward be excused, if we fall out and divide about inconsiderable and
indifferent matters, which neither relate to the foundation of our Faith, nor
contradict the Design of our Baptism? And to conclude,

One God, and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.
We are children of the same Heavenly Father, and Consequently ought to live in
Brotherly Love and Charity, in perfect concord and agreement, thinking and
speaking and Acting the very same things, as those who are under the same
paternal Government and Authority, who are taken care of, provided for, and
directed by the same Providence, and the same Grace.

These are the Arguments, by which the Apostle inforceth the Duty of the Text,
the sum of all which is, that the whole Scheme and Frame of our Religion, its
Author, its Rule, its Model, its end, do all oblige us to the keeping of unity;
so that we cannot any way contribute toward contention or division in the
Church of Christ, without going Directly cross to our Profession, and walking
altogether unworthy of our Heavenly Calling.

All that farther remains, three plain and easy Directions, and so conclude.

In order to this End, Humility. This I mention first, because it is that which
the Apostle himself advises to, as a good disposition toward Unity and Peace.
ver. 1.
I beseech you says he, that you would walk worthy of your Vocation. ver. 2.
How? with all lowliness and meekness, keeping the Unity of the Spirit etc.

Contention of all sorts, and particularly in matters of Religion, generally
flows from pride, an overweening Opinion of our selves, and our own Judgments:
whereas Humility disposes us to consider impartially our selves, and to hear
and receive whatsoever good reason can be offered by another, who differs from
us; and which is more, it disposes us heartily to seek, and to obtain the
Direction and Assistance of Almighty God, in all our inquiries after Truth, who
takes pleasure in resisting the Proud; but gives grace to the Humble.

We shall do well likewise to take into consideration,

I need not mention the ill effects that have proceeded from this Cause in
Foreign Churches of old, Experience has taught us enough with respect to our
own, in which our differences, about matters of Religion, and the Divisions
that have followed upon them, have produced very deplorable consequences
throughout this last Age. Not to mention the civil discord, which has, at
least, been exceedingly heightened hereby, I fear much of that Skepticism and
Infidelity as well as the Profaneness and looseness of manners, that have
brought a scandal upon our times, must be ascribed to this cause. I am sure
that want of Discipline for the amending our manners, which all good men
amongst us complain of, must necessarily follow, upon our being divided into so
many several Communions and Partys in Religion.

It Is time for us now to lay these things to heart, when that which we all know
hindered our Union, is taken out of the way, I mean, a design in those, who had
the management of public affairs amongst us, first to divide us, and by that
means to prepare us for a change of Religion.

It Is certainly the Duty, as well as the Interest, of all amongst us who have
any regard for the Protestant Religion, being now so happily and Peaceably
settled under another Influence, to forget our past contentions, whether with
respect to the Affairs of Church or State, and to do, what in us lies, toward
the becoming entirely one Body in both.

We may do well, in the last place, things with respect to which we usually
contend and divide.

The main consideration which prevails with a great part of those who divide
from the Communion established amongst us, is, as far as I can perceive, that
although they allow our public Service and Communion to be lawful, and
occasionally declare that they do so by their Practice, yet there is something
in the other way, which they like better, and which, they say, is to themselves
more Edifying.

Now waving all other Answers to this, I shall only recite, and leave to your
Serious Consideration two plain Texts of Scripture, (rather choosing to speak to
you in Gods words, than in my own, that they may leave the deeper impression on
your minds;) in both which we are taught to prefer the Peace of the Church, and
the Edification of our Christian Brethren, before our own Satisfaction, or the
mere pleasing and gratifying our selves, nay even before all other
considerations whatsoever, in matters, which are in their own Nature
indifferent.

One is that of St. Paul, in his Epistle to the Romans, where having discoursed
of some differences which were arisen amongst the Christians of that Church,
about the use of things indifferent, namely, Eating some kinds of Meats, Romans
14 1^.
and observing some sort of days, he concludes, First with this Excellent
saying, the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and Peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost; that is, Christianity consists not in the Former;
but in the latter. The Former are indifferent, and may be used, or not used, as
they conduce to the Peace of the Church, and the Edification of our Brethren:
but the latter are absolutely necessary. ver. 18.
For, as it follows, he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved of men. And then he adds that Divine Exhortation, Let us
therefore follow after the things which make for Peace, and things wherewith
one may Edisie another. Not the things which would most gratify our selves;
But the things which make for Peace: Nay not the things which we may Imagine
our selves might be most edisyed by; But the things wherewith one may Edify
another.

The other Text is of the same Apostle (who had a truly large Soul, and every
where expresses a generous Charity) in his Epistle to the Colossians. He had,
in the Former Chapter taken notice of the Differences between the Judaizing
Christians, and others, upon which, after other Advice he concludes, Col. 3.14,
15.
Above all these things put on Charity, which is the bond of Perfectness. And
let the Peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called in
one Body. Charity, it seems, was in his Judgment, to Bind, and Tie them, as it
were, perfectly together, in Spite of all their smaller differences; and a
Peaceable Temper of Spirit, to overruled all their little controversies, (...).
about indifferent things. The word we translate Rule is Remarkable, alluding
to the Vmpire in their Games, who was to determine all controversies that
should arise, and particularly to whom the prize did belong; as if he had said,
If there Happen any differences amongst you concerning matters of Religion, not
necessary, but in their own Nature indifferent, nay if you it may be could your
selves prefer one way before another, yet judging neither of them unlawful, Let
the Peace of God rule in your hearts, in all such cases; let that determine all
such controversies; let Judgment or arbitration be always given on the side of
Peace, and Concord, and Unity; for to these things ye are called in one Body.

After this I shall need to add no more; but only to remind you, that the Holy
Sacrament which we are now going to partake of, is the Symbol and Badge, of
this Unity I am pleading for; it is that whereby we profess to the World, as I
observed at the first, our Communion with God and our Savior, and with all
good Christians; it is that whereby, upon this Occasion, we own our selves
Members of the Established Church, not as divided from the rest of the
Christian Church; but as one sound-part of that great Body; and it is
consequently that which strictly obliges us to be henceforward the obedient
Servants of God, the faithful Disciples of our Lord, Peaceable, Charitable, and
Useful Members of his Body, Designing, and promoting, as far as in us lies, the
Welfare both of this Church, and of the Catholic Church of Christ throughout
the World.

Now to that one God and Father of all, who has called us to be Members of his
Sons Body; to that one Lord who is the Head of this Body; and to that one
Et^^nal and Invisible Spirit, who animates and Influences every genuine part
and Member of it, be ascribed all honor, Praise, and Glory, now and for ever,
Amen.

FINIS.
A Sermon Preached at the Church of St. Mary le Bow, To the Societies for
Reformation of Manners, October the 4th. 1697. By Samuel Bradford, Rector of
the said Church.


