A SERMON Preached at the Parish Church of RICHMOND IN SURRY: April the 5th,
1699. Being the Day appointed for a Public Humiliation and Collection for the
Vaudois. By N. Brady, M. A. Minister of Richmond in Surry, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty. Published at the Request of his Parishioners.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Wild, at the Elephant at Charing Cross, 1699.

TO MY WORTHY AND Honored Friends and Parishioners, THE INHABITANTS Of the
Parish of RICHMOND IN SURRY: This following Discourse (published at their
request) is humbly Dedicated by

Their Most obliged Servant, N. Brady.

A FAST SERMON Preached At Richmond in Surry. April, 5th. 1699.
JOHN, V. Chapter latter part of the 14. v. Behold, thou art made whole; Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.


THESE words were spoken by our blessed Savior, to one whom he had rescued
from a troublesome Infirmity, which (otherwise than by Miracle) seemed to be
incurable. But as all the Actions of his Life were general Examples, so all the
Words of his Mouth were universal Precepts; none of them being so narrowly
restrained to that particular occasion, as not to be applicable to others
attended with the like Circumstances: I shall not therefore fear to over-strain
the Sense of my Text, by making use of it upon the present occasion; and
addressing my self to those who now hear me, as he did to the Man whom he had
healed; Behold, thou art made whole; Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto
thee.

And indeed if we would employ our selves according as we ought, upon this
Solemn Day of Fasting and Mortification; if we would strictly examine our
Souls, and nicely pry into the secrets of our Consciences; I fear there would
be found but few amongst us all, whose murmuring and repining under the
Judgments which hung over them, whose carelessness and impenitency upon their
being withdrawn, whose ingratitude and presumption under the blessings they
have received, may not justly call for the caution contained in my Text,
Behold, thou art made whole; Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

Since then it has pleased the Divine Goodness, by the repeated Mercies which
have been extended toward these Nations, almost to change our Days of
humiliation, into solemn Festivals of Thanksgiving; I shall therefore endeavor
in my following Discourse, to follow this Method of the Divine Providence, by
intermixing with our penitential Acknowledgments, some Hymns of Praise and
Songs of Deliverance.

In pursuance of which Design, I shall insist upon five Particulars: Whereof
the two former are implied in the Text, and the three latter expressly delivered
in it.

1st. I shall reflect upon the dangers to which we have been exposed; the State
of weakness and affliction, which we formerly lay under; implied in these
words, thou art made whole; which plainly suppose an antecedent Infirmity.

2dly, I shall consider the Cause of those Dangers, and source of that
Affliction, Sin; implied in these words, Sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee; which clearly intimate, that Sin was the occasion of the former Evil.

3dly, I shall lay before you, the wonderful Mercy of Almighty God, in rescuing
and releasing us from those Dangers and Afflictions; Behold, thou art made
whole.

4thly. I shall examine the caution and advice here given us, how we ought to
comport our selves under such blessings; Sin no more.

5thly, And lastly, I shall urge the threatening or commination, added to this
Caution, to strengthen and enforce it; Sin no more, lest a worse thing come
unto thee. Of these briefly in their Order.

1. Then, we are to reflect upon the Dangers to which we have been exposed; the
State of Weakness and Affliction which we formerly lay under; implied in these
Words. Thou art made whole; which plainly suppose an antecdent Imfirmity.

I do not love to open those wounds which are but just skinn'd over; and by
rubbing the Sores which are beginning to be healed, to revive their smart and
renew their anguish: But, as a skilful Surgeon will rather search a Wound,
than suffer it through carelessness to mortify and gangreen, the great
advantage of such a proceeding, making large amends for the painfulness of the
Operation; so shall I, by laying open to your view the Troubles and Afflictions
which lately threatened you, (however uneasy the remembrance of them may be)
endeavor to prevent your forgetfulness of His Mercy, who has graciously been
pleased to deliver you from them, a greater Evil than any you have suffered, or
were in danger to have undergone.

And I cannot do this more fully or effectually, than by giving you a short
Draught of those Miseries and Afflictions, which your Protestant Brethren in
Ireland did actually sustain; part of weich Hardships your selves have felt,
and the rest of which most assuredly were intended for you.

Unless the usualness and familiarity of lamentable Accidents, as in the Great
and dreadful Plague of Athens, has hardened us against the sense of them in
others, or the apprehension of them in relation to our selves; we cannot but
call to mind with a tender resentment, the Miseries and Calamities which those
our Brethren underwent. When, as in the ancient Roman Saturnalia, the Servants
took upon them to act the Masters; and kept up that Character with all the
insolence, that usually attends so preposterous a Change: When by new and
unheard of Politics, the Conquerors were disarmed, and the Sword put into the
Hands of the vanquished Nation: When, besides, the apparent dangers which
threatened their Destruction, so that (with David) they might be said to hold
their Souls continually in their Hands; their lives were made so uneasy to
them, that Banishment was looked upon as a favor to be begged, as a purchase
to be bought; yet neither way could be obtained, by such as wished for and
desired it: When the color of Law, and Authority of the Government, like to
the pillar of cloud and fire, was to their Adversaries light and brightness, to
direct them in their ways of Cruelty and Oppression; but unto them darkness and
obscurity, to cover their Enemies from their search and prosecution: When the
two-edged Sword of pretended Justice cut but one way; and was blunt to those,
who chiefly deserved to have felt the edge of it: When there was nothing but
leading into Captivity and complaining in their Streets: When they eagerly
hearkn'd out for Sounds of Joy; and yet every Intelligencer, (like Job's
Messengers) brought a fresh account of Miseries and Afflictions: But far beyond
all this, when the Lord seemed, to cast off his Altar and abhor his Sanctuary;
when prosperous Error and Superstition, prevailed against suffering Truth and
Religion; when the misfortunes of the Professors, were made a scandal to the
Profession it self; so that their Enemies did daily cast them in the Teeth,
Where is now your God? The Scene is too dismal to dwell long upon; I shall
therefore shut it up with the words of the Prophet in his Lamentations, Judah
was gone into Captivity, because of Affliction, and because of great servitude;
she dwelt among the Heathen, she found no rest, all her Persecutors overtook
her between the Straits; all her Gates were desolate, her Priests sighed, her
Virgins were afflicted, and she was in bitterness; her Adversaries were the
chief, her Enemies prosper'd; the reason follows immediately after, for the
Lord afflicted her for the multitude of her Transgressions. Which leads me to
the consideration of my

2. Particular, namely to enquire into the Cause of these Dangers, and source
of those Afflictions to which we were exposed, Sin; implied in these words, Sin
no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee; which clearly intimate, that Sin
was the occasion of the former Evil.

It is very usual, even with the most faulty, to shift off the guilt from
themselves, and endeavor to fasten it upon others; and they are apt to impute
their Sufferings and Afflictions, rather to the Injustice and Malice of their
Enemies, than to any Demerits and Transgressions of their own: But this is a
very fallacious way of arguing, with which we too often deceive our own Souls;
for the Inflicters of God's vengeance may be very ill Men, and yet they who
bear the Infliction not a whit the more Innocent; the Hangman may be a most
profligate Villain, and yet the Felon or the Traitor suffer justly under his
Hands: Never was there any Man yet in the World, he only excepted who was God
as well as Man, that could with confidence propound this Question, Which of you
convinces me of Sin? Every one's own Conscience, unless seared or stupefied, is
a thousand Witnesses against him in this case; and we cannot but join with the
Prophet in his Confession, O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto
us confusion of Faces, because of the Trespass which we have trespassed against
thee.

For let me, I beseech you, ask you a few Questions, and let every one's own
Soul silently give an Answer.

What effect had that long Peace and Plenty upon us, with which it pleased God
to bless these Nations, when the whole Christian World besides felt the Sword
and Scarcity, but Chambering and Wantonness, Rioting and Drunkenness, Strifes
and Envyings? What use did we make of that abundance of good things, which the
giver of all good Gifts imparted to us, but to make provision for the Flesh, to
fulfill the Lusts thereof? How little was the Name of God thought upon amongst
us, unless to dishonor it with an Oath! Or his House frequented by us, unless
to pass away that time, which would otherwise have lain uneasy upon our hands!
How empty and superficial was our devotion grown! How mere a Form of godliness
without the Power of it was our Religion become! How earnestly did we contend
for the things of this World, and how little did we seek those things that are
above! God therefore as well in Mercy as in Justice, awakened us by his
Judgments from this provoking Security; and like a careful Physician to a
Lethargick Patient, recovered us with Causticks and with Scarifyings, from a
sleep which else would have been unto Death. Let us not then, in the Name of
God, look abroad for the Causes of our Sufferings; let us not flatter our
selves by imputing them, to the Ambitious Contrivances of Foreign Princes, or
the inveterate Malice of our Designing Neighbors; since the main Spring and
Original of all, every Man may find at home, within his own breast: Our Sins
cried out to Heaven for Vengeance, and God who is Infinite Justice could not
but inflict it; our Offenses were hurrying us on to unavoidable ruin, and God
who is Mercy in perfection, could not but use the roughest Methods to reclaim
us, since we would not be wrought upon by milder dispensations.

And yet even when we thus lay under his chastisements, how little did we take
the Advice of the Prophet, hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it? Did we
not rather give occasion to God to upbraid us, as he did heretofore the House
of Israel; and I said, after I had done all these things unto her, turn unto
me, but she returned not? In those Days did the Lord God of Hosts call to
weeping, and mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with Sackcloth; and
behold joy and gladness, slaying Oxen and killing Sheep, eating Flesh and
drinking Wine; as if we had seriously made that absurd conclusion, Let us eat
and drink for to morrow we die! These serious Truths may perhaps be uneasy to
us, but I am sure they are most abundantly necessary, that we may not be
tempted to justify our selves, or to ascribe our deliverance to our own
righteousness; but only to the bowels and compassion of him, whose Mercy
toward us endures for ever, and whose hand is mighty to save, and this leads
me to the

3. Particular of my Text, namely, to lay before you the wonderful Mercy of
Almighty God, in rescuing and releasing us from those Dangers and Afflictions;
Behold, thou art made whole.

This first word, in the Original (...), is always rendered by Lo, or Behold;
and is used, either to usher in something amazing and astonishing, or to
prepare our attention for something eminently instructive; and it always stands
in the Writings of the Evangelists, as a Hand in the Margent, to point out
somewhat more than ordinarily considerable. And certainly, if ever any thing
deserved to be thus ushered in, our releasement from the Dangers to which we
were exposed, may justly challenge such an Introduction, Behold thou art made
whole.

When the Lord turned again the Captivity of Jacob, then were we like to them
that dream: The greatness and the suddenness of the Alteration, made it rather
seem a fancy, proceeding from the fumes of a distempered Brain, than a Truth,
that carried with it what was real and substantial. When we were so near the
brink of Ruin, that there was but a bare possibility of our escaping; then
God, who is a help in time of need, snatched us from the precipice into which
we were falling, and set our feet upon a Rock and ordered our goings: When we
lay (like Isaac) a destined sacrifice, and the Knife was just at our Throats;
then an Arm (as it were) out of the Clouds, arrested the Hands of our
Executioners; and a Voice as if from Heaven gave command, Lay not your Hands
upon them, neither do any thing unto them: So that our Soul escaped as a Bird
out of the Net of the Fowler, the Net was broken and we were delivered.

I might endeavor to set off the greatness of this Blessing, by comparing it
with those Miseries which we lay under, and with those much greater ones which
threatened to overwhelm us; but this was a Mercy of the first Magnitude, which
will sufficiently affect our Souls with gratitude, if we set it in a true
light, and consider it by its self: How, by this, True Religion, the way which
those our Enemies call Heresy, but wherein we worship the God of our Fathers,
was again restored to its Ancient Splendor! Our Temples which they had
destined to Foppery and Superstition, were happily continued in the possession,
of unadulterate Worship and a reasonable Service! The Laws which had been
warped to serve the worst Ends, were again reduced to their Primitive Use, for
the Punishment of wicked Doers, and the praise of such as do well! The just
Prerogative of the Prince was vigorously asserted, and yet the Liberty of the
Subject not at all infringed! The Church and State, which like ill-yoak'd Oxen
drew different ways, now proceed lovingly in the same Track, and strengthen and
support each other mutually! Peace and abundance begin to efface the Memory, of
the War and the necessities under which we lately labored! Our Dangers and
Apprehensions are vanished and removed; and if any Scars remain of our former
Wounds, whilst they put us in mind that we have been hurt, they also assure us
that we are in a way to be healed! Happy are the people who are in such a Case,
if they make a right use of the Mercies they have received; yea, blessed are
the people who have the Lord for their God!

And certainly, so many visible appearances of the Divine favor, have entitled
God to the sole Honor of our Deliverance; that it would be a direct robbing
him of his Glory, to give the praise of it to any other: He having acted for us
in this Case, as he testifies of himself by the Prophet Isaiah; and I looked,
and there was none to help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold; then
my own Arm brought Salvation. The Lord indeed looked down from Heaven, and
beheld from the Habitation of his Heliness and of his Glory; his Zeal and his
Strength, and his Mercies, and the sounding of his Bowels toward (...) were
not restrained; He saw our Miseries, and turned away his Eyes from our
Transgressions; or if he viewed them, it was only to use other Methods to
withdraw us from them; and to attempt the reclaiming us by his Mercies, who had
formerly been incorrigible under his Judgments. Thus God arose, and his and our
Enemies were scattered; and they that hated both him and us fled before him.
Therefore Not unto us, O Lord not unto us, but unto thy Name give praise; for
thy loving Mercy, and for thy Truth's sake.

And now wherewithal shall we come before the Lord, and bow our selves before
the high God? What retribution shall we make unto the Lord, for all that the
Lord has bestowed upon us, according to his Mercies, and according to the
multitude of his loving kindnesses? The Answer to this Question, which every
devout Soul is obliged to make, is the subject of my

4. Particular, in which I am to examine the Caution and Advice here given us,
how we ought to comport our selves under such blessings; Sin no more.

The Mercies of God are designed for our amendment, and his Goodness leads to
repentance; if therefore we answer not this intention of his, we go about as
far as in us lies, to disappoint the gracious Methods of his Providence, and as
it were to counterplot his Omniscence. But God forbid, that where his Grace has
so signally abounded to us, there Sin should abound so much more! God forbid,
that we should continue obstinate and incorrigible, against all that an All
powerful and All-wise God can do for our amendment! If Judgments could not
frighten us into Obedience, yet let Blessings allure us; and like the Man in
the Fable, who held fast his Cloak against the blustering Wind, but parted with
it to the gentler Rays of the Sun; So let us, if we have kept our Sins close to
us in the Storms of Adversity, dismiss them when we are warmed with the Beams
of Prosperity. Ingratitude (we know) is styled a complication of all
Wickedness; and no Title is so reproachful, as that of an unthankful Person;
but how deeply shall we be liable to this imputation, if we will make no return
for such inestimable advantages? And yet how easy is the Tribute which God
expects at our hands! He only requires of us, that we should Sin no more; That
instead of provoking him to new Severities, we should put our selves into a
condition of recieving fresh Blessings: Had something very difficult been
exacted of us, when we lay exposed to the Oppression of our insulting Enemies,
would we have scrupled to perform it for our releasement from them? And shall
we now startle at that which is both easy and beneficial? God's Yoke is easy,
and his Burden is light; his Commandments are not grievous, neither does he
delight to afflict the Sons of Men: And yet how few are obedient to such
equitable Injunctions! How few submit entirely to so mild an Authority! Is not
the same Profaneness and Debauchery still rife amongst us, which drew down
those Judgments we formerly groaned under? Do we not still use the same false
balances and deceitful Weights? Do we not still practice the same overreaching
subtilties, in our usual Dealings and mutual Commerce? Is not all the Violence
and Injustice, for which we were wont to blame our Enemies, still exercised
amongst our selves, and aggravated by the profession of a better Religion? So
that I may say, in the words of the Prophet, the Lord looked for Judgment, but
behold Opression; for righteousness, but behold a Cry! Do not those that seemed
to lament and bewail, the Danger of loosing the Public Assemblies; absent
themselves too often from the Great Congregation; and leave the House of God,
at the ordinary times of Divine Worship, much more unfrequented than it need or
ought to be? Do not those who apprehended a Dearth in the Land, not a Dearth of
Bread, but of the Word and Sacraments, withdraw too frequently from the Bread
of Life, end Starve their own Souls in the midst of Plenty? Let us judge our
selves, my Brethren, that we be not judged of the Lord; and let us consider,
that the caution here given, Sin no more, is not a bare Advice, that may be
taken or rejected without any considerable Consequences; but that in the

5th. And last Particular of my Text, there is a Threatening or Commination, and
that a very severe One, annexed to it, to strengthen and enforce it; Sin no
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee.

A Relapse into any illness, is much more dangerous, than the first fury of a
Distemper; and we read of the Man, that washed and swept and garnished his
House, and yet admitted seven Devils afterward, that his last Estate was worse
than his first. For God, in his Impartial Justice, proportions his Judgments to
our Offenses; now every latter Sin is greater than the former, and therefore is
liable to a more severe punishment: For either we have repented before the
Commission of it, or we have not; if we have, our Sin, besides its own guilt,
includes that of breaking our Resolution; if we have not, it is an additional
Act of Obstinacy and Impenitency; and either way, it has a new accession of
Guilt and Wickedness.

Nor can we hope to escape from God's just Severity; since Sin, is that dark
Body which interposes between us and the light of his Countenance, and
punishment is the Shadow that inseparably accompanies it: Neither will the
Faults of those who seem to be the Ministers of God's Vengeance, be any manner
of Protection to us; nor must we flatter ourselves, that he will not fight
against us on their side: Executioners (we know) are seldom chosen out of the
best of Men; and the Rod may be made use of, though it be afterward to be cast
into the Fire; Nay even lice and flies, the meanest particles of the Creation,
have oftentimes in the avenging hand of God, been dreadful Instruments of his
displeasure.

If therefore we are unwilling, to lie under the same or greater pressures,
than we lately apprehended, and were delivered from; it we would not run
through, the same or a more dismal Scene of Afflictions, than we formerly
groaned under, and had in prospect; if we would not rather, have God act the
part of an offended Judge, than that of a tender and Indulgent Parent; Let us
follow the Advice prescribed us in the Text, and Sin no more, lest a worse
thing come unto us. God has been pleased to Visit us with Judgments, and we
continued incorrigible under them, by which our Sins were highly aggravated;
but if his Blessings are in vain employed for our a^^ndment, we offend to a
Degree as high as is possible: In the former indeed we sinned against his
Justice, but in this both against his Justice and his Mercy: And will not God,
think you, vindicate this his Beloved, his Darling attribute, from such a
contempt? What will become of us, when his Mercy is turned against us? When
that which used to restrain and qualify the Inflictions of his Justice, shall
then exasperate and make them sharper? When that which used to be poured like
Balsam into our wounds, shall then be like Oil to feed the Flames of his Fury,
and to make his Vengeance burn more fiercely? When our depraved Natures, like
vitiated Stomachs, that convert wholesome Nourishment into the aliment of ill
Humors, shall turn Blessings themselves into Curses? Yet thus most certainly it
will be with us, if we still remain impenitent; God will be glorified one way
or other, either by us, or upon us.

Let us but seriously meditate upon those sad Calamities, which oppress our
Protestant Brethren in distant Countries; and we shall see in them what our
Sins will bring upon us, unless we prevent those Judgments by a timely
Repentance: We cannot look upon them as more guilty then ourselves, nay, I
would to God we could vie with them for Innocence! And how then can we escape
with impunity, when we see them so severely punished! Some have been forced to
submit themselves a long time, to the licentious will of an unbridled Soldiery,
and to see and supply those excesses which they detested; to be the Objects of
their contempt, when they were used most favorably; and the Subjects of their
Cruelty, when Wine or Rage provoked them: Others have been torn from the
Embraces of their Relations, and condemned to the meanest and most laborious
Drudgery; being chained to the Oar as the worst of Malefactors, amongst Stripes
and Menaces and blasphemous Execrations: Not a few have been called upon to
resist unto blood, and to suffer Martyrdom for the Cause which they defended;
being Sentenced to the Axe, the Gibbet, or the Wheel, and glorifying God by a
variety of Sufferings: Multitudes have been driven from their Possessions and
their Dwellings; and reduced to seek in distant Countries, that relief and
repose which was denied them in their own; being barbarously Condemned to
perpetual Exile, only for the discharging of a good Conscience. These are the
Trials which have exercised our Brethren abroad, and which we must expect will
fall to our share; if Arbitrary Government or the Romish Religion, should
(which God avert) as a punishment for our impenitence, ever be established
within these Kingdoms.

How justly then does the pious Wisdom, of our careful Governors both in
Church and State, recommend to our Prayers and to our Christian Liberality, the
distressed condition of these poor Sufferers; whose Afflictions have made an
Impression upon all the Protestants in Europe, who unanimously concur to the
Relief of their Necessities. They are some of them such, I mean the Vaudois, as
have been forced with a barbarous Inhumanity, to forsake whatever is dear to
worldly Men, that they might retain the practice of their Religion in its
Purity; a Religion, which by a happy and distinguishing Providence, they have
always kept untainted with those Errors and Superstitions, which overrun the
rest of the whole Christian World; and which give them a just Title to the
Respect and the Assistance, of all such as are Professors of uncorrupted
Christianity. They are all Confessors for the Reformed Faith, having been in
perils by Sea, and in perils by Land, in perils from their own Contrymen, in
perils from Aliens; having wandered about in Deserts and in Mountains, being
Destitute, Afflicted, Tormented: These are they who have made some Protestant
Countries their Refuge and Sanctuary against all their Misfortunes; and yet
through their Numbers and the greatness of their Exigences, are in danger of
perishing in the Harbor of their Safety. But far be that reproach from
Professors of Christianity, a Religion made up of Mercy and Compassion; far
from all Members of the Church of England, which is famous for a Charity the
most diffusive of any: Let none (I entreat you) of those little prejudices,
which are apt to affect mean Spirits and vulgar Understandings, prevail with
Persons of Ability and Sense, to shut up their bowels of compassion from them:
Let us not so far remember that they are Foreigners, a word that sounds harshly
in English Ears, as to forget that they are Christians and Protestants. It is
below the Honor of the British Nation, not to relieve even an Enemy in
distress; and yet these have done nothing but what deserves our Friendship;
since we are Friends I suppose, to the Cause for which they suffer, and to the
constancy which they express in adhering to it: Let us tenderly and
considerately reflect within our selves, how like our circumstances might have
been to theirs; if the late Designs against our Religion had taken effect, and
we had continued Steadfast in the profession of it: And let us then practice the
great Rule of Justice; and so do to those poor people, as we would that they
and other Nations, if we had been driven out, should have done to us.

To look back then to my Text, from which I have so long digressed; and to
close up all that has been deduced from it: I beseech you, Beloved, in the
bowels of the Lord Jesus, so to reflect upon your own past Sufferings, and the
greater Dangers which were ready to over-take you, and upon your Sins which
were the occasions of them; as to detest and abominate the latter, for the sake
of the two former: So to meditate upon the Almighty Goodness, in rescuing us
from those Miseries to which we were exposed; as to give God the glory of it;
by Piety toward him, the blessed Author of it; and love to one another, the
mutual sharers in it: That so, we who are made whole, by sinning no more, may
avoid the danger, of having a worse thing come unto us: That so, we becoming a
peculiar People, purified unto God, zealous of good Works; the Lord God may
make us plenteous in every work of our Hands, in the fruit of our Body, and in
the fruit of our Cattle, and in the fruit of our Land for good; that he may
rejoice again over us for good, as he rejoiced over our Fathers. Which he of
his Infinite Mercy grant, through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ; to
whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor, Power, Might,
Majesty and Dominion, henceforth and for ever more, Amen.

FINIS.

