THE Doctrine OF THE KINGDOM And Personal Reign of CHRIST Asserted and
Explained IN An Exposition upon Zach. 14.5.9. By Ed. Bagshaw.

Printed in the Year, 1669.

The Preface.
I Am not Ignorant, Christian Reader, that the Doctrine of the Personal Reign
of Christ, with his Saints upon Earth, (which thou will find asserted in the
following Treatise) is commonly entertained with very great prejudice; the
Scriptures, which in plain terms affirm this, (and which I have endeavored to
restore unto their true meaning) being ordinarily interpreted in a sense quite
contrary to their literal import and significancy: Which kind of exposition
(under the notion of being Misterious and Spiritual) having held for many Ages,
and been embraced, without any further enquiry, by men of the greatest eminence
for Holiness and Learning, even among those of the Reformed Religion; together
with the Tragical Disorders occasioned in Germany, by such, who in words
asserted the Reign of Christ, but indeed, under that pretense, endeavored to
set up and establish their own; this has ever since made the True meaning of
the Scripture Prophecies, in this matter, to be suspected either of Novelty, or
else of some Design to subvert all civil Government; which men, out of their
impatience of subjection being naturally apt to throw off, they may be supposed
much more easily ready to be incited to it, if they shall be brought to think
that they do hereby God, and his Christ, good service, in attempting to set up
his Kingdom, exalting themselves, as the Robbers in the Jewish Nation did (Dan.
11.14.) to establish the Vision.

In answer to all these exceptions and prejudices which it is not strange that
the truth is attended and received with, no more then that the Sun does
ordinarily arise in a cloud, I have this to say briefly, that neither
Prescription of time, nor authority of Persons nor the Error of unstable Men,
should so far prepossess and fill our minds, as to make us shut them up against
the impression and entrance of Divine truth, which, like the Light, shines
sometimes more, sometimes less, according as it receives fainter, or more
vigorous influences from the Spirit of God, its Fountain; and it can be nothing
at last, but a resolved and peremptory Love of Darkness. which will deny it
admittan e, by what imperfect Medium soever it be conveyed: The first inquiry
therefore, by persons sincerely desirous of true knowledge, should be to learn
whether this state of things (which I have undertaken from the Scriptures to
demonstrate) be indeed Revealed by God or not, for then his words in this as
well as in other Mysteries, must be received according to their plainest sense,
in spite both of our own, and others, pretendedly rational, Contradictions.
And whoever are impartial and Unbiassed in this enquiry, reading the Scriptures
in their own Light and evidence, and not viewing them thorough the false
Perspectives, which customary expositions have made for them, I believe they
will be forced to confess that they are not capable of any other
Interpretation, but what the Prophets and Godly Jews; before; the Disciples,
in, and the Primitive Church, for above 300 years, after our Saviors time, did
understand them in: What that is I have here faithfully and plainly delivered,
and as to myself, I can say with the Apostle, I believed therefore I spoke, so
as to others, I thought the truth to be of that importance, and withal the time
of its accomplishment so near that I was easily prevailed with, by Publishing
this small Treatise, to do my duty in stirring up others to a more severe and
strict examining and study of the Scriptures, then commonly they are accustomed
to: I have no more to add, but to recommend it to the blessing of God, who can
make shall and contemptible means, instrumental for the effecting of the
greatest Works.

6th. M. 6, 1669.
THE Doctrine of the Kingdom, etc.
Zech. 14. v. 5. And the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints with thee:
or, as it is in the Greek, with him. v. 9. And the Lord shall be King over all
the earth; in that day the Lord shall be One, and his Name One.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, there is a Prophecy that Jerusalem, after it
is Rebuilt, and the People of the Jews restored to it (as is promised, c. 1.
16. and c. 8. 3, 4, 5.) shall by their enemies be besieged and taken ( v. 1.)
Presently after which Desolation, the Lord himself will come down from Heaven,
and destroy those Nations (v. 3. and 5.)

Jehovah, of the Lord, whose coming is here spoken of, is no other then the
Lord Christ, or, God Man, the second Person in the Godhead; who is called The
Branch (c. 6. 12. 13.) so named, either because he sprung from the stock of
Jesse, as a Branch does from the Root of a Tree (which is intimated) Isa.
11.1.10. Jer. 23.5.) and so used by our Savior ( Rev. 22 16.) or else the
Hebrew (...) (here translated Branch) may be rendered, as it is by the Greek
Interpreters, (...) i. e. Morning rise, or Dayspring, which very word is used
by Zechary, in his Prophetic Song, concerning our Savior ( Luke 1.78) with
allusion to which Phrase, the Apostle says, ( Heb. 7.14.) It is manifest our
Lord sprang Greek (...)) i. e. Arose as light out of Judah. To Christ, in both
these capacities (for he is not only The Branch of Righteousness) (Jer. 33.15.)
but also The Sun of Righteousness, as he is styled ( Mal. 4.2.) There is a
Throne and supreme Dominion promised, both in that 6th. of Zechary, and more
expressly (in Dan. 7.13 14.) Where he is called The Son of Man, which Name (as
I think principally with reference to that Prophecy of Daniel) was by our
Savior, all the while he convessed upon Earth, most commonly used: And that we
might not doubt but is the same Person, who suffered then, that is spoken of to
come and to Reign here, mention is made v. 4.) of his descent upon Mount
Olivet; which was a place, where our Savior, whilst he was upon earth did much
converse: Upon the Mount of Olives, He sat when he foretold the Destruction of
Jerusalem, and his own coming which was to follow, after the Dispersion of the
Jews, was fully accomplished ( Mark 13.3.) Upon this Mount he began his
sufferings; feeling here that Anguish and Grief of Spirit, which made him sweat
drops of blood ( Luke 22.39.) From hence, he ascended up to Heaven, (Acts
1.9.12.) and hither according to the Angels promise, is he to come down in the
same manner (v. 11.) The fulfilling of which Promise, and the Glory which shall
follow upon it, is in this place of Zechary prophesied of.

Two observations are clear in the words.

First, That the Lord Christ, will come in Person, and take to himself the
Monarchy, or, Sovereign Dominion over the whole earth.

Secondly, That when the Lord Christ comes to reign upon Earth, all his Saints
shall come with him.

Obs. 1.
The first Observation is, That the Lord Christ shall come in Person, and take
to himself the Monarchy, or Sovereign Dominion over the whole Earth. This
coming of Christ, which is His coming to Reign upon Earth, however it is now
decryed, and spoken against by many, yet (as I shall anon prove) it was the
firm and constant belief, of almost all the Primitive Church, for above three
hundred years together after our Saviors time; and it is evidently prophesied
of, not only in this, but in several other Scriptures: As

Isay 9.6.7. opened.
1. Isay. 9.6.7. The Son, who is there said to be given to us, i. e. to the
Jews, The Government likewise is said to be laid upon his Shoulder, of which
Government there is to be no end, and the exercise thereof is to be, in a
visible way of Administration, upon the Throne of David to order and to
establish it: Which is in effect to say, that the Son there prophesied of,
shall become a King, and rule his subjects in a visible manner as David did:
Unto which Prophecy, the Angel in express words alludes ( Luke 1.32.33.) And
this was so understood, as I have explained it, by all those who acknowledge
Christ; to be the Son of David; or, The King of Israel, as our Savior is
called ( John 1 49.) And that confession of Nathaniel is owned by our Savior
to be an effect of his Faith ( v. 50.) And when our Savior went up to
Jerusalem, that solemn acclamation signified no less, when the multitude cried
out, Blessed is the Kingdom, which comes in the Name of the Lord (the Kingdom)
of our Father David ( Mark 11.10.) whereby they plainly intimate, that they did
then at that time expect (and the Evangelist Luke does in express words declare
so much ( Luke 19.11.) That the Kingdom of God. (1. The Kingdom which God had
promised to one of the Posterity of David) should appear, or be made manifest
i. be then set up and visibly administered in its Glory: which, though, as to
the time, it was not so suddenly to be established as they expected; yet, as to
the thing it self, they were not at all mistaken, for our Savior does there
intimate, that he would come again in person, and destroy his enemies, (Luke
19, 27.) Which is the first preparatory work, to the setting up of his Kingdom:
and afterward the Evangelist John, does in a vision see the actual completion
of this, when upon the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, he heard loud voices in
Heaven, saying, the Kingdoms of the World are become the Kingdoms of the Lord,
and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever (Rev. 11.15.) which
place comparing it with Rev. 10.7. shows, that this was nothing else, but a
finishing of that Mystery of God, which in all the Proceeding Ages, he had
declared by his Servants the Prophets: Hence it is, that, after his victorious
and final subduing of his Enemies, John sees the Lord Christ attired with a
Tryumphant Robe, and upon it this Regal Inscription King of Kings and Lord of
Lords (Rev. 19.16.) which is the name that was given to Nebuchadnezzar, the
Head of the First Monarchy (Dan. 2.37.) and is afterward upon a much better
Title, given to Christ when he has actually made himself the visible Head of
the Fifth and last, for which reason, it is called a New Name, (Rev. 3.12.)

2. Another place, wherein the Visible and Personal Reign of Christ, Isay. 11.
is prophesied of, is Isay 11. from v 1. to v. 10. Where Christ is called a Rod
out of the stemm of Jesse, and of him it is said, that, he should bear Rule
over the Nations unto whom they should seek, or, submit themselves (according
to that in ( Genesis 49.10.) Unto him shall the obedience of the Nations be) The
Graces, wherewith he should be endued for Government are mentioned ( v. 2.3.)
together with his actual Ruling, Judging, and Governing according to them ( v.
4.) where to smite the earth with the Sword of his Mouth, is not (as it is
commonly understood) barely to convince the World by Preaching, but to conquer
it by Power, as it is particularly expressed ( Rev. 19 13 14, 15. Which
likewise is principally, intended in that excellent Song ( Ps. 45.3.4.5) The
Riding, Girding on the Sword, conquering and subduing of enemies, there spoken
of being only the Preparatory work unto the setting up of the Kingdom of
Christ; whereupon it follows v 6.) Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever the
Scepter of thy Kingdom is a Right Scepter, or a Scepter of Equity. 1. Ruling in
Righteousness, which as it was spoken of Christ so it is by the Apostle applied
to him, ( Heb. 1.8.9.) Suitable to who it is that Prophecy ( Is. 2.4.) He shall
judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke many people.

3. Another Prophecy concerning the reign of Christ, is Isa. 35:4. Isa. 35.4.
opened.
Behold your God shall come with vengeance; God with a recompense (i. e.
Recompensing that mischief which the enemies did his people, by returning the
same upon them themselves, as si threatened ( Joel 3.4.) and he will save you by
coming there, that a visible Appearance of the Lord himself in Person, is
meant, appears from ( v. 2.) where it is said, Carmel and Sharon (i. e. All the
places of Judea, which of old were famous but at that time shall be enriched
with an extraordinary fruitfulness; as follows in this chapter of Zachary. (v.
10 11.) compared with Is. 51.3. and ( Ezekiel. 36.35.36.) They shall see the Glory
of the Lord i. the Lord Christ; who is so styled ( Is. 40.5.) and whom to see
in his Beauty (i. e. when he appears the second time, in the luster of his
Majesty, without sin, i. without the imputation of sin, which before did cloud
and eclipse his Beauty, to see him then) it is reckoned as the sum and perfect
on of that happiness, which is promised unto those who walk uprightly (Isay
33.17.) Whereupon Sion is earnestly called upon to behold her God, (Isa. 40
9.10 11.) For as the Lord Christ (according as is there prophesied) came once
to save his people, by caring and laying down his life for them, as a shepherd;
so shall he hereafter come again, and that in the same nature, to rule them as
a Prince, and to deliver them from their enemies. And then in the Prophets
words, how beautiful shall be the Feet of those, that can bring such tidings to
Sion, as to say unto her, Thy God Reigns, Then shall the Watchmen lift up the
voice and sing, for joy of so glorious a spectacle, for this shall not be an
obscure and hidden thing, but eye shall see to eye when God brings back Sion (
Isay 52.7, 8.) That Phrase of seeing Eye to Eye, is very remarkable; it being
used but once before, and that (in Numb. 14 14) concerning Gods manifesting of
his glory to the Israelites, in a cloud and fire, that rested upon the
Tabernacle, and the beholding of this, is called a seeing of God Eye to Eye,
(...)
(for so it should be rendered and not Face to Face) i. plainly, without any
thing interposed to hinder the Vision. But these beamings forth of Divine
glory, shall be much more conspicuous and discernible hereafter in the humane
Nature of Christ, and equally exposed to the view of beholders. For the very
same person, whom in the days of his Humilation, and Abasement, in bearing the
sins of Mankind, Men did abhor, him hereafter Kings shall see, and arise (in
token of reverence) and worship (Isa. 49.7.] And as many formerly were astonished
at his Visage, so then, in sign of their Awe and submission, They shall shut
their Mouths at him (Isay 52.13, 14, 15.) Of which reverence and submission, to
be paid by all, unto the Sovereignty of Christ, when he comes to Reign, the
Psalmist likewise prophecies, ( Ps. 72.15.17.)

4. This is gathered also, from Isay 62 11. Isay 62.11. opened.
Where God calls upon his Ministers from the utmost ends of the Earth, to
proclaim unto Sion, Behold, thy salvation (or rather thy Savior, or thy Jesus)
comes, behold his reward is with him: which last words are used by our Savior
himself, when he foretells the suddenness of his second coming (Rev. 22.12.)
Which though it be indeed to destroy his Enemies, (...),
yet the principal end is to save and to deliver his people, by reigning with,
and among them: Of which time Obadiah speaks ( v. 21.) Saviors (i. the supreme
and most excellent Savior, who is also called Wisdoms, (Prove. 9.1) as being
most wise) shall come upon Mount Sion, to judge the Mount of Esau, (i. e. To
punish all the enemies of his People, who, with reference to the enmity of Esau
against Jacob, are frequently called Edomites (as Isa. 34, 5, 6, 8, and 63.1,
4, etc. and (i. after that Judgment executed upon those Enemies) the Kingdom
(i. the supreme Dominion and Sovereignty, of which Obadiah here prophecies)
shall be the Lords.

Lastly. All those places, wherein mention is made of Gods raising up David, in
the latter days; to be King among and over his people, cannot be meant of any
else, then of the Lord Christ, who, according to the Flesh, was of the
posterity and race of David; and who in order to the fulfilling of all those
Scriptures, and for the solace of his faithful subjects, as well as terror of
his Enemies; must hereafter Reign in as Visible and apparent a manner, as ever
David did: Thus God by Ezekiel, speaks expressly, I will save my flock, and I
will set up one Shepherd, over them, and he shall seed them, even my Servant
David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their Shepherd, and I the Lord will
be their God, and my servant David, a prince among them, Ezekiel. 34.23, 24.) so
cap. 37.24.25. David my Servant shall be King over them, and they shall all
have one Shepherd, and they shall dwell in the Land that I have given unto
Jacob, and my Servant David, shall be their Prince for ever. Of him, and his
personal Reign upon Earth, it is that God speaks by Jeremy, I will raise, up
unto David a righ eous Branch, and a King shall reign (i. e. (...)
He as a King shall reign) and shall prosper (or, shall deal wisely, as the
Word is Translated, in a Prophecy of the same Person, and to the same purpose (
Isay 52.13.) And shall execute Judgment and righteousness in the Earth, in his
days Judah shall he saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name,
whereby they shall call him Jehovah our righteousness. (Jer. 23.4.5, 6.) And
then as he speaks in another place, they shall serve the Lord their God, and
David their King, (Jer. 30 9.) Of which time also the Prophet Hosea speaks in
that excellent and clear Prophecy ( Hos. 3.4, 5) All which places, are so full
and plain for the Personal Residence and Reign of our Lord Christ upon Earth,
that without great violence and wrestling they cannot possibly be otherwise
understood.

That all these Prophecies of Scripture, with many more of the same Nature and
Tendency, must be literally interpreted, as really and plainly meaning the
things they speak of, besides the evidence of the words themselves, which have
nothing in them of Darkness or Ambiquity, there are these reasons which may
serve farther to evince it.

Reason 1.
First, Because God is very exact and careful in the fulfilling of his Promises,
for this end they were written, that they might be everlasting records of Gods
goodness, which his people might always plead in Prayer with him, and wait in
Hope for their full accomplishment ( Jer. 30 2, 3.) And for this end we are
commanded to read them, because none of those things shall sail of being
effectually performed, which are prophesied of, ( Isa. 34.16. And our Savior
has given such a Testimony to this purpose, as nothing can be more express.
Heaven and Earth, says he, shall pass away, before one jot or title of the
Law. (i, Of the writings of Moses and the Prophets, whether we consider their
precepts, or their Predictions) shall fail, till all things be done (i. Till
every thing be exactly fulfilled which they have written) for Gods Truth and
Faithfulness (which he magnifies above all his Name, as the most glorious of
his attributes Psalm. 138 2.) does engage him to the performance of the least
and most minate circumstance, which can from his word be rightly gathered as a
discovery of his future intentions: but if all their places, with many more
that may be quoted, concerning the Personal Reign of Christ upon earth, before
the last and Universal Judgment, may be eluded by Mistical Interpretations a
very great and considerate portion of Scripture Prophecy, will be utterly lost
and made useless; nay seem to be written to no other purpose, but to beget in
true Believers vain hopes, which far be it from any so much as to imagine,
since God, as he does not Tempt, (James 1.14.15.) so neither will he Deceive
any, but rather ruin this admirble frame of the Universe, then not employ his
whole power to effect, and that to the uttermost, what ever any of his
servants, in his Name and by his Spirit have foretold.

Secondly, Another Reason may be taken from the litteral, fulfiling Reason 2.
already of other Prophecies; which were much difficult in the accomplishing,
and some of them not tending so visibly to illustrate the glory of God and of
his Christ, as this I am now insisting upon: among these I shall mention only
two, which, in their several kinds are truly admirable.

1. Concerning the Birth and sufferings of Christ. 2. Concerning the Rise and
Reign of Antichrist.
1. The first remarkable Prophecy which has been literally fulfilled, is that
concerning the Birth and sufferings of Christ: that the eternal So of God
should become a mortal Man; that He who made the World should subject himself
to the penury and want of a Calamitous life, and after that, so far empty
himself of his Native glory, (...). Phil. 2.
as to dye an accursed death; this contains in it so many wonders, that before
it was done, the Prophet complains very few did believe the report of it; and
yet not a syllable which concerned our Saviors Humiliation and inglorious
estate, Is. 53.1.
as Man, but was by him fully accomplished; for which exactness and care there
is the reason given, both by our Savior and the Evangelist. All these things
were done that the Scriptures of the Prophets might be fulfilled (Mat.
29.54.56.) And it is very observable, that when our Savior was nailed to the
Cross, being then even in the Agony and pangs of Death, yet that nothing might
be omitted, which with the least possibility or plea could be urged as a part
of his sufferings; and calling then to mind that he had not yet drank the
Vinegar and Gall, which the Psalmist mentions ( Psalm 69.21.) He presently cried
out, I thirst; and having received that bitter potion from one of the soldiers,
he said, (...) It is finished, i. All things which the Scriptures have foretold
concerning, not only my Death, but all the manner and circumstances of my
dying, they are now to a Title accomplished; and then in token of thankfulness,
that his Father had heard and strengthened him hitherto, for this difficult, and
seeming less noble, John 19.28.30. Heb. 5.7
part of his work, He bowed his head, and contentedly gave up the Ghost, from
which exactness it is easy to gather, that the same truth and faithfulness
which our Lord manifested in coming into, and going out of the World, he does
intend to show by hastening this return, and in a litteral fulfilling of those
promises, which concern his Kingdom and Exaltation: and for any to read them
by a limited and restrained sense, it is neither to deal faithfully with the
Scripture (of which every Jota and Title must be fulfilled) nor honorably with
our Lord Christ; who certainly has merited so much by the punctualness, as
well as the greatness of his sufferings, that his inheritance of ruling all
Nations, should not be abridged or curtailed: since he did not, when he
suffered, mince the matter, nor ease himself by a distinction, but did Totum
sesum exsipere, Take the whole Chap, without shedding a drop, or abating the
rigor of the smallest circumstance, which did but seem to reflect upon him,
why should we then imagine but those many promises, concerning his actual Reign
and sovereignty over the world, will be made good in the most clear and
comprehensive Latitude of Scripture language: especially since beside the truth
and faithfulness of God which does engage him to perform it, this last does in
a more eminent and signal manner advance the honor of our Savior then the
former; which the Father who loves the Son, and has given all th ngs into his
hands, will not at his request deny him. Psalm. 2.8.9.

2. Another Prophecy, the fulfiling of which is an Argument that Christ will
come and reign upon earth, in the same visible manner as is prophesied of him,
is that concerning the rise and reign of Antichrist, that Christian Religion,
which is so directly contrary to men's natural appetites, and likewise met with
such fierce opposiition from enraged and cruel men, should notwithstanding all
this prevail over the world, had in it Miracle and strangeness enough; but,
after this Religion was planted, and almost an universal obedience was paid
unto it, that a company of Impostors (as they are called, (...)
2 John v 7.) should rise up and make use of this very Religion, to destroy
it is self, and wrest it is Doctrine quite contrary to it is true intent and
meaning, that any should be so impiously daring, as to persuade the world
(which Christ came to enlighten, John 12.35.36. that to be Ignorant and Blind,
i. e. To be willing to be deceived and seduced, was the next way to be Christ's
Disciples, and that they were most likely to serve God and to obey his commands
best, who studied his word least; this is too prodigious and amazing an
Impiety, that one might have said of it in former ages, what the Apostle speaks
concerning the Revelation of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 4. (...) 2 These. 2. Rev. 13.
It could never enter into the heart of man to conceive it, but yet such gross
delusions were exactly foretold (2 These. 2.1.10. 1. Tim. 4.1.2.3.4. 2 Pet, 2.
Revel. 13. And we have lived to see them, in their most amazing and stupendous
particulars, literally accomplished, since then, that Doctrine is taught
concerning the forbidding of Marriage, and the abstaining from Meats, which the
Spirit of God has already called the Doctrine of Divils: since there is a
lawless man who now actually sits in the Temple (or Church of God) challenging
to himself Divine power and honor: since that Beast who kills all that will
not worship his Image, and receive his mark, (i. e. Who will not testify their
Communion with him, by some visible and outward Act of Conformity,) is not only
Rasen long since, but reigning in Rome, Rev. 17.
the City with seven Hills, which is adorned with Gold and precious stones,
and makes all the Nations of the World drunk with the wine of her Fornication,
i. e. Which has a specious glittering, and Pompous Religion, whereby she does
bewitch the Credulous World, and makes his poisonous pills of Idolatry and
Will Worship securely swallowed. In a word, since Antichrist is come, in his
full proportion; and according to those Lineaments wherein he was before
deceived? why then should we doubt, but our Lord Christ will also come to
Reign, in the very same manner as is prophesied concerning him, can we think
that God will be more exact in fulfiling the Prophecies, which concern the
advancement of his Enemy, then in accomplishing those which make for the
Ezaltation and Honor of his Son? shall the Kingdom of Antichrist for thus
many hundred of Years, be an universal extent, that the Scriptures about him
might be fulfiled; and shall not the kingdom of Christ, in order to the
accomplishment of the same Scriptures, be much more large and comprehensive? I
cannot see the least pretense of solid Reason, why we should so much as once
doubt of it; for the same Spirit of Truth, who said, Antichrist should come,
has foretold likewise, that he should be destroyed; whom Christ shall abolish
by the brightness of his appearance. (...) John 7.
i. e. by the setting up of his kingdom (as they are joined 2 Timothy 5.1.) And
in the ruin of that great Impostour, erect unto himself upon Earth a durable
Throne of Glory, then will he put an end to all those Cheats and Divelish
Delusions, whereby the face of Christianity has hitherto been disfi ured, and
according as Zechary here prophecies, make the Name of the Lord, [i. e. his
Worship] one as the Lord himself is [in his Nature] One which happiness in this
degenerate and forlorn posture of things, we cannot hope for until that
kingdom come, which we (for the most part ignorantly) but daily pray for; and
our Lord from Heaven, be put in full possession upon Earth of his promised and
dearly purchased Inheritance: Heb. 12.2.3.
in contemplation and foresight of which he courageously bore the contradiction
of sinners against himself, enduring the Cross, despiseing the shame, and is
now sat down at the right hand of the throne of God, Heb. 10.13.
and as the same Author says in another place exspect, or, watch till the
time comes, that his Enemies be made the footstool of his feet.

Thirdly, Our Savior himself never denied, Reason third.
that he both was and would be a King in that glorious and visible manner,
which is prophesied of -- for though, while he was upon Earth, the Lord Christ
acted in a way suitable to that form of a servant, which he then took upon him
(and therefore his kingdom and patience are joined together, Rev. 1.9) Yet
when he was urged by the Pharisees, he told them that he was the Son of God,
and that they should see him sitting on the right hand of power (Mat. 26.64.)
And before Pilate he confessed he was a King, which he calls a witnessing to
the Truth [John 18.37.] and the Apostle Paul styles it a good confession [1 Timothy 6.13.14.] and though our Savior then said to Pilate, that, his kingdom
was not of this world, so as to be advanced by worldly acts, and to be set up
by the fighting of his followers, [v 36.] Yet he did not deny that he was to
have a visible kingdom in the world; but on the contrary does clearly
intiemate it, both there, and in several other places: As,

1. When Peter in the name of the rest of the Disciples, does ask our Savior
what reward they should have for leaving all, and following him, our Savior
replies, Mat. 19 28. opened
that, besides an hundred fold recompense in this life, given as an earnest of
something better, they should be fully recompensed in the regeneration i. e. As
the Syriacke translates it, in the new world, or, (...)
in the world to come, as it is called [ Heb. 2.5.] This is the new Heaven, and
new Earth, which Isay prophecies of [ Isa 65.17.] and which says the Apostle
Peter, we exspect according to his promise [2 Pet. 3.13.] and is the same time,
with that of the sounding of the seventh Trumpet [Rev. 11] for then the
kingdoms of this world, are to become the kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ, [v. 15.] and then he will give a reward unto his servants the Prophets,
and to his Saints, and to them that fear him both small and great [v. 18.] this
is called ( Acts. 3.) The times of refreshing, (v, 19.) and the time of
restitution of all things (v. 21.) i. That time wherein the state of the World
shall be renewed and altered, and that perfection and beauty put upon it,
wherewith it was endued at the first Creation, as is evidently prophesied (
Isa. 11.6.7.8.9. and 51.3. add 65.25. with Ezeck. 36.34.35.) And this is the
time in which our Savior promises; that all his followers shall have a rich
and ample requital for all their temporal hardship and losses; which time is
not the final judgment (for none of the forementioned places do speak of that)
but the time of our Saviors Reign in which he says that his Disciples shall
share with him, both there and again ( Luke 22.29 30. and not only they unto
whom that answer was made, but all the faithful, 2 Timothy 2.11.12.) and all who
overcome i. e. who have the words of Christ, and hold them fast unto the end,
even they have a promise of the same royalty, which the Lord Christ has
received from his Father, and that is To have power over the Nations, and to
rule them with a rod of Iron, [Rev. 2.26.27] Which is celebrated in that
Tryumphant Song of the Church, thou have made us unto our God, Kings and Pri
sts, and we shall reign upon earth, [Rev. 5.10]

2. Our Savior compares himself; upon his withdrawing from earth, Luke 19.12.
opened.
unto such a Prince, who goes a far Journey, to receive a Kingdom, and then
returns in person to manage it ( Luke 19 12.) Which comparison is very
observable, because is was used and spoken by our Sav our, at such a time, when
his hearers thought that the Kingdom of God, (which from the Prophets they had
received such clear discoveries of) was just then upon the point of Appearing
(v. 11.) And though by mentioning the delay that would be interposed, our
Savior does check the impatience and eager have of their desires, yet does he
sufficiently manifest, that, at the time appointed, he would come, and in
person destroy all his Enemies ( v 27) as we find he actually is seen to do (
Rev. 19.11.21.) Which is the direct purport of all those Prophecies that I have
mentioned.

3. When the Apostles, Act. 1 6. opened.
who were now in a great measure enlightened [for by our Saviors breathing upon
them, they had received the Holy Ghost [Joh. 20.22.] and their mind was opened
to understand the Scriptures (Luke 24.45) Yet then they asked our Savior,
whether he would at that time resto e the Kingdom unto Israel: (Acts 1.6)
where, by Kingdom is meant that Dominion and Sovereignty promised to the
Israelites, (in Deuteronomy. 33.29. Isa. 60, 10, 11, 12. Micah 4, 6, 7, 8.) At which
time the Lord Christ himself shall be at the Head of his Returning Israelites;
(Isa. 52.12. c. 35.8. according to the Hebrews; Hos 1.11. Mic. 2.12, 13.) And
our Savior in his Answer, does not rebuke them for expecting such a Kingd m,
(for the Scriptures which foretell it are clear, and must be fulfilled) but
only he proves the curiosity, in that they required after Gods Arcana, and
desired to know those Times and Seasons, (i. the particular time of setting up
that promised Kingdom) which as yet were not revealed, but reserved by the
Father, in his own Power, It is for the same Reason, that the two Sons of
Zebedee, (Mat. 20.22. are checked, who did believe that Christ, was to be a
King, nor are they blamed for that, but they discovered a preposterous
ambition, in desiring to be advanced above their Brethren, and utterly mistook
both the time and manner of setting up that Kingdom and therefore our Savior
(to take them off from their thought, which then possessed them, of present
greatness) mentions his sufferings, as the way whereby he (and consequently all
his Followers) were to enter into Glory. So Luke 24 20 21. When the two
Dssciples were disconsolate for the death of Christ, bemoaning themselves as if
now all their hopes were lost, for we, say they, trusted that it had been he,
who should have redeemed Israel: 1. Who should have asserted our Nation into
that liberty and freedom, which the Prophets speak of, as the effect of the
Sons being given to them, (Is. 9.4. Jer, 30.8, 9, 10.) etc. Our Savior, in his
reply, does grant their supposal, but reproves them sharply, for not being
better acquainted with the Scriptures, out of which they might have learned.
That Christ ought to have suffered all those things, and then to enter into his
Glory, where by his Glory, is meant his Kingdom, as is plain ( Mark 10 37.
compared with Mat. 20 21.) In the same manner, after his Resurrection, our
Savior does blame his Apostles, in that forementioned demand of theirs, not
for their expectation, but for their have, and therefore he bids them (v..)
prepare for suffering, and witnessing, as their next immediate work, His
Kingdom being to be prolonged, as to the setting of it up, till the number of
his witnesses was completed ( Rev. 6.11.) And then there should be no longer
time, (Rev. 10 6.) i. No more delay: but he would presently come, (...)
to reward his Servants, and to destroy them which destroy the earth, (Rev.
11.15.18.)

4. In the Revelation, which our Savior says, (cap. 1.1.) That he had
received from the Father to this end, that he might show unto his Servants,
what things were to come to pass hereafter, there we have this Reign fully
manifested and the time of it, duration for a Thousand years, expressly
mentioned ( Rev. 20.4.6.) So that now there can rationally be no more scruple
about it, because the words of that book are declared to be the true and
faithful sayings of God; [Rev. 19 9] and they are pronounced Blessed who read
and hear the words of the Prophecy, and keep the things that are written
therein, i. Who live up to a full belief, and expectation of them: But if such
a reign and Kingdom, as is there spoken of, shall never be, how can those
sayings be true? or, if they are to have another interpretation put upon them,
then the words themselves do naturally and necessarily import, how are they
Faithful? So that I conclude this third reason with this, that our Savior was
so far from denying his personal reign and visible Kingdom upon Earth, that he
does clearly own and assert it.

4th. Reas.
Fourthly. Another reason, why the Prophecies of Scripture, concerning the reign
of Christ, are literally to be understood, is this, because this way of putting
mystical and spiritual meanings, upon plain and positive texts, is very unsafe
and dangerous; many Heresies, were of old introduced, and still are fomented by
it, I believe it was upon this very prtence that some in the Church of Corinth,
did deny the resurrection of the dead, and others as Hymaeneus and Philetas did
affirm, 1 Cor. 15 12. 2 Timothy 2.17.18.
it was past already, and indeed what truth can be so clearly revealed, which
may not by taking the words in a figurative sense, be altogether eluded! far
be it therefore from us, to limit the holy One of Israel, or to seek how we may
darken his counsel by our words, (which if in any respect they contradict his
must needs be) without knowledge, since it has pleased God to promise, that
his Christ, shall reign with his Saints upon earth, let us not by unbeleif,
[for I cannot yet see from what other root such denial can proceed] cast off
the mercy: but rather labor to receive the truths of God, according to his own
word, in the utmost extent, and most comprehensive meaning of it, and not
according to what seems possible in our own narrow conceptions.

Fifthly, This reign of Christ in person serves to make up and to complete
Reason 5.
the great Mystery of the Gospel; which consists, not only in having God our
Savior, but the same God, in the same humane Nature, likewise our King; and
this was that Mystery, which God revealed to the Prophets (Rev. 10.7.) and
remained to be fulfiled under the seventh Trumpet (as I have already observed
from Revel. 11.15.) therefore when our Savior was taken up into Heaven, the
Angels comforted his amazed and sorrowful Disciples with this, that, the same
Jesus should return as he went (i. in the same visible and apparent manner) as
he went away (Acts 1.11.) which also the Apostle Peter testifies ( c. 3.19. 20,
21.) when the times of refreshing (i. the time of calling the Jews, which will
be a time so glorious that it will be as life from the dead, (Romans 11.15.)
shall come from the presence of the Lord; whom the heaven must receive until
that time, which he then calls the time of the rectitution of all things, which
God has spoken of by the mouth of his holy Prodhets: to imagine, that, the
eternal Son of God took a Body and Flesh, upon him, merrily contemned and
crucified, and that he will not bring the same body to receive it is promised
glory, ( Isa. 52.13.15.) this is neither sit for the Mystery of God, nor the
admirable contriveance and discovery of his Grace in the Gospel. For he must
reign, 1 Cor. 1.24.28.
says our Apostle, till he has put all his Enemies under his feet; and till
that be done (which as the same Apostle o^^er ( Heb. 3.8.) we see not as yet
accomplished) the end shall ^othe i. the end of the World, and the final
judgment. This ^^^e, Romans 8.19.23.
not only the Saints and the whole creation long for, as hoping ^en to be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, (because the ca^ shall be taken away
Zech. 14.11.) but likewise ous Savior said, in Heaven to exspect it (Heb.
10.13.) that so he may be put into actual possession of his sovereignty,
promised, ( Psalm. 2.) and have all his Enemies become his footstool (Psalm.
110.) After the period of which reign, the humane Nature of Christ it self
shall be brought into a state of inferiority and subjection unto the Father,
that God may be all in all (1 Cor. 15, 28.

Reason 6.
Lastly, This was the general and fixed belief of all the holy men, both before
and since our Saviors coming, until the time of the Apostasy under
Antichrist: what the expectation of the Prophets was, sufficiently appears
from the concent and harmony of their predictions, upon which the Prophet
Zachary (for at that time it is said that he prophesied Luk 1.67.) does make a
brief and plain comment ( Luke 1.68.75.) where he says that now in sending of
Christ, God had done what he had promised by the mouth of his holy Prophets,
which have been since the world began, that we (i. we Jews, for of them he
speaks especially, as also do the Prophets) should be saved from our Enemies,
and from the hands of all that hate us; with more words concerning the Peace:
Plenty and Righteousness, which was to be in the time of Chrast; as is more
fully prophesied of [ Psalm. 72. Is. 11. Jer. 30. Ezeck. 34 and 37. etc.] which
time having never yet been in the world, it is infallibly certain that it will
be, and ought to be expected: what was the Faith and Hope of the Apostles, I
have already mentioned out of their writings, and agreeably to what they say in
express words, was the belief of almost almost all the Primitive Christians for
above three hundred years after our Savior. Thus papias [whom Eusebius in one
part of of his History, calls a learned and eloquent man, and who says of
himself that he was an hearer of John the Evangelist] writes positively that,
After the first resurrection, the kingdom of Christ shall endure upon earth a
thousand years, so Justin Martyr, in that excellent and [by reason of the
writings of our learned and judicious Mr. Meed] well known dialogue with Trypho
the Jew, as many says he, as an Orthadox, [so far was the Church then from
judging it an Heresy] do expect a Resurrection of the hody, which is called the
first resurrection, and that the Saints thus raised, shall live a thousand
years in Jerusalem, then repaired and beautified: to the same purpose Irenaeus
who wrote about fifty pears after Justin Martyr and Lactantius asserts
positively that at the end of the 6000th year of the world, righteousness shall
reign a 1000 years, then shall Christ obtain the government of the whole
earth, and there shall be, ha^, which the heathen Poets only dreamed of, a
golden age: Tertullian does not only assert, but thus argues the case in his
discourse against Marcion; did also confess there is a kingdom promised to us
upon canth, but before heaven, but in another state, namely after the
resurrection for a 1000 years in Jerusalem, a city of divine workmanship let
down from heaven; which also the Apostle calls our mother that is above, which
also the Appostle calls, our Mother that is above, and when he affirms that our
(...) or, Burgess-ship, is in Heaven, he does undoubtedly make it have relation
to some Heavenly City. This also Ezekiel knew, and the Apostle John saw, and it
was verified lately in the Eastern expedition; for it is evident that Heathens
also being witnesses that in Judea; for 40 days together, every Morning, a City
did hang down from Heaven, which, as the day grew bright, did vanish away with
its whole structure; this we say, is provided to receive the Saints at the
Resurrection, and to cherish them with plenty of all spiritual good things, for
a recompense of what in this World we have either despised or lost, For it is
just and worthy of God, that his Servants should reign there, where they have
been afflicted for his Name, This is the account of the Heavenly Kingdom, after
a thousand years of which (within which time is included the resurrection of
the Saints, according to the merits of those, who are to rise, some sooner and
some later) then shall be the destruction of the World; and when the judgment
of burning is finished, we shall be changed in a moment into an Angelical
substance, and shall be translated into an Heavenly Kingdom, Thus far
Tertulliun, with whose words, as containing the sum of what all the Ancients
have said, I shall conclude my Reasons for proof of the first observation.

Before I proceed to the second Observation, I will a little inquire, what
might be the Reason, that a Doctrine so plain and evident in Scripture, and so
fully assented to and believed on, in the eldest and purest times of the
Church, came afterward to be so much spoken against and decryed; in
satisfaction and answer to which Query, though much might be said, yet I shall
content my self with these few things.

1. One Reason might be, from that care which in the primitive times, many good
men had to avoid any partaking with the error of Cerinthus, and other gross and
sensual Heretics, who taught that the thousand years Reign of the Saints on
earth, should be spent in all manner of sensual delight and carnal pleasures:
Which opinion, being so monstrous in it srlf; so contrary to the purity of the
Gospvl, and to the very end of our Saviors coming; which was to bring in true
Righteousness and Holiness (Luke 1.75.) Many zealous and well meaning men
thought they could never sufficiently show their Abhorrence of such an impious
conceit; and therefore, as it is usual in the heat of opposition, they rather
chose to deny even the truth it self, then to embrace it, as it was clogged and
sullyed with such impure and vicious mixtures: For Dyonisius, the most learned
of all those, who in elder days did oppose this Doctrine proceeded in his heat
and earnestness, as positively to deny that the Revelation of John, was written
by the Evangelist although the Author himself does expressly affirm it ( Rev.
1.1.2.) and others after him did deny the whole Book to be Canonical and
inspired Scripture whereby they endeavored to rob the Church of as divine and
holy a writing, and of as much tendency, to support the Saints under their
sufferings that both Heathenist and Antichristian men were to bring upon them,
as any in the whole Book of God whatever: Unto such desperate and fearful
shifts were they heretofore driven, who denied the Visible Kingdom of Christ
upon Earth, and therein wholly eluded the perspicuity and evidence of that
admirable and soul refreshing Prophecy.

2. Another cause of the opposition made against this Doctrine, might be the
reputation which the learned Hierome gained, who being a man very expert or
indeed, rather, excellent, in his Interpretation of Scripture, did by reason of
that prepossession and prejudice, which the errors of some had occasioned, set
himself with a great deal of vehemence to censure this opinion and his
authority did easily prevail upon the carelessness and credulity of others, who
were content to take his word without ever making any farther enquiry into the
truth themselves: Yet even that learned Author himself, in his comment, upon
the 37th of Ezekiel, is forced to acknowledge that that prophecy was not yet
fulfilled, and he confesses that not only the Jews, but likewise many
Christian writers, as Victorinus, Severus, Tertullian, Lactantius; who wrote in
Latin, and Iraeneus, Apollinaris, Justin Martyr who wrote in Greek, together
with many others even in his time, did all expect that that prophecy was to be
fulfilled in the thousand years Reign, of which upon that Chapter Hierome
speaks very favorably, and says it was an opinion not to be reproved: Yet he
continuing to write against it; and the Ages following having the countenance
of so learned a man, embraced hastily those mistical expositions he gave,
without any further examining them.

3. Another Reason, why the Scriptures concerning the Kingdom of Christ were so
little understood in the former ages of the Church, might be the usurpation and
setting up the Visible Kingdom and temporal Monarchy of Antichrist, who, as
soon as ever he was advanced into and secured in his Throne, did presently
apply to himself and to his Church, all those Prophecies, which any way
concerned the temporal Dominion and Glory of Christ and his people: When
Constantine the first Christian Emperor, had absolutely defeated all the force
and power of the Heathen Magistrates, and made a public Edict to destroy the
worshiy of all False Gods, and their Temples, then, as many understand it was
fulfilled that joyful acclamation, now is the Salvation, Rev. 12.10.
and the Power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Authority of his Christ;
and in part it might truly be said to have been so, for wherever the true
Religon is set up, and the professors of it encouraged, there indeed God
reigns, as he did in Judea in the time of David; and Eusebius making mention of
the glorious Churches that were then founded, the great revenues that were
settled the singular honor that was given to the Bishops and Ministers of the
Gospel by Constantine, we did, says he, in this see an Emblem of the Reign of
Christ: but this peace and security purchased by Constantine degenerated
presently into a love of ease aand worldly prosperity, which made the
Christians generally careless of looking after a better state, to be enjoyed in
the first resurrection; which sloth and remisneis of theirs gave advantage to
the Bishop of Rome, to wrest the Dominion out of the Emperors hands, and by
degrees to challenge unto himself the exercise of their Royalty; he boasting
himself to be the Vicar of Christ, and the person appointed to bear rule in his
stead; the greatness of whose Dominion all records bear witness to, that it did
fully answer the extent of that Prophecy, wherein it is said, that the World
wondered after the Beast, Rev. 13.3.4.
and all the Inhabitants of the earth, except a few whose names were written in
the book of life, did worship him, during whose Universal Reign and Tyranny
(for I am content to allow such an Universality to the Beast of Rome) it is no
wonder if the true kingdom of Christ was not so much as thought of; as when
Theives have taken possession and by force keep the house it is no wonder if
the Friends and Neighbors forbear to put in any claim for the right Heir.

Lastly, When the Antichristian yoke was, by the gracious working of the power
and mercy of God in very weak and contemptible instruments, thrown off in many
Countries and scripture light (which before was forcibly detained and
imprisoned in darkness) began to recover its luster, then amongst the Primitive
truths, this doctrine of the kingdom of Christ did in many places revive, and
was by several learned men at the very first reformation asserted: but by the
seditious attempts of some mistaken men, and the horrid practices of those in
Munster, this opinion became generally Nauseous to the most sober and learned
of our ancient Protestant writers, and particularly to the judicious and truly
worthy Mr. Calvin, whose deserved esteem in the Church of Christ, has
prevailed to keep this great Scripture truth from being so much as inquired
into; but with due submission and reverence to the memory of so many famous
men, I do conceive that in this particular they were swayed too much by their
prejudices, and notwithstanding their authority, we ought to make for our
selves a more severe and impartial enquiry, for every truth is of a divine
original; and ought no more to be denied, then the Scriptures from whence it is
taken, suppressed, because unlearned and unstable men do wrest it both to their
own and to others destruction. It was indeed a great Error, to say no more, of
those mistaken (though I hope, as to many of them, well meaning men, who
thought themselves call; ed to fight up Christ into his Throne; for his Kingdom
is yet in Patience (Rev 1.9.) and will not be fully (over all the world) in
power, till he himself does come from Heaven to establish it; for he is then to
abolish every Authority and Dominion besides his own (1 Cor. 15.24.) That stone
which Nebuchadnezer saw in his Vision, to become a Mountain and to dash in
pieces all former powers; is the Lord Christ himself, and not his Saints (as
some suppose) for it is he, who was cut out without hands [Dan. 2.44.45.] and
in the Prophets is often styled a stone, because of those saving and ruining
effects, which follow upon those who receive or refuse him [compare Is. 28.12.
with Is. 8.13.14. Zach. 3.9.] As at the building of the Temple, it was not by
might or power, that so difficult a work was effected, but by the spirit of the
Lord, so will it be when our Lord erects his kingdom, he alone shall be
exalted in that day: the sighs and groans of his oppressed people shall call
him down from Heaven, and in compassion, not of his persecuting and smiting,
but of his persecuted and suffering servants, he will come and save them, and
destroy their Enemies for them [ Is. 35.4.] They which teach otherwise, do
err, not knowing the Seriptures: whose mistakes howevever ought not to have
been looked upon to be of so dangerous and infectious a Nature, as that for
them the truth it self should be rejected, which is not at all guilty of those
consequences which rash men do unwarily strive to draw from it: and so much for
the first Observation.

The second Observation was this, When the Lord Christ shall come Ob. 2.
from Heaven, to set up his kingdom upon earth, all his Saints shall come with
him: whereby Saints may be meant either Angels [as Mat. 16.27. and 24 30, 31.]
who are called the Angels of his strength [2 These 1.7.] and the mighty ones,
who are to descend with him, as the executioners of his vengeance against all
ungodly men, according to Exoch s prophecy Jude v. 14.15.] but I do not take
the Angels to be principally meant in this place; for hereafter their office
will be rather to Minister, as they are described, standing like an out Guard
about the Elders and the living Creatures (Rev. 5.11. and 7.11) Whereas the
Prophet Zachary, speaks of those Saints, that were to Reign with Christ, and to
share with him in his Sovereignty, And therefore by Saints here I understand
Holy Men, who lived before this t me, and died in the Faith of Christ, of whom
the Apostle Paul is to be understood (1 These. 3.13. and 2. These. 1.10) and
describing of the order of the Resurrection, Choist, says he, shall rise the
first fruits, then they that are Christ's, at his coming, where by coming, 1
Cor. 15.22.25. explained.
that the Apostle means his coming to reign, (which he calls his appearance and
Kingdom (2 Timothy 4.1.) is plain from that which follows, then is the end, when
he shall deliver up the Kingdom unto the Father, when he shall have abolished
all Dominion, and all authorety, and power: For he must reign till all his
Enemies be put under his Feet (1 Cor. 15.23.25.) From which words it appears
clearly. 1. That when Christ comes, those that are his. i. e. Saints, or
Believers, shall come with him. 2. That between this coming of Christ, and the
end, i. e. the final destruction of the World, and consumation of all things,
there shall be interposed the reign of Christ, the duration and term of which,
though it is not their expressed, yet in that vision, which John afterward
saw, we find it is to last a Thousand Years, all which time the Saints shall
reign on earth with Christ, as is particularly and expressly affirmed, and the
matter Twice repeated, to make it more sure, [ Rev. 20 4.6.] With that place to
the Corinthians; agrees what the same Apostle writes to the Thessalonians [1
These 4.14. 1 These. 4.14. explained.
] If we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them also which steep
in Jesus, will he bring with him; and [v. 16.] The dead in Christ, shall rise
first: Then [i. e. after the resurrection and reign] shall be what follows
concerning the final Judgment, for the change of Believers that remain alive
till the coming of Christ [which is mentioned both there and 1 Cor. 15.51.]
shall not be done at this first Appearance of our Savior, which we are now
discoursing of, for then the Saints, at that time on Earth, shall live and
reign too, as is plain [ Deu. 7.18.22 27.] But after this Reign is fully
finished and the last Judgment begins to be celebrated, then shall those
Saints that then alive, be caught up in the Air, and bo for ever with the Lord.
The want of distinguishing these two Times, [which yet is plainly employed in
the word (...) Then, or, afterward which does not always signify, what shall
immediately follow no more then the word (...) presently, or immediately, Mat.
24.29. But only notes the order and success on in the several event, though at
great distance of times, neglect of observing this, has been none of the least
Reasons, why this place of the Apostle, has been so much urged against the
reign of the Saints before the last Judgment, though indeed rightly understood
it does necessarily imply it as containing the very same sense with that other
passage in the Epistle to the Corinthians, which is not capable of any other
interpretation.

To clear up this a little farther, I desire that place may be considered in
Isa. 24.23. The Sun shall be ashamed, and the Moon confounded, (i. either their
light and splendor shall be nothing in comparison of that greater Glory, as
Isa 60.19. or else it seems to note that general shaking and overthrow of all
things, which shall immediately preceed (as Mat, 24.29.30) When the Lord of
Hosts shall reign in Mount Sion, and in Jerusalem before his an^ients, (or
Elder) in Glory. Where by Ancients (in Greek, (...) i. e. elders) I cannot
understand any other, then those Elders mentioned, Rev. 5.9.10. Who in their
Song of Praise to the Lamb, thou wast slain, say they, and have redeemed us
unto God by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
Nation, and have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, ann we shall reign
upon earth: Which being spoken by the whole Church, under the name of Elders
and Living Creatures, consisting of Officers and Members, it evidently shows
that such a time will be; according to our Saviors promise [ Rev. 2.26.27. And
then all, who have now a right of Title, by their Faith in Christ, to be Kings
and Priests, (as is expressed Rev. 1.5.6. 1 Pet. 2.5; 9.) shall then have
reality of possession, and behold their King in his beauty, (Isa. 33.17.) not
at a distance, but as a people nigh unto him, and sitting with him upon his
Throne; i. e. Visibly sharing in his Dominion and Glory; which state is fully
spoke to in Rev. 7. compared with Isa. 25. and Rev. 21. compared with Isa. 60.
and 61.

The Reasons, why Christ at his coming, will bring all his Deceased Saints to
live and Reign with him, are.

Reas. 1.
First, Because of that near Relation, that is between Christ, and his Saints;
He is their Head, their Husband. And therefore he thinks not his own Glory
complete without them: As in the Body natural, every Member shares in the
dignities or indignities done to the Head (1 Cor. 12.26.27.) So it is in the
body Mistical of Christ; the Church which is his Body, is said to be his
fullness, or complement (Ephesians. 1.22.23.) i. e. That which makes him to be a
complete Head, which without his Church, his Body, he could not be. Hence is
that Solicitous and compassionate care, which our Lord shows toward his
suffering Saints, while they live upon Earth, In all their affliction he is
afflicted (Isa. 63 9.) which made him (as one that is sensibly wounded cries
out for ease) to call aloud from Heaven, and to rebuke Paul, for persecuting
him ( Act. 9 4 5.) This care, our Savior will be so far from putting off that
rather it will be more fully manifested, when he comes in his Glory; which is
the time, not only of our Lord Christ's, but of all his Saints and Followers,
Revelation, as their Reign on Earth is styled Romans 8.19) For, says the
Apostle, when Christ, who is our life, shall appear, (...)
then shall we also appear (or, be made manifest) with him in Glory (Col. 3.4.)
And to this purpose may be applied that excellent consolatory promise ( Isa.
26.19.) Thy dead men shall live, my dead Carcass, (for so the Hebrew word
should be rendered) they shall arise, awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust,
for thy Dew is the Dew of Herbs, and the Land of the Giants, (i. e. of all the
great and Mighty in the Earth) thou shall overthrow. 1. Thou shall utterly
subdue all thy enemies, (...)
how great and mighty soever. According to that of the Psalmist, The righteous
shall have dominion over them in the Morning (or, in that Morning) namely that;
of the first Resurrection, For then, they shall tread down the wicked, and they
shall be as Ashes under the soles of their Feet. [Mal. 4.3. Psalm. 49.14.
] And that because of their near Relation unto Christ, who has loved them and
conveyed this power to them [ Rev. 2.26.27.]

Secondly, Another reason, why Christ will bring his deceased R. 2.
Saints to Reign with him, may be taken from that proportion which God observes
in the distribution of rewards unto his people: For though the reward it self
in general is of grace, yet God is pleased to observe this order and method in
the dispensing it; that it should be some way answerable unto his peoples
sufferings and actings for him: Thus the Apostle [2 Timothy 2.11.12.] This is a
faithful saying; If we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him: And as
I have already urged the words of Tertullian, so does the Apostle argue, in his
second Epistle to the Thessalonians [2 These. 1.4.7.] after he had said that the
persecutions and tribulations, which the Christians then endured, were
permitted to be laid upon them by God, that they might be counted worthy of the
kingdom of God for which they suffered; He gives this as a Reason, Because it
is a righteous thing with God to recompense Tribulation unto them that trouble
you, but unto you that are troubled rest, with us when the Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels. He that serves Christ and follows
the Lamb here, shall hereafter be in the same place and partake of the same
honor with him ( Joh. 12.26.) And thus our Savior prayed for them, Father,
whom thou have given me, I will that where I am, they also may be with me, that
they may behold my glory which thou have given me (Joh. 17 24) part of which
glory is that the Father, (...)
by an Eternal Decree has set (or, as the Hebrew word signifies, Anointed] his
Son upon his holy hill of Sion; And when he returns from Heaven to take
possession of that Sovereignty which the Father long since promised him, his
faithful followers shall enter into his Joy i. e. As our Savior him self
explains that Phrase ( Luke 19.17) they shall have command and share the
Dominion with him: Therefore believers are said to be heirs of God, and
Coheirs with Christ (Romans 8.17.] and Partners with Christ, or Partakers of
Christ, [Heb. 3.14.] i. e. as Peter expresses, Partakers of the glory which
shall be revealed (1 Pet. 5.1) which glory is, as to the beginning of it, that
which I have already mentioned, and our Savior has fully declared, when he
says, that, In the regeneration they shall sit with him upon Thrones to rule
and judge [Mat. 19.28.]

The sum therefore of this second observation is briefly contained in these
three propositions which are all evident and clear in Scripture.

1. With Christ all the deceased Saints, both Patriarch, Prophets, Apostles and
Martyrs, shall be raised up and be brought to the Earth, to see and share in
the Royalty of his Government ( Rev. 11.18.)

2. The Saints at that time living upon Earth both Jews and Gentiles, but
especially the Jews (unto whom the first domion, and chief Sovereignty is
frequently promised as Isa 49.23. and 7 60.11.12. M chapter 4.8. shall enjoy all
that time, the greatest security, peace and prosperity immaginable doing all
the actions of a mortal life, but without either sin or sorrow for they shall
be all righteous (Isa. 60.21.) And the Lord will then put his Spirit into them,
without ever withdrawing it any more ( Ezekiel. 39 29.) and Satan shall be
chained up and hindered from deceiving, during the whole Term of a 1000 years
(Zech. 13.2. Rev. 20 2, 4, 6.)

3. After this state of things and the 1000 years is expired, then follows the
Insurrection of Gog and Magog and the final judgment as is expressed ( Rev.
20.7.) And then shall the Saints, that remain until that time, be changed, and
death for ever swallowed up in victory and the Reign of Christ and of his
Saints, hitherto managed upon earth be translated into and consumated in
Heaven, that God may be all in all (1 Cor. 15.28.)

If any ask, as Nicodemus did our Savior when he had discoursed to him
concerning the great mystery of Regeneration, (...)
how can these things be I may reply, in our Saviors words. art thou a Master
or Teacher, in Israel, and know not these things? For as the Apostle speaks,
Heb. 5.
handling partly this very Doctrine Whereas ws ought to be teachers for the
time, considering how long the Light of the Gospel has shone among us, we have
still need of Milk, sitting down satisfied with the lowest Elements and
Beginnings of Christianity, such are the Doctrines of Faith in Christ and
repentance toward God, which the Apostle calls the word of the beginning of
Christ ( Heb. 6.1.) But we cannot bear strong meat, nor are careful to be
carried unto Perfection: i. e. unto the height and perfection of our Hope and
Holy Profession, to the full comprehension, belief, and avowed owning of which
we ought to arrive, and leave the solution of all doubts and scruples, unto the
power of God which is able to the full to effect whatever he has promised when
the Angel had told Mary that the same Person who was the Eternal Son of God,
should become Man, and be conceived in her Womb she asked presently! How shall
this be? But after he had farther revealed that, the holy Spirit should come
upon her, Luke 1.
and the power of the most High overshadow her, by whose secret and
inconceivable acting that great and stupendous mystery, should be effected, we
do not find then that she questioned or doubted any more, but in an humble
resignation of her seif gave immediately thanks to God, Behold, says she, the
Handmaid of the Lord, let it be unto me according to thy word; The same should
every true believer do in this case, for this Temporal glory of Christ and of
his Saints: is not only promised: in every whit as express words but likewise
mention is made of the same creating and Almighty power, as engaged to perform
it, and therefore God speaking of this very state, commands his people not to
remember former things, (Isa. 43.18, 19:) Because he was doing a new thing, in
comparison of which all former acts of power and mercy, exepted by God on the
behalf of his people should be obscured and darkened, as stars are by the
brighter glory of the Sun, so ( Isa. 65.17.) Behold, says God I am creating a
new Heaven, and a new Earth, In which as Peter has it (2 Pet 3.13.)
Righteousness is to dwell; and which we expect according to his Promise, and
this is that time of our Saviors, and of his Saints Visible Kingdom, which
will bring a Reformation upon the whole World and when it once does take place,
former things shall no more be remembered, nor come into mind: In that place of
Isay, the word creating is very remarkable, for when the Prophet Jeremy
foretold the Birth of Christ: he uses the same expressions ( Jer. 31.22.)
Behold the Lord creates a new thing, a woman shall compass a Man. i. e. In
other words, a Virgin shall conceive a Son Isa. 7.14.) which thing when it was
done was so new, that is, so strange and extraordinary, that the Prophet Isay,
who foretold it, complains, Who has believed our report, (Isa. 53.1.) and yet
the exact and punctual fulfilling of that, which is far greater and less
intelligible, will not prevail with us to believe the other, but when our Lord
shall come, he will scarcely, as to this particular; find Faith upon earth
(Luke 18.8.) So little expectation will there be, of his A pearance and of his
Kingdom, which as they are joined by the Apostle, so they will be revealed
together [2 Timothy 4.1.] And all who deny this: may receive this answer, which
our Savior gave to the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection, They err, not
knowing the Scriptures [which have clearly promised such a state] nor the power
of God (which is fully able to effect it.)

Here I might end, as having fully, [and, as I think, to all unprejudiced
persons, convincingly] proved the Truth of the Doctrine I undertook to deliver,
but because one Argument commonly urged against it, is a supposal, that this
Doctrine has little or no influence upon our present Practice, but rather
tends to unsettle the World; which was the Outcry raised against it of old [
Luke 23 2, 5. and Acts 17.6, 7.] Then to build up any in true Holiness, I shall
therefore briefly insist upon a few practical inferences wh ch follow hence,
and so conclude.

Use 1.
First, This Doctrine, concerning the Kingdom of Christ upon earth, serves to
inform us, what we should continually pray unto God for, and make one of our
most earnest and importunate Petitions, namely this. Thy Kingdom come; That
God, in mercy to his People, and in zeal for his own Glory, would hasten the
time of setting up this Kingdom, that so the wickedness of the wicked [ Psalm.
7.9.] and the sufferings of the righteous, may come to a full end. For when God
reigns the wicked shall be destroyed out of ^^s earth (Psalm. 10.16. comp. Ps.
104.35.) and thus as our Savior himself speaks in the Parable, The Son of Man
shall send his Angels, and they shall gather all the scandals, and such as
commit iniquity out of his Kingdom (Mat. 13.41.) But to bring this to pass, it
must be the work of Fervent prayer, God the Father did not promise to give the
Nations for the inheritance of his son, but upon the condition of his asking
it. ask of me; says he, and I will give the Nations for thine Inheritance,
(Psalm. 2 7, 8.) So when God, by the Prophet Ezekiel, had promised the people of
Israel, that he would not only pardon their sins, but put his Spirit into them,
and then give them a lasting and peaceable possession of their Land, he adds,
yet for this I will be inquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them
(Ezekiel. 36, 37.) For Gods Promises, though never so absolute in the letter and
expression of them; yet, are so far from excluding Prayer, that they are given
as Motives to quicken us in it; since in them God has graciously afforded us
so many Arguments, by which our Faith may be supported and encouraged to plead
with him: Thus our Savior having foretold the coming of his Kingdom [for of
that he speaks Luke 21.31.] And given several signs, that were to be the Tokens
and Forerunners of its approach, he concludes, Watch ye therefore and pray
always [v. 36.] For the performance of which duty, besides the command obliging
to it, we have this great encouragement; That the more, the Hearts of Gods
people are drawn out, in earnest expectation of-and vehement longing for, the
Kingdom of Christ, they may be assured the nearer it is, Thus the Psalmist,
praying that God would restore his people, concludes confidently ( Psalm. 112
13, 14.) Thou will arise, thou will have mercy upon Zion, for the time to favor
her, yea the set time of which God had spoken ( Isa, 60.22) I the Lord will
hasten it in its time is come. Of which peremptory assertion he gives this
Reason, For thy people take pleasure in her stones; and they favor the dust,
thereof. As if he had said the desires of thy people are now more then
ordinarily raised up and carried out, in hope of a sudden restoration,
notwithstanding the present visible difficulties, which may hinder such an
expectation by seeing the Rubbish and Ruins of Sion, and therefore I conclude,
that the time of her deliverance is nigh: For this we must take for granted,
that a Spirit of Prayer, which is the Spirit of God in Believers (Romans 8 14.26,
27.) is never given out but there is a willingness and propensity in the Heart
of God at that time to grant the very thing, which he is prayed to for, Thus
the Psalmist ( Psalm. 10.17.) joins together Gods preparing the Heart of his
People, and the inclining of his own ear to hear, Thus it was, in the Church of
the Jews, at our Saviors first coming; there was then almost a general
expectation raised of him, Joseph of Arimathea is said to be one of those that
waited for the Kingdom of God, (Mark. 15 43.) Simeon, Anna, and many others,
did look for the consolation and redemption of Israel, as the coming of the
Messiah is called ( Luke 2 25, 28.) And not only they, but even the generality
of the Jews were then expecting that Christ should come (Luke 3.15.) And as
they expected and believed, so it was indeed though the mean appearance which
our Savior then manifested himself in kept the greatest part of them, from
believing in him. What the Church of God did, at our Saviors first we should
think it our duty, to do in reference to his Second coming, namely, Be
expecting and hastening it (as Peter's expression is) 2 Pet. 3.12. i. e. By heads
lifted up, (...)
be looking intently for it, and by arms stretched out in Prayer, be earnestly
requesting it: For if the Virgins slumber, it is no wonder if the Bridegroom
tarries And if his people do not desire him to hasten, how can we expect but
our Lord will delay his coming? This therefore we should, with all manner of
religious importunity, incessanly beg for, and offer a kind of Holy violence to
God, giving him do rest, (as the expression is Isa. 62.1, 6, 7) Till he does
establish his word, and send us our Promised Lord and King from Heaven, that we
may be Kings and Priests with him, and share in all his Royal Glories.

Use 2.
Secondly, we may learn from hence, as to pray, so to wait with patience for our
Lords coming, For he has only withdrawn his residence from earth for a time,
till all things be made fit for his return, and then he will not delay, when a
few changes more are past, he will come from Heaven, and by bringing in
everlasting righteousness, the effect of which is stability, and peace, he will
put a full end to all future Mutation. We should therefore as our Savior
advised his Apostles, Luke 21.19. In patience possess our souls; that is as
James speaks Let patience have its perfect work in us (Jam. 1.4.) that we may
be perfect and entire, wanting nothing, or in nothing, a little patience and
for a little time, will not serve our turn; for Christian patience has no
bound to it but is to be terminated only in the coming of Christ, (...)
therefore the exhortation runs; Be ye patient, Brethren unto the com ng of our
Lord (Jam. 5.7, 8.) This grace is requisite in all the actions which we do as
Christians, in Hea^ing, to retain the Seed, and to br ng forth answerable
Fruit, which is brought forth with patience ( Luke 8.15.) In Praying, that we
be not dicouraged, and for want of a present answer, be tempted to give it over
Luke 18 1. In sufferings, that we faint not, but resolutely hold out our Race,
(Heb. 12.1.) And therefore the Gospel, which so much enjoins and requires it,
is called the Word of Christ's patience, (Rev. 3.10.) But in nothing is patience
more necessary, then in watching for our Lords appearance, and therefore, with
the work of Faith, and labor of Love; is joined, the patience of the Hope of
our Lord Jesus Christ, (1 These. 1.3.) i. e. the patient waiting for and
expecting him from Heaven, as it is explained v. 10. So (2 These. 3.5.) the
Apostle prays, that God would direct their hearts unto the Love of God, and
patience of Christ, where patience, as also the Greek word (...) from the
Hebrew (...) signifies Patient expectation; for what faith believes, and prayer
solicites, that patience waits for; ( Romans 8 24, 25) Of which says the
Apostle, to the believing Hebrews, ye have need Hab. 10.36.) For because our
Lord (not delays, in the sense we usually take delay (2 Pet. 3 9. but forbears
his coming, till the proper time of it, which is not yet fully come, because
that all things that are to preceed it are not yet accomplished therefore we
had need be armed with patience, or else our have and impatience may undo us;
As that wicked servant, who relaxed his watch, and fell to fleshly pleasures,
lost thereby all the benefit of his former vigilance so will it also fare with
us, unless by patient perseverance, in well doing, we seek for Glory, Honor
and Immortality ( Rom 2.8.) like rubbish, by Fire, and a new Theater or Throne
of Glory; erected for men of another Nature and spirit to converse in. How
greatly then should we rejoice to drink of our Lords Cup, and to taste of the
same sufferings, since for ought we know the Death and Martyrdom of a few more,
may complete the number, and bring our Lord from Heaven, to avenge their
quarrel; and then our Tears will be rewarded, by having them forever wiped
away, and each drop of blood that has been shed in this illustrious cause,
will add a Glory and a Wreath unto our Crown: Then shall we in the Prophets
words, cry out and say, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him, and he have
saved us: This is the Lord, we have waited for him we will be glad and rejoice
in his Salvation (Isa. 25.9.) In which place this very Time and Reign is spoken
of.

Lastly, we should learn from hence to make a diligent inquiry into Use 3.
our Saintsship, for since, when our Lord come, none but his Saints shall come
with him we ought to make a careful search, whither we be indeed Saints or not,
least in that day of Trial, which will be revealed with fire, we be found
deceivers of our selves, and so be put to shame by him at his Appearance, [1
John 2 28] Many Professors like the foolish Virgins, and those, who boasted of
their prophesying in the Name of Christ, (Mat. 7.21.23.) will be found mistaken
and instead of partaking of the Resurrection of the Righteous, to whom alone
the reward is promised ( Luke 14.14.) will be raized up to shame and
everlasting contempt, (Dan. 12.1. with Isa. 66 24) beholding the glory of
others, who formerly were much inferior to themsel es, but see themselves
excluded which will increase their misery ( Luke 13.28, 29.) and occasion that
inward anguish, which is expressed by Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth: Ps. 112.10.
Thus the Psalmist, speaking of the happiness of the righteous, The wicked,
says he shall see it, and be grieved, he shall gnash his Teeth, and melt away;
The coming of Christ, though it be a time of Refreshing, (as it is called Acts
3 19.) to his distressed and persecuted Servant, yet to others it will be very
terrible which makes the Prophet inquire, who can abide the day of his coming,
or who can stand when he apprars? (Mal. 3.4.) For he will come as fire to
chaff, to burn the wicked out of the earth, (Mal. 4.1.) And therefore we had
need ask, whether we can, like Gold, endure his refining, and continue
unscorched in the midst of such everlasting burning, (Isa. 33.14) Christ comes
from Heaven, to take vengeance on his enemies (2 Pet. 3.7. Jude v. 14.15.) as
well as to be glorified in his Saints; and admired in them that believe (2
These. 1.7.10.) And therefore we have the Great and Rich men of the Earth
calling out to the Rocks to fall upon them, and to the Hills to cover them
(Rev. 6.16.17.) because truth of Holiness, and nothing else will be of any
avail at that day, which should make us very serious in examining our selves
about it.

Among many other signs, which may be given of our Saints-ship, I shall content
my self with mentioning only two, because they do in an especial manner relate
to the matter in hand.

Sign 1.
First, What love have we for the Appearance of Christ, and how are we affected
with the thoughts and hopes of his coming? Abraham rejoiced in Hope to see that
day, and when he saw it, by an eye of Faith, he was glad (John 8.56.) The same
disposition should be in all Believers, who are the Children of Abraham; and so
much the rather, because now Christ is to appear without sin (i. e. in his full
Beauty, and for luster of Majesty, without any Cloud of imputed sin to eclipse;
and to hide his Comeliness, as formerly there was, Is. 53.2.) and this he will
do for salvation unto them who expect him, (Heb. 9.28.) This the Apostle Paul
makes a certain sign of the Corinthians conversion to the Faith, that they did
expect the Revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ (1 Cor. 1.7.) for he cannot be a
true Disciple of Christ, a child of the Bride-chamber, who does not inwardly
grieve and mourn for the absence of the Bridegroom (Mat 9.15.) which Mourning
must necessarily be accompanied with earnest longing to see one of his days
(Luke 17.22.) And therefore the Apostle speaking of the great work that was
wrought by the spirit of God upon the Thessalonians, he makes the sum and
height of it to be this, They were turned from Idols to serve the living and
the true God, and to wait for his Son from Heaven (1 These. 1.10.) And again, in
his Epistle to Timothy, he says, The Crown of Righteousness was laid up, not
for himself alone, Comp. Tit. 2.13. Jam. 1.12.
but for all those that loved our Lords appearance (2 Timothy 4.8.) So that to
have a love for Christ, and a longing earnestness that his Name may be
glorified, and his Kingdom set up in the Earth, it is an undoubted sign of the
truth of Faith, and that the spirit of Christ has taken possession of us; For
the Spirit and Bride say, come, and every one that hears (or reads) let him
say Come; Yea O come Lord Jesus, come quickly (Rev. 22.17, 20.)

Secondly, What care have we to walk worthy of Christ; This is Sign 2.
that which the Apostle very often earnestly presses. We testify, says he,
that you walk worthy of God, who has called you unto his Kingdom and Glory (1
These. 2.12.) and having said (2 These. 2.14.) That they were called to the
obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, he adds, therefore stand fast
(Ver. 15.) We are not only to be holy as the Lord is holy, as Peter exhorts (1
Pet. 1.15.16.) but we are to have this end in it, that when Christ appears, we
may have confidence (1 John 2.28.) So also the Apostle Peter; Expecting, says
he, these things (i. e. New Heaven, and a new Earth, wherein Righteousness, and
the Practicers of it, is to dwell) give diligence to be found spotless and
blameless by him (2 Pet. 3.13.) which likewise upon the same grounds, is the
exhortation of the Apostle Paul (1 These. 5.23.)

There are Four things, which these Expectants should have an especial care to
purify, and to separate themselves from.

1. Fleshly Lusts, 2. Worldly Cares, 3. False Worships, 4. Servile Fears.
1. First, from Fleshly Lusts: What they are I need not mention For, as the
Apostle observes, The works of the Flesh are manifest (Gal. 5.19.20.) which
whoever do indulge and allow themselves in, they cannot inherit the Kingdom of
Christ and of God (V. 21. Ephesians. 5.5.) The New Jerusalem which comes down fram
Heaven, and is nothing else but the Kingdom of Christ, and of his Saints upon
Earth is a place of so great Purity that no unclean thing shall enter into it
(Rev 21.27 ( Dogs and Swine, all Voluptuous and hurtful Beasts like them, they
are without the Gates of that City (Rev. 22.15) A Christian is said to be
already raised with Christ (Col. 2.12) and as to the Truth of our Graces, we
are to look upon our selves, as Citizens and Inhabitants, not of Earth, but of
Heaven (Phil. 3 20.) and so to live like those that are acted by an Heavenly
Spirit, which daily prompts us to look after a better hope then any thing this
present Flesh affords, To sow unto, i. e. to gratify which, is only to take a
great deal of pains that we may Reap Corruption (Gal. 6.8.] the same Spirit,
which hereafter shall Raise and Glorify our Mortal Bodies, must now Sanctify
them [ Romt 8.11.] or else we shall die [v. 13.] i. e. we shall Rise only to
have our Portion in the Lake of Fire, which is the second Death, where all the
Abominable and Unbelievers are, [Rev. 21.8.]

Secondly, From Worldly Cares: we are commanded in an especial manner, to
beware that our hearts be not burdned with the cares of this life [Rev. 21.34.]
For, by such, the day of the Lords coming can neither be Foreseen nor desired;
both their Heart and Eyes being already filled and possessed with another
Object: When we cry out as Peter did. It is good for us to be here, we shall
never care to come down from the Mount, which we here reared up, and fancied to
our selves. As in the time of public Judgments, it is our Duty not to seek
after great things for our selves [Jer. 45.5.] so when we are assured that
Christ, at his Appearance and Kingdom, will destroy this present frame of
things, and cause all the beauty of it to perish; for any ambitiously to affect
and pursue a present fading Greatness and Glory, it argues plainly that their
Faith is but small, and that they have little or no expectation of something
better: Who rightly apprehend, and frequently reflect upon the inevitable
shakings and Convulsions, which the Kingdoms and Glory of this World are
subject to, will never rest satisfied till they have secured unto themselves a
place in that Kingdom which cannot be shaken [Heb 12.28.] Believers, with
Abraham, David, and the Patriarchs of old, are but Pilgrims and Strangers here
[1 Pet. 2.11.] and therefore they are daily to be looking for, and up to that
heavenly City which is the New Jerusalem let down from Heaven, whose Maker and
Builder is God [Heb. 11.16.]

Thirdly, From False Worships; who follow the Lamb, must have his, and his
Fathers name upon their Foreheads, and keep themselves undefiled with Women
[Rev. 14.1, 4, 5,] i. e. They must openly own the true Worship of God, and
carefully avoid all Idolatrous Mixtures; shunning all manner of Communion with
false and Adulterous Churches, from which who so keep themselves they are the
Virgins mentioned in the Revelation: And this is to be their State during the
whole time of the Reign of Antichrist in opposion to whom [because they hold
the Commands of God, and the Testimony of Jesus) they are called Witnesses
[Rev. 11.] Since we are Redeemed by Christ, we must take heed in every respect,
but especially in this, wherein his Fathers honor is so much concerned, how we
be found the Servants of Men, [1 Cor. 7.23]

When the sixth Vial is poured out, which I take to be the time when the Jews
(who are called the Kings from the East) shall have their way prepared for them
over Euphrates to return into their own Land, at which time Christ himself
shall appear at the Head of them ( Mic. 2.12.13.) Then is there this voice, as
it were from heaven, Behold, I come as a Thief, blessed is he that watches,
and who keeps his Garments, that he does not walk naked Rev. 16.17.) By
Garments there, is meant the righteousness of Christ, for justification, and
that way of holiness for sanctification, which Christ has revealed he will be
served and obeyed in; Which whosoever shall not at that time be found walking
in, but worships God, according to his own or other men's devices, his works (as
the Prophet threatened the hypocritical and ceremonial Jews) shall not prove a
covering to him, but both they, and all the lies which are found out to support
them, shall be swept a way: the fire, wherein that day shall be revealed, will
burn up all the Dross and stubble, wherewith vain men think they adorn, but
indeed only disfigure or rather defile, Gods worship, Whatever Paint may be put
upon Men Inventions, it will upon an impartial search be found, almost as
little a sin, not to serve God at all, as to serve him in any other way then be
himself has commanded: For the one indeed is bare faced impiety, but the other
is thus far like unto it, in that it presumes to teach God wisdom, and so Judas
like, betrays Gods honor, while it pretends to kiss him.

Lastly, from Servile Fears: there is nothing more unworthy of a Christian,
then to be afraid of men: since this tends to the dishonor of Christ, as if he
were not a great King, and able to save all his subjects, This charge he laid
upon his Disciples, when he sent them to preach, be not afraid of them which
can only kill the body, (Mat. 10, 28.) and afterward, when he encouraged the
Church of Smyrna, fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; the Divil
shall cast some of you in prison, that you may be tempted, be thou faithful
unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, (Rev. 2.10.) This promise we
do evidently disbelieve, if we give way so far to our Fear, as to be kept from
open confessing; and therefore the fearful and unbelieving are joined together,
as those that are to have their part in the same lake of fire (Rev. 21.8.) When
the Apostle presses Timothy to be earnest in stirring up that gift which God
had bestowed upon him (2 Timothy 1.6.) he uses this Argument, For God has not
given us the Spirit of Fear but of Power, (v. 7.) And thence he proceeds to
exhort him, be not therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, v. 8. but
suffer affliction with the Gospel according to the power of God, all those
distinctions and evasions, which men have devised to shift off the Cross, will
be found at last to be only the hiding places, that fear has provided to
shelter it self in, and what the Apostle affirmed concerning the ceremony
pressed and contended for in his time, may be asserted concerning all, that
those who compelled others to them, did it only that they might not be
persecuted by the cross of Christ (Gal. 6.12.) But since the Cross does prepare
the way for the Crown, let us not fear, but rather pray, as the Apostles did,
when they were silenced by their Rulers, Now Lord behold their threats and give
unto thy servants with all boldness to speak thy word (Acts 14.29.) Courage
becomes a Christian so much, that without it he cannot be one; but will, upon
every trial, expose his Lords Honor and Power to contempt and censure.

The Reader is entreated to correct these following ERRATAS.
PAge 1. Line 25. is read it is.

P. 2. L. 31. acknowledge r. acknowledged.

P. 5. L. 19. Ocadiah r. Obadiah.

P. 6. L. 6 Wrestling r. wresting ib. L. 28. minute r. minute ib. L. 30. their
r. these ib. L. 33. considerate r. considerable.

P. 7. L. 2. much difficult r. much more difficult ib. L. 18. the reason r.
this reason ib. L. 23. or plea r. of p ea ib. L. 31. seeming r. seemingly ib.
L. 37. r. his return ib. L. 39 r in a limited.

P. 8. L. 4. Sesum r. Telum ib. Chap. r. Cup. ib. L. 30. too r. so.

P. 9. L. 3. rasen r. risen ib. L. 7. his r. her ib. L 10. deceived r.
described ib. L. 16. an Universal r. of such an Universal ib. L. 37. exspect or
watch r. expects or waits.

P. 10. L. 10. Acts r. Arts ib. L. 20 r. intimate.

P. 11. L. 26. hebrews r. hebrew text ib. l. 29 proves the curiosity r.
reproved their curiosity 1. L. required r. inquired.

P. 12. L. 23. it duration r. it is duration.

P. 13. l. 30. merrily contemned r merely to be contemned ib. L. 32. Mystery r.
Majesty ib. L. 33. and r. and ib. l. 39, the canse r. the curse.

P. 14. L. 30. an Orthodox r are Orthodox ib. L. 34. r. fifty years ib. L. 37.
r. there shall be that ib. L. 39. r. We do also ib. L. 40. r. upon Earth.

P. 15. L. 2. dele, which also the Apostle calls our Mother that is above 16.
L. 7. that heathens r. the heathen.

P. 16. L. 12. proceeded r. proceeded so far

P. 17. L. 24. Beast or Church.

P. 39. L. 49 (...) r. (...).

P. 23. L. 33. exepted r. exerted.

P. 27. L. 27. like Rubbish by fire r. When Gods Jewels are made up and that
Sum sealed, then shall this perishing frame of things (which now have the
holy seed for its hidden support) be consumed like Rubbish by fire.

FINIS.

