APPELLO CAESAREM.

OR* An Appeal to CAESAR: In vindication of a little Book printed some years
since in the time of our troubles and entitled, A Praesent for Caesar.

Both done by Tho: Bradley D. D. one of his late Majesty's Chaplains, and
Rector of Castleford and Ackworth near Pontefract in Yorkshire, both in his
Majesty's gift and of his special grace bestowed upon the Author, but ever
since 44 (merely for his Loyalty) taken from him again by Sequestration.

YORK, Printed by Alice Broad, 1661.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty Charles the second, by the grace of God
King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, in all
causes and over all Persons Ecclesiastical and Civil within his Majesty's
Dominions next under Christ Supreme Head and Governor.
Most gracious and dread Sovereign,
TO your sacred hand and view I humbly offer this little peiee, because your
Majesty is in some sort concerned in it; I know your Majesty has little time
to read books, but there are some books which both for the usefulnes of the
subject and matter which they treat of, and for the smoothnes of the style and
language they are clothed with, are both pleasant and profitable, and so the
reading of them is but a studious recreation, and such is this at least in one
of these respects, and it is but a little one, it took not up above two days
in the writing of it, l^sse then one hours time in the reading of it will
dispatch it, and I humbly beseech your Majesty that you would bestow upon it
those few minutes, that you will be pleased to read it and that you would read
it through, and that you would read it your self, for there are some things in
it which perhaps there are many that are not willing your Majesty should be
acquainted with, and therefore against such I humbly beg your Majesty's
protection, howsoever I shall keep my self within the bounds of truth and
sobernes, and if I do disserve any of them it shall be in order to the serving
of your Majesty, which when I can do no way else, I shall supply with my
prayers public and private for all the blessings which may make your Majesty
happy both here on earth, and eternally hereafter in heaven. Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble and loyal Subject, T. Bradley,

Apello Caesarem: or an Appeal to Caesar in the vindication of a little book
printed some years since in the time our troubles: intiuled, A Present for
CAESAR.
TRue it is there was such a little book printed some years since; which I do
own, in which I find no fault but in the Title, and some complementall language
here and there to mitigate the ferocity of that Tyrant with whom in it I had to
do, but he was sagacious enough to discover the hook that lay hidden under that
bait which then I offered him, it is true the Title was A present for Caesar: and
we have no Caesar but the King. but surely in common prudence, thus much you
will allow to policy, that he which had a Tyrant to deal withal may give him
good words. neither did the giving of him a better style then he deserved make
him really such as that style did import, nor conclude him that gave it him
(only by way of allusion) to esteem him so. There are evidences enough to
conclude the contrary in the judgment of all them that know me, for if services
or sufferings, by sequestrations, plunderings, frequent imprisonments, menaces
and threatenings reaching even to life it self may speak a man loyal, there
are enough that speak loud enough to declare me such. For my zeal in his
Majesty's Cause, and service, it is well known I forsook all to follow him
through thick and thin, and did so to the very last, and being a sworn Chaplain
was one of those that did help to carry the Arc before him in the time of his
greatest troubles and dangers, and was afflicted in many of those things
wherein he was afflicted.

But to pass by these praevious considerations mentioned only for prevention
of prejudice. I pass from the title of the book to the book it self, and of
that I shall give a very brief yet a full and clear account under these two
heads. 1. By showing what the very sum, subject, and substance of that book
was. 2. What my aims, ends, and reaches were in penning it at that time.
The former of these is obvious to any man at the first view, which sees or
reads it, but in the latter I was more reserved they were known only to my
self, and very few more whom I acquainted with them, Dr. Healing for one which
knew more of that which lay in the bottom of that design then any other, and
with whom I had frequent conference about it. All these things I shall now
unriddle and unfold, which done and rightly understood, then Apello Caesarem,
Apello Ecclesiam, Apello Populum, Apello Omnes, I shall appeal to all the world
whether that book or he that penned it, deserves that blame which some imagine,
nay I shall rise so high in my vindication as not only to free it from blame,
but I challenge thanks for it from all England, especially the Clergy which
especially blame me for it, and if his Majesty shall be pleased to take hold of
some discoveries that there I make, and which here in this vindication I must
necessarily hint at, I hope his Majesty will think I do him no disservice in it
neither.

As to the first then of these 2 heads, The very sum and substance of the book
lies in these 2 proposals, and those two concerning only Churchmen and Church
livings all which at that time were in the hands and possession of the
intruding Clergy which had invaded and usurped upon the Church as their Patron
had done upon the civil State. concerning them therefore I made these two
proposals.

1. First, I did propose that all those that did possess sequestered livings,
and had peaceably enjoyed them two years or above might be required to pay
their first fruits, the Tyrant having set forth a cruel Proclamation, that we
should never return to our livings more, nor exercise our Ministerial Function
elsewhere.

2. My second proposal was this, I did propose that they and all others which
should hereafter be preferred to Ecclesiastical dignities or promotions might
pay their first fruits according to the statute of the 26 of Henry the eighth
whereby it is required that they should pay them in according to the full value
of such dignities, benefices, and promotions, and not as they stand partially
rated in the King's book by an ancient inquiry made above 100 years since which
gives them not in to the 5, 6, nor scarce to the 8 part of the true value
throughout the land, this done, I did demonstrate what a great improvement this
would make of the first-fruit Office, for the first fruits being thus improved
the tenths likewise must improve proportionably, according to which the tenths
would come to near as much as the first fruits now come to, and the
first fruits to 6 or 8 times as much as they now are. This is the very sum and
substance of that little piece for which I am blamed, all the rest is but as
the mantling to the arms, or filling to the limbs, or comment upon the Text
showing the aequity, legality, reasonableness, and seasonableness of such a
proposal at that time.

But there was much more lay at the bottom which was not obvious to every eye,
neither was it my desire that he should know them, therefore in the next place
I will show what were my ends, aims, and reaches in those proposals, and they
were these.

1. The first was (clear contrary to the apprehensions of those that charge me
in this matter) the very preservation of Tithes, Churches, Colleges, all which
were now in a tottering condition, dangerously shaken, undermined, and near
unto ruin. for,

1. That grand Impostor had proposed in the House that they would consider of
some way whereby a Ministry might be maintained in England without paying of
tithes.

2. Most of the Counties in England had petitioned against the payment of them.

3. The people did generally deny the payment of them, insomuch as one of the
Judges returning homeward from his Circuit told me that in that circuit they
had near 100 Causes came before them in the ease of non-payment of Tithes.

4. Cromwell's contrymen, Jones and Vavasor Powell had begun an experiment
tending hereunto in Wales, by gathering all the Tithes and Church-profit^ into
a common treasury, that is to say their own purses and their adhaerents, and
instead of a standing Clergy to set up an itinerant Ministry.

5. That mushrum Parliament called together by Cromwell's Writ, or Letters,
wherein Rowse was the Speaker had made a praevious Act in order to this design,
whereby they made the Ministry useles throughout the Land, for as for preaching
they tolerated a liberty to preach who would, for the Sacrament of Baptism,
that there was no need of that till children were come to 14 or 15 years of
age, and then they might make a Minister among themselves to do that office,
for the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, that was in a manner clear banished out
of the Church, for marrying that was committed to the Justices of peace, for
burying let one pit another, the dead bury the dead, not so much as the
Register book but it was taken out of our hands, and the Parish was to choose a
Register to keep it, so the Ministry was made useles throughout the land, and
what was this but a praevious Act proceeding from Anabaptisticall principles in
order to that sacrilegious and wicked design of overthrowing the whole body of
Tithes, the Churches ancient patrimony, and with it the Ministry it self, (for
the perpetuity whereof they were first ordained) together with the Schools of
the prophets, the Churches wherein God was worshipped, and all that was sacred,
if I at such a time as this stepped in to stay and to support the shaking pillars
of them all, by intitleing those that were the actors in this tragedy to a
considerable revenue out of them, that for the preservation of their own
interest they might protect and uphold the whole bulk and body, out of which
it did arise, forgive me this wrong, and who would think much in such a
dangerous storm to throw out some of the wares and fraught to preserve the Ship
and lading, and there are now living many (then Parliament men) to whom I had
distributed some of those books which confess that my proposals therein were
just and legal, aequall, reasonable and rational, and that they did sway much
with them in voting for the tithes, and yet for all this when it came to the
vote, it was carried but by one voice for the Chruch, for the House was equally
divided, and it stood merely and only upon speaker Lenthall's voice whether
tithes, or no tithes, and to his honor let me remember it in this great
business (for other matters if he did amiss let him answer for himself) he cast
it for the Church. Now in this point of time when the Church and Church
affairs, Tithes, Colleges, and all lay at stake, tottering as it were upon
the point of a needle, if I came in, and east in but one grain, or scruple to
cast it the right way, will my brethren of the Church charge me and say I did
them wrong, no I was their benefactor, I did them all good service, and I
deserve thanks at their hands. this was my first aim and I carried it with
success.

2. My second end that I aimed at was this, wherein I cannot so well justify my
self as in the former, because there was something of revenge in it, which
(though I were never so great a sufferer, and many more with me) yet I should
not have thought on, but this it was in a word, truly to punish the usurping
and intruding Clergy which by the power of their Committie of plundered
Ministers above, and their Country Committies here below subservient to them,
and the authority of one person more (whom I will not name) invaded our
livings, cast all the Orthodox Clergy out of the Churches, and put themselves
into the possession of them from Dan to Beershebae throughout the land. Upon
which by the help of their army they entered with such cruelty that they seized
upon all, Goods in the house, Corn on the ground, Croppe in the Barns,
imprisoning the Husbands, throwing out the Wives and children into the streets
without all mercy, not one in ten of them ever allowing them any fifths, or any
other help out of them notwithstanding a colorable Act made to that purpose.
So then distingue tempora distinguish but the times, do but consider in whose
possession the Church was when I promoted that design, and made those
proposals, and you will soon free me from any intention of evil to the
Orthodox Church or Churchmen in whose behalf I writ it, but for these cruel,
usurping and intruding Harpeys, God forgive me my revengeful thoughts against
them, I did not care what burden I laid upon them

3. My third end in those proposals, was the ease of the country and Commons of
England in respect of their contributions, taxes and assessments, by taking off
from them and laying a great part of their burden upon those unto whom more
properly it did belong, the Church and Churchmen, whose war this most
properly was, and in whose quarrel it was begun, and this is expressed in
terminis in that book, for which they so much blame me, but let them and all
others look back to the beginning of these wars and troubles, the cause, the
quarrel, the incendiaries and promoters of it, and will it not fall upon the
turbulent discontented Churchmen, and where were the coals of it first
kindled, was it not in the Pulpit, the rigid Presbiterian Pulpit, witness that
text in Judges the 5th. so frequently preached and printed on, and agreed on in
Sion College by a certain number of them there met together that it should be
so. Curse ye Meroz, curse him bitterly, because he came not forth to help the
Lord, to help the Lord, against the mighty, and although they did since that
some of them salve the matter by declaring against the murder of the late
King, and since that by declaring for his Majesty that now is, yet these
plasters are to narrow to heal that head which before they had so sore broken,
they have great cause to be humbled under the sense of those grievious things
which have fallen out as the consequence of their desperate beginnings, though
they intended them not, their doctrines, and practices were then pestilentiall,
turbulent, and seditious, and from their Spawn have risen since al those
seditious Sects of Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, etc. which now like
locusts coming out of the bottomless pit cover the face of the earth, and have
filled every corner of this land to the greivious corruption of the truth, and
interuption of the peace both of the Church and Kingdom. If then they were the
principal is the quarrel, the chiefest causers and beginners of the war, and
now had their desires in sharing the Bishops and the Chapters lands among them
for augmentations, and in putting themselves into the possession of the best
livings in the land, and the revenue of the Church; was it unreasonable that I
should move that they should bear the greatest burden of them for the ease of
others that were not so much concerned in the quarrel, but would willingly be
at peace in the land, this was my third end and aim in those proposals.

4. In my fourth end and aim in those proposals I had respect unto his Majesty
that now is, and then was our most gracious King and Sovereign, and to the
augmentation of his Majesty's revenue: For I did assure my self his Majesty
would return to his Crown and Kingdom with that honor which to our unspeakable
joy our eyes have seen, I did persuade my self that he would not himself take
the advantage of this discovery, but if it were done to his hand by another,
then he might, either with honor and justice enough continue it (as now the
Excile) and so it would be a fair augmentation to his Majesty's revenue, or if
not, that his Majesty might restore it to the Church again, and so gain unto
himself the glory of his bounty, and engage all Churchmen throughout the land
the faster and closer to him, from whose gift and bounty, they should receive
so great a benefit:

Obj: Oh but it will be objected, how shall we know you had any such intentions
toward his Majesty, and not rather toward the Usurper then in power?

Solv: If I do not demonstrate it, let me be severely censured and interpreted
at the worst you can immagine. For which purpose, First it is notoriously known
I did ever with great constancy and confidence from time to time assert the
certainty of his Majesty's return, and the necessity of it, and our certain
misery and bondage till it was so, that it would be done by Parliament, not by
tumult, that our distractions and miseries would be such that rather then it
should not be so we should all beg on our knees that it might be so, and this
not lately when things began to look this way, but 7, 8, 9, years ago. To this
I can call to witness men of great account both friends and enemies to his
Majesty's return, ear witnesses of it. In the first rank let me mention the
Noble Thomas Stoner of Stoner Esquire in Oxfordshire, at whose Table I spoke
these words in the presence and hearing of some persons of Honor, and others
of lower rank, one of which answered me at that instant, that he durst not
hear what I said without accusing me, I call to witness the Gentlemen of the
ancient Family of the Warcupps of the Manor of English in the same County,
and amongst them one Robert Warcup Esquire Lieutenant Colonel of the County under
Mr. James Whitlock, but who was in effect Coll: and much more, for he was the
very right hand of the Lord Whitlock and of his Uncle Lenthall surnamed the
Speaker, and a man of a vast power and authority in those parts, he knows well
I did always confidently assure him of his Majesty's return, and that all
their transactions would come under the examination of that power which now
they did despise and oppose, and therefore that he should carry wisely and
warily, with all aequity and moderation, as one that was sure to give an
account, and he took my counsel. Of the adverse part I Will reckon but one, and
that is one Henry Gooding a buffle-headed Baker in Henly upon Thames, who from
carrying the Bakers basket was exalted to a Justice-ship of the peace, as a man
fit to be an instrument of mischief, and subservient to such a Governor and
Government as we were under, who by abusing his trust and power, and by
cozening the Country, especially the Kings friends, instead of bread filled his
basket with money, and with it buying a Manor near Hyworth in Wiltshire, and
having married his Maid there lives now, and sits as securely as if he were as
good a subject as any of us all. I mention none but such as are living, and of
such I could mention many more which know and can testify, and will if called,
that not only now at the last but ever since his Majesty's exile, I did
constantly and confidently assert his return with Honor and Applause, the very
desire and expectation of the body of his people, in which case it were
strangely irrational that I should disoblige his Majesty by doing him any
disservice either this or any other way: No in the mean time it was my aim to
serve him, and to settle 100000 pounds a year to his hand, augmentation to his
Majesty's revenue, as due to him as any penny he does receive upon any occasion
whatsoever. And though I have not done it to his hand, yet I have given his
Majesty, or the Parliament, or the great Officers of his Treasury and Revenue
light enough how to do it when they will, and for that purpose I wish my Lord
Chauncellor with the Master of the Rolls would look over that Act of the 26 of
Henry the 8. Cap: 4. repealed the 1 of Queen Mary, revived again by Queen
Elizabeth, wherein they shall find that they are required from time to time to
send forh Commissions and Commissioners to make inquiry either by Oath, or by
any other ways and means which they can in their discretion devise to find out
the true value of all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Dignities and Promotions,
that so the first fruits and Tenths may be paid in and received accordingly,
that his Majesty receive no damage.

And I would but ask, what is the meaning of that fourth and last Bond which we
give into the first-fruit-Office, at our entrance upon our Ecclesiastical
promotions, called the Melius inquirendum, the condition whereof runs thus.

The condition of this present Obligation is such that if the Rectory of A. in
the county of B. shall be hereafter proved to be of more yearly value then 20l.
as it now stands rated in the Kings book, then if T. B. incumbent there shall
within one month after Certificate of due proof thereof had, and made, and
given in unto him,) answer his Majesty accordingly, then this present
Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to stand, and remain in full
force and virtue.

I remember that not many months since, a Praebend in a Cathedral Church put
in to be a Residentiary among the rest, it was answered him, he could not
except he had at least 100l. a year in benificiis, he told them he had so, but
it was replied to him that 100l. a year then when that Statute was made was now
300l. a year at least, and therefore he could not be admitted unles he had 300l
a year at least, and so was set by: I leave* the application of this, or the
conclusion to be deduced from it* for surely if this, Plea be good in the case
of a Subject, it must needs be good much more in the behalf of the King on
whose part all Statutes are to be interpreted, in favorem and in meliorem
partem.

And now after all this I do not persuade nor advise his Majesty to take the
advantage of this discovery to himself, yet though he do not so, there is this
advantage in it that his Majesty shall know what is his due, and what he may do
when he will, and others shall know how much they are obliged unto his Majesty
for his indulgence in forbearing it which hitherto have received the benefit of
it in silence without acknowledgement.

But certainly it deserves acknowledgment, and although his Majesty do not take
it, as by Law he may, yet if they should at this exigent offer it up to him as
a free will offering, as at first the Church did to Henry the 8. when that Act
was made, I think that therein they should but do his Majesty right, and
themselves no wrong. I am sure his Majesty begun to them first, he has given
them a free will offering, such a one as the Church yet never saw, nor I hope
never shall, (I mean the Cathedralls,) in the renewing of Leases taking of
fines, gathering of arrears, all these of 20 years growth now in this one years
harvest to be reap't and gathered in, which brings in such incredible sums of
money into some private and particular purses, that it is beyond belief to
relate. But if the late Parliament (to whose prudence his Majesty referred the
consideration of these things,) had so carried between his Majesty and the
Church, as that all these arrears and fines upon renewing of Leases, especially
of the Vacancies might have been gathered into a treasury, afterward to have
been disposed of, and distributed as his Majesty with advice of the Churchmen
in wisdom and Justice should have thought fit, and the Churches and
Church-Dignities might have been filled as at other times, so as to take the
profits ensuing, only remitting to the persons so preferred their first fruits,
it would have brought into that treasury above a Million of money, and the
Churchmen put into such a condition as they would have been very well satisfied
with, and thankful for.

Whereas now neither his Majesty, nor Community, nor the late suffering Clergy
banished out of those Churches, (most of them deceas't) nor theirs, have any
benefit out of them at all, but all is engrost into the hands of a few
Cathedrall-men, a Bishop, a Dean, and 2 or 3 Cardinal Praebendaries, which
call themselves Residentiaries, for as for the rest of the Chapter though
resident as well as they, and by their instistutions have Stallum in Choro
locum, and vocem in Capitulo, yet as to the Dividends they are all set by as
secluded Members, in the Church of York are 36 Praebends, and there are but 3
of all these that share in the dividend of those vast revenues: and those
Residentiaries (methinks very improperly so called,) for of all other they are
the greatest Non-Residents, for while they are Residentiaries in those
Cathedralls where the harvest lies, there are few of them but have 3.4.5. or
more other Dignities or Ecclesiastical pomotions elsewhere which call for
their residence and presence, and complain for the want of it. And if there
were but an inquiry made into the several Cathedralls in the Land for
Pluralists, and non-Residents, what strange Smect ymniusses should we find
amongst them, Men of as many Names and Titles as the beast in the Revelations
had heads, that we cannot tell how to write to them, nor of them, to give them
their due Styles but with an etc. I read in the Counsel of Trent of a Bishop
there called Quinque Ecclesiensis, but amongst these you shall find many that
surpass him, by almost double the number, for instance do but look upon that
Chapel at Windsor, for that is the style of it, the free Chapp^ll of St.
George, and there you shall see how Windsor, and Worcester, and Gloucester, and
Eaton-Colledge, and the City and the Country, Deanaries, and Praebends and
Parsonages, and Viccaragies, and Donatives, and all meet together in a little
room, and so in other places.

Let me give you an instance fresh in memory, I knew a man to whom (not many
months since) his Majesty (being made acquainted with his sufferings and
services,) had given the best Praebend in the Church of York, it past the
Signet and privy Seal, the fees of both were paid, it was carried to the Great
Seal, and money laid down there in pledge for the charge of it, yet after all
this came a Courtier, makes friends to his Majesty for the same thing, and
carries it for another that had but six Dignities and Ecclesiastical
promotions before: I confess he was a Worthy Person, a great sufferer, and one
that deserved a better Dignity then that, and I believe might have had it as
easily as he had that (if his friend had laid out his interests for it) and I
wish he had. Yet let me do his Majesty this right too, although he had signed
the Warrant for it, yet when they brought their Bill, his Majesty remembered he
had past it to another, and refused to sign it, a signal evidence of his
incomparable Goodness and justice, but the Praegrantee understanding that they
had prevailed with one of the greatest Subjects in the Kingdom to appear for
them (so far as to write his Letter to Secretary Morris to withdraw a Caveat
which was entered in the Signet Office to prevent Competitors) well knew it was
no contesting in such a case, and so was content to sit down and let it pass:
well let this go for a digression. In all this I would not be so interpreted as
if I did utterly condemn all Pluralities in persons rightly qualifyed for them,
nor non-residence neither upon occasion, there may be necessity for it, but
that which is to be dislik't in them both is, that they are so common and
ordinary, privilegia sunt paucorum, privileges belong but to few, and those
the choicest of men, and as a very learned and judicious Divine writ to me once
in the resolution of a case of conscience which I offered him. We do in nothing
more juggle with our own consciences, then in allowing our selves too much
liberty in things that are not absolutley unlawful. It was the Reverend Dr.
Sanderson, now Bishop of Lincoln, in the resolution of this very case of
Non-residency, occasioned by an invitation from the right honorable Nicholas
Lord Viscount Castleton, (Father to the Noble Lord George now living,) to leave
my Parsonage in Yorkshire, and to come and live with his Lordship in his
house, which I did civilly excuse, my conscience not allowing my constant
absence from my charge at that distance. And there is another thing that makes
these Pluralities so unreasonable, and that is the insatiablenes of greedy men
in those accumulations, that heap up mountain upon mountain, Pelion upon Ossa
Dignity upon Dignity without either end or measure as long as money or means,
or interest, or friends will last to procure them, when as (God knows) there
are many hundreds of learned, Loyal, honest, Orthodoxe, suffering, sequestered
Ministers unprovided for, unrestored to their livings, which to this day want
bread for them and theirs. And so are like to do, for what with that indulgent
Declaration of his Majesty tollerating so many irregularities in
Church-ministrations, and so much abused, and what with that late Act
(pretended to be made for the restoring of sequestered Ministers, but intended
doubtless by some of the contrivers of it for the clear contrary, to keep us
out while we are out, and to confirm those in that are in the possession of
them, there they are still, and there they will be, for first it puts us upon
impossibilities in order to our restoring of getting five or more Justices
together, which I am sure I could not do with the expense of above twenty
pound, and the riding, and s^nding too and fro of above three hundred miles, and
yet at four meetings could never get above three Justices together, which for
want of a full Quorum could not act, and then if we cannot overcome these
difficulties, and that within a time limited, it seems to praeclude from us all
other remedy of Law or otherwise for our relief, as in the eleventh page of it,
and what a strange toleration is this that being in possession, there they
shall be, and keep it though without institution, and orderly induction, by
this means the Church is to this day full of those notorious, seditious,
schismatic and violent intruders, which began all these troubles at the
first, and cast the Orthodoxe Clergy out, and now they stand upon better terms
then ever they did, neither is there yet any one Bishop in the Kingdom that
has visited his Diocese to take cognizance of these things, either by
himself or by his Commissioners, nor when they do, do I see what power they
have yet to purge the Church of them, or to restrain them: this not only is a
grievous oppression (for the present) to the suffering and sequestered
Ministers, the most of them very aged men, grown old in suffering, and a great
advantage to those factious and seditious Usurpers to confirm the people in
those seditious and Haereticall principles which before they had infused into
them, but there is a greater mischief then this, the consequent of it, and that
is this: That whereas his Majesty has graciously promised that there shall be
a Synod called, these Heterodoxe men (with which the Church is now filled)
shall be able to over-vote the Orthodoxe Clergy three to one in the choice of
our Representatives. The cure of all these things with the prevention of
greater evils (which these things (if not cured) may introduce,) we must leave
to the Wisdom and Justice of the Parliament at hand, and of the higher
powers, it was enough for me to hint at them, and that I have done impartially,
yet without any malignity to either party, Praelaticall or Presbiterian, though
an enemy to the abuses in both, yet my self a friend to both, who will ever
style my self An obedient Son of the Church, and an Episcopal-Presbiterian:
Tho: Bradley.

FINIS.

