Church-Musick Vindicated.

A SERMON PREACHED At St. Bride's Church, on Monday November 22. 1697. BEING St
CAECILIA's Day, The Anniversary Feast of the Lovers of Music.

By Nicholas Brady, M. A. Minister of Richmond in Surry, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the request of the STEWARDS.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Wild at the Elephant at Charing Cross, 1697.

To the Stewards of St. Caecilia's Feast. Hugh Colvill Esquire Capt. Tho. Newnam
Orlando Bridgman Esquire Theophilus Butler Esquire Leonard Wessel Esquire Paris Slaughter
Esquire Jeremiah Clerk Gent. Fran. Le Rich Gent.

Gentlemen,
However favorable a Reception this Discourse might meet with, at the time and
place of it is Delivery, when every body was disposed to Applaud Church-Musick,
by the irresistible charms of that Admirable performance; which by a management
peculiar to your selves, labored under no inconveniences of Disorder or
Confusion: Yet now that the Pulpit is no longer backed by the Organ-Loft; when
that which was spoken from the One, is no longer supported by what was acted in
the Other; I have just reason to fear, that it will but indifferently answer,
either the prepossessed Opinion of those who heard it, or the expectation of
those that did not.

Notwithstanding this, since only I am to be the Sufferer, and not the Cause;
(which has been already too well defended by Abler Pens, to undergo any
prejudice by the weakness of mine;) I shall gladly run that hazard in
Compliance with your desire; and shall not dispute giving even this Dangerous
Testimony, of that sincere Respect which shall be always paid you, by,

GENTLEMEN, Your Obliged, Humble Servant, N. BRADY.

A SERMON Preached on St. Caecilia's Day.
2 Chronicles. 5th Chapter 13th, and 14th, Verses.



WE do not (I think) meet in the whole Book of God, with a more Signal Instance
of his favorable Acceptance, of that Devout Employment in which we are now
Conversant, (our praising him, and giving him Thanks, with Voices and
Instruments of Music) than we have in those words which I have now read to
you, and which I have chosen for the Subject of my following Discourse; where
we find it makes up a very considerable part, of one of the most Eminent
Solemnities of Religion, that we ever heard of under the Legal Dispensation: A
Solemnity Regulated by the Wisest amongst Men; and in which we cannot suppose
anything to have been allowed of, but what was suitable to the Gravity and
Majesty of the occasion: It was Solomon's Dedicating that Glorious Temple,
which was justly Reputed the Noblest Structure in the World; and his
Soliciting the Almighty, that he would Arise into his Resting Place, He and
the Ark of his Strength To set off a performance so Remarkable as this, with
all the Characters of a becoming Grandour, he Summons the Elders and Heads of
Tribes, and even all the Men of Israel, to attend him at Jerusalem* where
having offered up Sheep and Oxen without number, they accompanied the Priests
who bore the Ark of the Covenant, and conducted it with Reverence into the most
Holy place; whilst to add to the Magnificence of the Ceremony, the Levites
which were the Singers, having Cymbals and Psalteries and Harps, stood at the
East end of the Brazen Altar, and with them a hundred and twenty Priests
Sounding with Trumpets; as you may read in the Verses just preceding my Text.
And certainly, if an incredible Multitude of Spectators and Assistants, if the
quality as well as number of the Persons Assembled, if the Stateliness and
Beauty of the Scene and Action, if a pompous expense of almost innumerable
Sacrifices, and a Delightful Variety of all sorts of Music, can give Life and
Quickness, Majesty and Splendor to any performance; the Religious Festival
which this Chapter gives an account of, may justly challenge the preference
above all others, that ever occurred throughout the whole Jewish Economy: And
therefore we find, that according to God's method of proceeding with that
People, whose more eminent Acts of Piety he usually Honored, with some
Sensible Demonstration of his favor, he Manifested his Approval of this Devout
Solemnity, by filling the Temple with his Glory, and giving visible Tokens of
of his more immediate Presence. But if amongst all those Religious
performances, which were severally exercised upon this Solemn occasion, we may
be allowed to Conjecture or Determine, which was most valuable in the sight of
God; we may (I believe) very safely conclude, that it was not the bare
Assembling themselves together, nor the Costly Pageantry of their Numerous
Oblations; since these were but so many dumb shows of Religion, and a
compliance only with the dead Letter of the Law;) But it was that Lively
Sacrifice of Praises and Thanksgiving; that agreeable Melody, and Harmonious
Consort of many Hearts and Voices, and Instruments as one; that drew down upon
the devout performers, an unquestionable evidence of his Approbation; to this
it was, that he set his own Seal, and made it (as it were) the Signal of his
extraordinary Appearance: For we are not told, that he took any public notice
of all the foregoing Exercises of Devotion; But (says the Text) it came even to
pass, as the Trumpeters and Singers were as One, to make one Sound to be heard
in Praising and Thanking the Lord; and when they lift up their Voice with the
Trumpets and Cymbals and Instruments of Music, and praised the Lord; saying,
For he is good, for his Mercy endures for ever; that then, (and not before)
the House was filled with a Cloud, even the House of the Lord; So that the
Priests could not stand to Minister, by reason of the Cloud; For the Glory of
the Lord had filled the House of God. Such an Authentic Testimony of his
favorably accepting, that Religious Entertainment which employ^ us at the
present; as may justly encourage us to Repeat the Practice frequently, and may
stop the Mouths of all Gainsayers. I shall therefore single out in my following
Discourse, from the great variety of Matter with which my Tent abounds, some
few instructive and useful Observations, which may be proper to the occasion of
our present meeting together. And*

1 st. We may from hence observe, that Music whether Vocal or Instrumental,
may both innocently and profitably be made use of in the public Service and
Worship of God.

2dly. We may observe yet farther, that the proper Office of Music in the
Service of God, is to praise him, and give him thanks, because he is good; and
because his Mercy endures for ever.

3 dly. We may observe in the last place, how Signal an evidence God has been
pleased to give of his avowed allowance and approbation, of this use of Music
in his Service.

1 st. Then we may observe from the words of my Text, that Music whether Vocal
or Instrumental, may both innocently and profitably be made use of in the
Public Service and Worship of God.

Religion, however mistaken or misrepresented by some, is the most entertaining
thing in Nature, attended by a good Conscience, which is a continual
Refreshment; and Supported by the Assurance of God's Favor and Protection,
which is the most certain Fund of Comfort and Satisfaction; if we take her
portraiture from the Life, she will appear as bright and beautiful as an Angel;
set off with all those Charms and and raising Attractions, which may most
powerfully Recommend her to our Affections; allowing and encouraging the truest
cheerfulness, and not clashing with, or condemning any Innocent Delights: And
therefore nothing has done her a greater prejudice, nothing has more hindered
her Diffusiveness and Efficacy, than the false Draughts made of her by some
sort of People, who would have her to consist in Moroseness and Austerity: They
dress her up like a Fiend or a Fury, they arm her with Snakes and Whips, and
Firebrands; and having thus made her an Object of Loathing and Aversion, they
pretend to recommend her under so frightful an Appearance; It is through their
means, who limn her after this hideous manner, that Music her obsequious and
useful Handmaid, has run the hazard of being Discarded from her Service; as if
she were an Attendant too light and airy, to comport with the gravity of so
reserved a Mistress. But in this they deal with her, as they did with the
other, and represent her much different from what she really is; making that
lightness essential to her, which is purely accidental; and decrying that as
her inseparable habit, which is only a loose Garment that the sometimes wears
abroad, but which the always drops before her entrance into the Church. There
the puts on such a Composedness and Solidity, a^ is suitable to the Sacred
Offices in which she is employed, and may qualify her to be made use of both,
with Innocence and Advantage. And

1 st. As to the Innocence of this Usage. It would be wholly unnecessary to
insist upon this Topic; were there not a party of Men so unaccountably
scrupulous, as to censure the Harmony, which is made use of in our Churches, as
a sort of proceeding extremely culpable* These then are the Persons whom I
would desire to consider, that that which has been the custom of good Men in
all Ages, without any mark of God's disapproval; that which is so often
recommended to our practice, by those who have been commissionated to convey
his Order to us; that which is the Entertainment of the Blessed above, in their
perfect State of Purity and Felicity; that (I say) cannot be supposed with any
shadow of Reason, to contract any guilt, or be liable to any just censure: But
this (we find) was a devout Emyloyment, in which the best of Men have been
exercised frequently; witness the Songs of Moses and Deborah, before the whole
Congregation of the People of Israel: Witness the Divine and Musical
Compositions of David, Solomon, and others, for the Service of the Temple:
Witness the Hymn that our Savior sung with his Apostles who were then the
Abridgment of the Christian Church, and those that were afterward, in their
solemn Assemblies, made use of by the Disciples and Followers of our Lord. This
also we find recommended to our Practice, by those who revealed unto us the
will of God; such as the Royal Psalmist, almost in every page; Isaiah and
Jeremiah in several places of their Prophesies; St. Paul in his Writings to the
Ephesians and Colossions, and St. James in his Epistle to the Church in
general; in all which we have frequent Exhortations to this Duty, as a positive
part of our Religious Wo^ship. In this we are assured that the Heavenly Host
are always happily employed, where Cherubim and Serayhim continually resound,
Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath: Where the Four and twenty (...) that
attend about the Throne, inc^ssantly chant out their Allelujahs; and where
those who have gotten the Victory over the Beast, unanimously join in singing
the Sorg of the Lamb: Unless therefore we will unreasonably imagine, that God
would be so far wanting to his best beloved Servants, as to suffer them to go
on in a sinful course, without giving them any notice of the E^rour they lay
under; unless we will Blasphemously suppose him so unfaithful to us, as to
suffer us to be deluded by those who come to u^ in his Name, and who bring his
own Credentials along with them; unless we will entertain absurd Notions of
him, that he is inconsistent with himself, and admits of that in his Heavenly
Pala^e, which is offensive to him upon his Earthly Footstool; we cannot
conceive that this decent usage, which has so many Testimonials of his Favor,
can be otherwise than highly Innocent in its self. It is true indeed, this
Heavenly Art, has been sometimes abused, to the encouragement of Debauchery;
and as the best things corrupted, contract the greatest illness, so has this
been made an instrument of looseness and sensuality; but if this were sufficient
to exclude it from the Temple, when purified from that Allay which debated it is
value; Poetry as well as Music, must be banished from our Churches, and the
Psalms as well as Harp of David, must be forbidden to us; since the two Sacred
Sisters have been equal Sufferers, having both been prostituted to the most
scandalous Employments. Let us rather endeavor to snatch what we can of it out
of the Hands of the profane; to rescue this Virgin, out the power of her
Ravishers; and to present her unblemished at the Altar of our God, where we may
join Devotions with her, not only with Innocence, but with Advantage also. In
order to which end, let us consider in the next place; what profit may redound
to us from such a practice. Nothing is so proper or so available as this for
composing our minds, and settling them in a Sedate and quiet posture; for
reducing our straggling thoughts, and fixing them to their Duty; for calming
and allaying our disorderly passions, or for lifting up the Soul in a devout
Contemplation: When we are thus entertained with the employment of Angels, our
thoughts naturally ascend unto those Mansions of Joy; we have an intercourse,
as it were with those Heavenly Inhabitants, and our Conversation seems to be
altogether above: There is in Music (...), something of Divinity, which
Captivates the Affections, and Regulates them at it is Will; it acts upon the
Soul with such a sweet Violence, as is almost insensible, but irresistible too;
and I have heard many testify from their own experience, and I question not,
but we have many present witnesses of the truth of it, that whenever they have
been present at the performance of this nature, they have felt their zeal grow
warm, if it were not kindled before, and increase considerably if it were. Is
the Spirit of the Lord to descend upon Elisha, and that upon an occasion, more
extraordinary than usual? A Minstrel must be brought to play before him, and to
make his Soul susceptible of the Divine Inspiration. Is Readiness Melancholy and
Despair to be driven away, and his mind to be set in order, for the discharging
his great Office? The Harp of David must apply the Medicine, and chase away his
gloomy imaginations: Such was the power of that Sacred ^yre, when tuned to the
Voice of the Sweet-Singer of Israel; and such would the effect of it remain to
this day, if it were still touched by the same inimitable hand; but the
unskilfulness of those that have played upon it since, has destroyed in a great
measure the Melody of the Instrument; and it is Efficacy has lessened* as it is
Harmony has been impaired. This Divine Art has such an admirable Secret of
uniting Earth and Heaven together, that the Scale of Music appears to me, to
be the exact counterpart of Jacobs Ladder; with one end resting upon the Earth,
in the material Organs that compose it, and the other end reaching up to
Heaven, in the Life and Spirit of it is performances; upon the several Degrees
of this, are the Holy Angels, those Celestial Choristers, perpetually Ascending
and Descending; and the Lord himself stands at the top of it, to countenance
and encourage the devout employment: Who then can withold at such an Heavenly
Entertainment, where Devotion embraces Delight, and pleasure seems to be
Spiritualized, from breaking out with the Patriarch into his Rapturous
Exclamation? Surely the Lord is in this place! This is none other than the
House of God! And this is the Gate of Heaven! For indeed what Idea can we form
to our selves, of those happy Regions of Joy and Tranquillity, of which this
will not be a most lively Transcript? What is Heaven, but an Assembly of Saints
and Blessed Spirits, in the immediate presence of their Almighty Creator,
Rejoicing in the Service of so bountiful a Master, and celebrating his praises
with their Voices and their Instruments? And such an imitation of them here,
will qualisie us for their Society he easter, when we with Angels and
Archangels, and with all the company and Host of Heaven, shall land and
magnify his Holy Name, and this leads me to the

2 d, Observation, which may be drawn from the words of my Text, namely, That
the proper Office of Music in the Service of God, is to praise him, and give
him thanks, because he is good, and because his Mercy endures for ever.

The earliest instance which we have of Sacred Music, are certain Songs of
Triumph which were composed, to celebrate some Great and Signal Deliverances;
such as those already mentioned of Moses and Deborah: It Is first Introduction
into the Jewish Church, was by the grateful piety of King David; who appointed
certain Levites to thank and praise God, in a form which he borrowed from one
of his own Psalms, and which are the very words recorded in my Text; pursuant
also to this, the Apostle advises us, that when we are merry, we should sing
Psalms, for Music being the most cheerful way of exercising our Devotion,
should therefore be appropriated to the most Delightful Act of Piety; and that
is praising God for the manifold expressions, of his Goodness and Mercy toward
the Sons of Men. All other Duties of Religion, seem to carry some sort of
uneasiness along with them; for they either put us in mind of our igno^ance and
forgetfullness, as in hearing the Word; or of our wants and necessities, as in
Prayer; or of our Sins and Infirmities, as in Repentance; but Praise is such a
Duty, as is entertaining in it is Nature, and carries no allay with it to damp
our satisfaction: To Reflect upon the goodness of our God, and the many Signal
Evidences which we have had of his loving kindness; to thank him for those
Mercies which we have already received, and thereby put our selves in a
condition to expect fresh Blessings; this is nothing else but the perfection of
Delight, and an employment the most desirable, and most Ravishing of any; it is
a good thing to sing praises unto our God, yea, a joyful and pleasant thing it
is to be thankful: And therefore this is the Religious Worship which is
practiced by the Church Triumphant in Heaven, as being not at all inconsistent
with our convenience of the most consummate Happiness. Indeed in our times of
Humiliation, in the Acts of Mortisication and Selfdenial, when we afflict our
Souls, and keep our Bodies under; Music which is apt to elevate the Spirits,
and Recreate the Senses, would appear as improper as Mirth at Funerals; but the
Church has it is Festivals as well as Vigils; and where the occasions of (...)
together are of a more cheerful nature, this delightful expression of our
Gratitude is as Decent, as a becoming Dress, a Sprightly Air, or a Look that
declares our inward Satisfaction. And certainly, if ever any People had just
Reason to join together their Voices and their Instruments, and to give the
greater Evidences of a Devout Thankfullness; We of this Kingdom are most
eminently obliged to it, upon the account of those Blessings which we have so
lately experienced; when in stead of the Calamities of a dismal War, we find
our Souls refresht with the abundance of Peace; and with his safe Arrival and
long wished for presence, to whom we stand indebted for so precious a Treasure:
Peace then is restored to us within our Walls, Peace that Banisher of Discord,
that Mother of Harmony, that Band of Union to consenting Minds, that Nurse and
Patroness of useful Arts and Sciences: This our long absent guest, condescends
to visit us again; Let us receive her with Hearts overflowing with Gratitude;
with a joy as great, as the Advantages she imparts; as Universal, as the
Blessings she dispences. And O! That all the several parties in this Kingdom,
however formerly divided by interest or design, would Resemble the Trumpeters
and Singers in the Text! That they were as one! That they would make one Sound
to be heard, in Praising and Thanking the Lord! That they would lift up their
Hearts and their Voices together, with Trumpets and Cymbals, and Instruments of
Music; and with Joint consent would praise the Lord saying, For he is good,
for his Mercy endures for ever! How delightful a Melody, would this Consort of
Brethren that dwell together in Unity, make in the Ears of God our common
Father! How certainly would he testify his Approbation of this Harmony, by
filling the whole Nation with his Glory! Which brings me to the

3 d. And last Observation, which may be deduced from the words of my Text;
Namely, how Signal an Evidence God has been pleased to give us, of his avowed
Allowance and Approbation, of this use of Music in his Service.

You may remember that I hinted to you in the beginning of this Discourse,
after how indulgent and engaging a manner, God was wont to proceed with the
People of the Jews, in Relation to their Acts of more Solemn Devotion; Such of
these as were more Eminent and Remarkable, he frequently testified his
Acceptance of, by some visible and extraordinary Token of his Favor; which was
usually done, either by the Fire of God descending from Heaven, and Consuming
their Sacrifices and Oblations, as in the great Contest between Elijah and the
Priests of Baal; or else filling the place of Worship with a Cloud, and with
his Glory, as in the instance that is now before us. And to whatsoever
Religious performances, we find these marks affixed of the Divine Approbation;
we may very safely conclude of them, that not only the Scope of the Action in
general, but every particular Circumstance and Ceremony of it, was agreeable to
his Will, and well*pleasing in his Sight; For had there been a failure in any
one part, God would never have set his own stamp upon it, to warrant it is
currancy and perfection. And therefore it was not barely Solomon's Dedication
of the Temple, and his bringing the Ark into the Holiest of Holies; but the
Method and Manner also of his proceedings in it, his Assembling the
Congregation, his offering up Sacrifices, his Praises and Thanksgivings, his
Voices and his Instruments, whose* usage was confirmed, and whose practice was
approved of by God's Vouchsafement of the Schekinah, or Divine Presence. Let us
not then question at any time, (when we exercise this Duty after this Solemn
manner, in which we find it was Discharged upon this Eminent Occasion) but that
God will countenance and encourage our performance, as a most acceptable part
of Religious Worship: But if we expect to have it equally approved of, our
management of it must be with equal Decency: We must banish from it all
Disorder and Confusion, For the Trumpeters and Singers were as one, we must
take the Subject of our Entertainment from the Oracles of God, and not dare to
introduce into his Church, any such composures as are not Sacred and Solemn:
For they lift up their Voices, and praised God, saying, in the words of the
Royal Prophet, For he is good, for his Mercy endures for ever: Nor must those
who are conversant in this Heavenly Employment, Dishonor God with their
Actions, whilst they Honor him with their Voices; for they were the Levites
and the Priests, Persons Dedicated to his immediate Service, to whom this part
of his Worship was entrusted: And I would to God, that all those who are
constantly attendant upon this most Solemn Office of Religion, would consider
the Honor and Gravity of their Calling; would look upon themselves, as entered
into a lower sort of Holy Orders, being appointed to Minister to God in his
Temple, and would never derogate from the Sacredness of their Employment, by an
irregular Life, or an indecent Behavior. Then would God declare his acceptance
of this Service, by inward assurances of his favor; as he formerly testified
his Approbation of it, by outward Evidences of his Presence. For though the
Jewish Sacrifices are swallowed up, in that great Oblation which Christ offered
once for all; though the Temple which was Dedicated, and the Ark which was
placed in it, are both Superseded by the Temple of his Body, which was the true
Ark of the Covenant of God; Yet Praises and Thanksgiving to our Almighty
Benefactour; and this Delightful way of tendering them, with the joint Melody of
Voices and Instruments of Music; has continued ever since in the Church of
God; will (I doubt not) remain in it unto the end of the World; and will
afterward attend it into the Mansions of Eternity; and make a considerable
part of it is infinite Felicity. And this seems to me to be a Substantial
Reason, why God here Distinguished it above the other Acts of Devotion, by
vouchsasing his Presence at that particular juncture, because this was to
outlast all the other Ceremonies; and to be a standing Duty in the Service of
his Church, when the rest should vanish and be done away.

And now I have gone through with the Method I proposed; I have vindicated the
innocence and usefullness of Church Music; I have showed upon what occasion it
is most sitly employed, and have examined that Testimony of the Divine
Allowance, which it has so eminently in the words of my Text. And though it might
perhaps be expected upon this occasion, that I should say something of Music
in General, of its Antiquity and Excellency, it is force and energy, of that
unaccountable Activity and surprising Subtilness, by which it insinuates it
self into our Veins, mixes with our Blood, and mingles with our Spirits;
altering of a sudden the whole inward Frame, and leading our Inclinations
whether soever it pleases, but I shall think my self excusable, if I wave all
this, since my Subject confines me wholly to Church Music; and I have
endeavored to Accommodate my Discourse to my Subject; by rather choosing to err
upon the side of Gravity, than running any hazard of bordering upon Lightness
And I shall now add no more to detain you from the Employment which I have been
recommending, but only bewail the condition of those, whose unhappy Aversion to
Divine Harmony, renders them unlike to the Saints and Blessed Spirits, which
are continually busied in that Employment; and congratulate the Happiness of
their Circumstances, who by their Affection to this Sacred Art, are qualified
to join with ineffable Raptures, in the Song of the ten Thousand times, ten
Thousands of Angels; Blessing and Honor, and Glory and Power, be unto him that
sits on the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

FINIS.

