A SERMON Preached at St. Catherine Cree-Church, Upon Sunday the 1st of MARCH,
1695/6. Upon Occasion of the Late Horrid Plot.

By Nicholas Brady M. A. Minster of St. Catherine Cree-Church, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the request of the Auditors.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Parker, at the Unicorn, under the Piazza of the
Royal Exchange. 1696.

Mr: BRADY's SERMON Upon the occasion of the Late Horrid Plot.

Exodus XIV. part of the 13th verse. Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord.


WE have lately been surpised with a dismal Account of an horrid Conspiracy
carried on at Home, and have at the same time been no less Alarmed, with the
well grounded Rumor of an Invasion from abroad; and this may, perhaps, too
much dismay and discompose the Ignorant, too much affect the thoughtless and
inconsiderate, who measuring the Forces of our Enemies by their Vanity and
Presumption, or proportioning their Strength to their malice and inveteracy,
may look upon the present Danger as much greater than it is, dress up a
Bugbear in their own Imagination, and then tremble at the frightfulness of its
appearance. But, as to be wholly unaffected with National Calamities, and to be
utterly unconcerned at the disasters of the Public, is to be guilty of a
vicious Carelessness, and deserves the Imputation of a Stoical Stupidity; so,
to be too apprehensive of uncertain hazards, to magnify a danger only that we
may the better excuse our fear of it, is a Proceeding mean and ungenerous,
unbecoming the fortitude of English Men and Christians; since therefore Courage
and Resolution are at all times necessary, either to make us despise a danger
that is small, or to wrestle and encounter with such hazards as are greater;
since, were our circumstances yet better than they are, a reliance upon God
would be our surest Protection; I have thought sit, to Address my self to those
who now hear me, as the Prophet Moses did to the People of Israel, to make use
of his short, but comprehensive Exhortation; Fear ye not, stand still, and see
the Salvation of the Lord.

These words were directed by the Prophet to the Israelites, when they were all
threatened with a general Destruction, which in human probability seemed utterly
unavoidable. Pharaoh, being incensed at their going out of Egypt, to offer
Sacrifice unto their God, pursues after them with his Chariots and his
Horsemen, even all the Forces of the Land of Egypt; he overtakes them Encamping
by the Red Sea, having the inaccessible Mountains of Baal-zephon and
Pi-hahiroth on either side; the only passage, which Nature and the Situation of
the place had left open for their escape, the Enemy possessed; and thereby
reduced them to this sad Election, either of Perishing by the Sword, or by the
Waves: Yet notwithstanding their condition was so very deplorable, that it made
them to murmer both against Moses and their God; we find the Prophet
Comforting, Encouraging, and reassuring them in the words of my Text, Fear ye
not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord.

Blessed be God, the hopeful posture of our present Affairs, and the happy
circumstances under which we now are, make our case so different from that of
the Israelites, that it does not deserve the name of a Parallel; I shall
therefore consider the words nakedly in themselves, independently from the
History of which they are a part, as they contain an Exhortation consisting of
two branches:

The 1st. persuading to Courage and Resolution; Fear ye not, stand still.

The 2d. Advising to an absolute dependence upon God for his Protection; And
see the Salvation of the Lord.

1st. Then, here is an Exhortation to Courage and Resolution; Fear ye not,
stand still.

By not Fearing, I do not mean such a dull and heavy unconcernedness, by which
a man is unsensible of approaching dangers, and careless to prevent or to
resist them; but such a firmness of Mind and constancy of Spirit, as enables
one fully to bear up under them, to struggle with, and overcome them: Neither
by standing still, do I design, such a stupid quiet, and unactive cessation, by
which one is contented to be a bare looker on, without any vigorous endeavors
for the Common Preservation; but such a fixed and settled posture of the Soul,
as may qualify one to stustain the shock of whatsoever dangers, and encourage
him to repel them with an unshaken stedfastness. And in this sense it is that
we ought to understand this pithy Exhortation to Courage and Resolution, Fear
ye not, stand still. And indeed, as in concerns of a Spiritual Nature,
Presumption is a sin of a very deep dye, being a positive offense against the
Justice of the Almighty; and yet Despair a greater, as directly affronting his
darling Attribute his Mercy: so also in Temporal Affairs, a too great Security,
tho very fatal and destructive, yet having something in it that looks like
Manhood, does not appear so shameful and so blameable, as a wretched
despondency and distrust, which proceeds from weakness, and is utterly
Effeminate. It is, we know, one of the Curses denounced by God against
impenitent Sinners, That they shall fear where no fear is; and whosoever gives
the Reins to this passion, farther than the occasion justly requires, is in
some measure liable to this imputation: That therefore we may avoid so infamous
a Character, by the due exercise of the opposite Virtue, let us view the
obligations which lie upon us, under a twofold consideration.

1st. As we are Men.

2d. As we are Christians.

1st. Then, we are obliged not to fear, but to stand still, as we are Men.

Whilst all the other parts of the Creation were formed with dejected
Countenances, in token of Obedience and Submission; Man was Created with an
erected Visage, as the visible Characteristick of Majesty and Power: And as his
outward structure bore all the marks of Sovereignty and Dominion, so was his
Soul endued with a proportionable stock of Courage and Resolution; as may fully
appear, by the first Couple's Conversing without fear amongst those very
Creatures, which now to us are so terrible and frightful: Sin made the first
breach upon this inward guard, this Armor of the Soul; that gave an entrance
to the King of Terrors, and to all his pale Retinue of Fears and
Apprehensions; For, as from God's question to Adam after his fall, (Adam, where
art thou?) We may conclude that his hiding himself was unusual; so from his
Answer we may learn, that Fear was the reason of it, I heard thy Voice in the
Garden and I was afraid: By how much more therefore we indulge this unmanly
Passion, by so much the more are we estranged from the dignity of our Creation,
and from the Purity of our first Condition. It is Justly observable, that in
all Languages, the word used to express manhood or courage, is derived from
that which signifies Humanity it self; thus Virtus in the Latin, (...), in the
Greek, (...), in the Hebrew, etc; by which the common consent of Nations seems
to imply, that is a quality ingrafted in, and resulting from our very Nature;
and consequently the laying it aside, is a degrading our selves from the rank
of Rational Creatures, and leveling our selves with Brutes; so that the man
without Courage (as well as the man without understanding) may justly be
compared unto the Beasts that Perish. But as the giving up our selves to the
unruly guidance of Fear, is the greatest baseness; so is it also the greatest
Folly: Pessimus in dubiis augur Timor, Fear is the worst Counselor in time of
Danger; it distracts and confounds the wisest and the best of men; this caused
Moses to staggar at God's Commandment; this caused Elias to fly from the
Womanish Threatenings of Jezabel; this caused Peter to deny his Maker; it
undermines the strength, and betrays the succonrs of the Soul, deluding it with
imaginary Idea's and false appearances; whilst like a deceitful Perspective, it
represents the objects of our apprehension, nearer than the Truth, and larger
than the Life: And therefore the Policy and Prudence of Gideon is justly to be
commended, who proclaimed throughout his Camp by sound of Trumpet, Whosoever is
fear full let him depart; the Nature of this Vice being so infectious, that it
often times corrupts the neighborhood about it. But as to Fear all things seem
difficult, so to true Courage nothing is insuperable: In the Land of Canaan
were Giants, to whom the Israelites compared, did seem but as Grasshoppers; yet
said Caleb and Joshua, Fear them not, they are bread for us; bread, which is
eaten without any labor or difficulty; which is so far from diminishing the
Spirits, that it increases and augments the Health and Vigor of those that eat
it. To this same purpose we read of Joab, that when he Warred against the
Ammonites, he began his Exhortation before the Battle with these words, Be of
good Courage, and let us play the men; as if, being Valiant, and being Men,
were terms Synonymous, and only diversely expressed the same thing. If therefore
we consider our selves but barely as Men, this Exhortation must be proper and
convenient, Fear ye not, stand still.

But if we are obliged to Fortitude and Resolution, as we are mere men; much
more are we so, if we reflect upon our selves,

2dly. As we are Christians.

It is the true and genuine property of our Christian Profession, to sublimate
and exalt to a higher degree of Perfection, whatever Virtues it finds implanted
in our Nature: For it is a slander cast upon Religion, by such as are wholly
unacquainted with it, and by such as maintain false Notions of Honor, that it
only serves to make men Cowards; the Fear of God, is the best Armor against
the Fear of Man, and true Devotion is the Root of Courage: By Faith our Fathers
subdued Kingdoms, waxed valiant in Fights, put to flight the Armies of the
Aliens, says the Author to the Hebrews. And thus indeed it ought to be, if we
will but look a little backwards, upon the first Inlet and occasion of Fear and
Apprehension: Original Guilt was the fatal cause, of which Fear is the unhappy
effect; when the former ceases, the latter cannot possibly subsist; but as we
are Christians, we have renounced the One, and therefore the other should
necessarily vanish: And indeed, if we consider the matter impartially, we shall
always find our sins to be the occasions of our Fears; not only, as they are
the means of drawing down those Judgments of which we are apprehensive; but
also, as they destroy that confidence and assurance, which we ought to have in
our Almighty Protector: Fear therefore being the consequence of Guilt, if
Christianity obliges us not to sin, it at the same time teaches us not to Fear;
and as no Christian will dispute the one, so no rational concluder can deny the
other; especially, if we take notice, that the three most Eminent Christian
Graces, Faith, Hope, and Charity, are absolutely inconsistent with the Practice
of it. And,

1st. As to Faith; we have our Saviors own Authority for it, in the 14th.
chap. of St. Matthew's Gospel; where stretching forth his hand to finking
Peter, he reprehends him in these words, O thou of little Faith! wherefore
did thou doubt? Wavering and doubtfulness, which is but the first step
toward downright Fearing, being here branded (tho the danger was so imminent)
with the black aspersion of weakness in the Faith.

2dly. As to Hope; tho it may allow of such a mixture of uncertainty, as may
sharpen its Appetite, and make that more eager (and this it always will partake
of till it is changed into Fruition;) yet such a Fear as we now speak of is
utterly incompatible with it; and these two can no more be found together, than
contraries can mutually support each other, or contradictions shake hands and
be reconciled.

3dly. As to Charity; the beloved Apostle informs us, That there is no fear in
Love, but perfect Love casts out Fear; now Charity being the Perfection of
Love in its highest and most intense degree, must consequently have the deepest
aversion against that sordid Passion, which is hereby declared to be
inconsistent with perfect Love. And certainly, the Love of God and his
Religion, can enliven Christians with a much greater warmth of Courage and
Resolution, than the bare Love of ones Country, or ones Honor, could possibly
inspire into the Natural Man: This has been evidenced by a Cloud of Witnesses:
Let the Heathens brag of their Decius and their Curtius, that devoted
themselves to Death for the safety of their Country; we have our Moses and St.
Paul, that desired to be made accursed for the Children of God: Their Socrates
drank his poison cheerfully; our Cyprian said Amen, to the sentence of his own
condemnation: Their Scaevola burnt his hand with an unaltered Countenance; we
are able to name a whole Army of Martyrs, who have kissed the stake, enjoyed
the flames, and sung Hymns in the midst of their Torments and Persecutions.
Thus in true courage, the Christian world as far exceeds the Heathen, as in the
motives to it, and in the goodness of the cause. Some indeed there are, and
those too many, who think courage to consist in Roaring and Blaspheming, in
speaking big words, and Tyrannizing over their inferiors, in quarrelling and
duelling, in trampling under foot all Laws and Constitutions both of God and
Man: but these things, my beloved, ought not so to be: True Christian courage,
such as I recommend to all who now hear me, is fearful to offend God; has a
Reverend regard to the Laws; is obedient to lawful superiors, courteous to
equals, affable and indulgent to inferiors; evermore grounded upon a good
cause, and therefore still accompanied with Piety, Cheerfulness, and
Resolution. The Wicked indeed flees, when no man pursues; but the Righteous
is bold as a Lion: He shall not be afraid for any evil Tidings; (the reason
follows immediately after) for his Heart stands fast and believes in the
Lord. And this leads me to the consideration of the

2d. Branch of my Text; namely, The Prophet's Exhortation to an absolute
dependence upon God for his Protection; fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord.

Since the Race is not always to the Swift, nor the Battle to the Strong, or
the Courageous, but time and chance (as the Preacher observes) happens to them
hoth; the best way to secure to our selves a certainty of Success, is to fix
our dependence upon the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning: Then tho the Arm of Flesh should be never so strongly
exalted against us, yet shall we find, that the Right hand of the Lord has the
preeminence, that the Right hand of the Lord brings mighty things to pass: It
is better therefore to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in man; it
is better to trust in the Lord, than to put any confidence in Princes. But
since the mercy of God is not such a foolish tenderness, or unaccountable
relenting, as is sometimes found in those whom we style good-natured Men, an
easiness of being wrought upon without any reason for it; I shall therefore,

1st. Enquire, what is to be performed upon our part, in order to fit us for
the Divine Protection, or to qualify us for seeing the Salvation of the Lord.
And,

2dly. I shall prove, that if we are so qualified, we shall certainly be
Protected, we shall assuredly see the Salvation of the Lord.

1st. Then, I shall enquire, what is to be performed upon our part, in order to
fit us for the Divine Protection, or to qualify us for seeing the Salvation of
the Lord.

The Lord is on my side, says the Royal Psalmist, I will not fear what man can
do unto me: We must be secure that God is on our side, if we would be free from
Human Apprehensions. Now to make us secure of this, it is not enough that we
can say we are Christians, we are Protestants, we are called by his Name, we
are Members of the Purest Church upon Earth. No, unless our Practices are
agreeable to our Profession, unless we exemplify our high calling in our Lives
and Conversations, these are but so many enhancements of our guilt, abuses of
the manifold advantages which God has bestowed upon us, and are so far from
affording us impunity and Protection, that they only qualify us for being
beaten with many stripes. Neither are we to reflect upon the faults and errors
of those who seem designed for the inflicters of God's Judgments; and from
thence presently conclude, That God will not Fight against us upon their side:
Their Offenses are no extenuation of our guilt, and the Scourge may be made use
of, tho it is afterward to be cast into the Fire: Executioners (we know) are
seldom chosen out of the best of men; the vilest and the meanest are generally
thought fit enough for such an employment; and not only the wicked part of
human Kind, but even Lice and Flies; the meanest Particles and Refuse of the
Greation, in the avenging hand of God, become dreadful Instruments of his wrath
and indignation. The surest way to give a guess at our own condition, and the
circumstances we lie under for a well provided hope of Protection, is to
examine our own ways; lest otherwise, by endeavoring to shun one extreme, we
should ignorantly and unadvisedly run into another; and avoiding Despair,
should be guilty of Presumption. To this purpose, the Royal Psalmist (in the
person of God) gives us this clear information; O! That my People would have
harkened unto me! For if Israel would have walked in my ways; I should soon
have put down their Enemies, and turned my hand against their Adversaries: This
is the necessary and indispensible condition, without which we have no title to
the Protection of our God. Let every one therefore amongst us duly enquire into
himself, and Commune with his own Heart secretly: Have I hearkened unto the
Voice of my God, and have I walled in his ways? Have I diligently sought out
his will, and carefully endeavored to square all my Actions according to that
rule? Have my Paths been the Paths of Righteousness, and have I walked
faithfully with my God? He that upon such an Examination, finds his Conscience
bearing witness for him, may Expostulate with the Almighty, in the Pathetical
words of the Prophet Isaiah; Look down, O Lord, from Heaven, and behold from
the Habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory: Where is thy Zeal, and thy
strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies toward me, are they
restrained? Doubtless thou art our Father, tho Abraham be ignorant of us, and
Israel acknowledge us not; thou, O Lord, are our Father, our Redeemer, thy name
is from everlasting: But if upon a due examination we find the contrary, as I
fear it is the case of too many amongst us, upon a just and serious Reflection,
that we have hearkened only unto the voice of our Lusts, and that our ways have
been the ways of Death; let us then, in the Name of God, endeavor to renew our
selves by a hearty Repentance, by a thorough Reformation; immediately setting
about to remove our Sins far from us, by which only we can be removed from the
Protection of our God: Let every man turn from his evil way, and from the
violence which is in his hand; and God will assuredly turn and repent, and turn
away from his fierce anger, that we perish not. Thus, if by a speedy and
sincere Repentance, we make our sins, that were red as Crimson, become whiter
than the Wool; God also will certainly do his part, he will make us to hear of
joy and gladness, and cause the bones which he had broken to rejoice: Then may
we take up the Prophet David's cheerful Ejaculation, God shall deliver us from
the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome Pestilence; he shall defend us
under his Wings, and we shall be safe under his Feathers, his Faithfulness and
Truth shall be our Shield and Buckler; we shall not be afraid for any Terror
by Night, nor for the Arrow that flies by day; a thousand shall fall beside
us, and ten thousand upon our Right Hand, but it shall not come nigh us; for
the Lord is our defense, the God of Jacob is our Refuge. And this leads me to
the consideration of the

2d. Particular, namely, to prove, that if we are thus qualified, we shall
certainly be Protected, we shall assuredly see the Salvation of the Lord. Fear
ye not, stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord.

Behold, the hand of the Lord is not shortened, that it cannot save; neither his
ear heavy, that it cannot hear; unless our iniquities do separate between us
and our God, and our sins do hide his Face from us; he will hear the cry of
such as call upon him, yea, of all such as call upon him faithfully. This we
find to have been his constant way of Proceeding with his chosen People; If
they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the Council of the the
most high; then he brought down their Heart with labor, they fell down, and
there was none to help: But when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he
delivered them out of their distresses; he sent his word, and healed them; and
they were saved from their destruction. The truth of this Doctrine is
undeniably made out, by the remarkable deliverance pointed at in my Text. The
Israelites were pursued by the whole strength of Egypt; they could not turn on
either side, for the Mountains that environed them, their progress was stopped
by the Red Sea before them, and their retreat cut off by the Egyptians behind
them: The poor Fugitives thus miserably hemmed in, were a naked and defenseless
multitude; their very number, which yet was all they had to trust to, was not
their smallest inconvenience; being chiefly composed of Women and of Children;
whose Tears and Lamentations, softened those Hearts into tenderness and
compassion, which should have been steeled with Courage and Resolution: What
should they do, being thus surrounded with horror and destruction? We are told
in the 10th. verse of this same Chapter, that when they lift up their eyes, and
beheld Pharaoh marching after them, they cried out unto the Lord: And we find
the consequence to be, that the Lord heard them; and turned that attempt which
was designed for their destruction, into a signal Instance of his Favor
toward them, and the utter ruin of their insulting Adversaries. And since in
this particular our case resembles that of the Israelites, namely, that the
cause of the Malice of our Adversaries, is only that we will not becomes slaves
to the Egyptians; and that we will not bow down before the Idols of Egypt; but
are resolved to Offer Sacrifice unto the Lord our God; were our condition as
helpless as we find theirs to have been (and God be praised it is most happily
different) we are as justly entitled to a Miraculous Deliverance. But we need
not go abroad for Instances of this Nature, our own experience will abundantly
supply, considerable Examples of the Divine Protection. How wonderfully has God
appeared in our behalf, not only in completing that advantageous change in the
Government of these Nations, by which our Religion and our Liberties were
secured; but also by watching over it in a peculiar manner, and defeating all
designs which were devised for its Destruction! For, not to look backwards to
former deliverances, which are much too numerous to be insisted upon at
present, how wonderful a Mercy have we lately experienced! if an attempt be
made to surprise us unprovided, (as in the Invasion at this time designed) the
Winds and the Weather conspire to keep back our Enemies till their intentions
are discovered, and their contrivances laid open: If secret Practices are
levelled against the Government, and Plots are carried on for the imbroiling us
again (as in the Horrid Treason so freshly discovered) the Providence of God
interposes for us visibly, and brings to light the closest Machinations: Thus
by the wonderful goodness of Almighty God, no Weapon, no Design formed against
us has prospered; but our Souls have escaped like a bird out of the snare of
the fowler, the net is broken, and we are delivered. Give me leave to stop here
a little, and to take an imperfect Prospect of that most valuable Blessing,
which has so lately been conferred upon us: And we cannot any way more justly
make an Estimate of it, than by considering the Miseries to which we must have
been exposed, had we not been rescued from them by so eminent a Providence:
What Confusions, what Distractions must we have lain under, if by a Barbarous
and Bloody Assassination, the Confederate Armies had lost their General, and
Neighboring Allies their Chief Magistrate, these Nations, their LAWFUL and
RIGHTFUL KING! And that at a conjuncture the most likelist of any, when the
embasement and scarcity of our current Coin, had spread a general uneasiness
throughout the Kingdom; and when all these perplexities were about to be
increased, by the additional Calamity of a Foreign Invasion! The Scene of
Affairs must have been so dismal, that it requires some of that Courage which I
have been recommending to you, to take a view of those extremities, tho we have
happily escaped them. But as this Design was a Masterpiece of Villainy; and
timed with all the Artifice of cunning Malice; so has it pleased God, by his
gracious Disappointment of it, to raise much Good out of that Evil; and to
Establish the Government, by those very means, by which its Enemies contrived
to overturn it: For as it must needs confirm the Layalty of the well-affected,
by showing them the great importance of His Safety, who is both their King and
their Benefactour; so I hope it will open the Eyes of some deluded People, by
shewin them the weakness and the badness of that Cause, which makes use of such
vile methods to sustain and support it self. How cheerfully then, upon a due
Contemplation of such remakable Providence, as I have just now been treating
of, may we Exhort one another not to fear, since so often heretofore, and so
signally of late we have seen the Salvation of the Lord.

I would to God, a due consideration of those several particulars, wherein God
has appeared to espouse the cause we stand for, would prevail with those who
are Enemies to our Peace, no longer to combat the workings of Omnipotency; but
to take the advice which God formerly gave to the House of Judah, Ye shall not
go up to Fight against your Brethren, for this thing is from me: Especially
that such among them as are Englishmen, and Protestants, would cease to act so
unsuitably to both those Characters; by betraying at once their Liberty and
Religion, in desperately abetting the attempts of those, who would give us
nothing else but Slavery for the One, and Popery for the Other: And this I
wish, chiefly for their own sakes; since I am not apprehensive that they are so
considerable, as to bring Danger, but Scandal, upon their Country and
Profession. If therefore we are not so mad as to play booty against our selves;
if we will not Fight the Battles of our Enemies, by unqualifying our selves for
the Divine Protection; we shall assuredly find, that God, who is a present help
in trouble, will never leave us, nor forsake us: Then may we lay hold upon all
God's attributes, and engage them to Fight in our behalf: The Bowels of his
infinite Mercy will yearn over us; his impartial Justice, when thus appeased,
will cease to be our Accuser, and become our Advocate; his eternal Truth will
stand bound to make good his gracious Promises; his unbounded Wisdom will find
out the method for our deliverance; and his almighty Power will execute and go
through with it. Fear ye not therefore, stand still, and see the Salvation of
the Lord; firmly rely upon him for his Protection, and cast your care upon him,
for he cares for you; not that you must so far depend upon him, as to neglect
the means which he has put into your hands; we stand not in need of a Miracle
for our Preservation, and therefore we must not expect one for it: Let us
cheerfully, and with confidence use our own endeavors; and God will not fail
to do his part too, in giving a blessing to our undertakings: his former
favors are so many earnests of future indulgences; unless we make our selves
unworthy of them, either by our ingratitude, or our distrust. Let us
courageously and undauntedly prepare our selves, to confront whatever dangers
may oppose us, in the maintenance of a cause so good and justifiable: Let us
Arm our selves with Innocence, and Fortify our selves with Faith; and we need
not fear what man can do unto us. Thus being resolved to discharge our duty,
let us leave the event of things to God and his good Providence; that the Glory
of our Deliverance may be his alone, in whom we live, and move, and have our
Being.

I shall close up all, with Joab's exhortation to the Armies of Israel; Be of
good Courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for the Cities of
our God; and the Lord do that which seems him good.

Now to God the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Honor, Power,
Might, Majesty, and Dominion, henceforth and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
Sermons Preached by the Reverend Mr. Brady, and Printed for R. Parker.
A Sermon Preached at Helmingham in Suffolk, June 30th, 1694. at the Funeral of
Lieutenant General Talmach. Published at the request of the Friends of the
Deceased.

A Sermon Preached at White Hall, March 3. 169^. upon occasion of her late
Majesty's Death, before the Right Honorable the Countess of Darby, and the
rest of the Mourning Ladies. Published at the request of that Honorable
Audience.

A Sermon Preached at the Parish Church of St. Martin's Ludgate, Sept. 12th.
1695. before the Incorporated Society of Apothecaries of London. Published at
the request of the Society.


