The Nature of that Salvation, which the Gospel offers; and the Method of
obtaining it, by a Mediator. A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church of St.
PAVL, March the 6th, School/9. Being the Third, for this Year, of the Lecture,
Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire;

By SAMUEL BRADFORD, M. A. Rector of St. Mary le Bow.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel, 1699.

Mr. BRADFORD's SERMON, Preached at St. Paul's, March the 6th. School/9.

1 TIMOTHY I. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that
Christ Jesus came into the World, to save Sinners, --


IN treating on these Words, I proposed, by God's Assistance, to make good the
Apostle's assertion, viz. that the Saying mentioned by him is both certainly
true, and fit to be entertained by us with all readiness and thankfulness; and
that, whether we consider the intrinsic Evidence it carries along with it, or
the external Attestation which has been given to it.

I began with its intrinsic Evidence, viz. its credibility from its manifest
agreeableness to those Notions which we naturally have concerning God and our
selves. And to make this appear, I proposed the following Method.

First, To consider who the Persons are, whom Christ Jesus came into the World
to save. Secondly, What kind of Salvation he proposes to them. Thirdly, In
what way and manner he has, by his coming into the world, wrought out this
Salvation for them.
The first of these I have dispatched, showing, that the Persons, whom Christ
Jesus came into the World to save, were both Men and Sinners, under each of
which denominations, I endeavored to make it appear, that they were fit
Objects of the Divine Care and Compassion to be exercised in some extraordinary
manner.

I proceed now to consider in the second place, what kind of Salvation Christ
Jesus proposes to these Creatures, concerning which I shall not need to add
much, after what has been discoursed upon the former head. For by a little
reflection upon the condition of Sinners, 'twill be easy to discern, what kind
of Salvation they stood in need of, which is the very same, which our Savior
has proposed to us in his Gospel, his design in coming into the World being to
provide for the necessities of fallen Men; with reference to which Necessities
Salvation must imply both a Deliverance from those many Evils, to which Sin had
exposed them; and a Restitution of those many Blessings, which by their
transgression they had forfeited.

Thus for Instance; The Salvation of Men by Jesus Christ consists in his
delivering them from the just displeasure of their Maker, and all the terrible
Effects of it; together with a complete Restoration of them to the Divine
favor, and giving them a Title to all those Blessings which are proper for
humane Nature, when accepted of God; in the setting them free from all that
disorder and irregularity which had been introduced into the several Faculties
of their Souls, together with the dissatisfaction and uneasiness of Mind which
necessarily followed, as also from those inconveniences and miseries to which
their Bodies likewise were exposed, either as a consequence or a punishment of
the corruption of their Minds; in restoring perfectly that frame and temper of
Spirit, which is natural to an intelligent and reasonable Creature, together
with that healthful and vigorous state of Body, that sound constitution of the
whole Man, which would have been the Effect or the Reward of Innocence and
Integrity.

In a word, Salvation consists in reconciling God to Men, and Men to God, and
in all the blessed Fruits of such a Reconciliation; which how many and how
great they will be, we are not able in this imperfect State so much as to
conjecture. This will be best understood, by such as shall partake of this
Salvation, when it shall be fully accomplished: In the mean time, it may
satisfy and encourage us to believe, that they will bear a proportion to the
Bounty of God, and the Capacities of Men.

And as this is the Salvation, which the Gospel offers to every particular
Man to whom it is Preached, so it assures us, that all those who shall embrace
the offer, shall be thus saved; and that the consequence of this will be a
Renovation of this part of the World, which has been so miserably disordered by
the Sins of Men, a Restitution of whatsoever has been decayed in it, the
expelling sin and misery out of it, the subduing and confining the great Enemy
of God and Man, who has so long usurped dominion over it, Romans 8.20,
the delivering the Creature it self, whole lower Creation, from that vanity
and bondage of Corruption, to which it is at presented subjected, and under
which it groans and travelleth in pain, a glorious Liberty; in a word, 2 Pet.
3.21.
the creating New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein nothing but Righteousness
shall dwell; and finally the complete and everlasting happiness of an
innumerable company of intelligent and reasonable Creatures, who by the craft
of their subtle Enemy, and through their own weakness and folly, had once
fallen from God, and the state in which he had placed them, and been in
imminent danger of utter Perdition.

All this is so evidently proposed by the Gospel of our Savior, as the design
of his Undertaking, and so expressly and fully declared thereby, that I need not
spend time in producing any particular Proofs.

And all this is without question highly worthy of so great and so good a Being
as God is.

Had the Christian Revelation told us, that Almighty God had sent his
only-begotten Son from Heaven, only to secure to us the pleasures of the
Elysian Fields, or a Mohammedan Paradise, to provide for us a full and perpetual
Enjoyment of Sensual Entertainments and Delights; whosoever had any just
thoughts of the divine, or humane Nature, might reasonably have disputed, nay
boldly denied the divinity of such a Revelation. But when on the contrary it
assures us, that our Savior came into the World with such noble and generous
designs as these, to cause the displeasure of God to cease, to heal the
diseases of immaterial and immortal Spirits, to repair the divine Image in
them, to restore both them and the Tabernacles they sojourned in to their
primitive Integrity and Soundness, to repair the ruins of Nature, to make the
Beauties of the Creation in this lower World conspicuous, to destroy the Works
of the Devil, to recover such of God's Creatures as should be found capable of
a Recovery, to introduce and settle Everlasting Righteousness and Peace, and
finally to make a considerable number of the children of Men Eternally happy in
the Enjoyment of their Maker; these are all of them things so well becoming the
Majesty and the Benignity of the Everlasting Father, and his only-begotten Son,
and at the same time so beneficial and grateful to humane Nature, that we have
all the reason in the World to hearken to such a Revelation as this, and to be
well disposed to receive it as coming from God.

And this again renders the Saying in the Text still more credible, when we
thus consider what kind of Salvation that is, which Christ Jesus offers to
Sinners.

But because the main stress, with respect to the intrinsic Evidence of this
Saying, will lie upon what I have to offer upon the third general Head I
proposed, I therefore proceed to that, designing to insist more largely and
particularly upon it, viz. to consider in what way and manner Christ Jesus by
his coming into the world has wrought out this Salvation for Sinners.

The Nature of Man, and the condition of Sinners, as you have heard, make it
credible, that God should concern himself for their Recovery. It Is also
credible, that if Almighty God should offer Salvation to Men, it would be such
a kind of Salvation as I have been describing: But besides all this, the Method
in which our Lord has obtained this Salvation for us is so excellent in it
self, so suitable to the nature of things, so agreeable to all just
apprehensions both concerning God and our selves, so well accommodated to our
necessities and our reasonable desires, that I am verily persuaded, nothing but
a want of understanding it can occasion any reasonable man to hesitate at the
belief of it.

I am very sensible, before I enter upon this Argument, that we ignorant and
weak Creatures are not able to account for the Works of our Maker. Even the
least of his Works in Creation and Providence infinitely exceeds our
Comprehension; and much more the wonders of our Redemption by Jesus Christ. We
are not capable of diving into all the depths of this admirable Dispensation,
nor of spying out all the reasons and excellencies of it. But yet so much we
may discern, as may cause us justly to admire and adore the divine Perfections
displayed therein, and may strongly incline us to believe the Divinity of this
Revelation, even before we come to consider the external Attestation which it
has received from God. This therefore is next in order to be done, viz. to
contemplate the Method in which Christ Jesus by his coming into the world
saves Sinners, and with Modesty and Reverence to inquire into the Way and
Manner of our Salvation by the Gospel.

Now the most comprehensive Notion we can frame to our selves of our blessed
Savior's Undertaking is, that he acted as a Mediator between God and Men; and
therefore by considering what the Office of a Mediator is, and how our Lord
executed that Office, we shall be the better able to understand the Method of
our Salvation by him.

That our Lord sustein'd the Character of a Mediator, is evident from the
account we have of his Undertaking, throughout the Scriptures. Those Persons,
who in the Old Testament are mentioned as Types and Representatives of the
Messiah, were diverse of them a sort of Mediators between God and the People of
Israel. Moses the great Lawgiver of the Jews was apparently a Figure of Christ
in this respect; as he managed all affairs between God and that People,
receiving and delivering Messages from God to them, and again presenting their
Addresses to God, and frequently making supplications on their behalf. And
therefore the Apostle gives him this Title, when he says, that the Law was
ordained by Angels, Gal. 3.19.
in the hands of a Mediator, meaning Moses. The Levitical Priests were so many
Types of our Lord, as they were a sort of Mediators between God and the
Israelites, being appointed to expound the Law of God to them, to bless them in
his Name, and to offer up Sacrifices together with Prayers and Praises to God
upon their account. Their High Priest had in an eminent manner this Character,
exercising the Mediatorial Function, as a special representative of the
Messiah, when he went alone once every year into the second Tabernacle, Heb.
9.7.
or holy of holies, upon the great day of Expiation, not without blood, which
he offered not only for himself, but also for the errors of the People.

As to the New Testament, it may seem superfluous to recite from thence any
particular Proofs, that our Savior acted as a Mediator between God and Men;
it is his Character throughout that Volume. 1 Timothy 2.5.
There is, says St. Paul, One God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus. The Author to the Hebrews making a comparison between the
Highpriests under the Law, and our great High Priest under the Gospel, says
of him, Hen. 8.6.
that he has obtained a more excellent Ministry than theirs, by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant. He calls him again more than once,
chap. 9.15. chap. 12.24.
the Mediator of the New Testament, or Covenant. And to add no more, St. Paul,
though he does not there use the Word Mediator, yet he expresses the sense of
it very emphatically, where he says, 1 Cor. 8.6.
There is but one God, the Father, of whom are all things and we (...) for, or
to him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we (...) by him;
in which words he evidently opposes the one Lord or Mediator of Christians, to
the many Lords, or Mediators of the Gentiles, mentioned in the preceding Verse;
and in saying that all things, particularly we Christians are by him, he
plainly gives him the Character of a Mediator.

What the Office of a Mediator is, we all know, viz. to make up a difference
between two Parties, and in order to that, equitably and impartially to
consider the real Interests and the just pretensions on each side, and to
transact matters so, that both may be satisfied; that if any injury has been
done, it may, as far as it is possible, be repaired; that whatsoever displeasure
has been conceived may be removed; that whatsoever mischief has been produced,
it may be prevented for the future; in a word, that all things may be managed
suitably to the condition, and agreeably to the expectation of the Parties
concerned.

But before we come to consider the particular way and manner in which our
great Mediator has discharged this his Undertaking, it may not be amiss first
to show in the general, that it was perfectly agreeable both to the nature of
God, and of fallen Man, that there should be a Mediator to transact this great
affair of reconciling this Apostate Creature to his Maker.

That this has been the general Apprehension of Mankind, that it becomes us to
approach to God by a Mediator, is fully evident from all the Records of ancient
and almost universal Practice. The Distinction between (...) and (...), the
superior Gods, and Demons, among the Pagan Theologers is well known, and how
they made the latter a sort of Mediators between the Gods and Men. Plutarch is
very express to this purpose, where he mentions the (...), Plutarch. (...).
and he only makes it a Question, whether those who asserted this Doctrine
derived it from Zoroaster and the Magi, or from Orpheus and the Thracians, or
whether it had an Egyptian or Phrygian original; but he takes it for granted it
was of the utmost Antiquity, and venerable upon that account, as well as
reasonable in it self. And even those Pagan Philosophers, who conceived most
worthily of the Divine Nature, and acknowledged one Supreme God over all, yet
at the same time allowed and practiced the worship of inferior Deities, as a
kind of Mediators between the Sovereign God and mortal men, as it were easy to
show from the School of Plato.

As to the original of this Notion, and particularly whether it became so
universal from a primitive Tradition, ever since the Promise made to our first
Parents, Genesis 3.15.
of the seed of the woman, and the appointment of expiatory Sacrifices (as is
probable) at the same time, I shall not venture to determine; though to such with
whom the Scripture Records have their just weight this appears most likely. But
be that as it will; what I at present insist upon is, that this is agreeable to
the natural Apprehensions of Mankind; insomuch that though the Pagan Theologers
exceedingly erred in appointing to themselves Mediators, whom God never
intended, nor could approve; yet they had good ground for conceiving a Mediator
necessary, at least highly expedient, between the divine Majesty, and the
sinful children of Men. It ought not to pass for a Mistake or a Prejudice taken
up without reason; but for a natural and just apprehension, as will plainly
appear, if we contemplate the Perfection of the divine Nature, or the
Imperfection of our own.

We conceive of God, as a pure Spirit, Eternal, Incomprehensible, Infinite in
all Perfection: We feel our selves dependent, indigent, weak Creatures, at an
infinite distance from him who made us. And although, if we had (...) our
Native Integrity, the consideration of the divine Goodness, and our own
Innocence, might have emboldened us to approach to him with freedom: yet being
farther apprehensive of his infinite Purity, and intimately conscious of our
Apostasy from him, and the impurity and disorder we have contracted thereby, we
must needs be ashamed and afraid to approach to him of our selves, and we
cannot but wish that we could meet with some Person worthy and fit to mediate
between him and us, who would be so kind as to offer us his Assistance, and
introduce us again into his Presence and Favor.

This was that, (as I took notice in my former Lecture) which, according to the
account of Moses, Genesis 3.8.
caused our first Parents to hide themselves from the face of God, and tremble
when they heard his voice, as soon as ever they were conscious of having
transgressed his Law, and thereupon felt themselves naked. And it is the very
same thing, which makes every Sinner, instead of repenting and returning to
God, be apt still to run farther from him; his guilt, as well as his corrupt
inclination, rendering him shy of approaching to him, or hoping in him. For
although, what I have before observed is true, viz. that it is both natural and
reasonable to hope, that so good a Being as God is, would find out some way,
for the Recovery of such Creatures as fallen Men are; yet it is as natural and
reasonable to be filled with shame and Fear, in the sense of having offended
this great and good Being, and to wish that some one might be found out to
interpose between him and us. And therefore Job speaks the language of Nature,
who, though he were as apprehensive as any Man of the divine Goodness, and
conscious of his own Integrity in the main; yet considering the greatness of
God's Majesty, and his own weakness, both as a Man, and a Sinner, and at
present in great distress, he makes this a part of his complaint, Job 9.32, 33.
He is not a Man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we should come
together in judgment; neither is there any Days-man (the Septuagint uses the
very word (...) Mediator) between us, who might lay his hand upon us both.

That this is really the sense of Nature, may yet farther appear, in that
amongst Men it is always reputed fit and decent, and the properest Method for
attaining our end, that an Inferior, who has injured or disobliged his
Superior, should attempt a Reconciliation, by the interposal of some third
Person well known to them both. If a Child by gross Neglect or wilful
Disobedience has incurred the displeasure of a Parent, notwithstanding his
knowledge and experience of his Parents Affection and Tenderness, it is very
natural for him to desire some good Friend, who has an Interest in his Parent,
and is more his equal, to mediate in his behalf. If a Subject has rebelled
against his Prince, and thereby dishonored and offended him, be the Prince
never so famous for his goodness and clemency, yet the Rebel is naturally
afraid to approach him, without the intercession of some prevalent Friend at
Court. And in each of these Cases, both the Father and the Prince judge it to
be more fit and decent, they better like and approve this manner of proceeding,
than if the undutiful Child or Subject should boldly and confidently intrude
themselves into their presence. And it is looked upon by all, as more for the
Honor of the Superior, as well as the satisfaction of the Inferior, that this
course should be taken. It does right to the one, by rendering his Authority
more awful for the future; as well as it relieves the other, by affording him
assistance suitable to his distress, and agreeable to his wishes.

And if it be thus amongst Men, why should it not much more be thought a
reasonable way of proceeding between the great and holy God, and his apostate
Creatures; when the universal Parent has been disobliged by his Offspring, and
the Supreme Lord of all disobeyed by his Subjects?

There is not indeed upon all accounts the same use of a Mediator between God
and Men, as between one Man and another. A Mediator between Men may be often
necessary to remove unreasonable Prejudices; to rectify Mistakes and
Misapprehensions, which may have been taken up without cause; or to allay
inordinate Passions, which may have been raised on one side as well as the
other. But in God, none of these things can be conceived; He can have no
unreasonable Prejudices against his Creatures; no Misapprehensions concerning
them; no inordinate Passions with respect to them: but still it may be for the
honor of God, and consequently to his satisfaction; as well as for the benefit
of the Sinner, that a Mediator should interpose between them, as I shall
presently endeavor to show more fully. Thus much I thought fit to premise with
respect to this Method of our Salvation in the general, viz. to show the
agreeableness and fitness of our Savior's sufteining the Character of a
Mediator, both with respect to God and Man.

I proceed now to consider more particularly, the way in which our Savior has
executed this Office, according as the Gospel represents the matter, and to
evince, that upon this account also, This is a faithful Saying, etc.

According to the account I have already given of the Office of a Mediator,
there must be these two general Designs, which our Savior must be supposed to
have carried on in the Execution of it.




Almighty God, both as he is a Being infinitely greater than his Creatures, and
as he was the Person offended, ought first to be considered in the Mediation,
which was to be transacted; and if any thing should be found necessary, or
highly expedient to be done, in order to the giving him just Satisfaction in
the case, this in all reason should be a principal part of the Mediator's care.

Now as to this, some perhaps might be apt to think, that nothing more could be
requisite toward the giving Satisfaction to God, than the bringing the fallen
Creature to Repentance and Amendment. For what can in reason be expected from a
weak and fallible Creature, such as Man is, who was drawn into Sin in the
manner I have before expressed, but that he should become thoroughly sensible of
his folly and guilt, humbly make his acknowledgments to his Creator, and for
the future endeavor to behave himself better? And how can we suppose, that a
God of infinite Goodness, should not take this as full Satisfaction from his
Creature?

This by a first and superficial view of the case, some men may be apt to
imagine: but if they would look more thoroughly into it, and consider the matter
to the bottom, they might easily see reason to alter their Judgments.

I readily allow, that this is all that can be expected from the Sinner, it is
all he can do on his part, and a God of infinite goodness will no doubt approve
of such his behavior: but notwithstanding all this, there may be something
farther necessary, or at least highly fit to be done for the honor of Almighty
God, and which he may therefore determine shall be done for his Satisfaction,
before he will enter upon new Terms with his Apostate Creature.

For instance; There are two of the divine Attributes, to which more especially
Honor ought to be done in this case, namely the Holiness of God, and his
Justice as Governor of the World.

Holiness of God.

The Epithet Holy is frequently annexed to the sacred Name of God in Scripture,
under which are comprehended all the Moral Perfections of the divine Nature,
particularly his entire love of goodness, and his irreconcilable hatred of all
Evil, or Sin. Hence he is said by the Prophet, to be of purer Eyes than to
behold evil, Habak. 1.13.
and that he cannot look on iniquity. He is frequently represented as hating
sin, Psalm. 5.4, 5.
and even the workers of iniquity, for their works sake; as being offended,
troubled, and, to speak after the manner of men, Genesis 6.6.
grieved at his heart, at the folly and wickedness of Mankind. All which
denotes, although no passion in God, nor ill will to his Creatures, of both
which the Perfection of his Nature renders him incapable; yet a fixed
contrariety and aversion in the divine Nature to all Moral Evil, and on the
contrary a full approbation of, and inexpressible love to all Moral Good.

And Reason, as well as Scripture, assures us this must be so. For if there be
so much unworthiness, baseness, and deformity in Sin, as I have showed in my
former discourse; if it be so opposite to the nature both of God and his
Creature; and the occasion of so much disorder and confusion in the whole
Creation, as I then observed; it cannot possibly be otherwise than the object
of the divine hatred and displeasure. The better any Creature is, the more he
abhors an unhandsome, a dishonest, or a wicked action; and the more he approves
and takes pleasure in Virtue and Goodness of all kinds; all which is nothing
else but a faint Image of God in his Creature.

From the consideration of all this it will appear very reasonable, that if a
Mediator should interpose between God and Men, he should provide for the honor
of this divine Attribute; he should take effectual care that the Holiness or
Purity of God should be rendered conspicuous to all the World, even in the
manner of receiving his offending Creatures to Mercy; and that the Method in
which God should declare himself reconcilable to Sinners should be such as
might consist with, nay fully testify and express his abhorrence of their
sins. Just as when a tender Parent determines to forgive his repenting Child,
he will choose to do it in such a way, as at the same time to discover his real
displeasure upon account of the Offense he had given, and that in some
proportion to the nature and quality of the offense.

Justice of God, as Governor of the World, was also to be regarded in this Case.

This Attribute is necessarily joined with that before mentioned. The supreme
Lord and Governor of the Universe must, from the purity of his Nature, be just
and righteous in his Government. And therefore Abraham, in his pleading with
God for Sodom, takes it for granted, that the Judge of the World would do
right, and infers from thence, that he would certainly distinguish between the
Righteous and the Wicked. Genesis 18.25.
That be far from thee, to do after this manner, to slay the righteous with the
wicked, and that the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right! And as it is the part of a
righteous Governor, to make a difference between the righteous and the wicked;
so it is another effect of the same Righteousness, in showing Mercy to
repenting Offenders, to make them thoroughly sensible of the heinousness of their
Offense. Thus earthly Princes are used to do, and it is esteemed an instance of
Justice in their proceedings: and why should it not in like manner be a proper
instance of Justice in the great Governor of Heaven and Earth; especially where
the Offense had so much of obliquity and malignity in it, and so much disorder
and mischief consequent upon it, as in the Apostasy of Mankind?

The Multitude of Offenders still adds weight to this Consideration. The whole
race of Mankind being corrupted, there was so much the greater necessity of
their being made sensible of their Maker's displeasure, lest they should have
been encouraged to go on in their rebellion, by an easy indemnity; lest from
the silence of God in this case, they should have been so vain as to have
thought him altogether such an one as themselves; Halm. 50.21
and because sentence against their evil works was not speedily or thoroughly
executed, Eccles. 8.11.
their hearts should have been fully set in them to do evil.

And if we might be allowed to add, what we Christians take for granted, as
being assured of it by the Word of God, Genesis 2.16, 17.
that God had given our first Parents a strict charge, together with a special
admonition and warning, as to the instance in which they transgressed, adding a
positive and severe threatening, that in the day in which they transgressed,
they should surely dye; this still makes it more requisite, that the Justice of
God should be publicly vindicated, before he should offer terms of
Reconciliation; and that if he should in Mercy forbear to execute the
threatening in its utmost severity, yet he should however make the Sinner
thoroughly sensible of his desert.

I might have added here, that it was very fit, that the Wisdom of God, as well
as his Justice in governing the World, should be regarded by our Mediator; it
being evidently an instance of Wisdom in a Governor, to render his Authority
awful and venerable to his Subjects, and never to appear so soft and easy as
to pass by notorious disobedience, without making some severe remarks upon it.

I might farther have observed, that there was no way so likely to recover the
Sinner to repentance, as by thus manifesting the divine Purity, Justice, and
Wisdom, in order to the awakening in him a sense of his fault and his danger,
and the engaging him to take greater care for the time to come. But this may
come into consideration more properly in another place. It may suffice here to
have observed, that it was very agreeable to the conceptions we have both of
the divine Nature and our own, that something should be done by our Mediator,
by way of satisfaction to Almighty God, for the dishonor which had been done to
his Attributes by the Apostasy of Men.

What remains upon this Head is to show, that the particular Method which our
Media or has taken, did eminently tend to these purposes.

It Is true, that all the Evils, which have befallen the children of Men, since
their Apostasy from God, have been so many expressions and testimonies of God's
hatred of Sin, and his love of Holiness, as also of the Justice and Wisdom of
his Government; but upon serious and impartial consideration of our blessed
Savior's undertaking, we shall be forced to confess, that greater honor has
been given thereby to God, than by all the Sufferings which any of the rest of
the children of Men have undergone; and that if we do but thoroughly lay to heart
what he, so great and excellent a Person, has voluntarily done and suffered
upon our account, it will tend more effectually than any other Method we can
think of, to the making us sensible of the evil and danger of offending so holy
and righteous a Being as God is. For

Mediator gave honor to these Attributes of God, by asserting, and publishing,
and explaining the Law of God which had been violated by Men; I mean the great
Law of Nature, divided into two Tables, requiring the Love of God and Man;
which, as they were the two constitutive parts of the natural or moral, so they
are also of the Christian Law.

What our Lord declared over and above the mere Law of Nature, namely
concerning the Mercy of God in forgiving Sinners upon their Repentance and
Faith in him, was become necessary by reason of transgression; and even in
making Repentance and Faith the conditions of acceptance, he has in an eminent
manner done right to God and his Law. For Repentance implys an acknowledgment
of our unworthiness in offending God by violating the Law he had given us; and
Faith in God through a Mediator implys our sense of guilt, and need of Mercy.

But besides this, our Lord did openly declare the Righteousness of the divine
Law, as first given to Man, by explaining it fully, and inculcating it afresh
upon us, and insisting upon the absolute necessity of a sincere Obedience to
it, even in this imperfect State, in which we are not capable of yielding that
which is absolutely perfect.

This appears by the Answer our Savior gave to the Lawyer, Matthew. 22.37, 38,
39, 40.
telling him that the Love of God and our Neighbor were the two great
Commandments of the Law, and that these were indeed the Sum of the Law and the
Prophets: but especially by his admirable Discourse upon the Mount, Mat. 5.17,
etc.
wherein he vindicates the Natural or Moral Law of God, from all the false
Glosses which the Jewish Doctors had put upon it, declaring the necessity of
regarding even the least of its Precepts, by those who hoped to partake of the
Kingdom of Heaven; expressly assuring them, that he came not to destroy the law,
but to fulfill it, (...), (one way of doing which was by interpreting it in its
fullest latitude and extent;) and finally, that till heaven and earth pass
away, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled; as much as to say, that the reason of it is immutable, and
consequently the obligation everlasting.

But of this I may have occasion to discourse more at large, when I come to
consider what our Mediator has done toward the relieving our necessities;
it is enough in this place to have mentioned it, as one instance whereby the
righteousness of the divine Law was vindicated, and consequently honor given to
the Purity, and Justice, and Wisdom of God.

Mediator gave honor to these Attributes, in complying strictly and fully with
the Law of God in his own Person, and thereby giving a complete instance of
Obedience in that Nature which had transgressed.

This was to vindicate the Law of God in a remarkable manner, by showing the
agreeableness and fitness of it to humane Nature, when the Son of God,
appearing in this Nature, made it the Rule of his Life, and thereby not only
testified his approbation of it; but also showed the capacity of humane Nature,
whilst innocent and untainted, and attended with the Grace of God to comply
perfectly with it. This was in truth a glorious Triumph over Sin and Satan,
when our Nature assumed by the Son of God, appeared in that instance like it
self, as it came out of God's hands, perfectly pure and obedient; and our
Savior might well say as he did, John 17.4.
when he was leaving the World, Father, I have glorified thee on Earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. He had done so, both as Man, and
as our Mediator.

But of this also, viz. the life of our blessed Savior, as it was an example
for our imitation, I shall have occasion to discourse hereafter, and therefore
do but just mention it here, as another instance wherein our Mediator glorified
the Attributes of God, by his coming into the World. But



It was not it seems sufficient for our Mediator to declare and publish the
divine Law afresh; nor to give an instance of perfect Obedience to it in his
own person: but it was judged requisite also, that he should submit to an
afflicted and suffering condition, and at last yield himself to be offered up
as a Sacrifice upon the Cross, to testify, in the most significant manner that
was possible, the fixed love of God to Righteousness, his unalterable hatred of
Sin, his impartial justice in governing the World, the excellency of the Laws
which he had given to Men, and the danger of transgressing them.

Such was the nature of the Offense given to God by Man's Apostasy, and so bad
were the circumstances of Mankind, that it seemed expedient to the great Father
and Lord of all, that our Mediator should voluntarily humble himself in this
extraordinary manner. The Son of God was admitted to be our Mediator, upon no
lower Terms than these; as is plainly intimated by the Author to the Hebrews,
when citing a passage out of a prophetical Psalm, he applies it to our Savior,
and represents him as saying to his Father, when he came into the World,
Sacrifice and Offering thou would not: Heb. 10.5, 6.
but a Body have thou prepared me. In burnt-offerings and sacrifices for sin
thou have had no pleasure. Then said I, Lo I come (in the Volume of the Book it
is written of me) to do thy will O God; by which will (as he adds a little
after) we are sanctified, Ver. 10.
through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all.

And upon our Mediator's thus suffering for us, new terms of Mercy and
Reconciliation were offered to us, upon which account he himself calls his
Blood, Mat. 26.28.
the Blood of the new Covenant; viz. that Blood in the shedding of which the
new Covenant between God and Man, for acceptance upon Repentance and Faith, was
made and ratified.

The Sufferings of our Lord are throughout the Holy Scriptures represented, as
making expiation for the Sins of Men; and particularly his death upon the
Cross, as it is made to answer all the expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, so
it is it self frequently Styled, a Sacrifice and Offering for Sins, and
represented as the means of God's being reconciled to us; and so it evidently
was, in as much as by this means the Sins of Men were so openly condemned, the
Righteousness of God's Law so notoriously declared, and by consequence the
Holiness and Justice of God so conspicuously honored in the view of the World;
which certainly may be reasonably called, giving Satisfaction to God.

This Doctrine of our Savior's offering up himself as a Sacrifice for the Sins
of the World, and thereby giving Satisfaction to the great Lord of all, is so
fully declared throughout the New Testament, and particularly in one whole
Epistle, Written, as it should seem, to that very purpose, I mean that to the
Hebrews, that I knew not how to do right to Christianity, without thus plainly
asserting it.

I know, that according to the Will of our pious and charitable Founder, I am
not to descend to any Controversies that are amongst Christians themselves, and
therefore I shall not make this a Controversy, but take it for granted, as
what is not only fully asserted in holy Writ, and agreeable to the sense of the
most primitive Christian Antiquity, as well as the judgment of the main Body of
Christians throughout every age; but what belongs to the true Christian Scheme,
and is necessary to render it entire and of a piece. And though I would be very
loath to deny the Title of Christian, to any man who seriously lays claim to it,
and in so skeptical an Age as this, to lessen the number of Christian
Professors: yet I must not, for the sake of such as desert the Christianity
which we are taught by the Scriptures, overlook so prime a branch of it as
this is. Let those, who call themselves by this Name, and yet deny that
satisfaction was made to God by the Sufferings of Christ for the sins of Men,
reconcile their Title and their opinion as well as they can: My business is to
assert and vindicate the truth of the Christian Religion, as exhibited to us in
the Gospel; and I am so far from thinking the Doctrine of Expiation, and
Satisfaction made by the Death of Christ, an objection against the Christian
Revelation, that I have judged it necessary to insist upon it, as one admirable
instance of the Excellency of that Method, in which our Mediator has obtained
Salvation for us.

The Sum of what I have said upon this Argument is, that our Lord, when he came
into the World, took upon him the Character of a Mediator, and that he executed
his Mediatorial Office, partly by doing that which was greatly for the honor of
his Heavenly Father, the Person offended, and consequently well-pleasing and
satisfactory to him, making this the first step in procuring Reconciliation
between God and Men.

The business of my next Discourse will be, to proceed to show how our Lord
has farther executed the same Office, by providing for the Necessities of Men.
I shall conclude at present with two short Inferences from what has been now
offered.

lessen the Person of our Mediator.

This inference will appear just, if we do but observe, that by how much the
greater and more considerable the Person of our Mediator is, by so much the
better qualified he must also be for the obtaining Salvation for us; and
particularly by so much the greater will that honor be, which is done to the
Attributes of God by his Doctrine, and especially by his Actions and his
Sufferings.

It must certainly, in the account of any reasonable Man, be a more full and
ample declaration of the Holiness and Justice of God, for a Person so near to
the Father, as the Scriptures represent our Mediator to be, first to condescend
so low as to assume our Nature, and then to do and suffer so much upon our
account; than for one that was (...), a mere Son of Adam, to have done it. The
dignity of the Person transacting this affair, must needs add weight to all
that was done by him.

Mediator; and when, having appointed his own Son to that Office, he was
pleased to found and ratify a New Covenant with us in his Blood.

The reasoning of the Apostle is unanswerable, both with respect to the former
part of this Discourse, and the latter. How shall we escape, Heb. 2.3.
if we neglect so great Salvation! And, If we sin wilfully, Chap. 10.2^,
after we have received the knowledge of the Truth, i. e. if we either
Apostatize from our Christian Profession, or which comes to the same issue,
ver. 27.
live in plain contradiction to the Profession we make; there remains no more
Sacrifice for sins; (no greater can be made) but a certain fearful looking for
of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries; Heb.
10.29.
this, as he adds, being to tread under foot the Son of God, and to count the
blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, besides,
doing despite to the Spirit of Grace.

May Almighty God preserve us all from such Apostasy, in this degenerate Age;
may he, if it be possible, recover such as be fallen; and may he give us all
Grace, not only to adhere to the Profession of Christianity, but also to bring
Reputation to it, by a suitable Practice; through Jesus Christ our only
Mediator and Advocate, Amen.

FINIS.
The First SERMON. The Qualifications requisite, toward the Receiving a Divine
Revelation. The Second SERMON. Apostate Men fit Objects of Divine Care and
Compassion. The Third SERMON. The Nature of that Salvation, which the Gospel
offers; and the Method of obtaining it, by a Mediator.
These three by Mr. Bradford, and Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.


