A CRY for LABORERS IN Gods Harvest: Being a SERMON Preached upon The sad
Occasion of the late FUNERAL of that Eminent Servant of Christ Mr. RALPH
VENNING, Who departed this Life, March. 10. 1673/4.

By Robert Brag, an unfeigned Lover of, and Mourner for, the deceased.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by John Hancock Senior and Junior, at the
sign of the three Bibles in Pope's Head Alley in Cornhill. 1674.

To the READERS, and more especially to such as were the HEARERS of this SERMON.
THough I should readily welcome any occasion, to testify to the world that
great respect and dear Affection which I had for the Person, in whose
remembrance this Sermon was Preached; yet (I thought) I had reason enough to
say you Nay again and again in your desires of Printing it: and indeed I cannot
well answer it to my own Reason that I do now subscribe my Placet to the
publication of it: For it seems (volens nolens) you will have it from me.

It had been excuse enough, that in the preparing this Discourse for the
Pulpit, I had no thought at all of preferring it to the Press: And this the
intelligent Reader will easily believe me in, when he sees how Homespun and
plain, both Matter and Style of it are. Truly I am afraid, lest some that knew
what a popular, and excellent Preacher Mr. Venning was, will think him
disparaged and not honored by such a Discourse, when they shall behold,
instead of a Velvet Pall, but a piece of Freeze for his covering.

When I heard the sad tidings of the Death of this my dear Brother and
fellow-helper; The Text here treated on was the first Scripture that came into
my mind, and I judged it might be a word in season to that Congregation who had
enjoyed his worthy labors, and were more immediately concerned in his Death
and loss. To help them in the Improvement of this sad stroke was all that I
intended: For how could I think there would be need of a Funeral Oration, of
any Elegies or Encomiums to keep up the Name and Memory of such a one, whose
praise is in the Gospel throughout all the Churches, and whose own works left
behind, will ever praise him in the Gates of this great City?

I do not question at all the acceptance of this work, how mean and slender so
ever it be; because (as the Picture of a dead Friend) it may serve to put you
in mind of him whom you so dearly loved, and have so great cause to remember.

If the having of these Lines before your eyes may affect your hearts; If it
may be of use to you, to stir up the Grace of God in you, and to engage you in
this great Duty which the Judgments of Gods Hand as well as of his Mouth do
call aloud for, I shall not think my labor lost.

I never Preached a Sermon with a sadder Heart, nor to a sadder Auditory: I did
not much wonder to see so many weeping Eyes, when I considered for whom you
wept. You have lost one that was an Interpreter, a Preacher one of a thousand.
Oh, how was he wont to lift up his Voice like a Trumpet, what Music was he
wont to make in your Ears, what Melody in your Hearts? How spiritually, and
sweetly did he use to Pray? How powerfully and profitably did he use to Preach?
What an holy Art had he of dividing the Word aright, both to those that were
without and those within?

Methinks I see you still flocking about him, and hanging like a company of
Bees upon his Lips. What Milk and Honey did there use to drop thence! He fed
you not only with the Milk, but with the Cream of the Word. I doubt not but
there are some, yea, many of you that have cause to bless God that ever you saw
his Face, and heard his Voice, God having spoken not only to your Ears, but to
your Hearts by him.

He has now Prayed and Preached his last with you, he is at rest from his
Labors, and his works follow him. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest, that he
would continue the faithful Laborers, that are yet among you, that the Harvest
may not be lost for want of Laborers, that none of his Churches may be left as
Sheep without a Shepherd: And Pray ye that He would send forth more Laborers
into the Harvest, that the number of those that Love and Fear him in the Earth
may be increased, and such added to the Church as shall be saved. And let all
that love the Lord say Amen, and Amen.

So Prays An unworthy Servant, R. BRAG.

MATTHEW. IX. 38. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send
forth Laborers into his Harvest.
YOU are not ignorant of the Occasion of my choosing this Text. And the Text,
as you may perceive, does suit the Occasion. God is calling his Laborers out
of his Harvest apace, he removes them by pairs, yea by clusters; what shall we
do, what is like to become of us? That is the Question. I know that you have
great thoughts of heart about it. There is like to be a great dearth and
scarcity of faithful Laborers in Gods Harvest. We have here the Counsel that
our Lord Christ himself gives in this very case, that we should Pray the great
Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest.

You see what the duty of the Text is, that is, Prayer.

Who it is that we must pray unto, to him that is the great Lord of the Harvest.

What it is that we must pray for, that he would send forth Laborers into his
Harvest. Then,

Lastly, You have the Therefore, or the Reason why he presses this duty upon
his Disciples, The Harvest truly is great (says he in the former Verse) but
the Laborers are few. The people did flock after Christ's Ministry in great
multitudes, and he had compassion upon them, because he saw them as Sheep
without a Shepherd. Pray you therefore, says he, the Lord of the Harvest, that
he would send forth Laborers into his Harvest. The Lesson or Observation that
I would put you upon the learning and practice of, is this.

DOCT. That it is the Duty of every good Christian Man or Woman, to pray and
cry mightily to God, that ^e would send forth more Laborers into his Harvest,
especially when there is a great scarcity and want of Laborers in the Harvest.

In the prosecuting hereof we would do something by way of Explication,
something by way of Confirmation, and something by way of Application.

For Explication, there are only two things;

1. What we are to understand here by the Harvest.

2. Who are those Laborers in the Harvest.

1. What are we to understand by the Harvest? Thereby I take to be meant the
People that were to be gathered in to Christ by the Preaching of the Gospel.
Christ you know did often speak in Parables; and that People it seems delighted
much in Similitudes and Parables: And therefore the Scripture does so often
make use of such kind of comparisons and similitudes as these are. The Lords
People they are sometimes compared to a Garden, sometimes to a Vineyard, or as
here to a Tilled and Harvest-field. So that our Souls they are Gods Field and
Harvest. What does that imply? It implys these two things.

1. It shows us what we are by Nature. When the Gospel does first come unto us,
that we are as an untilled Field, as a barren Desert, or as an unfruitful
Wilderness. In Genesis 3. and about the 18th. you read there, upon man's sin that
God had Cursed the Earth, therefore Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth.
There was the like Curse upon the heart of man; from that time it brought forth
nothing but Thorns and Thistles. So that as it is with persons that are
traveling through some Desert places over high Mountains, through rocky and
stony ways, where there is no husbandry used, there grows nothing but Briars
and Thorns and unfruitful Trees, such as are fit for the fire: Such are the
hearts and lives of all the children of men by Nature; like the Ground the
Apostle speaks of in the sixth of the Hebrews, that brings forth nothing but
Thorns and Nettles, which is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned. As
for those fruits of the Flesh, which the Apostle speaks of in Gal. 5.19.
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft,
Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, and the like; these fruits abound every where. But as for those fruits
of the Spirit, which he mentions in the following verse, which is Love and Joy
and Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Paith, Meekness, and the like;
These fruits grow not in Natures Garden. One asking a Gardener what the reason
was that Weeds did spring so naturally out of the Ground, when it was so hard a
thing to make good Plants and Flowers grow in it: He answered, Because the
Earth was as a Natural Mother to the Weeds, but was become as a Stepmother to
the Plants. Thus it is with all our hearts by nature; the things of Grace and
Godliness, they are not only above our corrupt natures, but contrary to them.
In a word, my Brethren, What were all those Churches you read of in the New
Testament, the Roman, Corinthian, and the rest of them before the Gospel was
Preached to them? They were all but as a noisome Dunghill, or barren Wilderness
to God, till the Apostles came to Preach amongst them, and to Plant them; and
then indeed the Wilderness was turned into a fruitful Garden, then was
fulfilled that of the Prophet, Instead of the Bryar, came up the Firtree, etc.
Then,

2. As this shows us what we are by Nature, so it evidences, Secondly, What we
should be when the Gospel comes to us. As the Ground receives in the Plow and
the Seed that it may bring forth the Harvest; so should we be willing to hear
the Word and to receive the Gospel, that we may be gathered in unto Christ by
Faith and Repentance. As the Prophet Jer. 4.3. He bids us Plow up the fallow
ground; for thus says the Lord to the men of Judah, and Jerusalem, Break up
the fallow ground, and sow not among Thorns. The Husbandman does not use to
cast his Seed among the Thorns without first breaking up the fallow Ground,
without first loosening the root of the Thorns, and cleansing it from the
Weeds, and when the fallow Ground is broken up, many times it needs to be
Plowed not only once, but twice or three times before it is fit to receive the
Seed. Thus it is with our hearts by Nature, we need to be Plowed by the Word
over and over, and to be Harrowed by Afflictions again and again before we are
fit to receive the Seed, and to bring forth fruit to God. Break up the fallow
Ground, and sow not among Thorns. For persons to sow their Seed without Plowing
the Ground, that were a preposterous course: And so it is with many people;
when they are convinced that they have lived wickedly, they think they will now
mend their ways and do better, and perform some good actions that God approves
of, and then they hope all will be well. I, but that is to sow without Plowing,
God will never have a good Crop here; Ungodliness will never be rooted out, nor
Godliness truly implanted in the soul, except our hearts be first Plowed and
broken up. Therefore as the Plow you know does enter into the bowels and heart
of the Earth, does rend it open, and break it to pieces; so there are some
truths of the Word, which are like the Plowshare to enter into our hearts, and
to rend them, and break them to pieces; such as the knowledge of the purity and
exactness of Gods Law, and of the evil of sin; and that dreadful curse we have
brought upon our selves by it, and of the sinfulness of our Natures, how all
our faculties are full of this sin. And therefore we should join in with God in
those things that are revealed to us concerning our lost and undone condition
by Nature; we should labor clearly to understand what is delivered in the Word
concerning our lost estate, and to work those truths upon our hearts, that we
may be sinsible of them, and to beg of the Lord that he would set them home
upon us, that we may be truly sensible of them. For Ministers they can only sow
the Truths in your Ears and your Heads, you must take them and labor to sow
them in your Hearts; and when the Truths come close to you at any time, as a
Sword piercing through your lusts, and dividing between the Marrow and the
Joints, Joh. 2. you should bid it welcome. The Psalmist complains that the
Plowers made deep furrows on their backs; but I may say blessed are those Men
and Women on whose hearts and consciences the Word does make deep furrows. For
the great reason why so much of the Seed in the Parable of the Sower
miscarryed, was because it wanted Root. So much for the first, what is meant by
the Harvest.

2. Who are these Laborers in this Harvest? There is no doubt of it but Christ
thereby means the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the Apostles of the New
Testament, and the faithful Ministers of Christ in every Generation, who are to
labor in the Preaching of the Gospel, and the salvation of souls. And though
this be the most blessed and glorious work that any Man or Angel can possibly
be employed in, to be recovering and reducing lost man to God his first cause
and principle; yet this shows us the nature of the work, namely that the
calling of a Minister is a laborious Calling, and so the Apostle in 1 Timothy 5.7.
Let the elders that rule well, be accounted worthy of double honor, they that
labor in the Word and Doctrine; the word signifies not only Labor but Pains,
or painful labor, such wherein men do spend their strength and spirits, so
that their life many times goes out in their Labor. And this is likewise held
out to us by those many Metaphors that the Scripture does apply to the
Ministers of the Gospel. They are compared here in the Text, you see, to
Harvest men; the Husbandmans work of Plowing and Harrowing, Sowing and Reaping,
it is a laborious and painful work; and the sweat of the Brain is no less than
that of the Brow. So sometimes they are called Builders, as in 1 Cor. 3.9. We
are Laborers together with God, you are Gods husbandry, you are Gods building.
Now the Building of Houses that is a laborious work; for the House is not built
of the Trees as they are standing in the Forest, or of the Stones as they are
in the Quarry; but there must be hewing the Stones, and squaring the Timber for
the building the House. What is the Ministers work but to build up an House for
God, an Habitation for Jesus Christ? As the materials with which the Temple was
built of old, were first squared, and fitted, and prepared for the Building; so
must souls be for this spiritual House. So that indeed Ministers are as
Carpenters, and Masons: I have hewn them by my Prophets; and that shows they
have hard labor of it, and many times meet with knotty pieces, very hard
hearts, such as have made some of the best of Gods Laborers complain, cry out
and resolve with Jeremy, they would Speak no more in the name of the Lord. So I
might show you likewise how they are compared to Shepherds, and Watchmen, whose
calling you know have labor in them. But to name no more, their labor is
compared to that which is the greatest labor of all; What is that? to the
labor of a Woman in Travail, Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travail
in Birth again until Christ be formed in you. Thus it is with faithful
Ministers, they have many a Pang, many a throw of heart, before Christ be
formed in them to whom they Preach. So if you look upon the work of the
Ministry in these Metaphors, by which the Scripture does express it, you see
their calling is a laborious calling. So if you look upon it out of these
Metaphors you may see there is much of labor in this work; there is labor to
Preach the word, labor in Reading, Studying, Praying and Meditating; as Paul
bids Timothy give himself unto Prayer and reading the word, etc. and there is
labor in dispensing the Word. There is a double labor, the labor of the Mind
as well as the Body. There is labor to instruct the ignorant, to show man his
unrighteousness, and to show man his righteousness; labor to exhort and
quicken those that are sluggish, labor in resolving those that doubt, and in
comforting those that are sad; there is labor in bringing in Souls to Christ,
and labor in building up souls when they are brought in. Do but see what is
said of John the Baptist, who, you know, was a Labourer in Gods Harvest, ( Luke
3.5.) what his work was. Every Valley shall be filled, and every mountain and
hill shall be brought low, and the crooked shall be made straight, and the
rough ways shall be made smooth. Now to level mountains and fill up Valleys, to
make crooked things straight and rough ways smooth, this cannot be done without
labor. And yet my brethren, there is greater labor that the faithful
Ministers of Christ sometimes go through than all this; they are forced
oftentimes not only to sweat at the Plough, but bleed at the Cross: they labor
in enduring reproaches and Persecutions they meet with in the world for the
truths sake. Remember my brethren, says James, the Prophets who have spoken in
the name of the Lord for an Example of suffering Affliction and of Patience.
Who would have thought they should meet with any hard usage for speaking to
People in the name of the Lord? What says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.3. Truly God
has made us a spectacle to the world; Why so? We are appointed to death every
day, and reckoned the offscouring of the World. They are the greatest enemies
the Devil and his Kingdom has in the world, and therefore the Devil is so
great an enemy to them. The faithful Ministers of Christ stand in the front of
opposition. That is the Devils principle, Smite the shepherd and the sheep will
be scattered. So that then you so they are much mistaken who look upon a
Ministers life as an easy, if not an Idle life; who think all their labors
but a little Lip-labor. I might tell you it is no easy thing for you to hear
a Sermon well; and then sure it cannot be such an easy thing to preach well:
it will cost you labor to hear aright. I grant it is an easy thing to give
the Minister the hearing; but to give the ears to the Minister, to give every
truth a double hearing, that is a hard matter. I grant it is an easy thing to
let in a Sermon at one ear and to let it out at the other; but to let a Sermon
in at the ear and to let it sink down in the heart, and thence to spring up in
the life, this is a hard thing. It is an easy thing to write down a Sermon in
your Books, and to repeat it at night in your Families, and to discourse and
talk of it; but to get this Sermon written in your hearts and to repeat it over
in your lives, to be doers of it and not hearers only, this will require pains
and labor. Thus we have shown you what this Harvest is, here spoken of, and
who the Laborers are: and now we come near to the point it self, to show that
it is your duty to Pray the Lord of the Harvest that he would send forth more
Laborers into his Harvest. Here are these three things offer themselves to be
spoken to for the confirming of the point.

1. That the Mininstry of the word, it is a very great gift and blessing to a
people.

2. That God and God alone, it belongs to him to send forth these Laborers
into his Harvest.

3. That our duty and work is to Pray and Pray earnestly to God, that he would
increase the number of his faithful Laborers. And these may serve as the
grounds and reasons of the Point, for I shall name no other.

1. Then do you ask me why we should pray to God to send forth more Laborers
into his Harvest? Because I say to have these faithful Laborers among you, is
one of the greatest gifts and blessings that God can bestow upon a People. See
what Christ himself says of such, Matthew. 5.13. Ye are the salt of the Earth,
etc. You know that salt savours every thing, and that it is to preserve things
from Rotting and Putrefaction; so that salt is a very useful and necessary
thing in the world, you know not how to be without it. Of such use and
necessity is the Ministry of the word; for the whole world would Rot and Perish
without it. All the Hearts of men and women in the World that live without the
Gospel they are to God as rotten and stinking meat, as filthy carrion is to
you. Indeed when once the hearts and minds of People are seasoned with the
Gospel, now they become sweet and savoury to God, so Verse. 14. What would this
World be without the Sun in the Firmament shining upon it, but a dark Dungeon?
Such, my Brethren, and no other are all the Kingdoms, Nations, Cities,
Countries, Parishes, Villages in the World where the light of the Gospel does
not shine. Where they have not had the Ministry of the Word, neither Prophets,
nor Apostles, nor faithful Ministers of Christ, to preach the Gospel and to
make known the mind and will of God to them, they are but as so many dark
dungeons, where the Prince of darkness reigns, where unbelief, Idolatry,
Superstition, and all manner of wickedness, and profaness reigns. I say the
state of nature is a state of darkness; all the world does but grope in
darkness, as the Egyptians did, till they come to have the Gospel preached to
them. Alas! they know little of God, and nothing of Jesus Christ, nor of the
Gospel nor of the Covenant of Grace, nor of the way to salvation by a Redeemer,
nor what the new Creature is, and the work of Regeneration is. How great a
blessing and great gift therefore is it to have the Ministry of the Gospel? You
may see it by that promise God gives out in Jer. 3.15. And I will give you
Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding. As if he had said; Here is the Blessing, the Blessing of
Blessings I will bestow upon you, for there is none comparable to it. Suppose a
man should have his habitation or dwelling in never so pure an Air, and never
so good a soil, where he has his Garden and his Fishponds, and all outward
Contentment his heart can desire; but does not the Sun of the Gospel shine
there, the Air and Wind of the Spirit breath there, the clouds of Gods
Ordinances drop there? then I say it is but a dark and black place: If the best
things be not to be had there, what is it for a man to be fatted to
destruction, what is a life without a life of Grace?

Again what a Blessing it is may appear in that it was the fruit of Christ's
prayer, of his death, blood and intercession; Ephesians. 4.8, 11. you read there of
Christ's ascending to Glory; when he ascended up on high, he gave gifts to men.
You know Kings and Emperors upon the day of their Coronation, they use to
scatter Money, and let Conduits run with Wine, give gifts to their friends;
this was the day Christ went up to Heaven, and went to take his Crown of Glory,
now he gave gifts to men. Verse. 11. What did he give them for? for the
Perfecting Saints. As if here was the greatest gifts the Son of God had to
bestow on the Children of men, here was the fruit of his Blood as well as
Intercession. Had it not been for the Blood of Christ, there had never been any
such thing as a Gospel Ministry, or Church, or Ordinances. In a word; If you
consider the great ends for which the Ministry is given, it is for the bringing
about the greatest good of the Children of men, it is for the bringing you to
the knowledge of God and his Son Jesus Christ, whom to know is eternal life; it
is to reveal the great Counsels of God to the Children of men. The Preaching of
the Gospel, it is not only to civilize men and women, though that were good if
it were no more, and many times where it has not its saving work, it has the
Authority to make people civil; but I say the Preaching of the Gospel, it is
not only to make you civil, but to make you Saints, new Creatures.

2. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest that he would send forth more Laborers
into his Harvest. Why, it belongs to the great Lord of the Harvest to give
these Laborers. The sending of Laborers into this Harvest is not only an Act
of Grace and Mercy, but of Power and greatest Authority. Therefore Matthew. 28.
when Christ sends forth his Disciples to Preach, mark the Preface, Verse. 18.
And Jesus came and spoke unto them, saying, All power is given to me in Heaven
and in Earth. Mark how Christ does begin with the preamble of all power being
given to him in Heaven and in Earth. It is as if he had said; I am sending you
about the greatest work that ever any Creatures were employed in; the Angels in
Heaven were not employed in a greater work than this of Preaching the Gospel;
for your Encouragement know, all power in Heaven and in Earth is given into my
hands, and I will be with you and second you. Here I might show you how the
Lord of the Harvest does send forth his Laborers.

1. It is he that calls them, he that gives them their Mission and Commission;
they have their Commission on from Christ, from Father, Son, and holy Spirit,
all their names are in the Commission, though it is more Immediately from the
Son. Indeed did not God send them, they could never expect to do any good in
the World, to convert one soul, were not Preaching Gods Ordinance.

2. It is he must gift and qualify these Laborers for the work. As in Nehem.
9.10. says Nehemiah there, Thou gave thy holy Spirit; Verse. 20. Thou gave
also thy good Spirit. The meaning is, in the Prophets which he gave them,
whereby they were fitted for the Work they were set about. So it is still under
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 12.4, 5. Now there are diversities of gifts but the same
Spirit; and there are differences of Administrations but the same Lord. Whence
are these diversities of gifts and ministerial Abilities? they are from God.
This indeed my Brethren is very wonderful to be considered. As you see a
multitude of faces in the world, yet every one differs from another; so to
consider that diversity, that variety of gifts and spiritual Abilities God has
given to men in this work, yet none has the same gift: To one the gift of
Doctrine, to another the gift of Exhortation. One he is as a Son of Thunder to
awaken, another is a Son of Consolation to comfort. I say variety of gifts, and
why? to profit withal. It is all for your profit, that if you are not taken
with one man's gifts, you may be with another.

3. It is the Lord of the Harvest that does send forth and design every
Labourer to his particular place and station wherein he is to labor; it is he
that appoints them the bounds of their habitation. The Apostle he bids them
feed the Church of God over which the H. Ghost had made them Overseers; the
holy Ghost placed them there. If a Sparrow fall not to the ground without the
power of God, much less does a Minister preach a Sermon but there is a
providence in it. When God sends a Minister to a Congregation, he does let out
a piece of Land, or bids him husband that for me. Levit. 27.26. You read there
how God would have them to value their Land dedicated to God to be worth more
or less according to the Seed of it, as it was capable of receiving much or
less seed; so the Minister should value his Land according to his opportunity
he has to sow Seed there.

4. It is the Lord of the Harvest that must give success to these Laborers, or
else all their Preaching and laboring will be but as Plowing and Sowing among
the Rocks. You must not think Preaching of the Gospel does work upon souls by
any inherent virtue in the Word, as Fire warms, and Food nourishes, and Physic
heals. If the Spirit of the Lord does not go along with the Word, it will be
but as Music to the Deaf, etc. 1 Cor. 3. Paul may plant, Apollos may water,
but God gives the increase. Now if the husbandman cannot command Seed to grow
out of the Ground, how much less can Ministers create Grace in Souls?

If in Natural things it is God that makes the Grass to spring, how much more
in spiritual things? It is he makes the Soul to fructify. Alas, it is not the
parts and Eloquence of the Minister can beget Grace; that must be the work of
Gods Spirit.

3. Here is our Duty, or work in order to the obtaining this Gift, that is, to
Pray the Lord of the Harvest, that he would send forth more Laborers into his
Harvest. Prayers, you know, that is the prevailing course for the removing any
evil that lies upon us, or obtaining any good we stand in need of, Psalm. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will hear you. Such and such things
God promises to do for his People: But for this I will be sought unto, says
the Lord. God will do good things for his Church and People, but he will do
things in his own order. Here I might show you the great power the Prayers of
Gods People have with him. The fervent effectual Prayer of the righteous
prevails much. Acts 12. You read there how Herod had put to death one of the
Apostles. And Peter was likewise taken up too, and the Church go to Prayer;
what was the issue? Peter was delivered. Likewise what became of Herod? He was
smitten of God. As one said, Woe be to the Birds of prey, when Gods Turtles
begin to cry and mourn before him. O that we were persuaded of this, that there
is such a great deal of power and prevalency in Prayer, how should we be more
exercised in this Duty both in public and private? and to be representing the
state of the Church to God as they did of Lazarus to Christ, He whom thou
love is dead; so should we say, He whom thou love, (thy Church) is sick and
languishing, ready to give up the Ghost. I would come to the last thing. There
are only two or three Uses I would make of it.

Use 1.

If it be the duty of every good Christian Man and Woman thus to pray and cry
to God, for the sending more Laborers into his Harvest, then it shows us,

1. The necessity of a Gospel Ministry. What do you think of the Husbandmans
Calling, is that a necessary Calling, to Plow, and sow the Land, that ye may
have Bread to eat? What would your Houses and Families do without Bread? No
more can a Church of God subsist in this world, without the Ministry of the
Word. I know there are some ready to say, What need is there of men's Preaching,
what need of the Ministry of Man? cannot God do it alone? Yea, we have Christ,
and the teaching of the Spirit, what need is there of man's teaching? is not the
Spirit above man, is not Christ above Ministers? I grant there is no necessity
of Preaching the Word, with respect to God, he is able to save men and women
without the Preaching of the Word, as well as with it, he does not need the
gifts and parts and tongue of any man for bringing souls home to himself. As
Israel in the Wilderness, when they had no Plowing, yet God could feed them, he
could bring them Bread from Heaven. But yet as Gods ordinary way of maintaining
and feeding your Bodies, it is by Plowing, and sowing the Field; so it is the
ordinary way God has set in his Church for feeding your souls. It pleased him,
1 Cor. 1.21. by the foolishness of Preaching to save them that believe; and God
will keep close to his own Ordinance, and honor his own Institution: As Acts
9. when Paul was converted, it was in an extraordinary way. It is true Christ
did speak to him out of the Clouds, Saul, Saul, why persecutest, etc. and he
said, Who art thou Lord? Christ you know Preached himself to Paul, and he
trembled and was astonished, and said, Lord what would thou have me to do?
and Christ said, Arise and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what
thou must do. Could not Christ have as well told him his own work and business?
See how Christ begins the work, but would have Paul to wait upon him in his own
way, therefore Ananias must be sent to Paul. The like instance you have in the
next Chapter; there you read of Cornelius a devout man, yet knew little of
Christ, and God sent an Angel to him, Thy Prayer is heard, and thine Alms are
had in remembrance in the sight of God, send therefore to Joppa and call Simon
whose Surname is Peter, and he shall speak unto thee. What was not the Angel as
well able to have taught Cornelius as Peter? yea doubtless; but as if he had
said, That is none of my Commission, therefore send for such a person, he shall
speak to thee. Here I might spend time to show you the necessity of the
Ministry of the Word.

1. In order to Conversion, Regeneration, and bringing sinners to Christ. Faith
comes by hearing. Who is Paul, etc. but Ministers by whom ye believed? Do you
look for seed-time without Plowing the Ground? No more must you expect Grace
without hearing the Word.

2. I might show you the necessity hereof, for the building up of those that
are Converted. When we are in Christ, when we are Believers, we are not now
above the Ministry of the Word, above Ordinances. No my Brethren, this Ministry
of the Word and Ordinances must continue in the Church as long as there is one
soul to be saved, as long as one soul is out of Heaven; it must continue till
the coming of Christ. Again,

2. If the sending forth of Laborers into the Harvest be such a desirable
mercy, then it shows us how much we should prize a faithful Ministry. If God
has sent us faithful Ministers, we should look upon it as a great and
wonderful blessing. It is the fruit of the Prayers and Blood of Christ,
therefore if Christ has disposed of us in such a place, where we have a
faithful Ministry, we should exceedingly bless God for it; as David, Psalm.
147.20. He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto
Israel. He has not dealt so by any Nation. Other Nations had as much wealth,
plenty of Gold and Silver, and more than they: but this is more than all
outward blessings. So how great a blessing this is too, you may see in that
Prophet Jeremy 30.20. God promises his People there, Though he should feed them
with Bread of Adversity, and Water of Affliction, yet they should have this
Mercy, that their teachers, etc. A promise to a carnal heart is of no worth or
esteem, but of great worth to a gracious heart. Though you should see sad
times, here shall be your mercy, and blessing.

3. If it be such a desirable blessing for God to send forth Laborers into his
Harvest, then sure it is a matter greatly to be lamented, when God is calling
his faithful Laborers apace out of his Harvest; instead of increasing them, he
is diminishing of them, he is removing the Teachers not only into corners, but
into Graves. Here is just matter of lamentation and sorrow to us, when we
consider how many faithful Laborers and eminent Preachers of the Word, God
has of late removed out of his Harvest. You know when Samuel died, 1 Samuel
28.3. it is said, They that buried him made a great lamentation for him. And in
Acts 8.2. you read of devout men that carried Stephen to his Burial, and made
great lamentation over him. And in Acts 20. when Paul tells them, they were
like to see his face no more, that it was the last time he should ever Pray, or
Preach with them, it sets them all a weeping and a mourning. I have read of
one, that when he heard of the death of any godly man, he would fall a weeping
to think of the great loss there was to the Church and People of God, in the
death of every good Christian and gracious person. Brethren, if you look on the
loss of a godly Parent, or Husband, a godly Friend or Neighbor, if you look
upon such a loss as a great loss, as David mourned for his friend Jonathan, and
Christ himself weeps over the Grave of Lazarus: What is then the death and loss
of a godly Minister, yea of so many godly Ministers, when you have loss upon
loss, death upon death, one week carrying one godly Minister to his Grave, and
the next week carrying another? I am afraid we do not lay these sad rebukes of
God to heart as we ought to do. It is not enough when you hear of such a
Minister dead to be asking, how long was he sick, or what disease he died of?
to say he was a good man, a good Preacher, and alas it was a great loss: but we
should seriously consider such strokes, and lay it to heart, for the Living
will lay it to heart. If we are living indeed, we should and shall lay them to
heart: Why so? Because the loss of so many faithful Laborers as you have of
late lost in these few years, in this City, it looks like a heavy Judgment of
God against you. I do not say a Judgment to them, it may be a mercy to them;
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord; Death is their gain and advantage:
but the great loss is ours.

1. Are you not thereby deprived of any further fruit or benefit of their holy
Labors? When the Vessel is broken, the Treasure, that is removed to Heaven,
and you can be no more enriched by it. When the Tree is cut down, it yields no
more fruit. How many faithful Preachers are gone, under whose shadow you did
use to sit and feed with great delight? How many whose Preaching used to be to
you as a lovely sound, and pleasant voice, whose Mouths are now stopped with
Dust, so that you shall hear them Preach and Pray no more, your hearts shall be
no more warmed by their Prayers and Sermons?

2. It is a Judgment, for sometimes, yea many times, when a faithful Labourer
is taken away, there is, it may be, some loyterer comes in his room. Acts
20.17. Paul tells them, after his departure Wolves would come; instead of the
Myrtle Tree, comes up a Bryar or Thorn; as it is with many people and
Congregations, who formerly had a godly painful Minister among them, and it may
be were a weary of him, and this godly Minister is taken away, and there is a
pricking Nettle comes in his room; instead of faithful Seers, they are blind
Guides, and where the blind leads the blind, Christ tells you the issue. The
Scripture speaks much of these idle Shepherds, as a Judgment; instead of
faithful Teachers they shall have those to give them a Stone instead of Bread.

3. It Is a Judgment to be greatly lamented, when faithful Ministers are taken
away, because it is commonly the sins of the People that do procure and have a
hand in the death of their Minister. Here we might be enquiring, What are those
sins by which God is so often provoked, to take away his Ministers from a
People? There are two extremes people are apt to run into; either to
overvalue, or under-value their Ministers. The Scripture does take notice of
such an evil as that of having the persons of men in admiration, when we
receive and love the Truth for the persons sake, and not the person for the
Truths sake, when one is for Paul, another for Apollos. We may lose our
enjoyments by our too high as well as too low prizing of them. Indeed the fault
commonly lies on the other hand, that is, their undervaluing the Ministry of
the Word; their unprofitableness, unthankfulness, barrenness under the
droppings of the Word, this provokes God to make the Heavens as Brass to them;
when they play with the B^ead and Light, then God comes and removes the Light
and takes away the Bread.

4. It Is a Judgment to be greatly lamented when faithful Ministers are taken
away out of the Harvest, because it is a sad prognostic of some greater
Judgments, and some heavier evils that are coming upon a people. You know what
the Prophet says, Isa. 57.1. The righteous perish, and no man lays it to
heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering that the nighteous is
taken away from the evil to come. Oh, those Words of Christ (my Brethren) come
into my thoughts; when he was a dying, and some were weeping for him, Weep not
for me (says he) but for your selves and children, because of those miseries
and calamities that are drawing nigh to you. Methinks it is the language of our
dying Ministers, Weep not for us, etc. When the Laborers are called home from
the Harvest, it is a sign the night is a coming. When chirping Birds are
removed into their nest, it is a sign the shadows of the evening are coming.
When Lights are put out, what can we expect but that darkness will follow? When
God calls off his Shepherds, we have just cause to fear he will loose Wolves
upon the Flocks to devour and make a prey of them. My Brethren, if God should
send such weather that men could not sow, or if when the Harvest should be
grown up, there should be a mortality, that there were no men to reap it, you
would think a Famine were coming, and lament over it as a sad and grievous
thing. Oh, there is a Famine the Scripture speaks of, not of Bread, but of the
Word, and when God takes away his Ministers so fast, have we not cause to fear
this Famine is coming on upon us? Oh, this my Brethren, should melt your hearts
into Prayers and Tears, and if you have any Groans or Tears, to pour them out
before the Lord; if you have any interest in the Throne of Grace, to improve
it, that God would send forth faithful Laborers into his Harvest. Here, my
Brethren, I might bespeak you of this Congregation, more particularly, to lay
to heart the sad breach God has made among you in his late providence, in his
removing him who was wont to labor in the midst of you. Methinks there are
some circumstances in that stroke that particularly do require our serious
consideration.

First of all, The suddenness and unexpectedness of that stroke. Not sudden to
him, for not many days before he was taken sick he set his house in order,
acquainting his Wife where his Will was, so that it seems he had some kind of
presage of his approaching death; but sudden to us the stroke was. How many of
you that were surprised and startled to hear of Mr. Venning's death? how many
that scarce heard of his sickness until you heard he was dead? Who of you
thought the last day you saw and heard him in this place, that it must be the
last day you should hear and see him? Who of you when you heard him beginning
to direct you how you must put on the first Piece of the spiritual Armor did
imagine that he was so near of being uncloathed himself, and to lay down his
Earthly Tabernacle? God snatched him away; he had a mind to take him from us,
and would not be hindered by the Prayers of his People.

Secondly, This circumstance does agravate the loss, namely, that he was taken
away, though I cannot say in the Prime or flower of his strength, (for he had
Labored many years) yet in middle Age. For according to the course of nature,
we might have enjoyed more of his Labors: he was not withered by old Age. When
a dry stake is removed out of the hedge, it is not so great a loss as when a
fruit-bearing tree is cut down.

Thirdly, Is there not this Aggravation attends it, namely, that he is taken
away in such a time of scarcity and dearth of faithful Laborers? Consider my
Brethren, the great Mortality of faithful Ministers that has been of late
years in this Nation, does speak aloud to us to warn us of great evils
hastening upon us.

Lastly, There is this circumstance, above all the rest, namely the Eminency of
the Ministerial gifts, and privileges God had qualified him withal. In this
respect he was like Saul, taller by the head than many of his Brethren; like
Benjamin, he had a double, yea treble portion of spiritual gifts. He was such a
workman (as the Apostle speaks,) that needed not to be ashamed, able rightly to
divide the word of truth. I do not intend to enter into any commendation of
him, though I might speak much of him, and yet speak below, not above his true
worth. He needs not any such Spices to embalm his name, which has left so
sweet a savor behind him. It was not praise or Commendation of the dead, but
instructions to the Living that I intended in this discourse. Only the more
Eminent a person is for serviceableness and usefulness in the Church of God;
when there are many can stand forth and say, It pleased God by such a man's
Ministry to open my blind eyes, and others that can bear witness too how God
has spoken to their hearts, for quickening, comfort and counsel; I say the
greater is the loss of such an Instrument, and the more to be bewailed by us.

I would wind up all by one word of Counsel, that is to teach you how you may
improve these sad losses. You know Sampson found honey in the Carcass of the
dead Lion. There are many sweet and wholesome instructions to be gathered from
the dead Ministers. Abel though dead yet speaks. I may say of the dead
Ministers though dead and laid in their graves, They speak to you; they speak
with a louder voice, out of their Graves and Coffins, than ever they did out of
their Pulpit. Here I might show you those several lessons you may learn from
your dead Ministers, (but time is gone.) This one thing to be sure they call
upon you for, that you would labor to remember and put in Practice those Godly
Sermons they Preached to you in their lifetime. The death of Ministers should
revive those Counsels and Comserts that you received in their lifetime from
them, and enliven the remembrance of them upon their hearts. 2 Kings 2.14. when
Elijah was dead, Elisha takes up his mantle. I would have you be gathering up
those instructions that the Ministers did let fall to you whilst they were
^^^ve; to remember how he spoke on such a subject at such a time, and spoke
such a word to my soul at another time. Here I might desire you to call to
remembrance the late Sermons of this Eminent Servant of God; to remember his
discourse of the grace of God which has appeared in the Gospel, to teach us to
deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly and righteously and
Godly even in this Present world. And his Sermons concerning the Love of the
Son of God; And of the saving Operations of the Spirit of God: and to labor to
show forth the Works of the Spirit in your holy walking, according to those
Sermons you heard from him so lately. To put on the Armor of God, and to
prepare for the evil day, that you may be able to stand in that day. All those
heavenly spiritual Gospel Sermons he Preached to you, call for holy, Heavenly
and Gospel conversations from you. In a word, let it be your care to bring
forth fruit Answerable to all the labor and cost God has bestowed upon you.
God will certainly call you to an account for the health, strength and sweat
and labor and lives of his Servants he has bestowed upon you. Therefore
people had need to look to it, for God highly values his dear Servants lives
and labors, and will have a valuable consideration from you or upon you.
Therefore my Brethren to conclude, what you would that your Garden and field
should be unto you when you have dug them, planted them, manured them,
plowed them, sowed them, and bestowed cost and labor upon them, that you
should be to God. To bestow plowing and seed upon a field; and yet to bear
nothing, that discourages you; but if there is a crop coming, and when the
Laborers find there is a good crop that they can fill their Arms with sheaves,
this incourages you. Then, Deuteronomy. 16.14. when the Harvest is done, they make
merry together, have a Harvest feast, and have Harvest songs and are merry: I
say, then are those words of Christ fulfilled, John 4.35, 36. and with that I
shall conclude. Say not that there are yet four months and then comes
Harvest, behold I say unto you, lift up your eyes, and look on the fields, for
they are white already to Harvest. And he that reapeth receives wages, and
gathers fruit unto life eternal, that both he that sows, and he that
reapeth may rejoice together. Thus it is where there is a good Harvest, he that
Plows the field, was Instrumental to begin the work, and be that sows the
first seed of Grace, and he that reaps the Corn, those that had a hand in
perfecting the work, all these shall rejoice together. Then all those faithful
Ministers that have labored according to the Talents given unto them of the
Lord: then the people too that are made sruitful to God, that have received the
seed in good and honest hearts; they shall rejoice with their Ministers, there
shall be a Harvest-feast and Harvest-songs, the supper of the Lamb and the Song
of the Lamb, and the Angels they will come in and have a share, (for they
gather the Corn into the Barn) and both Angels, Ministers, and People shall all
sing Praise and rejoice together, and that for ever and ever.

Use.

There are other Uses we should have made of this point. We might have made
application of it to such as are of the Ministerial calling, (if there were any
such here) to stir them up to follow their labor; and to reprove such as are
Loiterers not Laborers. Paul could say he had labored more abundantly than
they all; but may it not be said of some, they labor not at all? Oh how many
curses does the Scripture denounce against such as do this work of the Lord
negligently! But I shall not stay on this, as not suiting the present Auditory.

Use.

Let me shut up all with this one word more to the People. Remember the lesson
and duty we have been teaching this day, and make Conscience of practicing it.
If ever it were a duty in season for you to put on sackloath and lie in the
dust, to mourn and mourn bitterly for the loss of faithful Ministers, it is
now, when they dye and drop into their Graves so fast: If ever there were a
time for you (Christians) to cry and cry aloud to the Lord of the Harvest to
send forth more laborers into the Harvest, it is now, when there is like to be
so great a scarcity of them. And truly if I were able to speak so as to be
heard by all the Christians of England (who are commonly known and
distinguished by the name of Non-conformists) I would earnestly bespeak them
all, that they would with one heart and one consent agree to set apart a day of
Humiliation and Prayer for this very end: for certainly the loss of many
Ministers, so Eminent in their Generation, as have been lately taken away, is a
severe Rebuke from the Lord, and I fear a sad presage of some greater evils at
hand, than we think of.

Remember (my Beloved) who it is that here bids you Pray the Lord of the
Harvest; our blessed Lord himself, who has given you not only his command for
this duty, but his own example too in this very case, as you may see if you
read Luke 6.12. It is said, Jesus went out into a Mountain to pray, and
continued all night in prayer. If you ask what was the Occasion that he was a
whole night in Prayer, the thirteenth Verse will declare it, for when it was
day, he called his Disciples, and of them he chose twelve, etc. The occasion
seems to be, the work that he had to do the next mourning, to send forth his
Apostles to Preach the Gospel: Christ looked upon this as a great work, a
weighty and solemn matter, that required Prayer. And whatever men may think of
it, it is the greatest work that ever any of the sons of men were employed in
since the world began; and the Truths we Preach to you are so glorious, and of
such infinite Concernment, as you souls will have cause Eternally to bless God
for, if you receive them in faith and love, and such as you would not have been
without the knowledge of for ten thousand worlds. You therefore that have any
love to Christ, any love to the truth, any love to the souls and salvation of
men, oh Pray, all and every one of you, Pray, pray the Lord of the Harvest that
he would send forth Laborers into the Harvest.

FINIS.

