AN Answer TO TWO LETTERS Of T. B.

By the AUTHOR of The Vindication of the CLERGY.

-- (...) --
-- facit indignatio --
LONDON: Printed for H. Brom, at the Gun at the West end of S. Paul's Church.
1673.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER,
Written by T. B.
Reader,
I Hear the Vindicationer is come to Town again, and that he intends once more
to demonstrate me to be dead by the help of his old musty Authors, as much out
of fashion as Set Ruffs or Two-handed Beards: and that is the reason he never
thinks of business in the ^^ong Vacation; (poor Soul!) he is so in love with
every thing that is ancient and moul^y; that he can never p^int till Michaelnias
Term, toward (...) fall of the leaf, when the Year begins to grow decrepid.
You can only expect more of the same Dunstable stuff from him; for he must
not, he cannot, he shall not speak sense against me; and therefore I ca^tion
you beforehand not to believe one word he says. To see the d^fferent Genius of
men! This it is to b^ bred up at Aristotle's porridge p^t, and never eat well,
(...) so much as taste of a good-dish of delicious Atoms, but jogs on like a
Pack^orse in the wonted road* We that are the Wits and Rational^ists of our
time, who can make better books of our own then any he has read, choose rather
to accinge our selves to writing, when our fingers are free from all suspicion
of Caledonian Chill-blanes (caused by a stagnation or freezing of the humor in
cold weather) when our Spirits are active, Blood warm, and all the Parts
vigorous and sprightly; that is, a little before or after the Sun is got into
Aries; and then you would wonder to obs^^ve how our Letters and Dialogues ^ake,
and go off like Gunpowder 'twould do one good to (...) people gobble them down
a fast as Capons do pellets of paste and even grow fat with laugh^ing. I my
self was fain to print all my Works over again last Term, (as many as came to a
Crown in Silver at the easi^ market price) because ther^ were none of them to
be got^ and ^ was willing to make the best improvement of my talen^ for the
common good. He gr^pple with Me, who can confute Leviathan, and Alcoran too at
ten days warning! I compassionate his ignorance and imbecility! Mark my words,
if he be not at his ends of Latin, and scraps of Poetry again; and above all,
if he conclude not with some paultry abominable Post script, which I hate worse
then the other. But -- (now Logic!) here he comes: Remember what I told you,
that none but Dunces and Sots, Fools and Madmen, think he speaks sense; and I am

Yours in all haste, T. B.

TO THE Right Doubty and Puissant, Signior Timotheo Boccalini, Surnamed Junior;
Baron of Utopia, Knight of the most Novel Order of the Moon, and Governor of
the Isle of Pines, etc. at the Sign of the Covent in Hecdecapolis.

SIR,
AFter my hearty Commendations, etc. These are to acquaint you, that I received
yours, with the Merits of the Cause enclosed, which I should have made no words
of, but kept it as private as if you had trusted me with some occult Quality;
had not your prodigious Ingenuity dared me to some kind of Reply, by taking the
same Liberty with your Friend and Servant, that they do in France; where they
say, He that is cast in any Cause, is permitted to Rail at his Judges for ten
days after. For although you profess to make the very same Answer to the
Serious and Argumentative part of my Book, that Ulysses in the Metamorphosis,
does for his Running away from his Friend Nestor, that is, just none at all;
deferring your further thoughts thereof, I suppose, till Doomsday in the
Afternoon, as the Are^pagites used to put off their difficult Case^, Ad diem
Logisimum: ('it is Mr. Chillingworth's Note, Sir, though I doubt not but you can
find it somewhere in Lycosthenos) Yet, you have taken wonderful pains to pick
out some small Passages thereof, to make your self and others Merry, and expose
the poor Author; who, if you say true, had saved you that Labor, having made
himself Ridiculous enough to your hand. Let every man abound in his own sense;
but the best on it is, your word begins to be no slander; and I meet with some
few grown so Stout, that they will no longer take all you say, for either
Truth, or Wit, unless you can show it Confirmed by some Act of Parliament, or
procure the Kings Broad-Seal at least, ad Corroborand^m. For in the ordinary
way of managing Controversies, Traducing and Railing at an Adversary (like the
Stoic in Luciah, who called his Opponent, (...), etc. Deadly hard Names, Sir,
when he had nothing else to say) Nibbling at his Phrases, raising a Mist about
plain Sense; Chopping and Changing, Adding or Omitting, Mi^quoting, or
Wr^esting his Words and Meaning, and making Conclusions of his o^n from his
Premises, crying out upon Euclid and Nonsense, Bulls and Bears, all along; and
such like, have ever been accounted little Pedantick Artifices, poor unmanly
Refuges, and as shrewd Signs, as piteous Props of a bad Cause. Now, Sir,
although I am not at leisure to give you a complete Rowland, for your Oliver,
and show how infinitely guilty you are in this kind, throughout ^your whole
Packet of Letters: Nor yet I care not much if I throw away a sheet or two of
Paper in Animadverting lightly upon those two. You designed chiefly to Aim at
me, not that I intend to make my self to cheap as to Rally up, and Retort all
and singular the Impertinencies thereof; but only to Call in at some of the
most considerable places in my way, and thereby give the World some Hints and
short Items of your Innocent Style, Incomparable Modesty, Copious Inventions,
Accute Judgment, but above all, your Singular knack of Drollery. Nor have I set
my self so Giant-like a Task, as you may imagine, for, you know, he that comes
off fairly at the great Olympicks, never fears any lesser Stage, or more
ignoble Adventure, that is (to Treat you in your own Language for once and
away) having already Vindicated the Clergy in general, I shall much more easily
acquit my self in particular from all your puny Cavils.

The first Honor you are pleased to do me in your Letter to R. L. is your
comparing me to a Whiffler at my Lord Mayors Show: A Monstrous happy fancy
indeed, if you came honestly by it, and did not deal with Sydrophel, or some
other Cunning man for the finding it out! Now, Sir, though I can put on any
Vizor to serve you, yet I must needs mind you of Lucians (...), that only pat
and proper Similes (not such as will equally fit any He that wears a Head big
enough to pay Pole Money) are to go for Wit it by his Standard. For do you
think would be any great charge or trouble to me, to Dress you like my Lord
Mayors Horse, or his Wifses Monkey; to compare you to Esops Crow, a Thief in a
Mill, a Dog in a Bath, or a Dog in a Doublet, and make you like any thing
between York and London? But I disclaim all such sneaking Comparions, as having
no Sting in their Tails; I have odds enough of you besides, and shall ever
think me at the better end of the Staff, so long as you continue only like your
self.

In the next place I find my self much obliged to you for the choice Library
you have assigned me, Wits Commonwealth, Spencers Similitudes, etc. But that
fancy, Sir, begins to grow stale; and besides, I wonder you left your own
learned Works out of the Catalogue, for I Will assure you I make more use of them
to quit scores with you, than of all the Books in St. Paul's Churchyard.
However, methinks you are vilely out in your Politics here again: I have read
in Lucian (another of my Authors, Sir, which you quite forgot) of a certain
Addle-headed Historian, who having begun his Work with a solemn Invocation of
the M^ses, that they would inspire him migh^^ly, made it his great business not
so much to tell the truth, as to praise and flatter his Emperor. To be shot,
Sir; when (...) had Drawn up his Men, and given the Enemy Battle, and Routed
them Horse and Foot (for indeed it was done to his hand) to show how well he
was versed in Homer, he falls a comparing his own Prince to Achilles, and the
Persian King (who fell that day by his hands) to Thersites for Pureness, as if
it had not been more for his honor to have killed Hector, or some such Valiant
and Princely Hero, than the despicable Thersites. The Application, Sir, is
easy, and it goes thus: If it had not been more for your Credit to have
Conquered, or to have been Baffled by a considerable Adversary, and well
provided, than such a silly Creature as you have described, and so ill Armed
too, I never saw the like on it.

But above all things, Sir, I must desire you for the future, to have a great
care of a Mouse-Trap, especially if it be Baited with a bit of Greek; it is not
good Nibbling too far where there may be Danger in the Case. For although it
seems to be your Hogen Mogen design in this Epistle, to take me to Task for my
Greek, yet I am afraid you were better to have kept within your own Element,
your beloved English Exercises still, than have ventured out to so little
purpose.

Your charging me with mistaking the Sense, or the Author, or both in those
two pieces of Greek, is so Imposing, that, were that very Grandame alive that
Taught you this kind of Confidence (as your self somewhere tells us) I believe
she would scarce save you from a Whipping.

The ^^^st is an end of one of those golden Verses (so highly prised anciently
be the Sect of the Mumm^rs) wherein you make me construe (...) Virtue, and
(...) ^overty. If you make me, Sir, I cannot help it, but upon consulting my
Copy I find no such matter; pray Sir, next time, when your hand is in, make me
render (...) the Great Turk, and (...) the Pope, and upon my word I will not
take it half so hainously. But, to give you as much Rope as you can in reason
expect, let it be as you will have it; let the one signify Virtue, but not as
it is opposed to Vice, Sir, (that is your mistake) but to Infirmity, and implies
only a Faculty or Power of doing a thing; and the other Poverty, Fate, hard
Fate, Necessity, or what you please, Sanders de Oblig. consc. in prae^at.
provided it signify something that does either occasionally or necessarily
Excite, Quicken, and Enforce the Faculty or Power aforesaid, and I am content.
I could show you several Authors that use the words to this effect, but that
they are Old ones, whose Authority you don't use to value. Howeeer the World
may be in your debt for your Newfound exposition of this place; I shall hold
to my Old one still, viz. That, whether we attribute a man's condition of Life
to Fate with the Stoics, to Fortune with the Epicureans, or to Providence with
all sober Christians (the Text will bear these and many more Senses) Necessity
is and ever will be a reasonable Spur to Action, it will make us do our utmost,
and more then we thought to be in our power: I must forgive my Trespassing
Friend for once, else I shall lose him for ever; and so in other like Cases.
Hierocles (who knew that Author's mind better than you did mine, Sir) is much
of the same Opinion; (...) etc. The ancient Sages of Greece were wont to draw
up the Sum and Heads of their Principles in certain Schemes, Tables, or Trees,
(as they phancied) for the benefit of their Pupills, and in the Pythagorean
Scheme Power dwelt hard by (as I think at the very next door to) Necessity, to
imitate what I told you before. Now whereas you take Fate and Necessity to be
one and the same, (because Courteous to shun that unruly word Necessitati,
translates the place for his Verse sake fato vicina pote^t as) yet what if they
should prove it to be sometimes two things? For instance, Sir: your Fates may
dec^ee what they please, and my poor Scholar (for whom all this stir and
criticizing is) be never the wiser; but he is so well acquainted with his own
circumstances, that he easily perceives a manifest Necessity he should study,
(without consulting the Almanac of Fate) if ever he intend to be a wise,
learned, rich, or great man, knowing that this same poor (...), can almost do
Miracles: and so much for that.

As for my other Greek remnant, it seems, I am out in my Author, and then no
wonder I mistake his meaning too. But who is the Tiger now, Sir? cannot a man
cite a Comment for the Text without all this noise, as if Hannibal were at the
Gates, or Apprentices in an uproar? It were neither Felony nor Manslaughter,
however you dispatch your Hue and Cry so fast after me. But what if you should
reckon without your Host, Sir? What if the Text have not taken new Lodgings
lately, but is to be found still where I left it l^st, in plodding Aristotle's
own House? when you go that way next, pra^ call at the fourth Book of his
Physics, chap. 19. 128. and you will either meet with that or one very like
it, i. e. (...). Examine him accurately, take out your Compasses for sureness,
set one foot at the Text, the other on the Comment, and see where you find
those words, but be sure you don't confess your error: indeed I was amazed to
see you quote the very Chapter, and then question your faculties as far as to
deny a palpable matter of fact, till I understood you trusted a scurv^ Lexicon,
and that deceived you. I hope you will consult the Original hereafter, for let
Budaeus or Scapula say what they please, the Text is here, and shall be here,
when ^ome Mushrome Authors with their novel whimseys shall be hissed off the
Stage, and turned out of doors.

And now, one would think, I were as likely to guess at the old Man's sense
here, as you who stand convicted you never read him; and yet we must needs have
a cast of your Office, a set Lecture upon it, as if you were instructing your
Boys. It Is no great news to me, Sir, that he should treat of Natural
Philosophy in his Physics, how strange soever it seems to you that one of his
Principles or Maxims there should be applied to something else with due
Analogy. Bishop Sanderson finding the Civil Body somewhat like the Natural, De
O^ligat. C^nsc. prael. 9.
cites this noble Text out of Aristotle (not Them^stius) and to accommodate it
to his purpose clothes it with a Translation almost as Magnificent as mine, but
it is in Latin, Sir: pray mark it; Omnis mutatio (praesertim si aut subita ^it
aut magna) periculosa est ^ compare them, Sir, and you will find little
difference, save only that he treats of the Greater, I of the Lesser Body:
Both agree in this, that the changing of Fundamental (not to say Foundation)
Laws in either, is of dangerous consequence.

You see I have luckily found a very good Author to vouch both my mistakes, and
I am content to err with him rather than correct Originals with you.

The Greek Professors place, Sir, is already disposed of, else I had not been
so free with you; lest peradventure you might have put in for it. But if you
will be ruled by me, or expect I should lay on your head, I should rather turn
you loose to any ordinary man, nay to a Gentleman (provided he be a very
English one) in another Language I could name, than this unlucky, barbarous,
heathenish, Antich^istian Greek.

Thus much Sir, and no more shall I say of your Letter to R. L. ^lthough you
should hire me to it, and give me your Hand or Bond to forfeit Sword and Belt
if ever you drew upon a piece of innocent Greek again.

In your Express directed to Me there is a great Cry indeed, but scarce Wool
enough to make a Jack an Ape a pair of Breeches; a huge crop of Straw for so
little Kernel, that 'twill hardly pay the tasker, and quit cost for threshing;
and though you have rigged it out in a gorgeous dress, (I mean, bound it up
with the rest in Turkey Leather and gilt leaves) and worded it as if* you were
some Great Mogul amongst the Learned; yet upon examination I find it as very a
cheat as one of those Old Egyptian Temples, famous for outward Splendor and
Magnificence, whilst the God within was e^ther an Ape, a ^torke, a Goat, or a
Cat. For can you imagine you have much outdone Cleopatra's Pug in this rare
Adventure, when he quite forgot his business of Dancing, and fell to the Apples
and Nuts thrown before him? Or do you think all the World so mad as to be fond
of one Man's humor, who is under an imprudent Vow of never being Serious? Man
is a visible Animal, I grant, so long as he rides in a Terrestrial Vehicle, as
a Friend of yours has noted; but it does not thence follow that he must be
always laughing, (more then a Horse is Neighing) how white soever his Teeth
may be. The Spania^ds have a Prove^b, that a Mule will be a Mule o^ce a day at
least: but certainly it becomes not so able a Rationallist accomplished with
choice useful Learning to be all day long at Push^pin, or Sp^n-counter.

Now, Sir, if your Constitution be not faulty and full of Quicksilver, that
you can scarce be fixed if you should die for it; if it be not Natural to you to
talk as Idly, as one Elevated in a high Fever; I Will try what I can do upon you
by Chastising your Errors, and giving you a little good Advice, and that not
in the Grave Catonian way, but with some mixture of Levity to keep you awake
for the better Operation, not doubting but you will be careful of a due
Regimen, and apply every thing to the affected Part.

The first mistake I shall note in your Lette^, is an easy one, only a Steeple
for a Church; but you might as well have said, I thought it impossible for any
English Zany to have a Ringing in his Head because there are no Bells in
Turkey. Alas, Sir, I was so far from venturing you so much above ground, or
tempting you to skip off a Steeple for my sake, that I have made it a great
part of my business all along to keep you as far off the Church as may be. For
albeit you are like Archbishop Abbot himself in one thing, i. e. in being
neither Parson, Vicar, nor Curate all your life; yet you are not thereby
qualified to be a Regulator amongst us now, so much as John Calvin was in his
time, who offered his Assistance in our Reformation, but judicious Cranmer knew
the man and refused him. ^ little more Study and Experience will ^ssure you,
that Quinctilian's saying is true, though it be Latin, Soli artifii^^s de
artibus judicare debent: The Cobbler may laugh at all men in his own Trade, but
he is no more a competent Judge of Jewels, or Pearls, than a Blind man can be
of Colors, although you should carry the Sun in your Arms before him. (There Is
another Translation for you, bevause you like them so well.) Granting our
Church windows are or may be shattered here and there by late storms, yet what
does that concern you, who are in (...) Legal Capacity, not so much as that of
a Glasier, or Churchwarden, to see them repaired? Besides, I wonder you that
pretend to Trade so much in Stars, and Telescopes, could not foresee the
necessary Effect such a Train of Causes must produce. For what less could the
Dutch War, and your little Book, and another called the Expedient, or any one
of them portend, then an Indulgence to all manner o^ Non-conformists. (...) you
inten^ed no hurt, or did not think what would come on it; as much as to say,
there is no such thing as Common Prud^nce, nor any other way to (...) the
Morality of our Actions (in the Cartesian Ethics) but by their end. I say
again, and I think I speak it loud enough to be heard all England over; you
have Disparaged and Abused our Reverend Clergy de facto, most Egregiously; who
if they be so Ignorant as you make them, it is pity but the Breed of Adoniram
should be Unmuzled again, to Teach them to Study harder, and Preach better. I
could tell you the very Day and Year ('it was much about the time, the King came
in) when a little Spark kindled a great Bonfire; thus o^e of your pitiful false
Principles may occasion a thousand ^ll Conv^ni^ncies, according to the st^tely
Heroic, Magnarum usque adeo sordent primo dia rerum.

Another small mistake of yours is, your R^pe^tition of a great part of my Book
(and that more unfaithfully than I should have expected from any Scot) and then
Brandishing your Pen over it, and Bragging, it deserves no better Answer. A
very compendious and effectual way to Confute Turk and Pope, and Jack of
Cumberland to boot! The spightful World, Sir, willnot be so civil as to suffer
you or me to be Judges in our own cause; and however we think very goodly of
our own Brats, yet they may possibly (if there be no Bias in the case) have a
different Notion of them, especially in a Summer morning when the Sun is got
out of Aries. It Is you have taught me so much modesty (I shall for ever own it)
as to think, that I can not only maintain every Tittle I have said there, but
even a bad Cause upon occasion against you, and two or three more such
triffling Privateers. But I am not bound to maintain the Wise Reaso^iugs, and
pleasant Consequences you so ingenuously and plentifully Father upon me -- Male
dum recitas incipit esse tuum; They are all your own, Sir, by a better Title
than the Madman had to his Smyrna Fleet. I remember one Copy of the Vulgar
Translation corruptly reads Evertit domum, for Everrit; and makes the poor
Woman not Sweep* but throws down the House to find he^ lost Groat. Now if one
single Letter creates so great alteration in the case (quoth Ployden) what rare
work for a Tinker may a man make, that takes your liberty of changing whole
Words, Sentences, and Sides? What an easy matter it is to put a man upon the
Rack, and make him con^ess what you would have him? To render Sermons, or
Books, or Nihil est quin male narrando possit depravarier. Terent.
any thing Ridiculous, by Interlining, making false Comments upon them, by
Reading them backwards, or beginning them at the wrong end? I would not for Two
Pence Half Penny you had been a Scrivener, or Lawyers Clerk, lest peradventure
some of the la^ty had then smarted for it, and been as Poor as you have made the
Clergy. But you must not dream, Sir, I have so little to do, as to fall a
Repeating after you, to set all right and straight again, as I le^t it; yet
this I Will promise you, that if you please to send me a Page of the best Sense
that ever you was Master of, I will only carry on this little Metaphor of
yours, and if I don't return it you as Senseless and Impertinent Stuff (by the
next Post) as ever you met with, I Will be your Bondsman, and give you all the
Causes and Effects too, that that you and I shall deal in for ever. In the mean
time, I must desire you once more to be ashamed of this easy piece of Foolery,
and (if you have no better Friends about you) to Learn a little Ingenuity of
Achilles his Horse in Homer, or Mycillus's Cock in Lucian; for although the one
Repeated a number of Verses, the other a great deal of Prose, yet neither
abused the Author, or made him speak other than his own Sense.

I shall not disturb the Ashes of Old Ferdinando so far, as to guess at the
true reason why you would not Reply to my Book; but why you would not let it
alone neither; why you must needs show your Teeth when you could not Bite, and
neither hold me fast, nor let me go, is such a Riddle, that I dedie any man
that understands Trap to resolve it.

You tell me indeed, that I Iump in some Passages with W. S. and that you had
Answered him half a year before. And is it not a strange thing that two several
Men living perhaps above an Hundred Miles distant, should speak sometimes to
the same effect, though Treating of the very same Subject? Nay, is it not
stranger then that any man in his right Wits should deny, that you have
Answered the said W. S. Back-stroke and Foresstroke, fully and thoroughly, and
killingly too? For my part, I meddle with no bodies Principles, or Province,
but my own; yet, since you are so good at Answering, pray answer me one
Question: Did you ever hear of St. Dunstan? But -- did you ever see a little
Book called the Method of Preaching, Printed about Fifty years ago, the Author
whereof writes himself T. V. as you do T. B? They say he and you jump in your
Notions, that there you had your story of the Weepers, (though you have added
two of your own to his Six, and made it consist of Eight parts) and to mention
no more, your Preface from Adam, from his beginning of the World, which some
Ancient Historians will have to be much about the same time. In some things
indeed you seem to differ, for He was a Divine, you say you are none; He
pretends to Instruct young Preachers serionsly, whilst you Laugh and Droll upon
the very Old ones. Now I am not so vain, as from this and such like Instances
to Indict you for a Plagiary, but only to let you know, that when ever you
speak Sense or Truth, somebody else has done it before you, so that you cannot
claim the whole Credit thereof, more than of your late happy Intention of
English Exercises.

Nor do I stumble upon them again, Sir, out of a mere malicious design of
moving your choleric Particles, but only because I am now passing on to
consider your singular Antipathy to a piece of Greek, or Latin; for you
proclaim open War, and profess you hate it like a Viper or Toad; as if the
little Vermin struck so fiercely, that he left his Sting behind him. Now, Sir,
were I disposed to Mischief, what a fair Advantage have you given me to pelt
you with, (...), and an hundred such Scraps, every whit as significant as those
soft Compellations of yours, my Duck, my Dear, etc. and then Tack about, with a
-- Tendimus in Latiam, and give you a Broadside there too? But that were a
Cowardly Triumph, and I hate to use any true English man so Barbarously. Nor
will I renew the Question once put to a Dogmatical Philosophist, after he had
made a tedeous Harangue to Disparage and Vilify the Tongues, why he did not
cut out his own? But rather Argue the Busi^ess calmly and seriously with you. I
hope, Sir, you don't think there lies any Moral Turpitude lurking under the
Skirts of those hateful Languages, or, that they are absolutely and point
blanck against the Law of the Land: Our Statutes for English Manufactures, and
the Encouragement of Trade, were never intended to bolt out Learning and Latin
sure, as Foreign Commodities. I confess, I love the Smoke of my own Country as
well as you, or any of them that were lately Pressed for his Majesty's Service
abroad; but I would not willingly be such a mere English Machine, as not to be
able to Write a piece of Latin to borrow Money (upon occasion) or to teach a
Thief his Neckverse. But yet you must not hence infer, I Am one that reverence
Gr. and L. purely out of Honor to Rome and Athens; alas, Sir, I never saw
either of them in all my Travels, yet I have met with diverse Dead men that
have been there, and say, they were very Fine Places. And truly when I find
more Flesh, and solid Food in one of their Scraps (as you term them) than in
twenty whole Pages of some late English Scriblers, I cannot but stand amazed to
hear such a dismal outcry against them. There was Learning in the World, Sir,
above forty years ago, nay before that doubty Grammarian Palaemon's time,
albeit he boasted, it was born and would also die with Him. And though it be
the mode of late amongst some pedling Pilferers to rend an ancient Authors
sense, concealing his Name and Language both, out of a superstitious fear of
disobliging Monsieur Multitude, their Patron; yet I don't find my self at
leisure to admire them in this, more than their other Affections of
Singularity. For let them Fancy and Swagger what they please to the contrary,
so long as there is a Scholar alive, so long as it is not death to use any
other Language besides our Native English, there will be a laudable use of
Greek and Latin Authors, and that in their own Dialect; their Brevity,
Clearness, and Elegance, being not to be expre^s'd something by the most exact
Translations. Besides, Sir, the constant practice of our best English Writers
is so much against your private Humor, that I must either conclude them a
company of Fools, or continue my Respects to those Ancient Languages, you would
explode, or at least beat down their Price. I presume you may have seen or
heard of Jewel, Laud, White, Mountague, Field, Hooker, Chillingworth, Iackson,
Tailor, Bramhal, Hall, Hammond, Sanderson, Thorndike, and an hundred more I
could name, besides Mr. Hobs, all English Authors, (and many of them still
alive) and yet very full of Vipers and Toads, nay Crocodils and Basilisks too,
if these be your new Names for foreign Quotations. I would gladly be civil to
you, but I cannot find in my heart to call such Learned Worthies triffling
Piqueroons, and abominable Scrap-Monkers, merely because a Dose of Latin makes
you Maw-sick, and a Dram of Greek quite turns your Stomach. Believe it, I can
never humor you so far, as to think e're the worse of their learned Labors,
because you Startle and Flinch as much at the naming an Old Author on the other
side of the Water, as some men do at the sight of a Cat, Cheese, or Tansey. If
your Stomach be so Ni^e and Squeamish, they were to blame that did not put you
to some other Trade; for there is no possibility of avoiding a piece of Latin
or Greek now and then in our Profession. It runs in our Heads, and will be
Vented sometimes if it be but to ease the Brain, or communicate our Thoughts
more expeditely, and con^irm our Sentiments to be Old and approved. Did you
ever wonder to hear your Barber to commend a Modish well-^rizled Bush of the
last Edition, or your Tailor find a fault in a Garment made by some other hand?
Did you never hear Merchants talk of the Streights, Smyrna, Legorn, the Indies,
etc. or of ensuring a Ship for fear of Storms, or Pi^ats? Is it any false
Heraldry for Soldiers to discourse of Enemies, Fighting, Guns, and Garr^sons?
Lawyers, of Westminster Hall, and the As^izes, Causes, and Cliants? Physicians
of Diuretics, and Sudorificks, Emeticks, Catharticks, Broad-pieces, and
Guinnies? Nay, does not every Mechannick wiredraw the Discourse into his own
Trade, and tell you presently what Art he professes, because he understands
and can reason of that, though of nothing else? It is as natural, Sir, for
those that deal in Books to discover, upon occasion, where their Acquaintance
lies, and with whom they mostly Converse, and sometimes to Cite the Author's
own words, either for fear of wronging him, or ^or their own pleasure, or for
many other reasons which I shall not trouble you with, because (as I remember)
your self have done it more than once in your Incomparable pretty witty
Dialogue, and I will do so too when I think fit without asking your Leave,

There is indeed, and ever will be, an Abuse of this, as well as all other
things, so long as all men have not the same quantity of Brains, the same stock
of Judgment and Prudentials. There will be those that Cite Authors in the way
of Pedantry, Affectation, and most elaborate Impertinence, without any regard
to those useful Circumstances of Time, Place, or Company; and if they can but
shoot a Pellet or two of Latin now and then (though no more to the purpose
then Eggs and Moonshine) they will Huff and Strut with as much Scorn and
Stateliness, as the One-ey'd man is said to do amongst them that are stark
Blind. Nay, should they fall into your own dear company, and knew beforehand
how much you hate Latin, and that you had written a Book against it, they
would be at you notwithstanding, and give you a Specimen of their parts; they
would stick to you like Birdlime, and word you to death if you let the^ alone,
and did but seem to manage the Laugh on their side. I Am sure I have been
tormented with them in my time, and that you might not be surpised, but know
what to trust to, I Will borrow your leave to tell you a true Story of this
Nature, which I have very fresh in my Memory; and so much the rather, because
the Person concerned therein is so Arrogant, as to pretend he has some footing
in your Friendship, that so you may know and avoid him.

To supply my want of Company upon the Road, not many Months since, my
friendly Host brought me in a small Retainer to the Muses, whom he had before
recommended for a pleasant Companion, and the great Scholar of the Town. I had
no sooner bidden him Welcome in honest downright English, but he accosts me
thus: You know, Sir, Est natura homi^um novitatis avida; Pray, What news in the
South? Oh, Sir, quoth I, (little caring for taking Post to Rome that night) How
do you know I understand Latin? Vultus index mentis, replies he; by that I
guess you belong to one of our two Tops of Parnassus, C. or O according to that
of the Poet, Nec in bicipiti somniasse Parnasso m^mini. Nay, then (thought I)
if you are so great a Statesman and Scholar too, I Will (...) ^it you with News
accordingly. You hear, I suppose, Sir, that Hurst Castle is lately Ma^ned out
against the Dutch; and that another small Frigot of 50000 Guns will shortly be
Lanch'd upon Salisbury Plain, against the next Campaigne. Not a word on it
before (said he) Bona fide; but I remember my old Acquaintance Horace speaks of
such an one; O Navis referent in mare te novi fluctus? -- Which was no sooner
out of his mouth, but (espying a Picture of King James in the Room) he falls to
Admiring and Repeating Owens witty Distick, (as he called it) Qui petit
accipiet Iacobus Apostolus inquit,
O si Iacobus Rex mihi dicat idem!


That might pass for Poetry (quoth I) in those days, but it will scarcely get a
man Preferment in this Kings Reign. I know it full well (cries he) for Carolus
will not stand in the Verse: and then, to find a new Topiek, he asked me if it
was not hot Traveling, only to bring in Sive per syrtes iter aestuosas,
Sive fa^turus per inhospitalem
Cau^asum. --


At which I told him he seemed to be a great Traveller, and talked of strange
Places where I had never been. But he answered me with a modest smile in the
Negative, and that* Been qui latu^t b^ne vixit, was his beloved Motto; but ye^
withal that he had Read of one Ulysses, who was a great Traveller, and always
went on foot. Why think you so, said I? It Is very clear in Homer upon my word,
said he, -- (...), you meet with often. Quoth I, Are you very sure that was the
man? At which he craved my pardon, saying, It was lapsus Linguae, and that he
meant that other Heroic, (...). Whereupon I could not but gratify him so far
as to observe how well he was Read in all sorts of Poets; but he confessed
ingenuously he was only a Smattereer and a Well-wisher, and that ^e had not
Read above 30 or 40 of the best of them, which he had at his fingers ends, and
that he was almost Ravished with such a stately thumping Verse as that of
Musaeus, (...). Having no more of that Poem about him, and fearing I should
catch Cold (as I presume) he asked me, whether Business or Pleasure drew me
into those Parts? Thought I, he has me as sure in this Dilemma as Louse in
Pontesract: But I Will avoid him if I can, by answering, Neither. And yet that
would not do, for he (not doubting I would have said Pleasure) fastens on that,
like a true Echo, and tells me Virgil commends it for a rart thing; and where
should it be but in tha passage? -- Voluptatem commendat ^arior usus. By this
time I was grown so surly as to mind him from whence he had digre^sed (that he
was not so solicitous of News as he ^eem'd to be at first) for I was so vain as
to think to put him out of his Road. But alas, his Stock being not yet at an
end, he replied nimbly upon me; Oh yes, Sir, with your pardon, In nova fert
animus -- is a Book I have almost by heart: Please you to hear the story of the
Giants, and of the Golden Age, Ducalion and Pyrrha, Pyramus and This be, or any
other betwixt this and Iamque opus exegi -- Bless me, think I, what will now
become of me? I shall be Metamorphos'd presently into a Stone, Tree, Bird,
Beast, or I know not what. And therefore finding no way but one to avoid it,
and not desiring to die that Death of all others, I wns forced to cry English
to B^d, and tell him, It begins to grow late, Sir, and I shall rather choose to
sleep upon what I am already indebted to you for. And thus, when he had spent
the remainder of his Ammunition; and poured in a volley of Small-shot upon me
for a parting blow, -- Nox ingruit atra -- Fefsos sopor irrigat artus -- Per
amica silentia lunae; and about twenty of the same, which for brevities sake I
omit. He took his solemn leave of me, adding, I am yours, Sir, Dum juga montis
aper, fluvios dum piscis amabit, and so on till he came to the long-look'd for
and best bit of Latin he had reserved for the last, Vale, Valeto.

Now, Sir, I have as little Kindness for such a Coxcombe's Impertinence as you
or any man Living: It suits no more with my Humor than Oil or Caveere does
with my Palate, though as a Diversion I can for once, and so must you
sometimes, endure it. But would you have me like Greek or Latin ever the
worse, because some men are mad? Is there no way to enforce Temperance, but to
cut down the Vines presently? Must I chop my Horse's Legs off for fear he
should kick me as I get up? Neither ought you to argue against the use of the
most Excellent things from their Abuse. To bring the Business between us to a
short Issue, the Question is, Whether you or I be guilty of the Abuse
aforesaid? I answer positively, that -- Facit Indignatio -- on the outside of
my Book was an idle, heavy, Insig^i^icant, Senseless Shred, that did neither
fit me, nor bite you; whereas your Sylvestrem tenui -- was a most Select,
Quaint, and Nipping Motto, a Revenge indeed worthy of an Italian! Oh, it galled
me to the quick! And they may say what they will, but the Stab of a Poniard or
Stilletto, is nothing to the mortal Thrust of a dreadful, fierce, sharp
qoyson-pointed Sylvestrem tenui -- Pray, Sir, let me Rise, don't Kill me
outright; and I Will promise you never to return the Wounds I received at your
hand by that Dagger like Sentence; but (if I can agree with my Stars) shall
only live as a ^ame Trophic of your Generosity: And now I think you are
pleased!

But to proceed, Sir, (^or I begin to be as weary of your Company, as I was of
the Gentleman's above) if my conjecture failed me about T. B. and R. L. that
they were Vtopian Names, who can help it? This I am assured of, that when I
thought I had cut off two Heads at a Blow (you know the Story of the Hydra,
Sir) there sprung up a third, one I. E. a bold Lad, who lays claim to all that
ever you have written. Agree amongst your selves, Gentlemen, who is the right
and undoubted Author; I meddle with none of you all but my old Acquaintance T.
B. and have enough to do to be at a certainty with him, by reason of his Shifts
and Disguises, which are as many almost as Proteus the Prince of Rope-Dancers
was said to have; for he makes nothing to Skip into Devonshire, nay, step to
Peru, Iapan, Barbados, and I know not whether, at a minutes warning to fetch
Metaphors; so that I know not where to have him long.

But pray good Mr. T. B. is the Family of the R. L's. very ancient, much beyond
Henry the VIII. They that derive it from Radamanthus Lemithrobarzanes the
Babylonian Conjurer, produce not sufficient Authority to vouch their opinion,
and make me believe it. You say indeed they are a large and spreading Family;
but I have some reason to think I can remember the rise of them, though I
confess they are very near related (by the Mother's side) to another Family
somewhat elder, whose parts lie North and South, who are against all old
Fashions and Usages; insom^^h that they oft-times wear Helmets (...) their
Legs, and Boots on their Heads. Let them enjoy their own humor, and spread, as
fast as they please, provided they be subject to the Kings Laws, and disturb
not the peace of their Neighbors, and I Will ask no more, nor trouble my head
about them. But whereas you tell me that no true Gentile English Spirit would
have guessed as I did; when you make it out you was gentile. in hussing our
Clergy in general, and every particular Member that comes in your way, I will
warrant every word and syllable I have said of you and your Family, to be not
only Gentile, but Right Honorable.

As for the many small Games and petit Catches you abound with, I shall only
say Mum to them all; and if you please to employ some body else to pick the
feathers off your Querpo, I will inquire a little into the great Design of your
Letter, which is to magnify your own way of talking (or Wit as you call it)
and vilify all others, and then bid you good night. Not that I would be
thought to set up for a Wit, of all the Trad^ in Town; but because I find my
self bound by the Laws of Errantry (like some Palph or Sancho) to follow my
Leader into any, even the most Magnificently foolish Adventures. Standers by
may possibly see more than Gamesters without Spectacles: and now my hand is in,
I will be so hardy as to descant a little upon your very Masterpiece; and if
you be taken tardy here too, I must request you also to burn your Common Place
Book, or quit the Pit.

In the first place, Sir, though you would seem to be highly incensed against a
Quibble, yet I perceive you know not what it is, because you call conceits of
the first and second Rate by that diminutive name. For according to the best
Authors that have written on this Subject, a Quibble is nothing else but a
Gingling and Chiming of Consonant words; and this (I must tell you) is no less
then a Figure in Rhetoric called Paronomasia, saving your presence. But Bishop
Sanders (in the very S^r. 1. ad Aulam.
Sermon you Cite) maintains this kind of Speeches to be Elegancies, and flowers
of Elocution, when they are used sparingly, without Affectation, and only as
Sauce to our Meat. You might there have espied Ten or Twelve several places in
the Bible where this Figure occurres, whereof the good Advice of St. Paul is
one, (if you please to take it, and not Play with it) (...) -- to mention no
more. From whence that right Learned Prelate takes occasion to Chastise those
idle inconsiderate Persons, who Scoff at the like Elegancies in Sermons and
other Discourses, concluding utterly against you, viz. That it is only
Affectation in this, as in every other thing, that makes it tedeous or
ridiculous. But those Levities of mine you so judiciously call Quibbles, belong
Sir to another Figure in Rhetoric y^l^ped Homonymia, when the words are
Ambiguous, and ( Ianus like) look two ways at least. And what ever you say or
opine to the contrary; these, Sir, will be not only Lawful, but Useful and
Elegant, and have a Sting in them when you and I are dead. Vossius was never
Laughed at before for saying, Hermolaus nomine non re Barbarus; nor Heylin for
Baiting the Pope's Bulls, and telling us of one John Seldom, whose Name needs
no Titles of Honor, (do you see, Sir, how bold he makes with the Title of a
Book purely for the Phancies sake?) Nor T^lly for his -- Ex agro Falerno
depellantur Anseres, the same word unluckily signifying both a Man and a Goose.
I could for a need throw you an hundred more into the Bargain, but (as I told
you before) they must be used sparingly. Now, Sir, would you have us blot out
two several Figures in Rhetoric merely to please you? Must we get an Act of
Parliament in all haste against latter especially, which no* Language in Europe
can live without? Even your own English is utterly ruined if you take it away;
all your Proverbs, Tropes, Metaphors, and other Elegancies, signifying no more
than Chip in Pottage without their Allusions or Ambiguities. And may not I take
the same liberty of Speech that all the World has done before me, for fear of
angring you? But I Am confident, what e're you say, you don't really think such
kind of Allusions ridiculous, if you do, you left your Memory (surely) in your
other Breeches, when you went last to the Press. Pray, Sir, present my Services
to R. L. and ask what is the first Letter of that Gentleman's name, who styl^s
his Grace Guardian of Humane Nature, and says May and Can are of the same Mood
and Tense, and talks of pure terse (Good Man he would have said Terce) hum^ne
Nature newly drawn out of the Clouds? Who plays most Childishly with the
Reverend B. O. ^ for saying the Writes like one Puffed up; as if he meant, that
he was Fat and Bloated, when he is soberly attempting to Cure the Tympany i^
his Mind? Who tells me I am as utterl^ undone as ever was Oyster, and that his
Ca^ was not free to be Roasted? The same Figure all along to a Cows Thu^b.
These I only return you, Sir, to let the World see that however you hate these
little things, yet you cannot forbear them more than others; although by your
quarrelling at them other-whiles, you start a new Figure in Rhetoric called
Autocatacrisis, or Self-contradiction. You complain indeed I now and then speak
as some others have done before me, and that the Humor is not my own; as if
you were for none but New Phancies, new Stories, new Proverbs, new Old-saying^,
all spick and span New. But if this be a Fault, you have no reason to call it
so of any man living. For did you make those Forms of Speeches so frequent with
you? -- Dunstable Stuff -- Catching old Birds with Chaff -- From Top to Toe --
Tumble down Dick -- Courage Cakes -- The Story of the Oyster -- Hogs to Rumford
-- Nov^rint Vniversi -- Sink or Swim -- The Whore of Babylon -- A Phancie of
his Worships -- and Nineteen more I will not trouble my Head to remember? Did
you spin them all out of your own Brain? Alas, Sir, they are not only Trite and
Common, but of as long standing as that of the Boy that made the Knife; many of
them are as Old as ever was Paul's or, if that be yet too young, as Old as
Spilmans Trial, Mr. Eaton's Goose, or that of John Hall the Capper; you know
where I am. Nay, had I nothing else to do, I could Trace some of the most
tolerable Humors in all your Works, and show the very Page and Line in Don
Lucian, and the other Don, where you had them, albeit you put them off for New
(as your Philautus does his borrowed Notions) and own not those Old Gentlemen's
kindness for fear of spoiling your Markets. But for you to charge me with your
own guilt, Quis tulerit Gracchos? -- For my part, I love to speak in the
Language of other men sometimes, and do declare, I suspect all things that have
nothing but pure Terce novelty to Vouch them; of which kind I observe two or
three things in your way of Wit, which (pardon my boldness) I must needs
acquaint you with.

As first; Your Metaphors are often so far fetched, that it is worth no man's while
to go along with you; they are against all Rules of Aristotle's Rhetoric, whom
I name not to crack my Whip over you, but out of pure Honor to that
incomparable Tractate, and to recommend it to your perusal. Questionless you
find some profound Similitude (though I cannot) in those wide Rovings, --
Pigeons and Postscript, -- Logic and Wheel-barrow, -- Greek Diveling, -- A
Net for the Moon, -- A new Fashioned Sugar plumb, i. e. a Diamond,
Westminster Hall in his Trowzes, -- So many Bushels of Logic (to be even with
my Bushels of Atoms) -- Sucking of Eyes like raw Eggs, with diverse Monstrous
ones in your Story of The People in the South (which I shall be with by and by)
looking no better in my opinion, than a Saddle upon a Sow. These, Sir, are very
New, and all your own, and so let them be for me: the next Age perhaps may find
out the Wit of them, but you must not expect they will pass so currantly in
this.

Another thing I must tell you of, is, your Trivial, Low, and sometimes
Scurrilous and Dirty Language, as if you did not wash your Hands before you
went to your Book. As if it were a certain sign of Ingenious Education, to talk
of Ol^ Folks Slaver -- Putting ones Head in ^ Pipkin -- Not worth the Smoke of
a Ladle -- Curds and Apple Sauce -- Broil'^ Herrings, or a Burnt Fraize --
Mora^ Rules enough to stop a hollow Tooth -- Philosophy and Languages, Six
pence a Bushel -- New Oysters uew -- A Pot and a Cake -- In spite of your
Teeth -- Hang your self -- Rogue -- Rascal -- Villain -- Son of a Bitch --
Prate thy whole Gut full, etc. Oh the sublime Raptures, prodigious Phancies,
cleanly Comparisons, melting Strains, ravishing Style, and select Phrases of a
Judge-Wit, who pretends to give Law to all others that would be Merry and
Trifling! This kind of Way might go for Drollery at Billingsgate indeed, but I
suppose you don't expect many of the Learned should be^ in love with it;
whether you reckon them according to the Julian or Gregorian Account. I confess
I am neither able nor willing to engage you in it, perhaps the unmannerly
Presbyter you wot of, may, if he lay not down the Cudgels, because he thinks
himself more then your Match; however (if all fail) I Will bring you an ordinary
Porter, or take the first Water-man off the Thames) provided he be not Lineally
descended from John Tailor) and he shall play a Prize with you at any time in
this Dialect, for a Pot and a Cake, or so; but it is so New to me that I dare
not meddle with it, especially when you are within a Mile of an Oak.

One thing more, Sir, for the Credit of the Family I must not omit, that is,
your jumbling several Languages together for a very jejune fancy, (a thing you
deride in others) and Coining your pretty thoughts into new words, as if you
had a Patent to Regulate the King's English: Such as Packishness, Doomester,
Vindicationer, Vengeably, Vn-Iachin, Vn-Boaz, Carawimple, Eggifie, etc. and
then vamping and ^eking others, as Spiritual-ship, Heliogabalus-ship,
Bibber-ship, Do-as-you-would-be-done-by-ship, and many more ships, as if you
intended to set out a fourth Squadron against the Dutch. This is also new to
me, and if it please any, it must be those that understand the Covent Language
better than I do. I remember Lucian brings Lexiphanes (one troubled with the
same distemper) to the Physician; who, when he had given him a strong Vomit,
and made him throw up a pas^ full of Bombast-exotick words, the man recovered
presently, and spoke like other men: but you may do as yon please, Sir* Only
this you must take from me, that new words are to be minted without Necessity;
and many of yours are as much against all Rules of Art, as Sir Thoma^ Moore's
Vtopia, though some of the Critics are fallen quite out with Him for that
single attempt.

By this time I know you are got to your Logic, and making Consequences like
mad; That I am one of those that admire the very dust of Antiquity, and do
Reverence even to moldy Bread, or a rotten Post; and am such a professed Enemy
to Novelty, that I have forsworn wearing new Shoos, Hats, or Clothes; that I
be^ieve Antiquity does privilege any Er^our, and Novelty prejudice Truth.
Alas! Sir, I can laugh as heartily as any man at those Arcadians, who boasted
they had Monuments and Histories to show of seven and forty thousand years,
because they knew none could disprove them. I am not quite so Superstitious as
Vibius Rufus in the Story, who having named Tully's Widow, and purchased
Caesar's Chair conceived himself in a fair way to gain the Eloquence of the
on^, and the Power of the other. Thus Neanthus (in Lucian) bribed Apollo's
Priest to sell him Orpheus's Harp, but instead of making Stones, Trees, and
Beasts dance after him, he, (by his uncouth scraping) only invited all the
Dogs in Town to fa^ a barking at him. And another (he tell^ us) bought
Epictetus his Lamp for thre^ hundred pence, supposing if he studied (...) the
night by that, he should presently (...) like that admirable Old Man. I have
very good respect for Plautus, Plaut. in Amphit.
but yet I don't approve of his bringing in o^ swearing by Hercules before
Hercul^^ was born. I like St. Austine well enough, but have not such a
Reverence (...) his Person as that flatte^ing Jesuit, Maldon. in Io^ an. c. 6.
who will tak^ his private Opinion for infallibly true, though he bring neith^^
Scripture, reason, nor any other Author^ty to confirm and warrant it. I love
D^mosthenes, but not merely because he had stammering in his Speech. I approve
of many things in the Talmud Doctors, but done believe (as they would have me)
that (...) only reason why the Elephant was (...) placed in the Sea, was this,
because ^ would not hold him and the Whale both else belike, we must have gone
a Fishi^^ for Elephants too. I can freely (...) Plato and Aristotle, and the
best of them all in their Follies and Dotages. I honor the Memory of the
Ancients for the great discoveries they have made in Arts and Sciences indeed,
but yet you must give me leave to smile with you when I find some of their
Notions, Principles and D^ductions as cold as Plato's Laws, or Chrysippus his
Sylogismes, as Lucian merrily phraseth it. Again Sir, to prevent you on the
other side, I am not utterly against all News, but for it against the World,
provided it be good and true. I believe there are such people as the Antipodes,
though I had been counted a Heretic for it not many Centuries since. Posterity
has as much right to truth as their Predecessors, and none but a man that is
crazed will deny Philosophy to be capable of daily improvements, partly by
removing Old mistakes, and partly by advancing later Observations unknown to
former Ages. I think it not generous to cry up the Old or the New, or enslave
my self to any person or party for their own sake, but let Academick or
Peripatetick, Stoic or Epicur^an, or the latest Author you have (though
smelling still of the Press) discover some useful truth, and I shall not boggle
to believe and make it my own. Quod veram est meum est, sive Epicuri, sive
aliorum. Sen.
I profess, Sir, I am not against the Circulation of the Blood, nor the
Inventions of Printing and Gunpowder, no nor Tarts made of Harveys; nor against
any of those mechanical Experiments made by our own ingenious Countrymen or
Foreiners in this and the last Age for the benefit of the public; I could
heartily write a Panegy^ick in their Commendation, were. I worthy of that
honor. No, Sir, my Blood ferments and Stomach rises only at a pa^cel of Apish
Politico-Philosophists, who are ever Disputing whether Cambridge or Oxford be
the Elder Sister, and vying Pantaloon Pates against Spade-Beards; who cry up
Notions for new and their own, that are not such, but old enough, though
furbish'd up and put into another Dress; or if they be, they never can be
useful further then to light Tobacco; who put off their Hats when ever they
hear the Admirable Des Carts his Name mentioned, and choose to go bareoot (as
King James told Dr. Reynolds) because they wore Hose and Shoos in time of
Popery; who trouble all Companies with their Principles, Ends, Atoms, Vacuums,
Matter, Particles, Globuli, etc. though all this while they scarce know what
those Terms mean; and t^ink themselves more Demonstrative then other men,
because they can in a clear day, by the help of a Quadrant, wire-draw the Sun
through a little hole, and make him tell what is a Clock; and if the Night be
not cloudy, discover spots in the Moon; because they can at any time, be it day
or night, evidence to sense that two and three make five, and only with Rule
and Compasses show us some little difference between a Circle and a Quadrangle.
These are the New-nothings that admire one another, and write themselves the
very Miracles of the Age, because they have Courage enough to trample upon and
insult over a dead Lion, to rail at all old Wit, old Learning, old Religion,
and make new Experiments in Divinity too; as if no man spoke a word of sense,
that could not talk Deiformities and Incubations, Sensations and
Superfetations, Caresses of Heaven, treats of the Spirit, and the Opacous
apartments of Satan. I shall not trouble the World with the numerous instances
of this nature now, but only gratify you with a certain English definition of
Ink, because it suits so exactly with your Zacut us his Latin one of a Spoon,
and to show that men may be ridiculous and affected in any Language as well as
Latin. Ink (says my Author) is a Solution of Vitriol precipitated, or made
Opacous by the addition of Gauls, whose stipticity makes the Diaphaneous
Texture of the Particles in the Vitrioline Solution desert their former
posture, and muster in a confused opacous manner, filling those interstic^s
with solid Particles, which before were kept transparent by the fluid parts of
the water equally contempered. Ha, Ha, He! Now Sir let us take the common
Notion of Ink that every Shopkeeper has, (viz. an Infusion of so much Vitriol
and Gauls in so much water) out of his formidable Definition, and then tell me
what remains but a heap of elaborate and cross-grained Words enough to choke a
Horse, and affright an ordinary man out of his Wits. No way to the Old way, I
say still, and when I have reformed your Intellect of one thing more, you may
possibly be of the same mind, and that is this; that you are very much out, if
you think your New Modes of Wit, Learning, and Language, are of your own
Devising and Inventing: They are all Borrowed and Old, Sir, and I will prove it
(ex abundanti) that the Family of the Novelty-Mongers themselves is no late,
but a very ancient Family. Indeed I cannot find who was the Head thereof (that
perhaps is as obscure as the Head of the Nile) or say possitively whether it
beg^n before or since the Flood; but I can assure you it flourished long before
your time, and that is enough f^r my purpose. If you please to turn to Lucan's
Icaro-Menippus, you will there mee^t with the very Men I am describing, or
their undoubted Ancesters at least: For they are raising a Dust about Atoms
too, fighting with Ideas, scrambling for Globuli, and mawling each other with
Matter and Motion and such like Notions, as now (forsooth) would fain go for
New again. And the old Fox stands by and jears them, for such as knew not how
many Miles from Megara t^ Athens, and yet would tell you the space between Sun
and Moon to an Inch, the height of the Air, depth of the Sea* and circumference
of the Earth: That the Sun was a candent Mass or Stone, the Moon inhabited, and
the thirsty Stars drink water, which the Sun (that old Tankard-Bearer) fetches
up daily from the Sea. And in another place (his Rhet. Praec.) he seems a
little inclinable to my opinion: For he points at two ways of Wit and Eloquence
there, the one Craggy, Steep, and Tedeous, requ^ring a great deal of Sweat and
Oil, many Examples, much Exercise (meaning the Old way of Demosthenes, and
other famous Greeks) but tells his Scholar this is now quite out of Date, and
therefore (in a pleasant Ironie) he recommends the other New compendious way to
him, that will make him a great Orator before Sunset. He bids him get into the
Modish habit, learn to be Confident and Clamorous, and call things by affected
Names, as a Poet, a Versificator, a Shife, an Agonism, etc. and furnish himself
with a stock of fine Words, and canting Phrases, to give a haut goust to his
Discourse, and then he may set up for himself, and be soon esteemed not the
Excellent and Incomparable only, but the very Son of Jupiter and Leda, and
mount presently into Plato's winged Chariot, not to discourse of the Father of
all Beings, as he did, but to Admire and Magnify his own Great Self. Oh
Lucian, Lucian! were thou now alive, thou would find nothing but the Old
Plays Acted over again, and (because the Scenes are a little altered) cried up
for as New as a Gazette at Athens. Thus I hope, Sir, I have made my word good,
and that you will pretend no more to Novelties; for you see there is no New
thing under the Sun (as we speak here below;) what there may be in the World in
the Moon I cannot tell, nor am I at leisure to go to see.

But, dear Sir, Why so angry at my Story of the Covent, for that is New (now I
think on it) if any thing be? I Am sorry 'twas uneasy to some men's Humor, but
(as you say) I meant very innocently, and did not intend to render any man
ridiculous. I thought it might have deserved your pardon at least, because the
Scene was laid in Greece, far e^ough from your Quarters, and besides I had
compounded with my Readers beforehand not to believe it, a Complement you
should have made too in your Church-Romance. You see how apt men are to credit
Forgeries, how they love to be Cheated whether you and I will or no; and
therefore if we have got that fatal Itch of Scribbling, we must learn to deal
altogether in Truth, else we shall but expose our selves to the cruel Mercy of
envious Con-temporaries, and Self-conceited Posterity. I have always loved to
live Privately, and you may do so too (you say you would) where you please, and
how you can; but if you appear upon the Public Stage as a Satyrist in Prose,
or have a mind to Ride like the old Comedians and Rail in Meeter out of a
Waine, you must expect to be found out, unless you can agree with your
Goldsmith and purchase Gyges his Ring, whereby to walk Incognito.

But pray, Sir* What did you mean to fall a Commenting and Projecting upon a
Fiction (you say) of my own Inventing? Was it to make it better or worse? Had
it not been more prudent in you to have let it pass, and said nothing, than to
lay about you with so much Pains and Passion, only to tell the World you keep a
Cat? The Creature is indeed somewhat more Rational than ordinary, and not much
better Fed then Taught; for she argues lustily for her self, and holds to the
fundamental principle of Self-preservation tooth and nail; but she is civil and
meddles not with me, so that I can freely grant all she says. But let me tell
the Cats Master, that a very good Carter with six able Horses would be hard set
to draw one pardonable Fancy out of all his Catter-wawling Dialogue, and
unadvised Comment upon my Text. One thing indeed you demur upon as somewhat
more material, which I shall vouchsafe to answer. You observe well that I did
not say peremptorily what sort of Cubit I meant, when I was upon the Business
of the Beards: For there are (say you) Five several received sorts of Cubits,
some longer, some shorter, as you very occurately reckon them upon your fingers
now to put you out of all doubt, and clear your Head from such kind of sc^uples
for ever, you must understand me, Sir, of none of all those Five, but of a
Sixth sort, which I call the Covent Cubit; and what that is any man may guess,
that considers how much I make them differ in their Measures as well as Notions
from all other Men.

But Oh! the wonderful efficacy of a smart Repartee* They may talk of Quibbles
that have couched Wenns, and Hailstones sixteen Inches about, and twenty
strange things, but they are all nothing in comparison to the Necking blow of
an Argument well Retorted* I mean, Sir, your People in the South, those Goblins
and Misshapen Demons you describe. In the name of Holcot and Bricot, what have
we here? What? Turned Conjurer honest Tim? I profess such a Story thirty years
ago would have made my Hair stand on end, though it does not altogether so much
affect me now. And I wish you had done it into quaint Latin (as you did N.
N's. Speech) for fear of affrighting the Children, and making pregnant Women
miscarry. Here Is as ample a Specimen of your New way of Drollery, as I could
have given my self, and as full of Wit (to Imitate your own Dialect) as an Egg
is full of Milstones: It Is only for Dull Barn-doors and narrow Souls to confine
and tie themselves up to sneaking Pedantick Rules of Rhetoric, to compare
things that were somewhat al^ke before, and make their Relations probable; give
me a nimble Eleutherian, who scorns to be Shackled with a common heavy Vehicle,
who can Leap over Grantham St^eple upon occasion, and will not Boggle at an
easy Impossibility; who can devise such a Prodigious Story, as never a man in
England besides has Brains enough even to understand. Now, Sir, whether you
lay your Scene in the World in the Moon, or the ^^le of Pines, or in another
place called Terra Australis Incognita, I neither know nor care: I shall not
attempt to make any Discovery, but let your People alone; not doubting but you
will carry on your Revenge so charitably, as to provide for them as well as
plentifully as I did for my Greek Colony.

The old Po^yanthean Story indeed of (Lycosthenes, I should say) Callisthenes
King of Sicyon, which brings up the Rear, and follows as naturally as o^e Link
follows another in a Rope of Sand might have been tolerable; but that you
gravely left out the very life of the Jest, without which I never saw it quoted
before; and had you consulted the Original Text here again, and added in the
close -- (...) -- or told us in English that Hippoolides cares neither for you
nor your Author, but slights you both as much as if he were to Charm a Scold,
or Laugh a Horse out of Countenance, (as my Friend truly called my present Task
of Rejoyning to you) you might have gone not only for the Boccaline, but the
very Quixot of the Age.

And now, Sir, before you and I part, please you to go along with me to the
Whispering Place at Gloucester; I Will tell you something in your Ear that may do
you good another day; if the Spirit of Will. Pryn has not poss^st you, if you
have one good Ear le^t for sober Advice, let me beg of you to do your own
Business, and let me alone with mine; for you are like to get nothing of me
that I know of, but what you have already, a little more Civility perhaps than
you have yet deserved from the most Contemptible pretender to the Clergy. And
since your Style is so Exasperating, you must not blame me if I have
endeavored to turn the Point thereof sometimes: the Patient ought to accuse
his own Intemperance, when his Physician seems Cruel. But if you are resolved
(^all Back, fall Edge) to run the other Risque, and follow the unhappy Trade of
Sawing ^till; you must know, that I am in no haste to Run away; or if I be, I
can procure a Friend to Rhyme you and your Junto to Dead in Doggrel, or Write a
complete History of the Covent for me, as I did (you know) for my last Pr^face.
And if your Muse be such a Light-skirts, that she will not be kept in, I make
it my request to you that she may appear in Latin, out oth' common Dress, to
let us see that all your Money spent on her Education is not thrown away and
lost. I have gratified you now the second time in your own Language, though
against my Humor, and out of my Road (for I Will assure you I converse more with
those Old ones in Foreign Character, then any that pretend to the best English)
and if you will be Ingenuous, you must Write to me next in Latin, Greek,
Hebrew, Ethiopick, Spanish, French, High German, or any other Tongue I
understand not, or else you lose a Play-Fellow of me. My meaning is, Sir, that
it is below Men of your Worth and Parts, to Talk Homespun Buffoonry. and make
Sport for the most Mechanical Rabble; keep but out of their Reach, and let us
be Laughed at only Nos inter nos, and I shall rejoice in your Company, but
otherwise I shall leave it: And when you write to me in Latin, I hope you will
not trouble and charge me with a Packet of other Lumber again; for ^our last
Letter (on that account) cost me as much as would have furnished me with
Intelligence for one quarter of the year.

In the next place, Sir, let me prevail with you not to think so briskly of
your self and your own way, as to despise all others that are either gone
before, or live with you. You have written a Book of five pence price, says
Arrian upon Epictetus; (though Learning is grown dearer since the Dutch war*
and you have raised it to no less then five shillings) at that you may value
your self. But yet you must not hence Collect that you are the only man who
have the World like a Ball at your foot, and can send it which way you please.
(...). Luc.
It Is possible some men may write (as Bellerophon carried) Letters to their own
disadvantage, and themselves may not be thought so wise and wonderful abroad,
as they are at home. I read of a certain Chemist that wrote a Book too, wherein
he professed to extract Gold (as you do Wit) out of almost every thing, and
then presented it to Leo the Tenth, not doubting but he should be gratified in
most ample manner; but his Wise Hol^ness defeated all his hopes presently, and
only commanded he should be furnished with a very large capacious Bag to put
the Gold he made into, for that he seemed to want nothing else. And therefore I
would not have you part with your Boccaline's place I gave you so freely (no
not for two hundred Guynea's) till you are sure of a better; for Preferments
are grown scarce and dear, and for ought you know the best of your Lay and
Clergy Friends may give you the Bag, especially since you have added a fresh
affront to the Sacred Function, and of a higher nature than those in the former
Catalogue, in Ded^cating a parcel of Trumper^, Lev^t^es and Falsities, to the
most Rever^nd Metropolitan of all England, as if he must be thought (at least)
to pardon your temerity and extravagance, (a thing you see I have not
confidence to offer to the meanest. Vicar in our whole Trib^.) Indeed you write
not your Name in words at length, for fear of the worst, which I can attribute
to nothing but your affection to new and singular things; for I remember, the
old approved way of Addressing to Supe^iours, and Persons so infinitely above,
distant from, and withal so little related to Us; was (not to take the freedom
Jack and Tom, and all Familiars give each other, but) to Complement their
Grandeur, and bespeak their pardon in most humble wise, with all the poor Names
they had.

One thing more, Sir, and then I give my self and you no further trouble. I
must desire you in all love, to w^an your self from that calumniating and
deriding Humor you are so fond of: other men know as well as you, that the
Vulgar are mostly of that Nature, that they are hugely pleased and tickled,
when the business is carried on with Scoffing and Cavils; chiefly, when the
most August, Venerable, and Sacred Persons or Things, are prostituted and made
cheap; as Aristophanes brought the grave Socrates into a Play, Aristoph. in Nub.
and told a number of forged Tales of Him, as that he walked in the Clouds, and
gave the same reason of Thunder (when he came down) as of the Pesants
Peasep^ttage grumbling in his belly, and such like. But I would not have you
(knowing the Mischievous Consequences) follow such a l^ud Precedent, nor
imitate that invidious Theopompus, who is said to write rather like an Accuser,
than Historian. That Advice he gives his Son, was intended for you also; make
your wit rather a Buckler to defend your self, then a Sword to wound others:
For a word cuts deeper then a sharp weapon, and is longer in Curing. And the
Proverb founded upon great Experience, bids every man take heed of a Tongue
that will cut his own Throat. A little modesty blended together with as much
Prudence never did any man hurt.

Now if you will take these Advisoes you may; nay, if not, you may take your
own course. And so, with my due respects to the whole Club, wishing you all
more Wit and my self more Money, I bid you heartily Farewell.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgot to tell you that I have made bold with you to Write the
Pr^face for me now, (the other Gentleman being not at Home) to show how great
an Admirer I am of your Losty and Swaggering Style.

FINIS
ERRATA.
IN the latter Preface, Line 10. R^ad till the long Vacation. p. 2. l. 3. r.
Longis^imum. p. 3. l. 13. dele [nor] p. 5. l. 1. r. Comparisons. p. 6. l. 6. r.
for sureness. p. 7. l. 17. r. (...). p. 9. l. 4. r. intimate. ibid. l. 7. r.
Curterius. ibid. l. 10. dele [it] p. 10. l. 24. r. or Stephens. ibid. 26. r. is
the^e and shall be there. p. 13. l. 18. r. risible. p. 14. l. 2. r. and so
full. p. 17. l. ult. r. but throw down. p. 21. l. 8. r. invention. ibid. l. 26.
r. Latium. p. 23. l. 14. r. to vend an ancient Authors sense for their own.
ibid. l. 20. r. affectations. p. 24. l. 1. r. sometimes. p. 44. l. 27. r. not
to be. p. 45. l. 2^. r. married Tully's.


