A SERMON Preached at St Catherine Cree Church, UPON Sunday the 29th of June,
1696.

By NICH. BRADY, M.A. Minister of Richmond in the County of Surry, and Chaplain
in Ordinary to His Majesty.

Published at the Desire of the Parishioners.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Parker, at the Unicorn under the Piazza of the Royal
Exchange, 1696.

To my worthy Friends, the Gentlemen of the Select and General Vestry, and
others the Parishioners of St. Catherine Cree-Church.
Gentlemen,
AS this Farewell Sermon was not barely intended for a solemn formality upon
quitting my employment; but was the result of sentiments both tender and
serious, expressed with all imaginable sincerity and heartiness; so I flatter
my self with the Belief, that your desiring me to make it public, was
something more than a ceremonious Complement, being a fresh instance of that
kindness and good will, with which you have always been pleased to favor me.

And therefore, however fairly I might excuse my self, by the plainness and
indigestedness of the following Discourse; yet I cannot refuse you the absolute
disposal of that which is so justly and entirely your own; and shall please my
self with the agreeable opinion, That your Affection to me is the cause of
Publishing, what my Affection to you was the occasion of Composing.

That you may still continue steadfast and immovable in the profession of that
Faith which I have preached amongst you, and always abound in that Work of the
Lord, to the performance of which I have constantly exhorted you; that so,
neither my Labor in Preaching, nor yours in practicing, may be in vain in the
Lord; shall be the earnest and continual Prayer of

Gentlemen, Your most obliged Friend, and most humble Servant, N. Brady.

ACTS XX. 32. And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all
them which are sanctified.
THough it is not without a very senfible concern, that I appear before you
upon the present occasion, that I find my self so near being separated from
those, with whom I have conversed in five years Ministry, and from whom I have
received such obliging instances of affection, as shall ever be precious to my
memory; yet since neither the respect I so justly owe you, nor the deference we
pay to a prevailing custom, will suffer me to wave the melancholy task, of
taking a solemn and public leave. I thought I could not more properly address
to you, than in these words of the great Apostle of the Gentiles. They are a
part of his farewell Sermon, which he made to the Elders of Ephesus and Miletus,
among whom he had gone preaching the Kingdom of God: He foresaw that this would
be their last meeting, and that they to whom he spoke should see his face no
more, and therefore thought himself obliged to transfer the care of them, to
him who was best able to support and defend them; and to commit the guidance of
them to that Gospel of his, which was both capable of establishing them in the
truth, and of intitling them to that reward which is the consequence of it: and
now Brethren (says he) I commend you to God and to the word of his Grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance, among all them which
are sanctified.

Blessed be God, the circumstances of our parting, are not so dismal as those
of the Apostle and his friends; instead of not seeing one another faces any
more; I trust we shall have many happy opportunities, of keeping up a mutual
correspondence and intimacy: However, since providence has thought fit to
withdraw me, from the more immediate care of the spiritual concernments, I
cannot better express my solicitude for your welfare, I cannot consign you
into better hands, than by commending you to God for favor and protection, and
to the word of his Grace for counsel and instruction.

And here I must entreat that you would not expect from me, a discourse that is
methodical and artificial, that is the result usually of well composed
thoughts, not the product of a mind under disturbance and perplexity: I shall
only take the words just as they lie before me, and expound them to you with
all the plainness imaginable, and

First, my Brethren, I commend you to God.

Whatsoever dangers may at any time alarm you, whatsoever apprehensions or
afflictions you may lie under, if you have but recourse to an all-sufficient
Guardian, if you find your selves entitled to his favor and protection, you
have then got such a refuge as will never fail you, but will enable you in all
difficulties to be more than conquerors. Can any condition be supposed so
miserable, wherein the eye of a father will not look upon you? can any estate
be so wretchedly forlorn, wherein the bowels of a Redeemer will not yearn over
you? can any circumstances be so deplorable, as to set bounds to a goodness
which is infinite? can any of those friends whose assistance you may value,
whose support and succor you may depend upon, produce such evidences of their
kindness toward you, or show such strong credentials of an unalterable
affection, as those which you have received from your almighty benefactors. Was
it not he who drew you out of the dark womb of nothing? is it not in him that
you live and move and have your being? has not his careful providence
continually watched over you? are you not indebted for whatever you enjoy, to
him that is the giver of every good and perfect gift? has not his goodness been
exerted wonderfully in your behalf, and magnified its self by most remarkable
mercies? does not he compassionate all your necessities, favorably accept of
your imperfect performances kindly overlook your manifold infirmities, and
patiently bear with your grosser provocations? is he not willing to be
reconciled whenever you offend him? not ready to cast you off in anger, upon
every the least transgression of your duty? but waiting for your submission
with gentleness and long-suffering, and opening his arms wide to the returning
penitent? and how then can you wish for a more affectionate Protector? to whose
tenderness can I recommend you more justly than to his? but farther, have not
his wisdom and his power been frequently exercised, in securing you against all
the malice of your enemies, whether in private stratagems or open violences? is
it not he that brings the counsel of the heathen to naught, and makes the
devices of the people of none effect? is it not he that does whatsoever pleases
him, in heaven and in earth, and in all deep places? Can any thing frustrate or
disappoint his intentions, with whom all Wisdom is for ever? or pretend to
oppose the irresistible force of him that is girded about with strength? Has he
not many times unravelled all the secret designs, which your intriguing
Adversaries had levelled against you; and turned the wisdom of their wise men
into foolishness? Has he not often baffled and defeated all their boasted
might, with his own right hand, and with his outstretched arm? Has not he
overruled the most unlikely events, and made all things work together to you
for good? Either obviating all inconveniences by his wise dispensations, or
else overcoming them by his powerful assistance? And how then can you desire a
more available Guardianship? To whose conduct can I resign you more securely
than to His? Can the care of your safety be better consulted than by him, who
is not only your best of friends, but the most fitly qualified for exercising
that office? Can the sum of your concerns be more assuredly reposed, than upon
boundless Wisdom and unlimited Power? Such is the Protector to whose patronage
I commend you, disposed by his Goodness, qualified by his Wisdom, and enabled
by his Power, to support and sustain you under the greatest exigencies, and to
give you a happy issue out of all your adversities. May then that God, whose
mercy is over all his works, whose knowledge is unfathomable by humane Reason,
and whose power delights to be glorified in our weakness be your merciful
Savior and mighty Deliverer; may he be your firm support in all extremities,
your constant refuge in all necessities, your certain comfort in all
calamities; and as he influenced you by his good Spirit, to those offices of
love which I have received at your hands, so may he reward all the kindness you
have shown me seven fold into your own bosoms. This will God most assuredly
perform; unless you render yourselves incapable of the sweet refreshings of his
goodness, by not paying a due obedience to his commands, nor walking by the
rule which he prescribes; and therefore, my brethren, I commend you

2dly, To the word of his Grace.

The Law (says the Apostle) was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by
Jesus Christ. The Gospel is a most comfortable conveyance of the divine love
and favor to us; it is a Covenant made up of mercy and tenderness, free from
all the burthensom hardships and uneasinesses, with which the legal
dispensation was clogged and encumbered: In this God seems to have laid aside
his absolute prerogative, and to consult at once the ease and the delight of
his servants; the bloody initiation of circumcision, is exchanged for the
milder Sacrament of Baptism; expensive Sacrifices are abolished, that prayers
and praises may succeed them, and the dreadful menace, of draw not near lest I
consume thee, is turned into the obliging invitation, of come unto me and I
will give you rest. Well then may a message of such comfortable importance,
deserve to be styled the word of his Grace, since it exhibits to us the most
gracious promises, it holds forth to us the most desirable rewards, it
prescribes the most reasonable measures of obedience, and the most easy methods
of reconciliation. By this we are allowed to recover our selves, when through
humane frailty we at any time fall, to reinstate our selves in the favor of
our God, and regain our forfeited interest by a sincere repentance; by this we
are adopted into his own family, and put on the character of his Favorites and
Sons; by this we are admitted to a free access, to a kind of intimacy and
familiarity with our God; by this we are made capable of celestial
entertainments, and of tasting the powers of the world to come. These are some
of those inestimable privileges, of that word of Gods Grace to which I commend
you; and I cannot consign you over to any thing more valuable, but to what I
have already, even to God himself. I exhort you therefore to adhere carefully
to those admirable rules which it lays down for your direction; to attend
heedfully to the lessons which it gives; to make that the standard of all your
actions, and to let your whole conversation be agreeable to that model. The
excellency of the doctrines which it would establish, is enough to recommend it
to any prudent considerer; what can more considerably exalt your nature, than
that universal purity which it prescribes? what can more effectually preserve
Society, than that impartial Justice which it exacts? what can more secure your
health and vigor, than that strict temperance which it requires at your hands?
what can more promote mutual amity and concord, than that obliging benignity
which it would infuse into your natures? Thus if you would but examine the
Doctrines which it contains, you would find it to deserve your most serious
observation. But if you farther reflect upon the person that delivered it, you
will find fresh arguments for the fixing it in your esteem: God who in times
past spoke to your fathers by the Prophets, has in these later days spoken
unto you by his Son; who being the brightness of his glory, and the express
Image of his person, deserves your attention to what he delivers, more than any
other person of a less elevated quality. I say unto you, is his constant form
of speaking, with which he ushers in his most weighty instructions; and a due
contemplation of the majesty of the Speaker, should make you attend to what he
utters with a becoming reverence and respect. Again, the vast importance of the
things imparted in it, should forcibly oblige you to value it as you ought:
This explains to you the nature and the attributes of God, and shows you his
way of dealing with the sons of men; this gives you a prospect into the
invisible world, and makes you acquainted with that land of spirits; it shows
you by what methods God will dispense his unconceivable rewards or punishments;
and gives you directions by which you may be enaabled to secure to your selves
the former, and to avoid the latter: the mighty moment therefore of the matters
which it treats of, is sufficient to engage you to an awful attention; but
farther yet, the intimate concern which you your selves have in those sacred
truths which the Gospel unfolds to you, should powerfully engage you to give
heed to its directions: it contains no account of foreign news or idle
transactions, to which you may either listen or turn a deaf ear, without any
considerable consequences to your selves; but rules for the management of your
own lives and conversations; precepts which exact your own obedience; your own
interest is at stake in every part of it; and an eternal portion of happiness
or misery will be your own lot, according as your application to the duties it
enjoins, is more or less serious and considerate: The immediate dependence
therefore which you have, upon that word of Grace to which I commend you,
should abundantly persuade you to pay a due regard to it. These are some of
those strong and considerable motives, which I hope will incline you to put a
just value upon the maxims and instructions of Christianity.

Give me leave to instance in some peculiar duties in general, which I would
recommend more particularly to your practice and performance; and the first
that I single out shall be Humility, because it is the necessary preparative
for all other graces and perfections of the soul: Repress, I beseech you, all
unnatural swellings of the mind, all extravagant opinions of your own
self-sufficiency, copy the example of your Savior and learn of him, for he was
meek and lowly in heart: avoid that Pride which was a tempter even to the Devil
himself; which changed that brightest created resemblance of the Deity, into a
loathsome and detested Fiend: This it was that lost us Paradise, and exposed the
whole race of miserable mankind to the heavy wrath of an offended God; but as
by Pride the humane nature fell, so by Humility it rose again; and what was
lost by the vanity of the first Adam, was regained by the condescension of the
second. Let then this grace be your darling favorite, let it always be your
bosom jewel, which tho here it may look meanly, like a Diamond in the Ore, yet
will shine hereafter with an amazing luster, and be the brightest ornament of
your immortal Diadem. Another Grace in which I must entreat you to be
conversant is Charity; I mean that part only of this comprehensive duty, which
is employed in relieving the necessities of such as want. Forfeit not, I
conjure you, that well deserved Commendation of being one of the most
charitable Parishes within the City; keep up that Distinction above most
others, which your large Contributions upon any signal occasion have given you
by the confession of all Unprejudiced Observers. This is a virtue so amiable in
its self, that the pleasure which results from its performances, were enough to
make any one enamored of it, though no other reward were consequent upon it;
and therefore it is hard to find a Man who has once been charitable, and ceased
afterward to be so: the very satisfaction which arises from the action, being
sufficient to retain him in the practice of it; and yet such is the goodness of
Almighty God, that he has affixt rewards both temporal and eternal, to that
which is so amply its own recompense: this will cover a multitude of your
faults, and cast a veil over your numerous transgressions; this will give a
value to all your other good deeds, which without charity are nothing worth:
this is that by which you must be tried and sentenced in the great and terrible
day of the Lord, and this is that only which will accompany you to heaven, and
make up a part of your everlasting felicity. Let this then be your constant
entertainment, let it be made your business, as it will be your delight, and it
will liken you to the Angels, who still minister to our necessities, and
resemble you to your Savior, who went about doing good. A third duty to which
I shall more especially exhort you, is Peace. Remove (I adjure you) all that
bitterness of spirit which is wont to incline people to quarrels and
animosities; let all narrow distinctions be done away of Parties and of
Factions, and converse together with brotherly affection, under the
comprehensive characters of Men and Christians. Bear with one another errors
and infirmities, endeavor to overcome with meekness and affability, and never
to exasperate with sowreness and reproaches: This is an obliging temper of
mind, which will make even your enemies to be at peace with you, and will shame
them into kindness and condescension; if a Brother be overtaken in a fault,
whether it be an error in judgment or in practice, restore such a one in the
spirit of meekness, and if it is possible as much as in you lies live peaceably
with all men; avoid all malicious invectives and back-bitings, all reflecting
stories and ill-natured raillery; and endeavor by your favourablest and most
charitable construction to make the best of one another failings; so will you
find by a happy experience, how good and pleasant a thing it is for brethren to
dwell together in unity, and will have a title to those benefits which attend
it, for there God has promised his blessing and life for evermore Let this then
be at once your employment and your pleasure, and it will possess you of that
precious Legacy which our dying Savior left to his Disciples, Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give you; and will also conduct you by the surest method
to that peace of God which passes all understanding. A fourth duty which I
think my self more particularly obliged to recommend to you, is Loyalty and
Obedience to the present Government. Give not way, I beseech you, to any little
uneasinesses, which the present circumstances of affairs may lay upon some of
you; do not murmur or repine at every disappointment cast not the blame of
unavoidable miscarriages, upon those who are concerned in the management of
affairs; but contentedly resolve such unexpected occurrences into the
overruling Providence of an All-wise God: Let nothing tempt you to speak evil
of dignities, or lavishly to censure the conduct of your Governors: be
contented to think, that God can choose for you as well as your selves, and pay
a cheerful obedience to the King he has set over you, who consents to bear the
burden of a war in his person, which touches you only in your purses;
contribute readily to the support of those Forces, which are well employed to
keep the danger from your doors; and think not much to give some part of your
fortune for the security of the rest, and your Religion into the bargain. Then
will God give his blessing to you as the due reward of your submission to his
Will, by whom Kings reign and Princes decree justice; and he himself will not
fail to acknowledge that respect, which is paid to his image and his
substitute. These then are some of those more useful duties, which whilst you I
commend you to the word of God's grace, I have thought fitting out of that to
recommend to your practice; and may that word of grace so thrive within your
hearts, that it may take root downwards, and bring forth fruit upwards; may it
sh^d abroad within your souls the more eminent graces and fruits of the spirit,
such as Humility, Charity a peaceable disposition, and a hearty obedience to
the Government which you live under; that so the good seed which has been
carefully sown which was planted and watered by my unworthy Ministry, may, by
God's assistance; have a suitable increase; and may not lie dead or ineffectual
in any amongst you, but produce; according to the several measures of his
grace, in some a hund^d-fold, in some sixty fold, in some thirty fold. This
will commend you more successfully to God, than all my endeavors are capable
without it, and will both be able of itself to build you up here, and (...)
here after to give you an inheritance among all them (...) are sanctified. I
shall briefly consider these two great advantages, which our due regard t^ the
word of Gods grace, is here said to be able to impart unto us, and then I shall
make haste to a conclusion. And

1st. A due regard to the word of Gods grace, is able to build us up. This is a
Metaphor taken from a House, and it gives us to understand thus much, that in
order to our deserving the commendation, of being built up by the word of Gods
grace, there are two necessary qualifications required, without which no
edifice can be thought complete; and those are a foundation and a
superstructure: that which in a spiritual building answers to the former of
these, is faith; and that which is agreeable to the latter, is a good life and
conversation; for, to believe rightly, and to act accordingly, comprehends the
whole duty of a Christian.

1st then, I say, in this spiritual building, there must be faith as a
foundation. God, who is a wise and skilful Master Builder, will not allow his
House to be built upon the sand, but takes care to have it founded upon a rock;
as knowing that a failure in that principal part, can never be redressed by any
thing done afterward: let the other parts be managed with never so much care,
let them be beautified and adorned with never so much cost, yet cannot all this
make amends for the first miscarriage; it will be but a gayety of short
standing, overwhelmed by the violence of the first storm that shocks it: Unless
our faith be steadfast and unmovable, unless it be settled beyond wavering and
doubtfulness, it will never be able to sustain the weight of those good works
which must be raived upon it: But the word of Gods grace, the Gospel of our
Savior, is able to fix our faith so firmly and unalterably, as that it shall
be subject to no variableness, neither shadow of turning: it carries with it
such a power of conviction, and the divine authority shines through it so
clearly, that whoever attends to it seriously and without prejudice, must needs
be convinced by the demonstration of the spirit; and therefore, my brethren, if
any amongst you find their says at any time to be tottering and unsteady, I
commend you then especially to the word of Gods grace, apply your selves to it
with the greatest assiduity; and God, who is never wanting to those, who are
not first neglectful of him and of themselves, will not fail to assist you with
such a portion of his Spirit, as will enable you to profit by that, and will
make that able to build you up. But as this spiritual building must in the
first place have faith for its foundation, so must it

2dly, Have a good life and conversation for the superstructure. A foundation
is but useless of it self, and only supposes the folly of the undertaker,
unless he proceeds to complete the work, and finishes the upper stories for
ornament and use; and thus faith also is dead and insignificant, and serves
only to enhance the guilt of him that has it, unless it be made the groundwork
of good actions, and has a happy influence upon the course of our whole life.
Our Savior tells us, that when any man begins to build a tower, he ought to
compute whether he have sufficient to finish it; lest happily after he have laid
the foundation, and is not able to finish it, all that behold it begin to mock
him: and it is upon this very occasion, that he speaks this significant
parable, namely to expose the folly of those men who attempt to enter upon a
course of piety, and are not so far masters of their resolutions as to go
through with it, and persevere in it to the end. These men perhaps are willing
to give their assent to all the mysteries contained in the Gospel to confess
the truth of whatever it affects, and not to call in question the equity of any
of its doctrines; and this they think is sufficient for them, without ever
applying themselves to the practice of those duties, which it strictly requires
of all believers; they are contented indeed to be speculative Christians, but
it is upon the condition that they may be practical Atheists; but this deserves
no better a character, than the knowing, of our Masters will without the doing
it, and we are assured that the consequence of that shall be many stripes. In
vain then shall we plead, that we believe the Gospel; in vain shall we avow our
selves to be professors of Christianity, unless our practice be answerable to
our profession, and our faith is manifested by our works; our Savior will
declare that he knows us not, and will say to us, depart from me ye workers of
iniquity: we may make our passionate addresses at the door, and with repeated
exclamations cry, Lord, Lord, open unto us; but we shall be turned away as the
foolish Virgins were, because our Lamps have not been filled and trimmed. But
the Gospel of Christ is such a light unto our steps, and lantern to our paths,
as if we attend to it with a becoming reverence, will direct our feet into the
ways of godliness: we shall there see, if we are not wilfully blind, that the
design of our Saviors coming into the world, was not barely to inform our
understanding, but chiefly and most especially to regulate out practice; that
his business was not to form a set of Disputants; who should contest and
wrangle about points of controversy, but to purify to himself a peculiar
people zealous of good works: it will convince us that all the promises of the
Gospel, all the gracious overtures which it exhibits, have this express
condition annexed unto them, that we lead a pious and a godly life. Whenever
therefore, my Brethren, at any time you find your selves in danger to be misled
by your lusts, into the commission of any gross enormity, I then especially
commend you to the word of Gods grace; and advise you to betake your selves to
that set of Sacred Oracles, which will give you such assistance as may baffle
your temptations, and prove it self able to build you up.

But there is, secondly, another advantage, which a due regard to the word of
God's grace is here said to be able to impart unto you, it is able (says the
Text) to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

And this is an advantage of so considerable a value, as is sufficient to
engage you to a due regard, if the word of God's grace had nothing else to
recommend it. To have an inheritance among all them which are sanctified, and
to share in that possession which is reserved for Gods Elect, what a noble
privilege ought this to be esteemed, and how zealously should you contend to
qualify your selves for it! There are two things considerable in the
description of it. 1. That it is said to be an inheritance: and 2. That it is
such among all them which are sanctified. 1. then, It is said to be an
inheritance; and this shows you the certainty of that possession, the surest
tenure is that of inheritance; and especially amongst the Jews, it was looked
upon as a thing sacred, and not to be alienated upon any occasion: thus Naboth
chose rather to expose himself to the King's anger, and to that unjust
prosecution which cost him his life, than he would transgress against this
solemn custom, by parting with the Vineyard which he desired; the Lord forbid
it me (says he) that I should give thee the inheritance of my fathers. Yet this
secure and unalterable title is that by which you are allowed to make your
claim; and it is upon a due regard to the word of Gods grace, that the right we
pretend to is grounded and established; it is that which gives you the happy
assurances of your being heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ; from thence
you gain that spirit of adoption, by which you cry Abba, Father; and if you are
led by the directions which that gives, you shall find your selves thereby made
members of that general Assembly and Church of the first born, whose names are
written and registered in heaven; and happily admitted to be common partakers
of the glorious liberty of the children of God. But 2dly, This is an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified. Nothing that is unclean can
gain any admittance into this most holy and immaculate fellowship; purity of
life is the only qualification by which you may be fitted for this blessed
society: Those who would be looked upon as the brethren of Christ, must put on
him, and wear his resemblance; and whoever has his hope in him, must purify
himself even as he is pure. This is what the word of God's grace, inculcates to
you almost in every page: he that will ascend into the hill of the Lord and
abide in his holy place, must have clean hands and a pure heart; if you expect
that God should be a father unto you, and that you should he his sons and
daughters, you must come out from among the wicked and be separate, and not
touch the unclean thing: having therefore these promises, dearly beloved, let
us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the sear of God. Thus if you give a careful attention, to these and
such other rules and instructions, which are every where contained in the word
of Gods grace, you will find that sufficient to secure to you these advantages,
you will find it able to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified.

Thus in a confused and indigested manner (such as my present concern will give
me leave to make use of) I have touched upon all the material observations,
which the words of my Text have furnished me withal; and having all along
applied them to your more particular use, I shall add nothing more to what I
have said already. I shall only offer up, as I am in dispensably obliged, by
all the ties of gratitude and duty, my most hearty prayers to Almighty God,
that he would sanctify to you all what I have now been preaching, and what at
any time heretofore I have delivered to you; that so being defended by the
protection of your God, and fully instructed by the word of his grace, you may
be built up and established in your holy profession here, and have your
inheritance hereafter among all them which are sanctified

Give me leave to conclude the whole with St Paul's exhortation to his
Corinthians: Finally, brethren, farewell be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. To
him the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three persons but one God of love, be
ascribed all honor, power, might, majesty and dominion, henceforth and for
evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.
Sermons Preached by the Reverend Mr. Brady, and Sold by R. Parker.
A Sermon preached at Helmingham in Suffolk, June 30th, 1694. At the Funeral of
Lieutenant General Talmach.

A Sermon preached at Whitehall, March 3d. 1695. upon occasion of her late
Majesty's Death, before the Right Honorable the Countess of Darby, and the
rest of the Mourning Ladies.

A Sermon preached at the Parish Church of St. Martins Ludgate, September. 12th.
1695. before the Incorporated Society of Apothecaries of London.

A Sermon preached at St. Catherine Cree-Church, upon Sunday the 1st of March
1696. upon occasion of the late horrid Plot.


