THE HAPPY SLAVE, A NOVEL. In three Parts Complete.

Translated from the French.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for Gilbert Cownly, at the Popes Head in the Lower-walk of the
New-Exchange in the Strand. 1686.

To the Right Honorable, THOMAS Earl of OSSORY, Baron of MOOR PARK, One of the
Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, Knight of the Noble Order
of the Garter, etc.
My Lord,
NOthing was wanting to complete the Happiness of this Fortunate Slave, but to
fall into the hands of so Generous a Patron as your Lordship. And I who had
undertaken to furnish him, was willing to find him one so qualified, that he
might have reason to be well pleased with my Choice. To whom then could I with
more Reason Address my self for making this Present, than to a Lord, who by
Excellent Qualities, as well as Eminent Birth, every day gains Slaves and
Creatures to himself. To satisfy any of the truth of what I say, they need not
make a particular enquiry, or hearken after the Public Attestations of this
Kingdom. The Fame of your Glory extends beyond England; there is not in Europe
a Court, where it has not arrived, to gain you the Heart and Admiration of the
best. But, my Lord, to know your Merit more perfectly, we need only consider
the particular esteem always had for you by the greatest and most discerning
Monarch in the World; the choice he has made of your Person for the greatest
Employments of War, and the most important Negotiations of Peace; the weight
and stress he lays on your Advice, and the confidence wherewith he relies on
the clearness of your Judgment, and greatness of your Capacity in his Council.
How fair a Field, my Lord, are your Praises to enlarge on, were my Faculties
proportionable to my Subject, or my Offerings of value answerable to the
Dignity of the Person they are made to, but the Enterprise is too vast and too
difficult for such an Author as I; and your Glory stands so sure in that
universal esteem the whole World has for you, that it has no need of new
Elogies or Panegyricks. It becomes me better to study your Pleasure: The Happy
Slave has an impatient desire to entertain your leisure hours with the
Relation of his Adventures. And if he prove so happy, as not to displease you,
I shall esteem it the highest piece of good Fortune he has met with in his
Life; at least, I believe he cannot desire any thing with greater passion,
unless it be, that he who has taken the Liberty to present him to you, may
with all due respect subscribe himself,

My Lord, Your most Humble, and most Obedient Servant, S. Bremond.

Advertisement.
THE Book I Publish scarce deserves an Advertisement. But that I give you, is
not to bespeak the Critics in my favor. I cannot believe any Person of Wit
will exercise his Faculty on a Trifle, which perhaps I have spent less time to
Compose, than he must to censure. But it is because some Persons having small
kindness for an Author, have been pleased heretofore to comment on my Tables,
to make stories of my stories, and to stretch my fancy to conjectures which
never came into my Head: It were easy for me to justify my self in this
particular, if it were desired; but I conceive my manner of proceeding has
sufficiently done it, to Dedicate it to one of the Principal Lords of the
Kingdom, a Book, such as they make my former, by their strange interpretations
to be, and to put my Name to it, was it not the way to gain my self Enemies,
and utterly ruin me? I have committed faults in my time, but never of this
nature. Therefore I declare to the Public, and especially to those who busy
themselves in penetrating into other men's intentions, that under the literal
sense of my Tales there is not hid any Allegorical meaning, that when I speak
of the Turks and of Africa, I have not any Ideas in Europe or any other Nation,
and that they will make me think quite otherwise than I think, if they make me
speak any otherwise than I speak, if the Intrigues or Adventures I write of,
have some conformity to those of our times, I am not to answer for it: It Is the
fault of Chance and not mine. There are so many in Love, that though Love takes
infinite ways, they can hardly avoid meeting sometimes: were Writers confined
to entertain you only with things rare and extraordinary, they would be soon
drawn dry, and all their stories quickly exhausted; the Reader is entreated to
do me Justice herein, and not pay me with ingratitude for the Presents I make
him of my Toys: This shall be followed by a Second Part, where the History of
Laura, who shall bear the principal part in it, shall be matter of Gallantry,
and far exceed this of the Sultaness.

THE HAPPY SLAVE, A Novel.
AFRICA, for some Ages, has past for a part of the World, where the People
were no less Cruel and Savage than the Lions and Tigers that fill the Deserts
of that Country: But since the discovery of Love there, it has appeared, that
as Love grows in all Countries, so Barbary it self has nothing of Barbarous
but the Name. To verify this, I shall entertain you with a piece of Gallantry
acted there, which may justify what I affirm.

Count ALEXANDER, a young Roman Lord, very considerable for Estate, (but more
for Birth and Parts,) had scarce appeared to act his part on the great Theater
of the World, but he found himself pressed by his Relations to Marry: He was
handsome, high spirited, and witty, as those of Old Rome, but addicted to
Pleasure, as those of the New; humoursome, and wholly given up to the pursuit
of his Fancy and Inclinations. As for Marriage (upon the good Advice he had
received not to engage, but as late as he could,) he usually said, What a
pitiful Utensil a Wife is? witness the greatest part of those Gentlemen
dignified with the Illustrious Title of Husbands; especially now a days, when
Men seem to have Wives only for this, That others may make use of them.

These Consequences he drew, as well from Experience as Example; for being
Young, Handsome, and Rich; he was sufficiently qualified not to fail of good
Fortune, with a Sex (in our Age) very kind and susceptible, and had not wanted
his divertisements of that Nature; and therefore he had small inclination by
taking a Wife, to give others the Opportunity to pay him in his own Coin.

In the mean time the Interests of the Family (which often prove Poison to the
greatest pleasures of Life) obliging the most excellent Persons to ordinary
Actions: The Young Roman, to deliver himself from the importunity of Relations,
chose rather to quit the Pleasures of ROME, by Traveling abroad, than to make
himself subject to a Law so contrary to his Humor, and that beloved Liberty he
preferred before all things. He communicated his design to his Valett de
Chamber, who had served him long, and being active and ingenious, quickly took
order to have all things in readiness that were necessary for their purpose.

The Spring was come, and the Weather seasonable for Travel, when on a fair day
the Young Gentleman and his Servant privately left Rome, and Imbarqued at
Civita Vecchia in a Felucca hired for the purpose. His design was to visit the
best Courts of Europe, beginning with that of Spain. But there are Persons over
whom Fortune is so rigorously imperious, that she seems jealous of any thing
they undertake, without consulting her first. 'Twas she who provided Count
Alexander a Voyage into Africa, when he had designed to confine his Travels to
Europe: Of the Towns he was to see, Tunis was marked out by Fortune for one;
and though much out of his Road, yet where Fortune intermeddles, there always
happens something extraordinary; her excesses and Extravagancies being that
which chiefly makes us take notice of her.

The fourth day after he had left Civita Vecchia, this Young Lord began to
perceive, that though all the Elements are terrible at Sea, yet Men who are
Enemies are more terrible than the Elements. Till then the Weather had been
fair to extremity, not a puff of contrary Wind: He proceeded in his Voyage with
what speed he could wish, and blessed himself at the happiness of the Weather.

The Coast of Italy is dangerous, especially in Summer, being then subject to
In-roads by People of the South, whose livelihood is Robbery; and when the
Weather is fair, their Trade is so great, that whosoever is not upon his Guard,
is happy if he escape them; I mean the Corsairs of Barbary. Count Alexander,
who never thought he had left Rome, to be led in Triumph to Tunis, saw himself
at break of day saluted by a Brigandine of that Nation: The poor Seamen
presently took Alarm, the sight of one Turban was sufficient to affright them:
And the Turks had scarce discharged three or four Muskets at the Christians,
but they leapt into the Sea to save themseves by swimming; the Italian Count
and his Servant staid in the Vessel, not in hopes of being able to defend
themselves against that number of Enemies, which the strength of Rollando, and
the Enchanted Armor of Amadis could scarcely have done, (whereas now a Man is
but a Man, and among other Secrets that of Enchanting Arms is lost.) But having
no skill in swimming, he could not expect to esape as the Mariners: Yet he was
not so out of love with his Life, but that he held it better to be a Slave than
be drowned. But that those Barbarous Corsairs might see what a Person they
dealt with, and that he might sell his Liberty as dear as possible; having
commanded his Servant to throw his Baggage overboard, he gave him order what
further to do. I will omit the Description of the Action, though reputed the
most glorious ever done on the Mediterranean, being a Combat of Two against
Thirty, whereof they laid six dead on the Deck, and many more wounded. 'Twas an
Engagement of a Herd of Wolves against Two young Lions, who defended themselves
with unparalled Valor and Courage. It Is true, the Turks (not to lose the
Money they did expect from their Ransom) spared them at first, using Cudgels
only against them; but at length the Blood and Death of their Comrades, and the
shame and disdain they had of so long and obstinate defense made by two rash
Christians against them, being so many, having filled them with rage, they had
recourse to their Symitars: And with so much advantage, that having killed the
Valet, the Young Count (after several Wounds received, his strength, not his
Courage, having failed him in so tedious a Fight, was forced to yield, being no
longer able to lift up his Arm to make use of his Sword. The Cowardly Villains
had scarce the Courage to board him, and durst not approach him till they saw
him fallen flat on his back. They took him, and carried him on board their
Brigandine, where they gave him all the help in their power for saving his
Life, having no other mark of their Victory, but the taking one Valiant Person,
who had cost them too dear to be proud of their Prize: They beheld him with
Admiration, and could not comprehend how an Age so tender could be capable of
so much Courage; and that in a Body appearing so delicate, there was strength
enough lodged to perform the actions they had seen. And being Naturally
Superstitious, they did really believe there was something supernatural in the
Young Man's Person, or at least, that he was the Flower of Christendom; this
conceit helped them to bear with more patience the shame of their Victory. And
finding their Men thin, and having taken before some considerable Prizes, they
resolved to return directly for Tunis.

The Weather was favorable, and in few days sail they arrived at Gouletta,
where going ashore they put the poor Count on Horseback, bound and pinioned
like a Robber, and brought him to the Town; some of these Barbarians having got
the start of the rest, spread such a Report of his Valor and Courage, that
they drew together not the ordinary People only, (who are curious of small
matters) but the Principal Persons of Tunis, and the Bassa himself, who
accompanied with many of his Friends, came walking toward the Ruins of
Carthage, to see the arrival of this Famous Christian, whom they imagined a Man
that carried Terror in his looks: But how were they surpised to see a Youth
pale and disfigured, yet keeping with his good mien the marks of Grandeur in
his Countenance. He was pityed by all, and the Bassa being a gallant and
generous Person, was presently seized with such indignation against the
Villains, who used in that manner one so little deserving it, that he commanded
them forthwith on pain of his displeasure to unbind him upon the place; which
they instantly did, not daring to disobey him, who next the Dey was of greatest
Authority and Power in the Kingdom: He asked them the price of their Slave,
and, having commanded him to be conducted to his Palace, paid the Corsairs five
hundred Patacoons, being the Money they demanded.

Count Alexander having happily fallen into the hands of so good and generous a
Patron, began to recover. He was Lodged in a handsome Apartment, where the
Bassa's Chyrurgions searched his Wounds: And being more carefully looked to than
on board the Brigandine, he soon found himself better, though weak, and sore
bruised by what he had suffered at Sea from the hands of those Barbarians, who
having no pity for any, had not been too careful of him; yet there was no
danger of his Life, the Fever he had was not great, and they had hopes to see
him well in few days. The Bassa visited him Morning and Evening, and by degrees
his care and kindness grew to that height, that he came more frequently to see
him, and not only took more particular notice of him, but increased daily the
esteem and friendship he had for him.

Before I proceed, it may not be amiss to satisfy the Curiosity of the Reader,
in giving him an account of the Person; the Birth and Character of the Bassa.
Mahomet Bassa. by the Father of Sidy Marat, and Mahomet Lapsy the new Beys, was
the Son of a Renegado of Corsica, of the Family of Petrosanty, who by the
handsomness of his Person and the excellency of his Wit, having gained the good
Opinion of the Dey or King of the Country, made so good use of the favor of
his Prince, that he advanced him to the highest Office of the Kingdom, whereof
he left his Son Mahomet his Heir. But, to shorten the Story, Mahomet the
younger being deeply embroyled with the Dey and the Divan, (who, jealous of the
Authority his Father had gained, would have divided the Offices of Bassa and
Bey went to the Port, and returned Victorious: Tunis never flourished as under
him, being as fit for Arms as Gallantry, of a great Spirit, and excellent Wit,
the most Brave, the most Generous and Magnificent of Men: He loved the
Christians, and did them Justice; and entertained a Commerce of Civility with
many Princes of Europe. He sent and received Presents every Year to and from
the Great Duke of Tuscany; in a word, no Lord of that Country ever carried
himself better, and had more Merit and Reputation than he: Some resemblance of
this Splendour may yet be seen in the Person of Mahomet Lapsy his Son; he had
inclinations worthy a great Lord, as he was, and the Soul of a Man truly
Generous, and of Eminent Virtue.

The Bassa was charmed with admiration at the Wit of the Count, extremely
pleased with his Conversation, and sometimes past three or four hours in
familiar Discourse, sitting on his Bed. He was chiefly surprised to find his
Apprehension so clear, and Knowledge so general, that what Subject soever he
chose to Discourse of he spoke of to admiration. This made the Bassa speak of
him to his Friends with so tender affection, and so much to his Praise, that he
gained him the Esteem and Amity of all the principal Lords of the Kingdom, who
came to see him, and made him Presents according to the Custom of the Country.

The Bassa, by many Illustrious marks and clear discoveries, was induced to
believe the Count a Person of no ordinary Quality, but did not think fit to
question him on that point; and had no further knowledge of him, than that he
was an Italian. Nor durst the Count acquaint him with his Condition, fearing,
the knowing of it might make his Enlargement the more difficult: But after so
many favors from the Bassa, he could not in gratitude conceal himself from a
Person who had Obliged him so highly, and to whom he did owe more than his
Life. Therefore being asked by the Bassa, whether his Parents were living, and
why he writ not to them: Sir, (said he) I should be the basest of Men, should I
ever forget the Obligations you have put upon me, nor could I be guilty of a
greater dishonesty, than to be prevailed upon by fear, or any other
consideration, not to pay you what I owe you. I confess, (and I hope you will
Pardon me,) that I scrupled to make a full discovery of my self to you, for
fear my Captivity might be the harder, my bondage more severe, and my Liberty
valued at a higher rate: but having found you so generous, I cannot, after the
favors you have heaped upon me, the Rights you have over your Slaves, by
forbearing to tell you, I am a Person of Quality, of one of the best Families
of Rome; that my Name is Count Alexander, and that if ever you restore me to my
Liberty, I must pay you my Ransom with most grateful acknowledgments of your
kindness and favors.

The Bassa smiled, and with much tenderness answered, Alexander, you shall not
fare the worse for your discovery to me; I am no Merchant of Slaves, nor did I
buy you to sell you again: You are free, and shall live with me in this
Country as if you were in your own, with one of your Friends: And if I detain
you here a little longer than perhaps you would wish, it is because I can
hardly part with one for whom I have so high an esteem, and so cordial
affection. To these he added other expressions of Kindness, which were joyfully
received by the Count, and dispelled all his grief for the loss of his Liberty.

As soon as he had recovered his strength, the Bassa made him partake of his
Pleasures and Divertisements, in Hunting, Walking, Horse-race; in all which the
Count appeared Eminent above others, and became more Famous than ever any
Christian was in those Parts; every considerable Person was ambitious to visit
him, and took pleasure to see, and to treat him, which is a special favor to
those of their Country, much more to one who professed a Religion, to which
they are open irreconcilable Enemies. Hence you may observe the power of
Merit, and how irresistible are influences of a Fortunate Destiny. The esteem
the Bassa expressed publicly for him, contributed much to all these
advantages; but you are to consider his Person, and the sweetness of his
Temper, and candor of his Actions as the effectual means for gaining him Amity,
and that which won him the Love of the most Excellent Persons.

But notwithstanding his Illustrious Acquaintance, and agreeable
Divertisements, the Honors and Favors he daily received, he could not forbear
wishing with sighs for a return into Europe. He lived as one free, but was
really a Slave to the Affection of the Bassa, from which he thought his
deliverance more difficult, than from Fetters and Chains. His Wit and
Inclinations were not for the Men of that Country; he loathed, and was weary
of them: The Turks have a good sense, and will reason well enough of the
Affairs of the World, and are great and subtle Politicians; but for Wit and
good Breeding, they know not what it is; their Conversation is barren, and
consists more in the smoke of Tobacco than Excellent Discourse: Their Knowledge
is small, having ordinarily no advantage of Reading or Travel. The Bassa alone
had more Wit, and more Reason than the rest altogether; but his Employment in
the State engaging him in a thousand indispensible Affairs, would not allow him
to be always with Alexander, who in the mean time past his Melancholy hours in
the Garden of the Seraglio, where he had the privilege to walk, being a
retired and very pleasant place, and that wherein he took great delight. But
alas, how different were these days from those at Rome! the Italians are
naturally apt to be Melancholy, and this Solitude made the Count so: The Bassa,
who loved him sincerely, and passionately wished to have him always in good
humor, was troubled to find him sad and dejected; but having often enquired
the cause, could not obtain farther satisfaction, than that it was an effect of
his Temper: He had furnished him to excess with all that Country could afford
for the Pleasures of Life, and could not imagine the cause of the grief, but
fancied at last that to complete his Divertisements, Alexander might want the
conversation of a Woman. The Bassa being a Person much given to Gallantry, was
the more easily inclined to believe he had found the true cause of his
Melancholy. And looked upon it as no incurable Disease, but presently resolved
to find out a Remedy, by furnishing him with a Mistress, which was a high
strain of complaisance in a Person of his Character; but there were no limits
to the Love he had for his Alexander.

The Law of Mahomet is very severe in this Point, against Persons of another
Religion, though very indulgent to those of his own. Those who fall into the
hands of the Turks, and will make love to their Women, are under the necessity
of changing their Religion, or Burning: these Extremities are hard, yet of the
many Christians reduced to those straits, I know not one who has thought
Martyrdom so charming, as not to prefer Circumcision before Burning: the Bassa,
though no zealous observer of the Law, was willing however to avoid the Scandal
that might follow if the Intrigue were discovered, and therefore designed to
marry him to a Christian. There was with the Sultaness his Wife, an Italian
Slave, a young Maid of good quality, lovely and witty: it was not long since
the Bassa had been in love with her, but without any success: whether it
proceeded from the respect she bore to the Sultaness her Mistress, who loved
her entirely, or from scruple of Conscience in point of Religion, with which
she excused her self, certain it is, his addresses were vain; and after three
Months eager persuit of his design, being not accustomed to so much resistance,
he quitted her, and cast his eyes on other less difficult conquests: he hoped
that one Christian with another might have better success, and that Alexander
being very lovely, and young, needed only to show himself for gaining the love
of a Maid of his Country, professing the same Religion with him: he endeavored
to dispose her for the purpose, by raising in her an esteem for the Gallant he
provided her: he had often spoken of him in the Chamber of the Sultaness, where
Laura, the Slave we are discoursing of, did constantly attend.

And having formed the design, he seldom entertained them with any thing else,
but Alexander did this, or Alexander said that; of which he gave them so
pleasant Descriptions, that he could not fail of making some impressions of
love for him in a Woman, though never so little susceptible.

The Count knew nothing of all these good Offices; the Bassa smiling sometimes
at his sadness, would tell him, he should shortly see him in a different humor.
One having disposed all things on Laura 's side, (who had told him, she would
not be displeased to see this Christian) he took him into the Garden of the
Seraglio to walk, and after a turn or two, asked him if he had ever been in
love. The question did very much surprise him, apprehending, that being among a
People naturally suspicious, the Bassa might perhaps have had some Jealousy of
him, though he could not imagine the cause. But to disabuse him, he held it
necessary to affect great indifference in the business of Women, and (the truth
is) to that day he had not been in love. And though it were ill courtship to
the Bassa, who was an admirer of Women, to tell him he had never been in Love;
yet he chose rather to commit a solaecism in courtship, than to give him the
least cause of suspicion. The Bassa advised him to have a care of himself, lest
Love should one day be revenged of him, and told him, he despaired not of
seeing him a Lover in Barbary: You are, said he, handsome and witty, and there
are here, as in Europe, dangerous Ladies, who perhaps may have designs on your
liberty; and you are not yet got out of Tunis: This Discourse unexpected, and
spoken with such an Air, so troubled the Count, he knew not what answer to
make. The Bassa much pleased at the disorder he had put him to; What, said he,
does Love appear so terrible to you, that you dare not encounter it? can a Man
of your bravery be afraid of a Passion? Recollect your self, and think it not
so dreadful here as in Italy; you arm your Cupid with weapons of War, we dress
ours with Flowers; nothing is less cruel than Love among the Turks: our Women
are kind, and good natured, and never are the cause of any man's death by
coyness and disdain; the sole difficulty is in getting a sight of them; gain
but that point, and nothing can be more easy than the rest: your Ladies are
scrupulous and shy of showing favor to their Lovers, and ours make a
conscience of seeing their Languish: it is not so odious to be fond and coming
with you, as it is to be cruel and insensible here. We follow in the first place
the Law of nature, preferring it to Mahomets, as being Men before we are
Mussulmans. We hold our selves obliged to pay kind regard and affectionate
tenderness to Female Beauty, and expect from it a return of complacency. And
those who approve not these Maxims, we esteem unworthy to taste the pleasures
of Love. I know that in Europe you use this Passion an extraordinary way,
making that Martyrdom which should be a delight; but I would fain know, what
the design of that Woman can be, who sees a man every day on his knees at her
feet, sighing for that which she also desires, and it may be, more
passionately. Why then must he be tormented? Why so many sighs, why so many
tears expected from him, when the passion of both Sexes is equal, if that of
the Female may not pass for the greater?

The Count having in this time recollected himself, answered; I believe, Sir,
that in Love as in other matters every one may have his particular fancy, and
different Maxims for conduct: but if I, who was never in Love, may be allowed
to deliver my opinion of it, I conceive that Men born under a Law, are
insensibly disposed to bear it with ease. And I dare confidently affirm, there
is more sweetness, and charming delight in the torments we endure in our way of
Loving, than in those easy pleasures that cost you nothing: think not, Sir,
those torments so cruel as our Lovers represent them; they aggravate them only
to affect their Mistresses the more, and to make them more sensible. It would
certainly surprise you to hear them cry, Increase, O love, Increase so sweet a
pain: their sufferings are pleasures. The Bassa was so charmed with hearing him
speak, that he would not interrupt him, so that he proceeded, What satisfaction
can you find in a Love that is fulsom and dull, without any pique to make it
poynant, and season it for relish? What divertisement to be expected from an
innocent Cupid, a Child without wit, without waggery, that permits you to do in
all things as you please? The Bassa could not forbear laughing, and told him,
that to make him believe that Love the most charming, that made him suffer
most, he must make it appear by trial in himself by being in Love, enduring
with pleasure all the torments he spoke of: Sir, said Alexander, I was never in
love in my Country, where you know we have freedom of living, and Liberty of
converse with the Female Sex; it is not probable then I shall fall in love
here, where we are not allowed so much as a sight of them: means may be found,
replied the Bassa, to satisfy you in that particular if you desire it. I do
not conceive it for my advantage, said the Count, to thrust my self into the
fire to try the experiment, or to change my Religion. No, no, said the Bassa,
it is with a Christian I would have you acquainted, and one in my judgment very
beautiful, and not unworthy your sighs: had I been of your mind, and like the
Lovers of your Country, taken pleasure in being vexed and tormented, my business
might have been done. She made me pine for her above three Months, till weary
of a Mistress that had so little sense of my pain, I betook my self to others
that were more of my humor; her beauty and wit will certainly charm you, and
you may find her as haughty, as fierce, as cruel as you can wish: it may be
difficult to have a sight of her, as being with the Sultaness, who, since she
knew the inclinations I had for her, would never permit her to step out of her
Apartment: but I Will bring you thither disguised as an Eunuch; there is no other
way of entrance for you into the Seraglio: and you are so young, that by Night
you may pass for an Eunuch without any suspicion. The Count gave him a thousand
thanks for the favor, not but that he could have been very well content to
have been without it, having no great desire to engage himself in Acquaintance
in a Country where he would tarry as short time as he could; yet in
complaisance to the Bassa, and of Curiosity to see a Slave the Bassa
represented so beautiful, he accepted this offer with some kind of joy.

The fourth Prayer being over, be came to his Patron, being the time he usually
went to the Seraglio: And having taken the Habit of an Eunuch provided for him
there, he waited on the Bassa to the Apartment of the Sultaness: Laura, who had
notice of their coming, waited their entrance; the Bassa came smilling up to
her, and whispered her in the Ear, that he had brought her an Eunuch, who could
tell her News out of Italy; prayed her to have a care of him, and to use him as
a Person he loved entirely. Laura fell a laughing, and answered, she doubted
not but the Eunuch should give him a good account of his Reception. The Count,
though Disguised, was so easy to be known, that, had the Bassa said nothing,
his good Mien had discovered him: No Eunuch, no Turk had so good an air. She
gave him her hand to lead her into a Chamber, where they should not be exposed
to their view who past by. Sir, said she, I know not what thanks to give the
Bassa for the favor he has done me, to afford me a sight of you, no man being
allowed entrance here but himself, and the Eunuch whose Habit he has caused
you to take. I cannot impute it to any thing but the extraordinary affection he
has and daily declares for you. It Is true, Madam, answered the Count, the
kindness of the Bassa to me is extreme; but either of us have reason to be
concerned how to thank him, (as he very well deserves) it is certainly I, for
the favor he has procured me; yet I could wish I were not wholly beholding to
him for it, but that (as he would have me believe) you had a hand in it. Sir,
replied Laura, I shall tell you no lie, I have made it sufficiently known to
you, I desired this favor from him. He told us things so glorious of you, and
related them so much to your advantage, you may easily believe, I (who, for
three years I have been here, have not had the Liberty of Converse with any
Man) could not but desire acquaintance of a Person* so generally esteemed.
Madam, said he, this Country has been favorable in allowing me a Reputation,
which perhaps I may find difficult to maintain in your Opinion. You need not
fear that, replied Laura, your Mien confirms sufficiently the reports that have
past of you. But to change the Discourse, do you know, said she smiling, that
sometimes it is dangerous in a Nation like this, to make your self so much the
subject of Discourse; if not on the Men's account, yet certainly on the Women's,
who fall in Love merely on report, without a sight or knowledge of the Party:
The Count answered smiling, Madam, there is no danger of your being of the
number of those kind-hearted Ladies, I am not so Fortunate. And why, said she,
might not I be one, who have so longed for a sight of you: but to lose no more
time, I must tell you, your Fortune is better than you think; and I do that for
another, which perhaps I would not have done for my self. The desire of seeing
a Man is here reputed a mighty advancement of Love, where to see and to agree
are all one. But I have undertaken this affair, and made the Bassa believe I
have very favorable thoughts of you. And to satisfy your Curiosity of knowing
the Party for whom I have so much complaisance in store, it is for the Bassa's
Lady, Madam Alhie the Sultaness: The confidence she is pleased to repose in me
is so great, that she has entrusted me with this Secret, and my kindness for
her should not admit one moments scruple doing her this Service. I cannot doubt
but you have heard of her beauty; never was any so famous in this Kingdom, nor
perhaps in the World, more worthy admiration: And as for her temper, it is the
sweetest and most lovely that can be imagined. The first view you have of her,
will persuade you she has an inclination to Love, so tender, so languishing is
the air of her Countenance. And though this be natural to the Women of this
Country, and that the first thing they are taught, is to sigh, and appear
languishing, yet I have not observed those weaknesses in her but on your
account. To deduce things from the Original, I must inform you, that when the
Bassa returned from Constantinople, having dispatched the Affair depending
there between him, and the King, and Divan of this place, and being confirmed
by the Grand Signior in the Offices his Father had left him, which they had
disputed; the King, in order to Reconciliation, was advised to give the Bassa
his Daughter in Marriage. Alhie was then Sixteen Years old, and her beauty at
the height; though at this day in my judgment, no man that sees her, but must
be in Love with her. These Marriages of Policy and State-interest, to which the
Daughters of great ones are subject to be Sacrificed, seldom prove Happy. The
Bassa Espoused Alhie, and perhaps loved her a Week, but after that returned to
his former Engagements, and for ordinary beauties quitted the greatest of the
Kingdom. It Is true, it often happens thus in this Country, where Men abhor
loving by Duty and Obligation, and commonly love Mistresses better than Wives:
but this Lady, in my Opinion, ought to have been excepted, as wanting nothing
requisite to satisfy the Passion of any reasonable Man; but she is as
unfortunate as others. The Bassa, though otherwise a Person of much Gallantry,
visits her scarce once in a Month; yet he pays her all the Respect in the
World, and she has no cause of complaint but of his Love; but take love from
Marriage, what signifies the rest? What a trouble it is to a Young Lady, who
knows her own merit, to see her self slighted in that whereof she is most
sensible? A Lady who would think her self happy in being beloved, and thinks
she deserves it: you must be a Woman before you can comprehend the rigor of
this usage, and the greatness of her misfortune. But to come to what concerns
you; the Sultaness has ever had a great inclination for Christians; and the
greatest pleasure she takes, is, in stories she makes me tell of my Country,
which surprise her so (especially when I speak of the freedom Men have there
with Women) that she has a thousand times wished her Fortune had been as mine,
and that she had fallen into the hands of a Christian, who would have carried
her into that Country. It Is certain, a Woman had better be a Slave with us,
than free among the Turks, where their Life is nothing but a perpetual Slavery.
The Adventures of Love and Gallantry have pleased her so well in the relation,
that she longs for a sight of one of those I called Persons of Quality and
Merit, who were so Gallant and Handsome, as I represented. You were no sooner
arrived, but she came with great joy to tell me, the Bassa had newly bought a
Christian, of whom they spoke Wonders. I fell a laughing, and asked if it were
not such a one she had often wished for her Slave. She blushed, and turning
about with a sigh, answered, who knows what may happen, and whether Fortune
has not designed him for me. She made me her Bedfellow that Night, to
entertain her on that subject. On the morrow the Bassa having confirmed the
Reports of you, and commended your Person, she and I for several days had no
discourse but of you. The kindness she has for me, makes me somewhat familiar
with her; nor do we very strictly observe here our distance toward great ones;
this made me sometimes take the Liberty to quarrel with her for the longing she
expressed for a Man she had not seen. I confess, said she, this were falling in
Love a little too soon, if we managed our Love as the Christians do theirs. But
the Bassa having made such a description of this Man, there is not a Woman in
the Kingdom who would not have had a greater Passion for him than I have
expressed. And you may believe he would not have spoken so much in his praise
before the meanest of his Empresses; but though he slight me so, that he cares
not what I think, my affections are free. You would esteem your self happy,
Madam, said I, to have such a Christian in Love with you. More happy, replied
she, than you can imagine. And I will assure you, I could willingly change the
state I am in, for the condition of a private Christian Lady: What good does it
me, to abound thus with Riches, to receive so much Honor, to be the Daughter
of a King, and the Wife of a Bassa, if I cannot be content, nor do as I would,
nor love where love is due? In a word, if I am nothing less than I am taken to
be, but a Slave more unhappy than those under Chains. Poor Laura (said she,
embracing me tenderly) how I pity thee, who have tasted the Pleasures and
Liberty of thy Country, and have unhappily fallen into their hands who use so
unworthily all sorts of Women.

With such discourses as these did we entertain our selves ever since they
spoke of you at Tunis. The Bassa came oftener to visit the Sultaness, though we
knew not the reason; and almost every day brought us the News of you: And, as
he loves you entirely, took pleasure in relating every thing you did. Perhaps,
had he known the favorable inclinations the Sultaness had for you, he had been
more sparing in his expressions of you, for I cannot believe he designed to
prejudice himself in speaking obligingly of you. But it was an oversight, and
most unpardonable in him who so well knew the temper of Women of this Country:
Judge you whether so good a report from so good a hand could want its effect.
The Sultaness was affected with them so much to the purpose, that what at first
was a bare inclination, grew up by degrees to a settled Passion. Her humor was
suddenly changed from Merry and Jocund, into Sadness and Melancholy; and I, who
alone knew her Distemper, could not but pity her sighs and complaints, and was
extremely afraid she might fall into a Disease, which they call Fantasy, and
is a kind of Melancholy that proves Mortal to many Men and Women of this
Country. I did my endeavor to cure her of this Passion, by representing to her
all the obstacles in her way to the happiness she desired. But my Remedies came
too late, I did but trouble her to no purpose, having said to her self all that
I could possibly say to divert her from the affection she had taken: So that
despairing of Remedy on that side, I applied my thoughts another way, and
flattered her hopes of bringing that to pass, which I could not discover the
least possibility to effect. But to prevent the growth and increase of her
Distemper, it was necessary to deceive her by flatteries and hopes. At last, I
know not how it fell out, that the Bassa having spoken of you to me two days
ago, as he frequently does when he finds me alone, I told him, I should be very
glad to see you, if it might be done without noise and soandal: I was extremely
astonished how easily he promised it: And you may believe I had not waited here
for you, but that I very well knew him a Man of his word.

The Count having hearkened to all this discourse with mavelous attention,
and thanked Laura for all her good Offices, and answered all her obliging
expressions in behalf of the Sultaness, discovered to her the Bassa 's design,
and the reason of his being brought thither; Laura was ravished to hear his
discourse, and though she foresaw her concern in the Affair was like to be
small, yet she was pleased with the News she received, being willing to
sacrifice all Interests of her own, to the satisfaction of her Lady. But, Sir,
to tell you all, said she to the Count, having paid my thanks to the Bassa for
the favor I was in hopes of from him, I went presently to bring the News to
the Sultaness, who could not sufficiently embrace me, being so extremely
transported, that nothing in the World could have made her more joyful; she
has scarcely been able to sleep ever since: she and I have laid a hundred
designs* and framed to our selves a thousand devices how she may have a sight
of you: but if the Bassa will not permit you to come alone hither, I do not see
how it may be effected: the Sultaness in the mean time will be ravished with
joy that I have seen you, and that you know some part of her mind.

The happy Roman being charmed at the kindness a Lady of that beauty and
quality had for him, was very urgent with Laura to oblige him on this occasion,
and pressed her to say to the Sultaness from him, all that a heart extremely
sensible of the favor she did him, was capable to express. That he would have
esteemed himself the happiest of men, had it been in his power to have merited
this honor, and that it should be the business of his life, to deserve it by
his actions. Sir, replied Laura, all she desires of you, is that you will so
manage the Liberty the Bassa does afford you, that she may once have a sight of
you: I find my self engaged to it by so many reasons, said the Count, that you
may be assured I will not forget any thing that may gain this honor: I must
entreat you to assure the Sultaness accordingly, and that I have at least as
much passion as she. He had no sooner said this, but the Bassa came to them,
which made them change their discourse, and the Bassa having condescended to
make himself one of the company, and very pleasantly rallied; then said, he
perceived by their countenances they were obliged to him for the acquaintance
he had procured between them, and that they were very well pleased one with the
other: the Count and Laura having returned the complement, the Bassa took his
leave, and he and the Count went out of the Seraglio.

The Bassa had observed such joy in Alexander's countenance when he was with
Laura, it made him believe he was very well pleased with the visit he had given
her. But he had the curiosity to ask him how he liked her; and whether she
appeared so beautiful as he had represented her: the Count answered, it was
certainly impossible to see a Lady more handsome, or more witty: and that he was
charmed at her Beauty and Conversation. The Bassa who desired nothing more than
to see him in Love, was extremely glad at the confession he made; and told him
it should be his fault, if he saw her not again; and, if he desired, he might
do it on the morrow, that he would give him a Key to enter the Seraglio, and
that he might go alone; lest if he brought him in, the Sultaness might be
jealous: it being not his custom to visit her so often, the Count failed not to
acquaint him how highly that favor would oblige him; so that the Bassa bid him
go to bed, and take his rest, and told him he should see Laura on the morrow
about the time he had seen her that day.

Never was a night so restless to any man, as this to the Count, her
inclination, like that he had to marriage, with the principal and most
beautiful Lady of the Kingdom, was a thing so rare, and so tempting for a Man
of his temper; what Laura had said of those obliging thoughts that charming
Person had for him, did so ravish him with pleasure, that in the depth of
misfortune he could not imagine any man more fortunate than himself: But when
he considered, that she was the Wife of the Bassa, a Person to whom he was so
strictly obliged, he was troubled extremely, and sighed for sorrow; these
second thoughts prevailing at that time over the other, he highly reproached
himself for entertaining a thought of so base an ingratitude. But it is a
ticklish business to repent of a thing that extremely delights us, and men
seldom charge themselves home for a fault so pleasing and lovely, as the
pleasure of being beloved: those reproaches of the Count against himself, were
not altogether the most violent that might be, and sometimes he would be angry
with himself for making so much ado. At last, being assaulted by turns, on the
one side by Reason, on the other by Passion, by the Glory of that, and the
tenderness of this, he got up in the Morning, without having been able to take
any other resolution than to yield himself up to be guided by his Destiny, to
be governed by Fate, and be merely passive in the management of the business;
that is to say, to love, in this particular, like a Turk, and to see the
Sultaness, if it were so predestined: but to do nothing in order to it,
though he had promised Laura to contribute on his part all that lay in his
power, and had told the Bassa, he should be extremely glad to go again to the
Seraglio. His resolution sometimes was very tottering and weak, and to speak
truth, it is almost vain to take one against love: he wished a thousand times
that day, that his Fate to whose conduct he had given himself up, would incline
to bring him to the Sultaness. He waited the hour with a great deal of
impatience, however he would fain have persuaded himself to the contrary: but a
young heart cannot be insensible, being so apt to take fire, that it scarce
requires any help to inflame it.

As soon as the Bassa saw the Count in the Evening, he showed him (smiling) the
Key of the Seraglio: and he received it with the greatest joy in the World. But
I give it, said the Bassa, on condition that you make me your Confident. And I
think I have done enough to engage you to do me that pleasure. The hour was
come for his going to the Sultaness, and the Count having put on his Eunuchs
Habit, his Patron every day more obliging than other, would needs bear him
company as far as the Seraglio; Laura having notice of his coming, had waited
for him above an hour at the Gate, and no sooner saw him arrived, but ravished
with joy, she gave him her hand, and told him. You are either the most
dextrous, or else the most fortunate Person in the World: you bring about
things so difficult, and in so short a time, that all things seem to join in
your favor: I am obliged for it to my fortune, answered the Count; for, as for
Addresses I had no occasion to use any, but if you would make me believe my
self as happy as you say, help me to a sight of the Sultaness. Laura told him,
he should presently hear of her, and brought him into a Chamber, where her Lady
was used to receive visits. It was her custom to seat her self in a kind of
Alcove, the passage to which, was through her Chamber, made up with great
Ballistres guilt, and covered with a Curtain of very thin Silk, through which
she could see those whom she honored only with a sight of her; which is a
piece of State used in that Country.

Laura told the Count, that the Sultaness would see him from behind that
Curtain. And shall not I then, said he, have the honor to see her. I know not,
said Laura, but it is a favor so great, that it is never granted but when they
are willing to grant all that may be expected: Ah Madam, said the Count, I
beseech you to desire that favor for me; tell her it will be of small
consequence to give a stranger a sight of her, and that I shall die with grief
if she deny me that honor. Laura* promised him all the assistance in her
power, and leaving him for a moment, went to advertise the Sultaness, who
questionless longed for news of the arrival of her dearly beloved Christian. In
the mean time the Count considered the Riches and Ornaments of the Chamber,
being the most magnificent of the Apartment, it was set out with four Crystal
Glasses which had a pleasant effect on the Gold and the Jewels which glittered
all about: Scarce had the Sultaness seen Laura, but she knew by her countenance
the happy news she brought; and without allowing her time to say any thing, she
past to the Alcove, from whence she designed to take a view of the Christian,
before he should know that she was there. But she made too great a noise at her
entrance, and the Cavalier let her know, he had perceived her, by saluting her,
as he did, after the Turkish mode: Laura arrived the same time from the other
side, and going to the Ballistre, went to whisper the Sultaness, who was not
able sufficiently to express the pleasure she took in seeing this Christian,
and the Charms that appeared in his Person. As for him, he was strangely
perplexed at a visit of this nature, where he could neither see, nor speak to
the Party he visited. He went, he came, he turned about as desired, and at the
end of the Show, went silently to the Ballistre, and addressing himself to the
Sultaness, having seen a shadow of her through the Curtain, he told her a
thousand pretty Stories, a thousand Gallantries to oblige her to afford him a
view, for she understood Italian, and spoke it pretty well, having learnt it of
Laura. She was very well pleased to hear the Count speak, and heartily laughed
at it, but answered not a word, nor had the Curtain drawn. The Count was
impatient, and accounting every moment lost he spent in that manner, seemed to
fret and be angry, and in a frank and free way told her, he should die of the
Fantasy, as the People of that Country, if she denied him this favor, and
that at last he would with his own hand draw that troublesome Curtain: and he
had certainly done it, if Laura, who feared the Sultaness might take it ill,
had not hindered him. But Laura was mistaken, and her Lady gave her not thanks
for her pains.

It Is a Maxim among the Women of that Country, not to sin of themselves against
the Rules of their duty; but press them a little, and offer them the least
violence, they will presently yield without any resistance: their excuse is,
that nature is weak, that men know it well enough, and are very much to blame
to press them so home: that if there be harm done, it must be laid to their
score, who cause them to do it, and not to them who are ignorant of it, and
innocent in the business. Laura not well verst in the use of this Maxim,
committed a fault, when she thought she had been discharging her duty. The
amorous Sultaness would have been ravished with joy to have been seen by the
Christian, and the officious Slave spoiled all by a piece of useless
discretion. But her Lady was willing to receive the miscarriage, and satisfy
in some measure the extreme desire her dear Christian had to see her; she gave
him leave to ask what he pleased, to make him amends for the rigor of the
custom of that Country, which made it undecent for her Sex to show themselves
to any but their Husband. The Count presently desired she would at least do him
the honor of showing him one of her fair hands: The Sultaness no sooner heard
him, but lifting up the Curtain a little, she gave him her hand over the
Ballistre. The young Count was so charmed with this favor, that transported
with joy, he laid his knee to the ground, and kissed her hand with such
passion; that the Sultaness, equally transported, wrung his hand, pressing it
so hard, to let him know she approved of what he did. She was not over careful
to keep her self unseen; and having put forth her arm, she could not choose,
but sometimes appear to him in part by one chance or other (to which perhaps
she contributed a little.) Her Gallant could have wished he had had a full
sight of her, but thinking he had enough for the first time, he would not
adventure to desire any more. The pleasure the Sultaness took in the sight of
him, was so great, and so charming, that she could have willingly past that
night with him. But knowing that many eyes were upon her, and that she lived
where men are extremely given to jealousy, and especially of their Wives, she
had apprehensions of being Lampoon'd in her own Apartment for staying so long
in the Alcove, at a time so unseasonable for receiving a visit. And Laura had
told her, 'twas time to withdraw. But how cruel a thing it is to be forced to
part from that which we love? it cannot be done without pain and regret. Still
she found some little pretense or other to stay him a little longer; at last
she pretented him with a Gold Chain beset with Jewels, and told him obligingly
it was not fit a Slave like him should wear any other. The happy Count better
satisfied with this Chain, than if she had given him the Crown of Tunis,
answered her Gallantry, and the favor she did him with the most passionate and
the most grateful expressions imaginable. And seeing the necessity of parting,
he took his leave of the Sultaness, and withdrew with Laura, who accompanied
him to the Gate of the Apartment.

Presents among the Turks, are the first Evidences of affections, and often
pass for declarations of love. Laura, who knew it well enough, made the Count
sensible, before parting, what that meant which he had received from the
Sultaness; and that he was not to doubt, having heard and seen so much of her,
but she passionately loved him. Yet he was to take heed, and believe he had
need of abundance of discretion, to deal with the Women of that Country, whose
passion of love is sometimes so violent, that they observe no bounds; that the
Sultaness was indeed the most rational she had known amongst them, and had the
most wit, yet tender and passionate as the rest. That she and he would be
immutably ruined, if the Bassa, who had no small experience in Amors, should
once have the least suspicion of the Intrigue. That there was not in the
Kingdom a man more tender of his honor than he; and that all the kindness he
had for him, would not save him from his indignation, if he once came to know
he had seen his Wife.

As much taken as our young Roman was with the pleasant beginnings of his
Amors, and for all his rejoycings at those evident kindnesses he had received
from the greatest Beauty under Heaven, yet he could not forbear reflecting on
Laura's good counsels, but went musing along the Seraglio, what course he
should take, what means he should use against so dangerous a Passion, which
would certainly bring him to ruin and confusion. When the Bassa going to one of
his Mistresses, met him by the way, and seeing him pass by without so much as
saluting him, he presently fell a laughing, and taking him by the arm. Now,
said he, I see that you are in love. The Count being confounded at his
surprising him in that case, made excuses for his fault. The Bassa made answer,
that if he desired to be pardoned, he must freely confess the truth, and
acknowledge himself extremely disordered at the Merits and Beauty of Laura:
More Sir (said the Count with a very deep sigh) than you can possibly express
or imagine. But it being late, and the Bassa not willing to stay, he deferred
the more particular inquiry to another opportunity, and dismissed him to his
Lodging. This was a great happiness, and no less pleasure to the young Lover,
who was not then in condition to give the Bassa an account of his Amors. Part
of that night he passed walking in his Chamber, as if he had intended to come
to a Resolution before he went to bed. It was not the fear of death, or
misfortune that troubled him, but the horror of ingratitude; and having
received so much kindness from the Bassa, thought it inexcusable in him to have
any unjust designs on his Wife: But, then says he, should I not be the most
ungrateful of men, should I slight the affection of so charming a Person, to
whom, if I consider her Obligations according to their value, I owe more than
to the Bassa? And is it not possible for me to see, and to love her within
bounds, so as to be blameless on the one side and the other? No, no, if there
be ingratitude in that, I cannot help it, there is nothing in the World can
excuse me to the Sultaness, and love ought to make my excuse with the Bassa.

This was the last Combat between gratitude and love in the heart of the
Count; the last carried the day, and going to bed thereupon, he rested very
well. The Bassa who was extremely desirous to see him so deeply in love, that
he should not be able to deny it, was the first that spoke to him, to return
again that day to the Sultaness Lodgings: he gave him the Key of the Seraglio,
and laughing, told him, he need not make such haste to come back, if he found
as much pleasure as he wished him there: but that he must have a care, he did
not engross all the love to himself, but he should give Laura some part, unless
he were minded to languish, as he had done, a long time to no purpose.

The amorous Italian went straight to the Seraglio, and Laura, who waited for
him, told him at his arrival, he might pass to the same Chamber he had been in,
and that she would give her Lady notice of his coming; but she not having the
patience of waiting so long, was got already into the Alcove. The Count having
an extreme curiosity, and longing for a sight of that place, thought it
convenient for the purpose, to make use of that time, when he believed the
Sultaness was absent; and coming up to the Ballistre, gently took up the
Curtain. But how was he surprised to see on the sudden, that charming Person in
a posture the most capable of any, to make one in love.

I shall not trouble you with a description of the Alcove, which being a Room
of State for the Wife of so puissant a Lord, you may easily believe, was very
noble and rich: It was raised a foot higher than the Chamber; the approach to
it being by a space covered with a fair Turkey Carpet, checkquer'd with little
squares of Damask wrought with Gold. The Sultaness lay on a Bed of Damask of
like work; and having designed to show her self that day to the Count, she had
not forgot to put her self in an equipage and posture capable to charm him at
first sight: she had turned her face toward the Ballister, leaning her head
carelestly on her left arm, which you might clearly see in her great Tiffany
sleeve after the Turkish mode. Her black hair was partly pleated with great
ropes of Pearl, parting down on her Breast, and part on her shoulders, and set
off the clearness of her delicate Complexion (vying with the Snow in whiteness)
to so much advantage, that it wrought wonderful effects in the beholder. She
had about her body, a small Gold Bodice only, her bosom being half open, and
the rest covered with a piece of fine Tiffany, like an Amazons Scarf: all was
visible from her Neck to her Breast, and so admirable to behold, that it had
been impossible for an eye, having seen it, (as the Count did) to escape being
enamored of it: she had on her head, plumes of several colors, and in the
midst of them a crescent of Silver. Her Coat was of a light Stuff Imbroydered
with Gold after the fashion of the Country, with Diamond Buckles to tuck it up
at the knee: her Leg was half naked, and the rest covered with Buskins all laid
over with Diamonds and Pearls; in a word, she was all so Rich, so Gallant, so
full of Charms, that the poor Count was utterly undone at the sight. His joy
and astonishment were visible to her in that confusion of action and words, in
which he was so miserably plunged, that he knew not what was become of himself,
nor what he would say to her. But falling into an Ecstasy, and wholly swallowed
up with admiration, his Eyes and his Sighs were Orators for him. The fair
Sultaness as soon as she saw him, would, with a Handkerchief she had in her
hand, have covered her face, and hid from him part of the confusion she was in.
But the happy Lover, recovering courage by degrees, passing his arm betwixt the
Ballistres, hindered her from it. Once you might have had reason Madam, said
he, to have kept from my sight those treasures of love, as knowing full well
that no man can see them without dying for love of them, but now it is too late
to conceal them from me. I have seen more than any heart is able to bear,
without yielding it self; and it would be extreme cruelty in you, not to
complete what is so happily begun. As the Count was speaking to her in this
manner, she looked upon him with eyes so tender and piercing, that she seemed
willing to execute what he desired. The crafty Count having seized one of her
hands, (to which, as he looked upon it, he gave a thousand amorous kisses) by
little and little drew it out so far on his side, with so feeble resistance
from the Sultaness, that she came at last to lean her head on the Ballistre
just over against the head of the Count. Then it was, he had full liberty to
take a view at his leisure of those Beauties that put him to amazement, and
ravished him with such joy as he had never before been sensible of. As ill luck
would have it, the Ballistres were so close, that not any two of them stood
half the head distance one from the other. However the two Lovers meeting half
way, made a shift to slip through a great number of Kisses, the most charming
and sweet that Lovers e're tasted. The Count being naturally bold, made one
Liberty but a step to another, and seeing what he was permitted to do, and the
pleasure she took in it, he pressed his amorous temerity so far, that what he
did may pass for half an enjoyment. Till then their entertainment was made up
of dumb engagements, a thousand times more eloquent than the finest expressions
in the World. Their eyes, their sighs, their actions, their toys had spoken a
Language intelligible enough to persuade both they loved one another entirely.
They had no need of other conversation; yet, Laura arriving, they changed it a
little, but they spoke before her the most tender, and most passionate things
you can imagine. The Sultaness who had that confidence in her as to conceal
nothing from her, was not troubled at her coming. But the Count, who took not
so much pleasure in these discourses though very obliging, as in those dumb
entertainments, made a sign to Laura to take the other turn; at which the
Saltaness seeming a little angry, let down the Curtain, and so fastened it
behind, that he could not take it up. But this being in Jest, and to provoke
his Passion the more, her rigor was short lived, and Peace presently made more
firm than ever.

The first favors give a privilege for others, and a kind of right not only
to hope, but demand them: The Count, to be revenged of his Mistress for the
piece of spite she had done him, thrust both his Arms between the Ballistres,
and embracing her on the sudden, kissed her with that violence, that he forced
Blood out of her lips. The Sultaness was so far from complaining of the
rudeness of his Caresses, that being charmed with the pleasure of them, she
carefully saved all the Blood on her Handkerchief to preserve it as a Trophy to
show Laura, as a most sensible mark of the extreme Passion her dear Alexander
had for her.

Let me acquaint you by the way with a rarity of those parts; that for a Woman
to have been beaten by a Man she loves, is esteemed in that Country a great
evidence of affection to the party beaten. I confess such favors are somewhat
rude, but it is the temper of the Country, and such is their custom: As for the
Blood that came from the lips of the Amorous Sultaness, we may believe it
proceeded from a transport of Love. With us, one may be bitten, but not beaten
through extremity of this Passion; but blows exceed the limits of Gallantry,
and that Woman must be an African, that loves to be so Courted. It Is a fashion
will never pass in Europe, and though they use it sometimes, yet never to
oblige Women; none of whom that I know of, were ever pleased with a bastinade.
The rest of this visit having been spent in foolery and toys, though sometimes
of much moment in matters of Love, I will not trouble you with the particulars.
Laura, who was not far distant from the Lovers, appeared at the least sign of
their pleasure to have her attend. The Count and the Sultaness bid each other
adieu with the greatest kindness imaginable: And Laura brought him to the Door
of the Apartment, so deep in Love, he scarce knew where he was. He went
directly from thence to the Bassa, who instantly observed the visible change of
the Count's former Sadness and Melancholy into a tender and languishing air; at
which the Bassa taking occasion to laugh, said, Well, Alexander, has Love
played his part well?

Is it your pain, or your pleasure has so charmed you to day? I confess, Sir,
said he with a sigh, it is the pleasure I have met with; but pleasure, I fear,
which may cost me much pain. The Bassa believing, that to be the Confident of
the Count's Passion, might be of some use, took him by the hand, and led him to
the Garden, to take a turn in the Walks. He fell presently upon the subject of
his good Fortune, and prayed him to tell him truly, how his Affairs stood. The
Count having his Heart and his Fancy all full of Love, with very great ease
gave him such a ravishing description of his tenderest affections, and painted
the pleasures he had taken that Evening so much to the life, adding his sighs
and exclamations, with gestures and looks so eloquent and passionate, that he
awaked in the Soul of the Bassa the affection he had formerly for Laura, and
lately laid asleep. What care soever is taken to cure one of this Passion,
still there remains enough in the Heart of a Lover to set it on fire by the
least spark that falls on it. The insensibility and resistance of Laura had not
Ice enough in them to quench all the heat of the Bassa's affection. She had
only covered it with ashes, to preserve it the better against another time: Had
the Count acted like a Politic Lover, he had easily foreseen, how ticklish and
dangerous a business it is, to make such representations before Persons who are
Amorously inclined; and especially before a Man whom he had reason to consider
as a Rival, and in whose Power it was to dispose of him as he pleased. But the
truth is, that in speaking thus of Laura, he thought he hazarded nothing of his
own; he had really no kindness for her, but hoped to do his own business the
better, in making the Bassa believe that he loved her; which is the reason he
did not carry himself in this with so much caution, as he would have done in
another conjuncture.

The Bassa slept not that Night. Laura appeared a thousand times more handsome
and charming, in the description of the Count, than ever she had done in his
Eye at full sight. He esteemed himself the most unfortunate of Men, not only
for that he had quitted the pursuit, but had contributed so much to see her in
the Arms of another: Hereupon jealousy presently possessed him, attended with a
train of spite, rage, and peevishness to torment him. What great shame, thought
he, could ever happen to a Man as he was, who never found resistance from a
Woman, than to have been slighted by a Slave, who was his dependent, and had
yielded to another Slave as soon as she had seen him? For after the passionate
relation Alexander had made, the Bassa made no doubt but all was concluded; he
had fancies of this kind that troubled him extremely: and if he did not then
hate the Count, it is certain, he retained not for him that kindness he had
formerly expressed toward him: And as for Laura, though he was then more in Love
with her than ever, he had a pique against her, and could not forbear
reproaching her all Night, for her want of discretion in making greater account
of a man's kindness, that could do her no Service, than of his, by whom she
might have made her Fortune. These thoughts were followed by others concerning
his Person. He accused himself of baseness, and weakness of Heart, to trouble
himself with the thoughts of a Creature that so little deserved his esteem, or
to intend to hinder the satisfaction of two Lovers, whose Love he himself had
caused and promoted. All this notwithstanding, he went on the morrow with the
Count to the Seraglio; but for no other end, but to observe the countenance of
Laura, who surprised to see him come: This is extraordinary, Sir, said she
laughing, twice in one week: What will People say of it? As for you, said the
Bassa, you will say no ill of it, I come in so good Company; and should others
believe as formerly, that I come for love of you, you know it is not for my self,
and therefore you are the more obliged to me. Laura very civilly thanked him
for his goodness. They fell then all three into a little discourse of
Gallantry, wherein the Bassa spoke so many kind things to Laura, that she might
understand part of that Amorous trouble he was in, if she had mistrusted it;
but he delivered himself with such an air, that his Complements, and kind
Expressions were taken for mere effects of his good humor. But the Bassa's
coming thither, being under pretense of seeing the Sultaness, he could not
dispense without giving her a Visit; but he was not long with her, being not
able to rest till he returned to the two Lovers, which he did with all the
speed in his power. He told Laura a thousand things more obliging than
formerly; and having highly caressed her, gave her at parting such a look, that
if she had made the least reflection upon it, she might have easily perceived
the kindness he had formerly for her took fire afresh with more vehemence than
ever; but she could not suspect in the least he would trouble her any more,
after the kindness he had expressed for his Alexander, and having been the
instrument of the pretended Passion between her and the Count. She took all for
Gallantry, and made it the subject of raillery with the Sultaness, to whom she
gave an account of all that had past with the Bassa, and with Alexander. The
fair Turk went that Evening to bed, ill satisfied with her fate, having been
disappointed of an Entertainment she had expected, as pleasant as that she had
received the day before from her dear Christian; she could not sufficiently
lament the unluckiness of the Visit given her by a man who Courted other Women,
and seemed to have been born to incommode and give trouble only to her. Laura
answered in raillery, She had little reason to complain of it to her, to whose
complaisance she was beholding for a sight of her Lover: Ah Laura, said the
Sultaness, who knows for what reason he has been so complaisant? You may very
well believe, it was not to oblige me. I believe so, Madam, replied Laura, but
you are obliged to him however, and ought to thank him for me. After this
little raillery, they fell to discourse, what could have brought the Bassa
thither that evening; and could not imagine, but it was in Complement to the
Count.

The Bassa by this time was fallen into a deep Melancholy, seldom appearing,
but when he walked in the Garden, sometimes alone, and sometimes with
Alexander, and then not a word of Laura, nor any discourse of going again to
the Apartment of the Sultaness: This troubled our Lover, who besides his
affliction for being deprived of the sight of a Person he loved better than his
Life, and ceasing to see her, must cease also to live; had a thousand
tormenting surmises and troublesome fancies upon the Bassa's change of humor,
which he could not attribute to any thing but his having taken some umbrage and
jealousy of him, on the account of the Sultaness. The Sultaness and her
Confident were no less tormented on the other hand; they had seen a first, a
second, a third, and a fourth long day pass without a sight of their Alexander:
Lovers are very exact Accomptants, and keep reckoning of the very moments, but
account nothing more tedious than a day of absence. What should be the meaning
of all this, said they one to the other, having a thousand fears upon them,
though they knew not of what: it is a difficult matter to keep any thing secret
in places of that nature. Yet they could not imagine they had given any
occasion of discourse, or that any Person in the Apartment had made the least
discovery of their Intrigue. At last, on the fifth day, after abundance of
Affliction, the Bassa came to see them; but, the mischief of it was, that he
came alone. Besides, he appeared so dull, so musing, and so much out of humor,
they made no more doubt but he had smelt out the Intelligence they held with
the Count. But that which gave them the killing blow, and raised their fears to
the height, was, that Laura having, according to her custom, waited the Bassa
out of the Chamber, and asked him, what he had done with her dear Eunuch? I am
jealous of him (said the Bassa, making no stay) I need tell you no more: Laura
made have to give her Mistress the Alarm, and told her, there was no more doubt
to be made, but jealousy was the cause of the Bassa's not bringing Alexander
with him, the Bassa himself having told her so that instant; those who are
guilty, are easily frightened, and fear has this property, that it so confounds
the imagination, that the lightest suspicions are taken for clear and
unquestionable truths. With what sighs, what tears did the poor Sultaness
afflict her self; yet not so much for the ill consequences she might apprehend
from the jealousy of the Bassa, as for the fear she had, that if he were
really jealous of the Christian, she should never have a sight of him more. She
did heartily wish she could have written to him, but there are few trusty
Messengers to be found in those places, where there is cause to distrust every
one you converse with; and every Eye that sees you, is a spy on your actions,
at least if not gained by Money or Kindness, wherein, after all possible care,
you may be deceived, as she was in this trouble. Laura received a Note from the
Count, brought her by an Eunuch, and carried it forthwith to show it the
Sultaness, being in these words.

Madam, the Bassa every day more obliging than other, is pleased to grant me
the honor of walking with you this Evening in the Garden of the Seraglio. I
know not whether you can dispense with your self till then. Let us take the
hour you think most proper. He will be there with one of his Mistresses. Send
me word, if you please, if I may expect this favor from you.

The Bassa would never have thought of this walk, but out of the extreme desire
he had to know certainly, how Laura and Alexander stood affected one to the
other; and that he might inform himself of what they should discourse. The
Garden was a place very fit for his design, especially by Night, where he could
hear without being seen. He had made the proposal to the Count, in confidence
he would receive it with a great deal of joy, which in appearance he did, but
without hope of any great satisfaction from the Adventure, it being scarce
probable the Sultaness would permit Laura to come. But that which really
troubled him, was the opinion he had, the Bassa was certainly jealous of his
Wife, since he gave him so clear proof of his unwillingness that he should see
Laura at her Lodgings any more.

The Question then was, how to write to the Slave, to dispose her for the walk.
But the Count having written the Billet, the Bassa sent it by an Eunuch, and
stayed for the Answer.

The Sultaness read the Billet, and was of opinion with her Gallant, that it
was for Love of her the Bassa was unwilling he should come any more to see
Laura in her Apartment. It was long ere they came to a resolution in the point,
whether Laura should agree to the assignation: Laura very wisely thought it
better not to go, but the Sultaness, wholly led by her Passion, and too deeply
in Love, to act any thing with reason that concerned her affection,
notwithstanding any thing Laura could say, made her write him this Answer.

It were to act the part of a very ill Person, to be all alone in the Garden,
while others are diverting themselves there: I consent for pity, to come and
bear you company, but on condition that you will be wise, and that we be at
some distance from the Bassa, because I would not be known by her, that he
brings with him. If you can promise me these two things, I am for you after the
fourth Prayer, when the Sultaness is a Bed. Adieu.

This Answer was beyond the expectation of the Count, who rejoiced extremely at
the pleasure he promised himself with the Slave, from the discourse of the
Sultaness, while they should continue in the Garden.

Night being come, and the fourth Prayer over, the Bassa told him, he might go,
and bring Laura to the Garden, while he went for one of his Mistresses, who was
lodged on the other side. It is the custom of the Grandees of that Country,
among a multitude of Women they have in their Seraglio, when they have not a
particular inclination for any one, to take this to day, and another to morrow;
and having lost the taste of Love, to search for Pleasure in change and variety.

It may be easily imagined, that Alexander received this Commission with a
great deal of joy, and was in no small haste to go to the Sultanesses Lodgings.
She who was charmed at the sight of him, could not express her joy without a
thousand transports of Love, and the most tender caresses a most passionate
Lady could possibly make her dearest Lover. Alexander did his part to
admiration, not only returning transport for transport, and caress for caress,
but excelling his pattern, Love working in him, or he in the Sultaness such
things as gave her very great satisfaction. It may be admired peradventure that
two Persons so little acquainted, should in so few days become so very good
Friends. But we must know, Love in these hot Countries makes far quicker
progress than in the cold, where the Winds, and the Snow, and the Rain spoil
his Wings, and hinder his flight: Whereas on the contrary, the Sun is there
almost still at the height, and Love being a tender Infant, and going always
naked, thrives there the better, where he finds Hearts very well disposed, and
ready to take fire.

The Count, who could not stay long there, was willing to bestow the small time
he had to spend with the Sultaness in gentle reproaches for her permitting
Laura to come and walk with him. You have, said he, a very good opinion of my
Affection, Madam, or else you love me with a great deal of indifference, that
this does not in the least trouble you at all. The Sultaness answered, she
relied not so much on his Fidelity, as on Laura's Discretion, whom she knew too
well, to think she would betray her. Look you to your self, as for her I place
a confidence in her, and if you do your Duty, I am persuaded she will not be
wanting in hers. Having thus spoken, she would not detain him longer for fear
of the Bassa, but retired to the Chamber. The happy Lover, very well pleased
with the lucky moment he had past with the Sultaness, asked Laura if she were
ready; She made him answer, he should not stay for her longer than while she
fetched her Barnus, which is a kind of Hood that covers them from Head to Foot.
The Count seeing her return mufled up in that Garment, went his way before,
according to their custom there, and she followed: He said not a word to her
while they were in the Seraglio, for fear of being overheard, and discovered;
but being arrived in the Garden, where they had liberty enough, Who will
believe, Madam, said he, but we made an Amorous assignation, being come to a
place of Rendezvous so fit for the purpose. And the Bassa will not fail to
think us the happiest Lovers in the World. Laura made him no answer, but kept
on her way, till they came to the Bower that was assigned them at a convenient
distance from the Bassa's, as Laura had desired. The Count gave her his hand,
and knowing very well every turn in those Walks, which he visited almost every
day, he made her sit on a seat of green Turf made for the purpose. Then, said
he, this, Madam, is to try a man's Fidelity with a Witness, to expose him to
pass part of the Night in such a place as this with a Lady so beautiful as you.
Surely the Sultaness will hence-forward rest assured of my Passion. The Count
made a pause, expecting her answer, but not receiving a word from her, he
proceeded, telling her, I thought we had not been so debarred the pleasures of
an Assignation, but we might have enjoyed that of discourse; but for ought I
perceive, you mean to follow the fashion of Turkey; and since it is a favor in
this Country for a Woman to show her self, or speak to a Man, you will deprive
me of the one and the other: But while we are together, I pray let us live
after the mode of our Country, which is far better than the Turkish. To do
otherwise with me, were altogether too rigorous, and more, I believe, than you
have promised the Sultaness, or she expects at your hands. Away, I beseech you,
said he, taking her by the Barnus, with this ufeless Hood, and do me the favor
to tell me some News of the Sultaness; or if you please, of the Adventures
brought, you hither, which from the day I first had the honor to see you, I
have had an extreme longing to ask you: This you will not deny me, if you think
I may be any way useful to you, as I doubt not but I may, being your
Countryman, and so well esteemed by the Bassa, as to be able to do you some
Service. All this Discourse so obliging for Laura, she heard, without replying
a word, or quitting her Barnus, as he had desired. The Count seeing this,
pressed her no further, but with more serious air said, if you desire, Madam,
to pass the Evening in this manner, it will be very unfortunate for me; but I
must comply. And removing a few paces from her, he went and sat him down in a
corner of the Bower, where he continued a while without speaking a word. The
fair Lady fetched a sigh, as if she had been displeased at his quitting her.
The Count laying hold on that occasion to be even with her, took his turn of
tormenting, in not answering her sighs. At last she came to him, took him by
the Arm, and embraced him, with many grimaces, as if she would have turned all
into ridicule. The Count fell a laughing, and said, Madam, I beseech you be
satisfied with the Sacrifice I make to Love, without trying my patience any
further; let us, if you please, have a little conversation, but answer me when
I speak, for I do not love talking to my self. But all would not do; she
laughed under her Hood, and took pleasure in vexing him. The Count at last
growing impatient; This is too much, Madam, said he, and since you will needs
laugh, I Will show you a trick shall make you speak in spite of your Heart;
having said so, he took her in his Arms, and not being able to take off her
Hood, he used some Familiarities with her, would have forced speech from a Maid
of Laura's Discretion and Modesty: But the Lady was still silent, and so little
concerned, that she scarce made any resistance. At which the Count was
extremely surpised, and after all the esteem he had for Laura, apprehended
there might be a design in the business, and that he was abused: Then it was he
did all in his power to get sight of her through a little glimmering of light
that came into the Bower. Did the Sultaness know, said he, the liberty you
allow me, she would give you no thanks for your silence, or your being shie of
affording me a sight of you, which it seems you do to give me occasion to
attempt greater matters, and deny me small favors to grant me the principal.
The fair Lady not able to defend her self longer, quitted her Barnus, and
having escaped out of his hands, Ah, little Traitor, said she, is this the
Fidelity you have promised me? Oh Heavens, Madam, said he, is it you? It was
the Sultaness her self had taken Laura's place, and you may imagine what a
pleasant surprise this was to the Count, who could not on the sudden otherwise
express it than by his exclamations; and running after her (who fled not too
fast) he overtook her at the Door of the Bower, and embracing her most
tenderly, My dear Sultaness, said he the second time, is it you? Yes, answered
she (suffering her self to be gently brought back into the Bower) it is I, who
repent me already of what I have done for you who did not deserve it. Did you
think me so simple, to expose into the hands of another, that which I hold most
dear in the World? Do not I see how ill it is trusting of you? Your Constancy
was very tottering; it was at least half overcome. And had Laura, the
counterfeit Laura answered your offers, where would you have been? Never was
Man more confounded than the Count at all these Reproaches: He made a free
Confession, but excused himself by her carriage toward him, alleging it
impossible for any Man to have withstood the attaques she had made. At last, he
carried the Cause, all was accommodated, an Agreement made, and Love signed the
Articles.

To come in search of a Gallant (as the Sultaness had done) into a Garden where
she knew her Husband was present, was an Adventure somewhat bold: And
doubtless, there are many Women who will condemn her conduct as imprudent; but
of those who are in Love there, are few, who being in her place, would not take
the same course. The Bassa, though accompanied with a very Beautiful Person,
past away time somewhat worse than the Count: Chabania his Mistress had
(besides Beauty) an excellent Wit, and a very taking carriage, which made her
pass for the most charming Person in the Seraglio. The Bassa had formerly been
deeply in Love with her; but Love for convenience is not very durable: Her
Patron was not in an humor to Entertain her that Evening, and had not brought
her with him into the Garden, but to serve for a pretense to color other
designs; she apprehended as much, as soon as she knew that Laura was in the
Garden, which the Bassa unluckily told her, thinking he might satisfy her in
that point, by letting her know that Laura was deeply in Love with Alexander,
in whose company she was. But Chabania was so far from believing it, that she
presently fancied Alexander to be no other than the Bassa's Confident in the
affair, and that he had not brought Laura into the Garden but for his Master:
she had been formerly jealous of him, even to distraction, and I know not how
it came to pass the Bassa was so overseen, as not to have made choice of some
other of his Women, who might have been more for his turn on this occasion: She
was at her wits end for the small countenance he gave her; all the while he was
with her she had scarcely fewer words from him, and saw clearly his thoughts
were wholly of Laura. This was vexation enough for a Woman in Love, who knows
her self handsome, and is high spirited withal. But that which put her into
absolute despair, was, that the Bassa not able to obtain any truce from his
jealousy, having spent some time in her company, without any caress, or giving
her the least evidence of kindness, though she had more than once given him
occasion to show it; told her, he had a longing desire to go hearken, and know
how the Christians in the Bower entertained one another: she made him no
answer, but letting him go, she the next minute after went another way toward
the same Bower to observe the Bassa, and see what he did there.

The Nights in that Country are very clear, especially in Summer: the Bassa,
notwithstanding all the caution he had used to post himself securely near
Alexander's quarter, under the favor of the Hedges that covered his approach,
was perceived by the counterfeit Laura in the Bower. She had discovered him by
his shadow, and having made her lover aware of it, he presently went out, and
ran to meet the Bassa, to entreat him not to come any further, but permit him
to enjoy that moment of pleasure he had been pleased to procure him. The
Sultaness not knowing what wind had brought the Bassa to that side of the
Garden, and fearing he would come into the Bower, would not be persuaded by any
thing that Alexander could say to her, to stay after him in the Bower, but went
presently out to hide herself in some corner of the Garden, where she thought
she might be in better security.

The mean time the jealous Bassa, confounded at the discovery, and having lost
the opportunity of executing the design he had so unfortunately laid, suffered
himself to be prevailed upon by the entreaties of his Rival, and returned
toward his Bower, as Alexander to his; where being arrived, he was
sufficiently amazed at missing the Sultaness, but thought she had fled away for
fear, which troubled him extremely; but just as he was leaving the Bower to go
in search of her, he saw in the furthest and most retired part of it, something
that seemed to have the shape of a Woman: then going up thither, and finding he
had not been mistaken, he fancied it only to be a trick of the Sultaness; this
pleased him extremely, and passionately embracing her, Madam, said he, are not
you very waggish? you would fain have made me run all about the Garden in
search of you: She answered not a word, but getting out of his arms, she went
away briskly, and withdrew into another corner of the Bower: the Count was
surprised at this manner of proceeding, being not so gentle as he expected from
the Sultaness, who loved him so tenderly; but to undeceive himself as soon as
he could, and to find out the cause of so sudden a change, he went up to her
the second time, and taking her by the hand; What may be the reason, Madam,
said he, that you run away, and hide your self from me? there is no fear of the
Bassa; he is withdrawn to his quarter, and has promised not to give us any
further disturbance. But all this could not make her answer a word; so that not
knowing what to think of this rigor, he kneeled on the ground where she was
sitting on a seat of green Turf, and kissing her hand, prayed her for loves
sake, to tell him the reason why she seemed angry with him; he courted and
embraced her with great passion and tenderness, and she as patiently took it,
but at last perceiving her laugh a laughter very different from that of the
Sultaness, he examined her more nearly, and knew by the difference of her
shape, and her Clothes, that he was mistaken. It was inconceivable, what a
trouble this put him in. He thought himself arrived in Fairy-land, to see the
strangest sights in the World. That Laura had been changed into the Sultaness,
was not so surprising as pleasant, but that the Sultaness should be turned into
another Woman, and perhaps a Mistress of the Bassa's, this was the thing he
could not comprehend: that which troubled him most, and extremely disquieted
him, was the pain he was in, for not knowing what was become of the Sultaness;
and the fear he had, the Bassa might have met her in the Garden, and known her:
this moved him again to go out in search of her, but Chabania (for it was she
he had mistaken for the Sultaness) held him fast by the sleeve, and staid him,
telling him in the Moors Language, it was not fit for him to quit in that
manner a Lady for whom he had already expressed some affection. The Count
understood not her language, prayed her to let him go for fear the Bassa should
come, and be offended at his being with her. But all to no purpose, she no more
understood his Italian, than he her Moresque, and was so far from letting him
go, that she would have made him sit by her, that she might revenge her self on
the Bassa for the slight he had put upon her. During this little contest, which
could not but be somewhat extraordinary between two Persons who understood not
one another, the Sultaness comes in quite out of breath, and throws her self
half dead into the arms of Alexander, who happened to be in a place ready to
receive her. What frightful fancies had he then in his head? He presently
imagined they were utterly undone, and that she had been discovered. But the
Bassa arriving presently after, set him right again in saying, you run away
Madam, speaking to the counterfeit Laura, from a Person who wishes you no ill,
nor intends you any; then turning toward Alexander, he was about to excuse
himself to him for breaking his word, but seeing Chabania stand by him, he
suddenly altered both his mind and his Language, asking her in Moresque what
she was come thither for. She answered him aloud, and gave him a thousand
reproaches for his unworthiness and weakness in quitting her, to follow a Slave
that run away from him. This was a very rare Scene, and the Dialogue not a
little pleasing to the Sultaness; but she had not long to laugh at it, for
Chabania being vexed to the heart for the slight the Bassa had put upon her, and
for what he had said to her before her pretended rival, flew like a Fury upon
the Sultaness, with that promptitude and swiftness, that neither the Bassa, nor
Alexander, who would have staid her, were able to save the counterfeit Laura
from being somewhat ill handled. The Count was touched to the quick at this
outrage, and no consideration of life or of duty, could have prevented him from
having satisfaction, had not his fear of losing the Sultaness prevailed more
upon him than his resentment. The Bassa was as angry as he, and taking the
enraged Chabania by the hand, he drew her somewhat rudely out of the Bower, and
led her away.

The Count was no sooner alone with the Sultaness, but embracing her tenderly,
Madam, said he, with a passionate tone, what dangers have you gone through for
love of me! what a cruel assault have you but now endured? The Sultaness did
nothing but laugh at the last adventure she had been in, and told him she took
more pleasure to see Chabania's despair, (for whom she had ever a natural
aversion) than she had suffered of harm by her outrage and violence. But she
confessed the same time, that she was in extreme perplexity when she met the
Bassa ranging over the Garden in search of that Woman, and that it was the
highest piece of good fortune imaginable, that she had her Barnus with her, to
hide her self in. She added that her dear Husband had said to her a thousand
gallant things, and had done also some things a little extraordinary; but that
it was her good fortune to be not far from the Bower, and to make her escape:
she told him further, that there remained no more doubt of the Bassa's being
newly fallen in love with Laura, and that she was very well assured of it by
the kindness of his expressions, and the transports she observed him in at this
rencounter; that this was the true cause of all their alarms, and the reason
why he brought him not into the Seraglio as formerly: The Count was of the same
judgment, and both held it necessary to make good use of the occasion, and that
Laura who was to act the principal part, should employ her best address and
complaisance in their favor.

The Bassa taking small pleasure in the Garden after the unhappy success of his
amorous designs, having done his endeavor to pacify Chabania, would bring her
back to her Lodgings, and passed by Alexander's Bower, to let him understand it
was time to with draw. The Count followed him immediately, being extremely
joyful to have come off so happily from a walk that had proved so full of
adventures: He bore his dear Sultaness company into her Apartment, where he
staid not long for fear of the Bassa, but withdrew to his lodging. He past the
rest of the night very pleasantly, though he slept not at all; and the truth
is, he had reason enough to be well pleased, though his Patron had not, who was
more laboring under mortal afflictions: Laura, whom he now was more deeply in
Love with than ever, put him in despair by her Rigours and Cruelties: if no
more pity from her, then no more pleasure to be expected in his life. His great
affection for Alexander could not keep him from being his rival, and wishing to
share with him in the favors she did him. His passion was arrived at a point
which is the highest of sufferings, that of not being loved: and when he
thought of the opportunity he had let slip the night before, when he had Laura
in his power, he was so cruelly vexed, he could have found in his heart to be
revenged of himself: yet he had no great cause to blame his discretion, for he
had done enough, and unless he would have driven his Gallantry to the last push
of all, he could not have done more. He was not willing to declare himself to
Alexander, nor acquaint him with the thoughts he had newly entertained, as well
to prevent the displeasure he believed it would give him, as for that he
conceived the Count might be of use to him in the design, and that the
discovery might be to his prejudice.

In the Morning as soon as he was up, he went (as he sometimes was used) to the
Count's Chamber without any attendant, and found him in Bed: A Man, said he,
must be as happy as Alexander in his Love, before he can sleep as quietly as
he. If there be any, answered the Count, has cause to commend his good fortune
on that account, it must without doubt be a Person of your comeliness and
Gallantry, who to gain love, need no more than say you are in love. Yes,
replied the Bassa, with a smile, except it be to Laura, who has made me very
sensible that I can sigh to no purpose, and that the master of her person may
not be the master of her heart; It was necessary that Alexander should come
from Europe to Africa to make that Conquest: This, Sir, replied the Count, may
be an instance of the Vagaries and Extravagancies of Love, who often knows not
where to fix, but follows the effects of destiny, or the Stars which are
predominant over the affections. And I believe Sir, added he smiling, as for
the Love of Laura, you are already very well satisfied, and so little concerned
where she bestows it, that you never designed to make me in Love with her, that
you might be my Rival. However, said he, observing the Bassa sigh, I assure
you, should it so happen, you cannot do me a greater favor than in letting me
know it. And you shall find that all the passion I can have for her, shall not
hinder any performance of the duty I owe you. I will quit all my pretentions as
I know you have the least design upon her, that I may prevent all dispute with
a Person to whom I am so deeply obliged, that there can be nothing so dear to
me, but I will part with it for your sake. Believe it Alexander, answered the
Bassa, it is not so easy a matter to be disingaged from a passion like yours:
you may as well persuade me, you cannot be in Love. I am certainly in Love,
replied the Count, and it may be as deeply as possible; but having so many
favors daily heaped on me from you, there is nothing in the World I shall Love
more than your repose and satisfaction: And, Sir, if Laura appear now as
amiable as formerly to you, I must tell you again, I love her no longer; so
easy a matter was it for the subtle Italian to be generous in parting with
that in which he was so little concerned. The Bassa asked him if he would say
as much before Laura. He answered, he believed him too just and too gallant to
desire him to make a declaration of that nature before one who had been his
Mistress. At last the Bassa proposed another walk in the Garden that very day,
and at the same time prayed him to write about it to Laura; which the Count
having not been able to avoid, received this answer.

The burnt child dreads the fire; we do not commonly expose our selves twice to
the same danger. The Bassa's usage of me last night, gives me small
encouragement to trust him the second time. And you are an eyewitness how ill
I was handled by her he had with him. Let it satisfy you, that if you come
hither, I will have the honor to see you. But no more walking.

The Bassa much troubled at so unexpected an answer, went out of the Counts
Chamber without saying a word, and passed in solitude the rest of the day. But
in the Evening he went to the Sultaness, where he presently met Laura; who
inquiring of Alexander, and why he had not brought him with him; would it
displease you, said the Bassa, if I supplied his place this Evening: that were
too great an honor for me, replied Laura smiling, but the Sultaness expects
you, and is not very well. The Bassa gave her his hand, and would have led her
into a private Chamber; Laura perceiving it, and that he was in good earnest,
Prayed him to let her go; that her Lady was not well, and he knew well enough
she could not endure her being a moment out of her sight: I, I, replied the
Bassa, the Sultaness is sick, and cannot be a moment without you; but it is
because it is I desire to pass that moment with you; had it been Alexander you
could have staid a little longer. The Bassa said this with so pleasant a tone,
she could not forbear laughing. You know Sir, replied she, it is another case
when you are with the Sultaness. Besides Sir, added she smiling, one would
venture a little for a Sweetheart: Well, well, said he, pressing her to go
along with him, it is Love has brought me hither: I, Sir, answered she striving
to get away from him, and it is Love obliges me to avoid the occasion of being
found alone in your company; for though I know you a most accomplished Person,
you will allow me to tell you, you have not too much respect for our Sex, and
it is very hard trusting you, witness your assaults last night in the Garden.
the Bassa made her a thousand Oaths he would keep within the bounds of that
respect and discretion she might expect from the severest virtue, and protested
he desired only one quarter of an hours discourse. Laura, who knew the violence
and obstinacy of his humor, when denied any thing he held reasonable to be
granted him, disposed her self to entertain him that quarter of an hour. He
reproached her a thousand times for her hardness and cruelty against him, and
gave her withal the kindest words and the most tender and passionate
expressions imaginable. Laura, to defend her self, pleaded her Honor, her
Religion, and her Duty to the Sultaness her Mistress; three things she would
not betray for the World: Had you but a little Love for me, said the Bassa with
a sigh, you would not find so many reasons for defense. I have my Religion as
you have yours, and the Precepts of it perhaps as severe as yours; but Love is
stronger than all the Precepts, the Laws, the Religions of the World, and those
who serve him, worship no other God. As for the Sultaness, how are you
concerned, that is my business, not yours; and it shall be your fault, if ever
she know it. But what do you tell me of Honor?

Surely it is more for your Honor to love a Man as I am, than to love such a
one as Alexander. You mistake your self, Sir, answered Laura, if you think that
in the visits he has made me, there has any thing passed contrary to my duty*
It Is not with those of our Nation, as with the People of this Country: We may
be together, and no body by, yet my Honor secure. I swear to you, Sir,
Alexander never received that favor from me, which I could not afford the
Person for whom I am the least concerned in the World. The Bassa interrupted
her; what, not in the Garden? Neither in the Garden nor any where else, replied
she, had he ever any other advantage than a sight of me, which with us is
accounted for nothing. Can you make me believe, answered the Bassa, what you
say? Laura told him, there was nothing more true, and he might rest assured of
it: But Sir, said she, for your better satisfaction, bring him no more hither,
and you shall see whether I make my complaint for it: 'Twere pity, replied the
Bassa, to destroy so fair a friendship; and I do protest to you, that were it
in my power, I would give you no trouble, but I am not so much Master of my
self, to gain this point on my heart, to be unconcerned in your Love: But since
you love Alexander with so much indifference, that you can so easily resolve
not to see him more, I have no cause to afflict my self, but rather to hope you
may one day love me perhaps as much as you do him.

After these words the Bassa retired, with a heart a little better at ease than
when he came in, but as deeply in Love as before. He gave not an entire and
firm credit to what Laura had told him of her indifference and small
concernment for Alexander, but did believe her passion for the Christian not so
great as he had imagined, or that their Love had been cooled by some quarrel,
for he had observed on the one side and the other, more indifference than is
usually consistent with that passion.

But then reflecting suddenly on himself, may not this be (said he, resuming
his jealousy and diffidence,) an effect of their policy? may they not be
agreed to deceive me? and being already sufficiently assured of one another
affections, may they not pretend they have no Love for one another, that they
may Love one another with greater security? No, no, adds he, this cannot be,
there is no hiding of Love, it will appear if not smothered to death: She love
not Alexander at all, or loves him but indifferently; thus he the more easily
persuaded himself to be so, in that he did most passionately desire it might be
so; and thence-forward his passion increased so fast, it became greater than
ever. Hope being a passion that more than any other foments that of Love,
easily promises it self happy events, and flatters it self with expectation of
good fortune and success.

Laura gave the Sultaness an account of all the pleasant discourse; and the
Sultaness could have wished Laura had not been altogether so severe to the
Bassa, but a little more kind and complaisant, without which she thought they
could not see Alexander so often as she desired. Laura on the contrary told
her, that to have been complaisant, would have spoiled all, for that the Bassa
would then have entertained some hopes of favor from her, and so become more
amorous than before, and consequently more jealous of his supposed Rival than
ever. What shall I do then, said the poor Sultaness, who can do nothing but
fear, and cannot expect any thing but crosses and misfortunes? Laura told her,
things were not in so desperate a condition, that she need trouble her self for
it, for the Bassa had promised to send Alexander on the morrow, and that they
would consider with him how to order their business.

The Count did not know that the Bassa had been with the Sultaness; but having
not heard from him that day, he went on the morrow to wait on him at his
rising. He found him abed, so dejected and melancholy, that he might by his
countenance easily discover the heaviness of his heart. Yet he received him
with that air of kindness and friendship might well assure the Count, he was
not displeased with him. The Bassa was silent a while, and then looking on the
Count with an air of friendship and confidence; Alexander, said he, I am the
most unfortunate of men, especially, in Love. Laura, added he, sighing, the
cruel Laura has not the least tenderness for me; no, not the least pity for
the torments she sees me suffer for her: and unless you will be a little kind
to me, I know not what will become of me. Ah Sir, answered the Count, let me
but know what you desire of me, and what I can do for you: you know it is not
in my power to dispose of others hearts; but if I may contribute to your
satisfaction; if you would have me speak to her; if -- How happy should I be,
said the Bassa, interrupting him, would you do what you can. Sir, replied the
Count, if it depend upon me, you may promise your self success. The Bassa held
his peace for a little time, as if he studied what to say; but Alexander
pressing him to declare himself, he told him with some trouble, that he should
appoint an assignation with Laura in a Chamber, in the Apartment of-the
Sultaness, where the Bassa might meet her in his stead. The Proposal was so
unworthy and unfit for Alexander to consent to, that it astonished him on the
sudden so extremely, that having blushed at it very much, he knew not what
answer to make. The Bassa observed the disorder he was in, and was more out of
countenance at it than the Count; but for fear he should interpret it otherwise
than intended, and taking his blushing for no very good Omen, he told him, (to
be rid of him) that he might go think of it, and that if he gave him any
answer, it should be a favorable one.

The Count went out of the Chamber, and made a thousand reflections on his ill
Fortune, which had reduced him to the extremity of making him serve such a
person; not but that he was fully persuaded, Laura would not come, and that he
should be little concerned, though she should entertain the motion, and favor
the passion of his amorous Patron: but besides the baseness of the employment
he put him upon, he was mad to think he took him for such a Villain, that
loving a Maid, as the Bassa believed he did Laura, could betray her so basely.
This was the only thing troubled him, nor would he have done it, though he died
for it.

The Bassa having seen him leave his Chamber in that manner, thought there was
small hope of effecting his design that way; yet being a person of great reason
and worth, he was so far from thinking the worse of the Count, or being
offended with him on this occasion, that he esteemed of him the better, and
considered of other means to gain satisfaction to his love in the enjoyment of
Laura. His passion was now arrived at a height beyond the power of reason to
manage, and capable to put him on any enterprise whatever. The most virtuous of
men when changed into a desperate Lover, become the most furious and
extravagant of all; being so much more sensible of slights put upon him, as he
conceives himself a person of merit.

This transported Lover having failed of his design to make Alexander of his
Party, to serve his ends in a Proposal that included Treachery, resolved to
deceive Laura himself, by going to see her that night disguised as an Eunuch.
The design was not very well laid, but it took, as shall appear by the sequel.
He had not the patience to stay till his ordinary hour of going to the
Sultaness; but as soon as 'twas night, he went away disguised like an Eunuch,
and came to the apartment, where he found one old Moor at the gate, who not
taking so much notice of him as to know him, he sent her to Laura, to tell her
that an Eunuch of her acquaintance desired to speak with her in the Chamber of
repose; so called because it was retired, and far from noise, and the place
where they used to take some hours rest after dinner in Summer. He made choice
of this Chamber as the most proper for his design; and the old Woman was no
sooner gone about her message, but he went to hide him there. Laura was then
busy, and the Sultaness having casually met the old Woman in search of Laura,
asked her, what she would have with her? the old Woman having had no order to
keep private her business, told her freely, there was an Eunuch desired to
speak with her in the Chamber of Repose. The Sultaness hearing of an Eunuch who
would speak with Laura, made no question at all but Alexander was the Man; and
without further enquiry what kind of Man the Eunuch was, or any other
consideration, she takes Laura's Barnus, and goes to the place of assignation;
had she made the least reflection on the message, she could not have been so
deceived, nor have exposed her self so easily to the danger she went into. It
was not the custom of her Gallant to use her thus, or to see her any where but
in the Alcove-chamber; he scarce knew the name of the Chamber where she was
told he staid for Laura, and knowing what she did of the Bassa, she had reason
to mistrust him. But those who are in Love as the Sultaness was, are subject to
greater over-sights than these. She knew that Alexander was not to see her but
by night, yet she waited for him from the first moment she awoke in the
morning; and in this amorous expectation, which tantalized her extremely, and
kept her in a mortal inquietude whether he came or came not, there needed no
help to hurry her away when the time drew near. Women who have been in Love,
will easily confess there is nothing so hard as to be prudent on such
occasions, and that the name of their Gallant when expected, has made them
start up for joy, and run to meet him e're they knew whether he were come.

The passionate Sultaness having given up her self to be led blindfold, where
she thought Love waited for her, borrowed wings of that God to carry her the
sooner into that Chamber; there was not any light there, but this did not
surprise her, it being not usual to place any in that Chamber. She pleased her
self with the fancy of putting a Love-trick on Alexander, by making him take
her once more for Laura; this made her resolve to be silent a while, as she had
been in the Garden, and to divert her self that way. But as she was entering,
she was taken with a shivering all over, and such a sudden fear, that she was
on the point of going back again. But the Gallant who waited for her, having
taken her by the Hand, she began to recollect her self, and went along with him
where he pleased: he led her away to the further end of the Chamber, where he
was so loath to lose time for making use of the occasion, that embracing her
with some transport, though trembling withal, he had almost put it out of her
power to defend her self. The Sultaness thinking this action too violent to be
Alexander's, began to mistrust; and having given him his liberty till then, she
did the utmost in her power to resist him, and knew, though a little too late,
that she was abused, and that this Man had neither the shape, nor the stature,
nor face of her Alexander, and that it must be the Bassa, which some marks she
knew about him, soon put out of question, she changed her method, and stood
upon her guard. The resistance she made after the kindness she expressed at the
first, was observed by the Gallant, and made him perceive that the cheat was
discovered, and no hopes of hiding himself. So that without further dallying he
made his last efforts, and rendered those of the Sultaness so useless, that he
obtained his design. This transported Lover was happy at least in conceit,
which sufficiently proves the power of imagination, and that our greatest
pleasures proceed from it. I am sure, there is no unfortunate Lover but may
envy his mistake, and that chance could not put a greater obligation on any
Man, than this on the Bassa. His passion thus satisfied, he withdrew, without
saying a word, and the Lady made all the haste she could to her Chamber, for
fear the passionate Bassa should renew the assault. Laura who had been much
troubled at missing of her, was no less amazed to see her come in the condition
she was in, which made her throw her self on the Bed; where half weeping, half
laughing, she told her the story of the adventure: At which Laura did nothing
but laugh, expecting very pleasant conclusions from so comical beginnings.

The Count had been at the Bassa's in the Evening, and not finding him within,
came on the Morrow to acquaint him with the resolution he had taken on the
proposal. As he entered the apartment, he was told that the Bassa had been ill
that night, and had not slept at all, and that he had forbidden any entrance
into his Chamber; but the Count having more privilege than others, they let him
pass, and he found him abed, and writing with so sad a mien, and so dejected a
countenance, that the Count presently concluded he had had a very ill night;
seeing Alexander on the sudden, he colored a little; but the Count laying one
knee to the ground, I come, Sir, said he, to beg one favor more of you: You
are the principal Author of all the Love I am engaged in; it is my misfortune
that you feel the same passion. Accept, I beseech you, the sacrifice I make you
Sir, I will never love, and if you will have it so, I will never see Laura
more. Bless me! cried the Bassa, what Lovers are these! is it possible that two
persons who began to love one another with so tender affection, can part with
such ease? and that I, who am not beloved, cannot bring my self to this: speak
Alexander, and tell me whether it proceeds from any distaste you have taken, or
that you do it for my sake. No Sir, answered the Count, Laura is this day as
amiable in my eyes as the first day I saw her; but rather than see you in the
condition I find you in, I will not spare the doing my self any violence I am
capable of; and for your quiet and my own, I heartily wish. I never had seen
her. This example is so rare, replied the Bassa, that nothing less than the
esteem I have for you, can make it credible. In the mean time this Billet will
let you see, that I have not staid for you to set me a President, but that I
know in my turn how to give Presidents for others to imitate, but not to
outdo. It is written to Laura, read it: And there it will appear to you, that
if I have done you wrong, I know how to punish my self for it. I should be
heartily sorry, so virtuous and excellent a person as you, should part from us,
with an ill opinion of me. The Count extremely surprised at this discourse, not
comprehending the reason of it, after an answer full of respect and
acknowledgment to his dear Patron, took the Billet, and there read these words.

If all the passion Man can have for a Woman, is not capable to justify the
crime I committed against you, you ought to pardon me, at least having suffered
in one night all the torments and afflictions of a cruel repentance, which yet
fills my soul with grief and confusion. And if by giving you and your Lover
your Liberty, I may in some measure make amends for my faults, you may make you
ready for your voyage, for to morrow morning you shall go both together.
Farewell, and think of the violence I did my self, in forcing from my bosom two
persons, whom of all I ever saw, I loved most entirely, and then you will find
me not altogether unworthy of pardon.

The Count was so confounded at reading the Billet, as never was Man, and had
much ado to hide the disorder it put him in; he kneeled the second time, as it
were to give the Bassa thanks for this last favor, which before his engagement
in Love with the Sultaness, had been the greatest he could have done him; but
now after his passion, it was certainly the greatest misfortune could befall
him. He was willing by this action to hide from the Bassa the trouble he was
in. But the Bassa took him up, and told him, he could not see him in that
posture, for a business where he had more cause to complain of him, than to
thank him, that he should know at leisure the whole matter from Laura, and that
in the mean time he had nothing to do but prepare for his voyage; that he had
given order to stay a Christian Vessel, which should have gone off that very
day for Italy, and should land them at Legorn; that the weather was fair, and
that without fail he should embark with Laura on the morrow: for all which he
gave him his word.

The Count having taken leave of the Bassa, went out of the Chamber with a
heart so full of trouble and affliction, for the News he had received, that he
wanted a more proper place to comfort himself, and to vent his thoughts of the
resolution the Bassa had taken to give him his Liberty, and to send Laura with
him. He knew not what might have obliged him to a resolution of this nature,
though upon reading the Billet, he did imagine, the Bassa had committed some
outrage on Laura; but this was not the thing troubled him; it was the
Sultaness, from whom he must part, and must bid her adieu for ever: to part
with a Woman one loved so tenderly, to part with her for ever, and to part with
her in the height of his passion, sounds very harsh, and where is the Lover
could take such a resolution for any reason whatever? Yet Liberty, which to a
Man who knows what it is to be a Slave, to a Man of Alexander's quality, is a
thing so attractive; to return to his Country after eight or nine months
absence; the pleasure of Rome, and the consideration that if he lost this
opportunity, he might perhaps never have such another; all this, I say, made
such a Party, that the most beautiful, and most charming Lady in the World,
could not have hindered many excellent persons from quitting hers to take it.
But true Love which values nothing above its own satisfaction, slights a
liberty to be bought with too many tears: yet in this conjuncture, it was
almost impossible for Alexander to refuse this cruel liberty, being all he
could in appearance desire, and bestowed on him by the Bassa, with a Mistress
with whom he believed him passionately in love. What reason could he find to
refuse such a Present which had cost the Bassa so dear, and ought to be the
most acceptable to him? He despaired to find any, and saw clearly there was a
necessity of parting, unless Love, favorable to Lovers in extremity, would
come to his aid, and make the Bassa alter his resolution, as they commonly do
who take any against Love; never did Slave pay more Vows to be delivered from
his Chain, than he did for the continuance of his Captivity, choosing rather to
be a Slave the rest of his Life, than to be for ever removed to such a distance
from that which he loved a thousand times more than his Liberty.

The Bassa having passed some hours after in his Bed, to muse upon the
resolution he had taken, which he adhered to, though it made his heart ache,
called for his Aga, and gave him orders for the departure of the two
Christians, causing store of Provisions, and very rich Presents to be carried
on board the Vessel; this done he sent his chief Eunuch to the Sultaness his
Wife, to entreat her to give Laura her Liberty, whom he was minded to send home
to her Country, together with Alexander, for reasons of importance to her, as
of necessity for him, and for the ease and repose of one and the other. Having
given these orders, and the same time sent the Letter he had written to Laura,
he took Horse for Bardou, one of his Houses of Pleasure, a mile from the Town,
and staid there till midnight, having all that time walked alone in the
Gardens, to wean himself from the sight and company of Alexander, and the
pleasure he took in Laura's discourse.

That night the Bassa could not sleep, and in the Morning his Aga being come to
bring him an answer from the Sultaness, as to his request for giving Laura her
Liberty; he went presently to carry it to Alexander, whom he found in
appearance ready to be gone, but in truth never less disposed, but hoping every
moment some change of resolution in the Bassa. Ah, Alexander, said he, we must
part, but I know not how we shall; for the Sultaness who loves Laura with the
same affection I do you, notwithstanding my representing to her how much she
was concerned in interest to have us part, and to desire it as much as I,
cannot resolve upon it, but has sent me word this Morning she will sooner
loose her Life than her Laura. You must go see Laura, and tell her, 'twill be
her fault if she be not free, and go along with you; for as for me, what I have
promised I will perform. In the mean time I will give order that the Vessel be
staid longer, that it may not sail without you. Sir, answered Alexander, there
are frequent opportunities of Transportation, and when you have given some
longer time to satisfy the Sultaness, and dispose her to grant Laura this
favor, our obligation then will not be less for our Liberty you are now
pleased to grant us. Alexander, replied the Bassa, resolutions like that I have
now taken in your favor, go so much against the grain of a heart affected as
mine, that delays may be dangerous, and time may make them faulter: make use of
the good motions reason and equity have inspired into me. I do not tell you my
thoughts are unalterable. The spite I have against my heart for its weakness,
the outrage I did Laura yesterday; my shame to appear before her after it, and
the small hopes I have of gaining her Love, are the true causes of your good
fortune: All this is yet fresh in my mind; stay not till time deface these
impressions, there being nothing men are apt so soon to forget, as the injuries
they had done to others.

As they were discoursing together, a huge Moor who served as Purveyor for the
Count, and brought him every Morning his Provision from the Seraglio, came on
the sudden into the Chamber with a great Basket on his head, not thinking
(without doubt) of the Bassa's being there. The Moor started at the sight of
him, would have gone back, but the Bassa with his hand made signs for him to
stay; he obeyed, and laid the Basket on the ground, which appeared very heavy,
and so he withdrew; the Bassa, of pure curiosity to see what they had sent
Alexander to eat, bid a Moor, who waited in the Room, take up the Basket lid,
which he did, and found the Provision to be a Woman very pleasantly tucked up
and mufled in her Barnus that she might not be known. But being in the Habit of
a Christian (which the Bassa and Alexander had formerly seen Laura in) they
made no doubt but it was she. The Bassa at first was very much surprised, but
then fell a laughing, and said to the Count, the Invention is rare, and that
she had far more wit than the Women of that Country; but this is a product of
Love the Father of Inventions. However, it is certain nothing could have been
done more proper for our design: But shall not we see, said he, all your
Provision? Madam, you are here between the two best Friends you have in the
World, and you have no reason to be shy of showing your self; having said this,
he drew near to the Lady, and would have taken her by the arm to help her to
rise, but she refused and thrust him back. I see Madam, said he, you have not
yet granted me the pardon I begged of you. I confess the offense was too great
to be so quickly forgiven; but you are taking your leave, and it is not fit we
should part without being friends; for it would be a perpetual grief to me, to
see you leave this Country with hatred in your heart. Deny not this favor
(added he, reaching forth his hand) to a man reduced to despair for having
offended you, and punishing himself so severely for the fault, that there is no
need of this extreme curelty from you. But all he spoke was in vain, for she
hid her self more closely, and fortified her self in the Basket to prevent
being seen. The Bassa was unwilling to press her any further, but addressing
himself to Alexander, told him, it was his part to make peace, and to prevail
with Laura to let him see her once more being the last time: The Count took it
ill that she made so shy of showing her self to a Person to whom she was too
much obliged, to deny him his request in such a conjuncture, what cause soever
she might have had of quarrel against him. Besides, he was particularly
concerned to press her to show her self; for the last refuge he had, was his
hope that the Bassa's cenderness for her, would perhaps at the moment of
parting take fire afresh, and make him change his resolution; with these
thoughts he went to her, and gave her all the reasons he could invent to be
reconciled to the Bassa, and let him see her a moment; but all to no purpose.
He had not one word of answer, which angered him so, that having taken her
twice or thrice by the arm to make her rise, he was just going to force up her
Barnus, and threatened to do it; but the Bassa would not suffer it, bidding him
force her no further; that she had cause enough to complain, without doing her
new violence for love of him. But, says he, let us make use of the time, and
since she is brought hither to our hands, and you have no more to do but
embark, let us finish what we have begun, and perform what we have undertaken,
there never can be a fairer opportunity; and I cannot think that Laura will be
sorry to leave such a Country as this, or part with us to go along with you.
The Sultaness in all probability is yet asleep, let us not stay till she awake.
We must presently carry Laura (as she is in the Basket) into the Ship: you
shall bear her company, and as soon as you arrive, you shall hoise sail and
away; as for me, I will pass the rest of the day at Bardou, and give out such
orders as may be necessary, that in case the Sultaness miss Laura, and find she
is escaped, you may not be staid. Having said this, he sent a Moor to the Port,
with order to have a Shallop in readiness to carry Laura and Alexander aboard
the Christian Vessel riding at Gouletta. This done, he sent for the Captain of
his Guards, and bid him accompany the Count, and commend the care of that
Basket to the Moors who were to carry it along. Having given these orders, he
had no more to do, but bid his dear Alexander adieu; and having embraced him
with tears in his eyes, he bore him company to the Shallop, and from thence
went to Bardou with a heart full of grief. The poor Count was more to be
pitied: He was not much concerned to express how sorry he was to part with the
Bassa; but as for the Sultaness, whom he could have wished to have seen once
more at least, his trouble to leave her was so great, that he felt not the
grief he should have showed when he bid the Bassa adieu, who had so highly
obliged him. When he saw he must part, and no hopes of seeing her, his heart
was so full he could not speak a word; the tears ran down his cheeks, which
much moved the good Bassa, who thought they were shed for him, and was not
displeased to see himself outdone by a Man who was not ungrateful, and
cordially loved him: At last he saw him embarked, and bid him the last adieu.
The afflicted Count was so oppressed with grief, that from the Haven to
Gouletta, having given his heart a little more liberty than he durst have done
in presence of the Bassa, he let fall such lamentable expressions, looking
toward the Town, that the Captain of the Guard, and the rest that accompanied
him, were extremely astonished, and moved to compassion. By good luck they
understood not Italian, but his gestures, his tears, his looks, and the color
of his countenance expressed an unparalled trouble and affliction.

He no sooner got aboard the Ship, but he threw himself on a Bed, and was so
much beside himself, that he did not as much as think of his Basket; but the
Captain of the Guard had eased him of that care, and caused it to be carried
into his Cabin; after which he took leave of him, and having commanded the
Captain of the Vessel to hoise up his Sails, he went into the Shallop and
returned to Tunis; then was it that Alexander finding himself alone in his
Cabin, abandoned himself to the torment of his grief. Ah Fate, said he, unjust
Fate, what have I done that you use me so cruelly, that you force me away from
a Person without whom I cannot live. Ah my Sultaness, dear Sultaness, must I
leave you, must I absent my self from you for ever? For ever, said he again
rising up: Ah Heavens! let me rather be set ashore, I shall find pretense
enough with the Bassa; let me rather trust Love than Fortune, she has betrayed
me: Whatever happen I must die, and I had rather die at her feet whom I love,
than at this cruel distance Having said this, he went to see if they were still
at Anchor, but found they were already a great way from Land, and sailing with
a favorable wind, had almost lost sight of Gouletta. What despair was he in?
Ah my heart, said he, there is no remedy, now I must perish. Dear Sultaness,
added he, taking his Sword in his hand, see whether I am guilty of this
absence, and receive the Sacrifice I make you of my Life; with that he drew his
Sword, and was going to thrust himself through, when on a sudden the Person in
the Basket, who had thus far hearkened to all he had said, threw her self upon
him to prevent further mischief. Let me alone to finish a Life which cannot but
be unhappy at this distance from all that I love. Ah dear Alexander, answered
the Lady, embracing him with all tenderness, her joy not permitting her to say
any more. The Count finding immediately (notwithstanding the trouble and
transport he was in) some difference between this voice and Laura's, looked
behind him on the Lady who held him in her arms: But what an astonishment, what
a charming surprise was it for a heart like his, and in the condition he was
in, to see that it was the Sultaness her self?

THE HAPPY SLAVE.
The Second Part.
OH Heavens! Is it you, Madam, cried the Fortunate Lover? Is it you? says he
again, overwhelmed with a full Tide of Joy, flowing so fast it had almost made
him speechless; may I believe that I see you the moment I thought I had utterly
lost you? Oh happiness unparalled and beyond expectation! But, Madam, direct
me, I beseech you, where to pay my Devotion; am I obliged to Love, or to
Fortune? Your thanks are due, dear Alexander, said the Sultaness, for the
Design, to Love; and to Fortune, for the Success.

The Happy Lover extremely amazed at so surprising an Adventure, found in
himself so sudden an alteration from the depth of Grief to the height of Joy,
that to enjoy more fully the present pleasure of so blessed a change, he
thought his moments too precious to be employed in satisfying the curiosity of
knowing by what means he was so unexpectedly arrived at so complete a Felicity.
The Vessel under sail with a favorable gale rendered them as secure as Mortals
can be on an Element where the Winds are in a manner Master of our Lives as
well as Resolutions. The Happy Lovers lost not the advantage of the Season to
enjoy one another with as much pleasure and satisfaction as prosperous Love is
capable of.

The Captain of the Bassa's Guards being arrived at Tunis, took Horse, and soon
got to Bardou, where he found his Master walking alone in the Garden, and gave
him an account of the departure of Alexander. The Bassa, like a man dejected
and disconsolate, having lift up his Eyes and Hands to Heaven, without saying a
word, withdrew into a Marble Bower in the midst of the Garden, where he
continued all that day, having given his Guards express Orders not to permit
any Person whatever to come near him; hoping thus to free himself from the
importunity he feared from the Sultaness, on Laura's account. His Servants and
Guards were much surprised at these Orders, not knowing what might be the cause
of his displeasure, unless it were that Alexander was gone.

In the Evening arrived at Bardou a Spahie, who brought him a Letter, and was
followed by another, and he by a third, who all came to speak with him on
business of extreme haste and importance; but being acquainted with the Orders
he had given, they durst pass no further, but resolved to wait his coming out
of the Bower.

The Turks observe exactly the Orders of their Masters; but Aly the Captain of
the Guard, gathering from the number of Couriers the importance of their
business, thought it his Duty to step to the Town, being but three Miles
distant, to learn what the matter was, and getting presently on Horseback,
went directly to the General of the Galleys, being one of them who had
dispatched the Spahies. The General sent him instantly back, with strict Order
to speak with the Bassa, and tell him, that to oppose the designs his Enemies
had against his Life, his presence was absolutely necessary at Tunis; Aly, who
apprehended the consequence of the affair, made no scruple (when returned to
Bardou) to present himself before his Master; who extremely enraged to see his
Orders broke first by him, would neither hear him, nor receive the Letter he
would have delivered him from the General of the Galleys. But locking himself
up, past his time till the fourth Prayer, when he took Horse to return to the
Town. By the way he received Letters from several, but thinking they came from
the Sultaness, or some of her party, he opened not one of them.

The General of the Galleys astonished not to see him come, after News sent him
what was Plotting against him, resolved to go in Person to see what stayed him
at Bardou, and by the way met him. The Bassa seeing him come with a very large
Train, asked him smiling, if he thought he had been Besieged, that he came to
meet him with so numerous a Party. You are pleasant, Sir, answered the General;
but I wish we stand not in need of far greater Forces before we come to Tunis.
The Bassa observing him to speak in good earnest, fixed his Eye upon him a while
without speaking a word, then asked him, what need there could be of the Forces
he mentioned; and (with Indignation) what, says, he, will they Assault me for
love of the Sultaness? Do not you think, Sir, replied the General, there is
reason enough for it? Can you believe that a Prince like the Dey, your Mortal
Enemy (but from the Teeth outward) can brook the injury you have done him, who
loves the Sultaness his Daughter better than his Life? What injury, said the
Bassa? What injury, replied the General? An injury, than which, in my Opinion,
a greater could not have been offered. What, answers the Bassa, interrupting
him, will they dispute my Power to set two of my Slaves at liberty at my
pleasure? No, Sir, said the General, no question is made of your Right or Power
in the particular you mention; but the Sultaness was not your Slave, and unless
you designed to engage in a new Civil War, not only the Rules of Honor,
Justice, and Religion, but the Maxims of good Polity, should have prevailed
with you, not to deliver her into the hands of a Christian, than which a
greater misfortune cannot befall a Woman of our Religion. The Bassa thought
this Discourse so extravagant, that he burst out a laughing, and gave him no
other answer, but that he had taken the Alarm too soon. The General being
moved, replied with some heat, you know me too well to think me concerned at
that you reproach me with; but when you come to Tunis, you shall judge if I had
not cause to take the Alarm. If the Dey, answered the Bassa, design a breach
with me, he will find a better pretense than you speak of. True it is, I have
sent away Laura with Alexander the Christian, without the consent of the
Sultaness; but there were reasons for it, and such as the Sultaness of all
Persons living had most cause to approve. The General of the Galleys did verily
believe the Bassa was seriously bent upon raillery, and willing to keep that as
a secret which all the World knew; which he took in ill part, and had not spoke
a word more on that subject, had not the Bassa continued the Discourse. But,
Sir, said the General, interrupting him, what pleasure can you take in
endeavoring to conceal from me (one of your best Servants and Friends) a
business so notorious to all? Every body knows Laura is in your Seraglio, and
that the Sultaness is embarked with Alexander. Not to mince the matter, I must
tell you, the general voice is, that for Love of this Slave, you have rid your
hands of the Sultaness and Alexander, and that you design to Marry Laura,
though a Christian. But give me leave to tell you, that besides the novelty of
the thing (the like having never happened in this Kingdom) not only the Dey and
Divan will oppose it, but your Friends, will to their power obstruct it, and
prevent it if they can; and I dare undertake, you will scarce find a Person of
your side.

The Bassa hearing him speak in this manner, thought him distracted, and would
have used him accordingly, but restrained by the Friendship he had for him;
Laura, says he, whom I saw carried in a Basket, whom I accompanied to the Port
(where they put her aboard a Shallop) whom the Captain of my Guard conducted to
the Vessel in which she was Embarked, and he saw under sail, this Laura is in
my Seraglio, and I am to Marry her. Sir, answered the General, did I not know
you very well, and were fully persuaded of the good esteem you are pleased to
Honor me withal, I should not know what to think of your Discourse; for it
cannot be but you know the whole Affair better than any Man. But to end the
Dispute, let us go to your Palace, where you shall see whether it be Laura or
the Sultaness that is there.

It was not long ere they arrived at the Palace. The Bassa, who took all that
the General had said to be fabulous and vain, would not so much as have sent to
the Seraglio to know how things stood, thinking it foolery to doubt of the
Sultaness being there. However in complaisance, and by way of raillery, he
ordered Aly to wait on the Sultaness, and to Complement her for him, upon the
displeasure she took for the departure of Laura.

The Captain of the Guard not fancying his Master ignorant of what was past,
took his Order for a mere matter of Address, and a color only to hide the
truth of what he would have concealed; and approve himself able to manage the
intrigue, as one who could penetrate into the desires of the Person who
employed him, he went to the Seraglio, where he presently learnt what he
formerly knew, that 'twas Laura was there; and returning to the Bassa, made him
a civil answer as from the Sultaness. This put the General into very great
disorder, and gave the Bassa new occasion to laugh, telling him, he did not
understand the design of the Dey, in raising those Reports to procure him the
ill will of his Friends, and hatred of People, and renew their former broyls
with greater violence than ever; but that he should find the means to bring him
to Reason, and that in the first place, he would expose the Sultaness to view
of all the People, and then send her home to the Dey, -- to let him see how
unwilling he was to have any Alliance with a man who made it his business to
find occasions to ruin him.

As they were Discoursing, they heard a great noise on the sudden in the
Palace, followed by Vollies of Musket Shot, and People crying, to Arms, to
Arms. The Bassa went presently out of his Chamber to see what the matter was,
and met Aly coming to tell him, that the Palace was invested on all sides, and
that an attempt had been made to enter it by force, but that he had beat them
back with ten or twelve Soldiers of the Guard, who by good Fortune happened to
be with him. The Bassa, of all men the least subject to fear, and of a ready
Wit, and admirable Judgment in the most surprising occasions, knowing himself
destitute then of Forces to make any resistance, and hearing them threaten to
set fire on the Palace if the Gate were not opened, ordered they should cry out
at the Windows that the Gate should be opened, that those who had begirt the
Palace round, and were, for the most part, drawn thither with hopes of Plunder,
might run all to the Gate, and give him opportunity to make his escape another
way.

This Stratagem took according to his desire, and he made his escape by a
private way form his Enemies, who had showed him no Mercy had he fallen into
their hands. But he, with the General of the Galleys, and Captain of the Guard,
got safe to the Mountains, Inhabited by the Moors, who had great love for him.
He no sooner gave them notice of the need he had of their help, but they came
to him that Night, so that by break of day he found himself at the Head of 8000
Men, Armed some with Muskets, some with Pikes, both equally useful to them.

Poor Laura was alone, abandoned to the Mercy of this Popular Torrent, who
having pillaged in a moment that Rich and Sumptuous Palace, without respect to
the place or the Sex, entered the Seraglio by Order from the Dey, and took out
thence the unfortunate Slave, leaving the rest exposed to the will of the
Rabble. It was Laura's good Fortune, that he who had the Commission to take
her, was a Person of great honesty and worth, a private Friend of the Bassa,
and one who expressed as much respect for her as she could wish in such a
Conjuncture. She was carried to the Castle, where she was committed to the same
Officers Custody, being a Secretary, and generally esteemed by all the Divan.
And being the only Person could speak to her without danger of being heard, he
confidently told her the first time he saw her, that the Bassa, whose Conduct
till then appeared admirable, had committed a fact no less difficult to be
repaired, than generally condemned by the best of his Friends, but that he
feared the greatest smart would be hers. The poor Slave sufficiently Alarmed by
seeing her self forced out of the Bassa's Seraglio, and made the Dey's
Prisoner, was frightened much more by the Discourse of this Turk, who appeared
to her a very credible Person; she prayed him for Heavens sake to tell her what
the matter was, what fault the Bassa had committed, and how she was concerned
in it, that she must be thus handled? If you are ignorant of the passages this
day, answered the Secretary, I will let you know them.

I believe, continues he, that you know Chabania, or at least have heard talk
of her, all the World is convinced of the Malignity of her Nature, and illness
of Disposition: But to the business in hand; that which she affirms, is
grounded on Proofs so pregnant, and Reasons so clear, that her Malice has
compassed the effect she desired. Whether she was jealous of you, or in disgust
with the Bassa I know not, but she is the cause of the disorder you have seen;
which, if not remedied, may prove the ruin of the Kingdom: The Dey was at Chess
when word was brought him, that a Lady from the Bassa's Seraglio desired to
speak with him on business of great importance. Instantly he quitted his Game,
and retiring into a Chamber to give the Woman Audience, he sees Chabania enter,
attended with her Eunuchs who Ushered her, who falling before him on her knees,
spoke to this purpose. Sir, I bring you News, which doubtless will trouble you.
But if I deserve Death for not being able to endure an injury done to your
Royal Blood, and the whole Nation, without giving you Advertisement, I am
content to suffer for it, having the satisfaction to see you Revenge the wrong
has been done you, which is, that your Daughter is gone, that she is delivered
over into the hands of that Christian who sailed away this Morning, and that a
pitiful Slave is to succeed in her place, to the infinite dishonor of your
Highness and the Nation. Take your Revenge of the Author of this disorder, and
execute that Justice which you ought against so cruel an attempt, acted to the
dishonor of God, the injury of your Blood, and dishonor of your Country.
Scarce had she made an end, but the Dey inflamed with Anger, and extremely
enraged, called in those who had waited in the Antichamber, and scarce able to
speak for the Passion he was in, made Chabania repeat before them all that she
had said to him. It unhappily fell out that all who were there, were Enemies to
the Bassa, and instead of appeasing the Dey, took the present occasion to
animate and encourage him to get satisfaction for so cruel an outrage. Women
and Eunuchs were sent from the Dey to the Bassa's Seraglio, on purpose to know
the truth and particulars of this Affair, who made their report, that the
Sultaness was not there, that no body knew what was become of her, and that you
only were able to give us any news of her. A Messenger was presently dispatched
to Gouletta, to enquire at the Castle, if there were not a Woman in the
Christian Vessel that sailed away this Morning; the answer he gave was, that
the Vessel was sailed away without being searched, and that the Bassa had sent
order to that purpose by the Captain of his Guards, who accompanied the
Christian aboard the Ship. These Circumstances so clear and apparent, did but
too much confirm what Chabania had said. Hereupon diverse Councils were held;
and the Assembly consisting of Persons ill-affected to the Bassa, or at least
too Zealous for the Dey, the Result was, that Revenge should be taken. I cannot
conceive how it was possible the Bassa had no news what past, the report having
been presently noised over the Town. It was designed he should be surprised at
Bardou, where it was believed he would have lain this Night. But News being
brought, that he was on his way hither, the Dey's Aga had Order, if denied
entrance, to set upon the Palace, and seize his Person living or dead. And I at
the same time was to go to the Seraglio, and to carry you away. They missed of
him, and it was well for you he escaped; for had he been taken, both he and you
had been by this time dead. But having so luckily made his escape, and being
Master of the Militia and Moors of the Kingdom, he may become formidable to the
Dey, and be in a capacity to deliver you from danger.

The unfortunate Laura, too much acquainted with the unkindness of her Stars,
did nothing but sigh and groan at the apprehensions of the new storms that
threatened her. She knew better than any, the little reason they had to charge
the Bassa with the flight of the Sultaness; and being of Opinion, that by
justifying the Bassa, her cause would appear better before the Dey; she told
this Turk, that her Patron was not, perhaps, so guilty as they thought. I know
not, continued she, what is become of the Sultaness, since she left the
Seraglio this Morning; but the confidence you have expressed in me, in the
freedom of your speech to me, and your generous carriage obliging me not to be
so reserved to you, as I would to another; and seeing the extremity matters are
reduced to, I must acquaint you, that if the Bassa sent away the Sultaness with
the Christian, as is reported, she was very willing to go. And because it is
probable you will hardly believe me, without telling you more, I shall be
forced to relate part of a story which may serve at least to excuse, if not
justify the Bassa.

You know, Sir, said she, that the Sultaness loved Alexander; and that she
loved him entirely, the occasion was this: The Bassa, whom every one knows to
have had a mighty affection for that Christian, had a longing desire (whether
for Divertisement, or to fasten him more closely to his Person) to see him Love
with some Lady, and was of Opinion, I might be fit for the purpose, if he could
but contrive how to bring us together. But because I stirred not out of the
Seraglio, and that it would have been a very scandalous thing, to see a
Christian enter a Palace, where none of your Religion but Eunuchs have access;
he put the stranger into the habit of an Eunuch, and having prevailed with me
to accept of a Visit from him, brought him to me one Evening. The Sultaness,
already full of good thoughts for the Christian, whom the Bassa had a thousand
times spoke to her of, was extremely glad to hear of the design, to bring him
to her very Apartment, and with very great earnestness prayed me, if possible,
to procure her the pleasure of seeing him. This proved no hard task for me to
perform: The Bassa, who seldom came to visit the Sultaness, sending him almost
every day disguised like an Eunuch into the Seraglio; so that I had no more to
do but provide for the Secrecy of the interview between my Mistress and
Alexander. They had a sight of each other; and if Alexander was so handsome, as
to please the Sultaness, you may imagine that so Beautiful a Lady could not
displease him. Their Love increased day by day to that height, that they saw
one another very often. The Bassa seeing his Christian in Love, and thinking me
the object of it, took singular pleasure in it. The Bassa had formerly had some
kindness for me, which cooled by my resistance; but having one day for
Divertisement caused Alexander to give him an account of the progress of his
Amor, the fire of his Love so long raked up and smothered, kindled afresh into
a flame; and gathering from the success of Alexander's Address, that I was not
insensible, as I pretended to him; he renewed his Courtship, intermingled now
and then with Reproaches for the little esteem I had for him in preferring the
affection of a Slave before his: I foresaw the danger, but was unwilling to
make him sensible of his mistake, to save the two Lovers from the
inconveniences which would certainly attend the discovery. And making my self a
Sacrifice to the pleasure of the Sultaness, I let him believe I was not
insensible of the Merit of Alexander. The affair thus managed, there followed
many pleasant Adventures and Intrigues, which for fear of troubing you too much
at present, I shall defer the relation of it to a better Opportunity. The mean
time, the Bassa extremely pressed me, and reproached me daily for slighting his
Passion, and at the same time favoring a Christian far less worthy of my
affection. He left no stone unturned to compass his Amorous designs, insomuch
as at last he found the means to have a private and dumb interview in the dark
with his Wife, whom he mistook for me, and did her all the violence imaginable
to be revenged of the insensibility I had for him. Having satisfied himself, he
parted with her without knowing her, blessing himself for the good Fortune of
having obtained that which he might have commanded every day. But grieved at
last for the outrage he thought he had done me, and not knowing how to excuse
himself to a Mistress extremely offended, he judged no better amends could be
made for his fault, than setting at Liberty two Lovers, whose Passion he had so
unjustly injured, after having been not only the promoter, but first Author of
their Love. He sent me the News of his Resolution by a Billet he writ to me,
wherein he pleaded in excuse the great Passion he had for me; that to expiate
his fault, he would deprive himself for ever of the sight of me, and send me
back with my Love to my Country, being all could be desired from a generous
Rival: And that if I were sensible of the pain and regret my absence would cost
him, I should find him punished beyond his desert. My joy was not greater than
the trouble of the Sultaness upon receiving this News, which put her into an
unspeakable affliction. Her Nights and her Days were wholly spent in Tears; she
used all means possible to prevent the misfortune she apprehended from
Alexander's return into Italy. I gave her way, choosing rather to renounce my
Liberty than see her die for grief in the condition she was in. But the Bassa,
the firmest of men in what he resolves on, not perceiving the reason she had to
oppose a design she had more reason than he to promote, considering the Passion
she knew he had for me, which must needs trouble her, was true to his
Resolution; and knowing there was in the Port a Christian Vessel ready to Sail
for Italy, he caused it to be staid for our Embarking therein. What a trouble
was it to the Sultaness to see the Bassa so obstinate, and us on the point of
departing! Never was a Person so plunged in a Sea of despair, never were sighs
so lamentable as hers; I was resolved to entreat the Bassa to put off our
departure to another occasion, that I might gain time to dispose her to grant
me the favor; but whether it were for the shame to see me, or for fear that
the sight of me might melt him into a tenderness that might alter the
Resolution he had taken, he appeared not at the Seraglio. The Morning we were
to be gone, the desolate Sultaness resolved to die, or to follow us; she had
long studied to contrive a way how to do it: I was her Bedfellow, but neither
of us slept a wink. Laura, says she, having considered well what she would do,
thou know the affection I ever had for thee, that I have used thee more like
a Sister than a Slave. Thou know my heart, and I need not tell thee I cannot
live without Alexander. I desire no acknowledgment of what I have done for
thee, (added she, kissing me with her face all bathed in tears) but for pity
sake, forsake me not in the most desperate condition that a Woman in Love as I
am, can be reduced to, but do something to save my Life: had she desired mine
with such melting expressions, I could not have denied it her, which she might
perceive by the tears I shed to accompany hers. Then she told me of an
intention she had thought of, whereby get aboard with us, and that she doubted
not of the success, if Alexander had the Passion he pretended to have for her;
and if he had not, she would comfort herself, and find pleasure in Rage for the
absence of so ingrate a Person; that without the knowledge of any one in the
Seraglio she would be carried to his Lodging, and thence aboard the Vessel we
were to Embark in; and that the Bassa sending for me to be gone, we might all
three get aboard before any Discovery could be made of her departure. To give
her content, I approved of what she said, but did really apprehend the sucess
of this affair, and presage, I know not how, that I should be the sufferer.
It Is a dangerous business to yield ones self up to the conduct of Lovers, in
that which concerns the interest of their affections; they are apt to flatter
themselves, to puff themselves up with hope, and admit of no fear. When the day
began to appear in our Chamber, we thought it high time to set about and take
order for what we thought necessary for accomplishing our desires. We got up,
and the Sultaness having put on a Suit of mine, commanded me to call her one of
the Eunuchs, who was Purveyor for Alexander, and ready to Sacrifice his Life
for the Service of the Sultaness; she sent him for the basket wherein he used
to carry the Provision, and placing her self in it, wrapped up in my Barnus,
commanded him to carry her to Alexander's Lodging. I saw her go away in this
manner, waiting with fear and impatience enough to hear the success of this
contrivance of the Sultaness, and expecting every moment Orders from the Bassa
for my going away. At last, the time of Embarking being over* and the Sultaness
not returned, I was desirous to be informed how matters past, and understood
with astonishment and displeasure enough, that Alexander was gone, and that the
Bassa, having brought him to the Port, returned for Bardon. Then it was, Sir, I
felt the stroke of my ill Fortune, in losing, not only the hope of returning to
my Country, which might have given me some comfort, but of ever seeing the
Sultaness, the Person of the World I had most kindness for, and one who rendered
my Captivity pleasing. I could not doubt but her flight would be laid to my
charge; but the consideration of a Life so unhappy as mine, had produced in me
so clear resolutions for death, that, had you taken notice at your arrival, you
could not observe any trouble in my countenance. And in good earnest the loss
of my dear Sultaness afflicted me so, that the appearance of death could not
have done more. They asked me oftentimes what was become of her? the answer I
made, was, that I knew not: But having been long taken for her Confident, I was
shrewdly suspected. As for the rest of her Servants, you might have read in
their countenances, the trouble of their minds.

This is that, Sir, I had to say to you of the Sultaness; and if you think this
Story may be of use to the Bassa, and conduce to the procuring peace between
him and the Dey, I should be very glad you would relate it to him, though I may
appear guilty of having committed a crime against the one and the other. But
they have prudence enough to be sensible of the condition of a poor Slave,
whose happiness consisted in her complaisance to a Mistress, who loved her so
well as to make her confident in affairs of this consequence. The Turk made
answer, that the Bassa had so much kindness for her, and so little for the
Sultaness, that he would easily pardon the Treason she was guilty of; and as
for the Dey, he could not be much offended with her, for having done his
Daughter so eminent a service, in assisting her in a piece of unfaithfulness to
a Husband who (the Dey knows) had not any Love for her: and that he would make
use of the particulars of this Story to reconcile them; that he would manage
this business with some Friends of the Divan, and particularly with the Aga,
the Deys favorite, who had great influence over him, and though a Renegade,
loved the Christians very well, and might do her some service. To these
expressions he added a thousand assurances on his part, and civilities enough
to oblige her extremely. This done, he withdrew, to avoid the suspicion her
Guard might have of a longer discourse, it being already very late, but
promised to see her again on the morrow, and bring her News of all that past.

The Bassa being now at the Head of so many Moors, thought himself strong
enough to take the Field, and as soon as it was day, marched down toward the
Town, to favor the retreat of his Friends, and of the Soldiers who came
flocking in to him; so that before noon he had an Army of Moors and Turks above
ten thousand strong. The Dey used all diligence possible to arm his people, but
found himself not strong enough that day to encounter the Bassa, whose Arms
were already grown terrible to his Enemies, who from his just indignation
against them apprehended a Siege. But his quarrel being chiefly to the Dey, and
wanting Cannon to attack him in the Castle he was in, the Bassa was forced to
wait the arrival of the Artillery he had sent for to the Port whereof he was
Master.

In the mean time, having assembled the principal of his Friends, to make his
complaint to them of the unjust proceedings of the Dey, and to demand their
advice, he was not a little amazed to hear them all maintain the General of the
Galleys; that it was his Wife was gone away with the Christian, and that Laura
staid in the Seraglio; and that the Dey had reason enough for what he had done,
in the belief he was in of the Bassa's intentions to make away his Daughter.
The Bassa who still fancied that they were abused, would not vouchsafe to
contradict them, but calling in the Captain of his Guards, asked him before
them, if he had not the day before spoken with the Sultaness. Poor Aly
shivering for fear, fell down at his feet with his face to the ground, and
confessed he had thought the Bassa had sent him to the Seraglio, on purpose to
blind the world, and that it was desired he should justify before the General
of the Galleys, he had seen the Sultaness there, but that in truth she was not
there, and that he found only Laura weeping for the departure of her Mistress.

The Bassa for all this would not be persuaded, but said, he must see the Slave
before he could believe it, having many Reasons to the contrary, when he
received a Billet from the Deys Secretary to this purpose.

My Lord, Mahomet Bassa; I know not whether it was your good Fortune or mine,
that ordered the Deys making choice of me to take away and guard your fair;
Slave; but you may be assured she could not have fallen into better hands: she
wants for nothing, and you may believe, I hold neither my Estate nor my Life
too dear to bestow in your service, and obliging of her. If in the mean time I
may be allowed the liberty of giving you Counsel, I would advise you to
endeavor the advantage and peace of your Country, rather than that War and
Ruin which will be inevitable, unless you moderate your Passion. There is no
Man more sensible than I of the injury they have done you; but I am sensible
also that the appearances, for which you are condemned, have missed the Dey;
and thus the blame of the departure of your Wife ought to be charged only on
your Wife. The rash Counsel of disaffected persons, which the Dey has followed
in this affair, has put you both into this present disorder. God grant it
proceed no further, and that we may not, to the scandal of other Nations, see
our Country ruined by those who have it in charge to maintain and preserve it.
I hope both of you will be better advised, and waiting your Answer, I wish you
all happiness.

Adieu. Assen, Secret.


The Bassa, having read this Letter, could no longer doubt of the truth of the
thing, knowing Assen to be a person of great Integrity, and his very good
Friend. He was easily comforted for the loss of the Sultaness, and laughed at
the adventure, and could not believe she had had a design to follow the
Christian, if he had not given order to carry her aboard in the Basket. He was
not much troubled at the mistake he had been guilty of, and thought that in
matters of Love, a Mistress of at least as good value as a Wife. He never
suspected any treachery in the Case, but was willing to know what reason could
have reduced her to disguise her self in that manner, and go along with
Alexander; yet he could not but think Laura of the Plot, but thought himself
revenged of her, and her sufficiently punished in having lost at once her
Lover, and the occasion of her liberty, to pleasure a Mistress, who might
become a Rival. He longed extremely to see her, to know the whole business; and
Love adding new flames to this curiosity, made him so impatient of delay, that
how dangerous soever the enterprise might have been, he would have gone that
very day to Tunis, if his presence with the Army had not been absolutely
necessary, to receive those who every moment came over to his party. He sent
his Friend this Answer.

Mr. Secretary, you have in your hands a Treasure, which if the Dey knew how
much I value, he would not have trusted you or any other therewith, as being
assured he might with it make his peace when, and on what conditions he
pleased. Take care of her, I conjure you, as you would of my person, and
believe, I will never forget a service of so much importance. Send hither your
Moor to morrow at the fourth Watch; I shall want him for a business I cannot
trust any other person withal, nor write to you of at present.

Mahomet Bassa Dey.


By that time he had written this Billet, the night was far gone; yet for more
surety he would not let the Moor go till three or four a clock in the Morning.
The Walls of Tunis are very low, and in some places easy to get over. True it
is, they were then very well guarded; but the bearer of the Billet being known
to belong to the Deys Secretary, there was no danger of his being staid; and
accordingly he found his passage free as he could wish.

The generous Assen had been that Evening to visit his fair Prisoner according
to promise, and given her an account how matters stood, with some hopes of
accommodation between parties at difference; for that it was clear by the
confession of the Eunuch who had carried the Sultaness in the Basket, that if
the Bassa had a hand in sending away the Sultaness, she had contributed not a
little to her enlargement, out of a criminal passion she had for Alexander, by
going to see him at his Lodging. Laura well pleased with this News, could not
sufficiently thank Assen for the obliging care he had of her. He had sent so
many several sorts of excellent refreshments, that she found her self better
used in the Prison, than in the Bassa's Seraglio; she knew not what to
attribute so much goodness and complaisance to, and was a little troubled, out
of an apprehension she had there might be some love in the case; for the Turk
appeared so civil, so punctual, and so full of kindness, above the ordinary
rate of those of his Country, that she had cause to think him rather a Lover of
her, than a mere Friend of the Bassa's; yet had he not in a syllable
transgressed* the respect that was due to her, which pleased her the more, that
she had no cause on that account to be angry with a Man who had done her so
many good Offices. And the truth is, he acted only out of a principle of
generosity, having been five or six years a Slave in Italy to a Patron who had
used him very well; and therefore being of a generous nature, he held himself
obliged to do the Christians good offices, as having for them a more than
ordinary Love and Esteem.

As Laura was complaining of her ill Fortune, which threw her out of one
mischance into another, he prayed her to tell him how she was made a Slave
Laura was so much obliged to him, that the trouble she might expect in her
self, upon a fresh relation of her misfortunes, could not hinder her from
giving him that small satisfaction, in acknowledgment of the many services he
had done her; so that having assured him there was nothing pleasant in the
story of her life, yet to let him know the first rise of her misfortunes, she
begun in this manner.

Sir, I was born at Genoa, and of one of the best Families of that Republic,
but you shall excuse me, if I conceal the name: I will save my Family that
shame, since my misfortunes can do it no credit. I was born in a prosperous and
flourishing Estate, and my Parents having no other Child, I was bred with that
care and expense I may rather call profuse than great. It was my misfortune
that my Mother died when I was but 12 years old, and that my Father, though
aged, married a young Lady more considrable for Birth than Estate; but my
Father had sufficient to satisfy the ambition or pride of a woman of quality.
But these were not the Vanities my Mother-in-law was subject to, it was Love
had the Ascendent over her. My Father was old, she was young and handsome, and
he had cause to be jealous of her: He let her stir but very rarely out of her
Lodging, and never but in his company, and then only to Church, or to make a
visit to a Friend or Relation. But who can resist his fate? My Mother-in-law,
little pleased with the severe hand my Father held over her, found her
inclination to be unfaithful to him, increase more and more; nothing provokes
desire more than restraint, and difficulties and straits are Sisters of
invention; she made use of several to carry on some little intrigues in the
Town, but all to no purpose; my Father, an old Master in Gallantry, was so
cunning and mistrustful, that nothing could escape him. So that the kind Lady
despairing of relief from abroad, was willing to try if she could find at home
any means to satisfy her inclinations. She cast her eyes on a Man, of
condition so mean, I dare not for her reputation let you know what it was,
though otherwise very handsome, honest, and till then very faithful to my
Father, who had more trust in him, than in any of his Domestics: this
acquaintance and familiarity so dishonorable for a Lady of her quality, lasted
for some time without being discovered, till at last by ill fortune for them
and for me, having laid me down to sleep on a bed of repose in my
Mother-in-laws chamber, I was an eyewitness of their Infamy: they were not
aware of me, my Maid having by chance covered me with a piece of Tapestry, laid
usually on the bed. I saw them, and they me, with what surprise you may
imagine. I was then 14 or 15 years old. Was he not a Slave, says the Turk?
interrupting with a tone full of joy and surprise. Yes, Sir, answered Laura
(astonished at the Question, which made her look earnestly on him) he was a
Slave, and of Turkey. Ah Madam, cries the other, as soon as she had said so, is
it possible you should not know Assen? and that you should be Madam Elinor? At
this Laura was mute for some time, and then recollecting her self, Oh Heavens!
is it you, my poor Assen, says she? By what good fortune have I met you here,
and fallen in your hands? By the best fortune in the world both for you and me,
says the Turk, ravished with joy to find himself in a condition to serve her,
and being under the obligations I am to you, I should be the most ungrateful of
men, if I employ not my self in your service. I know you may accuse me on the
account of your Mother-in-law, but what could a poor slave have done, tempted
by the charms of a fair Lady, who offered him Money and Liberty when he
pleased? You will confess, men are gained by less matters, and that if I
committed a Crime in doing as I did, after the Confidence so good a Master as
your Father reposed in me, and the bounty he showed me, yet it is pardonable;
at least I believe I have made some amends for my fault, in saving your Lives,
which your Mother would have robbed both you and him of by poison. But I had
that influence over her Passion, that I diverted her from it. She made me a
thousand promises, if I would put in Execution that horrible design; but
because you are ignorant what followed that Adventure, I will tell you in few
words.

Your sight of us, as you said, surpised extremely both the one and the other;
and in that desperate Passion your Mother-in-Law was then in, I know not what
she would have done to have been rid of you. But, as I told you, I opposed her,
and made her understand, that the course she proposed, would certainly plunge
us into irreparable Mischiefs, and doubtless, cost us both our Lives. That it
were better to endeavor to gain you by fair means, in hopes that being very
good-natured, you would not pursue our destruction, by making your Father
acquainted with that which would certainly be the cause of his Death, and bring
him to his Grave You cannot but remember I went alone with you out of the
Chamber to persuade you. And that I told you, it concerned the Honor of your
House to keep the matter private, with several other reasons, with which you
expressed your self convinced. At last, you promised me not to make any more
noise of it, if your Mother-in-Law would, for the future, keep within the
bounds of her Duty. I made a relation of all this to her, expecting that the
experience of your discretion, so well known in the Family, would have past for
current Security, for your keeping your word. But it could not secure her from
strange inquietude and trouble of Mind. She could not see you without shame,
nor come near your Father without trembling. She buzzed instantly in my Ears,
that there was a necessity of making you both a Sacrifice to her Repose; and
that till then she could not expect any Pleasure in her Life. She told me, I
must help her to effect the design, or expect to be the first that should feel
the weight of her wrath. I endeavored the best I could to reduce her to
Reason, but for some time she would not hear any. At last, her ill humor
desired only the satisfaction of your being put out of* your Lodging, and was
content to find out several pretenses to persuade your Father to put you into a
Nunnery, or at least out of his House. Notwithstanding all the Arts of her
Complaisance and Cunning, she found it no easy matter to bring this about; but
for the quiet of the House, it was necessary to please her, and place you under
Pension in a Nunnery. Shortly after, whether it were that you had discovered
the business, or that she feared you had done so, or rather that she was
willing to be rid of me, by this Stratagem she came one Night to my Chamber,
while your Father was asleep, and with a fright in her looks told me, I was
undone, that my Master knew all, and that I had no more but that Night for to
save my self. Whereupon she gave me Money, and seeing me resolved to be gone,
bid me her last farewell. I kept, as you remember, the Keys of the House, and so
got easily out. I had, for a Disguise, taken a black Suit of your Fathers, and
as soon as it was day, and the Port open, I hired a Felucca, which carried me
to Legorne, where I lay private three days, staying for a Vessel of the Great
Dukes, which was to carry a Present to Mahomet Bassa, my Ancient Friend, who
made use of his Interest with the Dey to restore me my Estate, which since I
was a Slave, had been Confiscated, upon a belief I was dead. But having failed
of his desire, he procured me in recompense, the Secretaries place, which is no
great matter here. This, Madam, is the account of my Life since I left Italy.
You may oblige me in acquainting me with yours, which I could not come to the
knowledge of, having never heard since from Genoa.

That which remains to be told you, says Elinor (whom we will yet call Laura)
is a story full of troubles and misfortunes; the more difficult for me to
relate, that a Person of Quality cannot but be ashamed of them. But I will be
free with you.

Having spent two Years in the Covent I was placed in, my Father moved with
many tears, took me home; where for the time I stayed there, I was under
continual Persecution from my Mother-in-Law; who having got the Ascendent over
the good Man, made him believe what she pleased. She had new designs in her
Head, which you may believe was the cause of the fear she put you in: for my
Father never had the least knowledge of your familiarity, and was much troubled
at your running away, declaring he had lost in you the best Servant he had. He
had designed to have set you at Liberty, which was the reason he sent not after
you as he might have done. I was by this time become somewhat clear sighted,
and what I knew of my Mother-in-Law, made me suspect every thing she did: I
watched her narrowly, and in few days discovered a new Gallant. You may
believe, that after the mischiefs she had done me, I failed not to do her all
the ill Offices in my power: it is the nature of our Sex never to Pardon. But
besides the pleasure of Revenge, I was engaged in Honor against her. This
raised a War between us more violent than ever, and my Father had trouble
enough to content us both. At first she thought her self hard enough for me,
having once already turned me out of the House, and afterward sent you
packing; and putting on a bold face, feared nothing, as knowing I would not
accuse her of any thing, but her impudence could bring her off, my Evidence
being gone. But when she perceived by my obstructing her new practices,
rallying her on all occasions, and other cutting effects of my resentment, that
I understood her Secrets, she spared nothing that Rage and Fury could suggest
to her against me. At last, she fell heavy upon me with my Father; and having
not prevailed with him to return me into the Monastery, forced him to turn me
again out of his House, and place me with his Relations; where I passed six
Months with one, and six Months with another, to the great displeasure of the
Family. Till at last a Grandee of Spain, an old Friend of my Fathers, having
been created Viceroy of Naples, and passing by Genoa to go and take Possession
of his Government, my Father entreated him to take me along with him, which he
readily did. The Viceroy and his Lady received and entertained me, not only as
the Daughter of their intimate Friend, but as their own, and honored me with
such expressions of Civility and Bounty, that I thought my self too happy in
being of their Train. And the truth is, I was not deceived; these beginnings of
kindness growing every day to greater perfection, especially on the part of the
Viceroy's Lady, who appeared not able to live a moment without me. She had been
a great Beauty, and was not then unhandsome, though not very young. She kept
nothing from me, but imparted to me her most private thoughts, and made me the
Confident of her dearest affections. This lasted as long as I was
disinteress'd, but there is no trusting one another of our Sex, especially in
matters of Love. I was reputed not unhandsom, and having a full Purse at
command, I lived at that Court with Splendour enough. It was presently known, I
was not the most inconsiderable of Genoa, and this advantage set off with a
little Beauty, raised so great a number of Pretenders to me, that I could not
pass a day without treats and addresses of Love. The Court of Naples has
always passed for the most Gallant of Italy, by reason of the multitude of
Persons of Quality in the Kingdom, but was never so pleasant as then. I was so
young that I knew not what Love was, and was not concerned to make haste to
learn it, but made the Cares and Sighs of those in Love, my sport and
divertisement. But Love will in time be revenged, and make sport of us that
made sport of him. I had not yet seen the man who had the secret to affect my
heart, no not one who could please, though that Court had of all sorts, and
some very handsome. The Son of the Viceroy, being a young Lord very well
accomplished, and not a little concerned for me, did but give me trouble. But
as I hinted before, I paid dear for that indifference and those slights I
gloried so much in Five or six months after our arrival at Naples, there
appeared at Court a young Gentleman whom Love seems to have raised up for my
ruin. It was the Marquess Hippolito of the House of Accelyn, equally
considerable for his good parts as his Birth; a Youth whose outside was taking
enough to charm at first sight, but as traitorous and wicked within, as he was
outwardly handsome and well accomplished. When you have heard out my story, you
will say I speak with too much moderation. It is hard to hate what we have been
once truly in Love with. In spite of that unpardonable outrage he did me, I
find that if I saw him, and had it in my power to take my revenge of him by
death, which he has but too well deserved, my resentment would give place to
the inclination I had for him. He was newly come from France, and had got the
Court-air, so peculiar and natural to those of quality of that Nation. I was
extremely pleased to see him, and looked upon him with delight, the first time
he appeared at Court; and was sensible of it, though with shame and anger at my
self. From thenceforth he was constantly in my thoughts, though very
troublesome to me. I was displeased with my self for it, and would upon any
terms have put him out of my mind, but the more I endeavored it, the more I
found him settled there. I saw him several times after, and to the end the War
within me would fain have persuaded my self, it was not for my honor to
entertain such thoughts of that Gentleman; but I found in the end my ingenuity
deceived me. That which contributed most to my ruin, that both by his looks and
his actions he seemed to prefer me before all the Ladies of the Court, and
though he did not declare so much, yet I could observe he had more than an
ordinary respect for me, and would now and then say to my self some things I
fancied he might and would have said to me. At last I made my self of his
Party, and blaming my past coyness, I thought it very allowable and just, to
have some esteem for a man who merited it from all the World: Having once
entertained this thought, and convinced of it as reasonable, my passion and
Love finding my heart already more than half open, pressed in and absolutely
took it. The Viceroy's Lady, who often diverted her self in entertaining me
with all the Intrigues of the Court, having one day told me several Stories,
asked me if I knew the Marquess Hippolito's Mistress, for that, for some days
past, she observed him very solitary and out of humor, which she took for an
effect of some inclination. Had she looked upon me when she asked me the
question, she might read in my countenance how much I was concerned; for I
changed color three or four times. But being upon the Tarrass of the Palace on
the Country side, she was looking that way and took no notice of me; so that
having time to recover my self, I answered with an affected coldness, that he
was a dull young fellow, and I believed incapable of Love: and thereupon out of
Jealousy her question had raised in me, I made a description of him as really
unlike him, as contrary to the thoughts I had of him. The Viceroy's Lady fell a
laughing, and having looked upon me so, as she believed, would have put me out
of countenance; is it possible, says she, that you should think so of a man
whom all the other Ladies esteem the handsomest of the Court? If I were not
very well persuaded of your indifference for all men, I should believe of you
quite contrary to what you say. But look to your self, for sooner or later you
will be met with, and your insensible heart shall have her turn as well as
others. As for me, I confess, were I as you, that young Gentleman would please
me, and I would not have you slight him: think of it, he is a Person of merit
and worth, and wants nothing of what may justly deserve Love from a fair Lady
as you are. Who would not have believed but she spoke in good earnest? Who
could have mistrusted her after so many kindnesses and favors she daily laid
out on me? I know not whether I was to blame, but must confess I yielded my
self to be taken, and was ready to unsay in her presence all that I had spoken
against the Marquess Hippolito, and to acknowledge I had prevented her in the
thoughts she had been pleased to inspire into me of him, but my modesty
restrained me. I thought my self concerned in honor, to expect an Address from
him, before I would confess my self taken. I could never discover perfectly
this Ladies design, but as far as I can guess by the consequence, she
questioned me of pure jealousy, endeavoring to discover whether I had any
affection for the Marquess. She had often seen us talk together; judging by her
thoughts of him, that it was hard enough for a Lady to be acquainted with a
Gentleman of so many charming Qualities, without loving him; she had doubtless
some apprehension I had on his account ceased to be insensible. But finding by
what I said, that I continued indifferent, her jealousy giving place to
Love-policy, she desired to settle some friendship between him and me, to serve
her for a pretense to see him as often as she desired. At least I am of opinion
these were the reasons obliged her to speak of me as she did, and to tell me,
if ever I meant to love, I could not make a better choice. I stood out stiffly
to the end, telling her, my Liberty was so precious, that I would not part with
it for any consideration in the World, if the keeping depended wholly on me:
But because those of my condition were not born to enjoy it all their Life;
whatever I endured, I would be guided by my Friends, and absolutely obey their
pleasure who had the right to dispose of me. Hereupon she embraced me, and
said, All the Maids of the World would be wise, were they of my humor, and
followed my example. In the mean time, since I was resolved not to slight the
Counsel of Friends, it was her advice I should admit the Marquess Hippolito to
see me sometimes. But Madam, said I, interrupting her, has he desired leave to
do it, and is it at his request that you make the motion? She answered, saying,
that I need not trouble my self for that, but might believe this overture came
not altogether from her; and that the Marquess had found me out as well as
others. You may imagine what a pleasure she did me, in telling me this, who
desired nothing more than the love of that Gentleman.

This discourse being over, we parted extremely mistaken in our thoughts of one
another. She imagined I was still the same, and altogether insensible of love;
and I thought she had spoken as a Friend, and really desired to see me in love
with the Marquess: We began to have the young Lords company, after the
particular kindness between him and Don Alphonso, Son to the Viceroy, gave him
free entrance where he pleased; and the Viceroy having no small esteem for the
Marquess, was not only glad to see him at Court, but engaged him by his
Civilities to come to him oftener. I shall forbear mentioning what the Lady
contributed on her part; but you may believe it very probable, that having the
kindness she had for him, she omitted nothing in her power to further these
Visits. At first he was altogether for me, at least in appearance; for several
days he wanted nothing of diligence or complaisance to please me. Wherever I
went he still waited upon me, approved all that I said, and took my part on all
occasions. In a word, he practiced all that may be done, for gaining
a-Mistress; and was presently looked upon in Court as a new Servant of mine.
Many of my Friends congratulated my Conquest, and I could not but laugh at
them. Not but that I believed it, being easily persuaded to credit what I so
much desired, but that I was afraid to believe it so soon, and was unwilling it
should be known, to avoid the shame that might attend a mistake. He had not as
then spoke to me of Love; and the least I could do, was to expect he should
declare himself. A Lover of so much Wit as the Marquess, could not fail of
finding an occasion. But I know not whether fortune befriended him so ill, as
not to afford him one. However, it is certain he never took any to discover his
Passion by Speech: All that I knew of it, was from his looks and his sighs,
which perhaps my kindness interpreted too favorably. Men being now accustomed
to a general Gallantry, that in show and appearance, both their words and their
actions speak altogether of Love. These promising blossoms of an apparent
affection, were all blasted on the sudden. I was surpised at it to
astonishment, to see him so far advanced to make so sudden a stop, at a time I
least expected it, and prepared my self to give occasion to discover his
affection, which I feared his respect for me, or his fear to displease me, had
hindered from doing. I could not imagine the cause of so sudden a change; for
three whole days he absented from the Court, and when he appeared there, he
looked like a man so cold, so altered, as if he durst not cast an eye upon me,
whereas before he was jovial and complaisant, and his eye never off me, you
cannot easily imagine how terribly this vexed me. I was upon the point of asking
him the reason, and had certainly done it, but that I was overruled by a
little haughtiness and pride, which making me look on his inconstant
proceeding, as an effect of manifest Treachery, inspired me with scorn and
aversion against him; which however I smarted for in the end: for two whole
days I did nothing but weep and complain of Love and my own wickedness. The
Viceroy's Lady observing me sad and dejected, though I did all in my power to
hide part of my trouble, asked me what I did ail, which probably she knew but
too well, but was willing to have the pleasure of hearing what I would say, I,
who till then had not the least reason to distrust her, made no scruple of
telling her in plain terms the cause of my grief, and told her, she had more
than any contributed thereto. This made her blush, and comprehending on the
sudden what I meant, but thinking without doubt I had discovered her secret.
But I fell unhappily to explaining my self, and seriously confessed to her,
that what she had said to me of the Marquess Hippolito, had produced in me some
disposition of kindness for him, which cost me then very dear, having been very
confident she would not have deceived me, but that the Marquess had now
deceived us both. I must confess, says the Traytress, I was willing to conceal
from you the inconstancy and change of a foolish young flash, and did design
not to speak to you any more of him, not thinking you could be much concerned
for him after what I had heard you say of him. But since you are aware of his
inconstancy, and so much concerned at it, I must tell you, that to my grief as
much as yours, I have discovered he is otherwise engaged. She perceived me
blush extremely at that word, and in truth I was so disordered within, it was
impossible to hide my despair. Otherwise engaged! Madam, said I, sighing: Yes,
answered she, to a new Mistress very lately. Judge you, continued she, what I
said to him on that occasion, and whether he did deserve to be reproached,
having expressed so much passion for you, that I thought it impossible a man
could have been more deeply in Love. Oh Heavens, cried she, how deceitful are
men now adays! He excused himself by the Friendship he has for my Son; that to
be his Rival, were to betray him, and that the confidence he had in him, in
acquainting him at his arrival, with his affection for you, obliged him to make
a Sacrifice of his heart, to serve my Sons interest. Sorry excuses, I confess
says she, but how can we help it? It Is a mercy however, he knows not the
favorable inclination you have for him, for which he is unhappily beholding to
me, as the cause of your kindness. He should never have known these worthy
inclinations, replied I: I never discovered them to any but your self Madam,
for whom I had no reserve, and I hope you have not told him. Think not, says
she, I could so far forget my self; though I were not so much your Friend as
you know I am; I know very well with what caution to manage their concerns, who
repose a confidence in me. Then I asked her trembling, whether she knew the
fair Lady had robbed us of him? That, says she, I cannot learn of him, but I
will endeavor to discover it by my Son, who without question knows who she is;
leave that to me, and I will bring you news of her as soon as I can discover
her.

Thus did my Rival triumph and laugh at me. I must confess I was a very Fool,
in that I had not then more wit, than to trust any Woman; but it was the
confidence I had in her, that blinded me. Yet when I call to mind a thousand
things then spoken and done, I cannot but wonder, I who had seen so much of the
world, could not make discovery of the treachery they acted against me. I did
nothing but torment my self night and day, and avoided all occasions of being
with the Marquess, for fear my weakness should to my disgrace prevail over my
resolutions. I saw him entertain himself commonly with the Viceroys Lady, and
asking her one day, what it was they discoursed of; and whether she had
discovered the secret I was so desirous to know; she answered me, no, but that
I should not trouble my self, for the Marquess would come to me again; and that
she studied how to bring it about. I was vexed at this, and told her I did not
desire it: that she might do her pleasure, but that I desired to be
unconcerned. And the truth is, the pains I endured, would, I believe, by
degrees have made me insensible, and cured me at last. But on a day the Viceroy
treated us in the Garden, I quitted the Company, and walking aside to muse in a
dark and solitary place, I met with the Marquess. I thought it an effect of the
Ladies care, and that she had made use of this occasion to reconcile us. I know
not whether he took the haughtiness and seriousness of the Looks I entertained
him with for an ill Omen, or not; but sure I am, he trembled as he approached
me, and with a very settled tone, told me, it was very strange to see a person
of my Humor finding out so solitary a Walk, there being so much good company
in the Garden: it had been, said he, excusable in any other, as an effect of
some amorous thoughts; but for you Madam -- for me, replied I, interrupting
him, and who has told you but I may have been led hither by Love? Ah Madam,
answered he, we know you too well to entertain any such suspicion; and I am
sure, if you can love any thing, it must be only your self, It Is well, replied
I, if it be true as you say, that I love nothing at all; but as for what you
reproach me with, it is reported you are not altogether indifferent: there is
some ground for the report, Madam, indifference being a Quality I never stood
much upon, especially toward you of all the people in the World. What not
toward me? replied I, when you knew me insensible. It Is true, Madam, answered
he, I was told so, but submitted however to the destiny of those many
unfortunate Lovers, you have made such in this Court. In matter of affection,
said I, we are not to be led by example; some have more merit, or at least
better Fortune than others; we are sensible toward some, when we are not so
toward others: One person shall please, without knowing wherefore amongst an
infinite of others who shall not have that advantage though equally handsome. In
a word, every one has his lucky moment: you may believe I could not have said
all this without blushing. The Marquess having heard me with such attention, as
clearly discovered him surpised at my discourse, was just going to answer me,
when the Viceroys Lady, who would never with her good will have us both out of
her sight, unhappily interrupted us, and surprising us on the sudden, said, I
dare lay a good wager you were speaking of Love: it is true, answered I smiling,
we were discoursing of a very pleasant question, occasioned by being reproached
by the Marquess for my insensibility. He has reason, Madam, replied the Lady*
to prevent an answer from the Marquess; he who is so deeply in Love, may justly
reproach you: if you know it not, I can assure you of it, and will in time tell
you more. I thought, said I, we had not been so great strangers, but I might
have known it from himself, without being obliged to another for the News, and
if we two were alone, I know how I would quarrel with him for it. All this was
spoken with an air of raillery, which wrought very effectually on the
inclinations of the Marquess, which the Lady discoursed of; I applied to my
self, imagining what she spoke of it, was done for my honor, and to engage me
to an obliging answer which I gave. She presently fell into other discourse,
and led us insensibly toward the company.

On the morrow, the Marquess having mused all night on what I had said, found
me alone looking out at a window of the Palace, and falling insensibly on the
discourse of the day before, asked me, though I had no inclination to love,
whether I would be displeased at one who loved me with the greatest passion in
the World: I answered, there were but few I would allow that liberty to; and
that in the whole Kingdom I knew but one I could permit to use that privilege.
I believe he could not but understand I meant him, and my looks did but too
much confirm him in the opinion; he, though he observed it, but would not take
notice of it. I know, Madam, says he, it is extremely imprudent to propose a
person of a meaner rank than yours, or one of small merit, or not Master of
Qualities worthy your esteem; but the person I speak of, is beyond all
exception. Finding him take a course so contrary to what I expected, I had not
patience to permit him to make an end, having ground enough to believe, it was
not for himself he made this Declaration; and interrupting him briskly, A
Lover, said I, (blushing with anger and shame) perhaps would not displease,
provided he were like the Marquess Hippolito; any other may come too late. I
had scarce spoken these words, but I repented me of them, and unwilling to hear
any more in the confusion the torrent of my Passion had put me in, I withdrew.
Oh Heavens! cried he, running after to stay me, How unfortunate am I?
Unfortunate, said I, turning toward him: Is the esteem I have for you a means
to make you unfortunate? Yes, Madam, replied he with a sigh; that precious and
charming esteem, I was made believe, could never be gained, which I would have
purchased with all I have dear in the World -- He stopped there. Well, said I,
what of that esteem? Ah Madam, answered he, they have made me renounce it. I
had no sooner heard these words but I went on my way, having given him some
looks full of indignation; but seeing him follow me, and not able for very
grief to speak to him, I made signs to him with my hand, that he should come no
further. It is beyond imagination what a desperate condition I was in that
night: Rage, shame, spite, fury, repentance; in a word, all the Vexations of a
Lover, mocked, betrayed, assaulted me by turns I fell so sick, that for many
days I kept my Bed; however I resolved to speak to him once more, to know who
had caused him to renounce my esteem, as he had told me. I presently fancied it
was Don Alphonso; but was very desirous to learn how the matter had been
managed, and expected every day to see him with his Friend, or with the
Viceroys Lady, and that I should find an opportunity to speak to him of it. In
the mean time he came not to my Chamber, though all the Court did me that
honor, for the short time I continued indisposed: this surprised me extremely,
and hearing one day he was in my Antichamber, I sent Clarice my Servant to
desire him to come and see me, having something to say to him. He would have
come instantly, as the Maid brought me word; but the Viceroys Lady, with whom
he was discoursing, stayed him: at which I was not a little astonished; but
much more, when soon after I saw him come in, in the company of that Lady. He
looked very pale, and his countenance much altered, which contributed not a
little to allay my bitterness against him, though I had small reason to think
my self concerned in honor of that change that appeared in his looks. You see,
Madam, said I to the Lady at their entrance, this Gentleman must be sent for,
if we desire the pleasure of his Company. These are favors, continued I, not
usual with me, and such as I would not by any means have done him, while it was
in my power to have any esteem for him. But since he has told me, they have
made him renounce my esteem, you may believe, Madam, I am not much disposed to
have any esteem for him; and that what I now do, proceeds not from any such
cause. It Is true, answered the Lady, he does not deserve your esteem, but you
must pardon his Youth. I will pardon him, replied I, on condition he will tell
me who had the power over his Heart or Wit, to make slight of an esteem not
altogether unworthy a Gentleman of his Quality; and it is for that purpose I
have sent for him hither. He stood mute; so that turning my Head toward the
Lady, to ask her the reason of his silence, I was again surpised to find the
Lady in greater disorder than he. I was just speaking to him again, when I saw
him rise to tell me with trouble in his face; I will satisfy you, Madam, in
that particular, but entreat you let me take a fitter time. A fitter time, said
I, and why not now? Is it my Lady that hinders you? You know I conceal nothing
from her. Ah, if it be I, said the Lady, I will withdraw to leave you at
liberty; and with that she retired toward a Window, in far greater disorder
than if she had been angry. This made me more curious than ever to hear what
the Marquess would say to me. Yet he declared himself no further, but reaching
forth his hand toward me, he showed me a Billet, which I would not have
received on any other occasion; but in this Conjuncture I made no scruple of
it, believing I should find in it the Secret I longed for: Hereupon he withdrew
without saying a word. And the Lady returning toward me; Well, Madam, said
she, how comes it he is gone, without naming to you the Person you have so much
cause to hate? I must tell you, it is I, and that will surprise you. It really
did so, the word she had spoken having astonished me, I could scarce make her
an answer: You must know then, continued she, that having told me he had been
obliged on the account of my Son to change his thoughts of you, and engage
himself to another Beauty; I pressed him for your sake to tell me who it was;
and after a long refusal, he had the insolence to tell me, 'twas I. You may
imagine how I used him on such an occasion: However, I was of Opinion, that a
little more than ordinary complaisance I had expressed for him, had given him
that Confidence. But finding him sensible of his error, I was a little better
pacified, and let him see he was mistaken on all hands. That he should not have
quitted the design of serving you, being unquestionably the best deserving in
this Court of Passion and esteem of a Person of his Quality, and that he was
very ill advised to make addresses to me, who was neither for Gallant, nor
Gallantry. I was no stranger to the Character of this Lady, and knew very well
what she said was quite contrary to the inclinations of her temper. And having
had leisure while she spoke, to recover my self from the astonishment she had
cast me in at the beginning of this Discourse, and to observe the alteration of
her Countenance, I made no doubt of her perfidiousness. This, Madam, said I
very seriously, was to engage further in my concerns than I deserved, and in
truth than I desired. You had formerly told me, this young Gentleman would have
pleased you, had you been as I; and since he preferred you before me, it was
too much for you to part with him for my sake. I did, says she, but what I
ought both for you and my self. This, Madam, replied I, is a piece of more than
ordinary Friendship; and I question very much, whether among the best Friends
of our Sex, the pleasure of being beloved by a Person whom all the Ladies of
the Court own to be the handsomest and best accomplished in Naples, would not
prevail over their Friendship, and make it appear that one Woman seldom
scruples to be treacherous to another in cases of this Nature. But, Madam,
methinks what you now say, is somewhat contrary to what you formerly told me of
the Passion of the Marquess then wholly for me. I thought so then, I confess,
said she, but I was mistaken. And is it not possible, you should be now also
mistaken, answered I, for I have some reason to doubt it. You do but deceive
your self, replied she. Well, Madam, said I with some heat, let us try which of
us is deceived; peradventure it will appear in this Billet I received from him.
Whereupon I fell to the opening of it. The Lady much surpised, asked me, if it
came from the Marquess. I told her, it did; and that nothing but the curiosity
I had to clear this Affair, could have prevailed with me to take it from him.
Alas, says she, what assurance can that give you of the inclinations of a man
who changes them every moment; and will, it may be, tell you the same he has
told me already. I was in such haste to open the Letter, that I made her no
answer, but fell to reading it, being to this purpose.

How great an unhappyness is it, Madam, in matter of Affection, and great
trouble of Heart, to follow other Counsels than those of our Passion! Never was
Person so deeply in Love, as I was with you, from the day I first had the
happiness to see you. And I may very well affirm, I continue so still,
notwithstanding the many Oaths I have been forced to the contrary. But some
Persons, whom I had not the least cause to suspect of design, having taken the
pains to represent your humor so haughty and insensible, that I almost despair
of gaining your esteem, I was obliged to address my self to some more indulgent
Beauty; not out of inconstancy, but to cure my self of a Passion, the
consequence whereof I extremely apprehend. Those who advised me to it, were so
kind as to condescend to serve me in it: And the truth is, their Compliance was
such, being Persons of Quality, that had not I desired their Assistance, I
could not have refused it. But, Madam, there are some evils for which there is
no Remedy. That which your Eyes have done me is of this nature. If I have
committed a fault, in entertaining thoughts of breaking my Chains, I smart for
it more cruelly than you can desire. I know not to what extremity my grief
would drive me for the time I have lost, were it not for the hope I have to
redeem it. Be pleased, Madam, to give me leave to wait upon you with more Love
than ever, and by serious Repentance to deface those ill impressions my error
have wrought on you, concerning the constancy of my Affection. For should you
be more haughty and insensible than you have been represented, yet I am
resolved to die altogether yours.

Hippolito.


Ah, Traitor, cried the Viceroy's Lady, as soon as I had done reading the
Billet, is it possible he should have the Confidence to justify the most
visible inconstancy man was ever guilty of, and to accuse others of it? Madam,
said I without any Passion, it is fit we should hear him speak for himself; and
if you please to stay, we will send for him, and see how he will defend himself
against you. Alas, says she, what should I stay for? I am not otherwise
concerned than on your account. You may now do as you please, but if you will
be advised by me, see him no more. That must not be, Madam, replied I, though
it were but to know who they are he speaks of in the Billet; I must see him
once more, and then I shall understand what measures to take. I had hardly done
speaking but the Marquess came in. He thought without doubt the Viceroy's Lady
would not have favored me so long with her company after he had been gone; and
the impatience he had to know how I took what he wrote in the Billet, or
perhaps to tell me what made me so earnest to be informed of, made him
presently return. He was not a little surprised to find us together. He was
just stepping back to be gone, but I prayed him to come in. The Viceroy's Lady
seeing him, and confounded at the sight of him, or for fear I would put him
upon making the discovery before her, as I had certainly done in the condition
things were in, stood up, and taking him by the hand, turning toward me: I
have something (said she) to tell him; after which you may satisfy your self.
This action of hers moved more my pity than my jealousy. I know very well she
was not a Woman of the best conduct in the World, but I should never have
imagined her Passion could have carried her so far as (after all she had said
to me) as to make her give in my presence such an instance of her weakness. I
let them go without saying a word to one or other, but expected to see the
Marquess again, and assured my self of very pleasant divertisement by what he
should tell me of the Lady: But he came not at all that day, which angered me
not a little. On the morrow I perfectly recovered. My malady was a pure effect
of jealousy and vexation, and when I knew how matters stood, I was soon cured
of both: Not but that I had reason to fear the Viceroys Lady. But the sorry
course I saw her take, and her pitiful conduct, secured me from the
apprehension of any harm she could do me: I was well enough to appear at Court,
but hearing there was a Ball at night, I resolved to be sick one day more, that
I might steal at night in Masquerade to the Ball, and there speak with the
Marquess. My design took not, for he came not thither all the while I stayed.
But by reason of my going to and fro to seek him out, the Viceroys Lady knew
me, and being Alarmed at my Disguise, followed me to my Chamber, where I was
amazed to see her, and could not believe it was she. Well, and what News of the
Marquess, said she? I must know that of you, Madam, answered I, for I have not
seen him since yesterday, when you denied me the pleasure to discourse him one
moment in a business you and I were sufficiently concerned to be satisfied in.
I believe, replied she, you are now to seek for satisfaction. How can that be,
replied I, when I have not spoken with him never since. It is reported however,
answered she, you were this Evening together in Masquerade. Those, said I, who
report it, are very much mistaken; but I must beg your pardon, Madam, if I tell
you there is not any one but you capable of such a mistake. I know what becomes
me, and there are but few who make a doubt of it: Persons of my Honor are
seldom guilty of such faults. The Viceroy's Lady having a desire to vex and
fall out with me, never gave over till I had told her part of my mind, and let
her understand I was not to be fooled by her. The truths I told her, madded her
to that degree, that she broke out into expressions so cruelly offensive, I
could not forbear crying, and unwilling she should have the pleasure to see the
Tears run down my Cheeks, I rose up to retire into my Closet. What, says she, I
interrupt your Meditations in the Charms of your fine Marquess, is not that the
cause of your withdrawing? Or rather, continued she, to provoke me yet more,
are you going to seek him in your Closet where you have hid him? That which you
say, Madam, does so little become you, that nothing but extreme madness could
have made you think so unworthy of me; but I see what pleads your excuse. What,
replied she, I hope I have not great reason to trust her that will not trust
me. And the right I have to over-see and regulate your Conduct gives me the
privilege to visit any place I suspect. With that she took up a Flambeau that
lay lighted on my Table, and went up toward my Closet: I looked upon her with
that slight and indifference as wholly unconcerned at her action, which angered
her more than any thing I could have said to her. I do not yet know what was
her design; for she knew me too well to have the least suspicion of what she
charged me with, but it seems she was resolved to try me to the utmost, and be
revenged of me that way. In the mean time, by very ill Fortune for me, the
Marquess was in the Closet, and she was the first that discovered him; she
shrieked out with the surprise of it, which made me turn about that way, and
put me into such a fright, that together with the displeasure that accident
gave me, cast me into a sound, and made me fall as dead upon the Bed near which
I then stood. The Marquess seized with true or feigned grief for his being the
cause of so unhappy an accident, begged my pardon on his knees with tears in
his Eyes. What the Lady said to this I know not, but one of my Chamber-Maids,
who came to help me, told me she saw her go out so angry, that fire seemed to
sparkle out of her Eyes. When I was come to my self, I saw her not, but the
Marquess kneeling before me with a countenance so sad and so dejected, it
melted me into pity, and eased me of more than half of my anger. What have you
done, Sir, said I? you have utterly ruined me. Go and see me no more but at
seasonable hours, and when every body might see me; after which, though I was
very well pleased with his company, I prayed him to withdraw, to prevent
further occasion of Discourse.

I am sensible, dear Assen, I spend too much time in relating particulars so
inconsiderable, and abuse your Patience in entertaining you with such trifles.
But this having been the best of my time in that Court, and best part of my
story, you will excuse the difficulty I find in my self to come to the relation
of Accidents so shameful for me, that the memory of them is more terrible than
Death. Assen having answered, that all she had said was very material; and that
he thought himself equally concerned in the smallest Circumstances of her Life,
as well as the greatest, she proceeded in this manner.

The Viceroy's Lady having fallen out with me, and finding reason enough of
difference with the Marquess, who in spite of her visited me often, you may
believe she past her time very melancholy and sad. The first time the Marquess
came to see me, I insisted, that if he designed to please me, he should begin
to do it by telling me in particular all the kindness and caresses past between
the Viceroy's Lady and him. But he entreated me with so much Ingenuity not to
make use of the power I had over him, to oblige him to a thing so mean, that
his Discretion prevailed over my Curiosity, and made me esteem him the better
for it: however he let me know 'twas of her he spoke in the Billet, as I had
easily guessed. The disconsolate Lady, who could not but be concerned for us,
was willing to seek Peace, and having found a fair pretense for it, sent me
word by one of her Women, that I might do her a pleasure if I would give her a
Visit, which I failed not to do. She received me cheerfully, and with smiles in
her Countenance, being an Excellent Mistress of the Art of Dissembling, after
some Civilities showed me, she brought me to the Closet, where beginning her
discourse with a very great sigh, Well, my dear Elenor, said she, are you still
angry with me? I am heartily sorry, Madam, said I, that you gave me cause, who
never deserved it. Come, let us agree, said she, to say nothing of what is
past, and give me leave to let you see I am your Friend. It is that I desired,
Madam, replied I; and the Honor I have always had for you, must needs make you
believe your Friendship very precious and dear to me. It Is enough, said she;
come, tell me presently if there were a proposal of Marriage between the
Marquess and you; do you love him so well, as not to refuse him? Such a
Proposal from her appears very suspicious, and seeing me laugh, as one who
would not be caught in that Trap, I do not speak to you now (continued she, as
a Rival) as you have believed me to be, and as perhaps (added she smiling) I
have formerly been; but as your true and sincere Friend I tell you, that if you
desire to Marry the Marquess, it shall be your fault if it be not done; with
that she showed me a Letter from the Viceroy to my Father, written to that
purpose at the request of the Marquess, and said, your Father has so much
respect for my Husband, that there is no doubt but it will take effect; the
Marquess having desired my leave to speak of it to the Viceroy: and finding by
the Character of the Letter, they endeavored in good earnest to unite me to a
Man who was furnished with all I could wish, as well for a settlement, as to
please my Affection; I was ravished with Joy, but let it appear as little as I
could, mistrusting my Fortune, especially being in the hands of a Person who
would dearly repent it, before it could be effected. I thanked her with the
most acknowledging and affectionate expressions I could invent; and there
passed so many Caresses on the one side and on the other, that you would have
thought we had never been so great Friends before. At my return I found the
Marquess in my Chamber, where he waited to bring me this pleasing News, with a
Countenance full of Joy; and that the Viceroy had given him free liberty to
visit me. I told him I had heard all this from a Person he could not easily
guess, and in truth it was hardly credible it should be the Viceroy's Lady. I
told him it was she, and related all our Discourse.

The Liberty granted the Marquess to visit me when he pleased, having heightened
the affection we had one for another, degenerated by degrees into a kind and
tender familiarity. He took a little more upon him than had been allowed him,
and more indeed than I ought to have permitted him. But it is hard for one in
Love, so deeply as I was, to be proof against the Amorous assaults of a Man she
expects to be her Husband on the Morrow. At first I made resistance enough, and
would not so much as give him my hand to kiss; but Love blinds so, that he does
insensibly lead us away, and accustom us to things we never durst think of.
After the first blush, the rest follows of course. We expected with equal
impatience my Fathers answer. We were already mutually engaged, so that if his
answer should not have proved favorable, we were resolved to complete our
happiness: Such engagements given to save a Maids Honor, are but snares Love
lays for her Virtue. The Marquess, as all true Lovers, being impatiently
earnest for the possession of my Person as well as Affection, whereof he was
assured, and fearing cross Accidents that might hinder our Bliss, let me know,
amongst some little favors I allowed him to take, that he was very desirous to
obtain of my gift what I had forbid him to hope without my Fathers consent; and
that if I loved him, I would make it appear in obliging him in that particular.
I made as if I did not understand him, but by degrees he spoke so intelligibly,
that I was under the necessity of being very angry with him, or of defending my
self with Arguments: Finding it impossible to be angry with a Man I loved, I
fell to Disputing, but he was too hard for me. And certainly, in matters of
Love, a Maid that comes to reasoning, is in danger of being lost. However our
combat lasted long enough, to make me fancy I had satisfied my humor; but at
last I must yield. I thought there needed not so much caution, with a person
who had given the Viceroy his word that he would marry me, and assured me (as I
believed) by a thousand Oaths, that he would make me his Wife. He was to come
to me in my Chamber at night, an hour after all should be in bed; and because
my Chamber was near that of the Viceroys Ladies, where I had liberty of
entrance at my pleasure, I told him I would leave the door open, and prayed him
not to make a noise, or speak a word, lest the Lady should hear us. You see
Assen, I conceal nothing from you; though I might allege many reasons in
excuse of my fault. I cannot tell you all this without blushing; for I must
confess had I been more wise, or more prudent, I could not have been so
unfortunate as I am. The Viceroy was gone that day out of Town; all things
seemed to favor us, but it was for my ruin. The hour was come, and I heard a
man entering softly into my Chamber, for there was no light to see him by, and I
easily believed it was my dear Servant. I received him with the kindness of a
Woman in Love, and made no doubt but it was he; for he had the same imbroider'd
Wastcoat, which he had caused to be made against our Wedding, being one of the
richest ever seen in the Court. Part of the night we passed in an amorous
silence, till at last he fell asleep. As for me, I found my self a little
indisposed, and wanting a light to find something to take, I ventured to go
into the Ladies Chamber, which commonly had a watch-light burning all night.
Having opened the door from my Chamber to hers, I was not a little surprised,
when approaching the watch-light, and casting my eyes toward her to see if she
were asleep, the Curtains being all open because of the hot weather, I saw a
man in his clothes lying by her. I doubted very much whether it were best to go
back whence I came, or take away the watch-light; but the need I had of this
prevailed with me to go on, and light the candle I had in my hand: and having
seen so much, I was possessed with a Spirit of curiosity to know who that
fortunate Gallant might be; I perceived him in the habit of Marquess Hippolito.
I was surpised at the adventure, and had I not been fully persuaded I had
newly left him in my Chamber, I do not know what extravagances I might have run
into. However this Circumstance inflamed my desire of knowing who it was. I
perceived he was of the same stature with the Marquess, and had the same hair;
the Ladies arm was over his face, so that I could not see it. I was at the beds
feet, and could not be mistaken; I trembled all over, as an Omen of my
misfortune. Heavens! said I within my self, am I awake or asleep? is not that
the Marquess? could he quit me this night to come to this Lady? perhaps they
held correspondence together, and she knew he was to pass this night with me.
All these Reflections were made in a moment, and the next moment after that, I
came into my own Chamber, to find out the truth. But how was I astonished to
find the Marquess there too? Oh Heavens! cried I, which of the two is the
counterfeit? And drawing near him in my Chamber, I perceived by the color of
his Hair, how unhappily I was deceived, and that it was Don Alphonso was there.
What a Fury, what Rage did this put me in? I seized the Poniard he had laid on
my Table, and not knowing with which of the three to begin, being all equally
perfidious, I thought the Marquess as most criminal, was first to be sacrificed
to my just revenge, for fear of an Escape. So that I went into the other
Chamber; but the noise that I made, having awaked Don Alphonso, he was amazed
to see a Light, and perceiving me enter his Mothers Chamber, he got up in a
trice, and frightened at the sight of the Poniard in my Hand, he ran after me,
and laid hold on me by the Arm, just as I was going to stab that Traitor the
Marquess: but he was also sufficiently surpised to see me lifting up my hand
to kill the Marquess, lying by his Mothers side. He was enraged at the sight,
and to wash away the stain of his Family with the blood of the Traitor, was
ready to execute that vengeance he had hindered me to take; but I staid him, and
throwing my self upon him, Traitor, said I, this blow was not reserved for
thee, thou shall not have the pleasure of being first revenged. At these words,
and the bustle that we made, the Marquess and the Viceroy's Lady awaking, were
at their wits end, not knowing what resolution to take. The Marquess judging
that the Poniard Don Alphonso had in his Hand, threatened only him, made use of
the time I held him, to lay hold of his own, and stand on his Guard. I left
them in this furious Disorder, hoping they would sufficiently revenge one on
another, for their Treason against me; and re-entring my Chamber, I shut the
door on that side, and having taken with me all that was considerable in Money
or Jewels, I went out at another door, and ran through the Streets like a mad
Woman, to seek a Felucca in the Port, to carry me to any place my despair would
lead me. I was so unhappy as not to find one ready, and had not the patience to
stay, for fear of being pursued, and forced back to that Court, where I had
rather die than appear. At last with much ado I found a Barque bound for
Barcellona; provided they went far enough from Italy, and that my Name and my
Birth were concealed, I cared not whither they carried me; so that I went on
board, without taking a moment to consider. It Is not a single Accident makes us
unfortunate; the greatest disasters have commonly a large train of misfortunes:
Thus far my soul entertained not a thought, but what the transports of despair
and resentment had suggested. But when I saw my self at Sea, and in no other
Company than that of five or six poor Mariners, who knew not what to think of
me, my heart was so full, that nothing could ease it but a torrent of tears. I
will not trouble you with a Relation of the sad thoughts I had for two or three
days that I had the opportunity of a solitary entertainment; but on the fourth
I found my self plunged into new afflictions. About Sunrising the Seamen put
up such a lamentable cry, it almost broke my heart: I thought we had been
Shipwrack'd, and asked what the matter was, more out of curiosity than any fear
of death, being the thing I heartily wished for. I found the Galleys of Biserti
had us in Chase, and took us an hour after: I received this disaster with such
tranquillity of spirit, as really astonished all the Spectators. All my fear was
for my person, having fallen into the hands of men who are the most barbarous
and inhumane on earth, and have no respect for our Sex. However, whether it was
my particular good fortune, or that they had some regard for a Woman which
appeared of more than ordinary Quality, I may truly say, that setting aside the
haughtiness and rudeness of their first approach, in forcing open the door of
my Cabin with their feet; I was better used than the rest, and more favorably
than I expected. As soon as the Soldiers saw me, not one of them entered; only
the Captain of the Galley took that liberty, and very civilly asked me in
Italian who I was, and for what place I was bound. I hid from him both my Name
and my Quality, telling him, I was called Laura, and went for Barcellona to my
Father, then in the service of the King of Spain. Then I put into his hand a
little Box, in which were my Money and my Jewels; and the more to oblige him, I
told him I made him a Present worth above twenty thousand Crowns (as in truth
it was) and that I might have thrown it overboard, as most of the Seamen had
done their Clothes and their Merchandise. The acknowledgment I desired of him,
was that I might be civilly used; which he promised me, and the same time told
me, I should say nothing of the Box, assuring me of a share at our arrival at
Tunis. I was ravished at this Conjuncture, not so much for the hopes he gave me
of restoring part of my Jewels, but because this secret rendered me useful and
necessary to the Captain, and obliged him to a greater care of me. And the
truth is, I had no reason to complain; he caused me to be presently carried
aboard his Galley, and gave me his own Cabin, and never came into it till we
arrived at Biserti. Our Voyage was not long; we had a great Calm, and having in
three days gained the Cape of Carthage, we got safe on the fourth into the Port
of Biserti; where being landed, I was put into a kind of Litter carried by a
Camel, and so carried to Tunis, under a Guard of five or six Horsemen. I fell
to the Bassa's share, who joyful of it, made a Present of me to his Lady.

Thus you have, dear Assen, the fortune of a Maid born of an illustrious
Family, and to a plentiful Estate, as you very well know. The Turk being
perfectly acquainted with the condition of her Family, could not sufficiently
admire the strangeness of her fate, and assured her of his best endeavors to
make her more happy for the future, and to gain her liberty to return to her
Country, which she had no cause to scruple; That the Accident at Naples was a
disaster to be remedied by her Marriage with the Son of the Viceroy, who
doubtless would be glad of it: That if it should fall out otherwise, she had
many excellencies and advantages to comfort her against all the disasters of
her life: That her misfortune in the Neapolitan Court could not be laid to her
fault, but the infamous Treason of a man, who sooner or later was sure to be
punished for his Crime. In a word, after long discourse to this purpose, he
renewed protestations of his readiness to serve her, and to leave no stone
unturned to free her from her misery: That he had many good Friends about the
Dey, and was very well assured he could not take any sinister resolution
against her, but he must have notice of it time enough to prevent, or escape
it. Laura was not wanting to her duty of gratitude, for these signal
testimonies of Affection to her Family and her; and could not sufficiently
thank Heaven, that in the midst of her misfortunes she had met a Man so devoted
to her Service, and of unquestionable fidelity.

Thus Assen left her a little comforted against the malignity of her destiny,
and promised to come again, and pass part of the night following with her,
being obliged that day to wait on the Dey, to see how Matters were carried.

The End of the Second Part.
THE HAPPY SLAVE.
The Third Part.
ASSEN got home, but was extremely astonished the Moor was not returned: he
went to bed, but had very bad rest, fearing some ill accident had befallen the
Moor. And considering of what dangerous consequence it might be to him in the
present conjuncture, to be found to have held correspondence with Mahomet, he
began to repent he had so rashly exposed himself to discovery. The thought of
this kept him from sleeping; but at length the Moor arrived, and having given
him an account what had staid him so long, dissipated his fears, and quieted
his Spirits.

Assen was satisfied, took the Bassa's Letter, read it; and instantly
dispatched the Moor back again, it being a pretty while before day, and a
fitter time than at the fourth watch, as the Bassa had appointed by his Letter.

The Bassa was surpised to see the Moor so quickly returned; but having heard
the reason, he was not displeased, but hid him in his Tent; and as soon as it
was night, sent him in search of his General confident and dearest friend the
Master of the Galleys. Romadan, says he to him, with some disorder in his
looks, what think you of me when I tell you I intend to lie at Tunis to night.
I must tell you Sir, says Romadan the Master of the Galleys, I think you too
wise to expose your self to that hazard without assurance from our Friends
there, that they will open you the Gates; nor do I believe you can take
pleasure in putting your Country to Fire and Sword. You understand me not,
replies the Bassa, when I tell you I design to lie at Tunis to night, it is not
to execute my just vengeance against it; I am too tender of the Blood of my
friends, to revenge my self by night, when I cannot distinguish my Friend from
my Foe; I speak of going thither, only attended by a Moor I have here, to speak
with Assen, to learn what passed at the Divan, to enter the Castle, see Laura,
and return, Romadan heard him with that attention and silence, which
sufficiently expressed his wonder and astonishment. He thought it unnecessary
to use reasons to dissuade him from a design so rash and extravagant. The Bassa
who read in his looks the substance of what he might have said to him. I
confess, says he, I expose my-self to some hazard, and that it is impudence, or
(you may call it) folly to run such a risque; but that matters not, and to ease
you of the fear of being charged for not telling me what you think of the
business, I declare to you, I sent not for you to have your advice, whether I
ought to put it in execution or not* for that is already resolved. The story
they tell me of my Wife, that she is gone away with the Christian, and that
Laura is at home with the Dey, are the things that prevail with me, nothing but
a sight of her, can convince me it is true; the more I think of it, the more it
perplexes me: I would be satisfied at least how the business was carried, and
there is no knowing it but by the Slave. However, were the reasons I have told
you, not sufficient to make you approve of the design, I cannot refuse an
irresistible passion to so small a compliance.

The Bassa having said this, held his peace, in expectation of Romadan's
answer, who having for some time fixed his eyes on the ground, lift them up on
the sudden, saying, God preserve you Sir from the mischief you run into; but if
it be so ordained, you cannot avoid your destiny. Then he showed him the many
obstacles and dangers he should meet* with before he could get to Assen. How
impossible it was to effect some of the things he desired; that he could not
enter the Castle without being discovered, and that for a sight of a Christian
Girl his Slave, he hazarded the ruin of himself, his friend, and his party,
that a little patience would make him master of his designs without pains or
danger. The Bassa, instead of being persuaded by Romadan's reasons, expressed
by his countenance a visible impatience to hear a discourse so unnecessary and
useless after the resolution he had taken. His passion tempted him to try his
fortune, and deprived him of patience as incompatible with love.

The night being pretty well advanced, he disguised himself the best he could;
and having given Romadan such orders as were necessary, that his absence might
not be perceived, he went away with the Moor, who led him a way he came the
night before: they entered the Town without meeting any, but being heard by
Assen's House, they fell among a company of People belonging to the Divan, the
Bassa's sworn Enemies: But by good fortune he passed undiscovered, for which he
was obliged to the Moor, who being a witty fellow, told those who would have
staid them, that he was one sick of the Plague, whom he had in charge to carry
to the Pesthouse. This made them stand at a distance, and give them free
passage; though that disease be not so dreadful there as in other places, being
very common and ordinary in those parts.

The Bassa was glad of so easy an escape; and when he got to Assen's, he
rewarded the Moor according to the merit of so considerable a service.

Assen was abroad at the Bassa 's arrival, but was extremely surprised at his
return to see the Bassa there. Ah! Sir, said he, embracing him, is it possible
you would hazard your self thus? it might have been excusable in a hare-brain'd
young fellow, who had nothing to lose but his life, but for a man of your
prudence and conduct, (being the second Person of the Kingdom) to come, without
design perhaps, at least without necessity to throw your self into your Enemies
hands, and expose your life to a thousand dangers. This Sir, how ill soever you
take it, is a thing I can never pardon you: For Sir, adds he, what could have
obliged you to hazard your self thus?

The Bassa fell a laughing, and taking all in good part that was spoken by
Assen, whose kindness he was assured of, asked him if he had ever been in love,
and whether he knew not that love had made the greatest of men guilty of
faults, and that those faults had always their pardon: But Sir, said Assen,
what have you to do with love? is it not Laura you are in love with? and is not
she in the Castle? Yes, replies the Bassa, but being in your custody, it cannot
be impossible to have a sight of her. Assen would have dissuaded him from the
design, as the most extravagant and rash he had ever enterprized; but prevailed
no more than the master of the Galleys. Strength of reason and fear of dangers
are obstacles too weak to stop the progress of a passionate Lover. Love feeds
upon hope, and death is not half so formidable as the happiness of seeing a
Mistress is charming and pleasant. The Bassa resolved, whatever befell him, to
go into the Castle. But it was impossible to do it by Night, the Gates being
then open only for Assen, and others the Dey's principal Officers. So that it
must of necessity be between Nine in the Morning and Six at Night; and the
strict Examination they used in that time would have cooled any Man but the
Bassa from proceeding in so desperate a design. But those Southern Lovers are
too hot to be cold by Obstructions that appears invincible to others. Assen
told him, he had no better way than to put him into one of the Meal-sacks he
had order to send into the Castle on the morrow in a Cart. The Bassa was
content, and thought it an excellent invention; and that there could be no
danger in it at all. Having resolved on this, they past part of the Night in
Discourse of the present posture of Affairs, what past at the Divan, what
designs the Dey had, what Forces were raised, and such other particulars as
were necessary for the Bassa to know. After this, they went to Bed, where Assen
took his rest; but as for Mahomet, he had no mind to sleep, he dreamt waking of
the happiness of seeing the fair Laura on the morrow.

At length the day appeared, and the Cart was loaded with Meal-sacks for the
Castle, and among them the Bag with the Bassa in it, was so placed, that he lay
pretty conveniently. The Moor led the Horses, and Assen walked at some distance
before; the Castle-gate was opened* and no search made in the Cart, the Dey's
Secretary was Personally Convoy to. They past freely to the Magazin of
Victuals, where several Moors instantly attended to unload; but Assen very
dexterously got rid of them, sending them away on several Errands. This was well
for the Bassa, who having been almost stifled in the Bag, had untyed it, to
take a little breath, and had certainly been discovered, had those Moors staid
in the Magazin. Assen left him there all that day, not thinking it fit to bring
him to Laura till Night; so that he locked him up there, took the Key in his
Pocket, and went to the Dey's Palace to learn what News.

Poor Laura being all day alone, thought it very long, and with great
impatience wished for the Night, that she might have a sight of her dear Friend
Assen. At length the hour came he usually visited her, but no news of Assen,
which troubled her extremely. At last, she heard the Door open, and rising to
meet him, Did you but know, Assen, says she, the Sufferings I lie under in the
condition I am in, having no Friend but you, you would not have made me pine so
long for a sight of you; for in good truth, I am half dead with staying for
you. Assen fell a laughing, and turning about to the Bassa, who followed him,
here is one, says he, knows how to bring you to Life again, and I doubt not but
for his sake you will pardon my long stay. Assen had not told the Bassa of the
Ancient intimate Acquaintance he had with Laura; this made him interrupt her so
quickly, to make her take notice of him. But he was so white all over with
lying in the Meal-sack, that she took him for one of Assen's Men; but seeing
him laugh, she viewed him more narrowly, and knew him, Oh Heavens! is it you,
Sir? says she. Oh! whither are you come in search of an unfortunate wretch,
which has already given you so much trouble, and too great cause of complaint!
It is easy, answers the Bassa, to pardon those we love. But is it possible you
are here, and that the Sultaness is gone away in your stead? tell me, was it
she that betrayed you, or was it Alexander? I know not what to think of it; but
when I consider his proceedings in this last adventure, I cannot suspect him
treacherous. For 'twas not his fault I discovered not the Sultaness, it was I
hindered him to take off her Barnus, that I might see her, However, if she loved
you, I am sufficiently Revenged of you, for you have lost more than I, and if
he was false to you, you may comfort your self with the assurance of the
affection of a Person not so unworthy of your favor as he was. These last
words put Laura to the blush; but making no answer to them, As for me, Sir,
said she, I neither lost a Lover in him, nor have cause to charge him with
falsehood, but must lay on my ill Fortune all the blame of my being left behind
him. You surprise me much, replies the Bassa, and make me conclude you an
excellent Dissembler, or my self the most abused Man in the World. Call to
mind, Sir, says Laura, what I told you so often, that my affection for
Alexander was very indifferent; and to be taken off when I pleased. The Ladies
of your Country differ very much from those of Christendom in their course of
Love; yours are very susceptible, easily take impression, and are equally
unconstant. Ours are more shie of engaging in Love, but when engaged, their
love is more lasting. You believed me a Turk, and several times did me Honors,
due only to the Sultaness, whom you often mistook for me. The Sultaness,
replies the Bassa, much surpised at the News. The very same, Sir, says Laura,
for it is now time to disabuse you; and since I may justly glory to have made of
my Passion for Alexander a Sacrifice to her Love, I may now be allowed to
declare it, when she is out of all danger of inconvenience by my owning it. The
Sultaness, Sir, continued she, more affected than I with the good qualities of
that Christian, looked upon him as worthy of her Love. But permit me to say,
you may thank your self for it, who first sought out the means to gain the
Honor of finding a Gallant for your Lady. You may believe, replies the Bassa,
I designed no such matter, yet I pardon it in a Woman I had no kindness for.
But the falseness of the Christian was unpardonably base, who besides the
regard he should have had for the daily favors I did him, ought to have
observed at least the Laws of Hospitality. The Sultaness, Sir, said Laura, had
a Beauty of power to corrupt the most upright of Men; and had she been another
Wife, I durst not have undertaken for your integrity in the case. I had a
desire to see the Christian; you brought him into the Seraglio; she had a sight
of him: He was handsome, she loved him, and told him so; what could he do? The
Bassa could not forbear laughing at her relating the story. And it is all the
concern the Turks express for the falseness of their Wives, especially those
they have no love for, having Seraglio's well stored, and the privilege to
change Wives at pleasure. The Bassa very patiently took the loss of his
Sultaness, and told Laura it must be her fault if he should not be now more
happy than ever. The subtle Slave, very sensible how useful he might be to her
in the present conjuncture, thought it unseasonable to give him a repulse, but
resolved to manage to advantage so good an overture; she told him only, that
was not a time to make Love. You see, Sir, continues she, I am here in a
Prison, I know not how to get out of. But I know how to do it, replies the
Bassa haughtily; and if within three days you be not at Liberty, I Will fill the
Streets of this Town with the Bodies of the Inhabitants. Ah Sir! answers Laura,
that were the way not to save me, but to hasten my Death. And it being known I
am the cause of this Disorder, you may easily guess what Mercy I shall find. If
you have, Sir, any value for my Life, since it may be saved without shedding
Blood, and that matters are now in a way of accommodation, let me entreat you
not to think of those horrible extremities. Believe me, says the Bassa, it is
their design to amuse me, till the Troops they expect from Tripoly be arrived;
but I shall take Order for that, and if you will prevent inconveniences that
may happen, you must resolve to get out hence this Evening, and go along with
me. Get out hence, Sir, replies Laura, and how shall it be done, out of a
Castle where I am under Guard, and have so many Gates to pass? You see, says
the Bassa, spite of all those Guards, and those Gates, I have entered, and
resolve to get out again; and may not you so too? But, Sir, says Laura,
consider I am a Woman, and however disguised, may be easily discovered by my
gate, or my stature; and the least obstacle we meet with, will put me into such
a fright, will infallibly ruin both you and me. Assen fortified her Reasons
with his, and absolutely condemned the Enterprise proposed, as exposing the
Bassa and her to apparent danger of inevitable ruin. You shall see, Sir, adds
he, by the difficulty you and I shall find to get out, the trouble we should
have to get a Woman along with us. I am of Opinion with the rest of your
Friends, it is best to come to an accommodation. The Troops from Tripoly will be
long a coming, and if you keep the Town straightly blocked up a few days
longer, you will oblige the People to Petition the Dey to make Peace, which we
of your Party will not fail to help forward: And the Dey being of a timorous
irresolute temper, will be glad of the pretense to come to an Agreement.

The Bassa, though more inclined to violent than moderate actions, yielded this
time to the persuasion of two Persons who were the dearest to him of any, and
whose interest he knew it was not give him any Counsel to his disadvantage. He
told them he would stay a Week longer, but if in that time neither the Threats
nor Intercession of his Friends should prevail, he would make use of some
Stratagem to reduce the Town; and if that failed, he would employ all his Force
to bring the Dey to Reason.

Assen was easily induced to assent to all this, knowing the Town was ill
provided of Corn, and that the Inhabitants began already to be straightened, and
murmured at the exigences they were reduced to, and not without cause, although
it was given out these murmurs were raised by those of the Bassa's Party, in
favor of his designs.

The Bassa shifting his Discourse from the general affairs to his private
concerns, desired Laura to give him a particular account of Alexander's Amor
with the Sultaness, which Laura related in the most civil expressions she
could, not forgetting the Adventure in the Chamber of Repose, where the Bassa
had mistaken his Lady for her: the Bassa could hardly believe this, and was
more vexed at it, than all the rest of the story. Then she told him the design
the Sultaness and she had to go both aboard, and why the Sultaness had put her
self into the Basket without acquainting Alexander with her intentions. I do
verily believe it, said the Bassa, for I was in the Chamber when the Basket was
brought in, and feigned it was you; and was unwilling Alexander should do you
the least violence. I gave Order my self to have it carried aboard, and
together with Alexander went along with it to the Port. Assen and Laura could
not forbear laughing. The Bassa told them he was as ready to laugh at it as
they, but that Laura made one of the party, and had a hand in putting the trick
on him. For as for his Wife, the hatred he bore her Father, and the small
kindness he had for her, were sufficient assurances he was not sorry to be rid
of her. But he expected satisfaction from Laura for the ill Offices she had
done him; none being more guilty than she of the Treason of the Sultaness.
Raillery made up the rest of the Discourse, and the Night being far gone,
Assen, not affected as the Bassa with the Charms of Laura, told him it was time
to withdraw. The Bassa entreated him to stay a little longer, and said, while
Night lasted, he thought there was no danger; and that he had not taken so much
pains to enjoy that lovely Girl only for a moment. At last, Laura acquainted
him with the fear she was in, having been so long together, which heightened the
danger; giving the Guards cause to suspect so long an interview, and to stop
his passage if he staid much longer. The Bassa, to satisfy her, retired,
making new protestations of a Passionate Lover, who would rather perish a
thousand times, than not see her delivered from the hands of her Enemies by an
Honorable Peace, or a bloody War.

A new invention must be thought of for the getting out of the Castle, where
the Examination was as strict almost at going out as at entrance. Assen led the
Bassa back again to the Magazin, and having daubed his Face sufficiently with
Meal, laid a parcel of empty Sacks on his shoulders, without any disturbance,
past all the Guards with him, as a Servant of Assen's. It was not yet day; and
the Bassa thought it fit to make use of his time, to return before Morning to
the Camp, where he thought his presence very necessary. Assen bore him company
to the Walls of the Town, and having helped him over, took his leave.

Laura longed extremely to hear what was become of him, and could not rest till
she saw Assen. Cheer you, Madam, said he, as he entered her Chamber. The Bassa
is out of danger, and all will be well. Alas! dear Assen, answers she,
peradventure things may go well, but not for me. You will be certainly set at
Liberty, replies Assen, and in very few days. Yes, says Laura, I shall be set
at Liberty from the Dey, to be made Prisoner to the Bassa, whose Passion will
render my Imprisonment a thousand times more unfortunate than my present
restraint. Heard you not what he said? And what will become of me, when in his
power? Ah, Assen, adds she, with Tears in her Eyes, I did but too clearly
foresee the misfortunes that did threaten me, unless Heaven divert them. A
Maid of my Quality had better die a Prisoner, than buy her Liberty at that
rate. Assen sighing for pity, answered, he had already thought of all she said,
and that it was not without cause, he so much opposed the Bassa's designs of
taking her away that Night. That he could have found means enough for it, had
he thought it for her advantage; But that he resolved to represent to her
first, how much harder it would be for her to get out of the Bassa's hands than
the Dey's. And that he was very glad she had first spoken of it; that he would
keep his word with her, to do her all the Service he could, to help her back
into her Country; that he was very sensible it was as much as his Fortune was
worth, and perhaps his Life; both which he must hazard in the case: but that he
never scrupled to expose the one, or the other, but was ready to sacrifice both
for the interest of a Family he was more indebted to; and that he was very
willing to return among the Christians, whose Religion and Customs he loved far
better than those of his Country.

This ushered in a long Discourse of the Business in hand; the Conclusion was,
that Assen should use the interest of his Friends with the Dey, to persuade him
to set Laura at liberty, and send her back into her Country, to prevent the
Confusion to be feared, if he should be obliged to restore her to the Bassa,
and see her supply his Daughter St. Room. That, if this would not take, he
should try the utmost extremities, to endeavor the getting her on board a
Brigandine of his, which should be made ready to carry her away with the first
Opportunity. Poor Laura, deeply sensible of the Obligation she had to so honest
a Man, told him more than once, he might assure himself, she would not be
ungrateful for so considerable Services; and that he should never fail of a
Friend while she lived, but might command any thing in the power of her Family.
Assen, who needed no promises to persuade him in this particular, took his
leave; and went to spend the rest of the Night in thinking of the business, for
which his inclination and gratitude were motives sufficiently powerful to
engage his utmost endeavors. He slept not a wink, but as soon as it was day,
he went to visit those he thought to make use of, to speak to the Dey. Of
these, Beyran-Aga, the Dey's Favorite, was one, in whom he placed most
confidence, as most favoring the Christians, and his particular Friend. He
found him ready to serve him, but at the same time, he desired the favor of
seeing the Slave. Assen fearing the effects of her Beauty on a young man, as
the Aga, might obstruct the design, was so far from expressing a willingness to
comply with him, that he strained his invention to find the most specious
pretenses to divert him. Beyran took it for a denial of his Request, and was
somewhat displeased. He thought Assen was in Love with her, and told him only,
he would do him all the Service in his power to persuade the Dey to give the
fair Slave her Liberty. But the truth is, he endeavored it but coldly; so that
neither the Dey believed, a time might might come he might give Laura in
exchange for his Daughter, or that the Bassa loving her as he did (in case of
necessity) to make Peace with him, would for her sake grant him better
Conditions, he was not of Opinion with Assen's Friends, who advised him to be
rid of her.

Assen much troubled his project had failed, resolved to put himself into a
condition of stealing her away, helping to effect it as a thing depending
entirely on himself. Beyran whose desires to see Laura increased, by the
difficulty he found of obtaining it from Assen, would not ask it of him the
second time; but went straight to the Dey, to beg leave to see her, under
pretense of learning from her, the truth of what was reported concerning the
Sultaness, and the Christian, who was fled. The Dey too well assured of the
amor betwixt them, by the evidence of the Moor, who carried the Basket; and of
several Women of the Seraglio, and other Circumstances little needed further
Information. But Beyran being his Favorite, and thinking his request proceeded
merely from curiosity of seeing the fair Slave, he granted it; and gave order
to Laura's Guards to let him see her.

This Favorite had heard the Slave was very handsome, but could not learn how
long she had been at Tunis, nor how taken; fortune having so ordered it, that
he addressed his inquiry to Persons that could give him no certain account.

Assen had been busy that day, arming his Brigandine under pretense of sending
her a cruising, and commanded his People, being almost all Christian Slaves, to
be ready at the Cape of Carthage to sail with the first Orders. Laura was
disposed the night before, to venture passing the Sea in that little Vessel:
The weather was fair, the Season pleasant, and they hoped, if the wind served,
to reach the Isle of St. Peter in two days. Assen goes to visit her, and finds
her trembling for fear: Madam, says he, this is not a time to tremble, but to
arm your self with Resolution and Courage. I am a Woman, Assen, answers she,
and one unhappy enough to have cause to fear the worst, both for you and my
self. Assen endeavored to hearten her, saying, she should be set at liberty on
the morrow, and that he would take her out of the Castle without difficulty or
danger. Laura was in fear still, and so much disordered, she knew not where to
begin to provide for her escape; when on the sudden, she heard her Chamber door
open, and turning about, saw a man enter, which frightened her so (apprehending
a discovery) that she fell in a Swoon with these words in her mouth; Ah! Lord
we are undone! Assen extremely surprised at the accident, and the Moor
foreseeing the Aga, knew not what to think might occasion his company thither,
believing it could not be, but in behalf of the Dey. Both Beyran and he were
busy about Laura, holding her up, but of the two Beyran seemed most concerned.
He viewed and reviewed her Countenance, her stature, her hair, her hands, with
a diligence and trouble too extraordinary, not to surprise Assen, to whom he
had not yet said a word. But all on the sudden, giving free passage to a
thousand sighs, his surprise had stopped or suspended: Oh Heavens! Cries he as a
man transported, it is she, it is she, my Dear Eleanor. And at the same time
falling down at her knees, embraced them with that tenderness and height of
affection, you would have thought he would have died there for joy. These words
and transports, and hearing him call her Eleanor, surprised Assen, he knew not
whether it was the Aga he saw there, or some other that had borrowed his shape.
Laura the mean while was pretty well come to her self, and angry at seeing at
her feet a man she knew on no other account, but that the sight of him had
almost cost her life, struggled the best she could to get from him But the Aga,
with eyes full of tears, and not able to say a word* held her so much the
faster. Laura extremely astonished, Sir, says she, if this be an effect of
pity, you have for the fortune of an unfortunate Slave, I have done ill to be
so much alarmed at the sight of you. But I thought you came on a design
contrary to my wishes. You little know, Madam, says the Aga, with a languishing
tone, the Person prostrate before you.

Laura, feigning she knew the voice, fixed her eyes on him to take a better
view: Heavens! cries she, what do I see, is it possible it should be he? With
that she falls into a second Swoun into the arms of Assen, who much troubled at
it, entreated the Aga to withdraw a little, fearing the sight of him might be
the death of the poor Maid, not knowing who he was. What say you, says the Aga?
Alas! she knows me too well, being the sole cause of all her misfortunes.
Assen, I know you be honest, and my very good Friend, and therefore I apprehend
no danger in telling you, she is a Person, whose Merits as well as Birth make
her worthy your Care; and one for whom I would lose a thousand Lives to save
her from harm. Assen hearing this, fell from one astonishment to another, and
would have fain cleared the Mystery of the Adventure, but was so busied with
endeavoring to fetch Laura again, that he thought it convenient to respite the
Discourse to a fitter Opportunity. The Aga extremely concerned, assisted him
with extraordinary diligence; and Laura beginning to take breath, Assen asked
her, if she desired that Turk should quit the Room, and told her, he was the
Aga, the Dey's Favorite, he had told her of. She making no answer, turned her
dying Eyes toward the Aga, and with a languishing voice, Ah cruel, said she,
What Fate brought thee hither to persecute me to Death? Beyran could not hear
that Language, without falling the second time at her feet, and washing them
with a torrent of tears without speaking a word: Leave me Traitor, says she,
leave me, that I may dye in quiet, rather than be deluded again with thy tears,
which deceitfully as they are, have but too strong an effect on my feeble
heart. Assen the spectator of so tender a Scene, having fresh in memory the
story of Laura, with Marquess Hippolito, and Don Alphonso, knew not what to
think of it. The Aga was a Renegado arrived at Tunis a year before; and Assen
fancied he might be one of those Lovers, and rather the Marquess Hippolito,
than Don Alphonso. Laura in the height of her anger, having expressed a
tenderness for him, which she could not have retained, but for one she had
loved. He had a desire to know the bottom of the business, but thought it
unseasonable to interrupt them, and was in hopes this Scene would end in a
discovery of the Mystery. Yet being himself straightned in time, and that they
were fallen into a deep silence, using only expressions of mutual sighs. He
thought fit to say to the Aga (whom he sufficiently perceived no Enemy of
Laura's) had my former acquaintance with you been too small to give me hopes,
you would not cross the design we have in hand; yet Sir, what I have but now
seen and heard, were enough to persuade me, you will be so far from obstructing
it, that I assure my self, we shall have your assistance to compass it. By my
request to you yesterday, you know my endeavors for the Liberty of this Slave:
those proved ineffectual but I have thought of other means, which if you
please, we will execute this evening. You know well enough the Bassa is
passionately in love with her, if we give him time to see her once more, it
will not be in our power to get her out of his hands: If a War be resolved on,
it will be equally difficult to save her: And who knows but she may be put to
death here, the People being already extremely incensed against her, as the
cause of all this disorder; and upon the noise of a War, they will be too apt
to make her a Sacrifice. Let us be wise in time, all things are in readiness,
and if you will make use of them presently, I do warrant the success. The Aga
looked upon him as a man newly out of a Trance, and oppressed with grief. Let
us do, Dear Assen, says he, whatever you think fit; for in the condition that I
am in, I am not capable to give you any reasonable Counsel, but will do all you
shall desire of me, and employ my whole power in the Castle to favor your
design, and help this Lady out of danger. Ungrateful man, answers Laura, do you
speak of helping me out of danger? you who are the cause of all my misfortunes.
Go wretch, go, I Will never be so much obliged to you, but choose rather to dye
here in Prison, than not to have still just cause to reproach you. This is not
time, Madam, says Assen, (whose conceptions were too gross to apprehend the
delicacy of her Sentiments) to refuse any help, especially the Aga's, who being
Captain of the Guard, can give order for opening us the Gates, when we please,
without stop or examination. What confidence can we repose, answers she, in the
most perfidious of men? No, no, Assen, were it possible for him to be more
honest on this occasion, than he was faithful in his love, I will rather dye
than make use of his assistance, after the double Treason he committed against
me: The very thought of it, adds she with tears, is more cruel than Death. It Is
true, Madam, says Beyran, with the most moving action imaginable: I have
deserved death, yet peradventure I am not so guilty as you think me. Don
Alphonso and Clarice, who betrayed us both, have expiated their Crimes with
their Death, and if mine must be punished with equal rigor, my life is at your
dispose. You see me in a Country, Madam, whither nothing but despair on the
news of your death, occasioned my coming; for after diligent search of the way
you had taken, having been told you were embarked for Barcellona, I took the
same road, and arrived at that City, where soon after it was reported, the
Vessel you embarked in was cast away, and not one Person saved. Never was
grief equal to mine, every one pitied me; nor had I escaped death, but that
Heaven moved at my tears, reserved me the happiness of seeing you again, to
justify my self before you, and not dye in your ill opinion, the thing next
the loss of you, I was most of all troubled for. The life I have since led,
has been full of afflictions sufficient to expiate any Crime, if not committed
against you. Laura took pleasure to hear him, and heartily wished to find it
true. He was not so much to blame as she believed. But the evidence was so
apparent against him, that the very thought of what she had seen, made her more
angry than ever, so that she commanded him out of her sight, bid him quit the
Town, and never see her more. Poor Beyran being still on his knees, endeavored
with the kindest and most tender expressions imaginable to pacify her. Assen,
who by this time was sufficiently assured he was the Marquess Hippolito under
the name of Beyran, moved with his tears, took his part against Laura, whom he
thought not inflexible, and entreated her to have some regard to the penitence
of so tender a Lover, ready to deliver her out of all her troubles, and free
her from Slavery which he had occasioned; but perhaps without any fault of his,
and so against his will. But Laura more angry than before (at least in
appearance) answered, she valued not her Slavery, but would choose rather to
return to the Bassa, than go away with a man she hated worse than Death. This
troubled Assen, but he could not despair to see the fair Lady yield at last to
the pains and tears of a Lover, though she appeared unwilling to be overcome by
the persuasions of a Friend.

For anger in a Ladies heart,
Is but short lived, though it may be smart,
Against their Crimes who have the Art
To please;
For these
No sooner at the Bar appear,
Kneel, sigh, look sad, and drop a tear;
But they with ease,
A pardon for the offense obtain,
And are admitted into Grace again:
While the fair Judge, whose angry brow,
Lowr'd, and looked terrible but now,
To the poor Lover there below,
Finding her tender heart relent,
Begins her Anger to repent;
Thinks her self Criminal, that she,
So rigorous to him could be;
Owns her Severity a fault,
And that she may it expiate,
Submits his Prisoner to remain,
Bound in her own affections Chain.
Laura's heart was of this temper, she thought her self concerned in honor not
to yield too soon. Assen did her no small pleasure in taking the part of
Marquess Hippolito, whom we will yet call Beyran. And she was very willing
Assen should have the honor of obtaining from her a pardon for the ungrateful
Beyran, if he could plead any thing to justify himself, or extenuate the
Treason he was guilty of, but that would have ushered in a Discourse too long
for the present conjuncture, and Assen told the Aga, if he had a mind to
execute the design he had told him of, he must be at the Cape of Carthage
before day; for there the Brigandine waited their coming. Beyran answered, it
was impossible to get that night out of the Castle, the Dey having not above
two hours since had news from the Spies, he maintained about the Bassa, that
the night before, the Bassa entered the Town, whereupon the Dey gave strict
order no Person should go out or in but by day. Laura and Assen were surprised
at the news, and perceived the Bassa had been in danger. Beyran seeing Laura a
little mollified, was extremely desirous to improve so happy a beginning by a
suitable progress to an entire pacification. But though she saw him much
troubled and very penitent, she gave him not the comfort of a kind expression
or look, but against her inclination forced her self to appear harsh, and act
the cruel against him. Assen, who thought one night at least necessary to be
afforded Laura, to dispose her self for an entire Reconciliation; and that
being upon the point of executing so hazardous a design, care should be had to
take their measures aright, asked the Aga whether he thought it not fit to
retire, lest being seen to come from Laura so late, he might give cause of
suspicion. The Aga answered, he need fear nothing, the Dey having given him
full power to stay as long as he pleased. But Laura, who had more reason to be
of Assen's than of the Aga's opinion, who was wholly led by his passion, spoke
to him, though somewhat against her will, to withdraw. The Aga ready to obey
this order, begged the favor of her to give him hopes at least, she would
pardon him, if he made it appear he was altogether innocent as to the matter of
Alphonso, and that her hatred of him should be at an end. She made him no
answer, but her eyes betrayed her heart; and spoke clearer in his favor than
her voice could have done, Beyran kissed one of her hands, which she could not
refuse him, and left her full of that evenings adventures which found her
entertainment. The rest of that night not knowing what to think of Beyran's
fortune, whom she believed, turned Turk for despair; at the thought of this,
the tears trickled down her Cheeks, and she perceived, that if what he told her
was true, of her having been betrayed by her Maid, and that he had not any hand
in Alphonso's base action, as in truth it was scarce credible he had, she would
love him more than ever, and pardon his being found with the Vice-Queen, though
this was a tender point, and not to be remembered without a volley of sighs.

Assen found the Aga's news true, and not able to get out of the Castle, went
with him to his apartment, where the pretended Renegado caused a Bed to be
provided him, but they spent the whole night in discourse. Assen you may
believe had an itching curiosity to hear the story of Marquess Hippolito,
having heard Laura's; Assen as soon as they were private, fell into that
discourse. The Aga, who knew how much he wanted Assen's help to plead for him
to Laura, was ready to pleasure him with the relation, and having understood
Laura had told him part of what concerned her, he was willing to acquaint him
with what came not to her knowledge, and began thus.

When I arrived at Naples, I found there the Viceroys Son, whom I was
acquainted with in my younger days, and renewed our friendship, established
rather in the conformity of our age, than of our Inclinations: he brought me to
Court, and esteemed it necessary a new-comer should be a little instructed in
the passages there, he took the pains to tell me all the principal Intrigues
and Affairs of Love, and made me the Confident of his Passion for the fair
Eleanor, expecting from the fair friendship between us, I would, when
acquainted with her, do him the best service in my power; I had a sight of her,
and by the first effects of that view, could easily foresee there was no
continuing Alphonso 's Friend, without becoming his Rival: I was troubled at
it, and reproached my self for my unfaithfulness; but what signified that when
there was love in the case? There was no resisting Eleanors charms, and I had
instantly taken the resolution to love her, had not the Vice-Queen used all
possible arts to divert me; she expressed no small complaisance for me, which I
attributed to the friendship between her Son and me. But having found me one
day in deep meditation, she asked me, whether I would freely acknowledge the
cause of my melancholy, if she could guess what it was, and might serve me in
the business? I assured her I would; she adds, I was under the Fate of many
other unfortunate Lovers, who could not see Eleanor, without being affected
with the excellency of her Beauty. I was strangely surpised, to find a passion
scarce entertained in my Soul, already known to the Vice-Queen, and could not
imagine how she came by the discovery of a secret, I had resolved to keep close
as long as possibly I could: it was not in my power to deny it; the trouble in
my face and change of my color, having given her sufficient evidence, how
truly she had guessed. I told her I found my self too weak to resist the Charms
of that beautiful Maid, and was sorry only Don Alphonso her Son, and my Friend
was concerned: she answered, that a passion we cannot master, was not to be
complained of, nor blamed, and that her Son could not be so unreasonable, as
not to pardon my falling into a distemper, himself had been afflicted with. But
she believed, I should prove as unfortunate as her Son; but to keep her word
with me, she would let me see, my concerns were more dear to her than the
Interest of her Son: but I must not blame her, if her endeavors should prove
ineffectual, which she had too much cause to expect, from the strange and
unparalled insensibility of that fair Maid, that she would speak for me that
very day, and see what hopes of a favorable reception, and whether she defied
Love, out of a general aversion for Mankind, or a particular disgust against
some of that Sex. The same time she assigned me Ten a Clock at night, to meet
her in the great Walk in the Garden, to receive an account of her Negotiation:
I was there to wait for her, and she kept her Assignation. I saw her come with
one of her Maids, who was her Confident; and having given her my hand to lead
her into a Bower, I went in with her trembling, for fear of having ill News,
which I presently apprehended from her Countenance. Poor Marquess, says she,
you have no better fortune than others; this Girls heart is proof to all
Essays; and did you but know that ill-favored description and scurvy character
she gave of you, you would soon judge it to no purpose to apply your self to
her: but I would have you believe, I say not this to discourage you, but should
be sorry to see a young Gentleman as you, have qualities worthy the esteem of a
fair Lady, should employ them, where there is not any hopes to prevail. I had
certainly suspected this extraordinary condescension, and goodness of the
Vice-Queen, had not what she said been agreeable to the report of the whole
Court, that the fair Eleanor was the most insensible person in the World. I
knew well enough, 'twas not any concern she had for the passion of her Son,
made her speak as she did; she loved him very little, and the complaisance she
had expressed for me, secured me on that side. I might have been so sagacious
and quick-sighted, as to see she spoke for her self, and advised me to quit the
thoughts of Eleanor, to gain her self Advantage; but I was so oppressed with
grief at the News, that I was utterly incapable of making any reflection: she
was a Lady, the most dexterous and insinuating on Earth, and made so good use
of the power she had over me, that she not only shook the passion I was under,
but helped me to take resolution to rid my self of it, though with the loss of
my life. To bring this about, I thought it necessary to find another Beauty to
amuse my Affections; but wherever I cast my eyes, in the Court, or out of it,
I could discover nothing capable to make me forget one moment, the Charms of
the beautiful Eleanor. The Vice-Queen having after that evening said nothing to
me of it, saw me one morning alone in her Chamber, where her Son had newly left
me; she asked me smiling, Whether I had taken her advice, and followed her
Counsels? Madam, answered I, that cannot be done, without my having equal
command over my Affections, as you have over yours; or finding at least in
another Lady, those Excellencies I admire in the fair Eleanor. This Discourse
had not pleased her, could she have thought her self of the number of those
others I mentioned, not comparable to Eleanor. But the good opinion she had of
her self, and the respect due to her quality, contributed to the good
construction she made of my expressions, so that my words gave no offense; but
on the contrary, being extremely glad, no Beauty at Court but Eleanor's pleased
me, she told me smiling, She would find me out a Person, that wanted nothing of
what might engage the affections of a gallant man, and that she was very well
assured, I would not deny it. I gave her a thousand thanks, not doubting in the
least of the good success of her choice, but was very unwilling to abuse her
great goodness: that as to Eleanor, she had done her pleasure; but that the
respect due to her, would not permit me to give away, she should be at the
trouble to find me a Mistress. She told me, she took delight in it; that she was
loath any ones Affections should be lost for want of being engaged; and that
knowing my merit, she would think it a pleasure to serve me, and take care I
wanted nothing in her Court.

All this she said with an air so free, so full of goodness, it charmed me: And
I had almost answered, She might without further search, find in her self what
she promised me elsewhere. The truth is, setting aside her Age, she might have
passed for one of the fairest and best humoured Women of the Kingdom; but I was
not willing to venture so far for fear of miscarriage, and was content to wait
for a sight of her, she would provide for me. I desired her not to make me
languish, being an impatient Lover, and in a condition required present remedy.
She assured me, I should hear from her that day, and that I had no more to do,
but prepare my self to be deeply in Love.

At this we were interrupted by company coming in, which obliged me to
withdraw. I spent the rest of the morning in musing of what passed between us,
guessing sometimes she meant one Lady, sometimes another of those I knew most
intimate with her, and most proper for the design, but could not fix my
judgment on any. This gave me some disquiet and trouble, with an impatient
desire to see the Vice-Queen again. I made in the afternoon forty journeys to
Court, to see if she had any thing to say to me; she laughed at my haste, and
at length told me, my hour was not yet come, nor the day gone; that I should go
home and have patience, and when the time came, she would send me news. Night
came, but no news from the Vice-Queen, which made me believe, she fooled me; so
that I could not forbear returning to the Palace, where I heard she was gone to
visit a Lady her Friend. I was so ready to imagine it was the Lady she spoke
of, that I enquired her name, and where she lived; but could not learn either.
The caution she had used in that particular, fully convinced me, she was gone
about my business, and that she made the visit private, that my love might be
as secret; and the Court kept ignorant, how far her complaisance had carried
her to serve me.

I returned in all haste to my Lodging, as assured of all this; nor was I much
mistaken, for I was scarce got thither, but I received from her a Billet,
brought me by a Lady attended with two Chairs, and expressed as follows.

I have done what you desired, and I think, found out the person you wanted;
you will easily confess I am very much your friend: the sole acknowledgment I
expect is, you would not make me a Liar, having promised the Lady that upon the
bare description I made you of her, you would bring her a heart full of love.
See you do it, for it you deceive me in this, I shall never pardon you the
fault. You have no more to do but follow her that brings you this Billet
without noise or attendance; for you are to come into a place of safety.

Had it come from any other I should not have gone without a Guard at distance,
but coming from the Vice-Queen, I could not suspect danger. All I thought of it
was, that being a jovial and pleasant Lady, she had a frollick in her head, and
resolved to put on me some pleasant trick: without more ado, I made me ready to
laugh with her in good earnest: I went into one of the Chairs, and followed her
who brought the Billet, and was got into the other. They carried us a great way
into a private part of the Town, and there set down the Chairs which my Guide
sent away, and we marched a little further, till we came to a house which made
a fair show; I learnt afterward it belonged to a Lady of her Bedchamber, her
Confident, who indeed was my Guide, and having opened the door, made me go in
without noise: I saw neither lacquey nor light. This surpised me, and made me
the more confident, some frollick intended: I sald not a word but prepared, in
case things went not as I could wish, to have my share of the mirth with them,
who came to laugh at my cost. At last the Lady took me by the hand to lead me
up a pair of stairs in the dark, which brought us to a room no lighter then the
stairs, and thence into a Chamber where were two Flamboys lighted. It appeared
a good room, but what pleased me most was, the sight of a fair Lady, who
carelessly laid on a very rich bed, seemed asleep with her hood over her face. I
began to repent my censure of the Vice-Queen, whom I then thought to have
written in good earnest: I say nothing in this Lady but what pleased me
extremely, and to speak the truth, it was the sole moment I may be said to have
forgot the fair Eleaner, since I loved her. She was in a loose dress, but
handsome, and rich beyond expression: I had not seen the like at Court, and knew
not what to think, the Richness of the furniture, as well as her dress
declaring her to be a Lady of no ordinary quality: but I was very much perplexed
to guess who she was. I made up to her, and spoke; and the amorous impatience I
had to know her not permitting the use of much Ceremony toward the Lady that
stayed for me* I put my knee to the Ground, and laying Hold on one of her fair
hands, which she allowed me to kiss; It was but reason, Madam, said I, I should
have languished all this day as I have done, who could not expect this
happiness, without being put to the pain at least of longing for it. I looked
for an answer in hopes to know the voice, but she said not a word. I entreated
her to ease me of the pain, she might believe I was in, and that if she
resolved not to be seen, she would however vouchsafe to speak to me, that where
I was directed to bring a heart of love, I hoped to see a Lady that had Beauty
and Wit; that as yet she had only moved my curiosity, but if she meant to reach
my heart, I must see her. As I spoke thus, I perceived her laugh, which gave me
the boldness to lift up her hood: She put back my hand, but so weakly, I
thought it would not displease her to press a little further: there were but we
two in the Room, her Confident having doubtless received Orders to withdraw,
and I was ready to put her to the squeek, when at last she threw off her hood.
But how was I surpised to see 'twas the Vice-Queen. Well Sir, says she,
blushing, will you be content with your good fortune? And will it not be
presumption in me to fancy my self capable to make you forget all other
Beauties. I answered her more like a Gallant then a Lover: she was satisfied
however, and without engaging further in the relation of a discourse, of which
you may guess the consequence, I will tell you only that having spent two or
three hours in her company, I returned to my lodging the way I came, and she to
the Palace.

I saw her on the morrow, and our Correspondence held for some time, but cured
not my passion. Her Son with whom I had particular as well as general reasons
to maintain a fair Correspondence, expressed more friendship for me then I could
have wished: he was not content to make me the Confident of his affection, but
employed me to speak for him to the fair Eleanor, expecting more benefit from
the Intercession of such a Friend, than any addresses of his own: I did, and
you have doubtless heard from her; she let me understand, I should speed better
in speaking for my self then for him, 'twas then I thought my self the most
unfortunate of men, for believing so easily what the Vice-Queen had said to me,
whose conduct convinced me sufficiently, how far she concerned her self in my
business. I designed that moment to abandon her favor, and give my self up
entirely to my first passion; but to prevent the trouble I might expect from
the Vice-Queen, if she knew it, I thought fit to dissemble a little, and
disingage my self by degrees without declaring on the sudden for Eleanor. I
observed the best I could the measures I had taken, but it is a difficult matter
to conceal a passion from a jealous and a witty Woman. The Vice-Queen perceived
my relapse, before I made Eleanor acquainted with it; she punished my Apostasy
with a thousand reproaches, which were seconded with tears, and I (the better
to manage her) pretended a firm Reingagement to her. But what will not a
slighted Lady do? or what more dangerous than a jealous Woman? I was
thenceforward more curious of seeing and speaking with the beautiful Eleanor,
and avoided the occasions of being found in her company, which the Vice-Queen
was by, but all to no purpose: the Vice-Queen knew all, and so well discerned
what was true, from what was feigned, that she guessed exactly right of the
privatest of my thoughts. One day as I walked with her in the Garden, she told
me, we had both lost time to no purpose, I in forcing my self against my
Inclination, to pretend continuance of affection for her, and she in
endeavoring to make me love, though against my will: That she saw well enough
what I now did, was but the effect of my civility to a Lady of her quality, who
had expressed kindness for me. But 'twas time to put an end to our pain, and to
satisfy me she intended it. She assured me, she would no longer oppose my
Inclination, and that I would believe it, upon the Confession she made me, that
I might expect from Eleanor not only a kind reception, but something of love;
yet I put no great confidence in all these good words, as coming from a party
too liable to suspicion: But when by an Excess of goodness she added, that to
convince me, she was more my Friend then I could Imagine, she would contribute
more then any other to my satisfaction; and procure a Letter from the Viceroy
to Eleanor's Father, to persuade him to consent I should have his Daughter I
was so transported with joy, I could not forbear making her very large
acknowledgements. She told me, I should see by the answer to that Letter what
good Service she had done me: She did as she promised, and after the Letter she
procured from the Viceroy, I doubted not of being completely happy in few
days. The news was confirmed by the beautiful Eleanor, and I had the pleasure
to see her glad of it as I was: nothing troubled me then but the slow pace of
time. The Viceroy had sent an express to Genes, but the Courier was scarce got
a Horseback, but I wished him returned: every moment seemed a year by my
longing and impatience: the only pleasure I had, was the time I was in
Eleanor's company, who assured on her part of the success of the Viceroy's
Recommendation, who had great Interest with her Father, and sensible of the
pain I was in to have the matter confirmed; had not the power to deny my
passion the favor of a visit, which I begged I might make her, having engaged
my self to her with all the promises and oaths, to be expected on such an
occasion from a Lover beloved. The assignation was made, and her Chamber agreed
for the place of Rendezvous. Pardon me, my dear Assen, for fetching a sigh at
the remembance of that day, which should have been a time of love and of joy,
but was the most dismal and unfortunate of my life.

Night was come, and when I thought my self just ready to be possessed of so
great a happiness, Clarice, who waited on Eleanor in her Chamber, and was her
intimate Confident, brought me a Billet, I will show you, having by good
fortune kept it safe to this minute. With that he took out a little Purse from
his pocket, and out of the Purse the Billet, which he read to Assen in these
words.

I am heartily sorry, my dear Hippolito, I must fail my assignation. But an
unhappy accident I must not now tell you of, will for a few days retard our
happiness: you may believe me, as sensible of it as you are, but love me as you
have done. Love will furnish us with opportunity enough, Adieu.

I had never received a Letter from Eleanor, nor knew her Character; so that it
was easy for Clarice to make me believe that Billet came from her: I asked her
what her Mistress ailed; Nothing, says she laughing, but that she is not very
well this evening. I fancied I understood her meaning, and examined her no
further; but withdrew sufficiently displeased with my ill fortune that night,
when a Page of the Vice-Queens met me coming down stairs, and told me, his Lady
desired to speak with me. In the humor I was in, I could have wished a
Dispensation from waiting upon her; but not knowing what excuse to make being
so near her, and fearing she might have something to tell me from Eleanor,
being the common subject of her discourse with me, I followed the Page into her
Chamber, where I found her expecting my coming: she was at her Toilet, and the
Viceroy being out of Town, as soon as she saw me, she reproached me for
deserting her so: she could of late scarce see me in the crowd; that if I would
not out of Gallantry, I should at least out of civility have afforded her my
company, when destitute of other. I was not disposed for giving her so pleasing
an answer as I would have done another time, however I said not any thing to
disoblige her: I was melancholy and vexed, but so deeply in love, I had a stock
of kindness, and complaisance which abundantly furnished me with pleasing
expressions, which the Vice-Queen did not disapprove of: I had not seen her in
a better humor; and falling into discourse, she kept me with her a great part
of that night; but she thought me out of humor, and quarrelled with me upon it:
I excused my self, as having sat up all the night before at play. Hereupon she
invited me to lie on her Bed; I was priviledg'd to be familiar, and without
further entreaty made use of my liberty: for the truth is, I was almost dead
for want of sleep; within less than two hours I was awaked on the sudden by the
light of a Flam-boy, held before my eyes, and the first object I saw, was
Eleanor with a Poniard in her hand, to take away my life, had not Don Alphonso
laid hold on her arm, and prevented the stroke. Judge you what amazement I was
in, I might with some reason have suspected all this a Dream: But my Rival
having seized the Poniard, to execute what he had hindered Eleanor to do, had
she not done me in her turn the like Service. I thought it high time to take
care of my life, and running to my Arms, put my self in a posture of defense.
The Vice-Queen half dead with the fright, came running to part us, but was like
to have been killed by her Son, who seemed as eager to dispatch her as me: I
happily saved her two or three times, and at last standing before her, the fury
Don Alphonso was in, made him run on my Weapon, and kill himself rather than be
killed by me: I saw him fall, which troubled me extremely, foreseeing the
dreadful Consequence of such a misfortune. I turned toward the unhappy Mother,
to ask her what she would do, and found her swoun away, and lying without
motion: I was so much afflicted with the spectacle, I wished my self dead: at
last necessity pressing me to withdraw, I entered Eleanor's Chamber, to see her
once more, and dye at her feet, if she desired my life to expiate my fault, but
I found her not, and so left the Palace without any obstacle. My design was to
pass into Sicily, and being in search of a Felucca to embark in, found Clarice
almost drowned in tears at the Port. I knew her, and asked whither she went,
and what she would have: Ah Sir, said she, I have been looking for my Mistress,
who the Mariners tell me, is embarked not a quarter of an hour since for
Barcellona. I was strangely surprised at the news, and without further
deliberation, took the first Felucca I met, and Clarice being very willing to
go with me in search of her Mistress, or rather to get away from a Court, where
she had reason to fear the severest extremities, after the disorder lately
happened, wherein she knew her self concerned; I put her aboard, and had the
weather so favorable, we hoped to reach Barcellona before Eleanor could be
there. I took care to inquire the Name of the Felucca she was embarked in, and
the Masters. I was till then so distracted and oppressed with grief and
despair, it was not in my power to make any resolution on all these
misfortunes; but being got to Sea, I recollected my self, and considered all
those disasters; but the more I thought on them, the more was I perplexed about
them. I could not imagine by what accident Don Alphonso and Eleanor should be
altogether to surprise me in the Vice-Queens Chamber; unless we had been
betrayed, or Don Alphonso more in favor with Eleanor than I believed: and if
that were so, why should my Rival prevent my death, as he did, and why did she
take her turn too, to save my life from Alphonso, unless both were ambitious of
the hour to have killed me. However I must confess I deserved death, and wish I
had received it at Eleanor's hand; I should not then have had the displeasure
of imbrewing my hands in the Blood of a Person, who had all the reason in the
World to be revenged of me.

Clarice was very ill in the Felucca, of the fright she had taken, or else
Sea-sick. I had not seen her all the time of the disaster at Naples, I told her
part of the story, and found it so much afflicted her; especially when I
acquainted her with the death of Alphonso, she grew worse and worse: I asked
her several questions, which she answered with a great deal of trouble,
pretending Ignorance, but in such a manner as gave me cause enough to suspect
the contrary, and believe she was more concerned in this business than I was
aware of: I was unwilling to press her in the condition she was in, to reveal
the secret, though I was curious of a discovery, but hoped to make it, when she
should be a little better.

We arrived at Barcellona, but no news of the Bark Eleanor went aboard of: I
resolved to have patience a while, as well as the Merchants, who had effects in
it of great value: But how careful soever I was of Clarice, she grew worse than
at Sea, and all the Physicians could do for her, prevented not her being
reduced to that extremity, they gave her over as desperate; so that finding her
self at deaths door, she sent for me to her Chamber, and having desired to
speak with me in private, the rest of the company quitted the Room, and she
told me, that Don Alphonso having gained her, she did him all the Service she
could against me with her Mistress; and having overheard part of my last
discourse with Eleanor, she instantly acquainted my Rival with it, who
transported with rage and despair, against a design so fatal to his Affection,
resolved by any means to defeat it, and if possible make advantage of it for
himself. That in order to this, he made her write a Letter, and carry it me, as
from her Mistress; that Don Alphonso took his time, and his measures
accordingly, having learnt from her the hour, and the manner of my coming to
Eleanor's Chamber; that he got in without difficulty: but what passed further,
she knew not; only some hours after, hearing the noise of Swords, she ran in,
where she found her Mistress all in disorder, packing away; that she would have
followed her, but her Mistress begged of her to let her go alone. At last
finding the noise increase in the Vice-Queens Chamber, she was frighted, and
went toward the Port, where I found her; with that the unhappy Girl with
abundance of tears, begged that now at her death, I would pardon her a Crime
had cost her her life. She said no more, but two hours after died: I will not
tell you the different motions of my heart, during the dismal Relation this
Wretch made me; but the appearance of Death in her face made me pardon her. As
for Don Alphonso, I heartily wished him alive again, as not sufficiently
punished by one Death for his Treason; but the Traitors being both in another
World, I had no Subject to exercise my Revenge on, unless my ill Fate, against
which I spent my time in fruitless Complaints.

To complete my misery, News came, the Bark we expected was lost, which was
confirmed by Advice from several Parties. Never man in such despair as I; I
will not tell you the extravagancies it made me run into; it distracts me to
think on it: there was no other remedy to bring me to my self, but to persuade
me the News from Sea were not so sure, but that we had reason to expect further
Confirmation, and that Vessels reported cast away, came frequently safe into
Port: that the Sea was a large Country, and one Vessel might be easily
mistaken for another, and that many fell into the hands of the Turks, which
were supposed to have been wracked, because they were not heard of. This gave
me but small comfort; yet I thought I had some reason of hope, undertaking a
Voyage to visit all the Ports of the Levant, till I should learn some certainty
of the Felucca I was in search of.

The Aga having finished his Story, Assen told him, he was very glad for his
sake, that Matters passed otherwise than Eleanor believed; that it would be no
hard matter to make his peace, when she understood the Treachery of her
Chambermaid; that he was not to wonder at the Anger she expressed against him,
for that she knew not any of the Particulars he related to justify himself,
but suspected him of Intelligence with Don Alphonso to betray her. Heavens! is
it possible, cries Hippolito, she should do my Love the injury, to entertain
such a thought of me! had I not loved her as I did, could she fancy me capable
of so much baseness? Sir, said Assen, when there is Evidence against us, and no
Plea in defense for our justification, we are easily cast: what could you
expect a Lady dishonored by the Son, should have believed of you, whom she
found in the Arms of the Mother, but that he sacrificed the one to you, that
you might leave him the other. Ah! Assen, replies the Aga with a sigh, let us
talk no more of what is past; as innocent as I am of the one side, I must
acknowledge my self guilty of the other. But let me entreat you to excuse and
extenuate the fault as much as you can before her; or rather never speak of it,
but endeavor only to disabuse her, and alter the ill opinion she has of me,
and assure your self, whatever Fortune befall me, I will not be ungrateful for
the Service you will do me. I believe you have heard from her who I am, and if
the condition she is in, or any other Reason, has obliged her to conceal her
Birth, and other things concerning her, that might render her more worthy the
zeal you have for her Service, I will satisfy your curiosity in every
particular. Assen thanked him, and fell a laughing, and answered, He had known
her too long to want Instructions in those Particulars, and could give a better
account of her Birth and Family than any Person whatever. The Aga, surpised
at it, entreated him earnestly to let him understand, how he being a Turk,
should so long and so particularly know her. Assen told him the Story, and part
of what happened at Genes.

It was day by that time Assen had done, which put them in mind of taking some
resolution about the design in hand, and the means to be made use of, to get
Laura out of the Castle without danger. They thought of several ways, but all
appeared full of uncertainty and inconvenience; yet they two could best do it
of any, the one having all the power over Laura's Guards, and the other over
the Garrison of the Castle. But all things were so strictly examined by the
vigilance of the inferior Officers, whom the Dey (a man as vigilant as fearful)
had strictly commanded to be always on Guard, and not permit any to come in, or
go out, without taking exact notice of them, that it was absolutely necessary
to take right measures, and still fear the success. Assen at length bethought
himself of a Stratagem, the less subject to discovery, as covered under a cloak
of Religion, though in truth, apt to startle a nice Girl as Laura. There was a
Soldier of the Castle dead the night before, to be buried that day; he resolved
to lock up the Corpse in a Chamber, and carry out Laura on the Bier, as if she
had been the Soldier, to be buried in the Churchyard behind the Castle. The
Aga was of opinion, there could be no danger in the expedient, but doubted much
whether Laura could be induced to make use of it; yet after long consultation,
and discourse of other means, they thought that not only the best, but the only
one they could promise themselves a good design from. But to prevent the
trouble Laura might have upon the apprehension of Death, or other sad Accident,
they agreed not to tell her of the Bier, but propose carrying her out in a
Chair. This being resolved on, Assen, who was to see her that morning,
undertook to persuade her to it, and the Aga in the mean time gave order, the
dead Soldier should not be buried till the Evening. He recommended to Assen,
the care of his Affairs with his Mistress, gave him Clarices Letter to produce
in justification of him; and after a great deal of Civility and Kindness on
both sides, they parted, to meet again at Dinner at Assen's, for fear their
long Conferences in the Castle might occasion suspicion in the Garrison, being
extremely jealous and mistrustful. Laura, who had scarce rested all night for
Dreams, which troubled her, was very joyful to see Assen come so early, to
divert her from the thoughts of them. Well, dear Assen, says she, shall we be
once eased of our Chains? and must we carry this Traitor along with us?
Traitor, Madam, answers Assen, he is the most honest and most passionate of
Lovers. Ah! says she, I foresaw he would corrupt even your fidelity; I know too
well the power he has to gain affection, and had reason enough to distrust
him. Be not so hasty, Madam, replies the Turk, to condemn a man unheard. Why,
what says she, can he offer against what I have seen? Did not I find him with
the Vice-Queen? Was it not he that helped the Traitor Alphonso to abuse me? No,
Madam, I assure you, answers Assen, be pleased to let me tell you, what you
know well enough, that he loved you too well, to be capable of an action of
that kind; and to clear all your doubts, adds he, showing her Clarices Letter,
Know you that Character? Well, said she, somewhat surpised, it is my
Chamber-maids: Read it, replies Assen, and you shall see who was guilty of the
Treason. Laura read it, and had scarce done, when relenting at the Injury done
Hippolito, or troubled for the Treachery of a Maid, she had so much confided
on; O God of Vengeance, cried she with tears, will thou leave unpunished a
Wretch so treacherous, and one who has been the cause of so many disasters? No
sure, says Assen, for she is already dead, if not as her Treason deserved, yet
for grief of having committed it. With that he related to her, what she knew
not of the Story of the Marquess, and found it not difficult business to
appease the great wrath she had expressed against him, to procure him her
general pardon, and obtain her consent for his going along with them. Assen,
like a dexterous Confident, said not a word of what concerned the Vice-Queen;
and Laura, who had no desire to be any more angry with her dear Servant, was
not very curious to question him on that point: she was content to believe him
innocent of one side, and to be furnished with a pretense not to hate him; so
hard a matter is it to use ill those we love, how criminal soever. Assen then
told her of the resolution taken by the Aga and him, to have her carried out in
a Chair, and found her disposed to do whatever they should think fit, but with
condition there should be no more danger for them than for her. Assen undertook
it, and told her, she had no more to do, but make ready against the first
Watch, whilst the Aga and he took Orders for other things. Assen went home,
where Beyran-Aga, came shortly after, and gave him an account of all he had
done. Assen labored with much diligence and dexterity to see the Brigandine
well stored with Necessaries; you may believe, Beyran failed not, as busy as
he was, to desire an account of what most concerned him, the state of his
Affair with his Mistress. His dear Confident acquainted him with what success
he had discharged the Commission he gave him, which Beyran was so glad of, as
it was not in his power to express his Acknowledgment. All was ready, and Assen
had given out the necessary Orders, as well for the Brigandine, as for Horses
and Men. The Aga and he went together to the Castle, where the Aga made him a
Present of all the Jewels he had received at several times from the Dey, and
entreated him to accept them not as a satisfaction, but a pledge of the
assurance he had given him to be ever his Friend, and serve him on all
occasions. Assen, who endeavored, but in vain, to refuse his liberality, would
not accept of it, but on condition the Aga would make use on all occasions of
what he had bestowed, as still his own, and believe Assen sensible, he had not
sufficiently obliged him to merit so rich a Present. They went from the Castle,
to make their Court to the Dey; and the hour being come, Assen first changed
Laura's Guards, relieving them by three of his Servants, whom he was to take
with him, that none might be left behind to discover the Design, or the Road
they should take. The Aga quickly followed him, longing to see Laura; he fell
down at her feet in such a Transport of Joy and Love, it moved her to that
tenderness, she could not forbear embracing him. As she raised him from the
Ground, they were falling into amorous Discourse; but Assen told them, it was
not a time to discourse, but to put their Design in execution, unless they had
a mind to see it miscarry; and that when they should be once out of danger,
they should have leisure enough to say what they pleased. Laura and Beyran, who
desired nothing more than to see themselves at liberty, were easily persuaded
to follow his Advice. And the Chair being brought by the Aga's Order, who had
hidden the Corpse, they wrapped up Laura in a clean Sheet, and without saying a
word of the Bier, put her in it, and caused it to be carried out of her
Chamber, where having according to the custom of the Place, thrown a Carpet
over her, one of Assen's men took the Lanthorn, and the other two carried the
Bier; Beyran leading the Van, and Assen bringing up the Rear. A Corpse is a
sacred thing among the Turks; nor would any of the Guard have thought of
searching the Bier, though neither Beyran nor Assen had been with it. They went
to the Churchyard, where having taken Laura out of her Grave, they marched
toward the Carthage-gate, which the Aga commanded to be opened, that they
might take Horse, which attended them hard by. Laura and the Aga, whom we will
hereafter call by their names, could not yet take any pleasure to see
themselves out of the Castle and City, for fear of ill Accidents, but longed to
see themselves at Sea; however they were glad they got happily so far, in hopes
Fortune would in favor of Love, improve that lucky beginning to a suitable
end. But this small Lightning of Joy quickly vanished, being dashed out by the
cruelty of their Fate; for being arrived, where they expected to take Horse,
they found by Assen's Servants, the Bassa's Sophies had taken them away. In
what perplexity then was this unfortunate Company? they were five or six
Leagues distant from the Cape of Carthage, where the Brigandine was; they had
no time to lose, and knew not what to resolve on, when on the sudden they heard
the noise of Horses making toward them. Assen hid Eleanor and Hippolito under
an old Wall, and advanced with some of his people toward the Horsemen: They
marched apace, and quickly asked, who is there? Assen told them who he was, and
by good fortune, found it was Romadan, the Master of the Galleys, coming from
Port-farm with a Guard. He told him, the Bassa's Sophies had taken from his
people some Horses he had in readiness to go for Cape-Carthage, to see a
Brigandine he was sending out to Sea. Romadan, who knew the respect the Bassa
had for Assen, was angry for what was done by the Sophies; and to remedy the
inconvenience, told Assen, he might take his choice of what Horses he pleased
out of his Troop, and not trouble himself for his own, they should be sent him
where he pleased to order. Assen, glad of the opportunity, accepted his offer;
and Romadan taking him aside, told him, The Bassa had a design to come again to
him, and by any means to get Laura out of the Castle, and that he would do well
in his return from Cape-Carthage, to take the Camp in his way, and endeavor to
divert the Bassa from so dangerous an Enterprise. Assen having promised it,
dis-engaged himself from Romadan as soon as he could; but Romadan would oblige
him at parting, with two of his Horsemen, to accompany him, and serve him from
the Parties that were abroad, and might set upon him unknown. This put Assen
into a little perplexity, but he would not refuse the kindness, for fear of
giving cause of suspicion: And having taken his leave, he advanced toward his
company, and acquainted the two Lovers in few words, what fortune he had met
with. All mounted, and Eleanor in Boys Clothes, passed for a young Slave of
Assen's, the night helping to cover the disguise, they made all the haste
possible, Hippolito being still at Eleanor's elbow, the Master of the Galleys
Horsemen led the Van, to answer those they met; and Assen, as Commander in
chief, sometimes on one side, sometimes on the other, without affecting much to
be near Hippolito or Eleanor, by the help of the Horsemen they had free
passage; and were several times saved from being taken and carried before the
Bassa. At last being come to the Brigandine, they delivered the Horses to be
restored to the owners, and having rewarded them well for their pains, Assen
sent them back with this Letter to the Bassa.

Sir, Be not displeased with me, for endeavoring the liberty of a Maid, to
whose Family I owe mine: you have often heard me speak of my obligations to my
Patron, when I lived among the Christians; I have met with an occasion to
satisfy them in the Person of his Daughter, being that same Laura the Dey kept
Prisoner. Wonder not my gratitude has prevailed with me, to expose my life for
those who saved mine. The Dey perhaps may have as much reason as you to excuse
me, but in actions that honor and reason inspire, I fear no reproach. Laura
was the cause of the difference betwixt you, the Peace will be easier made now
she is gone. Thus doing my duty, I procure the good of my Country, which every
honest man wishes, and will certainly thank me for. Adieu, live content, and
prosper in your designs, and be so just as not to condemn*

Assen.


They instantly hoised sail, and the Weather being favorable, they doubled the
Cape, passed Port-Farine, and were got a great way to Sea, before the Horsemen
could have come to the Bassa, whom we will leave foaming with rage and fury
against Assen, and return to the happy company, now beginning to take pleasure
in seeing themselves out of danger at least from Land; for as to the Sea, while
you are on it, there is no security against it.

Hippolito sat sighing by his beautiful Eleanor, and she feasted her self with
the sweetness of liberty to enjoy in safety the conversation of a Lover she had
given over for lost. Assen was busy giving orders in the Brigandine; but being
becalmed on the sudden, and no way to be made but by rowing, he sat by them to
congratulate their happiness. It Is true, says Eleanor, I should esteem my self
the most fortunate person on Earth, if after what you have assured me of the
Marquess, you could ease me of the scruples, the Turks habit he wears, raises
within me. Was it possible, adds she blushing, you should change your Religion?
It Is the very thing I longed to know of him, Madam, and how he came to Barbary,
for he has not yet told me. No, Madam, answers Hippolito, I am still a
Christian, and had I been threatened with Death, or with Torments, I should not
have changed my Religion, but it is true I have been long thought a Turk. Assen,
who could not conceive how it could be so in a Country like his, where in
matters of Religion, there are Formalities not to be counterfeited, prayed him
to declare what course he had taken, and how it was possible for him to escape
Circumcision, being the first of the Ceremonies used in that case. Hippolito to
satisfy him, knowing he should at the same time do Eleanor a pleasure, went on
with his story.

I told you formerly of the resolution I took, of searching every Creek of the
Mediterranean, for the Vessel this Lady embarked in: I did so for seven or
eight months, in a little Frigate with six pieces of Ordinance, wherein I was at
last taken by a Vessel of Tripoly of no less than thirty Guns, after six hours
Fight, and the loss of almost all our men: I was carried to Tripoly, where they
presented me to the Bassa, who upon the good report they gave of my behavior
in the Fight, used me very civilly, and having in few days expressed no small
affection for me, wished I would turn Turk, and sent me for the purpose to a
famous Cady to be instructed in their Faith: this Mohammedan Doctor was a very
honest man, and witty; he was the Son of a Renegado, and had less Faith than
his Father in what he taught others: he spoke very freely to me, and I opened
my self to him, and prayed him to make the Bassa believe I was turned Turk; he
did so, the Bassa believed it on his word, and expressed for me more kindness
than ever; but he had a Nephew who was jealous of it, and often quarrelled with
me on that score, which might afterward have produced further inconvenience.
The Bassa, who had a tender love for this Nephew, foresaw what might follow,
and resolved to part us for some time, till this Nephew were cured of his
jealous and tempestuous humor; he sent me with great Presents to the Dey of
Tunis, his intimate Friend, recommending me very earnestly and affectionately
to him. The Dey within a week after my arrival, made me his Aga: You know
Assen, what a sad life I led; but who would have thought, says he, addressing
himself to Eleanor, I was so near what I searched for, and loved above all the
World, yet knew nothing of it; and that my Fate should make me so happy, when I
was just upon losing you.

The Marquess and Eleanor entered into further discourse of their adventures;
and the Masters of the Vessel coming to consult Assen, he left them together to
go on with their stories. The wind chopped about, and threatened a Storm, the
Vessel being small, they thought it inconvenient to venture further to Sea:
They tacked about, making toward Biserti, intending to sail near the Coast of
Barbary, till they should come over against Sardinia, that they might cross
over (as soon as the weather served) into the Isles of St. Peter, where they
hoped to anchor. This was their resolution, and 'twas well for them they
followed it, for the Storm was so great, they were forced to lie at Anchor
three or four days among the Rocks on the Coast of Barbary. They were so far
from Tunis, they had no cause to fear pursuit, being at Anchor in a place where
a thousand Vessels might have passed by without discovering them in the storm.

The storm at length was pretty well over, and the Brigandine pursued her
Voyage along the Coast of Barbary; meeting by the way several Creeks, floating
Hogsheads, and Planks, and other pieces of broken Ships, which they doubted not
were cast away in the last storm. For two days they cruised along that Sea;
they were frequently entertained with those lamentable spectacles, and at last
heard the voice of a Man, which they fancied must have come from a Rock at
least three miles distant from Land; they presently concluded it was one
escaped out of the late Shipwracks. Eleanor was moved to pity at the cry, and
Assen at her request, turned the prow of his Brigandine toward the Rock. The
Sea was then calm, and when they got within some paces of the Rock, they saw a
man almost naked, without Hat, without Stockins, without Shoes, so maimed and
disfigured, they knew not whether they should more fear him or pity him. Assen
having ordered the Seamen to cease rowing, asked him in Moresque, how he came
upon that Rock, and what he would have. I am an unfortunate Christian (answers
he in Italian) and not unknown to you, and if you will take the pains to get
foot on land here, you will find what perhaps you are in search of, but you
must lose no time, otherwise your help may come too late. Assen amazed to hear
him speak so, observed something in his Countenance, made him think he had seen
him elsewhere. Eleanor was particularly astonished at his voice, and fancied
she knew it; but the man was so disfigured, she could not possibly call to mind
who he was Assen asked him his name, and where he had seen him to know him: I
tell you, answers the man, I have here what you perhaps go in search of much
further; the man you see is Alexander the Bassa's Slave, and if he has sent
thee for his Wife, thou may find her on this Rock half dead with her
Sufferings these two days we have been here: he had scarce done speaking, but
Eleanor invaded at once with joy and grief cried out, which made the man turn
his face, and she knew him to be Alexander. Ha Sir, says she, is it possible it
should be you, and not know Laura? As she spoke thus, Assen having commanded
the Oars to turn the prow to land, ordered a Plank from the Vessel to the Rock,
and passed over it first, Hippolito following with Eleanor by the hand, and all
to embrace poor Alexander, who was so transported with joy, he could not say a
word: he prayed Assen to get him something from aboard to comfort his dear
Sultaness, who had not eat any thing for three days past. They gave order
accordingly, and instantly ran toward the place where the Sultaness lay under
a Bush, where they found her half dead; a sad sight for Laura, yet mixed with
joy to see her; but what an astonishing surprise was this to the Sultaness, who
could scarce open her eyes, and knew not whether she were awake or in a Dream,
and whether what appeared to her, were Persons or Spirits. You may imagine the
haste Eleanor made to help her, being readily seconded with Hippolito's
assistance: What are you here Laura, says the Sultaness with a feeble and
languishing tone, and am I not mistaken? what good Angel has sent thee to
rescue me from the Jaws of Death? Heavens! my dear Sultaness answers Laura, not
able to forbear crying, Heavens! which has had pity on us, and delivered me
also out of the hands of the Bassa. The Sultaness began to recover, but had not
strength to speak long. Assen told Alexander she would be better aboard than at
land, the Sea being still. The Count, who had not yet had leisure to discourse
them, asked where they were bound for, and having understood they sailed for
Italy, he could not sufficiently bless Heaven for so happy an accident. The
Sultaness was carried aboard, and the weather being fair, they resolved to put
out to Sea, and divert their course for Sardinia.

Laura was so careful of the Sultaness, that she began to gather strength;
Assen and Hippolito did their part with the Count, who had no less need of
nourishment and rest: This took up one day; on the morrow the weather
continuing fair, and the Sultaness finding her self in a condition to
discourse, they related to her what passed at Tunis since her departure, and
desired Count Alexander to inform them how they came to be wracked, and by what
Fortune they got upon the Rock; he answered to this purpose.

You have heard without doubt, how the Sultaness was carried aboard by the
Bassa's order, who thought (as well as I) it was Laura: You may imagine my
surprise great, and my joy inexpressible. At our putting to Sea we had a good
wind, but scarce past the Cape of Carthage, but we saw the Heavens cloudy on
the sudden, and had the wind in our Teeth, and so strong a Gale, that our
Vessel being small, and the storm increasing, we were driven on this Coast and
cast Anchor; presently a violent and most terrible Hurricane broke our Cables,
set us a-drift, and cast us upon the Rocks. I leave it, to you to guess, what
an extremity this was for a Lover, having her he loved above the World ready to
be lost before his face, which heightened to the utmost the terrors of danger
and death: I stood by the Sultaness, who with grief and fear was already half
dead; and reaching out her hand, Dear Alexander, says she, since the hour is
come we must dye, let us dye together. These words so resolute and kind,
pierced my very heart, and turned me into a Statue, leaving me without sense or
motion. All I could do, was embracing my dear Sultaness for a final Adieu, when
the Vessel giving a great crack, made me turn my eyes toward the Window of my
Cabin, where I saw a Rock almost touching the Poop; this surprised me not a
little, and taking a suden resolution, I placed the Sultaness on my back, got
upon the Deck, and in spite of the Seamen, who would have diverted me, I
leaped on the Rock without doing my self or the Sultaness harm. A moment after,
the Sea which cast the Vessel on the Rock, carried it off again, leaving me and
the Sultaness there helpless of help, unless our Seamen would pity us, but
they could not master the winds, and the night was far gone, so that no good
was to be expected from them till the morrow, if the storm would over. A sad
night it was, the poor Sultaness endeavored to comfort me with hopes the
Mariners would not forsake us; but what a lamentable spectacle had I at break
of day, to see some Leagues distance half a Ship a float, which by the number
of People I saw returning from one end to another to get nearer land, was sunk
by the greatness of the waves, and all the men drowned. What afflicted me most,
was the sight of the Sultaness, though she by I know not what presage, would
not despair of good Fortune, but would tell me still, Heaven had not saved us
from the Sea, to let us perish on that Rock; but would send to our aid one of
the many Vessels that passed by that way. It was a piece of good Fortune I did
not expect, yet I looked constantly about to discover some sail, when at last
having almost lost hope, having for two days seen nothing on the Sea, I ken'd
on the sudden something floating on the water, but being at distance, and
discovering no sail, I knew not whether to think it a Wrack, or some small
Vessel with Oars; yet seeing you draw toward the Coast, and the nearness of
the objects magnifying them every moment, I knew it to be a Brigandine that
brought the Sultaness the News, who was not much pleased with it, fearing the
Vessel came from Tunis, and being more willing to dye on the Rock, than return
thither, I hollowed, and cried, and had the good luck to be heard by you; and
if I did not presently express that joy which might have been expected upon
knowing you, you will pardon it as an effect of the miserable condition I was
reduced to, and will easily believe it could not but be great.

Count Alexander having ended his discourse, every one spoke his thoughts of
all these adventures, mingling sighs with their joy, which increased at the
news of one of Assen's Servants, that he discerned land, and that it could be
no other but Sardinia: He was in the right, but they could not anchor till the
morrow; and the weather continuing good, within eight days they arrived at
Genes, to the infinite satisfaction of this happy company, and all Eleanor's
Friends. Her Father was dead, and those who were entrusted with the tuition and
disposal of her (if heard of) were easily induced to consent she should be
married to Marquess Hippolito, who found means to make his Peace with the
Viceroy of Naples. The Sultaness turned Christian, and Count Alexander married
her: Assen followed the example of the Sultaness, and Count Alexander as well
as Marquess Hippolito served him with their Credit and Estates, to make his
Fortune, and live happily the rest of his days.


