The Excellency of Primitive Government: IN A SERMON PREACHED At GVILD-HALL
CHAPEL AT THE Election of this present LORD MAYOR.

By HENRY BAGSHAW, D. D. Chaplain to the Lord Archbishop of YORK, and Rector
of St. Botolphs Bishopsgate.

Waterman Mayor.
Octobr. 26. Die. 1672. Annoque CAROLI Secundi Angliae Vigesimo quarto.
It is Ordered by this Court that Dr. Bagshaw be desired to Print his Sermon
which he Preached before the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen, at Guild-Hall-Chappel,
on Michaelmas-Day last, at the Election of Sir ROBERT HANSON to be Lord Mayor
for the Year ensuing.

Wagstaffe.

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, for Joseph Nevil at the Greyhound (...) St.
Pauls-Church-Yard, and Moses Pit at the (...) Heart in Little-Britain,
MDCLXXIII.

To the Right Honorable Sir ROBERT HANSON LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON:
AND THE Honorable Court of ALDERMEN.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Have published this ensuing Discourse in obedience to the Order I received
from You. I know I deliver not here my own sense, but that You all jointly
concur in this Testimony, that nothing is so safe as an old Pattern in Rule,
nothing so Honorable, as the Name of Righteousness to crown it. Should novelty
of Manners and of Discipline get in, States grow loose and unbound: Should
Power be reckoned for true Glory, they quickly become Barbarous; but when
Primitive Practice gives the Form, and Religion the Character, then Government
appears in all its Strength and Beauty. This is the Subject I speak to: Yet
notwithstanding the truth of it, I may reasonably expect the Censures of
corrupt men, who have all the levity of Judgment in devising new Models, and
the Vanity of Passion in courting a Great Name: The one serving to unsettle the
Subject, and the other to terrify. But I hope an Ancient and Christian City, as
this is, will pursue Ancient Examples as their best Guide, and the Fame of
Piety as their Noblest reward. That You may Flourish in both is the Earnest
Prayer of

Your Honors most Humble Servant, HENRY BAGSHAW.

THE EXCELLENCY OF PRIMITIVE GOVERNMENT.
ISAIAH 1.26. And I will restore thy Judges, as at the first, and thy
Counselors, as at the beginning; afterward thou shall be called the City of
Righteousness, the Faithful City.


IN the foregoing Verse of this Chapter God declares the Mercy he designed the
City Jerusalem; which was to sit over it, like a tryer or purifier of Metals,
that cleanses away all the dross and corrupt mixtures of their Body. The Fire
that should do this upon the Jews, was the Fire of Affliction, which naturally
is not useful to the Patient, as having nothing else in it but consuming
qualities; but God would overruled them by his Power to reform. After he had
sufficiently chasten'd his people, the fruit of that Work should be a Universal
change: No more of Tin or Hypocritical Wickedness in the Land, but Silver
refind, i. e. a heart pure and upright in its Religion. Thus God makes his
Judgments serviceable to his Church; and the same Rod, that caused the Wound,
to flourish again with blossoms for its healing. But because a Kingdom cannot
be long settled in a Religious Course without good Magistrates set over it, who
may bind Subjects both by Authority and example; God provides here Governors
in my Text to complete the blessing he promises; which would be otherwise
imperfect, and by consequence the Fame of a Reformation very small, were not
such powerful Instruments employed. These are the right Nursing-Fathers that
breed up a Church, and the noblest Heralds to proclaim it to the World. And I
will restore thy Judges as at the first, etc. --

I shall not now inquire into the time when this Promise of Gods was fulfilled;
whether presently after the Babylonish captivity, under Zerubbabel, Ezra and
Nebemiah; or rather in the days of the Gospel, when pious rulers did praeside
in the Church; but consider the Words barely in themselves, and so they afford
as these Observables: 1. That the Gift of Magistracy is from God. 2. That a
People is highly blessed with that Gift, when Magistrates are restored by him
according to a Primitive Pattern -- Judges as at the first, and Counselors as
at the beginning. 3. That the Natural Issue of a Government thus qualified, is
the Reputation of Uprightness and truth in all the Members -- Afterward thou
shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City.


I. That the Gift of Magistracy is from God.

There are indeed Powers, that set up themselves, mock Judges that counterfeit
a Law, but the true order of Government is immediately to be fetched from Gods
Institution. The first have no other right than what Sin and Satan has; the one
being permitted to infect, and the other to vex the World: but the latter
peculiarly bears his sovereign character. Therefore to him the Apostle refers
all the original of worldly rule; Romans 13.1.
and though the Kinds of it in States may be determined by men, yet the thing
it self is of a Divine Establishment. That which leads men to join in
Societies, and appoint Governors, as the links to hold them together, is the
very instinct of Natures Law, which dictates to us all the necessary ways, that
conduce to the Peace and Interest of one another. Should we now search for the
Author of this Instinct, we shall find it to be none else but God himself, who
has engraved this notion in every man's Soul, whence we ought to conclude, that
it is he who works in our Appointment.

How common that stamp and impression is, may be easily evinced from the
Practices of the World; who as they are generally inclined to enter into
fellowship, so do they as generally agree in the manner of their Union; and
that is by setting up some Coercive Power, to restrain the wildness of living,
which an uncontrolled freedom would certainly lead them to.

We can all presently conclude that a State of absolute Liberty is a State of
War, and Unsettlement; every one then providing for himself, and striving to
maintain his own Interest to the Prejudice of others; which being a Life of
wrong and Violence, is utterly repugnant to the happiness of our Beings. And
this we all find out by the force of Natural Discourse: Which light God being
the Author of, when we set Magistrates over us for the remedying of those
evils, we are not so rightly said to make, as to discover that Order he has
proposed. In that Universal Judgment we have of its Use, God is the giver of
the Sentence; and we ought to refer it to so Universal a Cause.

Besides this that I have said, the very Good we reap from Magistracy, does
sufficiently show its Original, and that the Institution of it springs from
such a God, that tenderly regards our Well-being. Here the Concern of
Providence is made known, in thus blessing Mankind, and fixing their Condition:
which might be otherwise questioned, should it extend to other Creatures below,
in setting a rule to their operations, and leave the noblest without Principles
implanted in him for establishing his Peace. But by the benefit of Dominion
(which redounds to us all) we trace the goodness of the Most High: In that Copy
we see lively representations of Himself, and express characters of his Mercy.
Do we not all allow it to be his Work, when we see contrary Principles unite,
and harmoniously agree to the Production of things? In the same manner ought we
to acknowledge his Hand, when we consider how the contentious natures of men
are so far reconciled, as to beget Order in the World. Behold here the glorious
Marks of a Benefactor! who seems to create us anew by conforming us to rule,
and gives to each all the goods of Mankind by settling a mutual enjoyment. What
can more express him in his Power (and that Power mercifully exercised) then
humane Government? For by this the state of things is repaired, and the very
spirits of men at once awed and bettered, which are the Proper effects of
Divinity.

It is a true Title given to Magistrates in the Psalmist, Psalm. 8^^ 6.
where God is introduced speaking to them after the delivery of their
Commission, I have said ye are Gods; for while they are in that station they
cease to be common Men, and share in the Authority of their Sovereign; whereby
both they are taught to act like Gods, and Subjects to revere them. Should
Magistrates omit Works of Justice and Mercy, (which justify that high name)
they are no more Gods, but Idols; nay, the worst sort of Idols, that being made
to represent, do yet foully reproach Divine Power: On the other side should
People resist, libel, or abuse them, and so strive to deface the marks of their
Greatness, they strike at the Majesty of the Supreme. We may all learn Duty,
from considering that God is the Founder of humane Government; and therefore
the ends of that Foundation ought to be answered by a right Influence of the
Head, and a due obedience in the parts governed. Thus much for the First
Observable.

II. That a People is highly blessed with that Gift, when Magistrates are
restored by him according to a Primitive Pattern -- Judges as at the first, and
Counselors as at the beginning.

As the Truth of Religion is to be found out by examining what was delivered at
the beginning; so is the Excellency of Government by the same method to be
shown. Errors in Faith and defects in Politiques, may be both charged with
Novelty; for though they may bear a long Date in the World, yet there is a
degenerating in both from first Principles. Such is the corruption of Man's
Nature, that by degrees it spoils his private belief and his public practice.
There is now adays another Spirit in the World, than what our Forefathers were
guided by; all our Models are corrupt because our ends are so, whereas the
purity of Government was at first retained. There the Spring ran clear, and had
a wholesomness in its current; which was afterward lost by being conveyed in a
foul channel. Therefore we ought to ask after the old paths, and inquire for
the ancient ways to walk in, that so the blessing of Magistracy may the more
appear. And this will be cleared by considering 1. The Persons that of old did
govern. 2. The Rule they followed.


1 The Persons that of old did govern.

When God formed a Republic amongst the Jews (where he himself did immediately
rule) a Moses, a Joshuah were his Substitutes; and a Sanhedrim of Elders with
like gifts to assist them. The Spirit (wherewith they were filled) was a Spirit
of Wisdom to direct, and of Courage to execute; the Fire that inflamed them was
a Zeal for Justice; and the Principle of their acting, a Religious Fear. These
were the Graces they then excelled in; God taking special care that a Frame of
his own erecting should have suitable Ministers to keep it. Compare Jethro's
counsel to Moses ( Ex. 18.) with that choice of persons God afterward
approved; and you will find a right speculation surely ratified by Examples.
That vile separation, which Politicians have made betwixt Profit and Honesty
was not then known; nor a public Spirit counted a Paradox. With them Duty and
Interest were the same; Truth set up there for Art of Governing, and Conscience
for the Counselor. Whatever actions they entered upon, as they were duly
weighed, so they were virtuously pursued; so that the Government of the Subject
in their Days, seemed to be like that of the Creatures in Paradise, where, He
that was vested in the Dominion, manifested the highest and most difficult kind
of Innocence, namely Integrity of Power.

If we consult the ancient Histories of the Heathens concerning the rise of
their famous Cities, such were Sparta, Athens, and Rome; we may perhaps find an
appearance of some gifts in the first Rulers of them, viz. a show of Wisdom and
Courage in their proceedings: though (if we narrowly sift the nature of those
Qualities) they really missed of them; all their wisdom being lodged in the
Head of a Serpent that deceives, and their courage in the Heart of a Lion that
devours. But as for a Religious Fear, this was utterly banished from their
minds, whence a Conscience of Duty being laid aside, a Zeal too for Justice was
extinguished. Therefore they are upon no account a pattern to a Christian
State; since whatever seemed glorious in their acts, it was but a faint
resemblance of good, a color to disguise a rotten foundation. But from the
Jewish Model we may collect all that is fit for us to imitate, wherein those
Virtues met, that might either adorn or support the Fabric. I have hinted here
but Four they were endued with; to which all other governing Qualities may be
reduced; and without which it is impossible to make a perfect Guide. Let a
Magistrate lack Wisdom in his Rule, and he looks contemptibly; as Sampson did
to the Philistims, when he laid hold upon the Pillars without Eyes; let him
want Courage, and he looks weakly; as Government does in Picture, where the
Sword is born in vain; but take once from him the two latter, a Godly Fear and
a Zeal for Justice, then the very Life of his Work, and the Soul of his Office
is gone.

Now to reckon up the Follies that abound amongst Men by reason of the Folly,
Cowardice, Irreligion, and Injustice of Superiors, is but to repeat old
Remarques, sadly confirmed to us by the falls and ruins of many Cities. And the
wonder at this is easily removed; for where evil accidents are not foreseen,
nor for want of Spirit prevented; where Conscience does not bind, nor
distributive Justice prevail, there all the Seeds of Weakness are sown, which
naturally tends to dissolution. God, who knew well the faults of such a
Ministry, culled and picked out at the first right Judges in the State, that
so the Settlement of his People might be secured; which is a Lesson to other
States (when allowed by their Prince the choice of their Magistrate) to do
likewise.

2. The Rule they followed. And that was the Statutes and Ordinances of the
Most High. Moses gives this account of himself, Exodus 18.6. When the people
have a matter they come unto me; and I judge between one and another, and I
make them to know the Statutes of God and his Laws. And it was Gods special
command to Joshuah, 1 Josh. 8. The Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy
mouth; but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may observe
the Statutes of God and his Laws.

It is true, the Judicial Law God gave the Jews in order to their Government
does not now bind Christians; it being appointed by him no longer to last, than
their State did, to which those Constitutions were attemper'd; but with that
State their Laws were dissolved, and as at the rending of the Veyl of the
Temple their Ceremonies had a period, so had their Judgments too at the
destruction of their City. Those Rules they generally received for determining
their matters of Right and Property were merely positive; and being so, could
oblige only those to whom they were made; whence they ceasing to be a People,
the Force of their Policy likewise failed; nor could any Ordinance of theirs
extend to the World, but by another pasport of Commendation, which aequity
might give it. Therefore Christian States have constantly assumed the liberty
of governing the Subject their own way, according to the difference of persons,
places, and times; and by reason of the variety of Circumstances which attend
every action, have framed to themselves several Methods of ending their
Controversies.

However Magistrates still ought to have Scripture for their Guide as well as
the Jews had, though not in such particular cases; and from their example are
they instructed to have recourse to the rule, which is so beneficial to its
followers. And the advantages a Governor reaps by it are these Two: 1. In that
he learns thence the whole compass of his Duty. 2. He is thereby prepared to
execute it from a right Principle.


1. In that he learns thence the whole compass of his Duty. Man's Law is very
narrow, but Gods is exceeding broad; for it meets with all sinful enormities.
Nothing there escapes that deserves punishment, nor is left out that may plead
a reward. All kind of Sin, and all kind of Virtue is there revealed, which the
Tables and Books of the old Heathens (put all together) do but lamely discover
to us: and the ground of that imperfection of theirs is plain, because Reason
it self was weak and dim-sighted, when it dictated to them those Rules; whence
their Government miserably failed in those two great Hinges, upon which it
turned, the Service of God and their Neighbor. Should any doubt of this Truth,
let him survey all their Laws for Divine Worship; and he will find them to be
(like their Idols and Sacrifices) gross and impure; let him examine their Civil
constitutions, and he will discover the poor Fetters and Chains, which Justice
was bound in; Mercy having no Votaries, though a Temple to her were Consecrated.

But from Gods Law a Magistrate knows all that perfectly belongs to his work;
how in regard of that God, he is obliged to vindicate the Unity of his Essence
by a singleness of Worship, the Majesty of his Name with the Reverence of an
Oath, and the Holiness of his Sabbaths with a distinction of Duty; in regard of
Man he is bound to prop up the Authority of his Prince, to suppress Lust,
Lying, Fraud, Extortion; and all manner of Injustice in a People. Neither is he
only taught thence to root out evil from amongst Men, but to be their Minister
for good: to put on Righteousness as a robe, and Judgment as a Diadem; to lead
the blind and support the lame; i. e. to assist Weak ones in their Just Causes,
that would be otherwise overborn. In a word, to mix Mercy with his Justice in
all his management of affairs. For the end of Government (which this Rule leads
us to) is not Wrong nor Violence, but Protection.

2. He is thereby prepared to execute it from a right Principle.

The old Judges and Counselors by consulting Gods Law had Religion instilled
into their Souls; which most powerfully works where it comes. Honor may enoble
a Magistrates Acts, and like a blazing Light, give a Luster to his Station; but
Religion (that burns inward) reforms his Will and Affections in doing them.
This directs him not only to the Worlds Eye, but has a quickening Virtue in
secret, spurring him up to works of Justice and Mercy, when no outward
consideration can move him to them; so that he is always ready in his Office,
which is timed by others to renown. Those plausible seasons many make choice of
for Judging their Brethren, show they love not to be Magistrates, but to be
known; whereas a Religious Superior takes in any time for his Exercise, as he
does all kind of Persons for his Cognizance. With him nothing is of force to
divert him from, nor to bias him in the Employment. Every where his Government
extends; for that Conscience, which rules in him (being an Universal Principle)
will be sure to evidence it self in its Effects. For this cause Wisdom is
brought in by Solomon emphatically delivering this Truth, Prove. 8.20. I lead in
the way of Righteousness, in the midst of the paths of Judgment: which imports
this, that Religion and Justice are naturally united, and altogether
inseparable in their union; none being just, but out of a religious principle;
as none are religious, but by a proof of just doings. Great cause then is there
for studying the Rule, wherein the Truth of Religion is contained.

You see what Fruits that Study is Crowned with, and how Magistrates at first
abounded in them. Would you be eminent in your Places, and give your Fame a
wide Country to travel in? Let the Virtues of Antiquity be transcribed. I know
the world is generally apt to cry up Antiquity; but what does it there chiefly
propound for its imitation, except the Habits and Garbs, or rather the Errors
and Faults of it? which is like the madness of that Pilgrim, who pays his
Devotion to an old Monument, not for the Famous acts it represents, but for the
Rubbish that lies there. Now those that rightly follow the Ancients, do doubly
honor the State they live in; for they bring upon the stage their Forefathers
Glory and their own. I proceed now to the last head of my Discourse; which is
this,

3. That the Natural Issue of a Government thus qualified is the Reputation of
Uprightness, and Truth in all the Members -- Afterward thou shall be called
the City of Righteousness, the Faithful City.

These two words, Righteous and Faithful comprehend in them all the Duties of
both Tables; for they imply Faithfulness to God, and Righteousness toward men;
so that when a City is Dignified with them, it has all the Praise that Religion
may challenge.

In the management of this Point I shall do two things.

1. Show the Virtue of Good Magistrates in deriving the fame of religion to
that City where they are planted. 2. Discover the Nobleness of that Character
to be called the Righteous and Faithful City.
I. Show the Virtue of Good Magistrates, etc. -- What Influence the Natural
head has upon the body in deriving to all parts thereof sense and motion, that
the Civil has upon its members: The good spirits, that are conveyed thence,
give a vigor to the whole. One great reason why Christ's doctrine was so low at
the first publishing of it to the world, was because the Rulers believed not in
him; whence the Vulgar were taught to despise it; who slavishly depend upon
their Rulers Sense, and bind to the same Chair a Religious Faith and a Civil
Obedience. It is true, Religion has powerful charms of its own to persuade; but
though the Principles of it be lovely and beauteous in themselves, yet they
need a setting off by an eminent Example. The Multitude inquires not into the
nature of the Coin, but what is the Princes Superscription; it regards not the
Intrinsic Worth of a Jewel, but the Nobleness of the Hand that wears it.
Should that be wanting, all the Rays it casts, are dimn; and Night seems to
cover its Brightness. Now whenever Rulers embrace the Faith, they lay all their
Ensigns of Dignity upon it; they set it with Joseph in the Royal Chariot,
whereby it is commended to a People. With that sight, their Curiosity is raised
to examine the Grounds; but without much search, they yield to the Motives,
because Piety strikes them with a double Light, and so takes off all pretense
of resistance.

Thus the Manners of Inferiors are formed; and the general Art of Subjects
Living in the world, is (what Aristotle defines Poesy to be) an Art of
Imitation; where something without is figured to them to follow. And you all
know the great Object, proposed to every ones observation, is the Chief
Magistrate; who by reason of the Eminency of his Place, and the Honorable
Stamp that is put on him, commands every ones regard; whence they readily copy
out the Goodness of his Actions. If Men be not inwardly altered or changed, yet
to appearance they will be so; for the Sword that he has, takes an Edge from
his Life; and it is an Edge of that Sharpness, that it will surely prevail to
cut off Scandal, though it cannot kill Hypocrisy. The Stench of the Carkase
will be certainly removed, though the Whited Sepulcher continue.

It is the nature of Virtue, to check and awe the Spirits of those, that are
most vitiously inclined; but then it effectually pierces when it comes armed
with Authority to govern them. That inward reverence it naturally creates,
proves now a Law to men's passions; and curbs the effects of them with the
Scepter of Rule. Who can choose under such a State, but seek the Fame of
Well-doing, when both Reason and Fear join their forces to bind him? It were
easy for me to produce instances in those Godly Magistrates of the Jewish
Church; from whom the Church gained a Name, and Religion a Power to oblige.
Then was the Temple it self judged Sacred, and every Sacrifice had its value;
then the whole Service of God flourished, because the Magistrate upheld it with
his Devotion. Such is the Force of a Lawgiver, when he makes those Laws, he
enjoins, as so many Axioms proceeding out of his own deeds.

But on the contrary, a wicked Governor brands his Seat with Infamy, letting
loose by his example the Vices of other Men: which, gathering their strength
from Natural corruption, are hardly stopped; but then they easily flow forth,
when they can borrow from Dignity a color for Shame. We read Eli's Sons for
miscarriages in the Priesthood made the People to abhor the Offering of the
Lord, 1 Samuel 2.17. Certainly no less do Governors in their station vilify Gods
Worship, when profaneness by their practice is indulged. For stains, in the
Robe, seem Graces to sinners; and Vice loses with them the deformity of its
shape, when it takes Greatness to cloth it. Therefore you are bound both now
and at all times to be heedful in your choice, where the credit of Religion is
concerned. I proceed to discover;

II. The Nobleness of that Character to be called the Righteous and Faithful
City --

All sorts of People in the world are ambitious of a Name, as a refreshing
Shadow, which adds to the Pleasure of their beings; but most are ignorant
wherein the excellency of it consists. Some place it in greatness of Wealth,
others in power of Arms, a third in the force of Eloquence, that commands both;
but the bright name of Religion is utterly rased out by them, as if it were
fitter to be fixed upon the Walls of a Cloister, than a City. But to evidence
the grosness of this their mistake, consider with me these two particulars: 1.
The Advantage which the Name of Religion carries in it self. 2. How it excels
all other Names by a comparison.


I. As to the Advantage of the Name; This will appear, if we regard it as man's
greatest Ornament, and his best Shield: his greatest Ornament; for it sets out
the highest perfection of his Nature: his best Shield; for it contains in it a
God to defend him. None can deny the first of these, that will allow Reason to
be man's Form, and the top of that reason the Worship of a Divinity. The name
then that imports this, must needs be most honorable to a People. What can
more grace us, than to be crowned with the Praise of Intellectual beings, and
bearing the stamp of a Sovereign mind? Does not the Pride of our Natures lie
here? And is it not the Fame of Religion that speaks it? Where shall Honor
have place, if the ground of all Honor be excluded?

Of all Privileges we would aspire to, these Two are the greatest, an
Understanding enlarged, and a Will Sanctified. By the one we come to conceive
the best object, by the other to resemble Him. And both these Religion bestows;
for it begets in us a Knowledge of our God, and a likeness to him: which
whoever reflects on, will be forced to admire the Beauty of its appearance, and
learn to despise all lower accomplishments, as a mean dress, that serves not so
much to show, as disguise the Wearers. Here we are properly seen as Men, and
proclaim to the world the true birth of our Souls, which though they be
Heavenly Sparks, yet afford no Light, till they are blown to a Flame from a
Religious exercise. These things considered, how can we choose but engage in
that course, where as our operations are at their Height, so they are in their
Brightness represented to the world!

But it may be an Ornament, yet defenseless; therefore the Name of Religion has
that farther excellency of a Shield to protect those it adorns. A City (thus
renowned) mates its enemies with fear: the very sound of its God, conquers: It
is like that imagined Noise of Horses and Chariots wherewith an Host of the
Syrians was discomfited. 2 Kings 7.6.
So subject are men to the Impressions of a Deity, that a Nation becomes
terrible, when once thought by that Deity to be loved. In this case every
Priest is reckoned a Soldier, and every Temple counted to be built a Citadel
for War; whence though real Aids and Strengths may be wanting, yet they are
abundantly supplied by an Adversaries apprehension. Even the Heathens relied
upon this; and those Cities of theirs, that more peculiarly served their Gods,
feared not any Enemies would assault them; because they knew the Reverence of
opinion was a sufficient guard to defend. How much more would a known Truth of
Worship, secure men from the hostility of others, who being convinced of the
sinfulness of the Act, together with the Majesty of the Avenger, must needs
tremble at the Crime! You see the Advantage of the Name in it self. Consider

II. How it excels all other Names by a comparison.

The great Renown most Cities have purchased in the world is either for Arts,
for Riches, or the warlike Valor of the Inhabitants; but all this is nothing
answerable to that esteem gained by Religion.

I confess Arts have an Intrinsic worth; but then they are not useful to
another World; and some here, though they may improve the Understanding, yet
they do not perfect the Will: therefore Fame mounts but little, when born upon
the Wings of them. But as for riches, they have no worth at all; it is the
Opinion of Men gives them their value; and besides, their Tyrannical nature is,
to vex and oppress their own Masters: therefore Fame here creeps on the Ground,
not being able to get upward by reason of the Weight of its burden. Lastly for
warlike Valor: It is indeed helpful to a State, and conduces not only to the
defense, but to the enlargement of a Dominion; yet withal, it generally lies in
a Brutish force, and is many times employed in that sad Work of ruining
Kingdoms, and planting a Wilderness in their Cities; whence, if the Fame of
such acts flies, it leaves so bloody a track in the flight, that it stains the
Glory. All these (I have mentioned) do not reach humane Excellency, nor come up
to that perfection we desire.

But Religion is useful to another World; being the ready way to it; by
perfecting our Wills, as well as enlarging our Understandings: It has all worth
in it, that so excellent an object, as God can bestow; in regard of Mankind it
is Beneficial, a true servant to our Peace and Interest, quenching all those
Heats and Passions that disturb it. To conclude, it is every way lovely,
whether you regard its good here, or its reward hereafter. Therefore the Fame
of such works is in its flight High and Cleet, like that Heaven whither they
tend. Why should we not then stir up our Ambition to pursue it, and leave our
quest of any other renown, that is so low and sinking? Will the Reputation of
Arts, Riches, or Valor, stick to us at the Day when a proof of their help is
expected? Behold! they treacherously leave us in our needs: whereas the Good
Name of a Christian stands close by Us at the Hour of Death to sweeten the
Pangs, and remains after Death to embalm Us.

I shall shut up all in one word of Application.

One great Business of this day, and the design of this Assembly, is the
Election of your chief Magistrate; a Work highly Useful to the Church, as it is
Serviceable to the State: Therefore a good Choice may Consecrate the Day, when
a bad one Profanes it. The Pattern of Government I have already proposed; the
Virtue of it I have shown, and what Honor attends a People thus Governed: Upon
You all these depend, and in You rests the perfecting of Your City. Then will
Your Walls surely stand, and in their full Beauty be preserved, when You
constantly Elect Men to defend, and Christians to bless them. Alas! what does
all the pomp of Power signify, or the Stock of Your Riches without Rule? Is not
that River You trade by, an emblem of their Vanity? which flows in a full Tide,
when it conveys Your Wealth, and ebbs again, to mind You of the shortness of
its stay. But where Good Rulers are settled, there Greatness is fixed, and Fame
too, with all the advantages that follow it.

This City, I now speak to, may deservedly be compared to the Greatest Cities
in the World, whether we regard the Nobleness of the Works, or the Strength of
the Inhabitants: Men fit to buy Kingdoms, nay, (which is greater) to Conquer
them: Your Magistrates also have of late Years excelled in the Order, Wisdom,
and Loyalty of their Rule; nothing remains, but a continuance of that Exercise,
and a farther advancing of Gods Church, by suppressing Vice in the Subject. The
buildings of Your Walls are quickly dispatched; but here the Building must be
always carried on; nor can it ever be thought finishable, while corruption
prevails. Oh let no tumults be heard in that work, nor Innocent blood seen, to
make Your mortar ill-temper'd; let the Voice of Peace be heard in Your Streets,
and of Justice in Your Assemblies; let Gods Church and Truths be upheld, and
Debauchery kept from mocking Your Sabbaths; in a word, make good Your City-Arms
in the strictness of a Christian Profession with Loyalty joined. Upon both
accounts, a Good Magistrate is necessary for maintaining Faith and Obedience in
the multitude, to which they are led not so much by standing Laws, as by Life
and Practice. From such a one they easily learn, whatever is praiseworthy; and
dutifully regard every Order he sets up, as an Image of that Virtue He
exercises; but should his manners fail, should he cast off Conscience and turn
wicked, all his Orders, though never so good, will (like Bodies upon Gibbets)
be contemned. Judge You what will follow that contempt; Evils so sharp and
pressing, that the late Calamities (if compared to them) are but little Essays
of Judgment. The Plague and Fire, You have endured are nothing so destructive,
as a had Government; for this is a Plague of a strange Taint, that seizes the
Soul, and a Fire of an operation as strange, where the gold only wastes, and the
dross increases. Oh! how would this City be lifted up, did both Magistrate and
People unite in the Building! Can ever Your breaches be filled but by a leading
hand, or Your ruins healed without good Architects to cure them? Still (Right
Honorable) will this City lie desolate, if Sin be not removed by the Authority
of Examples. By them must Your Greatness be confirmed, who can add to your
Glory, what will defend Your Glory? The title of a Righteous and Faithful City.
--

Now to God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost be ascribed,
etc. --
FINIS.

