A SERMON Preached before the KING AT WHITE HALL, January xxx. 1675/6.

By HENRY BAGSHAW, D. D. Rector of St. Botolphs Bishopsgate, and Chaplain to
the Lord HIGH-TREASURER of England.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel against the little North-door of St. Paul's Church. 1676.

To the Right Honorable THOMAS EARL of DANBY, Lord HIGH-TREASURER of ENGLAND,
And One of the LORDS of His MAJESTY'S MOST HONORABLE PRIVY COUNCIL.
MY LORD,
I Have adventured upon the Publication of this Discourse to the World, as a
poor Testimony of my Obedience to Your Lordships Pleasure. Uprightness is my
Subject; and the Great Example of it is a PRINCE, to whose Memory you pay
homage. Religion shines in such Instances, and borrows new Majesty from the
Pattern; nay Martyrdom it self looks Royal, and the Blood (thus shed) paints
its Glory. It is one Mistake in the World, to cry down Titles as mere Names;
when as they produce Noble Effects, and are such a shadow to Virtue, that they
protect it by following. If Goodness gives Honor a real grace, Honor pays it
back in opinion; therefore the usefulness that is in it, renders it a fit
Object of our regard: However alone it cannot profit the Persons, without
Goodness be joined.

You (MY LORD) have a great share in Temporal Dignity: Your tried worth has
recommended You to Your Prince, and the steadfast Integrity of Your Actings: The
first provokes Envy, and the second Love to acknowledge it. Your Fastness to
the CHURCH is as well known, and the employment of Your Power to oblige. May
God continue You an Instrument in His Service, establish You with His Grace,
and preserve in You a Goodness as well as Greatness of Name; which is the
earnest Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordships most obedient Servant and Chaplain, HENRY BAGSHAW.

A SERMON Preached before the KING.
PSALM xxxvij. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of
that man is peace.


IT has been a perplexing Question in all Ages, and by all sorts of Religions
entertained; why Good and Evil should be blended and mixed; and without any show
of choice dispensed amongst Men in the secret course of God's Providence? This
indifferency of acting in humane Affairs, has made Heathens to conclude, that
an uncertain Chance governs the World; nay, it has further prevailed upon true
Worshippers to suspend the exercise of their Faith, though not utterly to
destroy the root of it. And such a kind of doubting the Church was subject to
in David's time; whence this Psalm was written for their cure, who through
weakness of flesh took sense for their guide, and the outward surface of things
for their argument to build on. By the one they fell under a shortness of
sight; by the other they had emptiness for their object. Therefore he sets them
in a sure way of considering Events, and that is to mark and examine them with
their understandings; to take their flight beyond present appearances to the
ends and periods of things; where the substance of Beings is discerned, because
the truth of their state is laid open. Otherwise we should be all apt to
mistake, and ready to pronounce a false judgment.

So a little before my Text, he acquaints us what imagination he had when he
first saw the wicked man, whom he presently compares to the green bay tree; as
looking fresh and gay in the ornament of power, though blood likely was the
moisture that fed it. His laurels and his crimes they flourished together, and
an impious hand became the planter of his glory; so that the Prophet thought at
the first glimpse the prosperity of his condition to be most desirable: But lo!
the exit of all; He passed by, and was not; Verse 36.
yea I sought him, (says the Psalmist) but he could not be found: As if all
that greatness he beheld, were rather some image in sleep (where fancy sports
with its own creation) than a real object without, presented to the beholder.

Who is it now he opposes to that wicked man, or propounds to us devoutly to
regard? It is the perfect and upright Worshipper; and the end he assigns him is
peace, or a glorious reward, notwithstanding those seeming blasts in his
lifetime, and the apparent ruins of his state, when (like a Cedar cut down) he
leaves upon the earth the sad reverence of his fall.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is
peace.

I know the Septuagint read these words in the abstract, which is followed too
by some other Translations; but the Hebrew-Text, and the scope of the Psalmist
(not to speak of our own Bibles) will justify the sense I have mentioned. And
so I intend to handle them, where we may consider three things: First, A Duty
enjoined: Mark and behold; that is, as from a watchtower look far off and
observe. Secondly, The Subject wherein it is employed: The perfect and upright
man; which includes also the opposite party, the evil doer. Thirdly, The Fruit
or Effect of this Observation: Which is to discern a distinctness of end,
namely, the upright man's peace or reward; which necessarily supposes the
others punishment.


I shall cast the two first into one proposition, which is this:

That we ought to be heedful Observers of God's Providential Rule in the World,
and particularly of his Dispensation to his People.

As for heeding his Rule in the general, 1. The Usefulness of the Work, 2. The
Excellency of our Faculties calls for it.


1. The Usefulness of the Work; since by an exactness of search we discover not
only a Hand of Power, but an Eye of Wisdom, in turning the Wheel; where all the
courses of it are serviceable to God's Glory, and the intricacy of its motions
brings about the accomplishment of his Designs. The result of this Discovery is
increase of Faith, settlement of Mind, and a close dependency upon the Supreme.
Do but regard the Throne above, you will regard too the Chain that is tied to
it; how immoveably God holds there the Links of Causes, not to be broken off,
nor altered, but by His special appointment. Did we thus mind the order of the
whole Frame, the connection of Events, and God's care to uphold what he has
purposed, a Spirit of Atheism would quickly vanish; and the Light of that
Theater we walk in, would at once convince and reform us.

2. The Excellency of our Faculties calls for such a beholding. For God has
planted in us contemplative powers as well as active; nay, the pure and
spiritual exercise of the Soul lies in the former. It is the subliming of our
Understandings, the exalting of our Reason, the great prerogative of our
Beings, to view God and his Works: He is continually viewing them and Himself;
and we show the nobleness of our descent from Him, when thus employed in our
speculation.

If you regard the actions of Sense, here Brutes do surpass us; and the
pleasures they enjoy, are more accurate, because they have no higher perfection
to seek after: But the height of Man's Faculty, that leads him to the best
Objects, it breaks the force of a sensual delight, since he has an intellectual
Vision to pursue. Now a chief part of this Vision is God in his Providence;
where the Mind is taken up with the sight of Order and Beauty in the Creation;
of Omnipotence and Knowledge in the Rule; of Labor and Conspiracy in Beings to
those Ends appointed them; and having these things for its Idea's, it grows
enlarged and beautified by what it receives. Whether then we attend to the
advantage of the Employment, or the dignity of our own Natures, we may easily
conclude, that a considering spirit is required of us; which if laid aside
through any carnal temptation, Man thereby as well as his Interest is forsaken.

Thus much briefly for marking Providence in the general -- But that which more
particularly binds us to observe, is God's Dispensation to his People. For God
walks in his Church, as in a Garden of Pleasure; He delights in those Plants He
sets, prunes and dresses them, and shows by the singularity of His care, that
they are the Favorites of his Government. The World is but waste ground, and
altogether subject to a common influence; the Sun enlightens, the Wind blows,
the Rain waters, but the true Husbandry is reserved for the Paradise he has
chosen. Here He has fixed his Dewlling Place, and here He exhibits his
loving kindness; all the method of his Discipline tending to the improvement of
the Soil. Yet lest we should take wrong measures in our notice, as it relates
to the governing of his Children, these Rules must be followed to direct us.

1. That God, who prescribes to Himself one method for eternally saving,
prescribes none for temporally ruling those He saves. In the one, He acts like
a Judge, where a certain order is set up; in the other, like a Sovereign, where
a perfect freedom is established: So that the variety of models and forms,
which are seen in the conduct of his People to happiness, ought not to infer
any neglect, but the uncontrollable liberty of his Power.

2. That outward Blessings are not gifts of choice, nor the proper donatives of
His hand. They may adorn indeed the uprightness of a cause, but not distinguish
it; which has surer characters to be known by, and a right founded upon better
Titles, than an Idolater or an Usurper can plead. We all find that even the
worst of Men can urge a success, and the honor of that portion they enjoy, as
a most plausible defense of their actings; therefore if marks of Grace were not
otherwise placed, God's love to his People would be lost, nay the Justice of
his Government destroyed. Thirdly, we must observe,

3. That the End of his Government being spiritual, he carries it on sometimes
by invisible ways, and leads his Servants thorough a dark path, though at other
times he draws out his Lights, I mean the miracles of his Protection, to
confirm his Church in a Belief of his Promises. So then, his Methods being
various, his outward Blessings undistinguishing, and his End spiritual in his
Rule, our contemplation of a Saint ought to be pure and refined; abstracted
from those accidents he meets with in the World; and how severe soever his
changes he, yet our judgment upon them should be unchangeable, fixed (like God's
purpose) on his reward. The perception of things in Religion is at a distance,
whereas Sense requires a neerness of the Object. To take a prospect of Nature,
is to approach near to particulars; but to take a prospect of God's Government,
is to stand a far off and behold. Therefore no conclusion ought we to form, but
by comprehending the Stage of the whole Life; we must not judge upon a present
view of persecution, flight, routing of Armies, and an eclipse of Glory (which
the best of Princes has been subject to) but carry our Eye forward to the last
enduring of the temptation, when he receives a crown of life.

What we are to mark in our Lord Christ, the same should be observed in his
Followers; first the Sufferings of the Cross, and then the Triumphs of the
Throne: To stop in the way, and divide our prospect, is to render it deformed;
it is to fill it with shadows, and not with light; to view a hand in the cloud,
gathering together storms and no blessings. Whoever would think to know the
beautiful proportions of any Being, must consider it at the full, and not in
the separated and divided parts of it; so the work of Providence in governing a
Saint, ought entirely and perfectly to be looked upon. For we do but libel it
by taking it in pieces, but we learn to adore it in the whole.

Pythagoras makes his Wiseman to be (...), a Spectator of Beings and Events;
and to enter into the World, as into an Olympic Game, there to regard all
passages; but this necessarily does infer a suspense of judgment 'till the
prize be obtained; which should he let loose to all the accidents of the
Combat, in stead of wisdom he would act folly; since it is the Eye of a Fool
that is always ranging to an uncertainty. Who is there can possibly determine
the conditions of Men from an immediate beholding of their course here? Does
not God often shuffle humane Affairs, turn and cast them, and make his outward
Administration in States a kind of mockery of Man's Knowledge, where the
difference of persons is lost for some time, and consequently the ability of
discerning? If any difference be found, it is that which offends; and that is,
when the perfect and upright Man falls, and (what adds weight to his overthrow)
perhaps caused by the hand of some prosperous triumphing Malefactor; which
seems at the first sight, as ill an Object of contemplation, as the Picture of
a Temple burnt and destroyed, with the Breaker up of that Temple passed by. Yet
however it becomes a Christian to mark, and to keep his Eye fixed in the midst
of turnings; the patience of Faith is expected from him in his standing, that
so the evidence of Faith may succeed. -- Which brings me to the Third
Particular in my Text, viz.

The Fruit or Effect of this Observation. And that is to discern a distinctness
of End betwixt the righteous and the wicked. For the end of the righteous is
peace, or a glorious reward; which unavoidably supposes the others punishment.
And here two Queries naturally arise:

1. Why God should defer to the last His distinguishing care of his People, and
not appoint them his Blessings in a bright course of his Providence?

2. In what respects a distinctness of End becomes visible to an Observer?

In answer to the First, concerning God's delays of distinguishing his People,
some allege the absoluteness of his Dominion, as a most satisfying ground for
such a disposal. But here the doubt still returns: For Dominion may be a Rule
to subject our Wills, but not to settle our Understandings. The Mind of Man is
too free to be bound up with that Notion, and still seeks to enquire further.
What then will fully satisfy it in its search? It must be convinced of the
Justice and Wisdom of his Proceedings; for these are two Attributes that strike
our Reason with the excellency of their luster, and can silence the cavils of a
Disputer. If then his Justice and Wisdom may be made out for appointing such a
way, no room is left for any scruple to get in.

Now Justice respects us in its exercise, whereas Power is but a Minister to
him that uses it. And how Justice respects us will appear, in that our corrupt
Natures require the method of an Affliction, and the Principle of Grace (there
infused) needs sharp proofs to corroborate it in its acts, and to testify its
soundness to the World.

He that will but consider the corruption of our Natures, how deeply printed
their stains are, and by what a sinfulness of practice farther confirmed; must
needs conclude, that those Evils we suffer are truly penal; and consequently
our meriting of the scourge, acquits our Judge from the tyranny of inflicting
it. The Rod that humbles our carnal strength, it loads too our consciences with
its burden; and tells us when we are bruised, that we have guilt likewise, to
complete the misery of our torment. God, who is righteous in all his ways, and
holy in all his works, brings no pain upon any of us, but what our own sins
duly deserve: The storm comes from above; but it is some vapor below, that has
bred it. Earth and Man's heart are alike fatal in their productions; they
nourish in them the seeds of a tempest, and sending them up toward Heaven,
darken that Region where they come, and turn its influence to oppress us. Upon
this account, none of us can repine or tax God's dealings, that will but
severely examine himself, and read the sinfulness of his own actings; whence he
may soon pick a Comment, out of the blackness of that Evidence, to expound and
interpret the sad accidents of his life, as a convincing Argument of God's
Justice.

Again, the Principle of Grace (infused into our Natures) does justly exact the
discipline of suffering; that so it may grow up and spread in our Souls, under
the benefit of that trial; and show the Divineness of its original, by all the
hardship of perseverance. Faith, Hope, and Charity, abide weak in their
infancy, when untryed; and (which is another reproach to that state) the truth
too of their birth is suspected. Nothing gives the spiritual Man such life and
vigor as a temptation: Not that of it self it can cause either, but
occasionally it conduces to his improvement; for affording him the matter of a
resistance, his Graces are thereby quickened and raised; and when the
temptation is beaten off, their true birth from Heaven is discovered by the
nobleness of their Conquest. So then, those temporal evils God sends, are to be
reckoned no otherwise, than a just diet He prescribes; their ends and uses are
proper to the Patient; whereby the equity of the Sender is always preserved,
though the Instrument many times that conveys them, contracts guilt in the
Service. Where now is the wrong offered a Saint, if vast rewards be designed,
and crosses only decreed to fit and prepare him? He that can complain here of
Injustice, may as well complain of hard seasons that ripen fruits, or the
laying of Isaac under the knife, which secured the Inheritance to the Child.

As God's Justice is thus cleared; so his Wisdom is no less evident, in the
appointment of those troubles in life before mentioned.

For it is an act of Wisdom to suit wages with works; and so Heaven being the
highest pay, He wisely exacts from us the highest performance. But this in
suffering consists; which as it is the best proof of our love to God, so the
most eminent mark of our courage; by how much the greater difficulty we undergo
of repressing our fears, and keeping our selves firm and immovable in a good
purpose. Upon this score of difficulty it is, that passive valor is deservedly
preferred before active; as giving us larger proofs of a generous resolution in
the Encounter. For to him that suffers, evil is present, and thereby sharper
upon his mind; nay it is farther edged in its sharpness, by seeming to come
from the stronger party; which makes the force of it more terrible; last of
all, length of time is required for the exercise, wherein Nature is apt to flag
and dissolve; so that here three discouragements lie in his way, which yet he
courageously breaks thorough: And they are, sense of evil; opinion of his
enemy; and a wearisome trouble of the time. But none of these are found in him
that briskly attempts danger; who regards evil as future, and so removes the
smart of its sting; who with the mind of a superior sets on it, and so learns
before hand to contemn it; lastly, who needs but a sudden heat to evidence his
courage; and so keeps fresh his spirits in the employ. Here then lies the
advantage of a Martyrs suffering, that he has every thing to daunt him in his
cause; whereas the Heroes of this World find easiness in their hazards, which
lessens the glory of their triumph. Hence God wisely puts us to that noble
trial of bearing the Cross, and so following our Lord; which being the utmost
pitch of our resolution for his Service, Happiness is duly rated by that price
He demands.

But there remains a second Query to be discussed, viz. in what respects a
distinctness of End becomes visible to an Observer.

For, 1. Peace in this place cannot be limited to a temporal deliverance,
though Man seems properly the judge of it; and Scripture too affords some
pregnant instances of those happy periods of an Affliction: So Noah was freed
from the tossings of the flood, and (like his Ark) rested in peace: So Joseph
was taken from the pit and the dungeon, to end his days near the Majesty of a
Throne; and David (the Author of this Psalm) could experimentally confirm the
Mercies of a change: Others too I might reckon up, that had a sensible taste of
God's Promises before they were summoned to their graves. However, should we
admit it in a sense so restrained, we must exclude out of our prospect whole
Armies of Saints, that neither knew, nor would accept deliverance, that they
might obtain a better resurrection. And where is the remarkable end of these,
or what pompous finishing of their lives, without you will say Swords and Axes
made it up, and the Heroic Courage of the Expecters? Either then we must take
it in a wider Notion, or poorly limit it to a few; where right is not so much
done them in a record of God's Blessings, as injury to others by our silence.
And as a bare temporal deliverance is not here meant, so neither, in the second
place,

2. Can we restrain it to Immortality of Bliss; for though that contain in it
all the substance of peace, yet being an invisible reward, it is above the
consideration of our outward man; therefore we must take it in the widest
extent, where both the Eye of Faith and the Eye of Sense may join in the
testimony.

As for the Eye of Faith, it is most open and clear when the End of the
Righteous is come. His Death gives it a quiet view, and the darkness of the
Scene is removed by the light of Eternity breaking in. While he sleeps, it
awakes, and delightfully expatiates over his Joys; for it is now like a Mariner
set on shore, and stands safe upon fixed ground, whereas Shipwracks at Sea did
before disturb the apprehension; so that it can with a composedness of thought
contemplate his Bliss, answerable to the softness of his repose. Whatever
distractions it might meet with in his life, they are all buried with the
Sufferer; the doubts and scruples are taken away; and no more is God's care of
him called in question, since it sees him as it were put in possession of a
glorious Inheritance. Thus a Saints decease procures a double liberty; first to
himself, from the fetters of a calamity; next to the Faith of a Beholder, from
the prejudices of the World.

But is the Eye of Sense alike capable of satisfaction? And can we be
entertained in our outward man with a true pleasure of beholding him? We all
readily grant it upon the sight of a recompense, and a successful close of the
righteous Man's days. None stumbles at Providence in that Sunshine; nay his
bare setting in light has that strength of luster, as to reflect it back upon
his past troubles. But how can the Spectator be secured from falling, while he
is viewing the Act of some black Tragedy; when the vail of government is drawn
over a Saint, and he seems to be given up from above to the lust of his
Enemies! To stand in that case seems very hard, by reason of the sadness of the
spectacle. And yet even here, if we would take but direction, we may still
safely look on; because there is proper matter for Sense to regard, and from
thence to form the Notion of Peace.

And this is grounded upon a threefold remarque: 1. Of the Cause. 2. Of the
Manner. 3. Of the Consequences of his End.


First, the Cause has a brightness in it to strike our Senses, when we see
Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety, singly maintained; and the Seal of
Martyrdom cheerfully embraced in the midst of terrors from an armed multitude,
where Power and Victory might be Pleaders of Right, but Blood and Sacrilege
the Overthrowers. And so the primitive Confessors powerfully convinced the
Heathen World, by a single maintenance of their Cause. Alone they triumphed in
what they professed, because alone they stood up Champions to defend; whence
those that saw them, fell from viewing to wonder, from wonder to love; and love
easily ended in their Conversion. Neither is this instance restrained to those
times, but every Age can produce one; and let God's Call but warrant the like
appearance, the goodness of a Christian profession, as it will arm a Saint to
acknowledge it, so it will justify him to any enemy, by the constancy of his
defending.

Next, the manner is visible, when we see in the Witnesser meekness and
charity, faith and devotion matched and joined; which speak of themselves a
tranquillity of mind, a compassion for Sinners, a conscience of Glory, and
lastly a fitness for Heaven. A stout defense is nothing, without Grace to
accompany it; for both History and Experience can furnish us with Examples of
the vanity of that sign; but where Grace does attend, it then becomes
proclaimer of a good confession; it erects a Scaffold for fame and martyrdom
together. And so the Saints of old, by the manner of their departure proved the
gloriousness of their End. A heavenly flame appeared in their acts, which
directed the Spectator to look upward when they dyed. And this kind of
Religious Spirit all true Martyrs are endued with; therefore to behold them in
their last part, with what piety they manage it, according to the rules of
their Blessed Savior, is to be alike convinced of the truth of their state,
and what a Kingdom above is prepared to receive them.

Lastly, the consequence will declare it; when we see the upright Man's Name
and his Posterity flourish; and the concern of Justice in his revenge, first by
a general confusion of things, afterward by a signal punishment of his
Persecutors; Pillars and Monuments being every where built upon the Ruins of
his Adversaries, to direct us in our Gaze, and confirm us in this Truth, That
Innocence alone has the Authority of Execution, when the Majesty of its
Defender is gone. If now other Ages we cannot recur to for one perfect Instance
in every particular, our own can richly afford it us; for we find the
consequences clearly exemplified in our late Prince, as well as the cause and
manner of his End; so that the Demonstration here is complete, and the very Eye
of Sense can bring in its testimony, that the end of the righteous is peace.

I would not be thought to anticipate the Fast, which by a particular accident
is removed; but I am sure the Day of the Fact, and your own Memories, no
accident can change. This is that Fatal Time, wherein a Glorious Martyr
prepared for Sacrifice, with all those Ornaments of Virtue that either a
Sovereign or a Christian could put on; and a bloody Enemy seemed over him to
prevail, with all those Crimes that Rebellion or Hypocrisy can contain:
Therefore by mentioning the time now, I do but pay it its due debt, and prepare
your humiliation for the morrow.

It is not for me to attempt His Character, whose Life was the exact Transcript
of His Religion; His Government, the representative of His Goodness; His
Writings Princely, as if the Pen were His Scepter; but withal humble and
charitable, as if none had offended Him; lastly, His Sufferings all along a
lively Expression of Christian Graces, and a full Argument in themselves to
reveal the righteousness of his Cause.

As little can I describe the guilt of His Murderers; whose Inspirations were
killing; their Fasts but a Solemnity to devour; who mixed their breach of Divine
Law with the mockery of its Maker; and to show wickedness was ripe, with an
impudence of sinning invaded that Head, where the Oil one would think were
enough to protect it from danger. All that they could possibly boast of, was
the current of prosperity for some time. But Christian Observers should weigh
their End, as the Heathen Votaries did not mind the Garlands about the Heads of
their Beasts, but the Altars they were led to: They might indeed (like those
Victims) break loose for a while, but could not properly be said to share in a
deliverance: The Peace they enjoyed was but a disturbed slumber before death,
but an unpleasant Feast before Execution. Who can have confidence to affirm,
That Pharaoh (who drowned so many Infants) had yet redemption from plagues,
when an expiatory deluge was to succeed? Or that Ahab (who could swallow a poor
Man's Vineyard at a Fast, and cruelly mingled the blood of the grape with the
blood of him that owned it) had yet peace in his days, when an Arrow was made
sharp to pierce him? No more can we call those Victories Mercies, that were
constantly waited on by greater judgments; and we find by the Fall of those
that had them, that to build impious Trophies upon the Graves of Princes is to
build upon sacred ground, that will sink them.

But passing by this Subject, I come now to infer some useful Truths from a
general beholding of such Examples. And here I shall show 1. The necessity of
converting our speculation into a Religious Practice. 2. The benefit of being
upright betimes in order to our Peace. 3. The folly of Irreligion, whereby a
future peace is utterly excluded; neither has it a present one for its reward.


1. The necessity of converting our speculation into a Religious Practice.

When the Psalmist bids us to mark the upright, it is not a mere direction to
our eyes, but to our steps likewise; and our gaze little avails us, if if it
reform not the lookers on. The Christian Watchtower is quite different from
the Worlds; there the Watchman stands fixed, viewing his space, and lazily
measuring the course of another; and the reports which are brought to him from
sense, never alter his posture begun: But here we are bound to turn and move,
labor and strive in our Office of observing; first advance our Reason to see
the race, and then work our Wills to pursue it. Indeed a bare speculation is
mere solecism in Religion; a work contradictory to the main end: We absurdly
set against the designs of Providence, if we use not Instances to promote
Piety, and the scope of his Laws, if our light be not serviceable to guide us
in duty.

God in his Government abroad, leaves exemplary proofs, to train us up for his
Service; and by express Commands in his Word, farther enforces the obligation;
therefore a naked Theory of things is so far from becoming an ornament to our
Natures, that it rather increases their guilt, by a flat resisting of his Will.

I know the contemplative powers enlarge our Souls; but they are the active
that better them; the former give them the subtilty of spirits, but the latter
crown them with goodness. And it is goodness alone that qualifies us for
Heaven; whereas subtilty may belong to the Angels condemned; who retain their
height of discerning, as another addition to their plague; for they reap
nothing by it, but a fuller sense of their pains. Would we then give our Theory
a right advancement? Practice with it must be joined: It is to no purpose to
glory in marking and beholding, when it cannot separate us from Hell.

They are but False-Prophets, that see and are not obedient to the Vision; so
they are but False-Professors, and will finally perish in deceiving their own
Souls, that consider the upright Man in his ways, but are never wrought to
imitation. Balaam we read could get up to a high mountain, that he might see
the utmost part of God's Israel: From the top of the rocks he saw, Numb. 23.
and from the hills he beheld them: But taking the coldness and barrenness of
his station, he was utterly lost in that view; when it filled him with delight,
but not with love; chained up his fancy, but left his corruption still free.
But whoever ascends Mount Sion, he ascends a fruitful Hill: He contemplates
the righteous in their path, and by treading that path, enriches his prospect.

2. The benefit of being upright betimes in order to our Peace.

Peace is a summary of all Blessings, a most comprehensive word to denote the
Perfection of our state; and being particularly referred to our end, it implies
the security of our Happiness. Now the perfection of our state is in nothing
more furthered, than in an early following the righteous Man's way; since it
creates a present, and establishes too our future repose. As for the present
Good we enjoy, it is perhaps unknown to the rest of the World, because it lies
deep in our Souls, and their workings we know are invisible to others; yet
however the foundation of our quiet abides the same; and it lies in an
effectual restraining of our unbridled desires, in a powerful asswaging of our
griefs and fears, and a thorough purging off the guilt of our consciences. All
these advantages a timely uprightness brings with it; and every Saint may
discern them in himself; which is a sufficient allay to his outward troubles.
What an ease must this be in the midst of suffering, to look within, and find
there every thing still and clear, the affections being calmed, and the
enditements of sin made void? Nay, this is not all; but God comes in with the
consolations of his Grace, to feed and refresh the inward man; so that could
the World here make an inspection, it would be forced to confess of the perfect
Walker, that not only his end, but all his progress is peace.

Let us next consider his future settlement, where you may behold him even in
his deathbed (as if it were the stage of his triumph) how undauntedly he
encounters the terror of what approaches, with all the pleasure of a
reflection. And he is supported in it two ways: 1. He knows the spring of his
repentance was pure in its first rise, which begets an assurance. 2. That he
has the testimony of after-fruits to confirm it.


Whence he joyfully meets that grim Sergeant, and while he is haling him
forcibly to rest, he excuses the roughness of the seizure.

But this peaceable kind of spirit a late penitent is deprived of, as he is of
all honor in the performance. For in both these respects his comfort fails,
when in the pangs of extremity he seeks his God; though through the mercy of
that God he may be saved.

His first discouragement is, that he knows not the purity of the spring,
whence his repentance proceeds; nor can certainly conclude, that it is a filial
love, but rather a slavish fear, that is the principle of the current. For
Death he sees is before him, and all those evils that accompany it; whence he
may well doubt those tears to be false which flow from him, and destructive too
in their falsehood, by a shipwreck of his Soul. And is not this want of evidence
sufficiently tormenting, though the Soul should be privileged with happiness,
since thereby all sense of it is gone, and the sting only retained of past
pleasures? While in the mean time, the upright Liver continues down his peace
by a register of his actings, and brings at the very last gasp a full and
entire spirit to close with his apprehension of coming Joys.

His next discouragement is, that an after-testimony of good fruits is cut off,
to confirm him in his fears. For how can such a testimony be produced, when he
presently dies after repenting? Whence suspicions must needs arise, and his
Death be surrounded with dark shadows, because no space is left him to prove
the sincerity of a good purpose. And what an Agony must a departure of this
kind be (how gracious soever God be in accepting) when the past sins, we
reflect on, terrify our minds, and a future uprightness is denied us? whereas
the perfect Man has the credit and support of a good stock beforehand, and
improving it all along to his Deathbed, he can quickly rely upon Divine Mercy,
as pardoning his frailties, and expecting no longer proofs of obedience. If
then we value the Peace of Conscience as well as the other of Immortality,
holiness of Life must be antecedent, for the better compassing of our end.

It remains I should show in the third place,

3. The folly of Irreligion, whereby a future peace is utterly excluded;
neither has it a present one for its reward. Now the Folly of it is manifest,
since it neither discovers a life of reason, which provides for good in the
succession; no nor a life of sense, which provides for an immediate gratifying
of our Wills. The succession of good is cut off, when our future happiness is
obstructed; and an immediate gratifying of us is denied, while war continues in
the Soul. How then can there be wisdom in the pursuit of Impiety, where there
is neither hope to tempt, nor enjoyment to satisfy! The Object of a Man's
choice must be either some present or future pleasure; the past is not, because
not possible to be enjoyed; therefore when no time can administer delight in a
course of sin, what motive is there in it to allure us?

As to the possibility of attaining to future peace in a vicious custom, it is
confessedly disowned by the profane; who are convinced, that their want of
Title does sufficiently baffle their Plea; all they can pretend to is the
present; and here lies the mystery of sins deceit, that it colors an evil with
such paint, as to hide it from him that laid it on.

Man carnally reasons for the corruptions of his life, and forgets the falsehood
of their covering. He passes by the madness of courting a moment, and considers
not the lastingness of its punishment. What then is Conscience wholly dead,
that it should not wound the Evil-doer? Has it quite lost its edge or activity
in his Soul? Why then does it so generally invade Mankind, perplex their
Spirits in fulfilling of their lusts, rack them in all their sensual delights,
and grow upon their pains, like a fresh Executioner? For so is the force of it
proved in the World; and to break their peace in the commission of sin, two
Images haunt them (of an equal terror) God and the Righteousness of his
Throne. All then a Sinner can expect at best is but a short suspense of his
trouble; and whether the suspense be not a greater act of hostility from his
Judge, he may well question. There is no tempest so hurtful as the calm before
it; where the face of danger is smoothed up, and death suddenly conveyed. Judge.
4.1
Jael's bottle of milk was more destructive to Sisera, than the hammer in her
hand: For by giving him that drink, she laid him fast asleep to be slain.

But besides pangs of mind, and a more dangerous Lethargy, if they be wanting;
let the wicked Man show any color for peace, by being filled with what he
enjoys. Behold! he is as much a stranger to an ease of fullness, as he is to a
rest of desire; so that there is war in his very Feasts, to which he seems most
cheerfully prepared. Nothing of the Creature can satisfy him, and therefore
every thing is his disturber; he wanders for good, and finds none; he craves
variety of Objects, and is punished by doing so: For he is thereby distracted
in his choice, and has all the labor of an uncertainty. Go now and pursue the
pleasures of sin; Walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine
eyes; but withal tell me at the same time, whether thou have true cause of
rejoicing, when thou treadest a fools maze, and art wretchedly lost in those
turns and windings, which thy own appetite has contrived. Above all call to
mind what substantial peace is neglected by thee, I mean those vast and solid
joys in another World, to which a loss in this is nothing comparable; how thou
barterest away thy Soul for a lust, and pawnest eternity for a moment; as if
thy great strife were for nothing else, but to complete the Character of the
unwise.

I need no more insist on this Subject, and shall therefore beg leave more
particularly to make Application.

To be speedily Religious is the highest Charity to our selves; nay (to add
somewhat more) our best homage to Princes. For we thereby secure to them their
Peace, and establish their Throne; we encompass them about with God's
Blessings, and bring Heavenly Forces to their Cause. But National Sins raise
Storms, set up Hills of provocation to plant battery against that very Seat,
which God has fixed by his Power. Nothing so traitorous as Vice, nor so disloyal
as Iniquity; and we have all sadly experimented the efficacy of its treason,
wherein vile Instruments had never prevailed over such Authority of Power, and
Majesty of Goodness, but that general guilt was their Arms.

Who now, that considers the advancement of holy living, will not contribute
what he can to his own, nay his Princes Glory; endeavor as a Christian to
purchase a Crown, and as a Christian to defend one? In the mean while, let no
Instance of prosperous sinning tempt us to the practice of any corruption; for
all prosperity of that kind is but the guilding of a storm; where God hides the
Evil He intends, that He might double Men's ruin by the surprise. It was a true
saying (though Jezabel spoke it) Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? So Men
may thoroughly execute the worst Crimes, but that liberty allowed them is their
plague; and their want of peace (as the consequent of their deeds) is a
sufficient motive to dissuade them.

Neither should any be terrified with those crosses, which are many times the
portion of God's Children. For how sharp soever they be, yet they cannot null
the force of His promise: The promise secures them from overthrow, though not
from suffering. It is like that Bow in the Clouds, set by God for a token of
peace; Showers indeed do accompany it, but no Deluge. And O that we would
consider the reward of inward peace, which is safely lodged in a good
conscience! where the mind delightfully views its own acts, and calms the
passions in the survey; where a victory over sin is followed with triumph, and
a pursuit of good with the rest of satisfaction; where the accidents of life do
not shake, and Providence is a Sanctuary from trouble: In a word, where Heaven
it self is set up in all the light, beauty, and order of its frame. Therefore
since no Plea is left for commission of sin, but all encouragement given us to
duty, with what judgment should we behold, and with what affection transcribe
the perfect man; that resembling him here, we may finish that likeness in
another World, and find that uprightness (which is the peace of our Souls) will
be the peace too of our Persons in a Blessed Eternity.

Now to God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, be Praise and Honor for
evermore.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is newly published two Recantation-Sermons (Preached at the French
Church in the Savoy by two Converted Romanists; Mr. De la Motte, late Preacher
of the Order of the Carmelites; and Mr. De Luzanzy, Licentiat in Divinity;)
wherein the Corrupt Doctrines of the Church of Rome are laid open and confuted.
Both printed in French and English, and sold by Moses Pit.


