To the Supreme Authori^^ The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND: A
Serious CHARGE AND ACCUSATION Against Mr EDW. WINSLOW, One of the Commissioners
for Compounding at HABERDASHERS HALL.

BY Capt. WILLIAM BRAY.

Imprinted at LONDON. 1652.

To the Supreme Authority, The Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND, etc.
Honorable Senators,
I Have always been, according to the light and talent that God has given me,
faithful to the Cause of this Commonwealth: and though I am weak and frail in
this life, yet my desire and endeavors has been, and I hope shall be, not to
sin wilfully against God, my own soul, or my neighbor. I am now constrained,
by all the obligations of humanity to my self, to appeal for your Justice; that
so you might exercise your Virtue, Reason, and Christianity, on my behalf. I
shall present unto you the Case as briefly as I may, in that manner and form as
things are; and shall present nothing to you, but what I can make to appear in
Judgment Seat.

I have been about two years and eight months a Prisoner; and it pleased God,
who is just, wise, and merciful, to stir up the spirit of his Excellency the
Lord General Cromwell, and some other worthy Members of Parliament, to make a
just and truly worthy motion for my release, even at such a time when I judged
in my self that my afflictions had even wholly destroyed my bodily health, as
well as encumbered me with destruction, by reason of worldly prejudice to my
self, indebtments and obligations to friends.

But may it please this honorable Council, that on the first day of January
instant, I was desired by Cornet Cheesman to appear for him on the behalf of
the Commonwealth, in order to a Charge exhibited against the Sub-Commissioners
of Berk-shire, before the Committee at Haberdashers Hall, in a matter of many
hundred pounds per annum, which the Commonwealth had been apparently,
negligently, and wilfully defrauded of; as did appear unto me by information,
and Judgment by the Depositions of abundance of Witnesses.

And I was further acquainted by the said Cornet Cheesman, that, about a year
since, he had a hearing of his Cause: and he alleged unto me, that he was
surprised in his Trial, because the Publication and Trial was all in one day,
so that he had no time to inform Counsel, or abbreviate his Cause, which he had
so deeply engaged in (according to his Oath) against the wilful corruptions of
the Sub-Commissioners. I desire not to be tedious; but I appeal to this
honorable Council whether this was just, holy, rational, or good.

Secondly, he the said Cornet Cheesman informed me, that, by way of
recrimination, his adversaries had charged him that was Plaintiff for the
Commonwealth, and upon very slender proof, as he informed me, and accordingly
did show me the copies of the Depositions on the Defendants part; the
particulars whereof I shall not trouble you with, because I hear he intends to
present his whole Cause before you. Yet he told me, the Commissioners of
Berk-shire had only some verbal check, and were continued in their Places; and
he, that had appeared for the Commonwealth, was cast out of his Trust.

He informed me, that there were about seventy or more Witnesses examined to
the Cause which he first of all began for the Commonwealth; and thereupon
desired me to be a friend and assistant unto him.

Whereupon, after I had taken the Engagement in Court, in obedience to your Act
(as my judgment and understanding did lead me) I spoke on the behalf of the
Commonwe^lth for Cornet Cheesman the Plaintiff. But may it p^ease this
honorable Council, whilst I was composing my self to discharge my trust for
the Commonwealth, and, as I con^eive, according to my instructions, for the
honor of your Authority; one M. Blackgrove, a Member of Parliament, that did
much appear for the accused parties, the Sub-Commissioners, asked me in full
and open Court, in the presence of many people, Whether I was not Captain Bray
the Ranter: but I answered to this effect, that I knew no one in the world
could justly accuse me of any such thing; and I did not know any one of the
name to be so. Secondly, so far as I ever understood their Opinions, I was
contrary in my spirit unto them, and have endeavored, when I have been called
to it, to convince them by principles of Religion and Reason, according to my
light and conscience. And truly, let me say and boast as Paul did in a sense,
and upon an occasion; If I were as free from sin, inwardly and outwardly (for I
have no cause to boast, but in the Lord Christ, who was crucified, and is
risen) as I am from those acts of conversation that such a people are accused
with, I should have no sin at all. I desire this honorable Council to excuse
me, if I vindicate my self, seeing I am so abundantly constrained, for the
defense of the Commonwealth, for the honor of your Authority, in which I have
reason to comprehend my own preservation.

But may it please this honorable Council, if such sinister questions and
cunning illegal accusations shall be given to a man that stands for the cause
of the Commonwealth, Who can be innocent? Who may not be politickly and
craftily destroyed in his reputation and good name? And to do it in such a
cause, in such a time, and indeed unto me, after all my sufferings, and when I
had undertaken such a way and resolution in my self, to plead in such causes as
I conceived were honest and just, wherein I might do the Commonwealth service,
and keep me from an idle state and condition, (which is unsuitable to a man) and
to preserve me in a state of subsistence, out of duty to mine own body, that I
might not be a lawless and wilful destroyer of my self. And I believe no
honest or Christian man can be my enemy for this: for these Reasons made me
willing to employ my self in this way. 1. For four or five years before the
Wars, I was educated to the understanding of the practice of the Law. 2. I
conceived it to be the liberty of an English man, a Christian, and a Rational
man. 3. I thought none could rationally deny me that, since I had engaged in
the Parliamentary cause.

But further may it please this honorable Council, M. Winslow one of the
Commissioners went much higher, tending to overawe me, and discountenance me,
(as from the other Commissioners I received no incivility at all;) and
manifested so high an enmity to me, that he stood up and uttered these words:
viZ. Captain Bray, you shall plead no more at this Court: Are not you the man
that hold dangerous opinions? were not you found in bid with two women
together, at one Mistress Seney 's that was carted?

This was in open Court; this was to one who has been for your safety, and can
prove upon Oath has been in several engagements (his conscience testifying to
that end:) this was in open Court, in the face of an assembly, when, according
to the Instructions and copies of Depositions given me, I was to plead the
interest of the Commonwealth, in faithfulness and duty, against wilful
violators of your Ordinances, Rules, Acts, and Instructions. And I appeal to
this honorable Council, whether this be not, as much as in him lay,
dishonorable to Parliamentary authority, and capital Tyranny.

But this was from a Commissioner that should show forth humanity and good
example. This was a way to ruin me in all credit and esteem, and to make my
life a burden to me, after the expiration of my imprisonment: whereas it was
fully known, I was a prisoner when Mistress Seney was carted. I have been a
prisoner almost three years, and was but lately released. I was never in
Mistress Seney's habitation in my life. And indeed, this was the way of the
corrupt bloody Papists of old, as well as the uncon^cionable Persecutors in the
Primitive times, To make such sinistrous general, illegal, and destroying
accusations; which has been condemned by this honorable Council, as the
Parliamentary Declarations manifest. But of this I shall say no more at
present, though I could say much more in it. My cause will speak for it self,
and be an object for your Wisdoms and Justice.

When I was coming forth of the Hall, I told M. Blackgrove he did not deal with
me like a man, or like a Christian, (...) Gentleman. He told me he would
acqu^int the G^^^ral of me. But I replied, I would acquaint both P^^^^^ment and
Lord General of him; and I do accordingly tender it to your serious
consideration, and do humbly desire that my cause may be acceptable in your
sight. I commit my cause to the righteous Judge of heaven and earth, and to
your Christian, virtuous, and honorable consideration.

6 January, 1651. William Bray.

FINIS.

