DIATRIBAE; OR Discourses UPON SELECT TEXTS: Wherein Several weighty Truths are
handled and applied against the PAPIST AND THE SOCINIAN. By HENRY BAGSHAW, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. H. for Ric. Chiswell at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

TO The Right Honorable and Reverend Father in God, Nathaniel, Lord Bishop of
Durham.
My Lord,
I Have been long doubtful in my thoughts what Subjects to handle under so
great a variety of Christian Truths; but I do not doubt in the least where I
should fix my Dedication; since your Lordship may challenge all my endeavors,
whether I be barely considered as a Member of your Diocese, or farther as
planted by your self under the noble Influence of your Favor. As a Member,
there is due from me all the Reverence of an Esteem: as one planted, there is
requisite the peculiar tribute of a thankful mind in a return of some Fruit to
your hands.

The Discourses I here offer to your Lordships view, and from thence to the
World (how weakly soever they are written) yet I am sure they have weight of
matter and worth of Patronage to defend them. I here open from Scripture,
First, that heinous sin of Imprisoning Truth, and the justness of Gods
vengeance revealed: Next, the natural Inference from Divine Promises, which is
the exercise of all Piety: Thirdly, the cogent reason of adhering to our Lord
Christ, because He has words of Eternal life for his followers: Last of all,
the proper Benefit of his Death in that work of Justifying us, and the Peculiar
Advantages of his Rising: In all which points I have strictly confined my self
within my Circle; and (as occasion led me) reflected upon Two great Enemies to
Christianity, which are the Papist and the Socinian; the one crying up his
Diana (which is the Church) the other magnifying as false a Goddess (which is
his own Reason) to overthrow it.

I need not here publish your Lordships Zeal for our Protestant Church, which
you have abundantly demonstrated to your own Clergy, nor the prudence of your
Government, which we all taste of: but since I am made so singular an Instance
of your kindness both as to present and future encouragement, I take leave to
mention it to the world, and withal to acquaint your Lordship, That the great
Temptation I had to write was my Sense of it; where I hoped I might erect some
lasting Memorial; or (if the poorness of what is written should hinder life,)
yet the Candid Reader might give it one by considering your Lordships Name, and
the Gratitude of the Writer.

I am, my Noble Lord, Your Lordships Most obliged and ever faithful Servant,
Henry Bagshaw.
Houghton le spring, Sept. 30. 1679.
The First Discourse.
Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all
ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness.


THese words have reference to the sixteenth verse of the Chapter, wherein the
Apostle stoutly defends the Charge of his Ministry, because the Gospel he
preached, though it might seem to have a weak Subject (a Crucified Savior) and
as weak a Deliverer of that Subject (a despised Messenger) yet was the Power of
God to Salvation. How it proved such an effectual Instrument in Gods hands to
convert the World, He farther illustrates by the Methods and Rules of it, as
being a full revelation of his Will, both to accept the imperfect righteousness
of men, and to punish their wilful disobedience. In the one it suits it self to
our highest Hopes, by that blessed Life it propounds; in the other it is
applied to our greatest Fears, by that cursed Death it threatens: so that none
can possibly escape the force of Religion, except at the same time their own
passions be destroyed.

Now what is Gods rule of saving men by, he tells us in the Verse foregoing my
Text; and with what clearness of discovery the Gospel lays open the
Justifification of a Sinner, and Faith the condition prescribed: but lest this
Faith should be mistaken (as if Heaven were the reward of a naked Belief, and a
bare relyance on Christ might buy out his purchase) he checks our confidence by
another Manifestation of Gods Justice against Sinners, As the Just shall live
by Faith, (whereby He means Faith that is the Principle of a new life,) so the
Wicked shall die for their Impenitence; and both these states the Gospel
reveals; a Light sent us from above to work doubly upon Earth, in refreshing
the Saint, and consuming the Malefactor. For the wrath of God, etc.

Whether the scope of these words be directed against the Gentiles, who were
such Rebels to Nature, or against a mungrel sort of them (the Gnostics) who
were such corrupters of the Gospel, I shall not here examine, but consider them
barely in themselves as they point out to us a General Truth, which is this,

That the wrath of God against all kind of sin, but especially the sin of those
who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, is plainly discovered in the Gospel.

In the management of this Truth it will be necessary to enquire into these
particulars.

1. Into the Nature of Gods Wrath, what it implies.

2. Why the Revelation of his Wrath is more peculiarly ascribed to the Gospel?

3. How justly it is exercised upon those Sinners who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness.

I. Into the Nature of Gods Wrath, what it implies.

The holy Penmen of Scripture that borrowed our Passions to express the manner
of Gods dealing with us, teach us withal to abstract from the weakness of them.
Passions in us show the imperfectness of our beings, that we need such
Principles to act by; and the imperfectness too of our State, in that Trouble
follows their Motion: And particularly this passion of Wrath is attended with a
double one; either if you regard the disturbance it raises in the Soul upon the
sense of an Injury, or the poor limiting of it to Time in its effects of
punishing: in neither sense can it belong to God; for could He be disturbed
when provoked, He would lose the Happiness of his State; could He be limited in
his Vengeance, He would lose the Glory of his Power.

Therefore his Wrath in this place can signify nothing else but a settled
decree, or fixed will of punishing sin eternally. This is a revenge proper to
God, and it is this alone makes the Transgressor fear: In this sense it is
taken by John the Baptist, when he warns his hearers to flee from the Wrath to
come; and by St. Paul when he speaks of the day of Wrath; styled so with an
Emphasis, to distinguish it from Gods other days of Execution in this world.

Here a Day of Justice may rather be termed Night for its darkness, and
Providence it self seems to be clouded even in those Thunderbolts that come
down; but the Day wherein the sinners eternal Portion will be assigned, is a
clear one; for it derives its distinguishing light from the scorching Flame
that preys on him. Did not God thus punish the Offender, all his other
Judgments would not bridle us, nor could there be a sufficient Evidence of his
wrath, did it only light on the party, but not stay nor abide on him: Then
Justice appears to be his, when it is not common with man's; but man can
temporally punish and be mocked to by the Sufferer, since that Death he
inflicts as his highest punishment, is but an end and escape from it. We all
foolishly burn in our wrath, and the fires we prepare for oaths carry a vain
heart in them; they scorch and heal together, they dissolve the body to ashes,
and cool it by doing so; but when Eternal Wrath seizes on us, when Everlasting
Burnings break forth, this is to give the substance of pain, and no shadows. In
this way God rewards men's evil deads, and by the terror of it keeps his
infinite mercy from being abused; which is an Attribute that wicked men
naturally stick to, and as hardly quit their hold of it in pursuit of their
wickedness, were they not shaken off by another notion of Infinite Justice.

I proceed to my second Query,

II. Why the Revelation of Divine Wrath is peculiarly ascribed to the Gospel?
This is intimated in my Text; For the wrath of God (says the Apostle) is
revealed srom Heaven, that is immediately by the God of it, who descended upon
earth to teach the world, and in an heavenly manner confirmed what He taught,
sealing by his Works the Truths He delivered.

In handling this point I shall premise two things, which are here necessarily
implied.

1. That the eternal punishment of evil doers was a Truth decreed by God,
before it was revealed: for Revelation gives no Essence to things, but only an
Appearance to us: it is not a creating but a discovering work; not a saying,
let it be, but let it be with full Evidence. He that opens the earth, and
produces those stores it shuts up, does not thereby cause them to exist, but to
be known; so when Gods wrath is said here to be manifested, it imports this,
That it was first prepared. His decree was past from all eternity against sin;
having determined with himself to create Man, and govern him by Law, determined
likewise a Punishment answerable to the Majesty of the Lawgiver; from whose
infinity Man's guilt should swell up, so as to deserve infinite Wages.

The Wrath then of God was sure beforehand; only the benefit we have by his
revealing it is the applying of that Truth to us, whereby we are warned to seek
out and provide a remedy of the Judgment.

2. The second thing I shall premise is, That till the Gospel came, the nature
of Gods Vindictive Justice was much hid and concealed.

It is true the Gentiles had a Light from Heaven (which was the Light of
Nature, the Candle of the Lord) and the Jews a more special one, which was the
Light of the Law to direct them; yet neither of them contained a like evidence
of this Truth which the Gospel affords us.

1. For the Light of Nature the Gentiles were led by;

I confess they had unalterably this dictate from it, that Wrath was the due
pay of Offenders; and because men lived not up to the Principles of their
Creation, they were therefore justly liable to the Curse; but how far that
Judgment should certainly extend, herein the Light failed to guide them. Reason
it self taught them to conclude the Wicked deserved punishment; but the Reason
did not suffice to confirm that punishment in another World; for how Man could
eternally subsist in a course of misery they understood not, nor what
consistency there was of an immortal being with perpetual Torments (...) was
the Speech of one of their chief Philosophers; as if to Suffer and to be Mortal
were one and the same thing.

I need not mention the grosness of their mistakes about the Nature of him they
worshipped, which is palpable to all from that Idolatry they invented; but
their Error also is alike notorious as to those Motives they failed in, for
urging Religion upon men. For when they denied the Resurrection of the Body as
Impossible, they must consequently deny an Eternal Reward that was built on it.
What we read in the Acts to be the professed Mockery of the Epicureans and
Stoics (when St. Paul preached to them upon this Theme) was indeed the sport
of all the rest; who scoffed at any thing above Nature, and minding only the
constant course of its operations, made accordingly their Estimate of Gods
Power. But perhaps they delivered somewhat concerning the Life of the Soul; but
then they did it very uncertainly (as Socrates in his Apology for himself
before his Judges sufficiently witnesses) and if any of them were so positive
as to affirm it, yet they made that state after death so Aerie and so Romantic,
that neither the Just man could be refreshed, nor the Wicked frighted with that
opinion.

Go to their Stories of the Dark Regions below, and the Fiery Lake the Bad
should be cast into; the Stone, the Wheel and the Vulture that was appointed
them; these were the reports of their Poets, fit Priests for such Worshippers.
Little did they work upon men's Faiths to believe them, who with their fabulous
mixtures corrupting Truth, hindered thereby the conviction of their Hearers.
Hence their great ones were not moved with what was related to them; and the
Vulgar did but consider them as Tragedies upon a Stage; where Fears perhaps
were raised in them from the Apprehension of an Evil, and again easily cured
with the conceit of a Fiction. In a word whatever Religion they had concerning
another life, it was made by Fancy a wild Speculation, and had no check upon
conscience to bind practice; so that to them the Wrath of God here in my Text
proved still a Doctrine unknown.

2. Let us examine the Doctrine of the Jews, and that Light of Special
Revelation which they enjoyed.

It must be granted by all Christians, that the Jews had their Covenant
established upon promises and threatenings of an Eternal Condition. God who
chose them out of all Nations to be his People, and governed their State
peculiarly by his Laws, did by this too distinguish them from the rest of the
World, that they had their Religion advanced by those Prophets He sent amongst
them: whence we find it vindicated by Christ in a Dispute, by Paul in a
Defense, by Abraham in a Parable. Christ's proves from thence his Doctrine of
the Resurrection, Paul his hope of the Promise, and Abraham the different state
both of good and bad; which one would think were enough to stop the mouths of
our Modern Saducees when the Old were put to silence. And indeed whoever shall
assert that the Jews had no such benefit of Revelation, he must at once charge
their Lawgiver with weakness, and their own Faith with absurdity in cleaving to
him.

Yet however, this Law of the Jews (if compared with the Christian in the
manner of its evidence) came not up to the excellency of that discovery. For
the whole Mosaic Economy was made up of Types and Figures, and a thick Night
continually overspread their Tabernacle: Their Promises and Curses literally
concerned the things of this life, and it required a piercing Faith spiritually
to interpret them: a vulgar eye would surely stay upon the Surface; but for to
be able to take in the depth, this must proceed from a strong enlightening,
which we read only a few were blessed with, that like Moses were carried up to
see the hidden things of the Mount, when the generality stood below and saw
nothing but Clouds.

There was then great need of a Savior to appear, whether we regard Jew or
Gentile; and that not only for the work of saving Mankind, but for redeeming
Truth, which was so obscured by the one, and lost by the other. Now Christ has
discharged his Office in this particular; and for this Prophet alone was
reserved all the glory of Divine Revelation, who being the express Image of his
Fathers Person, was the Signifier also of his Will in the brightest Character.

We know in the Creation Light was Gods first work, but in restoring of
Religion his last He judged it not fit to bring bright day on his People at
first, but by degrees to prepare their weak sight that it might be the better
confirmed; and when the full time came, the Gospel was published, which put an
end to farther discoveries and sealed up the Vision.

This being premised, it remains I should speak one word to show how Gods wrath
by way of eminency is revealed in the Gospel: which will appear by considering,
1. The Cleerness of it in the Letter. 2. The Public Promulgation of it to the
World.


1. For the Clearness of the Letter; nothing can be more lively shown than the
Sinners Hell, whose Worm is said not to dye; neither is his Fire quenched: Nor
does the Second Death cease from hurting him. Should we now conclude with the
Socinian, Eternal Punishment to be nothing else but Perdition or a Negation of
Existence, we must flatly deny those phrases of Scripture before mentioned; for
the Worm it self dies if its prey does so; the Fire is put out if the matter it
feeds upon be not lasting; and the Second Death is not in the least hurtful; if
it imply nothing of torment. But besides (were this granted them) what is become
of the fierceness of Gods wrath, when neither felt nor endured? Where is his
Judgment and severe reckoning with evil doers, if they partake with Brutes in
their end? It is folly to fear where Justice is not known; and consequently a
wide gap is opened by such men to all impiety, when they take off the Terrors
of Death, leaving men as unconcerned to be nothing an hundred years hence, as
an hundred years past to be unborn. O the vanity of that Reason they pretend
to, which breaks the Authority of Gods Laws! O the cruelty of their Compassion
to Man's nature, whereby Religion it self is destroyed! But Christ has otherwise
instructed the World, and knowing it needful that Everlasting Punishment should
be equally set before us with Life Eternal; He has joined them both in the
Sentence, that we might be every way convinced Eternity is our lot, and
therefore a full motive to Duty.

In the Old Testament Tophet or the Valley of the Children of Hinnom (where
their Sons and Daughters were sacrificed to Moloch) was used by the Prophet
Isaiah as his greatest Type and Representation of Hell: But how short it fell
of a Gospel-description will be made evident, if we consult the place, the
number it was prepared for, and the time of its burning: the place though deep,
yet had bottom: the number though great, yet was limited to one People; and the
time of its burning though fierce, yet had end. On the contrary the Gospel
reveals a bottomless Gulf, a multitude of all Nations that enter, and a
perpetual duration of their torments. So that here we have a clear light of the
Letter, wherein the Jews were defective.

Neither does the excellency of a Revelation stop here, but we may consider in
the second place:

2. The Public Promulgation of it to the World; and the Seal it carries of an
Universal Publishing, answerable to the Majesty of him that came to set up an
Universal Kingdom. Behold, the Sentence of Divine Wrath was before hid with
the Jews; but now the knowledge of it spreads into all parts, and so it proves a
new Light in regard of its extent through all quarters. That Sun of
righteousness, that has risen, shines round about, not only with healing under
his wings to preserve, but with Flames too of vengeance to consume. And this He
manifested here on Earth, when he proclaimed the Glad-tydings of Salvation, and
pronounced many a Blessing upon his People; yet lest they should forget the
Justice of a Savior, Woes and Threatenings were ushered in, to allay and temper
all his Ministry. Therefore those that heard him, had reason to fear, and not
think themselves freed from Legal terrors, since the Thunder of Sinai continued
still, though the Darkness of it was gone.

And as He thus awed them with his own Teaching, so He commissioned his
Servants to do likewise, when He sent them abroad to teach all Nations. Mercy
alone was not their Theme, nor the riches of Divine Grace in man's Redemption
(which is such welcome news to the receiver) but the Curse was also annexed, and
the Charge of future Judgment; that if the former did please, the latter might
bind. Before this, Ignorance might be some way pleaded by the Gentiles, that
they obeyed not Gods Law, when Life and Immortality were not known; but after
these were cleared up in the Gospel, then their Condemnation was perfected. For
now they could be no longer termed unhappy for sitting in Darkness and in the
Shadow of Death, which is a kind of Sanctuary to the Pleader, but Wicked for
loving the Shadow which is the beginning of Hell. Upon this account He no more
winks or spares, but judicially eying their steps, denounces against them his
heaviest Judgment.

I know many refer the Revelation of Gods Wrath to the Experiments of it in the
world, and make his outward Judgments upon sinners as so many Witnesses to
confirm it. But were no higher meant than those Instances, we should be still
in the dark; convinced perhaps he was wroth, but not wroth to a distinction,
wherein Justice is revealed. None can spell out Characters of Providence, nor
read the special Handwriting upon the Wall without the benefit of Vision. What
is all our sight of a just God here but (...) in a Riddle, a Riddle that has
busied Philosophers to resolve, and hardened their doubts by the enquiry? If
Wrath be manifested, let the bad feel its burden; but alas! Gods Tempests here
seem only to fall upon his own Chosen: They may call it Grace thus to suffer,
but it is Grace not seen, nor acknowledged by others, all the face of it being
spoiled in the Storm.

On the other side the calm and luster of outward good, this is generally the
wicked man's share; we may call it Punishment thus to flourish, but it is a
Punishment desired. Now to break up the Pit and show those Treasures of
vengeance shut up there; to search into a wicked man's Fate, and discover the
Miseries that follow it; to represent him naked in his Grave, and awaked
afterward in that nakedness for scourging, this is properly to reveal Wrath,
and to the Gospel we must owe such a Discovery.

Thus much for my Second Particular. There remains the Third to discuss, which
is this.

III. How justly it is exercised upon those who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness?

In discussing this Head I shall first open the Charge, and then it will be
easy to prove the justness of the Sentence.

The Charge laid against the Sinner is not error of mind, nor weakness of
passion, nor decay of nature (which are Guilt attended with an Apology) but the
tyranny of a corrupt heart; That hating the Empire of Truth, takes it prisoner
to be freed from its Government: for so the word (...) properly signifies,
namely forcibly to withhold or detain Truth, that is, to obstruct the power of
Religion.

What a high piece of injustice this is, will be evidenced if you regard, 1.
The Act in it self. 2. The Motives that lead men to it. 3. The Effects that
flow from it.


1. As to the Act; it is no less than the seizure of a Sovereign Prince; for
such Truth, is; and therefore justly demands to have Jurisdiction in the soul,
and like Light to spread in its full liberty. What have Subjects to do with
fettering Princes, whom they are bound to obey, or keeping them in the dark
when they ought to be visible in the Throne? Kings are only at Babylon led
captive: There they have their eyes put out, and their feet bound, that they
can neither see nor walk abroad: So the Christian Law (that ought to rule in
the World) is at Rome barbarously used; a place eminent for kindling of Lamps,
and for smothering of Light; for adorning of Altars, and for corrupting the
Sacrifice. What I beseech you is all their Worship but blind and lame, Truth
being so ill racked with their handling, that they can only acquaint us with
the deformities of its body? The Prison it suffers in is that of One Language,
hardly revealed to the Priests themselves; the Eyes it has are those Figured
ones of an Idol, that need the gildings of Art to be owned: the Feet are the
supports of a Tradition which requires an Implicit Faith, that is, Faith of the
same lameness. Who that sees Truth in this shape will not say it is vilify'd by
its professors, when the bare withholding it from others is a high Act of
Injustice? For that Act is a withholding of the Birthright and Inheritance of
Men, and a frustrating of Gods purpose in the gift of it; who as he has
designed the Elements of Nature to be commonly enjoyed for our Bodily
sustentation, so he has also designed the Elements of Truth to be with a like
commonness imparted for preserving the Soul.

Yet these kind of men (that lead Scripture captive) dare plead the
Infallibility of their own Church; a word wherein the Mystery of Iniquity is
sum'd up, and from whence they have fetched all their Artillery to beat down
every thing that opposed them: which puts me in mind of that famous Engine
Demetrius contrived, and is mentioned by Plutarch in his Life, that had several
Rooms and Partitions in it to hold Soldiers; and the men that lodged there did
fight with all sorts of weapons. Such is their Engine of an Infallible Guide;
but certainly of it self it would little prevail, were it not for its many
Cells and the Forces that fill them. For behold! what Bands of Friars, what
Companies of Priests lie there armed and prepared to defend their Cause! This
word (Infallible) has strength enough with them to solve all Arguments for
Truth, to remove all objections against Error; and withal it so blinds their
whole party, that they can neither discern any compounded mixtures in Faith,
nor notorious scandals in practice; though the one proceeds from all the
grossness of Humane Invention, and the other from all the licentiousness of
Corrupt Nature.

But the falseness of that Title they pretend to, is sufficiently laid open in
the world; and they themselves too might be convinced of the arrogance of their
claim; since whatever promise they may plead for such an assistance, concerns
only the leading of the Universal Church, and is limited too in its sense to
points necessary for its salvation; whereas they (being only a part of that
Body, and a part wretchedly fallen in Christian Principles) cannot truly be
said to be upheld by the Spirit, but rather Judicially forsaken, by reason of
their banishing the Word of Truth, which can only secure the Spirits Conduct.
But I pass from hence to the Second Aggravation of this sin; wherein I shall
consider,

2. The Motives that lead men to it.

Could men urge some powerful Temptation for the reason they had to hinder the
Authority of Religion over them, they might fetch an excuse from it; but when a
base lust, a sordid appetite shall get strength to prevail, this heightens the
Crime because of the shamefulness of that Conquest. In all Irreligion we are
poorly mastered, or rather betrayed. The Will quits its allegiance to the
Understanding (which by nature it is a servant to) for a mean, narrow, shrunken
object, that cannot so much as bribe it by a Reward. Atheism is built upon
gross dictates of Sense, and Lust forms to its self principles to resist
Conscience; wherein Man (pretending to live free) is left miserably bound by
his Slave. Consult the whole Method of an Atheistical discourse: In Flesh it
begins and ends with it; but take once out of Man's mind carnal Hopes, and
sensual Imaginations, then the Soul comes to do it self right, by being filled
with proper Ideas of God and Eternity. Devotion is the genuine birth of our
Thoughts while the streams of them are pure; but Impiety is a Monster, that out
of mud and stime is formed. We may know its Original by its Fruits, and the
debauchery of an Atheist's reason by his practice, whose love of Drink,
Whoredom, Gluttony, and other foul Uncleanness, furnishes him with Arguments
to defend them. Upon the same score the Heathens maintained their Idol-Temples,
because their inclinations led them to vice, and the Gods of those Temples
showed them the way.

The like Reason may be given for that exact care and diligence in the
Roman-Church to suppress Truth, which is Lust and Interest. These are the Two
commanding Principles they are swayed by, and Unrighteousness is served by them
for low wages. They hide the true doctrine of a present Repentance, that their
followers may sin all their lifetime without fear, and at last purge by
Confession: They conceal the True Tenet of Christ's full satisfaction (whereby
both sin and punishment are taken off) that they may make an Exchequer of Man's
Pardons: They destroy the nature of Good works, and make them to be nothing
else but an Art of Compounding: The Creature is set up by them (as it was by
the Gentiles) (...) besides the Creator: They drive at Universal Empire and
Sovereignty, and in order to this all worldly Stratagems are made use of; so
that it is hard to judge whether their Capitol or their Church be better
founded. A Man's Head (we know) did denominate the one, and I am sure it lies at
the Foundation of the other; except you will say the Old Serpent gets in to help
the Subtilty of it, and to mix his poison with the Invention. Indeed they may
boast of their Politics thus improved. But whoever will survey the whole Model
of their Religion, or impartially view their Discipline and Practice, he shall
find Truth is hid by them for carnal ends, which adds new height to the sin.

3. The third and last aggravation is drawn from the effects that follow this
violence offered to Truth.

Whoever shall suppress the power of Religion in himself, does thereby contract
a hardness in his soul to commit iniquity, and lives a continued scandal to his
Brethren; but whosoever shall suppress Truth by a Law, he thereby proclaims his
defiance of it, and employes all his force to six Error and Corruption in the
World. How can Injustice rise higher than this case! for it is a flat war
against Heaven; a public Invasion of each man's privilege; it is a digging of
the Eyes out of that Head, which should be general in its shine; and a reducing
of things to a strange Chaos; where the confusion is far worse (when Truth and
Falsehood, Good and Evil are not known) than when Heaven and Earth lay
undistinguished. O how sad and deplorable is Men's case, to be left in ignorance
of their way to Eternal Happiness! Who can possibly attain to Life without a
knowledge of it before hand, or be brought from the power of Satan unto God,
except their eyes be first opened, and their Spiritual Blindness removed? There
is no altering of Gods Methods to save, nor of the course of his Spirit to
convert men; who begins in an act of Conviction upon the Understanding, and
conveys by it to the Will its sanctifying operation; so that without
enlightening there can be no renewing of the inner man, and by consequence no
fitting or preparing of him for Glory. So then look where Truth is hid, there
so many souls are buried, and descend by degrees from one Gulf into another.
Till the Prison be broke, and light again restored, a recovery is impossible.
Therefore when such a General ruin is the issue of Religions Captivity, the
crime of detaining it must needs be heinous, and arise in proportion to those
mischiefs that are caused.

I could alledg the same instance I before mentioned, as a pregnant proof to
show how destructive it is to a people that Truth should be withheld, and an
Inquisition established to keep off that Trial. Hence multitudes perish for
lack of Knowledge, and wanting a requisite Faith (which a blind Credulity takes
the place of) are in all the folly of it condemned. But light they pretend
wounds men, and Scripture (if public) deceives, many wresting it to their own
destruction; a liberty (say they) of Christian knowledge is but a Curse and a
rank Field for several Heresies to spring up; whence it is better to root it
out, and thereby hinder the growth of tares. But an Objection of this kind is
easily answered: for there was never any thing of great esteem and use for man's
Life, but it bred a difference in opinion. As Physic intended for the cure of
Bodies, and Philosophy for the health of Souls, are both fruitful of many
questions; yet none in his wits would avoid Physic or Philosophy, because of
different Sects and Parties they breed; so neither should the free use of
Scripture be condemned, in regard of differences amongst men; which proceed not
so much from their study of contention, as from a variety in their abilities to
understand. Farther, were this charge of theirs valid to null the force of the
rule, let then the great Eye of the Firmament be pulled out, because he raises
vapors as well as enlightens: The vapors that are raised he owes to the
Earth, but enlightening must be ascribed to his own Body. Would we certainly
know the reason why the Gospel is hid? It is jealousy and fear of being
reformed: An evil eye will not bear Light, nor a diseased Conscience retain it:
Light reproves and convinces where it comes; for this cause they keep it close,
dealing with Truth as the Tyrians did with their God, whom they fettered with a
strong Chain, lest (if free) he should leave their City, and take the Enemies
side.

Hitherto I have spoken of the Charge; whose greatness does appear from the
treason that is in the Act, from the baseness of the motives, and from the
murdering nature of the effects: proceed we to speak a little of the justness
of the Sentence that is here denounced against those who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness.

It may perhaps be counted a disproportionable reward by some, that wicked men's
finite Acts should be everlastingly punished: But did they farther regard them
as Acts of Strength where the Will governs, Acts of Enmity where Revelation is
opposed, they would not so readily complain of the rigor of that Judgment.
Besides there is an absolute necessity for such a Sentence to secure Religion
in the World, since the bounds of Christianity would be quickly past over, were
not infinite terrors the fence to keep Travelers in. And what seems more
loudly to call for it, than the sin I have already discoursed of? or how shall
the authority of Truth be maintained, the honor of God vindicated, and the
injuries done to our Brethren avenged, but by so signal a punishment? Take thy
measures of the offense from the Object: in that Glass thou may discern its
full stature. He that quenches Light; strives to destroy the God of it; which
being so high a provocation, the same God is solicited to exercise his
Omnipotence in a revenge. The Princes of this World would be satisfied to the
utmost, when their Subjects daringly rebel; only their want of power causes a
weakness in their blows: God that can take the extremity of a payment when an
affront is offered him, pursues but the will of a Sovereign in doing so.

Did he indeed hide Truth from us, we might likewise be hid from his Justice:
but when he clearly propounds it to us, and enables our Wills to close with it,
here we inexcusably offend. Now we say we see, therefore our sin remains; now
we confess we are assisted by Heaven, therefore Heaven is absolved when it
punishes. May we not with shame own that reproof which God delivered against
Israel, Your destruction is of your selves? May we not apply what he had spoken
against Jerusalem, What could have been done more for my Vineyard that was not
done? For he has taught us by his Word, awakened us by his Rod, invited us by
his Bounty, offered himself to us by his Grace, while we desperately forsake
our own mercy. Even the worst of men taste of his Goodness; They find his
Spirit in their Consciences to check, in their Minds to guide, in their Wills
to allure them; he wooes, he sollicits, he waits, all our Faculties he besets,
that he might draw us over to the Government of his Laws. He is always free and
communicative of his Treasures, but it is man's guilt cuts off the spring. Tax
not then the Method of Gods proceedings, that summons into an extraordinary
Court the gross abuser of his Talents; but reflect sadly upon the sinfulness of
thine own ways, that causes Grace to alter its shape, and the face of a Savior
to be transfigur'd with darkness.

I shall close this point with an Inference from the whole.

I suppose none will expect in this place I should attempt a description of
Divine Wrath, which though it be revealed from Heaven, is yet hid in the manner
of execution. So Lightning is discerned by its brightness when it strikes,
though the way of its working is not seen. How the Fire below by an Almighty
breath will be kindled, and yet kept by the same breath from consuming the
Sinner, it is not for us to explain; but certainly the Wound, the Smart, the
Plague is intolerable, wherever the weight of Gods Justice falls. And they of
all men will feel its burden, that bring Light to their punishment; whereby
they are forced to acknowledge the double calamity they are pressed with, namely
Wrath not to be shunned, and Sin not to be pleaded for. Here the Sword cuts
deep, enters the very marrow and spirits, and renews continually its edge with
piercing. Who is able to meet Vengeance in its assaults, and Light in its
convictions? Is not their force strong, nay irresistible where they come?
Behold! the one makes, and the other quickens our Hell; the one binds us fast,
and the other heats our Furnace.

I know the Theme I now insist on is not suited to a Scoffers ear, because not
suited to his designs. What have we to do (says an Epicure) with a warning of
Gods Justice, that chastises all our delights, and mingles gall with our
pleasures? If Religion must be preached up, let Grace and Mercy be revealed:
Those have a healing quality in them, and like Beds of spices refresh with
their opening; but Treasures of Wrath, and the Pains of another World, these
like noisome pits do punish us in our searching. Thus he would secure his way
of sinning to himself, and remove all sting from his conscience.

But alas! his arts are in vain; were he freed from any outward sounds of the
Ministry of the Word, yet his mind is still checked with a future Judgment, and
by fits submits to the Revelation. Indeed how can it be otherwise? for the
notions of God and his Justice are twisted together in our Souls; and the same
impression that convinces us of his Being, convinces us too of his Wrath
against sin: nothing remains but that the eternity of it appear, and when that
is effected, the Soul necessarily yields, and witnesses its surrender by those
pungent acts of reflecting.

We suppose now adays Atheism to abound, and fortify that supposition by our
frequent discourses to confute it; but if there be such a Leprosy amongst
Christians, it does not so much seize the head as the heart, which is the seat
of the Devils Disease; and he cares not to spread it farther in his Children.
All our crime is, not that Divine Characters in us are lost, but only hid in
our souls: Truth we bury by our practice, though we feel it lives to our
torment. And God grant we be not punished for our Ingratitude with outward
darkness by a removal of his Candlestick from amongst us. Do we now pride our
selves in this, that we enjoy mercy? but let us also regard the dangerous
neighborhood of Vindictive Justice, when that Mercy is despised. What
Attribute is there can rescue us from the stroke, when Goodness will not
defend? Is it Power we may flee to? but that determines it self to destroy: Is
it Wisdom? but that contrives the way of destroying: Is it Holiness? but that
justifies the proceeding; whence Goodness alone is the security of the Sinner:
That Altar of Refuge God himself has set up to stop the course of his own
Vengeance. And yet even here we are not safe, because our abuse forfeits the
Privilege; all the protection of it is lost through our stubbornness of
offending; whereby we become guilty of a mad Sacrilege, when we pull down the
Sanctuary that might save us. There is no sin so aggravating as what strikes at
God in an Evangelical Revelation: for here we offend against his last and best
method of drawing us to him.

You are all diggers in Truths Mine, and have your toil paid with those
pleasures you find there; but where ought it to be seen in its greatest beauty,
if not amongst those that chiefly discover it? All kind of Truth has charms
upon its face to get Lovers, but the Truth of Religion has a Divine Image upon
it to win Souls, and an Eternal Dowry to hold them: Blind are we if we resist,
absurd if we refuse such a Temptation. The Duty I here press is very
seasonable; for the Object you see deserves Love, ay and the courage of Love to
pursue it. How can Lusts or Fears take room in a Christian, that has such high
Motives to govern him! Propound to thy self Good and Evil in their full
latitude here; swell them to their biggest bulk; dress them in their choicest
colors and shows, they sink to nothing with a religious comparison: Heaven
melts away all the paint of a present delight, and Hell renders all the Vizards
of outward danger contemptible; so that neither the one, nor the other, can
stir a passion in the Soul when our thoughts are well planted.

Therefore if either the Mercy of a God can move, or the Wrath of Almighty can
bind us; if the Scepter of Grace can persuade, or the Lightning of Justice
terrify, if Life, if Death be of any moment to us, let us be fast maintainers
of the Truth, and commend our Profession to the world by that Infallible stamp
of our lives.

The Second Discourse.
2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves from
all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God.


IN the last verse of the preceding Chapter (to which these words chiefly
refer) we find what a gracious promise God makes to his People, when He assures
them (if they separate from sin) in what a glorious manner He will receive
them; allowing them the noblest Privilege a Creature can have, and the best
security to maintain it. For the Promise runs thus, I will be a Father unto
you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty

Now the former of these Titles speaks not only the nearness of our Creator,
but all the bounty of his Grace: the latter declares not only a height our
Natures are raised to, but an equal advancement of our Hopes; and the Lord
Almighty (added in the close) is the best Security against Fear, since a Father
assuming it to himself, does thereby direct its influence to save us.

I grant Power to be dreadful of it self, and Omnipotence much more; but let
the name of Mercy be joynd, all the pleasantness of its luster is cast on it:
we can then view it as a calm Sea, where breadth and depth grow delightful, by
reason of the gentleness of the Current: so when an Almighty Lord confirms this
to us, that He will treat us like Sons, we can then cheerfully contemplate the
Attribute of his Greatness, because all the Majesty of it is allayed with his
condescending goodness to Mankind. This then being everywhere offered in the
Gospel (that perfect Model of Divine love) what is the Fruit we should return
to our God, but such a work of obedience that prepares and fits us for what is
promised; that stamps upon us Gods Image in our Souls, and conveys with that
Stamp our right to Glory? Having therefore these Promises, etc.

We may observe in the words three particulars.

1. A Motive. 2. A Duty. 3. The Manner of performing it.
The Motive answers our utmost desires; for it consists of Divine Promises.

The Duty contains the best preparatives; for it lies in purifying of Flesh and
Spirit.

Lastly, The Manner of performing it affords the surest marks to undeceive us;
for it is a Perfecting of Holiness in Gods Fear.

The First persuades, the Second qualifies, and the Third distinguishes our
Religion from the Worlds.

I begin with the Motive, as it powerfully persuades to Christian Practice:
Having therefore these Promises -- Where we may note by the way, how allowable
it is in our Christian Profession to regard the Titles and Privileges of it for
the better encouragement of our service. It is not a mercenary, but a rational
act to eye a reward in any action we perform; much more the reward of eternal
Blessedness; since the very End of our Faith (with St. Peter) is the Salvation
of our Souls. Moses (the greatest Prophet of the Jews, and a Type of our Lord
Christ) had a respect to the recompense of reward; and this our Apostle St.
Paul commands us in another place to run that we may obtain: so that to bid us
do Gods Commandments merely for the Beauty of Holiness which is in them,
without looking upon the Promises for our support, is to make all our Religion
a poor thin Speculation, when it affords us no prospect; and to turn our
Obedience into an uncomfortable slavery, by cutting off those helps the Gospel
propounds for our Devotion.

But for the better handling of the Motive (here laid down) I shall consider
Two things.

1. The Nature of Man's will that is to be moved.

2. The fitness of Gods Promises to inflame it.

1. For the nature of man's Will; How free soever it be in its acting, yet it
has always Good for the object of its choice; nor can Evil (as such) be
possibly desired. Nay, it is Truth of Good Man properly seeks; but that
Appearances and Colors should more often allure us, it is rather the effect of
error and weakness, than the genuine product of our Wills. As the Understanding
affects what ought to be known, so the Will affects what ought to be coveted;
only the sensual part in us overrules, that stops the one in its proper
pursuit, and spoils the motion of the other.

We all find in our selves, how earnestly we desire some chief Good, and
therefore presently close with Happiness proposed; but if this Happiness be
inquired into what it is, then indeed we fall off and divide; which arrises
from the corruptness of men's affections, that inclining them several ways,
teach them to set up several Objects, where they wretchedly wander and turn
aside, and so miss of that which in the general notion they seek after. Yet for
all this the Will of Man as it follows Reason (for so it differs from Appetite)
is disposed by it to follow the best grounds, and allow particularly of that
Good which does most conduce to its perfection.

And so I proceed to show in the second place.

2. The fitness of Gods Promises to inflame Man's Will.

This will appear in that they contain all those Topics of persuasion that can
possibly belong to any Promise: such are Excellency of Good, Infallibility of
Obtaining, and a Miserable defect as to both these in any other offer besides.

Now we need not prove in the First place the intrinsic Excellency of what is
promised, since that rich offer of Adoption includes in it whatever Gift an
All-sufficient Being can bestow. For hereby we are translated into Gods own
Family, and invested with suitable Privileges as his Children. All things are
here allowed us that can be hoped for from a Father of Love, and from a Lord of
Power; which combining together their proper acts, complete the Riches of a
Christians Inheritance. In the Old Testament Father is not a name that God was
styled by, but only Lord; and the Title the Jews had was that of a Servant:
which though it take honor from their relation to such a Master, yet it
imports in it self all the Burden of Duty: But in the New, where Father and
Lord are both joined, and to become Sons and Daughters, is the Privilege of his
People; this speaks at once the Ease of their Service, and the Comfort of their
Hopes as to a future enjoying. Indeed God shows in this Covenant of Grace his
utmost contrivance to draw us to him. As it was the Consultation of his Wisdom
at first to make, so it is here the labor of his Love to invite us; for which
end He reveals his Treasures, opens his Stores, sets out Heaven in its chief
Lights; any, converts himself to a Reward. He desired emptiness to become Man,
that He might take again fullness to enrich him. Is it then Life, Joy, Liberty,
Glory, or any other Good we count excellent? Behold! the Purchase of it by him
who propounds to us these blessings; and having already widened our Faculties
for desire, He farther enables our Natures to receive.

Next let us regard the Infallibility of Obtaining, which cannot but render a
Promise as exceeding worthy to be prized.

The worth and excellency of any Good is a sure foundation of our esteem; but
our certainty of having it is that which fixes our Love, and crowns our
Endeavors in pursuing it. Now this certainty of ours, as to what God promises,
is built upon two great Attributes, Truth and Omnipotence; which are like
Buttresses to support our Faith and our Hope; the one freeing us from all
jealousies of a deceit, the other from all dread of a disappointment. How can
we distrust or fear Gods failing us, that is every way qualified to save!
First, the Covenant He makes is framed by his Love; then Truth writes it down;
afterward Power comes in to seal up the Assurance; so that no room is left for
any doubt or scruple, since all his Promises are sure; nor will Man's
expectation ever shame him, if Sin does not, the only blot of our hopes, as
well as the stain of our pleasures. Nothing but Sin can possibly defeat us: it
is Sin which undermines all our Blessings, alters our claim and property in
Bliss, and gives the Threatenings in Scripture Authority to succeed. In him the
Promises are Yea and Amen, that is, firm and steadfast: and when we fall off by
a wilful Apostasy, their stedfastness still remains in their own nature; only
the benefit of Application is lost to Us. But if we once turn to our God by a
true Repentance, if we approve our worship of him by the sincerity of our
hearts, and the holiness of our lives, lo! they are firm and steadfast to us
also: God cannot in that case exclude us from Heaven; for we bring him the
condition of happiness he requires from us; we produce the Grace that leads
thither, and know it is impossible He should either deny his own terms, or
refuse the likeness of his Perfections.

The last thing to be considered in Gods Promises, is, That He has provided
against all Temptations from other offers, by dispersing a Vacuum in things,
and leaving nothing here below fit to stir or move us, except you will say defect
of Substance, and want of Certainty are charms. Were any Good upon Earth
adequate to our souls, had it worth and certainty to attract our desires, then
I grant we might justify the byas of our inclinations that way; because the
vifibleness of what is offered us is a farther motive to turn them thither; but
when vanity, nay, vanity of vanities is superscrib'd upon all the Creation,
here is not the least color for our adherence. What is there I pray in this
World can be exhibited to us, but some Scenes of Good, and Images of an
Inheritance? Thus Christ by the Great Tempter was entertained with Landskips
and Shows, and Kingdoms that were drawn in Airy Figures, where the Delight
could not recompense the Emptiness of the Prospect. The like emptiness is
spread through every thing here; and for any one to reckon upon a settled
Possession, it is like casting anchor upon a wave, or binding the wheels of
Times motion: In a word, such a Task that has an impossibility in the Act to
baffle the Design. But where the Promises are of God there is weight and
stedfastness to persuade us: weight that can fix all the extravagancy of
desire, and stedfastness strengthen our patience of expecting. Thus you see the
force of the Motive to confirm that Inference he makes from it.

I proceed now to handle in the second place.

2. The Duty which contains in it the best Preparations for receiving those
Promises: Let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and
Spirit.

Where we may take notice,

1. Of the Act, Cleanse.

2. Of the Subject about which it is employed, Flesh and Spirit, that is Body
and Soul; so that a thorough Baptism of the whole man is required; and such a
washing in the Fountain of Repentance that purges away inward and outward
defilements.

1. The Act is remarkable, (...), Let us cleanse: a word mentioned in the
Heathen Schools by way of Speculation, but prescribed to the Jewish and
Christian Church as a rule of Practice.

The Heathens were not altogether ignorant of it, when they styled Virtue it
self to be (...), a Cleansing; which the Platonists give us this account of,
namely, That it is a retirement of the Soul within, and a separating from the
Body in its motions, when Reason acts freely and undisturbedly, nor has any
tincture from the Passions to defile it: such a state say they of the Soul is
pure and divine. This I confess may in some sort be called a Purgation, but it
is very defective in another sense, where they suppose no guilt to be washed
off, which both Soul and Body have contracted: They regard only a refining of
the Intellectual Powers, but seek no purifying of any sinful uncleanness. And
this must be chiefly imputed to that natural pride they all had, that they
would not allow of a corrupt spring; as we must owe it wholly to their
ambition, that they studied to advance Reason in its actings; therefore the
Fountain of sin being unsearch'd, we cannot admit them for Judges here; but
ought to consult the Jewish and Christian Church for the true notion of
Cleansing.

In the Jewish Church the outward Ceremony was enjoined, but withal Typical of
the inward: whence we read in Exodus of an express Command before the delivery
of the Law, That they should sanctify themselves and wash their clothes; from
which Precept their Doctors gather that Tenet and Custom they had for
Baptizing all whom they admitted to their Church and Covenant.

Now that they should thus be washed in order to receive the Law that was
published, it argued both a greatness of guilt in the parties, and an absolute
necessity of repenting, when not so much as a spotted Garment was allowed to be
near that Mount that quaked and trembled; lest the Lightnings of the place
should break forth to consume, and the Trumpet (there heard) proclaim nothing
but Execution. If such a preparation were requisite for hearing Gods Will, much
more was it for obeying: whence those Sacrifices of old (He commanded) were
first to derive their cleanness from the Offerer, and so had their force of
Legal Atonement. Were the Offerer not sanctified beforehand, all his Worship
was spoiled by reason of the spots and blemishes that overspread it: The
foulness of his hand laid a Curse upon the Expiation, and by slaying the Beast,
he destroyed the Sacrifice. Therefore a strict way of Cleansing was observed in
the outward man, whereby God led them to the Spiritual Duty; as he taught them
by Temporary Promises to have a taste and relish of the Heavenly. And lest
they should at any time forget what was signified, their Purifyings were
frequently repeated on them: representing to them in the same washing New
Guilt, and a New Obligation.

But the Christian Purifying is of a higher nature, as being outwardly but
once; to show We are buried with Christ by Baptism into Death, that like-as He
was raised from the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness
of Life. Here is no need of sprinkling Garments, and Vessels, nor of separating
from the Camp upon an Uncleanness, when the whole work of Holiness is fully
exhibited, and one solemn Rite introduces the performance.

The work divides it self into two parts, according to the division of man's
nature, whereof the first is

1. A cleansing from the Filthiness of the Flesh.

And good reason is there to begin with it: For though Sin be properly the
Souls act, yet by the Body it first appears; nay, this Body of ours, being
joined with the Soul, becomes rather a Minister than an Instrument in its
working; such a Minister that continually provides fuel for the Hearts lusts,
and makes the corruption of them visible to the world. If then the Murdering
Sword be justly cast off, and the Cup broke whereby the man has been poisoned,
how much more ought this Principle of Flesh to be cleansed and subdued, that so
deeply shares in the Souls guilt, and proves an active Executioner in it ruin!
I need not mention the several works of it, which the Apostle tells us are
manifest, because they discover themselves with outward stains and inward
impressions upon the consciences of men. Those acts of the outward man, that
express themselves in worshipping an Idol, in Murder, Sacrilege, Revellings,
Lasciviousness and the like, pollute the Body that commits them, and convey
farther the taint of that pollution to the Soul. Nor can Men with all their art
so color and disgrace what is conveyed there, as that the nature of its
deformity should be changed; but the Corruptions of Flesh will still abide
frightful even in the midst of their Conquest. Sin then carrying its own
Conviction, the great Query is, How we should purge it? But to this the
Assistance of Grace, and Man's Resolution is required: the former will not fail
if the latter be present; nor will the latter be wanting if Gods Promises be
the Object. Where these are steadfastly beheld, they will surely melt and
dissolve us, powerfully break our rocky hearts, and engage us anew in a Life of
Holiness.

Goodness is commanding in its own nature, and enthrones it self in Man's Will;
nor needs it other force for keeping its Sovereignty, but what it continually
carries by charming the affections. And this Goodness is fully seen in Gods
Promises: all the Vail is taken off, which is generally cast upon Providence;
and instead of glimpses and half-lights we are allowed a full discovery of
their glory; such a one in its working that can join surprise, delight and
victory together. For all the Graces of a Savior are here shown, and all the
Riches of Eternity are here manifested; which must needs take away the
resistance of Flesh, provided we be fixed in our Contemplations.

Why then are we not serious in weighing these things? why does not Love, nor
Mercy constrain us? I am sure no carnal Temptation can be endued with such
strength: It is seated in Flesh, which is weakness, and only conquers that
Heart which is unprepared. The Question that was put to Pyrrhus when he had in
his head the design of conquering many Kingdoms, may be put to the pursuers of
Sin in those various forms and fashions of Appetite, what it is they intend by
all the Travel they make through a World of Corruption. Perhaps they will say
(as he did, when we have compassed our designs we will the be quiet, and live
to our selves: but to this the reply is strong and forcible; why will they not
be quiet now, and live to themselves in a service of their God, when that
knowledge of evil they seek after is purchased with trouble, and manifest
danger of their Souls? Therefore whether we would consult our own Interest, or
witness our Gratitude to God for his Promises, we are bound to be resolute and
speedy in the cleansing of this Flesh, which at the best is but a burden, and
sin gives it a farther weight to crush and destroy us.

But that we may perform this Duty aright, Two Rules are to be observed by us,
which are here intimated in my Text.

1. That the Object of our cleansing be all. Filthiness of the Flesh.

2. That the work which refers to it, be so effectual, as that no Filthiness
should return.

The first of these is necessary, because indeed without it there is no
cleansing; for wherever Filthiness is but in part washed off, the whole is
still denominated impure. Who will call that Body sound, where the disease
shifts places, but is not altogether removed? No more can we call that Flesh
cleans'd, where Vice changes its seat, but never loses its commanding power. It
is true an Hypocrite may look fair in the worlds eye after a superficial
purging of some corruption; but that cheat he puts upon others alters not the
uncleanness of his own temper. The Character of things remain fixed how
changeable soever be men's Judgments. It is said of Myriam the Leper, that she
appeared white as snow; but none could conclude from that whiteness any thing,
except the malignancy of her disease; where the mass of blood being tainted,
the Body became wan and pale like a Dead Carcass. Such is the whiteness of some
Professors in those half-acts of outward Purity; It is but a Leprous
Hypocrisy, which argues deadness and rottenness within. But in Gods and
Scripture account none are truly clean in the outward man, but those that purge
out every thing which defiles it: in whom the health and complexion is found by
a vigorous expelling of all corruption. In these the Spirit truly works; and
they show their sanctifying Principle to rule in them by an universal effect
that follows it: For thus Gods Spirit acts in Believers, diffusing its virtue
through all parts, nor can any deed pass it uncleansed: But when men solely act
by their own spirit (which has a partial influence) then they single out some
enormous Vice, some provoking Goliath to kill; which were a happy Conquest, did
it make an impression upon the gross of an Army; but alas! here execution is
done, and not at all followed with any weakening in the Body.

Again, the second is necessary, because a Relapse into Filth spoils the fruit
of the former cleansing, and withal doubles the stain. Therefore to prevent a
guilt of that kind in this Body of flesh, it must be our continued work to
subdue it: The only way to assure us of Sins Death, is by persevering to
destroy its Dominion: that Sampson within must be continually shaved; nay the
razor must pierce deep to the very roots, otherwise his strength is not gone.
Little severities upon a remorse are no better than a Drunkards soberness in
his qualms; which he then dies to, but not to his sin: short penances upon
check are but an Adulterers Whip, whereby he lets out Blood to cool a present
Burning, but not to end the Disease. O the Art of a Professor in thus subduing
his carnal motions; when he chooses for a while the method of Rigor, only to
give him ease in new sins! Many can turn Hermits that way; with whom a suspense
of their lust is but a preparative to fresh vigor: they endure much to sin
more; and make use of hardship to become helpful to their corruptions, as
Frosts and Snows are to Seed; which they seem to lock up and bury in the
ground, but indeed improve it for multiplying. If this be a cleansing from all
filthiness of the flesh, then let them that study an increase of their lust be
styled the only Champions to overcome it. But would thou have the true glory
of it? then deny thy self constantly in a Temptation, and hold out to the last
in the discipline of Repentance: So this Body of Sin will appear utterly
defeated when thou bring Time as a witness of thy Victory.

But there remains in the second place another sort of cleansing.

2. From all filthiness of the Spirit. This is not so much considered in the
world; but surely there is in some respects more of sin, and consequently more
of defilement than in Carnal corruption. Such are those inward spots, of Pride,
Malice, Envy, Hypocrisy, Distrust of God; to conclude, all those sinful
motions which it is proper for Spirits to be guilty of.

The Enormity of them will appear upon Three accounts.

1. In that they are the spring of all outward filthiness. For from the Heart
it is (or the spiritual part in man) that Fornication, Drunkenness and
Blasphemy flow; whence if these and the like sins have all the foulness of
tincture on them, the Sink whence they issue must be much more defiled. Were
evil Thoughts effectually restrained in us, all the stream of carnal wickedness
would be cut off; which made Solomon call for our greatest care over the Heart,
where sinful Imaginations are cherished. Keep thy heart (says he) with all
diligence; for out of it are the Issues of Life; ay and of Death too when it is
not rightly governed in its motions. An evil Heart makes an adulterous Eye, a
deceitful Tongue, a violent Hand: All outward crimes are the Offspring of the
Thoughts; therefore these (being the Parent-sins) are the more aggravated in
their guilt, as the cause of others.

2. In that they are purely the Souls work, and that in its strength, without
the dregs of matter, or the weakness of flesh to interpose.

What Jacob said to Reuben, Thou art my Firstborn, my might, and the beginning
of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power, the
same may be applied to those actions which primarily issue from the Soul. And
so when they prove sinful, they derive from the Dignity of those noble
faculties the greater shame. It is the Devils way thus to offend; and howsoever
he may tempt us to deeds of Flesh, yet he is as to himself only an Agent in
such sins that pollute the mind, and defile the conscience, so that he is a
Rebel in all the height and excellency of Being, and knowing no Body to defile
him, as an Unclean Spirit, he dishonours his nature, and against the God of
Spirits does immediately make war. So then when our hearts are alike stained,
when our Filthiness becomes spiritual, we then bear his Image in the true
Character. Now what can be greater disgrace to our Natures than this is? For
the highest Perfection we can ever arrive to is to be like God; and that is to
resemble him in Holiness, which chiefly consists in the purity of our minds; On
the other side the greatest Fall we can be ever condemned to, is to be like
Satan, and that is to resemble him in Uncleanness, which chiefly consists in
the foulness of our Souls; whence these Souls of ours must needs contract a
great guilt, when bad thoughts do defile them; wherein we carry the very
picture of the Father, and bear his stamp in the crime.

3. As they are the work, so they are the full delight of the Inward man. Here
the Soul centers within it self, and uncontrollably embraces its own actings;
and the secretness of those stains renders them difficult to be cleansed;
whereas these fleshly motions cannot breed any fullness of pleasure; and their
pollutions being evident, do often check the committer with those Three
restraints to a Rational Being, which are Law, Conscience, and Fame. And
therefore changes are many times wrought in the greatest Sinners; but when Sin
once retires to Invisible Garrisons, it is seldom destroyed, because neither
Law nor Fame have here place, and Conscience is too weak to overcome. Upon this
account the labor of cleansing is here necessary, and the Soul must be brought
to encounter it self in all the subtilty of a reforming, that we may present to
our God in Pure Flesh a mortified Spirit.

Now should Uncleanness be inwardly cherished, whatever the outward acts of
sanctity be, they are to be reckoned no better than Pilate's purifying before
the Multitude, when he washed his hands, but suffered the guilt of the most
innocent Blood to pass uncleansed. Yet how many are there that rest in a Shape
and Outside of Piety! a Privilege (if they will call it one) which the Old
Serpent can challenge; who in the midst of his Curse does yet gild his Spots
with fair Light, and in a form of Blessedness lays his Sting. But a Bodily
purging (take it at the best) is only the Preface to a new Life: an
introductory part to true Holiness: It is a Dedication of the Court to prepare
the Offering upon the Altar; and it is the Altar you know sanctifies the Gift;
so it is the Heart that qualifies the performance. If we go no higher than bare
Flesh, we are but like the Bullocks that were cleansed; but if besides that
Purifying we are spiritually Holy, we become like the Priest that sacrificed.

Now to attain such a state as that is, a watchful jealousy is requisite over
our Souls: and here, as we must doubtfully suspect, so we ought immediately to
suppress any springing Temptation. It is easy to cast out the Adversary while
he is weak; such are all Filthy Thoughts in their Infancy; but let them once
spread and grow in the mind, then it is difficult for any one to check and
subdue them. Who knows not what easiness there is in quenching a spark, or
turning as one pleases a little current? But if the Spark gets fuel to feed
on, and enlarges it self into a great Flame, how often does it mock men's labor
and pains to hinder the mischief of its progress? So likewise a little current,
if it be supplied from Floods, and allowed to swell with fresh streams, how
ungovernable is its course! After the same manner do Spiritual Lustings prove
furious and wild, when they get their fuel and supply from the will and
affections flowing in. It is very needful then for thee to guard thy Heart,
which is so apt to breed sin, and so ready to strengthen an evil purpose. But
for the better securing of it, oh labor steadfastly to apprehend thy God, not
only as the accurate Beholder, but as the severe Judge and Punisher of the
Inner man. Indeed God does not exercise such a Visible Judgment upon any
spiritual filthiness in this World, because He is mainly concerned here (as a
Governor) to prevent the mischiefs of outward actions, for the better defense
of humane Fellowship; but when all worldly Societies shall cease, and every one
be summoned to his Tribunal, He will then proceed as a Lawgiver, demanding a
strict account according to the full extent and compass of his Laws; and so
these Spiritual Sins will be visibly punished, in that they are such evident
breaches of his Spiritual Commands. It is my duty then chiefly to prepare for
that Day; nor am I so much to examine the manner of this Government in this
life, as how He will deal with me in another: Since that is the proper state,
wherein I shall be ever fixed and determined, and wherein his Justice (that
summons me) will be clearly revealed. Thus should every one employ his
Meditations, and whoever busies himself in them, he will find this to be the
fruit and success of them, that he will thereby get armor of defense within,
and discourage the Tempter from assaulting.

Thus much for the Duty.

The Third Particular I am to handle is

3. The Manner of performing the Duty enjoined us; namely a Perfecting of
Holiness in Gods Fear: where we may note Two things.

1. The Degree or Measure we should contend after, namely Perfection.

2. The Inward Principle that ought to quicken us, a Godly Fear.

The former shows we need a continual Progress in a Religious course; the
latter shows we need a faithful direction to a right object.

1. For the Degree or Measure we should contend after, this imports no less
than a summoning of all the Powers of the Soul, and the setting of a Task to
our outward members, that both in Mind and Body we may render to our God an
unspotted Sacrifice. Such an Offering (as this is) is not in an instant to be
performed; nor does God so sit any Saint, as that his Initials should be full.
His Justification of a Sinner may be complete in one act, when he gives him a
Legal discharge; but his Sanctifying of us is not thus perfected; because it is
such a work of his Spirit in us, that gradually proceeds to the expelling of
Sin, and takes in our Endeavors to grow up and increase in holy duties. There
is first an Infancy in the new nature, where (all the parts being formed)
Innocence is written as a Character to be kept, but not its Weakness: for a
farther advancement is still looked for; whence the strength of Men and
perfectness of Stature is required in a Christian.

Truly how can we imagine beginnings should suffice, or that we safely can rest
in them, when the remainders of concupiscence within, the temptations without
to which we are subject, the proper fruits and effects of a Faith justifying,
lastly, the necessity of imitating our Divine Pattetn, do all call for labor,
strife and diligence in our Christian race, that we fall not short of Heaven by
but a little entering the way thither? Naaman's washing in Jordan seven times,
as it represented to him the Greatness of his Leprosy, so it represents to us
those repeated acts God expects from us of a naked search into our ways, and
that accompanied with a frequent purging of all the filth we contracted. Here
is an evidence of Gods adopting us that we do (...), that is, finish and bring
to end the work of Holiness: otherwise we are as unsafe in our cleansing, as
those Swine were which the Devil hurried into the Sea, making their first
cleanness and their last destruction to go together.

But we must observe in the second place,

2. The Principle that ought to quicken us, a Godly Fear; and this is the Point
I shall conclude with.

But some may ask why is Fear brought in when Gods Promises are the motive? Is
not Love the natural consequent of such offers, and a Principle too of it self
more binding?

I answer, Love is not the sole consequent, but Fear also, by reason of those
conditions upon which the Promises hang; and this Fear of the Two is more
binding; as urging upon us a sense of danger, and thereby quickening us unto
action; whereas Love without is faint, and altogether languishes in its working.

Now this Principle of Godly Fear excludes utterly the Heathens way of
purifying, as a Rite in its using unclean: For so every thing becomes to an
Unbeliever: It excludes likewise those seeming religious acts of Pretending
Christians, who in the good things they do, have either a dread of Punishment,
or the vanity of Opinion for their Object. The one consists not with this in my
Text, which purely terminates in God alone, and the other destroys all the
notion of a true Worship, when it sets up an Idol of Applause.

Yet thus do Hypocrites boast of Holiness; to some parts of which perhaps Legal
Terrors, or the regard of Men may constrain them; nothing is natural in their
Religion but forced; and the spring of their motion is without them; so that
they are rather to be counted artificial Engines (produced to cast forth water
upon an open burning) than Christians that are free and active at all times to
extinguish the Flame. But if such as these be excluded, how much more the
loosely profane! who cannot be thought to have a touch of this Passion when
they defy God and his Laws. Did a right fear once rule and sway the Conscience,
it were neither possible for vice to be barefaced, nor for Hypocrisy to be
disguised: The awe of a God would shame the one, and strip the other of its
Covering. But behold! the masque, the disguise is not so much the danger of
this Age; we are fallen from shows to a contempt of Christianity, from colors
to open war: our paint is turned to rottenness; and the perfume of our
Profession is become like the air of snuffs, nay the noisome smell of corrupted
Bodies, that can kill at a distance, and by their power of Execution sadly
manifest Death has not destroyed them. O the extremes of Sin! whither is the
triumph and glory of our Religion departed! Is it not now a matter of boasting
to kick at Heaven, while the head at the same time knocks the Earth, and calls
for the opening of a Grave? Is it not the triumph of wit to sport at a Lust,
when it reproaches the Committer in the act, and tells him farther by its sting
that his own scoffs are revenged? But what is it we trust to in this our
offending? God we know is above, has a hand of Justice to strike, nor can any
promise tie it up, when once forfeited by our transgressions. All our shift for
sinning is to hinder Conscience from interposing, by cutting off all
seriousness of thought, and desperately throwing our selves into a Gulf of
pleasure. In the mean time, while we are sunk in ways of iniquity, Judgment is
ripening over us; clouds gather about us thicker and blacker, and the lightning
of Gods wrath is fitted and prepared; nor can we escape the force of it, except
we remove the Seeds of our ruin by a speedy and universal repentance.

The Spartans we read were great Worshippers of the Passions; and therefore had
Temples erected to them; but Fear was the Goddess they chiefly worshipped in
regard of its use and influence to preserve States. Certainly though they erred
in thus dedicating their Temples, yet they did not err in their notion of the
advantage of Fear: but had a godly one fully possessed them, they would much
more have concluded the safety of a Nation to depend on it; as being the surest
Bond of Law, and the only preventer of Gods Plagues. I need not endeavor to
prove either of these; for where such a Fear has due place, it will in the
closest secrecy oblige men to obey, and engage God openly to defend them. But
whether outward prosperity be always the fruit, I shall not enquire: I am sure
the success is of the last day, and the sentence of mercy waits only upon
those that religiously fear to offend. To these no death can be sudden nor
untimely, which alone is the portion of impenitent sinners; who fall often to
the earth with their Youth and with their Sins too as full blown: and being
cast down by a Judgment, are not allowed a space to recover them. Why then will
we abuse the promises that are offered us? There is a Golden thread of them let
down from Heaven, but tied to a Sword with the point over us; and while we are
rioting and indulging the Flesh, the thread is ready to break, and the Sword to
fall on us.

Pardon the harshness of denouncing these things; for soft words are not for
Ministers to deliver: It is your conscience we are bound to strike, whereas
your eyes are enough enlightened. And the Corruption of men's natures requires
this Method, that Promises and Threatenings should be joined, to chastise and
temper our hopes, and settle upon our spirits a right frame. Otherwise we
should boldly presume, and learn no Holiness in Gods Fear, but that Good and
Evil possessing our thoughts, help to quicken us in our Obedience.

So then I beseech you contemplate Divine Love, as withal fatal to the refuser:
join the Father with the Judge, and the Adoption he offers with his Severity in
condemning: farther consider how the Dignity of Humane Nature lies in the
pureness of its faculties, as a Reward follows their Exercise: First you are
advanced by it to be like God, next in that likeness to enjoy him: Last of all,
search out every motive to press you to Holiness, which if you enter upon and
persevere in, the same God (who was Gracious in making, and is Faithful in
performing what He has promised) will enstate you in the Inheritance of Sons,
and add Eternity for its Crown.

The Third Discourse.
St. John 6.68. Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou
have the words of Eternal Life.


IF you examine the scope of these words, they are a full and passionate reply
to that Question Christ made in the verse foregoing, where He tries the Faith
of his Apostles, whether they would constantly adhere to his Laws, or with the
rest of the Multitude forsake him? For we read in this Chapter how that great
Crowd of people which followed him, began now to shrink and fall off, because
his Doctrine was (like his Person) no ways suited to a carnal Apprehension.
And the color they had for this their Apostasy was some supposed absurdity of
what he taught; as when He styled himself the Living Bread which came down from
Heaven, verse. 51.
and whoever eat of that Bread should live for ever: So that we find upon an
enquiry that a bare Metaphor was the quarrel, and a Figure of Speech the
foundation of the Controversy.

But waving the subject matter of their Dispute (which is at large described in
the Chapter) it will not be impertinent to observe the strange levity and
ingratitude of the Vulgar, who being the worst judges of a discourse, will yet
presume to sit upon it; and if it once crosses their fancy, they are ready to
throw off the Authority of their Lord; ay and such an Authority, that was
before highly commended to them in all the Wonders of Mercy. Hence it is said (
v. 66.) That many of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him.

Upon so general a revolt He appears at that accident unconcerned: whatever
pity He had for their persons, yet He leaves them to be punished by that flight
they had made; but as for the Twelve (whom He had particularly chosen for his
Attendants) these He deals with as a Friend, sounds their Loyalty, and by his
very seeming to doubt of it, shows all the Tenderness of a Savior. Then said
He to the Twelve, Will ye also go away? Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to
whom shall we go? Thou have the words of Eternal Life.

In this Answer of St. Peter's we may consider Two Particulars.

1. The Sense of all the Apostles delivered by one of them, which was plainly
this, That they ought not to seek another Master.

2. The Reason of their Choice drawn from the singular excellency of his
Teaching, Thou have the words of Eternal Life. --

I begin with their General Sense, Lord to whom shall we go? which kind of
speech does imply, that should they offer to leave Christ, yet a Master was
needful to be their Guide in Religion. For such is man's weakness and poverty by
nature, that he requires somewhat without him to rest on for Happiness: but it
here farther fignifies, that they were already fixed upon a Teacher, and could
find out nothing comparable to him they heard. This is the scope and meaning of
the Question.

From the Matter thus declared and from the Occasion of doing it we may note
Two things.

1. The Nobleneness of a right Faith when once seated in the Soul.

2. The Authority of Truth notwithstanding the Opposition of the World.

1. The Nobleness of a right Faith, etc. -- And it is this, That it sets upon
Difficulties and conquers them: Let the times of Profession be bad and
reproachful too for those numbers that backslide, yet he that is well grounded
in his Belief, has his thoughts higher planted. He is above the Poor
Circumstance of time, and beyond the Contagion of an Example. Now the rules
that govern most men in their course are Private Interest and Public Opinion;
so that like Puppits they move, and the principle of their acting is without
them; but he that is led by neither of these, but makes Religion his Interest,
and obedience to it his Fame, he may be called a Believer indeed: for he
expresses the Man and the Christian together. Others are but Reeds in their
Station, shaken with every wind, and marked for their barrenness while they
stand: but he is a Tree set by the Rivers of water, that has depth of root and
fruitfulness to crown it. Yet the constancy he has is not any stiffness of
mind, that proceeds from the prejudice of Education; for that is no better than
the stiffness of earth, which is senseless in that condition; but it is a
vigorous judgment sways him to the act, and confirms his faculties in working.

I grant it very difficult at first to believe, because of the Enmity of Flesh,
and the Sophistry of Reason, which is Flesh set out in another figure; but
where Faith gets an entrance, there flesh is subdued and reason answered, and
the heart comes prepared to embrace Christianity in its hardest terms. For this
is a Principle that humbles and lays us low, and discovers our weakness to our
selves: It forces us to confess that God has depths of his own we cannot
fathom; and since we allow our assent to Mysteries in Nature, no less ought we
to do so to Mysteries in Religion, though not to be explained by our narrow
understanding. This was the Apostles case, who learnt to submit to the Doctrine
that was preached, and derived from that submission a courage to adhere. Let us
consider next

2. The Authority of Truth notwithstanding the Opposition of the World.

God never left himself without witness in the midst of the greatest
Apostacies. He had Noah to be his Champion in the Old World, Elijah in Israel,
and Apostles in the Infancy of the Christian Church, that kept up Religion from
perishing. Truth and Light have this property common to them both, that as they
are apt to be clouded, so they have virtue to break through those Mists that
interpose. There is a natural Sovereignty in them both, and they seem to be
born to an Universal Inheritance: though they may be as Strangers and Exiles in
some lands, yet in others they take the Possession.

We all know the force of a good title, how it prevails. If a Prince of
undoubted right be cast off by the vile treachery of his own Subjects, yet his
Title will still rule; powerfully possessing the peoples hearts, and as
strongly warring in the conscience of an Usurper. The like command has the
Cause of Truth amongst Men, and a surer too; for a People may be scourged by a
total loss of their Prince; but Gods Faithfulness is engaged to maintain the
Dominion of the other. He that created and established all things by the word
of his power, has spoken this, that Truth shall for ever endure; and in order
to accomplish what He has spoken, he employs his Spirit to work; gives us
natures inquisitive and reflecting, whereby we are stirred up to the duties of
Piety; so that as long as the Spirit abides (which is eternal) as long as
Reason and Conscience last (which are essential to our frame) the Characters of
Religion must for ever remain. Whether it be of the Essence of Gods Church to
be always visible, I shall not discuss; but the foundation upon which it is
built, can certainly never fail, since He is God that is laid there. For other
Foundation can no man lay, than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ.

Should we now on the other side consider the growth of Error, and the fair
show it makes in the world, we cannot conclude hence that it has strength to
continue. For strength presupposes a real existence in the Subject; whereas
Error is of it self a mere nothing, and ows to Ignorance that it appears. It is
a Ghost that walks in the dark, whose body is framed by our fancies, and when
day comes, it vanishes with them. But to Truth a being pertains, and it
constantly strives to open its way into Light, to reveal that Being to others,
which when effected, it gloriously spreads, and enlarges its Empire with that
discovery.

Before I pass to the second Head of my Discourse, I shall briefly dispatch one
Quere, which is this: Why Simon Peter (that singly spoke here) should so
readily proclaim his own Faith, and undertake likewise for the Faith of the
Apostles, though a Judas was of their number.

Now the reason of this I can only resolve into those Two Graces, wherein he
excelled Zeal and Charity. The one made him forward in a public Confession of
himself, the other in a Defense of his Brethren. Zeal is a fire that will be
sure to get uppermost; whence our Apostle being heated with it, comes out first
for his Lord; but then lest the ambition of that act should urge him to pursue
his own Glory, he religiously suppresses it by his Charity to others. It is the
nature of Charity to be kind, and free from envy; not to seek her own but
another praise: It treats all persons alike, except some visible fruits do
distinguish them; and brings a Garment along with it of an equal breadth to
hide every right Professor; in a word, it is a generous Virtue, enobling our
works of piety, and making us beneficial to the world.

This was the temper of our blessed Apostle, whom many are prone enough to
imitate for his Zeal; but if this latter Grace be wanting, they ought to
suspect the birth of that flame; since the true Gospel-fire that comes down
from Heaven has a comforting warmth in it that heals, and tends not to kill,
but to save.

I come now to my Second Head, where we have

2. The reason of their choice drawn from the singular Excellency of Christ's
Teaching -- Thou have the words of Eternal Life.

It might be expected that poor Fishermen (as these were) should have had Souls
as low as their Trade: that they should be far from conceiving, and farther yet
from pursuing a state of eternity; whose great end and business before was but
the small gain of a draught; neither knew they how to prize any greater wealth,
than what a Lake or a Brook contains. But see how Religion exalts them; what
high thoughts are now formed, and what vast desires are raised in them by the
force of their Masters Discipline; so that they begin to despise a present
Good, and breath after nothing but a future Reward. Temporal Dominion was below
their aim; for who can imagine they should propound to themselves an Earthly
Monarchy, that stuck only to Christ for an Invisible Crown? Truly the manner of
his appearance in this our Flesh, and the nature of his Doctrine taught them no
other: His appearance was so mean that it was but the form of a Servant which
He assumed; Again, his Doctrine was so spiritual, that He challenged only a
Kingdom distinct from the World, Joh. 17.36, Luke 9.2.
and sent only his Disciples upon that Errand to preach it.

But the Pretended Successors of St. Peter (who here follows his Lord for his
Heavenly Ministry) can arrogantly pursue a worldly claim; as if Earth were in
their Charter as well as Heaven, and therefore they ought to take both by
violence, pull down Kings and Princes, and advance themselves to an arbitrary
Greatness. Whose Apostles I pray are they that would thus rule? or by what
right of donation do the Kingdoms of the world belong to them? For we do not
read they were any of those Gifts Christ gave unto men, but only the Devils
offer, 4 Mat. 8.
which He rejected. I am sure such as these are the Greatest Persecutors of our
Lord. The putting of a Reed into his hand before he should suffer, was but the
mocking of his Power; but to put a Sword into his hand that is come to save us,
is a flat denial of his Goodness, and so they impiously number him with the
Transgressors. I need not farther enlarge on this Subject, nor demonstrate the
wildness of their Tenet, which both our Saviors Life, and manner of
Government, the Commands and Practice of the Apostles, the Examples of
primitive Martyrs, and in a word, the Profession of the best Saints has
condemned. But this by the way -- It here lies upon me to prove how Christ's
words are the proper words of Eternal Life; which may be easily made out from
that Gospel he has delivered to his Church; wherein we find him.

1. A Minister, in that He has fully revealed it to the World.

2. A Purchaser, in that he has acquired a right to bestow it.

3. A Worker, in that He has made the Doctrine of it effectual to Salvation.

I. A Minister, in that he has fully revealed it to the World, as He did also
the Doctrine of Eternal Death, which I before handled. And He has revealed this
Life in a way of Authority and Sweetness proper to himself, at once forcing us
to assent to the truth of that evidence, and raising our affections to pursue
it. He therefore delivered it in such a Style that might powerfully engage us
both ways: as when He did not only expressly mention the thing it self, but
likewise described it by such inviting Characters, as Joy, Glory, the Kingdom
of Heaven; nay, in a peculiar Emphasis, the Kingdom where Life and Immortality
are enthroned.

Now who is there but must acknowledge the blindness that covered the Gentile
World, till this Great Prophet came to enlighten us? For we sat in darkness,
and in the very shadow of Death, which encompassed us round and beset us, and
took away from us any farther Prospect; not to be opened nor enlarged, till
this Light came, which gave us Knowledge and Salvation. What force soever there
may be in Natural Religion (which some boast of) yet the great Masters of those
Schools which taught it, were miserably dimsighted as to any future state of
Life and Happiness, except we will say a walk in Elysium for Wandering Souls, or a
wretched Pilgrimage through several Bodies, be a proper Condition to be
desired. Yet thus did the best of those Writers dream, who apprehended well
enough a God and his Worship; and though they might deliver fine notions of
both, yet fancy came in to corrupt all with gross devices and foolish mixtures
in their Reward. Hence the morality even of their Chiefest was suited to their
Principles; that is, They had the Shadow of a Good Life, as they had the Shadow
of Immortality. The greatest height of virtue they ever arrived to, was but to
disguise their Passions, and by stopping some foul effects of them to consult a
Fame of well-doing, whereas the seed and root of a corruption was still
cherished, and lust secretly ruled in their hearts and lives, for want of a
discovery which we Christians enjoy about the eternal Wages of our deeds. Upon
this account Tertullian and the rest of the Ancients had sufficient ground to
condemn their choicest Philosophy, since the study of it was followed with no
other fruit than this, That it served for Paint to hide Vice, but proved no
Antidote to expel it.

But if Natural Reason did thus fail, must we also complain of any defect in
those Inspirations which Gods own Prophets were assisted with? No; for the
words they delivered were words of life: only the Jews that heard them were in
their nonage, bred up at first with milk and honey, and that Infant-food of a
Carnal Promise: and therefore it was judged fit by Divine Wisdom to wean them
by degrees from these outward things, and not allow them a Spiritual Diet of
perfect happiness, till they arrived at the strength of a Masculine
Understanding. But the Prophets themselves had that state revealed to them in
all its clearness; only that Discipline, which their Hearers were under causi'd
it to be dispensed to them by a Figurative application.

But Christ came in the very fullness of time, when Life and Immortality were to
be shown; and He answered that fullness by his own Teaching: so that all those
Prophets who went before him, served but like the light of a Morning Star to
usher in the brightness of that discovery. Let us consider him in the next
place.

II. As a Purchaser, in that He acquired a right to bestow it. And this Title
He has to such a donation by that Price he laid down for his own People, when
He bought them out of their old Thraldom, and cancelled that forfeiture they
had made of Life Eternal, by the merits of his Death, and the infinite
Satisfaction of his Sufferings. His Gospel is the Evidence of this his
Purchase, wherein Eternal Life and our Lords Propriety is declard; whereby He
is qualified not only to possess it in himself, but to confer that
Inheritance upon others. And therefore to him we must have recourse in all our
Devotions, and upon his Merits alone ground our addresses, Heb. 7.25.
who is able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God by him.

But the Romanists seem to have found out other Purchasers, at least many
Sharers with him in that Prerogative; when dividing the Virtue of his
Mediation, they fly to Saints and Angels by a solemn invocation of them to
intercede. What is this else but an Idolatrous act, when the Creature is set up
by them for a peculiar Object they must adore, and for a Meritorious Helper
they should trust to? or wherein do they differ from the old Heathens, who
worshipped their Demons or Inferior Gods as intermediate Agents with the
Supreme? If they upon that score were condemned as Idolaters by the ancient
maintainers of our Religion, certainly a like charge does most deservedly fall
upon such Worshippers that parcel out and communicate Divine Glory; nay, the
Charge is much heavier in this respect, because the Heathens were ignorant of
Gods will; but for Christians this way to beg life, it is to libel Gods Word
that speaks otherwise; it is to exclude his Son from his own Office and
Royalty, in whose Name we are bid to pray, and by whom alone we have access to
our Heavenly Father; nay it is repugnant to the condition of those Spirits
above, who can neither hear every man's prayers throughout the world, nor look
into the hearts of those that call on them. Yet O ye blessed Saints and Angels
(if ye can behold such Worshippers as these men) see with what wicked Plots and
bloody hands they offer Incense: Can ye possibly accept their Prayers. No, none
can accept them but their own Martyrs. But all Worship (how innocent soever) is
rejected in Heaven, where the God of it alone is not sought to: therefore the
right asking of Life is from him, who can only give Grace, and lift us up to
his own Glory.

III. The third and last way we are to consider him is, As a Worker, in that he
has made the Doctrine of Eternal Life effectual to Salvation.

For this Word (He has commissioned us to preach) is the great Instrument of
the New Birth: It is a means to beget in us a true Faith, and being once
steadfastly embraced, it gives us the first fruits of Eternal Life, till we are
fully invested in the Inheritance. What was heretofore the virtue of his Word
at the creation of all things, when he spoke out a World, and called it forth
into an actual Being, the same is the virtue of his written Word, whereby he
calls Us to an Eternal one. For the All-quickning Spirit is mixed with it;
whence it becoms fruitfully strong and mighty to save those that hear. What
Rock is there so hard, or Ground so barren, that can resist the influence of
its power? How does it cut through a heart of stone, and cultivate the De sart
of wild passions! How does it mould and fashion us to become a people
acceptable to the Lord! If natural inclination or carnal interest should stand
up to oppose it, these are but like Muddy Fortresses that are quickly battered
and dissolved; and a new frame is set up in the soul, that is pure and
heavenly; which expresses the Agent in the Divinity of his work, and shows the
beauty of those Promises he applies, in such motions that bend wholly toward
them. This Spirit of old (which worked by the Word) drew multitudes of men to
Christianity, beating down in them the strong holds of sin and Satan,
fanctifying their natures, and so giving them a new relish of things; raising
their love to a Christ crucified, and their desires after a distant reward;
whence they would not so much as receive their good things here, in hopes of a
richer treasure hereafter. Truly even the Word it self did much persuade: but
the Spirit came in with a Demonstration; whereby they gave up their private
interests, surrendered their darling lusts, and casting out every thing that
resisted, yielded themselves absolutely to his conduct.

These things considered, who can deny the fullness of his Ministry, that sees
Heaven and Hell in their distinct lights set before him, which heretofore were
either quenched by Fables, or under Shadows concealed? Who can deny the right of
his Purchase, that beholds the merit of his Sufferings, for which his Humane
nature was lifted up, and vested in full power to sit on the Throne and
pronounce life to his followers? As little can we deny the Third way, namely
the Efficacy of his Doctrine to lead us thither, if we either reflect upon it
as the Power of God, or the natural tendency of it to work in us a spirit of
Holiness, and so fit us for Glory. These things St. Peter had respect to when
he so emphatically tells his Master, Thou have the words of eternal life.

This Phrase (Eternal Life) is a short description of the good man's future
estate; nor is it otherwise ever mentioned in Scripture than as signifying the
Saints Portion: so that for Christ to have words of that kind, is to have in
store for him a double Blessing: For when He speaks life, he puts him into
possession of an Inheritance; when he speaks an Eternal Life, he gives him a
security of enjoying: whence he mercifully joins them in his Sentence of bliss,
as they are necessarily joined in the notion.

I shall not trouble my Reader with a farther Comment, nor run into a
controversy whether there be indeed such an estate that we from Scripture are
assured Christ speaks of, it being no way pertinent to this Text I discuss, nor
I presume to him that peruses it; of whom I ought to suppose that Principles
are believed, which neither imply in them a contradiction for Reason to cavil
at, nor hazard for Wisdom to fear.

It remains I should show the force of the Argument why we should stick close
to our Lord and Master from St. Peter's supposition that the Doctrine of Eternal
Life proceeds from him.

It were much to be wished that the rules he lays down for our Course upon
earth might bind followers to him without such a proposal as that is; since
they yield us a present pay in Honor, Ease, and Bleasure, that do certainly
wait upon virtuous actions: But if Flesh be so strong as to reject those
motives by reason of the narrowness of their limits, how can we exclude an
Eternity of all these, where it adds another Good, safety to perfect them?
Behold! there is in that state of Eternal Life a complete answer to those two
Passions that govern us here, and make our life a torment to us except they be
satisfied. For

1. The Gift is so vast that it swallows up Hope.

2. So durable that it removes Fear.

Now in all Hope there is want, and desire is nothing else but a craving
emptiness in the Soul. That hungry Guest is often called to an Epicures Feast,
and as often spoils it, turning his Plenty into Penance since it cannot fill.
The like vanity of Imperfection cleaves to other worldly enjoyments, because
the eye of our mind (being too big for them) has an unquiet Appetite of looking
farther. But it is impossible there should be any place for that restless
Passion where an Infinite Good is enjoyed: For this is an Object which
transcends even our thoughts, surpasses our fancies that our desires are
founded on, and so delightfully keeps us within its Circle: All that we can
imagine is there present, and therefore all we can hope for has in that
presence an end. Hence we come settled to those Joys, and bring a spirit full
and entire to feed on them: so that there is no color for a departure to a
lesser Good, that leaves us still dissatisfied in our fruition. Such are all
Temporal Objects we pursue: they naturally tempt us to fall off from that
chase, because they do not answer our expectation, I mean while another is in
our view, that (being eternal) commands our desires, fulfils our hopes, and
cures the defect of both with the satisfying wideness of its compass.

Next for Fear: this inseparably attends us in life; and argues not only want
and emptiness, but the misery and pain of it. Hope may afflict us for the
absence of a Good, but then it some way chears us for the likelihood of
attaining it; but Fear is a passion that eats into our delights, and devours
all our Contentments. Neither can we possibly be freed from it, while we
reflect upon those changes which the Stage of this World exposes us to; States
and Kingdoms being shifted there like Scenes, and almost with the same
quickness. But the Doctrine of Eternal Life (Christ promises) is a Sovereign
remedy against all trouble; for it shows us a fixed point, an unchangeable
instant; nor can we be afraid with that contemplation, no more than we are with
the prospect of Shores and Havens, that receive us safe from a Storm. How is
the soul quieted to think that those evils it suffers are passing away, and a
settled rest is prepared! With what peace does it apprehend a moments danger
when a perfect Liberty is the recompense! This and much more does a blessed
Eternity import, and through that encouragement is a Christian armed to
encounter any affliction.

And so we read what a stoutness of spirit was raised in the Primitive
Professors, that preached up Christianity and ventured all upon it. A bare
Faith did not carry them to that act, but a Faith that was grounded upon the
Heavenliness of the Doctrine, Courage of Martyrs, and Power of Miracles; strong
Promises that will infer as strong Conclusions, except we will say Heaven and
Earth were combined together in a plot to abuse, and the abuse too must be
this, viz. a cheating of an Idolatrous world into good living. Let the Scoffer
count it madness to quit Sense for a Good that is yet hid from him; I could
tell him that even a Present Good is invisible; for we want time to discern it
for its shortness, we want a Substance to be discerned for its emptiness;
whereas an eternal one is invisible for its transcendent fullness. Thither does
right Reason drive us, and a true principle of Self-love, it being our interest
to seek a Treasure that will not fail us.

But should we take the opposite state to This Life, namely Eternal Death which
is the Curse he threatens to those that deny him) here we are tied to our
Masters service by a sure chain, which the dread of Omnipotence puts on.
Earthly Powers can awe their Subjects, and justly too, with what they are able
outwardly to inflict; yet Death (being the utmost stroke of that Justice) seems
indeed but a retreat from it. But the Grave (how free and quiet soever it be)
is no Sanctuary to keep us from Gods hand: It dissolves our Bodies, but not his
Government; who watches every particle of our dust, and locks it up safe for an
after-summons; but the Soul He makes the the immediate subject of his Tribunal.
Therefore the highest homage may be well demanded of us, upon whom the highest
Sovereignty is shown.

I confess none come up from the dead to tell us this news: no, they cannot;
for the Judges Sentence binds them to their seats, where their great part is
suffering; and if they could, it is useless, no ways tending to settle our
Faith, but rather confirming our suspicion that in Satan's Errand some Ghost may
be employed. If Scripture (which St. Peter calls a light that shines in a dark
place) be with all its evidence of Divine Witnesses disowned, how can we
believe a testimony from the Damned, that would be sure to bring with them all
their night to deceive? This then can be no objection. The true one is formed
by our own corrupt hearts; and we are apt to question the Evil-day, because we
would not be checked nor controlled in our finning. In the mean time we baffle
that design by starting such a doubt; which unsettling the soul in its
pleasures, does thereby hinder it from enjoying them. We labor to be Scepticks
that we may offend, and after we are so, we find our selves pained with that
Uncertainty. Oh let us be wise for our latter end, and choose to serve our God
by a true Faith, since our endeavoring to shake it does but wake Conscience to
torture us.

Hitherto I have handled the Argument St. Peter lays down for following his
Lord, and by the way touched upon the Sinners Judgment: I have shown the
nobleness of Faith, the authority of Truth, and the excellent manner of
revealing it by Christ above all those discoveries that were made: The natural
result from all is this, that we would seriously inquire whether we can better
our life under another service, and if that be not possible, then immediately
list our selves his Disciples in all the watchfulness of Devotion.

As to the matter of Inquiry, it becomes us as men not to take any Master upon
trust, or the custom of others: Credulity is proper to Children that are weak
and want sinews; but the strength of Wisdom consists in this, to prove all
things, and not be easily governed in our actings. Yet this childish weakness
are most men subject to in their main end, when they relinquish their own
Faculties that would lead them to Christianity; and suffer themselves to be led
by a Customary Discipline that destroys it. What that teaching is, and how far
it extends, every one knows: The mind is not taught here, but the brutish part
and some transient reward propounded to encourag it: Transient I call it with
respect to those two Masters that rule over us, Flesh and the World, which
pretend to nothing higher in their offers of Good; for all the color they have
to invite us is only the gratifying of our senses for a few moments; only
Satan makes bold to counterfeit our Lord, and wears his shape in a full
promise, that so his hook may the better fasten and catch our appetite when he
tempts us. He has therefore in readiness for his followers words of Eternal
Life (as he had for Eve) but those very words prove fatal; for with the same
breath he kills the Sholar that hears him. What other effect can be looked for
from a Serpent condemned? who delights in the spreading of his plague, and
knows no other liberty from torment, than that pleasure he takes in enlarging
his Hell. To this end he continues down the poison of that Doctrine (Eat and
live, sin and be happy) in the mouths of his False-Prophets; who are very busy
to reconcile Faith with an Evil Conscience, and would fain compound up a
Religion of Flesh; which are arts indeed to draw many after them in regard they
bribe their Sensuality: But let us see the issue of all this, and what fruit
there is in obeying such Doctrines, when the Good (there promised) is blown
away with our breath, and instead of light we find darkness.

On the contrary under Christ's rule we have an Eternal Life tendered to us in
all certainty; and the condition He requires of us is an excellent part of that
Life, since it gives us a proper Eye to enjoy it: The condition I mean is
Purity of Heart, a Grace that doubly profits the Soul, first in refining our
natures, next in strengthening us to see Glory. Who would not endeavor to be
thus qualified for Heaven? Can any corruption move us to forfeit Security? and
can there be greater security than the Good here promised? Man's Knowledge you
will grant is much exalted in foreseeing future things, but his Reason is more
advanced in pursuing them. And whither would we go from our Lord? Other
Offerers of happiness do betray us; He only can save. To him Nature has
subjected us as being made; Gratitude as being redeemed; Interest as expecting
a reward: so that to deny him our hearts is to join Sacrilege and folly
together, when we rob God and impoverish our selves.

We are all covetous of Life, and of Life too in its best estate. For though
sin has corrupted men's choice of the way, yet it has not blasted their desires
of the end. But our Lord has farther provided those desires should not be
frustrated, if we follow his rule, and strictly adhere to his Commands in
mortifying our affections and lusts, and as it were spirituallizing the whole
man to be thereby fitted for his Kingdom. It is from us he expects this work
should be performed, and not from age: Age may indeed prove the mortifier of a
Lust, but withal it kills the service. Little is the glory of overcoming the
Tempter when he does not assault us; but to break fleshly motions in all their
strength this is a true Conquest. Neither should it be thought strange for any
Disciple to deny thus self in Christianity; for Heaven being the object of that
work will easily destroy the Miracle of doing it. How can any of us contemplate
the happiness above, and yet not be willing to forsake his proper sins, sins
(how colored soever) yet in the midst of their Varnish deformed! Where is true
beauty but that of Life, which only in the Counterfeit we admire? where is true
wealth but that of Immortality, which only in the Glitter we esteem! since then
such a fair and substantial Treasure is there offered us, we ought like
wisemen to determine our choice; and forsaking the vanities of other objects,
become fixed and settled in our endeavors, that we may obtain and compass that
Good which yields so bright, so weighty, so glorious a recompense to the
Pursuer.

The Fourth Discourse.
Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that
is risen again.


THe Justification of a Sinner, and the way God has prescribed to save men by,
is so mistaken in the world, that no Point has begot more disputes, nor is
there any Theme wherein Scripture has more suffered. Yet this quarrel amongst
men cannot be charged upon any want of evidence in this particular; but either
an humor of pride to contradict, or the interest of a Party to pursue, or the
prejudice of Opinion to defend, have been the main cause of that contention.
Would we come with a sincere mind to the reading of the Word, especially the
Writings of this Apostle, we should find the difficulty of that Truth cleared,
and the glorious effects of Christ's Mediatorship laid open, upon which our
Justifying does depend.

Now for the better handling this Text (which I have here chosen to discuss) I
shall a little explain the verse before it, by reason of their necessary
connection together. In which verse we may observe

1. The Triumphant Challenge he makes, summoning any Adversary to appear in
Court (...) Who will charge or accuse?

2. The Ground of his confidence how little that Accusation would avail,
because of the mercy of the Judge that acquits the offender. -- It is God that
justifies.

3. The limitation of the Charge in respect of the party against whom it is
drawn, and the limitation of the act of Justifying Grace in respect of the
party to whom it belongs -- Who will lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect?
It is God that justifies, that is those Elect: where by Gods Elect he means the
same that are spoken of in the first verse of the Chapter, namely such as are
in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit: that is,
who perform all the conditions required in the New Covenant: For these alone
are the chosen of God, whom He has decreed to reward with Eternal Life.

But because the grace of Justification does necessarily suppose a work of
Satisfaction (since the goodness of God could have no place for justifying a
sinner, were not the way first made by attoning his Justice) he therefore
proceeds in my Text to clear that point, and show whence Pardoning Mercy
springs, namely from Christ's undertaking our Cause, and reconciling us to his
Father by the virtue of his Mediatorship. Acts 4.11, 12.
He indeed is the Stone upon which all our salvation is built, so that without
him there neither is nor can be given either Pardon of sin here, or Glory
hereafter. Hence the Apostle with regard to his satisfaction does further urge,
and more strongly confirm what he laid down in the former verse, Who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again.

The words contain in them a True Believers full discharge; and the Reason or
Ground of it. The fullness of the discharge is held forth in that Question, Who
is he that condemns? The reason of it is expressed in that double work of our
Redeemer, but one of them more dignified than the other. It is Christ that
died; yea, rather is risen again.

The sense of the whole may be resolved into these Three Propositions.

1. That there is a Proper and Peculiar Virtue to be ascribed to Christ's Death
in the act of redeeming us.

2. That there are Proper and Peculiar Advantages in Christ's Rising above that
Death.

3. That Christ's Death in particular, but more eminently his Rising, has
procured the Saints freedom from Condemnation.

1. That there is a Proper and Peculiar Virtue to be ascribed to Christ's Death
in the act of Redeeming us.

In the handling of it I shall premise some Truths.

First, I take for granted what Scripture so clearly reveals, that the breach
of a Positive Law (which was given to Adam in Paradise) did not only involve
him but his Posterity too in the Curse there threatened; so that the propagation
of Mankind from him was but the propagation of persons condemned; all of us
being liable thereby to Death Temporal and Eternal.

Secondly, though God considered in his Absolute Power could forgive Man the
sin he had committed, yet considered in the Decree he had made of punishing his
Sin, and as a Governor bound to maintain it, so he was hindered from the
exercise of that power.

Thirdly, No creature could possibly reverse that Decree, nor expiate the
violation of this Governors Authority, for want of a Satisfaction which He
demanded. For where was the Creature that could give it? Angels withdraw from
the brightness of Gods Glory, how then would they flee from the Fire of his
wrath! Man cannot bear the punishment due to one of his own, how then would he
sustain the sins of a World! Had either of them been deputed to this Task, they
had sunk under it, poor Mankind had been lost, and God still unreconcil'd: For
to the work of Satisfying him Srength as well as Innocence is required; but the
Creature at best is too weak to intercede; the price of its suffering too mean,
the merit of which cannot extend to another; and so Divine Justice instead of
accepting would quite devour the Sacrifice.

Therefore it was necessary to our recovery one should undertake for us, that
could answer the rigor of the Decree by his Sufferings, and supply the defects
both of Men and Angels by the Innocence and Worth of a Sacrifice; Innocence to
prepare, and Worth to crown the Oblation.

Now that Christ was thus qualified to appear in our stead, may be easily
evinced, if we will but consider either the purity of his Humane nature, which
was without spot, 1 Pet. 1.19. Romans 9.5.
or the Majesty of his Person, who is God blessed for ever. The first of these
would serve to make his Offering holy; the latter would give it infinite value;
by both which he was fitted to pay our debt, and bear all the wrath of his
Father due to our sins.

And that He actually did what He was so qualified to perform, we have the like
evidence from Scripture. The whole Economy of the Jews, and the strain of the
Gospel confirms it. The Sacrifices of the Old Law were Types and dark Images of
this Great one that was once to be offered for the sins of the people: The
Gospel-phrase points altogether to this Truth; and therefore when it speaks of
Christ, Mat. 20.28.
it calls him (...) a price of ransom, nay (...), that is a price by way of
exchange, 1 Timothy 2.6.
in supplying our place: again we are said to be justified by his Blood,
reconciled through his Death, and to have redemption by his Sufferings: all
which expressions signify the proper effect of his Death was the remission of
our sins. This He himself testifies, how that his Blood was shed for the
remission of sins; Matt. 26.28.
whence we may take comfort in his Death, and rejoice in the virtue of his
Atonement, whereby our pardon is obtained.

Should we now with the Socinian make plain words that express all this, to be
mere Metaphors and Figures, we may as well join with the old Heretics (the
Valentinians) that made a Figure of his Living, Dying and Rising; in that they
denied the reality of his Flesh: nor can their Opinion be more contrary to the
Faith than this: For as to hold. He was but the Image of a Man destroys a
Christ, so to hold He was but the Image of a Priest destroys a Savior. Thus to
wrest the Scripture is to wrest it to our destruction: for what follows upon
it? If he be not in a true sense offered for us, we are still in our sins, the
Curse of the Law yet abides, and his Death becomes altogether unprofitable,
when it brings us deliverance but in shadow. I might add how his suffering upon
any other account than in our stead to redeem us, has nothing of justice in it,
and therefore cannot demonstrate the justice of another; whereas his Blood and
the declaring of Gods righteousness are joined together: Romans 3.25.
but if He who was all innocence in himself, did not bear our guilt when He
suffered, the Death He underwent (being properly a punishment because sins
wages) would be so far from declaring Gods righteousness, that it could only
manifest the Tyranny of the Inflicter.

Yet these kind of men are the great pretenders to Reason, who reject the
Doctrine of Satisfaction; but cannot maintain what they deliver without laying
their groundwork in impiety; which is to assert He was no God that suffered;
where how grossly they renounce their reason will appear in this, that denying
him to be God, they deny themselves to be True Worshippers, and proclaim to the
world their Idolatry in adoring Man. But their absurdity farther appears, when
denying the Meritoriousness of his Satisfaction, they can yet make his
Sufferings to be meritorious of Divine Power; as if there were any proportion
betwixt mere humane actions and so high a reward. Now what Merit is this that
could raise him to be the Head of Angels, and Governor of all created Beings;
nay to be adored and worshipped equally with the Father; which Honors the
collected services of the whole Creation cannot reach to? May not the Heathens
scoff at their Idolatry, who pretending to Christianity, set up a made God to
pray to; and expect Salvation from One who is exalted for the virtue of his
sufferings in maintaining his Religion, as they consecrated theirs for the
Gallantry of public actions? Behold! this is only to refine, but not to
change the nature of Gentilism: as likewise it utterly overthrows the Mystery
of Godliness, and destroys the Greatness of Divine Love; which consisted
chiefly in abasing the Deity for Man's sake, whereas this makes it ridiculous
and dishonorable in thus exalting the Humanity.

But I leave them to their Judge above, and their Books to Judges below: I shall
now only briefly inquire into Two things for the better opening this Point,
and so proceed to my Second Observable.

1. How Christ's Death is the Cause of the remission of our sins.

2. From what Time we should date the Benefit of that remission, as it is made
ours.

1. How Christ's Death is the Cause, etc. -- I answer thus; God the Father was
moved for that price his Son laid down (which was his precious Blood) to free
us from that punishment we deserved in our own persons; and to enter into a New
Covenant with us; offering us Pardon of sin and Eternal Life upon new easy
terms of faith and sincere obedience: whereas before rigorous Justice bore the
sway, and shut us all up under a a sentence of condemnation without hope of
mercy. Therefore He is called the Mediator of a better Covenant; and whereas in
the old League we were used as Gibeonites and made slaves, in this New one
(procured by Christ) we are treated as a free People, and made capable of the
Privileges of his Kingdom. This He ratified in his own Blood; whence his Blood
is called the Blood of the New Testament, wherein all his promises of Grace are
confirmed, and the Legal Curse done away.

See here the Love of a Savior, that would thus die to restore us; buy our
peace at the price of himself, and bring us terms of salvation so dearly
purchased, which before we could not hope for. This shows the wretchedness of
our state, and the need we stood in of such an Expiation, when He who could
create us at first with the ease of a word, is not allowed to create us anew
but with the pain of suffering. The Cross upon which He did this work, is a sad
spectacle to Sense, but a glad object of Faith: the one presents him naked in
our Flesh, but the other covered with our Sins; the one shows him in his Blood,
but the other in our Guilt, the burden of which He carried up thither,
encountered his Fathers wrath, and at the very point of death proclaimed his
Victory, It is finished; which is all one with this, The Atonement is wrought,
because the Victim is slain.

2. From what time we should date the Benefit of that Remission, when it is
made ours? I answer not immediately from his Satisfaction, but from the time of
our rightly believing in him. We are justified by his Blood in one sense, and
we are justified by faith in his Blood in another: His bloody Death procured
for us the Pardon, which is nothing else but putting us into capacity of being
pardoned; but True Faith applies the Pardon to the Soul, whereby we actually
enjoy it. How Faith here will be understood, may be found out by comparing two
places of Scripture, namely Acts 10.43. with Acts 3.19. In the one it is said,
Whosoever believes in him shall receive remission of sins: in the other,
Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out: so that True Faith
is the Principle of a new life, the beginning of Sanctification; when the Heart
is resigned up to God, and with sincere resolutions turns to him. No Faith can
justify us but as Faith that thus works: for as God will take no
unsanctified person to his Glory, so neither will He seal to him in that
condition pardon of sin here, which is the earnest of that Glory.

Trust not then to his Wounds if thou bear not the marks of them in thy
Soul; rely not on his Death, if sin in thee be not crucified. They were
Reprobate Jews that turned his Passion into a Sight, and came off not wounded,
but true Christians are pierced with beholding him, and find it operative upon
their lives. Should we be justified without doing any thing on our part,
obedience to Gods Commands would rather be a Gift than a Debt; whereas the
Gospel enjoins it us as necessary to please Him; let us then so come to his
Grave, as not idly to bury our selves there; for we are but dead men in doing
so; neither will our Master be found, since the Angel can tell us, He is not
there but is risen; whence we ought not to rest in that place, but go forth to
seek him. All the virtue that is in the Sepulcher comes out to those that rise
and resemble him who is risen, That like as he was raised from the dead by the
glory of the Father, so they likewise might walk in newness of life. Thus much
for the First Observable.

I proceed to handle the Second Proposition.

II. That there are proper and peculiar Advantages in Christ's rising above that
death -- yea rather is risen again.

All the time Christ slept in the Grave was a time of gloominess and thick
darkness: but here God speaks as he did in the old Creation, Let there be
light: His rising bring us day and the joys of it; wherein Death has lost all
its spoils, and Life his victory; Sin has spent all its force, and Mercy
triumphs; the Synagogue it self ends, and our Church begins. A Day very
pleasant in the speculation! but may no doubt come in, that it is artificially
framed and devised by Christians? Truly doubts cannot be hindered, where
corruption and infidelity so much reigns; but the reason of our doubting is
taken away by the clear evidence that is given us of his Resurrection.

If you ask what that is, behold! it is grounded upon Prophets that fortell;
Eyewitnesses that confirm, and God himself attesting the truth of both by the
power of his Spirit that worked in the Preachers, to make this Point
undeniable. To the Prophets St. Acts 2.
Peter appeals for convincing the Jews; and St. Paul makes it a standing proof,
how He rose again according to the Scriptures. 1 Cor. 15.4.
Eyewitnesses are produced to convince the Gentiles, not only a few Women and
Apostles whom he had chosen, but Five hundred Brethren at once: and those He
appeared to were not so much considerable for their number as for their nicety
in believing; men that had scruples of sense which kept them from being
deceived, as well as scruples of concience, which kept them from deceiving
others. The first of these is manifest from hence, That they would not
thoroughly believe He was risen (though they saw him) till they were convinced
by the very touch: the latter is clear from that Doctrine they embraced, which
forbad the least sin; and how can we imagine they durst propagate a Cheat under
all discouragements, when they knew they not only ran the hazard of losing
their Lives (as they did by professing him) but their Hopes too of a better
life (the only Anchor of their Profession) from which a Lie would certainly
exclude them. Add to this the Spirit they received, the Wonders they wrought,
and the Success they had in their Ministry, when their Doctrine spread through
the world from poor naked beginnings merely by the force of this Article, it
shows the Body of their Master was not stolen away (as the Keepers absurdly
reported) but that God himself was risen to defend them. These things well
considered (if they amount not to Demonstration) yet afford so rational a
proof, as will engage our assent to the Truth, and convince us of folly in
denying it.

Now the Advantages of Christ's Rising above his Death have a double aspect; for
they either relate to Christ or to Us.

First to Christ, and so the Dignity of his Resurrection is seen in these
Particulars.

1. It justified the Innocence of his Humanity.

When Christ was laid hold of, and carried away to be condemned by the Jews,
then his very Cause seemed to be given up: It was counted criminal with them
that He would submit to an Arrest, and a sufficient evidence to make him a
Malefactor, that He did so tamely yield to the Trial. But when He endured the
Sentence to be pronounced, went patiently to his Cross, and suffered his Body
to be fastened with the nails, as if He had the guilt of a Slave with the
punishment, here was the Hour to overcome Truth, and the Power of darkness to
cover him, who is the light of the world.

But his Rising from death removed that Eclipse, cleard that Innocence, by the
distinction it made of his Fate, when the Vileness of his Execution gave
Authority to the Charge. This caused such boldness in Peter to plead for his
Master, and return the fault upon his Persecutors (which He was so guilty of
himself) Ye have denied the holy one and the just; Acts 3.14.
and he proceeds farther to aggravate their Crime, and maintain the
righteousness of his Cause by that convincing Argument of Gods raifing Verse. 15.
him from the dead. Now it is easy for any one to conclude, that had our Lord
been an Impostor, or an evil doer, he could not rise; such kind of men would
surely rot in the Grave, and know no other Resurrection than that of the last
Day to a worse Judgment; because for God to punish them with Death here, and
allow them presently to rise, that so they might confirm their own followers in
those Errors they taught, and those Evils they practiced; here a work of
Divinity would be employed to destroy the true worship of it, which is a flat
contradiction to his Goodness. Christ therefore by his rising had a Testimony
from Heaven of his uprightness, and the Evidence sealed by Omnipoteoce it self,
That He was the True Prophet which came into the world.

2. It declared the Divinity of his Power; For He raised up himself. Now to
raise the Dead is beyond the strength of a Finite Agent; and to restore things
as well as create them does equally require an Almighty hand; both which works
not being to be found in Nature, the Heatheris (thence taking their measures)
judged them Impossible to be done: which is an unreasonable limiting of the God
of Nature, when Men will not consider what reserves of Power He ought to have
that is the Fountain of all the actions of his Creatures.

That Christ would thus raise up himself, He in his lifetime foretold, and He
particularly appeals to the Divinity of that act (He would one day show) as a
sign of his Authority to purge that Temple which they profaned. 2 John 19.
And the Apostle S. Paul expressly tells us how by his resurrection from the
dead He was declared to be the Son of God with power; Romans 1.4.
that is with power He had in himself to give life, not with power his Father
alone put forth in quickening him; for then his Rising would be common to him
with others. But did not the Miracles He wrought (when living) declare him
likewise to be the Son of God? Not so convincingly as this: for the Wonders He
then did, mere men (such were the Prophets) had the Privilege of doing before
him; but none except the Son of God could thus rise; much less did his dying
reveal him in that Majesty, which could only declare him to be the Son of Man
with weakness. For what more argues it then to dye? what greater scandal of
that weakness than to die on the Cross? wherein the Godhead stooped to the
lowest infirmities of Flesh, and the worst malice of his Persecutors. Then his
Enemies could grow bold, and scoffingly demand some proof of his Power, and the
contemptibleness of that state He was in (which hid all his Greatness) made
them ask such a sign of it as that was of saving himself; which, if granted,
had kept the world from being saved.

But his Rising from death had all marks of glory in it; the breaking up of the
Sepulcher, the Ministry of Angels, the shaking of Earth, and the trembling of
Keepers; which were but several ways of Homage due to the Power of his
Resurrection. Here He discovered himself to be truly God, and confirmed the
Faith of his Disciples with the Reason they had to worship him;

3. It invested him in his Rights, and put him into actual possession of his
Kingdom.

This was the Covenant betwixt Him and his Father, that He should first make
Attonment for sin by his Death, and receive afterward the reward of that work
in Dominion. Hence we read how for becoming obedient to Death, Phil. 2.9.
even the Death of the Cross, He was therefore highly exalted; Psa. 110.7.
for drinking of the brook of the way he should therefore lift up his head.
King He was indeed from his very birth, but He received not then the oil of
gladness above his fellows: the Honor of his Anointing was as imperfect as the
Form He assumed, which was the Form of a Servant, where He was put under
subjection to the Law and the Curse, but after He rose (...), He was made
perfect, that is, actually crowned. This is that (...), Matt. 19.28.
the Regeneration or New state mentioned, namely the Kingdom of the Messiah,
which takes its date from the time of his Resurrection; for then He showed his
Conquest of the chief Rebel Satan, by overturning the Foundation of his Empire,
which was laid in the Grave; so that whereas all other Princes Glory ends in
that place, this Princes Triumph there began; then He commissioned his
Disciples to Preach every where and Baptize, to gather him a Church made up of
Jews and Gentiles, where He would always rule and preside, when as before they
continued Members of the Synagogue. And his Authority to do this He grounds
upon that Universal power that was given him both Mat. 28.
in Heaven and in Earth, whereto He had right in his Flesh as the Heir, but the
exercise of it as a Possessor was suspended till his rising.

Should we compare his condition under death with this his condition after it,
we shall find a vast difference; for at his death He was so far from having the
Ensigns of Sovereignty, that He bore only the looks and wore the chains of a
Captive: The great mark of his Kingship appeared in the Title of his Charge,
King of the Jews; which being set over his head, and He crucified under it, it
showed He was the object more of men's Mockery than Fear. But when He rose, He
put on Greatness, took the Scepter in his hand, and made his way as a Prince by
victory. Here He manifested the Virtue of his Kingly Office, and convinced the
World of his right to command, and what obedience is due to his Laws.

Hitherto I have insisted upon the Dignity of the Resurrection as it relates to
Christ, I shall next consider the Advantages of it as it relates to us -- Yea
rather is risen again. And they are these:

1. It manifested a full discharge of our Debt, and Gods ready accepting of
that price which was paid.

When a Surety that undertakes another Debt is cast into prison by the
Creditor, if he comes out of it, it argues the Creditor is fully satisfied: so
Christ's coming out of the Grave (whether He was delivered by the Judge for our
offenses) declares the obligation is taken off, and no more left for Him to
suffer. To this purpose the Apostle speaks, Romans 4.25.
That He rose again for our Justification, or in other terms, to give us
assurance by the Satisfaction of his Death that our Acquittance is obtained.
The work of Redemption was performed in the dark when He dyed; all the time He
was held in the Grave, we could have no sense of a deliverance; but when He who
was slain for a Sin-offering, presented himself afterward alive before the
Lord, this brought us light to behold the Perfection of that Atonement.

Look then on his Death as the cause of thy freedom, but on his Rising as the
ground of thy comfort: in the one He was the Priest to offer, in the other the
Messenger to assure us; a preceding requisite to give us the joy of a Savior,
and complete our notion of his performance, when we should see his love in the
strength of it, find out the Price He laid down for us by Death in the Power of
that Evidence He gave us by Life. The Scapegoat under the Law was but a poor
uncomfortable Type, that had all the iniquities, sins, and transgressions of
Israel put upon his head, and was after this sent away into the Wilderness,
whence he never returned: but Christ that bore the sins of the World, and
entered the Wilderness not inhabited (the Grave) came out thence to bring us the
news of his Expiation, and so made us certain of the benesit. It was not enough
with him to work our Redemption, except we were further enlightened to know it:
Thus He doubled the mercy of that act, when we whose state He recovered by
dying, had our Fears too healed by his Resurrection.

2. It is an efficient cause of our rising with an identity of Body as He rose;
for we fall not in respect of our Souls, but our Bodies; if therefore the same
Body does not rise, the notion of a Resurrection is destroyed. This power and
right He has to raise us, is part of that Dominion he received when He rose;
whereby He became Lord of the Dead as well as the Living; Romans 14.9.
and He gave a pregnant instance of it at his rising, when He caused the Stone
to be removed not only from his own, but from others Sepulchers; for He had
many Bodies of Saints with him. They had long before slept in the dust, and
perhaps were so far from being dry bones, that the question might be put, Can
this dust live? yet were they quickly fashioned in the earth, and built up by
virtue of their Masters breath to attend him in his Triumph.

If our rising be later than theirs, yet it is as sure; for in him (says the
Apostle) shall all be made alive; He is become the First Fruits of them that
slept; Now the First Fruits do not so go before other Fruits but that they are
in being, though not brought to the same maturity; so though the Resurrection
of the Dead be not ripe, yet it really is begun, because Christ is risen.
Whatever alterations befall us in death, they are but changes of Figure; no
particle of us is lost; the very least mite of our Frame is put into the
Treasury, whence it will be one day taken out and restored. An excellent
privilege Christ's Members enjoy, to be thus quickened by their Head! otherwise
the benefit of their reconciliation were small, had he not proved their Life as
well as their Sacrifice. It is a poor stopping of the Plague to enter the
Gulf, and not keep it by that Entrance from swallowing; but to open it that it
shall yield up its dead, and no longer devour them, here is a rich Atonement,
All our hopes depend upon the success of such an Undertaking; which we have
confirmed to us by the rising of our Lord, who has abolisht Death, broken the
tyranny of that Oppressor, and made it a Servant to convey us to Glory.

But this is all upon supposition that we are qualified for his Members; then
we are raised by a Power inherent in us, whence we receive the influence of
salvation; if we are no part of his Body, we shall however be raised, but by a
power without us, the power of a Judge, that will sit over us as Slaves, and
pronounce the Sentence of Execution. Therefore the carnal liver can take no
pleasure in this word (Rise): it is like a Rack to stretch his limbs on, and
represents to him all his parts new set that they may be fitted for torment.
All his joys are placed in a life here, which is the Senses Portion; but the
life of another world cuts him in reflecting on it, as a Curse that is attended
with pain. Would we then make it our interest to rise, let us live like
Children of the Resurrection, purge out all corrupt humors of Flesh and Blood,
mortify our lusts, keep our Souls pure, and our Bodies clean, that when they
are quickened, they may be raised to those Heavenly Mansions, where the Honors
of the Place, the delights of Vision, and the clothing of Immortality, will
satisfy our utmost desires, and show us the vanity of this Worlds good that
holds us.

3. It has procured the Assistance of Gods Spirit whereby we are sanctified,
and enabled to obtain the Promises of Eternal Life.

Had not Christ rose, the Comforter had not been sent; indeed the promise of
the Holy Ghost was made before, but it was shed upon none till after his
Rising. Then we read of his breathing upon the Apostles, Joh. 20.22.
which showed the Authority He had to bestow it, and the Gifts that should
afterward follow upon his Ascension. How necessary the coming of the Spirit
was, and consequently how great the Advantage of his Rising, will appear in
this, That thereupon Ministers were empowered, Wonders wrought, a Church
gathered, and the Word made so powerful in the hearts of the hearers, that
they were not able to resist the Doctrine of the Resurrection, whereof the
Apostles were ordained to be Witnesses. See this exemplified in St. Acts 1.22.
Peter's first Sermon on that Subject; which the Spirit accompanied with such
efficacy, that those who heard it were pricked to the heart, and the same day
there were added to them about three thousand Souls: Where by the way the
Temper of these new Converts is remarkable; for it is said, They continued
steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and and in breaking of
Bread and in Prayers. They were no lovers of Novelty or Schism, but close
adherers to the Truth, and united together in Worship: A rich Draught this!
which Peter had figured out to him in a former one, when he drew the Net to
land full of great fishes; and for all there were so many, yet was not the Net
broken.

By the same Spirit Christ still rules in his Church in order to men's
Conversion; whose work is to enlighten and convince us by the Word, to prevent
us by his Grace in all our doings; to incline our wills and further them in
good; without which assistance we could never by any natural strength of our
own either rightly believe or repent, and so be made capable of the Promises.

I have here given a short view of the Benefits of Christ's rising, which if we
compare with the Virtue of his Death, we shall find good reason for that
Emphasis in the Apostle -- Yea rather is risen again.

What are the proper effects of each I have already mentioned: How his Death in
particular contributes, but more eminently his Rising, to the Saints freedom
from Condemnation, may be easily collected from what I have said, so that I
need not handle my Third Particular; therefore I shall now only in a few words
apply this Truth to our selves.

Gods Justifying Grace we read in the former verse is restrained to his Elect,
or which is all one, his peculiar people that are zealous of Good-works; the
Benefits of Christ's dying and rising are restrained likewise to the same
persons: For He is become the Author of Salvation to all them that obey him:
Heb. 5.9.
Others are excluded from that Purchase; whence this Point obliges us to a duty
of working, that as He died to Nature, and rose again in the Body, so we might
dye to Sin, and live unto Righteousness, which is the Souls Resurrection. The
great design of his rising was to bless us in turning away every one from his
iniquities; Acts 3.26.
which implies the very nature of his Blessing consists in the cleansing of us
from sin; as our Taste of hereafter consists in being purified. No unclean
liver can enter Heaven; for he wants the condition of Bliss; no nor relish it
(if granted him) because of the unsutableness of that Glory: For the vast
disproportion which is betwixt those objects that are pure and spiritual, and
such a man's desires that are filthy and carnal would turn the very Joys of
Heaven into a Punishment; so that either way he is miserable; in the Denial of
Heaven he has no hope; in the Gift no pleasure. We see a sanctity of nature is
necessary to the fruition of Happiness; and need we motives from some powerful
example to encourage our obedience? I can produce no greater than in my Text;
the manner of Christ's love to us when He dyed, and the manner of his acting for
us when He rose, are sufficient arguments to quicken us.

If we consider his love to us when He dyed, it is the Picture of strength in
weakness; which could carry him cheerfully to submit to Gods wrath, the Jews
malice, and Human frailty; and worked too his end by that submission; for he
nailed our sins to the Cross, when He was nailed there himself, and by death
cancelled our Bond. Such was the virtue of his Sacrifice, that it did not
require a Second Offering; what is this else but a Pattern to our
Mortification, that we would dye to sin, as He did for it, that we need not
kill it a Second time?

If we consider the manner of his Rising, here strength of love is visible in
the activity of the Conqueror. He rose from the dead before day; so He would
often rise in his lifetime; He loved Early Devotions, and Early Conquests; the
one to show his speed in interceding for us, the other in comforting. How is
this a Lesson to us for following his steps, and rising to a life of
Righteousness in the very dawn of our Time, when the Morn is fresh, and our day
begins; that as He made haste to do us good, so we might to fit our selves for
him. Youth is as much consecrated to his service, as the Morning was to his
rising; if we come late to him, we are unthankful Worshippers; and besides, the
feebleness of such a course takes off from the value of the performance.

But his early leaving of the Sepulcher (wherein the quickness of our Redeemer
is manifested) does not so much instruct us in duty, as the perfectness of his
Resurrection, which discovers the absoluteness of his Conquest. All others that
were raised, dropped again into their Graves; had not life so properly as death
restored to them; but Christ being raised from the dead dies no more; death
has no more dominion over him: That glorious Body of his has put off
mortality, and all signs of it, except we will say the wound in his side, and the
prints of the nails are; which yet He bears for another use, which is this:
that whereas before they were Characters of his Weakness, they might now be
Trophies of his Strength; whereas before they were marks of the Enemies
Victory, they might now prove marks of his own. With the like strength of
Perfection should we live to him; so quit the deadness of corrupt nature, as
never to admit its return; infuse such a Soul into our Good works, that may
make them vigorous and lasting. Thus we shall copy out his Death and Life in
our selves, and bring that comfort home, Who is he that condemns? To think
salvation for us is so wrought that we need not work it out our selves, is
miserably to delude our expectation, since all those glorious effects which
issue from his Dying and Rising, are appointed to be Mercies to the doers, but
Wonders only to lookers on. Let us then put off the Old man with his deeds,
and keep up the memory of our Master in the Newness of our lives, that when our
Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved, we may have a Building of God not made with
hands, eternal in the Heavens.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Richard Chiswell.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.
Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers. Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of
Ancient Time. Wanly's Wonders of the Little World, or History of Man. Sir Tho.
Herbert's Travels into Persia, etc. Holyoak's large Dictionary. Latin and
English. Sir Ric. Baker's Chronicle of England, Causin's Holy Court. Wilson's
complete Christian Dictionary. Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, or Philosophical
Language. Pharmacopaeia Regalis Collegii Medicorum. Londinensis. Judge Jone's
Reports of Cases in Common Law. Judge Vaughan's Reports of Cases in Common Law.
Cave Tabulae Ecclesiasticorum Scriptorum. Hobb's Leviathan. Lord Bacon's
Advancement of Learning, Bishop Taylor's Sermons. Sir Will. Dugdale's Baronage
of England in 2 Vol. Raranelli Bibliotheca Theologica 3 Vol.
QUARTO.
THe several Informations exhibited to the Committee appointed by Parliament to
inquire into the burning of London, 1667. Godwin's Roman Antiquities. Dr.
Littleton's Dictionary. Bishop Nicholson on the Church Catechism. The Complete
Clark. Dr. Pierce on Gods Decrees. History of the late Wars of New England. Dr.
Outram de Sacrificiis. Bishop Taylor's Diswasive from Popery. Garissolius de
Christo Mediatori, Corpus Confessionum Fidei. Spauhemii Dubia Evangelica 2 Vol.
Dr Gibb's Sermons. Parkeri Disputationes de Deo. Caryl on Job complete, 12
parts. Description and History of the Future State of Europe, 1 s. Fowler's
Defense of the Design of Christianity against John Bunyan, 1 s. Lyford's
Discovery of Errors and Heresies of the Times, 4 s. Dr. Sherlock's Visitation
Sermon at Warrington, 1659. 6 d. Dr. West's Assize-Sermon at Dorchester, 1671.
6 d, Mr. Dobson's Sermon at Lady Farmers Funeral, 1670. 8 d. Directions for
Improvement of Barren Land, 6 d. Culverwel's Discourse of the Light of Nature,
3 s. 6 d. Dr. Meric Casaubon's Letter to Dr. Du Moulin, about Experimental
Philosophy, 6 d. Lord Hollis's Relation of the Unjust Accusation of certain
French Gentlemen charged with a Robery, 1671. 6 d. The Magistrates Authority
asserted, in a Sermon by James Paston.
OCTAVO.
Conold's Notion of Schism according to the Ancients with Reflections on Mr.
Hales. The Posing of the Parts. Elborow's Rationale upon the English Service.
Burnets Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England. Winchester
Phrases. Wilkin's Natural Religion. Hardcastle's Christian Geography and
Arithmetic. Ashton's Apology for the Honors and Revenues of the Clergy. Lord
Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature of the House of Peers in the case of
Skinner. -- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals. --
Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions. -- Letter about the
Bishops Vote in Capital Cases. Xenophontis Cyropoedia. Gr. Lat. Duporti Versio
Psalmorum Graeca. Grews Idea of Philological History continued on Roots.
Spaniards Conspiracy against the State of Venice. Batei Elenchus motuum
nuperorum in Anglia. Erown's Religio Medici. Several Tracts of Mr. Hales of
Eton. Bishop Sanderson's Life. Dr. Tillotsons Rule of Faith. Gregorii
Etymologicon Parvum. Passoris Grammatica Grae. Novi Testimenti, 4 s. Rossei
Gnomologicon Poeticum. Gouge's word to Saints and Sinners. Dr. Simpson's
Chemical Anatomy of the Yorkshire Spaws; with a Discourse of the Original of
Hot-Springs and other Fountains; and a Vindication of Chemical Physic, 3 s. --
His Hyrological Essays; with an Account of the Allom-works at Whitby, and some
Observations about the Jaundice. 1 s. 6 d. Dr. Cox's Discourse of the Interest
of the Patient, in reference to Physic and Physicians, and Detection of the
Abuses practiced by the Apothecaries. 1 s. 6 d. Organon Salutis: Or an
Instrument to cleanse the Stomach: with diverse New Experiments of the Virtue of
Tobacco and Coffee: To which is prefixed a Preface of Sir Henry Blunt. 1 s.
Aristotle's Problems. Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts. A
Discourse of the Nature, Ends, and Difference of the two Covenants, 1672. 2 s.
Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness, 1672. 1 s. 6 d. Lipsius's
Discourse of Constancy. 2 s. 6 d. Willis Anglicisms Latiniz'd. 3 s. 6 d.
Buckler of State and Justice against France's Design of Universal Monarchy,
1673. A Free Conference touching the Present State of England at home and
abroad, in order to the designs of France, 1673. 1 s. Bishop Tailor of
Confirmation. 1 s. 6 d. Mystery of Jesuitism, third and fourth part. 2 s. 6 d.
Sanderson Judicium Academ. Oxoniens. de Solenni Liga. 6 d. Dr. Samways
Unreasonableness of the Romanists. 1 s. 6 d. Record of Urins. 1 s. Dr. Ashton's
Cases of Scandal and Persecution. 1674. 1 s.
DUODECIMO.
FArnabii Index Rhetoricus. Ciceronis Orationes selectae. Hodders Arithmetic.
Horatius Minellii. Sands Ovids Metamorphosis. Grotius de Veritate Religionis
Christianae. Bishop Hacket's Christian Consolations.
VICESIMO QUARTO.
LVcius Florus. Lat. -- -- Id. Truth. 19o Crumbs of Comfort. Valentine's
Devotions. Guide to Heaven.
Books lately printed.
GVillim's Display of Herauldry with large Additions. Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of England. folio. Dr. Burlace's History of the
Irish Rebellion. Herodoti Historia. Grae. Lat. fol. Mr. John Jenison's
Additional Narrative about the Plot. Cole's Latin and English Dictionary with
large Additions, 1679. William's Sermon before the Lord Mayor, October. 12.79. --
History of the Gunpowder Treason. -- Impartial Consideration of the Speeches of
the Five Jesuits executed for Treason. fol. Relation of the Massacre of the
Protestants in France. Trials of the Regicides. 8o Dangerfield's Narrative of
the Pretended Presbyterian Plot. Mr. James Brome's Two Fast Sermons. The Famine
of the Word threatened to Israel, and Gods call to weeping and mourning. Account
of the Public Assairs in Ireland since the discoof the late Plot. Dr. Jane's
Fast Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. Dr. Burnet's Two
Letters written upon the Discovery of the late Plot. 4to Decree made at Rome 2d
March, 1679. condemning some Opinions of the Jesuits and other Casuists. 4to
Mr. John James Visitation Sermon, April 9. 1671. 4to Mr. John Cave's Fast
Sermon on 30 Jan. 1679. 4to -- His Assize Sermon at Leicester, July 31. 1679.
4to Certain Genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon in Arguments Civil, Moral,
Natural, Medical, Theological and Bibliographical; with a large Account of all
his Works, by Mr. Thomas Tenison. 8o Dr. Puller's Discourse of the Moderation
of the Church of England. 8o The Original of all the Plots in Christendom;
with the Danger and Remedy of Schism: by Dr. William Saywell, Master of Jesus
College Cambridge. 8o A Discourse of Supreme Power and Common Right, by a
Person of Quality. 8o Dr. Edw. Bagshaw's Discourse upon Select Texts against
the Papist and Socinian. 8o
Books now in the Press.
Mr. Rushworth's Historical Collections: The second Volume. fol. -- His large
and exact Account of the Trial of the Earl of Strafford, with all the
Circumstarices preliminary to concomitant with, and subsequent upon the same to
his death. fol. Remarques relating to the state of the Church of the three
first Centuries, wherein are interspersed Animadversions on a Book, called A
View of Antiquity: By J. H. Written by A. S.

