The XXIV Cases CONCERNING THINGS INDIFFERENT IN Religious Worship Considered.
OR THE RESOLVER Better Resolved by his own Principles; AND NON-CONFORMISTS More
Confirmed. ALSO THE GRAND CASE Touching Ministers Conformity, with the double
Supplement thereunto Annexed, Briefly Discussed.

Romans 15.22. Happy is he that condemns not himself, in that thing which he
Allows.

And, Happy is he that allows not himself, in that thing which he Condemns.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

Question. Whether Things Inexpedient, or purely Indifferent (such as our
(English) Ceremonies are) may be Imposed by men lawfully in the Worship of God?
Or, if Imposed, may lawfully be submitted, assented, and consented unto?
THis Grand Question has three Heads of Dispute; Of the Lawfulness 1. Of the
Imposition of them in Worship. 2. Of Submission to them as to Practice. 3. Of
the Declaration of an Unfeigned Assent and Consent to all and every thing
contained in, and prescribed by the Book of Common Prayer, or by the Late Act
of Uniformity in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline. The Problem has respect only
or chiefly to Worship, and to the Decision of it, I shall do these three
things. 1. Explain the Terms. 2. Show how far the Dissenting Parties agree. 3.
Undertake to prove the Negative in all the Particulars, upon the Casuists own
Principles and Concessions.

I. Explication of the Terms.
1. Ceremonies.] I begin with this, partly to distinguish between Ceremonies,
and Circumstances of Worship, which commonly in this Dispute are confounded;
and partly to draw down the Question a Thesi, as discoursed in general under
the Notion of Things Inexpedient, and purely Indifferent (as it is warily done
by the Rev. Casuist, and others, which affords them some Creep holes, and
Liberty of Evasion) ad Hypothesin in special to our Ceremonies, of which the
Controversy is. And the Definition of a Ceremony will clearly difference it
from a Circumstance of Worship. Every Ceremony may be considered as a
circumstance, but every circumstance in, or of Worship is not a Ceremony. A
Ceremony is a circumstance, and something more. And a circumstance may be made
a Ceremony: ex. gr. The color of a Beast offered in Sacrifice was a
circumstance in it self: But in the Heiser of Expiation, the color was
specified, and required to be Red, and no other: Here a circumstance is made,
more then naturally it was, a Ceremony. Say the same of Time. Place, Habit,
etc. abstractedly considered they were but circumstances of Worship, but
determined or instituted by God were made Ceremonies, as were the Jewish
Festivals, Temple, Ephod* etc. As for the Definition of a Ceremony (for a
circumstance is nothing but an Adjunct of any other thing, substance or action)
it is variously given by diverse Divines; but all for the most part agree in
this (even Heathens also in any Religion) [That a Ceremony in Religion is a
sacred Rite inst^^uted for the honoring of God in his Public Worship, and
indeed a part of external Worship.] The Casuist calls them [Sacred mystical
Ceremonies, significant symbolical Rites, Page 145.] Others call them Ritus
colendi Deum; not only circumstantial Rites to attend the Worship, but Rites of
Worship: or Ceremonial, Ritual Worship: that is, parts of Worship: for worship
is divided into Moral and Ceremonial; which Distinction is idle and vain, if
Ceremonies be not worship or parts of worship. The Learned Casuist (and others)
fearing this may fall foul upon our Ceremonies, have confounded Ceremonies with
circumstances, or at least have equivocally used the words: For Page 6. He
speaks [of circumstances properly so called, as time, place, habit, purely
indifferent] in a general consideration abstractedly from Inconveniency; But he
knows that those circumstances determined by God were made also Ceremonies:
Institution Divine made this alteration in, or gave this addition to them: And
will not humane Institution also of Sacred, mystical, symbolical, significant
Rites do the same? That shall be tried hereafter. But in another place, Page
145. speaking of such Ceremonies, he confounds, or darkens the sense by a
Distinction: To this effect: [Ceremonies may be appointed to signify the
Favor of God, or the Grace of the Sacraments, or to be a means of receiving
any Blessing from God, and this is very dangerous, if corrupt and superstitious
men at any time rule the Church, etc. -- But if by Rights and Ceremonies we
mean only the circumstances of Divine worship, and by significancy that they
are fitted to commend the Exercise, with Order and Decency to express the
Gravity and Devotion of the worshippers, I cannot discover so much danger.] But
1. Should not men speak Properly in such a controversy as this, distinguishing
Ceremonies from circumstances? Do any that would be understood, call mere
circumstances of Order, etc. Ceremonies? Are not natural and civil
circumstances so far significant, to express gravity and devotion, and tend to
Edification, and yet no sacred Ceremonies? 2. Though our Ceremonies do not
signify immediately the favor of God, or the Grace of the Sacraments; yet do
they signify Duties on our part, Purity, Constancy, Humility: and unless they
be idle and vain, (and for that cause be cast out of Worship) they are intended
to be a means of receiving some Blessing from God, by a moral operation of
those Graces and Duties intended to be signified in their Institution: And this
will easily multiply their number, and in his Judgment render them dangerous,
till (as he says) they become stench in the Nostrils of God, and of all sober
and stayed men] As in the Church of Rome. More of this hereafter.

2. Inexpedient things.] This word had need to be explained; for it may have a
double sense. 1. Privatively, it is as much as not expedient: and so is the
same almost with those things the Casuist calls purely Indifferent (of which in
the next place) and often calls them Inconvenient. 2. Positively, as directly
contrary to expedient, which signifies things useful, helpful in worship, or to
the worship. He gives us this notion of them, when he says, p. 49. [Ceremonies
of the Church ought to be expedient not hurtful to the Church, not troublesome
to good Consciences, not burdensom] Things inexpedient therefore in worship are
such as are hurtful to the worship or worshippers, troublesome, burdensome, in a
word, any things that violate those 7 Rules required in the Imposition of
Indifferent things in worship, Cas. 8. p. 33. And in this sense I think the
Rev. Casuist does, or should understand the word Inexpedient; as a degree worse
then purely-indifferent (which also for their uselesseness in worship are
unlawfully imposed by the Church or Magistrate, as we shall hear him assert
anon) But yet (which is observable) in the process of his Discourse he
confounds things inexpedient with things merely or privatively inconvenient, or
unfit: The Instances are many, [ Page 80. Inconveniency and inexpediency, Page
81. Any thing unfit and Inconvenient. Page 89. Inconvenience only. Page 91. An
Inexpedient indifferent thing. Page 109. Somewhat inexpedient, barely
inexpedient. Page 105.] But (under favor) this is either a tergiversation, or
perverting of the Question; especially in respect of the second part, our
submission to them: for though it be true that some things inconvenient ought
not to be imposed in worship, yet such things if imposed, may in some cases be
lawfully submitted to, and in that No^ion have been submitted to, by some
Learned and Pious Nonconformists: For the Inconvenience may be only in a
circumstance of Worship, as at an unseasonable time, or unconvenient place, and
the like. And if no other will be allowed, submission to them may be lawful,
rather then not to enjoy the public Ordinances. But if inexpedient as
Ceremonies, i. e, hurtful to the Worship as before; the Question is altered,
and some new Distinctions must be used, of which more perhaps hereafter.

3. Things purely indifferent] What is meant by things Indifferent, he resolved
us in his first Case. A middle between necessary, as commanded, and unlawful
things, as forbidden; morally neither good nor bad in themselves, but may be
either by some circumstance: And these seem to some to be of two sorts. 1. Such
as may be some circumstance be made good or bad. 2. Such as when used in
Worship, are at least not good: (whether not bad is a Question if Imposed and
used in Worship) These our Casuist calls purely Indifferent, others merely
Indifferent; or quatenus Indifferent. Case 6. What those purely indifferent
things are, he discovers not, either by a description of them, or any one
Instance in particular. Indeed at Case 12. He gives us the same description of
a thing Indifferent (as at first) and applies it to a thing purely indifferent.
[A middle place it holds between things necessary and things sinful; between
things expedient, and things inexpedient, etc. but in all regards purely
indifferent.] And then tells us, [The Question is not whether there be any such
things or no, but hoc supposito, that such things there are, and that they are
commanded by Lawful Authority] But did it not concern him to give one Instance
of such a thing as is purely Indifferent, not in its Nature and in it self, for
there are enough in that kind, but when Imposed in Worship? That Is the Case and
Question: [What's to be done by private persons, when things purely indifferent
are required in Religious Exercises?] Now if there be no such things as purely
Indifferent in worship, the Case is vain and idle: Speak Sir, to our
Ceremonies: Are our Ceremonies, as the Surplice, or Cross in Baptism, a thing
purely Indifferent in worship? You durst not say so; for that had reflected
upon the Church imposing, as a crime, you having formerly affirmed it unlawful
to impose such things upon several good Reasons, Case 6. Therefore you had
rather suppose such a case should be, then propose an Instance when it is so:
Caute si non cast. But Sir, by things purely Indifferent, my self, and some
Readers understood you to mean things that were no way useful in worship, but
like Herb-John in the Pot; if they do no good, they do no harm, as differencing
them from things Inexpedient, as less evil. And this at last you give us to be
the sense, but when you thought this question and your former sense of it, Case
12. was forgotten, see Page 147. your own true description of a thing purely
indifferent, viz. [as to be of no use or service] that is, in worship.
Affirming [nothing so purely indifferent ought to be imposed.] And in this
sense I take a thing purely indifferent in worship is a thing useless,
needless, unnecessary, etc. And in this notion if you do not take it, you will
never fully resolve the present Controversy. As on the other side, if you take
inexpedient only privatively, for not useful, or only inconvenient and unfit,
your Cases are coincident, if not the same; this of purely indifferent, and
that of things inexpedient. But I pass on in my Explication.

4. May be imposed lawfully by men] This deserves to be explained a little. 1.
To manifest where the Poison lies of most of humane Traditions applied to
worship, viz. in the Imposers, sometimes, only; always, chiefly. For their
Imposition entrenches most upon the Wisdom, and Sovereignty of God; and the
Kingly Office of Christ, in appointing ways and means of his worship. 2. To
distinguish between the Imposers and Submitters in point of Lawfulness. For
some inconvenient things may lawfully be submitted to, if they be imposed,
which may not but sinfully be imposed. As if a mere circumstance unfit or
inconvenient (in the Casuists language) be commanded in worship, without the
Observation whereof, there can be no public worship, it is granted by him to be
unlawful to command such a circumstance, but strongly pleaded to be lawful and
expedient to obey it. 3. I add, By men.] For God may by his Sovereignty
command what indifferent, or to us seeming inconvenient things in worship, he
pleases (as water in Baptism to signify and operate the Grace of Regeneration)
because he has power to work Grace by any means: but men as they have no
Authority to institute any means of Worship, so neither have they power to
render them effectual to them that use them.

5. In the Worship of God.] For in civil things there is a Latitude or Liberty
both to Superiors to impose things inconvenient, or inexpedient, both
privatively, if not unfit; or positively, as hurtful; and for people to obey,
without sin: but not so generally in Worship: for there both may sin, the one
in commanding, the other in submitting to unlawful things. Unlawful, I say,
either in their own nature, or by some Accident or circumstance becoming sinful
in Worship. Of which hereafter more.

6. Or, if Imposed, may lawfully be submitted to.] This brings us to the second
question, concerning Submission to things inexpedient, or purely indifferent in
Worship. For 1. That they may not lawfully be imposed, is asserted often by the
Casuist. The submission to them is now considerable. 2. This submission may
respect either the Minister who is to act them, by active obedience, or the
People, who in some things are, or may be only passively obedient, by presence
at them, when they are done without any assent or consent unto them, yea with
manifested dissent from, and dislike of them. Of which in another Place and
Time.

7. Assented and Consented unto.] And this leads us to the third and last
question. We have thus proceeded. 1. That some things inconvenient may not be
imposed in Worship. 2. That yet some such things, if imposed, may be barely
submitted to, and also lawfully in a Case. 3. We are now to go the last step,
whether they may be submitted to with an unfeigned assent and consent? The
Explication is only here intended in three words. 1. Assent] has respect to
the truth of a thing, and is an act of the Understanding. 2. Consent] is an Act
of the Will respecting the Goodness of a thing. 3. Vnfeigned] implies the
sincerity and fullness of that Assent and Consent from the bottom of the heart.
The Terms of the question being thus explained, we proceed to the Second thing
propounded. How far Parties agree.

II. Postulata, sive Concessa.
1. Things used (or to be used) in Worship, are of three sorts: Necessary,
Unlawful, or of a middle sort, of themselves neither good nor bad, but made so
by circumstances, called things Indifferent.

1. Necessary, as commanded by God: and they are of two sorts. In special, as
the particular Ordinances, the word and Sacraments. Or in general, as the
necessary circumstances tending to Decency, Order and Edification, 1 Cor. 14
40. This Distinction is given us by the Casuist in a little other terms, Case
12. Page 67. A thing is necessary either properly as expressly commanded by God,
or occasionarily, as expedient.] that is, with respect to the Rule of
circumstances, and so generally commanded also. Things expedient then are
Necessary in Worship by an occasional or secondary Necessity; let that be
remembered.

2. Unlawful or sinful, from some Prohibition from God, and that (as was said
in the former) either in special, as forbidden by express words, as Images in
the Second Commandment: or in general and by consequence, as all Imaginations
and Inventions of men added to divine worship, which are prohibited in the
negative part of the same Commandment: and also such Circumstances as are
indecent, unorderly, and against Edification in the Negative part of that
Precept, 1 Cor. 14.40. This Distinction is owned and given us also by the
Casuist in the same place, Page 68. A thing may be sinful either in it self,
(that is, in its own Nature, as directly prohibited by God) or by some
inconvenience in its use.] that is, when it is Inexpedient to be used in
Worship; Inexpedient as to the use, as he expressed himself there, page 66.
Things Inexpedient then, as violating Order, Decency, etc. are unlawful in
Worship: Let this be remembered also against anon.

3. Indifferent, of a middle sort in themselves neither good nor bad, as
morally considered, or in their own Nature, but by circumstances they may
become good or bad: or to use his own words [very apt by reason of
Circumstances to tend unto, to swerve unto, to become, or appear, either good
or bad.] Now what those Circumstances are that change them into good or bad, he
does not thereby tell us (as he ought to have done) but yet we may collect his
sense or meaning, by what is already said, (and more hereafter:) viz. they then
become good, (yea necessary) when they are expedient for Decency, Order, etc.
and Bad, i.e. sinful when they are inconvenient, or inexpedient for those ends,
that is hurtful in their use.

For a Close of the first Concession, I shall only take and give notice of the
Method of the Casuist. In the former part treating of the Imposition of things
in Worship, he only denies the power to impose things, purely Indifferent, and
Inexpedient, (supposing indeed that as Necessary things are commanded by God
and Imposed: so sinful things may not be Imposed by man.) but says nothing of
things doubtful or significant, etc But in the latter part, of Submission, he
instances in, and puts five Cases, what is to be done, if such things be
imposed, viz. 1. Necessary things. 2. Expedient. 3. Purely Indifferent. 4.
Inexpedient. 5. Sinful. In which Proceeding this is further observable, that he
misleads himself and his Reader by this gradation: as if all the 4 former were
sinless and lawful, and the last sort only sinful in Worship. But it already
appears (by what has already been said, and will do more hereafter) that as
the two first sorts are only lawful in Worship, So the three last are all
unlawful there; either in themselves, as those he calls sinful, or by the
Inconvenience of their use, as the third and fourth. And so stealing (in this
Mist) this Opinion, that things purely Indifferent or Inexpedient, without the
former Distinction, are lawful in Worship: His Arguments for Submission seem so
Rational and Plausible, taken from Peace, Duty, Safety. In a word, as he
mistakes, so he mis-states the question, disputing for Submission to things
lawful in themselves: when he should prove things Inconvenient in their use, in
Worship, may lawfully be submitted to. This Observation being remembered we
thankfully accept this first Concession, and proceed to the next.

2. Nothing sinful or unlawful, may be either Imposed or submitted unto in
Divine Worship. 1. Not Imposed: This needs no Proof, as confessed by all, that
know what Religion is, and the Worship of God means. But we have the Assent and
Consent of our Rev. Casuist, often attested in this Point. For putting the
Case, what is to be done, when things sinful are Imposed, he deprecates any
[mistake of being an Advocate for sin or sinful Impositions.] And presently
after resolves, [such Impositions are not to be obeyed,] and if not obeyed, to
what end are they Imposed? Yea when he resolved before, that things purely
Indifferent and Inexpedient cannot lawfully be Imposed in Worship, much more
will he deny things sinful to be lawfully Imposed. 2. Not Submitted to if
Imposed. This is the Resolution of the Case, Page 119. peremptorily from the
Authority of St. August. and Bernard. [Things of themselves and materially
evil, as they cannot justly be commanded, so they cannot lawfully be done.] Yea
in another Case. [What if they seem sinful to us, though lawful in themselves,
if after sincere and serious disquisition they seem still sinful to us?] He
peremptorily concludes we must not obey, page 126. Much less if it be sinful in
it self. But seeing some things are sinful, not materially or in themselves,
but in their use, what will he resolve in the latter case? Whether may such
things be Imposed in Worship: or if Imposed, be submitted to? The Resolution of
this sully and clearly would have put an end to the present Controversy; But
he either waves it, or obscures it. Yet something shall be said to it in the
next Concession.

3. No Inexpedient thing may lawfully be imposed in worship, See page 69.
There Is a preobligation upon Authority to Impose nothing but what is expedient
in the Worship of God, and p. 73. admits the exerting of power in requiring of
things that are lawful, but inexpedient, to be unwarrantable, as an abuse of
Authority.
or submitted to. 1. Not imposed: this is fully yielded us, page 36. Case 8.
[It being against the Rule of the Apostle, (all things are not expedient) and
indeed against common Reason; it is not lawful in Church Governors to impose
any thing about Gods worship that is only Indifferent, and lawful in its self,
but not expedient.] Had he given us his Reasons against Imposition of such
things in worship (as he does in things purely Indifferent) he had done noble
service to the Church; yet something he hinted in the words alleged [Its
against the Apostles Rule, and common Reason to impose such things,] and more
explicitly in the words before these immediately [All things that are
Indifferent and not expedient, are not lawful, but sinful] Sinful! Surely he
must not mean materially and in themselves (for they were not then Indifferent)
but sinful in their use if Imposed or used in Worship: that is, because they
are Inexpedient, yea hurtful to the Worship, against Order, etc. and to the
Worshippers too often. In a word, against the Second Commandment. 2 Not
submitted to. For this we have his Assent also. [Things not expedient to be
done) ought not to be done, and things not expedient to be commanded, ought not
to be commanded.] Where we have both asserted. They ought not to be imposed, or
if imposed, not submitted to. If he, or any for him shall say (as some for him
do say) things not expedient, if left free to our choice, may not be done, but
if commanded, that alters the Case. I Answer (though I think he intended not
this hidden sense in this place) 1. He has asserted that [things not expedient
(in worship) are not lawful, but sinful] as before. And can the Command of
Authority make that lawful which, if not in it self, yet in its use is sinful?
2. It is acknowledged by a Proselyte, and stout Advocate of the Casuist, [That
if the things be sinful, they may neither be lawfully Imposed nor Submitted
to.] I see his Evasion: He means if they be sinful in themselves, or in their
Nature, and not if only sinfully commanded. But I rejoyn. Things may be sinful
in their Use as inexpedient (as was said and granted by his Friend, supra
Concession. 1.) and will he, dare he affirm, that things either way sinful, may
be either imposed, or practiced in Worship? I believe he will not upon second
and serious Consideration.

4. Nothing purely Indifferent (that is idle, or of no use) in worship, See
Page 147. Nothing purely indifferent ought to be Imposed, as all moderate men
allow.
may be imposed in worship, or if imposed, submitted to in Practice. 1. Not
imposed, that is granted, and asserted often. First, he has a case wholly
against it, Case 6. Where, by several Arguments he confutes that Opinion; some
whereof are taken from the gross Absurdities which would follow if such a power
were granted to Church Governors. All a posteriori, only the last a priori.
God has not invested them with such a power, which though I grant to be true,
some of his good Friends will not allow him: For they say God has not only
given allowance, but a Command to the Church-Rulers, to ordain Ceremonies for
Order and Decency, 1 Cor. 14.40. Yes, may he say, but not what indifferent
things they please. But according to the Rules of Imposition in the Scripture:
that they be few and wholesome, expedient, etc. But I pray who shall be Judge of
their Impositions? If themselves only in their Prudence and Discretion, they
may impose what, and as many as they please. And though the Rev. Casuist says,
page 28. [he never met with any high Conformist that allowed them such a
power,] yet sure he forgot himself. For a few Leaves after, page 36. he brings
in the great and famous Defender of this Church, confidently, and expressly
asserting such a Power. [Church-Governours (says he) have liberty to establish
whatsoever being in it self indifferent, shall to their wisdom seem most
expedient.] But let that pass. How does he prove [that God has not inve^ed
them with such an Arbitrary and strangely unlimited power?] Not a word to prove
it, which concerned him to have done; seeing others affirm, that he has such a
Power. One Argument a priore, from the Prohibition of God, had done the deed.
That was, the sinfulness of such things in Worship. Why? Because they are
either against the Apostles Rule, (they are against (or not according to)
Order, Decency, or Edification.) or against the Third Commandment of the first
Table, (the general Rule of worship) as idle, useless, superfluous, and
consequently a taking of Gods Name in vain. Again he tells us, what he had told
us before, that [such things, viz. purely Indifferent, ought not to be enjoined
by Authority.] 2. But what if they be Imposed? May they be submitted to by
Ministers, or People? For this, he is as peremptory for the Affirmative, as he
was before for the Negative. [When a thing is once required, though not
expedient as we would desire (here he calls things purely indifferent not
Expedient) we are under an obligation, and we must not consult our Liberty, but
our Duty. Not so much our liberty to forbear, as our liberty to obey, etc. page
69.] And presently endeavors to prove this his Assertion [By three things of
so great concern, and even indispensable convenience, that the ordinary
inconveniency of any lawful thing enjoined, seems very light and
inconsiderable, etc. page 90 and they are Peace, Duty, Safety.] But (let it be
observed) This he could not affirm, till first he had changed the state of the
Question: which was of things not expedient, or Inexpedient, turning the sense
into Unfit and Inconvenient. And 2. Pitifully begged the question; that the
things specified, (whether purely indifferent, or inexpedient) are lawful in
Worship. He must not mean lawful in themselves, or in their nature, but also in
their use in worship. For this Distinction he gave us, (and we shall hold him
to it) in the first Concession: [A thing may be sinful either in it self, or by
the inconveniency of its use] that is, when it is inexpedient to be used in
worship. A thing therefore may be lawful in it self, out of worship; which may
be sinful by the inconvenience of its use, if used in worship. And upon this
gross (I say not prevarication, for I judge reverently of the Casuist, he
intended not to pervert the state of the question, but) mistake or slip of his
Judgment or Memory, the whole following Discourse is founded. He supposes (and
it has misl^d too many) that because the things are lawful in themselves,
abstracted from worship, therefore though inconvenient in worship; they may be
lawfully obeyed in worship, and yet sinfully imposed. And this Mistake I
confess he might the more easily fall upon, by the non-observation of a double
Distinction, useful to the decision of this Controversy. 1. Between the Nature
of the things inconvenient imposed in worship. They are either mere
Circumstances, or more even Religious Ceremonies; If the first be imposed
(though sinfully by Authority) rather then lose the substance of Worship, the
Ordinances of God, they may, yea must be submitted to, and obeyed. But if they
be Sacred Ceremonies of humane Invention, and Institution, they may not (I yet
think) be obeyed; at least, that is the question. 2. There Is another Distinction
to be observed between Active and Passive Obedience, when such things are
imposed. It may be lawful (as I yet suppose, to prevent separation from a
Church) to yield Passive Obedience, by presence at the Ordinances, when not to
be had without them, having showed our dislike and dissent. But the question is
of Active Obedience in acting those Impositions, which involves our assent and
consent, either unfeigned or hypocritical. But I return to the Rev. Casuist And
had he not in his Title Page, limited his Discourse to Religious Matters, that
is, Matters of Divine worship, I should have suggested another Distinction,
between Civil and Sacred Affairs, with respect to the power of Superiors in
both of these. It may give a little light to the business in hand, and
therefore I shall briefly touch it. In civil affairs the supreme Authority may
impose some things inconvenient, or inexpedient, that is perhaps hurtful to the
business, and to the Subjects or Inferiors, and must also be obeyed; But in
Religion and Worship, as he may impose nothing inexpedient (as is granted
above) so if he does impose such things in worship (with the Limitations and
former Distinctions) he is not to be obeyed. And this I shall briefly make good
against him by his own Principles, and Concessions, and other Reasons. 1. No
sinful or unlawful thing may be (imposed or) submitted to in worship: but
things inconvenient in their use, are sinful: See the first Concession, Paragr.
2. [A thing may be sinful either in it self, or by the inconvenience of its
use, p 68.] Therefore they may not be submitted to. 2 No inexpedient thing may
be (imposed or) submitted to in worship: This is yielded in the third
Concession; and the Reason is, because they are sinful. So he affirmed before,
page 35, 36. [All things that are indifferent, and not expedient, are not
lawful but sinful.] But things purely indifferent are inexpedient in worship.
This is also his own Expression, now he is speaking of things purely
indifferent, to call them inconvenient, not expedient; And surely he will not
deny but purely Indifferent things imposed in worship, are inconvenient in
their use, and not expedient or inexpedient. (If he take these terms for the
same) therefore not to be submitted to.

3. No things that cause the submitter to them, to profane the worship of God,
by taking his Name in vain, against the Third Commandment, are to be submitted
to, though they be imposed; this cannot with any Reason be denied: But purely
indifferent things, that is, (by his own Exposition) such as are of no use in
Service or worship, but idle, useless, superfluous, (perhaps ridiculous) do
profane the Worship of God, therefore they are not to be submitted to.

4. Nothing that violates the Rule of the Apostle concerning Order, D^cency and
Edification, 1 Cor. 14.40. ought to be imposed, or if imposed, submitted to;
That such things may not be imposed, is asserted strongly, page 43. [Nothing
that is disorderly, indecent, (or against Edification in Gods Worship, can
warrantably be imposed upon the Church.] But things purely indifferent
(described as before) are indecent, disorderly, and unedifying in Worship; ergo
not to be imposed, and for the same reason to be submitted to, because they are
sinful against the Apostles Precept: Much more might be added, but I forbear
till we come to the Hypothesis in our Ceremonies. I have been large in this, I
shall b^ shorter in the next Concessions.

5. Nothing really superstitious may be imposed in worship, or if imposed,
submitted to. 1. Not imposed: For that is a manifest injury to, and violation
(as of the whole first Table of the Decalogue in general, so) of the Second
Commandment thereof in special, which forbids all superstitious Worship, as
false. Our Rev. Casuist speaks not expressly of this Case, in regard of the
Imposition of such things; but comprehends it (as I suppose) under the general
of things sinful and unlawful, and that is enough against the Imposition of
them. 2. And as for submission to them, he seems to grant that if the things be
proved to be really such (as by some they are supposed to be) they need not,
they ought not to be submitted to. To discover his Judgment herein he puts a
case [wherein does Superstition, or the appearance thereof consist? page 129.
And he reduces all to 4 Heads. 1. Merit. 2. Worship. 3. Perfection. 4.
Necessity] Whether all the kinds of Superstition fall under these 4 heads, I am
not fully satisfied: But he seems to me to grant, that if they be truly and
really superstitious, we may lawfully disobey the Imposition of them. But of
this more in Hypothesi.

6. Nothing doubtful or suspicious of sinfulness ought to be imposed in
worship, or if imposed, submitted to. For the Imposition of such things in the
worship of God the Rev. Casuist says nothing, or but little directly, as not
making it a disputable Case; only by consequence he says something to it in
another Case. [What is to be done when a thing seems sinful to us?] And he
seems to resolve it negatively, we ought not to submit unto it. For page 124.
He thus bespeaks his private person. [If thy disquisition for satisfaction,
has brought thee to this, that thou art in a doubt, whether thou may obey or
no, first I recommend thee to that excellent Casuist, the Rev. B. of Lincoln.]
But what if he satisfy him not; then hear his own Resolution, page 126. [If
the thing required appear sinful to thee still, thou art bound by the Law, thou
art bound to the peace of thine own Conscience, -- Thou may not obey.] Thence
would I infer if in doubtful things, I am not bound to obey (for if I doubt,
and do a thing, especially in worship, I sin) the Magistrate seems pre-obliged
not to command such things: For to what end, if the doubtful need not, must not
obey him? But of this also more in Hypothesi.

7. No part of worship may be imposed in Divine Service by men. The Reason is
given by the Rev. Casuist twice, because it is superstitious; once p. 4. and
130. Adding, It Is Gods Prerogative alone to prescribe his own Worship; Command.
2. and forbidden to men in the Negative part thereof.

8. No significant thing (or Ceremony) may by men be imposed in Worship.] The
Rev. Casuist, having propounded this case, p. 144. [Whether the imputing of
significancy to things imposed render them superstitious?] Resolves the Case by
a double or rather treble Distinction. 1. Of Ceremonies from Circumstances of
Worship. 2. Of the Authors or Institutors of Worship, God or Men. 3. Of
Significancy, to signify either the Favor of God, the Grace of the
Sacraments, or to be a means of receiving any Blessing from God, or to intend
only fitness to commend the exercise with Order and Decency, and to express the
gravity and devotion of the Worshippers, etc.] The Result is this, That
Ceremonies (not mere Circumstances) instituted by men (not God) signifying the
Favor of God, etc. (not Order, Decency, Gravity) are very dangerous, if
corrupt and superstitious men should at any time rule the Church: and we may
have quickly not 7, but 70 times 7 if not entire, yet Semi-Sacraments, the
Church of God and his Service being thereby obnoxious to all the antic and
conceited Crotchets that the vain imaginations of overcurious men can cumber
them with, till they become stench in the Nostrils of all sober and stayed men,
and of God himself, as with the Church of Rome.] This is enough to decide the
Controversy in hand, if justly appliable to our Ceremonies. To the
Consideration whereof we now proceed.

III. The Proof of the Negative in all the Particulars.
Hitherto following the steps of the Rev. Casuist, I have proceeded only in
Thesi, concerning things Inexpedient, or purely Indifferent, whether they may
be imposed, or if imposed, submitted to in worship; and have gathered his
Concessions into one view, and showed how far both Parties agree: We are now
come to the Application of these Concessions in Hypothesi. to the Matters of
our bitter Contentions at this day: And much of my work is done already. The
Propositions being granted me, and proved, I shall need only to prove the
Assumptions of all my Syllogismes:

For if our Ceremonies prove such things, as the Concessions grant, the
Conclusions will easily follow, that they are unlawful, to be either Imposed in
Worship, or Submitted to: I shall now therefore state the Question anew in our
particular Case, thus:

Whether our Ceremonies may lawfully by men be Imposed in the Worship of God:
or, if Imposed, may lawfully be Submitted, Assented and Consented unto? The
Explication of the Terms is laid down in the beginning, and the Problem
contains 3 questions, viz. Of the Lawfulness 1. Of the Imposition of them in
worship. 2. Of the Submission to them. 3. Of the Declaration of an unfeigned
Assent and Consent unto them. To the Particulars.

I. Of the Imposition of Ceremonies.
What we, and most Learned Divines understand by a Ceremony imposed in worship,
was discoursed in the Explicatory part at the Entrance of this Dissertation,
viz. a Sacred Rite of worshipping God intended and instituted to the honoring
God in worship; whereby it is contra-distinguished to a mere Circumstance of
Worship, tending to Decency, Order and Edification. Now that such Ceremonies
may not be Imposed, the Rev. Casuist does not explicitly assert (that had been
dangerous to himself) but yet implicitly insinuates so much: [If Ceremonies
significant of the Grace and Favor of God, or to be a means of receiving any
Blessing from God be imposed, there is, no doubt, (says he) much danger in it,
p 145.] But what if mere Circumstances be imposed? But of this more in that
Head of Significancy.

That it is unlawful for the Church or Magistrate to impose our Ceremonies,
will appear by Application of all or most of the Concessions above, given us by
the Reverend Casuist himself; In General thus. No sinful, unlawful thing may by
any sort of men be imposed in worship. This is yielded by all of any Religion,
as at Concession 2. But I assume, our Ceremonies imposed are sinful and
unlawful; ergo they ought not to be imposed in Worship: The Assumption is
proved by the special Concessions.

1. [All things imposed or used in Worship, are either necessary or unlawful;
and so either Good or Bad: But our Ceremonies are not necessary; ergo.

The Minor is constantly and frequently affirmed by the Advocates thereof. God
was, is, and may be well, yea better served without them.

The Major is granted in the first Concession. Necessary a commanded by God;
specially, or generally. Unlawful, as forbidden by God, either in special or in
general. If it be said, but there are some things Indifferent, neither
commanded, nor forbidden by God, as the Division above was Tripartite. I
Answer, There are three things in themselves abstractedly considered which are
Indifferent, neither morally good nor bad; but in Worship, nothing Imposed is
Indifferent, but it is either expedient for Decency and Order, and so commanded
and necessary; or Inexpedient in the use, and so forbidden and unlawful; It is
asserted by our Casuist, Case 2. [No one Action (he might have added, no
Ceremony) in Religious Exercises is of its own nature so Indifferent, but that
by the Circumstances, it easily becomes good or evil.] Good, if it be expedient
in, or useful to the Worship: evil, if any ways Inconvenient in its use, that
is, Inexpedient, or hurtful to the Worship. Of this more in the next.

2. [Nothing Inexpedient may be imposed in Worship: but such are our
Ceremonies; ergo etc.] The Major is fully conceded above, and proved also by
very good Reasons; this for one, [All things indifferent and not expedient, are
not lawful but sinful.] If not expedient things, that is, not useful to the
worship, be sinful, then much more, things inexpedient that is, hurtful to the
worship, are sinful: In the Explication of this Term, Inexpedient, it was
showed, that as, Expedient, imports something positive, useful, helpful to the
worship; so, Inexpedient, must (in the just opposition) signify something
prejudicious, hurtful to it: Not privatively only, which may be taken for some
things purely Indifferent; but positively, as hurtful, troublesome, burdensome,
etc. The Minor, that the Ceremonies in Controversy, are inexpedient and
hurtful to the worship, or worshippers, is abundantly proved by others, and
evident by Experience: as violating most of his 7 Rules, given for regulating
the Imposition of Indifferent things in worship, Case 8. Take the Particulars
briefly.

1. [They break the Peace of the Church, which ought primarily to be regarded
in Imposition of such things.] The Casuist proceeds excellently and boldly in
the Vindication of his second Rule for Public Peace. I wish the Imposers of
our Ceremonies would read or hear his words, and seriously lay them to heart.
[God is the God of Peace and Order, of Peace as well as Order. And as the
Order, so the Peace of the Church (without which, there is no Order) is
precious with him, and with all that have the Spirit of God, and any care of
his Church: Should any thing give way to Peace, and should not things
Indifferent? Are not these Indifferent? Is not Peace necessary in many
respects?] See the Place. Who knows not, that as the first Breach of the
Public Peace of the Church, was about a Ceremony, or thing Indifferent; so
these Ceremonies imposed have for many years broken the peace of our Church,
and now worst of all? I shall add a few more of the Reverend Casuists words.
[Who can think it wisdom to force any thing that is but indifferent, to the
endangering so necessary a thing as peace, or the dividing of the Church of
God, or provoking any considerable part thereof to separate from us?] But I
forbear.

2. They are offensive to weak Brethren [who (as he well) though weak, are not
to be thrown to the walls, without any regard, yea the Scripture reasons us to a
greater tenderness to the weaker part of the Church.] And more to this purpose.
Things inexpedient of this nature are described by our Rev. Casuist, to be such
as are troublesome to good Consciences, burdensome, etc. telling us, Ceremonies
of the Church ought not to be hurtful to the Church, troublesome, etc. page 49.
The Apostles had a special care of this, (...), not to trouble Gentile
Believers with Jewish Ceremonies, Acts 15.19. And how much trouble and sad
distractions these Ceremonies have brought upon many truly tender Consciences,
is too visible. While they were put upon this Rack, either to violate the peace
of their Consciences, or to run upon their utter undoing by the rigor of the
Law. I commend to their Consideration a Speech of Mr. Rogers, to be seen. p.
40. (a sufficient Defender of Ceremonies.) [He that in things indifferent has
not a tender care of weak Christians, shows that there is not that Charity in
him, nor regard of his Brethren which God commanded.] But I pray Sir, Ought
there not to be the same tender care of weak Christians, after they are
commanded? Let him resolve it.

3. The next Rule violated, to render them inexpedient, is [that of
Edification; the grand Level of all Church Power (says our Author)
Edification, and not its Destruction, in the whole or in any part. The great
Principle of such Impositions must be Charity, not envy at, or desire of
revenge, upon any person or party otherwise minded. Not to show victory over
them, or dominion over their Faith or Actions.] Add the next words, with a very
little variation. [Things I doubt, not sincerely abhorred by our present
Governors, as nor by our former] Things then that make not for Edification,
but rather against it, ought not to be imposed in worship; because they are
inexpedient, either privatively, as not furthering Edification, or positively,
as hindering or hurting it. But our Ceremonies, and other Impositions do rather
hinder, then further Edification; and by Edification I mean true spiritual
Edification, not carnal or superstitious; there are some things, that in (
Tertullians Language) do aedificare ad Gehennam; edify downwards, or to
destruction; that is, to take men off from the power of Godliness, and make
them formal, placing all their Relig on in Ceremonies, and Ceremonious Worship;
as it was with the old Papists, the Pharisees, and at this day with the new
Pharisees the Papists; yea they have turned to the destruction of precious
Ministers, and pious people. I need say no more to that.

4. The next is, That they violate [that most noble Rule of all, that of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently, and in order. A
standing Rule (as he goes on) never to be crossed by any Authority under
Heaven: yea God himself will never reverse it. Then (says he) nothing that is
indecent, or disorderly in Gods Worship, can warrantably be Imposed upon the
Church.] Now how disorderly some things imposed in our Liturgy are, the
Reverend Commissioners, and others have manifested. And if men were not
resolved upon their own Inventions: Is not Kneeling at the Lords Supper a
disorderly Gesture? Not only varying from the first Pattern, but from the Order
of all Nations, who stand or sit, but never kneel at a Supper? and as contrary
to the Custom of the prime or purest Churches for the first 600 years together;
who by the Decrees of Councils, forbad Kneeling at Prayer, on all Lords days?
And Custom is one of the Rules of Imposition given by the Casuist. [Of very
great use to indicate what is decent and orderly: Custom is Umpire of
Indifferent things, etc. page 44] I might have made this a distinct Head by it
self, But it may suffice to touch at it here.

5. The last Rule violated by humane Ceremonies imposed in Worship is, Gospel
or Christian-Liberty. [This must not be invaded by any Imposition which is
infringed, if these and other rules be not observed. 1. If any thing
indifferent be imposed, which any way checketh with the former Rules of
Expediency, Peace, Offense of the weak, Edification, Decency, Order, and the
Custom of the Churches. 2. If things indifferent be required with equal
severity as things necessary.] I list not to make the Application. How far
these Rules are infringed in the Imposition of our Ceremonies, he that runs may
read it. By what has been said already, they are now sufficiently proved to be
in inexpedient and hurtful to the Worship and Worshippers, and therefore ought
not to be Imposed in our Worship. But further.

3 [Nothing purely Indifferent ought to be Imposed in Worship. This Proposition
is fully yielded, asserted and proved above at the fourth Concession. The
Assumption, That our Ceremonies are such, i. e. purely Indifferent, will be
manifested from the Description of a thing Purely Indifferent, given us by the
Reverend Casuist, above in the Explication. [A thing so Indifferent as to be of
no use, or Service (in Worship) not more Expedient then Inexpedient.] that is,
(as I suppose) neither good nor bad. But I question whether any thing Imposed
in worship is not either good or bad: yea therefore bad, because it is not
good. The sense is Things purely Indifferent, are things useless, needless,
idle, superfluous, the Worship being complete and perfect without them; Now it
is confessed by all that our Ceremonies are not necessary (as was said above) but
yet their usefulness is strongly pleaded for, as decent and orderly, adding
Beauty and Luster to the Worship: I could ask many Questions here. 1 Are not
Gods Ordinances orderly and decent without them? If not, they charge the wisdom
of Christ, as not able to manage his Worship decently and orderly without the
help of foolish men. If so, what need have they of a painted Beauty, having a
native beauty of their own? 2. To whom do Ceremonies seem to add Decency and
Order to Divine Ordinances? Not to God, or truly Devout Christians, who are
both best pleased with the simplicity of Gods prescribed Worship. To whom then
I will not say. 4. What Decency, or Order is there is a Surplice, more then in
a Gown, or Cloak (such as Paul wore) but of some men's fancying? 4. If they
plead them useful as significant Rites, to excite Devotion, or Duty, etc. I
shall therefore plead them useless, needless, etc. because what is expected by
them, is done before, and better, by the Ordinances themselves. Of which more
upon another account.

4. [Nothing really superstitious (or easily abused to Superstition) may be
Imposed in Worship. But our Ceremonies are guilty of Superstition, and
superstitiously abused, not only at Rome, but by many amongst our selves; ergo,
etc.] The first Proposition was the fifth Concession: but lightly touched,
intended to be more largely handled here. Thus the Rev. Casuist speaks more
fully. [Upon supposition that the Idolatry, or superstition (and superstition
is a degree of Idolatry) cannot be severed from the use of a thing, or very
hardly done; Idolatry and Superstition must have no Indulgence: the Serpent it
self must be broken in pieces; and that famous Rule of Pope Stephen is
applauded by all,] See page 141. (The rather because it is the Testimony of a
Pope against his Successors) the words are these. [If some of our Predecessors
have done some things which at that time might be without fault, and afterward
are turned into Error and Superstition, without any delay, and with great
Authority, they may be destroyed by Posterity.] But Superstition being not in
the things used, or required, but in the persons that superstitiously require,
or use them, grounded in the false Doctrine, and Superstitious Opinion which
persons have of them, how shall we come to know when things are superstitiously
abused? And then how can we charge our Ceremonies with Superstition? Our Rev.
Casuist has given us some rules to try them by, page 130, etc. which we shall
apply to the case in hand as we go. Only premising these two things. 1. That we
limit not our Discourse only to the 3 Ceremonies, Surplice, Cross, and
Kneeling, but enlarge it to any other Rites and Ceremonies Imposed and used in
the Public Worship; even to the Liturgy it self, which being the Form of
divine Service, as it is called, may be styled, a Grand Ceremony. 2. That it
must not be expected that all the Rules of Discovery should be applied to every
particular Ceremony to prove it superstitious; but any one may suffice, if
rightly applied. And now I proceed.

1. The first way of Discovery of Superstition is by the 4 Characters thereof
given by Learned Divines. An Opinion of Merit; of Worship; of Perfection; of
Necessity. Any one of these found in our Ceremonies will testify the persons
that so use them to be Superstitious.

1. Of Merit. [When (to take his own words) we think God is bound to reward our
Inventions, and that by our Purses or Labors we purchase his favor, this is
Superstition.] And does not a great Rabbi of our Church (whose Learning and
Books are not only applauded, and admired as Oracles, but approved as Orthodox
by our Rulers,) profess openly and confidently. [It is his Doctrine that
Will Worship, (his Free-will-Offerings) are more commendable, more acceptable,
and more rewardable with God then commanded Duties.] Amongst which Free will
Oblations, the Liturgy is one, great one, the only Form of Divine Service, as
it is called by some; and do not the vulgar and many higher persons esteem it
to be most commendable, most acceptable, and consequently most rewardable
Service of God? and if not with their Purses, yet by the labor of their Lips;
in bearing a part in that Service, to purchase his Favor? And is not this
Superstition? If it be rewardable, it must be either by some Promise, but there
is none such in Scripture. Or of due Debt. Romans 4. but that is plain Merit;
there is no third way to ground the Reward on.

2. Of Worship. [When things are required as parts, or of the Essence of Divine
Worship, or so used, this is Superstition] But the Liturgy it self is by the
Rulers made and called the Form of Divine Worship, not a part only, but the
whole Essence and Substance thereof. 2. Ceremonies are esteemed by all
Religions, Rites of Worship, Ceremonial worship, and so parts of worship, (as
was proved above.) 3. They are made by the Imposers, Religious, not civil
Ceremonies, and so parts of Religion, that is, of Worship, and so used by many:
Certainly Kneeling at Sacrament is a part of external worship, and so esteemed
and used by most.

3. Of Perfection. [When we conceive the true Beauty of the Church, and the
Perfection of Christianity consists in things of humane Invention. This is
Superstition.] And do not some, on this side Rome, place the Perfection of
Christianity, and the beauty of Religion, in Pompous Ceremonies, Glorious
Temples, Sweet and melodious Music, Gaudy Priestly Garments, a completed
Liturgy, etc. And do not many think the Service undecent without a Surplice?
the Baptism imperfect without the Cross? the Sacrament irreverently received
without Kneeling? Is not this gross superstition?

4. Of Necessity. [When such things are required, and so used, as simply
necessary in their Nature, being but things Indifferent. This is also
Superstition.] And I pray, has not a Learned Doctor a Late Bishop, pleaded the
Liturgy to be so necessary, that without it, there can be no Religion, no
honesty, no Allegiance. And do not the Late Commissioners plead a Precept of
Scripture for their Ceremonies? Not an Allowance only, but a Command to
institute Ceremonies? And is not that necessary? In a word, does not the Late
Act make them so necessary (as far as they can) that the commanded worship must
rather be omitted, then any of their humane divine Service omitted? that men
must not worship God without observation of their Ceremonies? Wear a Surplice,
or pray not, preach not: Cross the Child, or baptize not: Kneel, or receive not
the other Sacrament. And for the ordinary users of them, it is observable, that
humane Inventions added to the Worship of God, as they are more strictly
observed then the prescribed Worship of God, Micah 6. ult. so after long
continuance, they are esteemed necessary; as (falsely) supposed to be of Divine
Original. These are the ordinary Characters of Superstition, which I could wish
were not too visible spots in the face of our Church; But I believe there are
more and other ways to discover Superstition, then these. As, 1. To put
Holiness in things, times, places. 2. To put virtue, efficacy, in things which
they have not neither in their Natures, nor by Divine Institution. 3. To put
significations upon Ceremonies in Divine Worship. Of which more by and by.

2. The next Rule is [when upon evident and undeniable grounds of General
Practice, it appears to the sober and unbyassed sort of men, that a thing is
used superstitiously in any of the former Respects, then no doubt there is an
appearance of Superstition.] Now first the Cenerality of our Nation, are proved
before, to be superstitious in the use of our Liturgy and Ceremonies. And for
the Learned that conform to them some are known to be Popishly superstitious;
in Bowing, Crossing, etc. Some are by assed by Profits or Preferments that are
gotten or lost thereby. Only some few Sober, Learned and unbyassed persons are
free from the guilt of Superstition: sticking to the simplicity of
Gospel Worship.

3. A third Rule given, and most undoubted, is [Look to the Doctrine of the
Church, whence the Grounds of Imposition and Practice are drawn: If they be
false and superstitious, then there is an appearance of evil to be avoided.] We
join issue in this also, and apply it to the Case in hand.

1. The Doctrine of the Church though found in most of the 39 Articles, has
yet been scrupled at by Nonconformists in the Institution of Ceremonies; and
the Doctrine and Power given questioned: [The Church has power to Impose
Ceremonies,] see the Article: and this is asserted by that great Advocate of
this Church cited above, and more confidently by a Late Bishop. Upon this
Principle and bottom are all our Ceremonies, and all those at Rome founded, and
is most certainly false; as is proved elsewhere.

2. They are held forth in practice, as Moral means to excite Devotion, and
teach and provoke to Duty: the Surplice to Purity, the Cross to Constancy, etc.
And upon these Reasons commended, and commanded by the Church her self,
(Preface to the Liturgy:) and by her Champions propugnated, which renders them
superstitious; as will further appear on another Head.

4. The last Rule is [When we have some unquestionable Reason to suspect the
design of our Governors, to betray the Church to Superstition and Idolatry,
contrary to the known Doctrine of it] enough, and enough! This Symptom has
been visible formerly in some chief Rulers of the Church, who were known to be
Popishly affected: and labored to bring in Superstition and Idolatry into the
Church, by setting up Images, Crucifixes, Altars in the Churches, requiring
Bowings at the Name of Jesus, and to, or toward the Altars: Asserting holiness
of Times, Places, etc. which God never consecrated: What some in chiefest
places of the Church are now designing, time will manifest. Sufficient has
been spoken to prove our Ceremonies to be superstitious, and therefore not to
be Imposed, or if Imposed, to be repealed, and reversed.

5. [Nothing doubtful, or suspected justly to be sinful may be Imposed in
Worship.] This was the 6th. Postulatum, either to be granted, or proved: How
far the Rev. Casuist has yielded to this Proposition, may be seen above, and
what was evinced from his Concession. Other Learned and Judicious Divines
assert, and prove it more fully; Take some of their own words. First, the
famous Mr. Hales. who propounds this as a remedy of Schism. [To have all
Liturgies and Public Forms of Service so framed, as that they admit not of
particular and private Fancies, but contain only such things in which all
Christians do agree. To charge the Church with things unnecessary, was the
first beginning of all Superstition and Schism: -- and concludes, wheresoever
faise or suspected Opinions are made a part of Church-Liturgy, he that
separates is not the Schismatic; for it is alike unlawful, to make profession
of known, or suspected falsehood, as to put in practice unlawful or suspected
actions.] See more in his Book of Schism. Or as his words are cited more
largely by Mr. Stilling fleet, who agrees with him in the Assertion, Iren.
part. 1. page 120, etc.
and gives a strong Reason against the Imposition of suspected things. [As for
public Forms of Divine Service such of all things certainly, should be so
composed, as to be the least subject to any scruples from any person
whatsoever, being on purpose composed for the declaration of men's Unity and
Consent in their public Worship.] And let me add my Mite to the Heap; See Rom
15.5, 6. and 1 Cor. 1.10.
In worship there is req^ired Unanimity of hearts, rather then Uniformity in
Ceremonies; so the Apostle: Be ye all of one mind. Speak the same thing, Phil.
2.2. And all should say Amen to the same Prayers, 1 Cor. 14. Which cannot be
done in things to any doubtful, or suspected to be false or unlawful.

And now I shall not need to prove the Assumption. I shall only use Mr. Hales
his words cited above, spoken indeed of Image worship, appliable to our
Ceremonies. [They are acknowledged by all to be unnecessary, by many held
unlawful, by most suspected or doubtful;] and therefore may not lawfully be
imposed in Worship.

6 Lastly, [No significant thing (or Ceremony) signifying either the Favor of
God, or the Grace of the Sacrament, or to be a means of receiving any Blessing
from God, may by men be Imposed in Worship: But such are our Ceremonies; ergo,
etc.] The Major Proposition is fully granted above in the 7th. Concession; and
further confirmed thus; Because significations of such things, put upon things
or Ceremonies in worship make them Sacraments, too like to those of Christ's
Institution, at least (as he) Semi-Sacraments, which Papists call Sacramentals.
And indeed they fall under the Definition of a Sacrament, given in the Church
Catechism, [A Sacrament is an outward visible sign, of an inward and invisible
Grace,] and therefore an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual Grace, is
a Sacrament. Now, Exodus 30.33.
as in the Holy Perfume in the Old Law, there was a strict Prohibition that no
man should dare to make the like, so is there a stricter prohibition (if
stricter may be) in the second Commandment, that no man presume to make a
Sacrament, (which is a part of worship) or any thing like a Sacrament, or part
of worship. The Jealousy of God will not endure it. It was Jeroboams sin (and
therefore not such policy as he fancied) to make a Feast, like unto the Feast
in Judah, 1 Kings 2.32. It remains then to prove the Minor; that such
significations are put upon our Ceremonies; that in their Imposition some of
those significations are put upon them, and so practiced by many Conformists.

1. That voluntary Services (such as our Ceremonies) are intended to signify
and procure the Favor of God in some respect, was openly professed by a
Learned Rabbi of this Church, approved cum Licentia Superiorum, as was
instanced above. And by those that esteem the Sacrament of Baptism, imperfect,
without the Cross; or the other Sacrament irreverently received without
Kneeling, it must be intended, that those Ceremonies do procure (and therefore
signify) the Favor of God: but I let that pass as the sense of private
persons, (for so it will be answered) and not as the Judgment of the Church.

2. [They are Imposed to signify the Grace of the Sacraments, at least in
part,] with this only difference, that the Sacraments do signify the whole
Covenant of Grace, or the whole Grace of the Covenant; these some particular
Graces thereof: as the Surplice to signify Purity, the Cross Constancy: and
what are these but Semi Sacraments (as he calls them) and the Definition of a
Sacrament fits them handsomely. The outward sign of the Surplice signifying the
inward invisible Grace of Purity. The outward visible sign of the Cross
signifies the inward invisible Grace of Constancy in our Profession: signified
before by Baptism; Sacraments are signs to remember us of the whole Covenant of
Grace, in both the parts; of Grace from God to us; of Duty from us to God.
Ceremonies are imposed, to signify (they say) our Duty to God, but not the
Grace of God to us. Ex. gr. the Surplice (being pure white Linen) signifies
what purity, holiness chastity, should be in a Minister, (say the same
proportionably of the Cross.) But does it not also signify Grace from God, to
work those duties or graces in us? (for they are both graces and duties) If so:
What differs it from a Sacrament? If not; it will prove an idle and vain
Ceremony; and for that reason not to be Imposed in worship, or if Imposed, to
be repealed. In the Old Testament, they were commanded, to make, and wear
Fringes, Frontlets, Phylacteries, [To look upon it, and to remember all the
Commandments of the Lord, and do them, and be holy unto their God, Numb. 15.39,
40.] And being things appointed by God, no doubt but to the right users of
them, they were accompanied with grace to perform those duties; and those were
part of their Ceremonial Worship. But if they had devised their Ceremonies of
their own heads to the same religious ends in vain might they have expected the
like efficacy: though still they had been religious Ceremonies, and parts of
worship, but false. And when the Pharisees did add to these Ceremonies [by
making broad the Phylacteries, and enlarging the Borders, (that is, the
Fringes) of their Garments Mat. 23.5] Our Savior reproves not only their
Hypocrisy, in seeming holier to men; but also their Superstition, in seeming
wiser then God, in their own additions. As in another case of their own
Traditions, their Ablutions before they did eat, washing of Pots, Cups, and
Beds, as well as hands, they made this a Ceremony, to signify what purity and
holiness ought to be in themselves and others; expecting no doubt the same (if
not greater) efficacy from this Ceremony as from those Ablutions commanded by
God in their Law; and for this our Savior charge them with Will Worship,
[Mat. 15.8.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men.] How applicable all this is to our Ceremonies, I need not
say: the Surplice answers to their Fringes, the Cross to their Frontlets, being
applied to the Child's Forehead: If any shall say these our Ceremonies as they
are only monitory of Duty, not exhibitory of Grace; so the like efficacy is not
given to them, by the Doctrine of our Church. To that see the next.

3. [They are instituted (as I conceive by their words) to be a means of
receiving some Blessing from God] that is, to be moral causes to work those
Duties, or Graces in the Users of them; and such (and not Physical causes) were
not only those Frontlets, Fringes, etc. but the Word and Sacraments also of God
appointment. To make good this Charge, I shall produce the words of a Late
Advocate of our Ceremonies. [If men put any force or efficacy in Circumstances
devised by men, which neither God has promised to make good, nor Nature it
self is apt to produce, a religious Form is impressed on them by an erroneou
Intention.] That more virtue or efficacy is put upon our Ceremonies, then God
has promised, or Nature can produce, shall be made out from their own
acknowledgments. 1. The Church it self, in retaining and instituting them has
these words; Pref. to the old Liturgy.
[We have been content with only those Ceremonies, which make to decent Order,
and pious Discipline, and which [Note that] by some excellent and special
signification, are able to call to memory, a Duty to be performed to God, in
the stupid mind of man to his edification] It must be remembered here: 1. That
these Ceremonies are to be used in the Worship of God. 2. They are able to mind
men of a Duty to God. 3. They are useful not to civil, but spiritual
Edification: just as the Frontlets and other Ceremonies were. Now this is a
supernatural effect expected by the use of them, which neither by any promise
of God, nor by their own nature, they are able to produce. But 2. the
Apologists, who understood the mind of the Church, and were approved by her. Go
further: As, Eccles. Pol.
1. The Learned Hooker affirms, [That Ceremonies do leave a stronger and deeper
Impression.] He must mean it, as I suppose, of a Spiritual Impression, (being
used in the Worship of God) and that stronger and deeper then the very
Ordinances of God do exhibit, or else they are idle, and needless, where the
same or an equal Impression, is made by the Ordinances themselves; ex. gr. The
Cross used in Baptism, must be supposed to make a deeper Impression then
Baptism it self, etc. which if it be not Superstition in a high degree, I know
not what is. 2. The Learned Dr. Field speaks fuller to the purpose: Who having
strongly confuted the Popish Superstitions, because they put a supernatural
force in these Ceremonies: adds this; [Our Ceremonies are adhibited, to put in
mind, Of the Chur. lib. 4. Cap. 30. ad sinem.
and (mark this) to excite greater Fervor and Devotion, and to be of force to
express such spiritual and heavenly affections, dispositions, motions, or
desires, such a are or ought to be in men.] And I pray, what did the Legal
Ceremonies appointed by God (beforementioned) do more? Or what is this less
then is intended to be effected by Romish Ceremonies? If it be said (as it is)
[Our Ceremonies are monitory only, D. B.
external occasions, and objects, whereby the mind of man works upon its
self, not causes working by some virtue in them.] I Answer, 1. The very
Ordinances of God. Word and Sacraments, and those other named Ceremonies, did
not work physically by any virtue in them, but morally by the Institution of
God; and yet were they and are means to procure and receive a Blessing from
God. 2. The words are plain, they are appointed to excite spiritual Devotion,
make stronger impressions, etc. and is not that a working cause, or a means
used in worship to those ends? which is flatly against the Second Commandment.
3. If they stir up spiritual devotion, heavenly affections, etc. are not those
supernatural effects? 4. If they excite such effects in men's hearts, must not
that presuppose, all that use them to be spiritually minded, and disposed? How
else can they stir up in them, those affections that are not in them? But then
what use are they of to Natural and carnal men? There is a carnal Devotion, as
well as spiritual. To stir up carnal devotion will not make them acceptable to
God: If they stir up spiritual devotion in carnal men, is not that a
supernatural effect ascribed to humane Ceremonies? And are they not made hereby
as operative, and exhibitive of Grace as those Instituted by God? Let it be
considered! I could enlarge this Discourse with other Testimonies of Learned
Ceremonialists; to the same purpose: and with the Practice and Opinion of many
that dote upon them, who expect Grace Favor, and a Blessing from God, upon
such Devotion: But I forbear, and now draw up the Argument into one view
against the Imposition of our Ceremonies, twisted up of a six-fold Cord, which
will not easily be broken. Thus, [Nothing sinful, inexpedient,
purely-indifferent, superstitious, doubtful, or significant Ceremony may by men
be Imposed in Divine Worship] But our Ceremonies are guilty of all these
Crimes; therefore they may not by men be Imposed in Worship, and consequently
if Imposed, to be repealed, which was our first undertaking, now performed.

II. Of Submission to them, if Imposed.
The hardest and greatest work is now over, and I shall not need to be long or
large in the two following Particulars As to the present Question. [Whether if
such things be Imposed by Authority, we may lawfully submit unto them?] It is
often pretended by the Casuist and others, [that though the things be
Inconvenient, and Inexpedient, yet the Command of Authority alters the state of
the Quest. page 39, 69, etc. and makes them to us necessary by a necessity of
Obedience, (though not so in their own natures) by virtue of a Divine
Commandment. [Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves.]
Indeed this pretense seems to put a demur to the Case: and is the foundation of
all his Discourse in the greatest part of it, concerning submission to such
Impositions: But it is easily removed, by a Distinction or two.

1. Of the sense of the word Inconvenient, which he substitutes for the word
Inexpedient, to mo^lifie the harshness thereof, as was noted in the Explication
of Terms, which having once presumed to do, he then supposes (unjustly also)
those things now called Inconvenient, to be things lawful not only in their own
nature, and extracultum, but also in their use, and in Worship, which is
contradicted by himself, when he makes things inconvenient in their use to be
sinful, p. 68. Of which before.

2. Of things inexpedient or inconvenient, which may be conceived to be of two
sorts. 1. In regard of mere Circumstances of Worship, as an inconvenient place,
or an unseasonable time thereof, which must be taken, or no other allowed for
public worship, wherein the Authority may sin in Imposing: as violating, the
Rules of Decency, Order, or Edification, 1 Cor. 14. but the Subject sins not in
submitting, yea should sin in not submitting. 2. With respect to humane
Ceremonies, which are inconvenient, and inexpedient in their use, that is
hurtful to the Worship, or Worshippers: which are always sinful in worship,
and may no more lawfully be submitted to, then Imposed in worship, as he has
often granted. Now then our Ceremonies being proved to be so many ways
inexpedient, that is, sinful in worship, one Argument (but a complicated one,
and so much the stronger) will dispatch the business. Thus. [No sinful,
inexpedient, unnecessary, superstitious, doubtful, significant Ceremonies, may
be submitted to, if Imposed in Worship. But our Ceremonies are proved to be
such; ergo they may not be submitted to.] Against this Conclusion neither the
Peace of the Church, nor pretended Duty, nor too much desired Safety (his
threefold Cord, used to draw others to Conformity with himself) can dispense,
till this Argument be enervated, and made void. I proceed to the last.

III. Of Assenting and Consenting to them.
This third and last Question is newly occasioned by the Late Act for
Uniformity, and the too general compliance of Ministers, with it: not only to
submit to the Ceremenies, and other things Imposed as to Practice, (which in
some things might be tolerable) but also to enslave their Judgments, to a full
approbation of all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by it. Which
one would think, should have stumbled many more till they had serio^sly
considered both what the things are (which are very many) and also have
sufficient ground for so large a Submission. When it is evident that many of
the Declarers and Subscribers, never saw the Book, nor considered the Reasons
of so deep an Engagement, but hastily swallowed down all, with an Implicit
Faith trusting to their Rulers. Now if there be but one thing Inexpedient in
it, one thing false, or evil, that is sinful: As submission to so universal a
Practice of it, is proved unlawful, so the giving an [unfeigned assent and
consent to all and every thing contained in it] can by no good Conscience be
justified. That Act takes in the whole Book, as now it is Published and
Established. And contains the Epitome, or rather Volume of the English,
Protestant, Episcopal Religion.

1. The Form of Doctrine, or Confession of Faith in the 39, Articles.

2. The Mode of Worship in the Liturgy.

3. The Model of Discipline in the Book of Ordination or Consecration, of
Bishops, Priests and Deacons.] All these to be at one Lump, submitted,
subscribed, assented, consented to, and that unfeignedly; It was partly yielded
above, that in some cases it may be lawful not only for peace sake, but also
for Conscience sake, to submit to some thing Inconvenient, (as an Inconvenient
Circumstance) if Imposed by a lawful Authority: But now the Question is, of
declaring openly an unfeigned assent and consent to a thing (any thing, if any
there be) Inconvenient in the Book, which to me imports an Approbation of it:
as shall be showed ere long: I shall only desire to remember the Explication of
the Terms. That Assent has respect to the truth of a thing: Consent to the
Goodness: Unfeigned to the sincerity of both. I now propound the Question the
third time.

Whether it be lawful for Ministers to conform so far to the Late established
Book for Uniformity, as Publicly to declare an unfeigned Assent and Consent,
to all and every thing contained in, and prescribed by it? To the Decision of
this great Question, one would easily think, little need be said, considering
what has been said already, against diverse things contained in that Book; any
one whereof if proved sinful (as I believe some are, and more will be) might be
a sufficient bar to suspend either Ass^nt or Consent to the truth or goodness,
much more the practice of them, which yet is promised in the Subscription to
them; I shall argue first ex concessis and probatis; and then add some more
special Reasons in some Particulars.

1. In General; thus I assault them. [If diverse things Imposed and to be
submitted to be sinful, (the Imposition and Submission to them being therefore
sinful) then it is much more sinful to declare an unfeigned Assent and Consent
to them, yea to all and every thing contained in and prescribed by that Book;
but the Antecedent is most true, and asserted by themselves, and where they are
shut, proved so to be: the Consequence is made undeniable by the Apostles
Logic and Divinity, [ Rom 1 ult Who though they know that they that do such
things are guilty or worthy of death; not only do such things, but also (...),
consent to, or favor them that do them.] The Argument is taken a minore ad
majus: It is bad to do things sinful, especially against Knowledge and
Conscience, but much worse to assent and consent unfeignedly to the truth, and
goodness of such things. The reason is, because a man may do a thing sinful,
either out of Ignorance, or inadvertency, or the violence of a Temptation; but
he cannot unfeignedly assent, and consent to the doing of them, or to them that
do them, without deliberation, and knowingly against his clearly convinced
Conscience. And the more of Will is in a sin, the higher is the aggravation of
it. Now this is observable, that few Conforming Ministers there are, which do
not believe some things in that Book to be inconvenient, burdensome, troublesome,
and scarce Orthodox, either in Doctrine, Worship, or Discipline: And some in my
hearing have already complained, that the burden to read all prescribed, and to
preach when they have done, (as they ought to do, being of Divine Institution)
is a Burden which they are not able to bear, as some of their Forefathers
complained. And to omit or shorten Preaching, to enlarge the Church Service,
they are ready to profess to be against their Consciences; as a making void the
Commandment of God, by observing the Traditions of men.

2. [It is highly sinful to Assent and Consent unfeignedly to things
Inexpedient, purely Indifferent, (that is Idle, or Useless) Superstitious,
Doubtful, or Significant Humane Ceremonies, as against the Second and Third
Commandments,] and because such things are sinful in Worship. But to some such
things, yea many, do they assent and consent, who declare their assent and
consent to all and every thing Contained in, and Prescribed by that Book, as
has clearly been proved, ergo, etc.

3. [It is highly Presumptuous, Sacrilegious, if not Blasphemous, to make that
Book equal to the Sacred Bible, and the Powers Imposing it, as infallible, as
those were that wrote the holy Scriptures, (as the Pope does the Apocrypha, and
the Traditions of the Church.)] But this is done by all that in that manner
make that Declaration: For what can more be declared and asserted of the Holy
Canonical, Spirit inspired Scriptures, then an unfeigned assent to the Truth,
and consent to the Goodness of all and every thing contained in those Books?

4. [To assent and consent to the Imposition of things unlawful, in Worship, is
to make themselves twice guilty of sin, once as they assent and consent to
things unlawful, and a second time, as they confirm the Imposers in that sinful
Imposition. For when will they repent of, or repeal these sinful Impositions,
when they are confirmed to be true, and lawful, by so many complying Ministers
in so high a Declaration?

5. To declare and profess so publicly before God and their People, their
unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing in that Book: believing,
that some things are Inconvenient and Inexpedient, which they wish were
removed, is gross Dissimulation, and desperate hypocrisy. But many of the
Complyers do believe and confess some such things to be contained in that Book,
either not true, or not lawful, and yet assent and consent to all and every
thing contained in it. Or suppose them so corrupted in their understanding and
Judgments, as to be persuaded of the Goodness and Truth of all and every thing
therein, it may easily be proved, and has been already, that some things in it
are not true, as to matter of Doctrine, and some things not lawful, as to
matter of Worship or Discipline, if I might safely dispute against that Book,
having a Law to render it liable to a Praemunire. But Truth is Truth, and to be
acknowledged, when we are called to give testimony to it. This has been done
by many, and not yet answered. The Book contains the whole of English
Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, and in every one of those
Defects, Imperfections, and Corruptions manifested; and yet without Reformation
of many things, imposed and pressed on us with more rigor then formerly. See
some Particulars.

1. In Doctrine. As 1. In the Articles of Religion, Art. 20. [The Church has
power to decree Rites and Ceremonies,] which words being ambiguous, taken
either for mere Circumstances of Worship, for Order, Decency, etc. or for
Sacred Rites, and religious Ceremonies; In the first sense they are true, but
doubtful: To which no unfeigned assent can be given, till the distinction be
given: In the last sense (in which they are usually taken,) they are proved to
be false, above in this Discourse. And some other principal points of Doctrine
there are so doubtfully worded, that as Papists and Arminians, have glossed
them to their Opinions, so no tender Conscience can safely give so full assent
to them as true, till they be explained, which was formerly denied and
prohibited to be made by those that subscribed them.

2. In the Liturgy, some Doctrinals are delivered and prescribed to be assented
to; as first, a false Translation of the Psalms, according to the errors of
the Vulgar Latin, still retained to be read; not to speak of their leaving out
of the Titles of many Psalms, which in Hebrew are Canonical Scripture. And it
is as unlawful to take from the word of God as to add to it; unless they intend
to make amends for their Substraction of some, by Addition of other things: and
that is sufficiently done, by addition of some Apocryphal Psalms, Te Deum,
Benedicite, and a great many Chapters of the Books called Apocrypha, to be
read, a most for two months together; some whereof are false, and as very
lying Legends as those used in the Romish Churches, and some newly added not in
before, as the History of Susanna, Bell and the Dragon. And what is this but
(as they at Rome) a Canonizing in part, of the Apocrypha, making it equal to
the Scripture in Divine Service, as part of their Doctrine; I might add that
Assertion [That all Children Baptized are really regenerated, and want nothing
necessary to their Salvation] which draws after it, all or most of the
Arminian and Popish Tenants

3. The Homilies are part of the Doctrine of the Church, ratified by the 35
Canon, and prescribed to be read by every Minister, and now with the Articles
enjoined to be assented to unfeignedly as true. In these have been observed
some false Doctrines; as to justify plurality of Wives, by the old Fathers,
Hom. Of the time and place of Prayer, page 147. That Alms purges away all
sins, delivers from death, Hom. 2. Of Alms, page 16. For proof whereof is
cited, as good Scripture, Tobit 4.10. and the Son of Syrach. Dare any Orthodox
Minister declare his unfeigned assent to the Truth of these Doctrines? yet this
is done by too many.

2. In Worship. There are some things not good, that is unlawful, to which yet
an unfeigned consent is to be given. For the Ceremonies they are largely
discovered to be sinful and unlawful above. To which may be added the
Apocryphal Psalms and Books made not only equal with the Divine Scriptures,
but also parts of Divine Service, as fully as any part of the Word of God. Add
to these the Responds of the Clerk and People, Women, Boys and Wenches,
clearly against the Apostles Rules of Decency, Order, Edification, as may be
easily manifested. And more might be said concerning the Ministers change of
places, postures, ridiculous gesticulations, as if Divine Service were some
Play or Comedy to be acted; which causes the Name of God to be taken in vain
against the third Commandment: Can any pious devout Minister give his unfaigned
consent to these as good?

3. In Discipline. The Book of Ordination is the Epitome thereof, now joined
and established with the Articles and Liturgy. But there are some things in
them proved to be false. As 1. That there are three kinds or Orders of Church
Officers; Bishops, Priests and Deacons, when Scripture knows but two: It being
proved and confessed by Episcopal men, that in Scripture a Bishop and a
Presbyter are one and the same Order and Office. 2. That Ordination by
Presbyters is null. I add no more: To all these either false or unlawful do
they assent and consent, which how they can do with a good Conscience, I
understand not, but do admire.

6. And Lastly, (besides the burdens they have laid upon their weak Brethren,
in a very considerable number, and the hurt they have done to the Church in the
loss of so many Able Ministers, to the gratifying of Antichrist) they have by
their unfeigned assent and consent to all and every thing contained in and
prescribed by that Book, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, as precluded all
future hopes of Reformation, so also enslaved themselves, and their Successors
of the Clergy to the power and yoke of Episcopal Tyranny: Just in the same
manner, (if not measure) as the Popish Clergy are enslaved to the Pope, without
all hope of freedom, till either Antichrist be fallen, or those strict Laws
for Conformity be repealed and broken: This is one chief Character of
Antichrist, that he causes all his Subject; (especially the Clergy) to receive
a Mark in their right hand, and in their Forehead, that none may buy or sell
that want this Mark. How far this is appliable to our present condition, any
wise man will easily discern. The Bishops have now obtained their long Desire,
and Design, to subdue, and enslave the Clergy to themselves (and with them the
People) they having boared their Ears to their Door posts, and received a mark
in their Foreheads, by their so Public Declaration, and in their Right Hand by
their Subscription, without which no Minister may buy or sell, that is, deal in
any thing that concerns his Ministerial Office, or as a Scholar, to get a
Livelihood. And whether this be not the slaying of the Witnesses (Natural or
Civil) spoken of in the Revelation, or the Forerunner of it, I leave to prudent
men to determine. And here I rest.

The Grand Case considered, as to the double Supplement annexed thereunto.
I. Touching Things Inexpedient.
I Begin with this (though it stand last in the Grand Case) partly because it
is intended to be a Support to uphold his former Tract, which I have thoroughly
ventilated; and partly because it must be the Foundation of the Main Case of
Conformity to the Declarations required in the Late Act. For if the things in
question, be not only Inconvenient, or burdensome, but also Inexpedient, that
is, (according to his own Exposition of the word) Sinful, [In vain is the Net
spread before the eyes of any Fowl.] No man of any good Conscience, can, or
dare be taken with such Chafe, as he has here scattered, in stead of good
Corn, to beguile and mislead his Readers.

Before I consider, what fresh Supply he has brought, I shall premise some few
Observations, as grounds to shake and frustrate all this second Undertaking.

1. He here again (as was complained of, and manifested, on his former cases)
confounds Inexpedient with Inconvenient. Sometimes we hear of [Things simply
inexpedient, p. 144. which he expounds by things Inconvenient, p. 147. No small
Inconvenience, p. 150. For some Inconveniences imposed on us, we ought not to
quit our Ministry.] (Which we profess we would not do) and other the like
Passages: when yet he told us, [Things not Expedient in Worship ought not to be
Imposed, or if Imposed, to be Submitted to.] as anon we shall hear.

2. Inexpedient may be taken, either negatively, for a thing not Expedient; or
positively, for something hurtful: For as, Expedient is taken for useful,
helpful, to the business we are about: So a thing Inexpedient (in a flat
opposition, as was said) may be taken either way, for not-useful, or hurtful to
it.

3. A thing inexpediently evil, or hurtful in Worship, may be taken either for
malum poenae, as troublesome, or burdensome, or for malum culpae, a thing sinful.
The Rev. Casuist does not clearly distinguish these two senses, and which he
means; and therefore seems secretly to pass a genere in genus: from one kind
to another.

4. A thing may be sinful, either in it self, or in its use in Worship, from
some Circumstance of time or place, etc. This Distinction is given us by the
Casuist, p. 68. of the former Tract, and we shall make use of it hereafter.

5. A thing may be Inexpedient in two Respects; 1. In matters of Civil, and
common Affairs, or in matters of Religion and Worship. Some Assertions of his,
are true and allowable in the first, but not in the second respect. I needed
not to have noted this, but that he seems to have forgotten (what he first
intended) that he is tied to speak to things Inexpedient in Worship.

6. Things evil and Inexpedient, in both senses, as penally or sinfully such,
may be considered or compared 3 ways.

1. One evil of punishment with another, a lesser with a greater; and here the
Rule is, e malis minimum; choose the least.

2. An evil of punishment, with an evil of sin; and here the Rule is, The
greatest evil of punishment must be chosen, rather then the least evil of sin,
as Heb. 11.25.

3. One evil of sin with another, lesser, equal, or greater; and here the Rule
is, e malis neatrum, vel nullum.

And now we come to the Case propounded [Whether, or how far things inexpedient
(not imposed in Worship, for that is peremptorily denied by the Rev. Casuist in
the former Tract, but) may be submitted to, if imposed, by Authority?] That was
the Case before. [What is to be done, when things Inexpedient are imposed? viz.
in Worship: Now an Objection, it seems, is lately flarted, and an Argument
enforced from his own Principles, for the Negative, in this manner:

Nothing sinful in Worship may be submitted to, though imposed by Authority;
which is now proved by Scripture, we may not do evil, that good may come
thereby: But Inexpedient things imposed in Worship are sinful; ergo not to be
submitted to.] The Major as it is obvious to any Religious Conscience, so it is
often asserted in the other Tract: The Minor is also granted in the very terms:
[All Indifferent things not expedient, are not lawful, but finful, p. 36.] And
p. 34. Things not expedient to be done, ought not to be done.] What says he
now to it? Both the Propositions being his own, he must either yield the Cause,
and own the Conclusion, or distinguish of one, or both the Propositions; which
latter he attempts to do, as follows:

[Things are evil or unlawful, either in specie, or in genere only, either in
themselves, as prohibited by some special Law, Natural or Positive; or in
respect to some Circumstance or Accident.] To which I reply in this manner;
desiring to know to which Proposition he will apply this Distinction. 1. If to
the Major, it must be thus; [Things sinful against a special Commandment, may
not be submitted to in Worship, but things forbidden by a general Commandment,
may, if imposed by Authority.] For so he says: [Things of the second kind,
prohibited in general, are not a violation of a special Law of God, but of a
general, p. 145.] And such may be lawfully submitted to, or I know not what to
make of his words: To say, that things prohibited by a general Law, are not a
violation of a special Law, is a vulgar truth, and not beseeming the R.
Casuists Learning. And to say, things evil and unlawful either by a special or
general Law, are not sinful, will less beseem his Wisdom; for that is a
contradiction: Things sinful (such are all prohibited by any Law of God) are
not sinful. 2. If he apply his Distinction to the Minor, it must, I suppose be
thus: [Things Inexpedient are of two sorrs; either such as are prohibited by a
special, or by a general Comandment: the first sort are sinful, and not to be
submitted to, but the latter may.] Will he stand to this? May any sinful thing
in Worship be submitted to? Has he not asserted the contrary, in the case of
sinful things imposed? Besides, this Distinction comes here too late, being
necessary to have been used, before he gave us that universal Proposition: [All
Indifferent things not-expedient, are not lawful, but sinful.] And now, belike,
some not-expedient things are not sinful, but lawful in Worship. 3. Or if he
shall say, by Inexpedient, he means only things Inconvenient, burdensome
perhaps, but not sinful: the first may be submitted to, not the second: He
says true, but then he equivocates with us, in both his Tracts, in the sense
of the word, Inexpedient: having told us, that all Inexpedient things in
Worship, were sinful, and not to be done: and so slips a genere in gemes. 4. He
told us also, some things were sinful in themselves, and some by Inconveniency
in their use, p. 68. But both are sinful, and can either of them be lawfully
submitted to? 5. His Instances of things prohibited in genere, are Indecencies,
and Disorders, and the like, in Worship. But this is a great Mistake, in a
Divine, in a Casuist: For there are as special Laws against them, either in
Nature, or Scripture, and as Moral, as against Murder, or Theft; viz. either
the Second or Third Commandments, as Additions to the Worship, or profanation
of it, and consequently a taking of Gods Name in vain; or by 1 Cor. 14.40.
where specially forbidden: Yea, they seem prohibited by a Law of Nature, [A
standing Law, (said he) never to be crossed by any Authority under Heaven, yea
the God of Heaven being the God of Order, will never reverse it, etc.] p. 43.
of the other Cases: If not imposed, nor may they be submitted to: The Reason is
the same for both, because they are sinful in their use, or by the circumstance
of the time, when used in Worship, being now Inexpedient, and for that reason
both unlawful to be imposed, or if imposed, to be submitted to, p. 34.

Hereupon it seems strange to me, which here he says; [If the Inexpediency of
such a thing, for which alone it is prohibited, be either separated from it, or
overballanced, it becomes repugnant to no Law at all, etc.] For, 1. This is as
if he should say, separate the sin from it, and it is not sinful: What is the
sin of a thing inexpedient in Worship, but the use of it in Worship? Separate
the use of such a thing from Worship, and it may be lawfully used out of
Worship: e. g. a Surplice, and the Sign of the Cross used in Worship, as
Symbolical Rites, or Ceremonies, we say, are sinful: but out of Worship, the
one may be lawfully used, by a Groom or Porter; the other for a Sign of a
dwelling house, etc. But in worship, the sin and the thing used, are
inseparable. 2. Neither can the sinful Inexpediency be overballanced by any
external, temporal, Expediencies: [An evil of sin may not be done, to prevent
the greatest poenal evil, or to procure the greatest temporal good.] And here
he secretly flides from one kind of evil to another. Calvin's. Testimony is not
to the purpose; for he speaks of Civil usages, or Customs of the place, and
not of Religious Rites or Ceremonies.

The like Mistakes are in the next. [That which by reason of Circumstances
only, is evil, or unlawful, is so accidentally, and may be not immutably so.]
The first part is true; but a thing which is accidentally evil, may be
immutably so, in its use, in worship, as an Indecency, or Disorder in Worship,
is always evil; sinfully evil, as was confessed. 2. [That which is evil by
accident, in one respect, may be good, yea better than another.] True also, if
he speak of things poenally evil: But if the thing be sinfully evil, (though
but in the use, in Worship) all the respects in the world cannot make it good,
much less, better to be done in Worship. 3. Hence the thing that seemed, and
was sinfully Inexpedient, can by no Circumstances penally evil, be made (as he
says) expedient, much less lawful, and necessary: for so we may, yea must do
evil, that good may come thereby. Polanus his Rule is Golden, and good in civil
things penally evil; there the greater and more expediencies must overballance
the lesser and fewer; but is a Leaden Rule, when sinful and penal evils meet
together; the first must be left undone, whatever becomes of the other.

We must not do evil, to obtain good. He returns to this. [Yet we must do good
to prevent evil, though the thing be good for nothing else.] I pray what is the
meaning of the Apostles Rule? [We must not do the least sinful evil, to obtain
the greatest temporal good:] But he by evil, understands some poenal evil (not
moral or sinful) when he says, we must do good, to prevent evil: What good?
Morally good? That Is true, but then he secretly begs the Question, that
Inexpedient things are morally good, in worship; or if otherwise, then he
allows us to sin, to prevent some penal evil: And what means he by evil, which
we must prevent? If only penal, he permits us to do a sinful evil to prevent
some penal evil, or if sinful, then he allows us to prevent one sin by doing
another: For such we take things Inexpedient in worship to be. But (by the way)
this is but an ill Character of the good he intends, that it is good for
nothing else but to prevent the evil of suffering: I leave him to apply it. I
shall not now stand to answer what he says of the Apostles making of some
inconvenient things necessary: It will come again more fitly, and fully to be
considered in the next Case. All I say now, is but this; That if Expediency
will make a thing good, and necessary, and our duty to do (as he asserts) then
it may seem reasonable, at least, in worship, that Inexpediency should render a
thing evil, and unlawful, and make it ones Duty not to do it.

The Testimonies of Cypr. Ambrose, August. are easily answered, in a few words:
They speak not of Mystical Rites, or significant Ceremonies, but of some civil
external Usages gotten into worship; different in diverse places; as Socrates
tells us of many, in his time; as in observation of Easter or Lent: in
receiving the Lords Supper at Evening or Morning, standing or sitting, etc.
Such an Usage in Reformed Churches, is, that somewhere the Ministers preach
with heads covered, otherwhere, bare-headed, and many the like: In such things,
those Ancients advise to conform to the Usages of the places where they come:
but surely, would never have wise people to comply in things inexpediently
sinful, in worship, in any place.

The same may be said for Foreign and home-reformed Divines. [Do not they
(they abroad) either approve our Usages, or dislike them only as inconvenient?
and those they dislike as such, do they not yet earnestly persuade to
conformity to them, from a sad prospect of greater Inconveniences, the
disquiet of the Church, provoking Governors, and the laying aside the work of
the Gospel?] D. A. Fresh Suite part 2. p. 456.
I might answer many things, but a Learned and Pious Nonconformist has done
it to my hands at large, to whom I refer the Rev. Casuist, for full
satisfaction. The sum is this:

1. Some of those Learned men, did, at the beginning of the Reformation, and
before they had studied the Controversy about Ceremonies, suppose our Usages
to be only Inconvenient, and burdens, and therefore advised, that for some
Inconveniences imposed here, they should not quit their Ministry, or hazard the
Church. (Which Counsel we should be willing to embrace, were not many things to
us unlawful.)

2. Some of them, yea many, upon more serious Consideration, do in their latter
Writings, declare their Judgment of them, that they are unlawful.

3. Being in some perplexities, what to answer to those Inconveniences feared,
and out of tender humane Compassion to their Brethren here, like to suffer
poverty, and hardship, did advise, comparatively, rather to Conformity, than to
quit their Ministry; against their own Judgment. This, and much more, that
Learned Professor. They did not therefore so sweetly agree together, as is
pretended; for they agreed not with themselves.

As for Illiricus, who differed from the rest of his Brethren, in matter of
Conformity; it was only or chiefly with respect to the Interim, imposed by the
Emperor; wherein were many Popish Errors. he had better ground to oppose that
Conformity, than others had to persuade unto it: And if some things now
imposed, be (to us) as unlawful as those were, they that now refuse, have as
good, (if not the same) Apology for themselves. And if that only was his Crime,
and occasioned so many tumults, he was unjustly charged by Beza, [That he
promoted Popery, as if he had been hired by the Pope.] unless any will say, the
preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, was the cause of so many Tumults,
wherever they came. But rather, they that imposed those Errors, were the
causers, and they that conformed to them, were the Occasioners of those
Calamities, which fell upon Non-conformers: and did the Pope more service, by
silencing those Pious men, from Preaching against those Errors. If Illiricus
was an hot-spirited man, and had other Errors of his own (as this for one,
that Sin was a Substance, etc.) which he too vehemently maintained, he might
deserve that black Character, given him by the Historian; but not for
persuading the Ministers, to lay down their Ministry, rather than conform to
those many Popish Errors.

And for our own Divines, at home, that they were subdued by this Principle
[That we ought rather to conform to some things Inexpedient, (that is
Inconvenient) than to lay down our Ministry,] is partly true, of some of them,
that at first, taking things imposed to be only Inconvenient, and not unlawful,
they did, in some things comply; But it is as evident, that they did esteem
foam things unlawful, and (like men under sad temptations) did contradict
themselves; an example whereof, the Rev. Casuist gave us, in one of the most
eminent among them, in his other Tract, p. 101. But the truth is, most of those
named by him, lived, and died Nonconformists.

For Mr. Sprint, as he was prevailed upon, to conform, by that supposed, not
proved Principle, that our Ceremonies were but Inconvenient, not unlawful; so
no marvel, if he upon the same Principle, prevailed with others, perhaps
unacquainted, and unstudied in the Controversy, and willing to be persuaded,
for some reasons of their own. And if our Rev. Cas. perceive any blossoms, to
appear in some, by the influence of his Resolutions, I fear it is with them, as
with some over-forward trees, that blossom in February, and are blasted by
some March winds, and Frosts: when they shall see themselves deceived, in the
Application of that Principle; and find some things presumed to be only
Inconvenient, (not proved such by their Author) to appear, and be unlawful.

2. Touching the Imposition of things unlawful.
In the proposition of this Case, we must rather take his meaning than his
words. The Question is not of the Imposition, but of the Submission to unlawful
things, if they be imposed. He has in his former Tract, strongly argued
against the Imposition, of not only unlawful and sinful things, but also of
things which he calls Inexpedient: And that for this very reason, because they
are not lawful, but sinful, in worship; as was showed in the former case: And
any man rational would easily conclude, in this present case, one or both of
these two things.

1. That if it be unlawful, to impose things unlawful or sinful in worship, it
is also unlawful to submit unto them in worship, for the same reason.

Or 2. If it be lawful to submit to unlawful or sinful things imposed in
Worship, it may be lawful to impose such things in Worship. Yea these two
things he has formerly granted, and asserted. First, That it is utterly
unlawful to impose things Inexpedient, in Worship, as being sinful there; and
then, that it is as utterly unlawful to submit to sinful things, if imposed, p.
119. And yet now he undertakes a stranger Paradox; [That it may be lawful to
submit to things unlawful, even directly sinful against a particular Scripture,
not only inconvenient, and unlawful in genere:] And the Argument to this
purpose, must, I think, be thus framed: [It may in some cases be lawful, yea
necessary to do things directly forbidden by a special positive Law in
Scripture, therefore much rather, if forbidden, only by a general Law.] The
Consequence at first view, seems reasonable, a majore ad minus. The Antecedent
he proves from Scripture Instances; [Of the Priests profaning the Sabbath, and
yet innocent.] and the like, of which anon. To the answering whereof, these
things may be said, in general.

1. He still takes for granted, both that things Inexpedient, are only
Inconvenient, not sinful in Worship; and also that such things (as our
Ceremonies) are forbidden only by a general Law: when as we have manifested, in
the former case; that they are forbidden by special Laws, the second and third
Commandments, and 1 Cor. 14.40, etc.

2. God may dispense with his own Laws, yea seemingly, and in part Moral
Laws; As to the Israelites to take the Goods of the Egyptians, and to Abraham
to kill his own Son; The reason is, partly his Sovereignty over all Creatures,
to dispose of them as his own, as he pleases, Psalm. 50. And partly, and
chiefly, because all men are Delinquents, guilty of many sins, and Forfeitures
of all their Enjoyments, and God may justly punish them, with loss of Goods, or
Life; and make what hands he pleases his Executioners; as in Jobs case: But no
power on earth may command, what he forbids; nor forbid, what he commands; and
therefore none may forbear to do what he commands, though men forbid: nor
submit to do, what he forbids, though men command.

3. The things instanced in, at least some of them, as the Priests killing
Sacrifices, were never sinful, in the intention of the Law of the Sabbath,
being Gods works, not our own; but commanded, by a special Law, and so their
Duty to do; as being also a part of sanctifying the Day, in that Ceremonial
Worship: [And in such a case (they are the Casuists own words) it is not
sinful, not to fulfill a particular Command, but rather a clear Obedience to
God, who in the instance, takes off the force of the particular, in his more
general Law.] But can he show us any general or special Law for our unnecessary
Ceremonies? If not, what Necessity can make them expedient, lawful, or
necessary? But we say, they are sinful, and so says he, by consequence, being
so many ways Inexpedient, hurtful to the Worship, and Worshippers, as is
proved on his former Tract.

4. Those Inftances, were only, in cases of Necessity, and that also of Gods
making, either by his special Command, or by a way of Providence, casting men
into some necessity. [And then doubtless (his own words again) the general
warrant of the more general Law of Necessity, gave a Supersedeas against
particular Obligation.] as will appear upon review of the Particulars: But I
pray, what Necessity is there for the things in question, either by way of
Divine Command, or of his Providence? What necessity to command them? what to
obey them, especially if Inexpediently sinful? If there be any, it is of man's
making, either on the Commanders, whom the R. Cas. has excluded from Imposing
them: or on the Submitters part, for fear of punishment, loss of Livings, etc.
And if such Necessity may make Submission necessary; the 3 Children, (as
called) knew not their Liberty, they might have saved their Lives, by obedience
to the Kings Command. I shall put him a Case or two to resolve: There was a
particular Law, that a Jew might eat no Swines-flesh; Two Cases of Necessity
might happen, to enforce him to eat it; Extremity of Famine, or the Command of
a Tyrant; I suppose the Casuist will grant, that it was lawful, yea necessary
in the first case to eat it, rather than starve; but not in the second: Or else
those Brethren suffered death foolishly, when commanded by the Tyrant to eat
it. He may easily understand my meaning, and apply it. I come to his
Particulars.

1. That of the Priests, is answered already; I only add another Case: Suppose
Saul had commanded Butchers, to kill Beasts on the Sabbath, under some great
penalty: Here was his Necessity to do it, or suffer: Let him resolve the Case.

2. It was by a special Law enjoined, that none might eat the Shewbread, but
the Priests: Suppose again, Saul had commanded David and his men, (in no
necessity of hunger) to eat it, with a sharp penalty upon refusal. Here was his
Necessity again: Might they eat it, or not? Yet in a Case of Providential
Necessity of hunger, they might eat it, and are justified by our Savior. The
Reason of this Difference is, because in the one case, Life is more necessary
to be preserved, than a Ceremonial Command: in the other, Obedience, even to a
Ceremonial Commandment of God, is more necessary than Life.

3. For Solomon's Offering upon an Altar not commanded, our Divines give these
Answers.

1. That he did it by Divine Direction, as he did many other things.

2. That it was in a Case of Necessity, in such abundance of Sacrifices: and
other the like Reasons. See D. A. ubisupra. P. 328. But there is neither
Direction from God, nor any Necessity for our Ceremonies, more, than for many
more at Rome.

4. Hezekiahs admission of the Legally unclean, to the Passover, foam perhaps
will plead Necessity; but (under favor) I should rather say, Hezekiah did not
well: Which appears by Gods striking of the people, which he would not have
done, if they had not transgressed some Law; or if Necessity would have excused
the matter: Yea Hezekiah had forgotten the Case determined by Moses, that if a
man were unclean, or in a Journey, at the just time of the Passover, he might
be excused, if he did observe it, the 14th. day of the next Month.

5. Paul's Case was this, Life is more worth, more necessary than meat, than
Corn, in such a Condition.

And therefore his cautelous Distinction, [betwixt things, that are naturally,
internally, materially evil, and such as are unlawful only by some positive
Prohibitions in Scripture;] is here little helpful to him: For we tell him,
that the things in question, (some, if not all) are naturally, internally evil;
and some become materially evil, by some evil Circumstance, (if a Prohibition
will make a thing materially evil, as he seems to allow) and as against some
special Laws, the Second or Third Commandments, and that special Law of
Nature, 1 Cor. 14.40. Which in his own Judgment, is a Law of Nature, which the
God of Nature, will not reverse; and so immutably such: Things Inexpedient in
Worship, though but Inconvenient in their use, are as naturally, internally
evil, as is any other thing prohibited by a Moral Law; and therefore not to be
submitted to, for any external humane Necessiry.

That Law of Indulgence of God, [I will have Mercy (to men or Beasts) rather
than Sacrifice,] deserves his and our wonder, and astonishment. But little to
his present purpose: For it is applyable only in Cases of emergent and
Providential Necessity; and then also, but when compared with Sacrifice, [the
external and Ceremonial parts of Worship] as himself speaks: e. gr. An House is
on fire, a Man or Beast is fallen into a Pit, on the Sabbath day, in time of
public Worship, in danger to perish: Here God will have Mercy, and not
Sacrifice: as Paul left off Pre^ching, to recover the man fallen down dead. The
reason is evident, because to preserve Life and Goods, are Moral Commandments,
and the external Exercises of Religion, are, in a kind, Ceremonial; And
besides, these may be delayed, and made good another time, but the other will
perish, if not speedily succored: [The positive (says he well) must yield to
the Natural, and Moral Duty, the less Necessity, to the more necessary, the
less to the greater.] But can any external necessity be greater, than that of
Obedience unto Gods Command, by a Moral or Natural Law?

His Application therefore, of that Rule of Indulgence, proceeds upon his too
common Supposition [Is Mercy to our Beast so highly prized, how much more is
Mercy to our selves, to our Nation, to the Church, to the souls of our people?
etc.] This Inference were good, were the things in question proved to be only
Inconvenient penally in Worship: but if any of them be proved unlawful, and
sinful, I should argue to the contrary; [Is Mercy to our Beasts, so highly
prized, how much more, Mercy to our own souls? Yea Mercy to our Nation, Church,
People, in avoiding sin against God?] whom by sinning, we provoke against all
these. This is the way to destroy both Altar, Sacrifice, and Priests also: for
Ministers to comply together, to offend God: Mercy does well with Piety, but
without it, is mere Cruelty.

But much stress is laid upon the practice of the Apostles, in their
condescending to Conform in some things, to the Ceremonial Law, and in that
Decree, Acts 15. To make some things necessary, after they were abolished by
Christ his Death. This was alleged in the former Case, and here again. For
Paul's circumcising Timothy, and his own Observation of some Jewish Rites, when
he had preached against them; and that Decree, making some Ceremonials, not
only lawful and expedient, but necessary, many things may be said.

1. Though those Ceremonies were dead with Christ, yet at that time they were
not deadly till they were decently buried; and therefore were then, a while,
Indifferent, to be used, or not, according to occasion: Paul, that circumcised
Tim. would not circumcise Titus, in another case.

2. The reason of both, was one and the same, viz. to avoid offense, to the
Jews, one while to further their Conversion: to the Gentiles another while, to
prevent their Apostasy. Now not to lay a Stumbling Block, or to remove it, if
it be laid, is a Moral Law, to which, Positive, and Ceremonial Laws must give
place: Even Ceremonials of Divine Institution, much more of men's Invention.

3. For that Decree, making some things abolished necessary; though enough has
been said already; yet I shall consider further what he says: [Things that are
expedient, are therefore good, (it seemed good to us) and therefore necessary,
these necessary things: whence those very things, which we are afraid to do,
because Inexpedient, may possibly, be our Duty to do, because expedient.] By a
contrary Inference, things that are not-expedient in Worship, are not good (but
evil) and therefore unlawful: hence those things, that we do, when expedient,
we must be afraid to do, when, and where they are Inexpedient, that is, (in his
own Gloss) sinful, in Worship: He adds, p. 147. [The Apostles knew, that
refusing to eat things strangled and blood, at that time, especially by a Law
to enjoin it, was in one Consideration, no small Inconvenience, yea a burden,
as they call it, yet to prevent greater Inconveniences, the Apostasy of the
Jews, the Interruption of the Gospel, etc. it seemed good, yea necessary to
them, to do so.] Let the Reader observe here, his old Diversion, (to say no
worse) in substituting the Word Inconvenient for Inexpedient: a penal, for a
sinful evil, and confounding the terms: For true it is, those Ceremonial
Observations (dead before this time) were a burden, if Imposed on Christians,
at that time, but not sinful; but the causing or occasioning of the Apostasy of
the Converted Jews, or the Interruption of their Conversion, by the
Non-observation of them, for a time, were not only Inconveniences (though such
also) but sinful Inexpediencies, and therefore enjoined for a time, to prevent
very great sins: But I pray, is the Imposition of our Ceremonies, and the
submission to them, for any such ends? Hear himself speak; [The ends moving
thereunto, were most weighty, viz. The Unity of Brethren, winning Souls, the
Propagation of the Gospel, the prevention of Scandals, and the danger of the
Ministry, by persecution.] Now as for our Ceremonies Imposed, (or the
Imposition of things Inexpedient (such as they are) which might equally be
justified, upon the same grounds, which yet is by the R. Cas peremptorily
denied) not one of these ends can justly be pretended:

1. Not the Unity of Brethren; for they are the greatest Causes of our former,
and present Divisions.

2. Not winning of Souls: for whom should they win? Papists? We see the
contrary: as some are hardened by our coming so near them; so some, upon our
Compliance with them, are turned Roman Catholics.

3. Not the Propagation of the Gospel: they hinder it (nothing more) by casting
out some Thousands of able Ministers, as is reported.

4. Not Prevention of Scandal; for none that judge them M^tters of
Indifferency, and unnecessary, (as most do, or they are very ill taught) have
any just cause to be offended at our non-observation of them, while we are
persuaded of their unlawfulness: yea they occasion much Scandal, to many truly
tender Consciences.

5. Not the danger of the Ministry, through Persecution; For as that was no End
of the Apostles making that Decree, they being persecuted, for not observing
them, and preaching against them; so it was the end of the False Teachers, Gal.
6.12. who preached up Circumcision, to avoid Persecution: and indeed the
rigorous pressing of them, has proved the greatest danger (I must not say,
persecution) of the Ministry, since Q Mary's days: Upon all these Reasons, in
my poor Judgment, the Rev. Casuist, and his Prelates, might have done far more
and better Service, to this Church and Nation, if they had endeavored to
procure an Act, for Repealing of them, than for their Imposition, with so much
rigor: But whist.

Lastly, To this Instance, of the Apostles Decree, and Practice, I will not
plead, the great Distance of the two Authorities, then, and now, in imposing
things Indifferent, or Inconvenient, on the Churches: For I foresee, what may
be Answered: But I shall only tell him, that very Learned men, are of Opinion,
that, that Decree, or Law, to abstain from things offered to Idols, strangled,
and Blood, is still obliging to Christians: (and then this Instance is
impertinent.) For,

1. More may be said to assert their Obligation, than for any of ours, or for
all the Ceremonies of the Roman Church: for this was one of the Laws given to
Noah, before the Law: revived again, by Moses, under the Law; and now the third
time ratified under the Gospel: I know nothing so attested, except one day in
seven, for a Sabbath.

2. The things decreed by the Apostles, seem all either equally necessary, and
perpetual, or all equally mutable: These necessary things; and if mutable and
arbitrary, then, Fornication may seem now to be, a venial sin, as Papists; or
an Indifferent thing, as many Protestants repute it, if we may judge by their
Practice; And why things unequally lawful, or unlawful, should be included in
one Decree, I should be glad to see a clear Reason:

3. The reason of their Prohibition may seem (for I assert it not) to be Moral,
and the same in all: As,

1. Things offered to Idols, the eating of them, especially in the Idol
Temples, seems to be two ways Scandalous, first to the Idolaters, to confirm
them in their Idolatry, by Christians Communion, and communicating with them;
and next, to encourage weak Christians to do the like, with a doubting
Conscience; thus the Apostle argues against it, 1 Cor. 8.10. Or else, let the
Rev. Cas. give a Reason, why it is unlawful to be present at, and communicate
of the Romish Mass.

2. The not eating of things strangled, and blood, is founded, (say some) upon
a Moral Reason, because the Life is in the Blood, or is the Blood, Genesis 9.4.
Lev. 17.14. and that is perpetually so.

3. As for Fornication, that, say most, is prohibited by a Moral Law, the
Seventh Commandment. Now I shall leave this Case also, with the Rev. Casuist,
to be resolved, at his leisure. However, in the Interim, I shall say, these two
things.

1. That in some Cases, those things (besides Fornication) are still obliging,
as to abstain from eating things offered to Idols, in their Temples, if a
Christian should live amongst them, for the Reasons given above: and to abstain
from things strangled, and blood, if the Jews lived with us, if it might
further their Conversion.

2. That our Case is not the same with theirs. For we abstain not from things
merely Indifferent, or Inconvenient, but from things (in our Jugment, and his
also) Inexpedient, that is sinful in their use, in Worship.

I shall not need now, to say any thing, to the Testimonies of Calvin, Pet.
Martry, or Zanchy; they are all satisfied, by what is said: and I hasten to
conclude this Case: I hope the Rev. Cas. will now find his Scriptures answered
better, and himself better resolved, by his own Principles; as my self, and I
believe many others, are more confirmed in our Inconformity, by a prudent and
sorious pondering of the Premises, lent us, by himself.

3. Concerning the making of the first Declaration.
In managing the whole Discourse of the Grand Case of Conformity, the Rev.
Author, deals not so fairly and fully, as was expected, nor (under Favor) so
ingenuously, as is desired: For he carries on the Business so precariously, so
limitedly, as if he cared not, or intended not to satisfy all his Readers, but
to wave the main part of his work, or leave it half undone: as may thus appear.

1. Page 2, 4, 12.
He professes, that he treats only with such, as could conform, were it not for
one, or both the Declarations, which I believe (for I have spoken with diverse
of them) not one of a hundred of Nonconformers, would have done. And he speaks
not one word to satisfy those, who have other Reasons for their Inconformity.

2. He professes also, that he takes for granted, that the Government, Liturgy
and Ceremonies of the Church, are all good, and lawful, (waving the Necessity
of them) and esteemed such by them, that refuse conformity, p. 138. [I confess
I took the lawfulness of these, in themselves, for granted.] When as he knows,
they have all been controverted, more or less, well nigh these last hundred
years, and are yet subjudice.

3. As in his former Cases, so here, all along, he takes also for granted, both
that Inconvenient and Inexpedient are both one, and also, that the Ceremonies,
and other things controverted, are but inconvenient, and not sinful: Now it is
an easy thing, to make and resolve any Cases, if a man may have liberty to
suppose what he pleases, to build (as a Foundation) his Resolutions upon: And
if he will give me the like liberty, to suppose all those three named to be
unlawful, or but to have something in them, untrue, or unlawful, how easily can
I dissolve all his Resolutions, and resolve and determine the contrary to his
Opinion. And this Advantage we have on our side, that as he ( I say not,
cannot) has not proved all things in them lawful, so if but one Particular in
each of them, yea in the whole Book, as now established, be either untrue, or
unlawful, no conscientious man can make those Declarations, without palpable
Dissimulation, if not something worse. Had the Rev. Cas. taken but half so much
pains to prove them, and all things in them, to be true, and lawful, as he
has to persuade us to conform, by supposing them lawful; he might have had
more Proselytes, than now he can expect: But I attend his motion.

His first Case, with the Resolution thereof, concerns not those at all, that
go upon other grounds, for their Inconformity. For as some of them, never made
the former Subscription, nor took any Oath to the Ordinary; so others of them,
have (seeing just cause, as they believe) repented of their rash undertakings
in their younger years, through Ignorance, and inconsideration. And as the
Objections by him started, are not by these owned; so nor do they think, the
Solutions by him given, will be satisfactory, to those, for whom they are
intended.

For the first Objection, that though they could read the Expressions, yet they
do not so heartily like and approve them, as seems to be required; he resolves
it thus [The Object of your assent, and consent, is not the words, but things;
not every word, but every thing, etc.] A poor elusion, or rather delusion of
his Readers; For as the things are expressed in the words; so the very words,
(for it was sollicitously worded) are a part of the all, and every thing
contained in the Book; from which if a man should vary, to use his own
apprehensions, and expressions, he should quickly hear of it, (as is said) with
both his ears. And to say, we cannot heartily like, and approve them, as seems
required, and yet to give an unfeigned Assent, and Consent to all and every
thing therein, seems to me ( I say not Hypocrisy) a contradiction: as I say;
[I cannot heartily approve them, and yet I do heartily approve them.] For what
is done unfeignedly, is, I take it, done heartily, ex animo.

His Distinction, of absolute, and comparative approbation, applied to the
Second Objection; will hardly please any Party:

1. Not the Nonconformers; for if their ground of refusal be good, viz. the
unlawfulness of but one thing therein, they can neither absolutely nor
comparatively assent and consent thereunto: A comparative Approbation of a
sinful thing, is it self sinful.

2. Not those he intends to persuade; for an unfeigned assent, to the Truth,
and Consent to the Goodness, of all, and every thing in that Book; is as full
and absolute an Approbation (in their apprehension) as can be given to the Book
of God, the Holy Scripture it self.

3. Not to the Bishops or Prelates; for it is supposed, that their design, in
procuring and promoting the Act, was to get the Assent and Consent, and that
unfeigned, of all the Clergy; that is their Approbation of the Truth, and
Goodness, of all and every thing in the Books of Prayer and Ordination; of
their Order of Episcopacy, above Presbyters, etc. which was formerly attempted
(but miscarried) in the and caetera Oath: And to say, [you do not absolutely
approve of every thing in the Book, as that you would choose above all, and as
best in it self,] as it will hardly please them, so it seems to put a slurre,
as upon the Book, as not the best (which yet was requisite in the public
Worship of God) so upon the Composers of it, as if something in it, were
scarcely true, or good; but at least, very Inconvenient, and to be yielded to,
only comparatively, to prevent some greater Inconveniences, all which, if they
pleased, they could have removed.

Lastly, It will hardly satisfy the Imposers, whose Design is supposed to be,
Unanimity, as well as Uniformity; a full and unfeigned Approbation, of all, and
every thing, contained in that Bulk, or Body of Religion, as now it is come
forth, and established: for they three or four times (besides this Declaration)
require, in the Act, an Approbation of all and every thing; as if they intended
to explain, what they mean, by [those milder words of Assent, and Consent,] as
the R. Casuist calls them, p. 8. viz. a full Approbation of all.

But he adds: [Had the word free been in the Act, in stead of unfeigned (as
some malcontents out of a vile Design, do buzze up and down) there had been
more color of the former Objection.]

To let pass the harshness of his words, in this Paragraph, the rather, because
he has been so modest and moderate, in his former Cases: To the rest I should
say: Is not unfeigned, as much, or rather more, than free? Surely what I
unfeignedly assent to, as true, and consent unfeignedly to, as good and lawful,
I do it freely, or grossly dissemble. And may we not freely choose things that
we believe are true, and good, for themselves, and of our own accord? I believe
many do so: Assent and Consent to all and every thing as freely, as
unfeignedly, and desire no other, no better, as thinking these the best. And I
suppose, the Composers, if not the Imposers, expect this free choice, and will
hardly thank them that do it, for other Reasons; as no sure friends to their
Cause.

But the last Answer will [perfectly remove any such scruple for ever: Let the
Act interpret it self: The words foregoing are these: Every Minister shall
declare his unfeigned Assent, and Consent to the use of all things, in the said
Book, etc. not simply, to all things but to all things with respect to their
use, to the use of all things in the said Book.] As fine and nice a Cobweb
Lawn, as can be spun; but transparent, and fit only to catch weaker flies, but
easily broken by the stronger. For.

1. He told us before, p. 7. [the Object of our Assent, was not words, but
things, not every word, but every thing.] Now Assent, (as was said long ago) is
an Act of the Understanding, whose Object is Truth: Consent is an Act of the
Will, whose Object is Goodness; If then, I assent and consent to all and every
thing contained in that Book; do I not simply assent, and consent to all things
in it, as true, and good?

2. Can any Conscientious man, assent, and consent to the use of all and every
thing in the Book, unless he be first convinced of the Truth and Goodness, of
all, and every thing to be used? And if the use had been intended only, in this
first Declaration, it was superfluous to put it again, in the second.

3. The Intention of the Imposers, may be collected rather from the Declaration
it self, than from the foregoing words, [They shall declare their Assent, and
Consent, to the use of all, in this manner, by declaring their Assent and
Consent to all, and every thing in the Book.] their uniformity in practice, by
their unanimity in Judgment: For this in reason must be supposed, or they could
not in any reason require the other, to make men practice against their
judgment. And if this was not their design, why did they so suddenly change the
expression, first to the use, and now to all and every thing?

4. And why do they afterward, so often use those words, He shall declare his
Approbation, his Approbation of all, etc. which must be meant of the Truth and
Goodness of all, as well as of the use.

Lastly, this nice distinction of use and things, cannot be applied to all, and
every thing, in this first Declaration: For, every Minister, though he assent
and consent to the use of all in the Book of Common Prayer, yet he cannot
properly assent and consent to the use of all and every thing contained in the
Book of Ordination: for no Minister under a Bishop, can Ordain a Presbyter, or
Deacon: It must then necessarily be taken, for their Assent and Consent to the
Truth and Goodness of the Way of Ordination by Bishops, and of the three Orders
of Church Officers, etc. And thus much of the first Declaration.

4. Concerning the making of the Second Declaration.
In the Subscription, or second Declaration, there are three main things that
fall into consideration.

["1. The taking up Arms against the King.

"2. Corformity to the Liturgy.

"3. The Solemn League and Covenant.]

Of which, we know not what is best, and safest, whether to speak, or be
silent: If we speak not very warily, we run upon a rock of Law; if silent, we
may be suspected, to betray our own Innocence: To the two first, we shall say
very little, to the last a little more.

1. To the first, we humbly cr^ve leave to say this little: They that refuse to
make this Declaration, do not stick at this, but are ready to profess [That as
they never did take up Arms against the King (which was constantly denied by
the Parliament, in all their Declarations, and Protestations, and they think,
in the Covenant it self) but for the King. So they hold it utterly unlawful,
for Subjects, so to do.] and hold it (as now by Law it is determined) a
Traiterous Position, so to assert; which they were taught before to abhor, both
by Scripture, by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and by the Solemn
Covenant it self.

2. The second of Conforming to the Practice of the Liturgy, as little is said
here by the Casuist; so it is sufficiently discussed and resolved, according to
the judgment of Non-conformists, in the former Case: The Result whereof is
this: [If there be any thing, any one thing in it, either untrue, or unlawful,
they dare not declare their unfeigned Assent, and Consent to it, or the
practice of it.]

3. That of the Covenant is the Mountain to be removed, not by the Faith, but
by the strength and skill of the Learned Casuist: And this is acknowledged by
the Refusers of this Declaration, to be the main Business of contest: and that,
not in the whole, but in one particle thereof, in the second Article: as will
appear.

In three things, the Rev. Casuist, and they, are fully agreed.

[1. That a Covenant both illegally Imposed, and illegally taken, may bind the
Takers.] That must be (I suppose) from the, either necessity, or lawfulness of
the matter covenanted.

[2. That the Covenant in question, does not bind to an endeavor to alter, or
meddle with the State-Government.] No, for it is as strong an establishment of
it, as can be made, in the third Article.

[3. That if the Alteration or Extirpation of Church Government, be the main
Business of the Covenant, and this be lawful it does so far bind the takers: if
not lawful, they are so far discharged from the Obligation of it.] Now evident
it is, that the Anti-Covenanters, as they do not except against any Article of
it, but the Second; so not against any part or particle of this second Article,
but only this, [That Covenants to endeavor the extirpation of Prelacy, that is
the Hierarchy, etc.] This, this is the Helena, for which they contend so
vigorously: This the eyesore, that so exasperates their Spirits. They do not,
I think, they dare not deny the Obligation, of the other Articles, nor of the
other parts of the second, [as to the extirpation of Popery, Superstition,
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, etc.] Much less will they deny the Obligation of
the third Article, [to defend and preserve the Kings Majesty's Person, and
Authority, the Rights and Privileges of Parliament, etc.] They may say, they
were bound to those, either by the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, or by the
Law of Nature, as Native Subjects: I answer,

1. How many took the Covenant, that never took those Oaths? This Oath was
made, at least in this Article, to God only, P. 114.


2. The other is true, but then it must be granted, that the Covenant, though
illegally imposed, and taken, (the matter being necessary, or lawful) adds a
new Obligation, being made to God only: And as the latter does not void the
former, so the former does not disoblige from the latter.

3. I add, we were bound (before the Covenant was imposed or taken) by the Law
of Nature, and our Covenant of Baptism, and Scripture-Rules, [to endeavor the
Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline, in our places,
and Callings, and consequently to extirpate Popery, Superstition, etc.] though
we had never taken the Covenant: Hence I would infer, (supposing, for
Disputations sake, not positively asserting it,) [If the Episcopal Government,
as then it stood, be equally unlawful, with Popery, Superstition, and the rest:
we are by a former Obligation to God, bound equally to endeavor the
alteration, and extirpation of it;] and the Covenant is but a new Cord, added
to strengthen that Obligation. Hic labor, hoc opus.

I know it is not safe for any wise man, to say much, in Defense of the
Covenant, there being an Act published to dissolve, and annull it, as unlawful,
in several respects: I shall therefore assert nothing positively for it, or
against the present Church Government; but humbly crave leave, to proceed
suppositively, as the Rev. Cas. does: For all his large Discourse, to persuade
to that part of the second Declaration, is founded upon this Supposition; not
that the Government is Jure Divine, and so necessary, (for upon supposal of
that, a Covenant, or endeavor to alter or extirpate it, were utterly
unlawful:) but only Lawful or Indifferent: And then, I should, for my part,
grant, that it was unlawful to Covenant, much more to endeavor to alter and
extirpate it, without the Supreme Authority of the Nation: And let me but have
the like liberty, to suppose, (let others that can, make it good) that the
Government, is, by the Word of God, unlawful; and upon that Supposition and
Persuasion, as I may not own it, by Assent, Consent, or Subscription, so all
his Arguments, to prove the Lawfulness of making this Declaration, are to me,
of no force; till he prove it, either necessary, or at least Lawful (which he
goes not about to do, but all along takes for granted, which, I think, he ought
not to do) for their sakes, who scruple the Lawfulness of it.

That he does suppose the Lawfulness, (for he waves to plead the Necessity of
this Government, as others begin to do, both in the former, and in these Cases)
appears in several passages: ["as p. 25. s. 10. and p. 52. Admit that
Episcopal Government was Res Indifferens, and Mutabilis, when sworn against, p.
80. If the Government sworn against, be not unlawful. And p. 138. I confess I
took the Lawfulness of the Government, etc. in themselves, for granted.]
Importing (as I think) if the things were unlawful, then the fault of the
Covenant was not in the Matter (it might be lawful to covenant, and endeavor
the extirpation of them) but in the Manner, that it was illegally imposed, and
taken, without the King, etc. And now I shall see him state the Question.

It seems, some Covenanters granting, that if the Matter of the Covenant, was
but in this Particular unlawful, the Covenant it self, was so far unlawful, and
lost its Obligation; do call aloud for strong Reasons, to prove the
unlawfulness of the Matter, in this particular: The Learned Casuist now
undertakes to give such as he has; but (under favor) quite besides the
Question by them intended: For they suppose, not only the Government to be
unlawful, but also the Extirpation of it (which is the Matter now in question)
to be lawful: and require Reasons to prove it materially unlawful. But his
Case, and Reasons respect the Takers, whether they may Covenant and endeavor
to extirpate the Government, without the King: for so he says: [My work is, in
short, to prove, that the Covenant, so far as it engages the Takers of it,
against Church Government, and for the change of it, is unlawful, and sinful,
in the Matter of it.] The Matter is one thing; whether it be lawful (for any)
to extirpate the Government (supposed unlawful:) The Takers are another;
whether it be lawful for private men, to undertake this, without the King: The
former may be lawful, when the latter is not so: And here he slides secretly
from the Matter to the Manner; from the Thing to the Persons; as will appear.

For mark his Distinction, whereon, he says, he fixes the foot of all the
Arguments following: [The things sworn to be done, may be either such, as is
simply unlawful for any to do, or quoad nos, when though not sinful in the
first Consideration; yet to such persons it is sinful.] Mark this, it is in
true sense, as if he had said, the Matter may be lawful and laudable in it
self, and lawful to be done, but not lawfully (for Manner) by some Persons: For
instance; The Government, being not necessary, but Indifferent and mutable, may
lawfully be altered, yea extirpated, by the King and Parliament; but not by
single or private persons: ( I doubt his Superiors will give him little
thanks for this Intimation.)

But now see, how he applies this Distinction; [If the Extirpation of the
Government, be unlawful, either in the first or absolute sense, or else as to
those, that did thus covenant; if either way, it be found unlawful, so far the
Covenant is sinful in the very Matter of it.] This is strange from so Learned a
Casuist: For if it be absolutely unlawful to extirpate the Government, then it
is unlawful to Covenant so to do; but if it be unlawful only as to such
persons, will your Learning suffer you to assert, it is sinful in the very
Matter of it? And is there not another way, granted by your self, to free the
Matter from fault? You may please to review, how you secre^ly beg the Question,
that it is simply unlawful to extirpate the Government, which you cannot say
unless you make it necessary, Jure Divino, (which you have twice waved to do.)
And if it be only lawful, and not necessary, (as you seem to be of opinion) you
will not deny (unless you deny a Privilege of Parliament) but it is mutable,
and may be altered by a Lawful Authority: much more if it be it self unlawful:
And if so; then the Matter of the Covenant, is not sinful; but the Crime will
fall only on the Takers, which respects the manner. But on the other side; If
it be in it self unlawful, the extirpation of it, is also lawful, and the
Covenanting to endeavor it, even by private persons, may be materially lawful,
by former Obligations to God. Or let him give us a solid Reason, why the
Covenant shall bind us, to extirpate Popery, Superstition, etc. And in the same
Article, shall not oblige us, to extirpate an unlawful Government, I mean,
supposing it to be such.

There are therefore no small misadventures in his Ninth Paragraph, p. 25. As,

[1. That the immediate Question, and that which most nearly concerns the
Covenanters, is not, whether the thing sworn be in it self lawful, but whether
it be so to them?] But by his favor, the first Question concerns them most:
for if the thing sworn be unlawful in it self, it renders it ipso Facto
unlawful for them to swear: But if the thing be lawful in it self, yea
necessary for some to do, yet it may not be lawful for them to undertake it; as
he told us, a little before.

2. If the thing be materially lawful, and more, if it be necessary for all to
do, in their places and callings, there lies no guilt upon 'them, ['first to
purpose, and then to swear to do their Duty;] that is, to do that which God
has some way or other commanded them to do.

3. It is not reasonable to say. [As it is unlawful for us, it goes into the
matter of the Covenant which we take.] For the Matter may be lawful, as to
execute Justice, etc. and yet unlawful for private persons. And then the
Consequence, which he would infer hence, is inconsequent. [That that which is
unlawful to us, if sworn, does make that Oath, as ours, unlawful in it self,
that is, in the Matter of it.] It makes the Oath unlawful indeed, but not in
the Matter, which may in it self be lawful, but in the Manner, as ours.

The prime and main Question then, should have been, [Whether the Government
covenanted against, be necessary, lawful, or unlawful?] All which, he
industriously waves to resolve: for so he says, [I shall not need to dispute,
whether the Government of our Church be so necessary by a Jus Divinum, as that
it is unalterable by men: or that it is sinful in it self, to endeavor the
alteration of it, p. 25.] Truly, I believe, he answers not the expectation or
desires of some of his own Party, that he does not undertake this Task. And I
can assure him, that if he had proved that by two or three strong Arguments,
his Nonconforming Brethren, would have much thanked him, and ingenuously have
confessed, the Covenant in the Matter of it was unlawful: But why would he not
for their sakes, give some solid Reasous, to prove the Government lawful? And
then perhaps, they would have yielded, the Covenant to be unlawful in the
manner, if not also, so far in the Matter. It were no hard work, to conjecture,
why he chose rather to prove the Covenant to be unlawful, with respect to the
Persons, that imposed, and took it; and took it for granted, the Government
was, and is in it self lawful. But I shall forbear to express my thoughts. I
shall tell him what I observed on his former Cases, that he did not in
Hypothesi, take upon him to vindicate our Ceremonies, but kept aloof in Thesi,
in Indifferent, and Inexpedient things (which yet he could not do, but he must
suppose, for Disputes sake, the Ceremonies were such things, though he
instanced not in any of them) because it was both hard to prove them lawful;
and unsafe or dangerous, to insinuate they were unlawful: I say no more.

But now, seeing he knows, that the Governments Lawfulness, has been long
controverted at home and abroad, by very Learned and Pious men, and Churches: I
should think, it had been reasonable and expedient, in this so great an
undertaking, as to persuade Dissenters to Conformity, not to presume, and take
for granted, the things are lawful, but by some irrefragable Arguments, though
few, to prove that they are so: Or else to give them liberty to produce theirs,
to prove them unlawful; which is not safe for either Party: Yet to suppose a
while, and for Disputations sake, to take them (the Government in special) to
be unlawful; and then, thereby to manifest how weak, and unsatisfying, all his
Reasonings are, to such as take them so to be: This one Answer may be an
impenetrable shield, [The Government is to us unlawful; and therefore we
cannot, we dare not assent, consent, or subscribe unto it.]

To follow the Rev. Author, in all his Particulars, would be both dangerous,
and tedious, when one Answer must so often be repeated, which may serve once
for all, It is to us unlawful.

For hence, 1. It matters not at all [Whether the Covenant in this part (or
others) was imposed, and taken, by a Body in Parliament, or by Single persons,
or by the King himself without them.] For the thing it self being unlawful,
they were bound, without any Covenant taken (but more with it) to alter, and
endeavor to extirpate it, every one in his Place, and Calling. A necessary
Duty, concerning all persons, more, or less; as it may and must be done, by
every one single (I say still, in his Place and Calling) so it may be
covenanted to be endeavored, by one or more together. This is Asserted by a
Learned Episcopal Doctor [That to fulfill the express Commandment of God, no man
doubts, but that a Covenant may be made, not only without, but against the
Command of a Prince.]

2. If the thing be in it self unlawful, then to Covenant to endeavor (each in
his Place and Calling) to extirpate a sinful Government, is not against, [1.
The Kings Rights, either as S^pream Governor, or as Legislator. 2. Nor against
the Laws of the Land. 3. Nor against the Privileges of Parliament. 4. Nor
against the liberties of the subjects. 5. Nor against any former obligations.]

God has the first Obligation upon us, by our Baptism, and Christian
Profession ( I say still, each in his Place and Calling.) [To contend earnestly
for the Faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude v. 3.] And consequently to
endeavor to remove and root out, all Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, or
Government contrary thereunto: I shall not so much distrust the Understanding
of any Reader; much less the Judgment of the Learned Casuist, as that they will
deny the former Consequences (upon my borrowed, or begged Supposition) or that
they are not easily able, if but willing, to make Application thereof, to all
the Particulars named.

Much more might have been said, to many things, but I am warned by another
Harm, [Not to fly too near the Candle, lest I be scorched by the Flame.]

5. The Conclusion. Concerning the Lawfulness of Reordination, etc.
There is one thing (and but one thing, he says) more, in the Condition of
Law, required of Ministers, by the Act, and that is, [Re-Ordination of such, as
were Ordained by Presbyters only, and Ordination of others, by Bishops.] And
both these are much scrupled by some, men of hopeful, and very useful parts:
The latter sort, because they believing Bishops, as such, and as a distinct
Order from Presbyters, to be unlawful, dare not come under unauthorized hands:
The former, because they judge their Ordination valid, by Presbyters; and dare
no more be re-ordained, then rebaptized. And indeed, if their Ordination by
Presbyters, be invalid, all their Ministerial Acts, by virtue of that
Ordination, are null, (as some Prelates have told them:) and if not they
themselves, yet those baptized by them, must be rebaptized, or else they are
scarce Christians: which seems very harsh Doctrine, from them, who as thy cry
out of Anabaptists, for Re-baptization; so in some Cases, allow a Woman to
baptize: Let them consider it: and I attend him. He uses many Reasons, to
persuade the first sort (though nothing to the second) not to stick at
Reordination. As,

[1. Considering, that Liberty is not denied them, to keep their own sense,
whether Ordination by Presbyters, is valid, or not.] This is, as if the
Children of Anabaptists, being forced by Law, to be baptized, should persuade
their Parents to suffer it, considering that Liberty is not denied them, to
keep their own sense, whether this Baptism is valid, or not: and they may
rebaptize them, when at Age. Does an Ordinance of God, depend upon men's sense
thereof? Or may men dally with it in this manner? and not take his Name in
vain? However, some Bishops tell them, their first Ordination, with all the
Acts thereof are null, and bid them repent of all. Now if their Ordination be
judged by them, to be valid, they in repeating of it, offend against the Word,
the Ordainers, and those Churches that have no Bishops, as making theirs, no
Ministers, no Churches. If they judge it not valid, they offend (if but
ignorantly) against the Institution of Christ; who has placed Ordination in a
Presbytery. Bishops themselves being first Ordained by such, (even B. Timothy,
if a B. he was) as Hierome (with the Scripture) has proved, and others follow
him therein.

[2. The Act (he says) makes it self no judge of the Ordination by Presbyters,
in foreign Churches.] In words, and directly it does not; but implicitly, and
consequentially it does; Else, why does it so strictly, so rigorously, require
Ordination by a Bishop? But as making the former null, and invalid, to any
Ministerial Acts? Yea some Prelatical men, stick not to affirm those Churches
to be none, that want Bishops.

[3. There is no other way (says he) to exercise their Ministry, in this
Church, by Law, or to entitle them to a Charge, or the Profits thereof.] How
true this is, appears, in that many Priests, ordained by Popish Bishops, are
admitted to all those, without Reordination, It is a sad thing, that a
Presbytery of pious, Learned, Orthodox men, should not find the same favor
with Protestants. But if Ordination by Presbyters, be Evangelical, it should
seem reasonable, it should be made Legal: No Law of man ought to countermand
the Institutions of Jesus Christ. And what is this, but a kind of Independent
Principle, on the one side, who allow and require Reordination of their
Ministers (such as it is) as often as they remove from one congregation to
another: And on the other side, a kind of Anabaptistical Fancy, and practice,
who allow, and require rebaptization of those baptized by our episcopa
Ministers. And lastly it seems a too near Compliance with Rome; where they
re-ordain those of ours, that convert, or apostate to them, though ordained by
our Bishops, as our Bishops re-ordain those ordained by Presbyters. This
Retaliation may seem just, and reasonable, at least from God.

4. To save himself a further Labor, he refers us to Mr. Humphries
Justification of his own, and others Reordination: Alas poor Soul? A worse
Persuasive could scarce have been brought: whose Tracts are judged by some very
weak, and by others sufficiently confuted; and which is more, strongly, really
contradicted, by a most vehement Abjuration, of his 2d Ordination by a Bishop.

Concerning his own solemn Profession and Subscription, ex animo, [That he has
not used one Argument, but what he judges convincing, etc.] I, for my part, am
in Charity bound, and willing to believe him: For upon his Supposition, I
should easily be convinced my self; that is, [if the Government, Liturgy,
Ceremonies of this Church, be in all, and every thing, true and lawful,] (which
are indeed all concerned, and supposed in the Declarations, but not by him at
all proved, but confessedly here, taken for granted) I should be ready to
profess Conformity to them; notwithstanding many Inconveniences in them: But
when his Opposites take many things to be unlawful, and he presumes to take
them all for lawful; he may perhaps persuade some, that are of his mind, (which
few are) but cannot in reason hope to make them his Proselytes, who judge any
thing in them, unlawful.

There are some other things here repeated, which have been spoken to
elsewhere, and I pass them by. I have one humble request to make to the Rev.
Casuist; and I have done: That at his next leisure, he will be pleased to give
some few new Arguments, (for the old, we think, are insufficient, and
sufficiently answered) to prove, I say not all and every thing in the
Declarations to be necessary (that would be too hard a Task) but to prove, the
things controverted, the Government, Liturgy, Ceremonies to be Lawful,
according to the Word of God; and I shall engage my self, and what little
Credit I have, either to give him a fair, and full Answer, with Meekness, and
Modesty; or, if I cannot, to yield my self his Proselyte.

FINIS.

