Hattige:

OR THE AMORS OF THE KING OF TAMARAN.

A NOVEL.

AMSTERDAM, Printed for Simon the African, at the Black-Prince in the Sun, 1683.

THE PREFACE OF THE Translator.
I Read in French this following Book over, in my Passage from England into
Holland; and finding it to please me very well, I resolved to make an Essay, to
put it into English.

And in order to that, I found I had a great deal of leisure time to do it; for
not being able to speak Dutch, and being not very desirous to learn it, I sat
often alone in my Chamber, and in a few Days finished this little Novel.

Which how well I have done it, let the Reader Judge. But let me put him in
mind, that it is the first Essay in this kind, or any other, that I have
offered at.

I will say something as to the Original, that I think it is as full of
Intrigues, and those managed as well, and the whole Design carried on, as
probably, as it is possible for any thing of this Nature to be; and that the
Design is laid with great Art, and managed with as good a Wit.

If the Reader receive this Book favorably, I do promise him, that I will in a
little time make him amends with something of a more useful Subject.

Although I cannot but acknowledge, that I think it equal to any of Scaroons,
or the more Famed D. Miquel de Cervantes, and has been esteemed so abroad: For
in this small time since it came forth, which is not four years since the first
Printing of it here at Amsterdam, I have seen four other Editions, one of
London, one of Paris, and another at Colen, and the last at Bruxels; which is
the most imperfect Copy of all.

I think I have said enough, and desire the Reader to excuse me, and pardon all
the Errors that are committed in the following Discourse; By,

Dear Countrymen, Your Humble Servant, B. B.
Amsterdam, St. Briget's-Day, 1679.
HATTIGE: OR, THE KING of Tameran 's AMORS.
OF all places of the world, the Sea is fullest of Adventures, but not those of
Love; it is the Scene Fortune most delights to play her Pranks in; but that
Element is too boisterous to agree with the tenderness of the Sex: Yet Love
derives his Original from the Sea, which gave birth to his Mother; and though
Gallantry be a Rarity there, it cannot appear strange where Venus was born.

A young Knight of Malta, (which Character speaks him of Eminent Quality) full
of generous emulation for the bravery of his Brethren of the Order, resolved in
pursuance of the Duty of his Profession to follow their steps, in seeking
Honor, by making War against the Infidels: He came to Malta in a Frigate of 30
Guns, excellently fitted, and the best Sayler that had of a long time gone out
of that Port.

The Knight having performed his Land-services was grown a little acquainted
with the Sea; but it was the first time he commanded a Vessel, and very glad he
was, at his coming to Malta, to find Gourdan there, and made him an offer of
being his Partner for Honor and Arms. Gourdan, an Old Corsair, very loath to
admit a sharer in Profit or Honor, and very rarely making use of a Second in
War, did notwithstanding accept the Proposal made him by a young Man, the most
hopeful of any that Order ever had. The Agreement was made, and the 15th of May
they left Malta, and went to cruise on the Coasts of Tunis, in hopes to meet
with three Vessels which Gourdan was informed were bound with Pilgrims for
Mecha. The Wind was favorable, and in three days they were in Sight of Tunis:
On the Fourth Gourdan's Vessel drawing nearer the Coast, discovered some Sail,
and discharged a Gun to warn in his Partner.

The Sails he discovered were those of the three Vessels they went in search
of, which made up to Gourdan, and attacqued him very vigorously, and were glad
to see the Knight come up to second him, making full account of him as a Second
Prize. But it is no slight dealing with the Corsaires of Malta, whose Custom it
is to fight to the last, and dye before they yield: Those I am speaking of were
strangers to fear, the one having long run an uninterrupted course of Victory
in all his Engagements, and the other supplying his want of Experience by
incomparable Valor. I will not enlarge in particulars: The Fight was sharp and
bloody, the Turks having four times as many Men as the Christians, and three
Ships at least as good as the Malteses.

Gourdan had kept aloof from the Enemy about a Musket shot, till the Knight
came up, who no sooner joined him, but Gourdan would let him see at what rate
he had purchased his Honor in the Levant. He fell in furiously among the
Turks, and plied them so terribly with shot and Grenades from both sides his
Ship, that you would have thought him on Fire. The Knight, though he needed no
President to teach him his Duty, yet glad to have a Man, Famous as Gourdan,
witness of his Actions, seconded him so bravely, that the Turks, who till then
made no doubt of the Victory, began to fear the success: They cooled in their
Attaques, and fell off to more distance, not daring to grapple with the
Christians. The Knight had no sooner observed it, but, to make use of his
advantage, which had visibly raised the Courage of his Soldiers, he commanded
them presently to Board the Ship that lay next him, being the stoutest of the
three; he was readily obeyed, and as readily rushed a-Board the Enemy; a
Company of Volunteers immediately followed him, with some stout Soldiers, who,
animated with his Example, did every one the Actions of Heroes. 'Twas wonderful
to see (though nothing more true) all the Decks covered with the Bodies of
those Barbarians, slain at the first Assault by a handful of Men: The Knight of
Malta appeared more than Man, he seemed to be in ten or twelve several places
at once; so ready was he, and nimble, to help where need. But I forget my self,
to engage thus in describing the Fight, which is not my design, having a
Thousand other things to say, not of greater importance (this Engagement being
possibly the most terrible and glorious happened on those Coasts) but more
ordinary and gallant, which my intention at present is to entertain the Reader
withal.

I shall add only, that after six or seven hours Fight, wherein you may believe
there wanted not occasion for these excellent Captains to signalize themselves,
the Vessels having all boarded one another, the Christians sunk one of the
Enemies, and put up the Standard of Malta in the main tops of the other two.
Gourdan, who at that day thought no Man his equal at Sea, began to apprehend,
from the Actions he had newly seen, the Reputation of the young Knight might
one day exceed his, and rob him of the glory of Sovereign of those Seas: He had
observed him more than once enter the Enemy's Ships, and bear down all before
him that offered to resist, and hewing his way to Victory through Wounds, Blood
and Death; and that the honor of the Victory was almost wholly due to him: In
a word, You are not to expect so much Justice in the Old Corsaire, as not to
believe him jealous of the growing Reputation of his young Partner, and
therefore less glad of the Victory, than otherwise he would have been.

The Knight had been wounded (though not mortally, yet) so dangerously that he
was obliged for some Days to keep his Bed; the news was no sooner brought
Gourdan, but he went to see him, and expressed the best he could how much he was
troubled at it; he ended the Complement with all the Commendations and Praises,
a Man jealous as he was of the young Knight, was capable to give. But the young
Hero, no less modest than brave, put him off handsomely, attributing to Gourdan
the whole advantage of the Fight; only he did justice to some of his Ship, who
had signalized themselves most, without saying a word of what he had done: They
resolved to return to Malta to refit their Vessels, and to sell the Prizes:
Resolutions at Sea depend much on the Pleasure of the Winds; and they found
themselves becalmed on the morrow, which for three Weeks stopped their design,
and rendered that a very tedious Voyage, which a Week before they had performed
in three Days.

The Knight was soon well of his Wound, and finding himself able enough to walk
about in the Calm, he had a mind to take a view of the Prizes with Gourdan,
who that day had given him a visit: He found them both considerable for the
number of Turks and Moors of both Sexes, which in a Christian Country would be
a current Commodity. When they returned a-Board their own Ships, Gourdan's
Lieutenant, being a Friend of the Knights, and not well satisfied with his
Captain, took an occasion, as they were speaking of the prizes, to tell the
Knight privately he had not seen the most considerable Prize, being a Turkish
Lady of Eminent Quality, and one of the handsomest Women that had ever been
seen. The Knight was surpised Gourdan had said nothing of her, but looked on
it as a Trick of an old Corsair; yet he could not but be displeased with the
proceeding as unjust and uncivil; but the Lieutenant told him, he was not to
wonder at it from a Man who never knew what it was to be civil or just to the
best of his Friends: He went on and told him how Gourdan had shifted the Lady
into his Vessel by Night, and placed her under the Guard of a Moorish Eunuch
who had served her long, and that Gourdan was so much in Love with her, and so
jealous, he would not permit any one to see her; that the Eunuch had told him
the Lady had so great an Aversion for Gourdan, not only for his ugliness, but
for his ill usage of her, that she was resolved to dye rather than comply with
his desires. The Knight was of too noble and generous a nature not to pity the
poor Slave, especially being handsome, and no ordinary person; he presently
laid designs in her Favor, and told the Lieutenant he would go see his Captain
on the morrow, and reproach him with having concealed that Treasure, in hopes
to prevail with him, at least to use the Lady better, and send her back into
the Vessel she was taken in: The Lieutenant, better acquainted with Gourdan's
humor, told him, it was more than he was to expect from one so deeply in Love,
and so brutish as Gourdan. However the Knight went to see him on the morrow:
Gourdan received, caressed, and entertained him with a great deal of kindness,
but not a word of the Slave: the Knight had of purpose given him occasion to
discourse of her, but Gourdan made him no satisfactory Answer: At length the
Knight, having lost all patience, asked him, as in raillery, if he knew what
was become of a handsome Turkish Woman, which he was told had been taken in the
bigger Prize; and told him, he was much surpised he had not seen her when they
took a view of what was found in the Turkish Ships, and that he had said
nothing of her: The Amorous Corsair took this for an Affront, and told him
roundly he knew not what Woman he meant, that they had seen Women enough in the
Prizes; that true it was he had one in his Ship who was no handsomer than the
rest; but, if that troubled him, there were enough left, and he might go pick
out one from amongst them that should please him best. The Knight little
satisfied with the Answer, replied very seriously, that he held the Conditions
of their Partnership so sacred, that till they came to a dividend, he thought
neither had right, without the privity and consent of the other, to appropriate
to himself any thing found in the Prizes: Gourdan was a Man of so shallow
Discourse he had not a word to say for himself, but, without any reply, rose up
and went to walk on the Deck, leaving the Knight in his Cabin; who, mustering
up the Forces of his good nature and gentleness, to stifle the resentment the
cross usage of this savage Man had raised within him, resolved to win him to
reason by Civility; he followed him, and embracing him with a kindness would
have gained the heart of a Beast of the Field, I have no design, says he, to
contest with you for the fair Slave you have possessed your self of; it is a sort
of Commodity I have no mind to deal in, but pray do not refuse me the sight of
her: Gourdan was quite deaf of that Ear, 'twas a ticklish Request, and he did
not intend to expose her to the view of a young Man so handsome as his Partner;
he loved her too well to hazard her on such an Adventure; and walking on still
without answering a word, he made it sufficiently appear to the Knight he must
hunt for other Game, as for this Gourdan reserved it for himself; the Knight
knew not whether he should be angry or laugh at the proceeding, yet looking on
Gourdan with more pity than anger, Few men in my Circumstances, says he, would
be satisfied with this usage; but you must be complied with, make much of your
Slave; the time may come you will be a weary of her, and then I may be allowed
the liberty of seeing her: Having said this, he left Gourdan, and retired to
his Ship.

A few days after, he sent Gourdan word he had taken his Counsel, and was going
among the Prizes in search of a Woman to his mind, that might bear him Company;
though in truth it was to find out one who could give him an account who she
was the Old Corsair had got aboard; and very luckily he met with one who had
served her long and took her a-board his Vessel, where he treated her with more
Civility and Kindness than a Woman of her condition knew how to receive; he
made her sit with him at Table, and used her so obligingly as confounded the
poor Slave: She was neither young nor handsome, and could impute the Favor to
nothing but the pure generosity of the Knight, whose good mien was sufficient
assurance of the sincerity of his actions: Her Mistress became insensibly the
Subject of their discourse, and the Maid wanted not wit to satisfy his
curiosity: She told him her Mistress was a Lady the King of Tamaran had been
passionately in Love with, and out of remorse of Conscience she was going a
Pilgrim for Mecha: The Knight, who knew persons of that Quality did not without
great reason perform acts of so extraordinary devotion, asked her merrily,
whether she knew the cause her Mistress became so extremely Pious; and seeing
her disposed to conceal nothing from him, he prayed her to tell him the whole
story, not doubting but the account of the devotion of a woman of that
Character must needs contain more then ordinary adventures: Razy (the Slave he
conversed with) was by this time so taken with the Knight she would not have
denied him a far greater matter, and without further entreaty spoke to this
purpose.

Tamaran is a Kingdom where Love at this day reigns more absolute, than ever he
did at Cyprus or Granada: Gallantry is become so much in use there, it is almost
as natural to be a Gallant, as to live, they are wholly given up to Love, and
the young People, encouraged by their Fathers Examples, get themselves
Mistresses before they get rid of the Rod of their Schoolmaster. In a word,
from the age of fifteen to sixty, from the King to the Plowman, every one
enjoys his natural Liberty: whether it proceed from the nature of the Clymat,
or temper of the People, I cannot resolve you; I rather think Subjects are such
as their Kings make them. And the King of Tamaran being one of the most gailant
Princes the World ever had, it is no wonder there is nothing so much talked of
in his Kingdom as Gallantry. But to come to my Story; that King, when he came
to his Crown, fell in Love with Hattige my Mistress, who is certainly one of
the most beautiful Women eye ever saw. She is the daughter of a Janizary, and
was married to a Person of Quality, who had a competent Estate, sufficient to
make her happy, had not her ambition preferred the Title of Mistress to a King,
before private Felicities: To shorten the discourse, the good Man found himself
obliged to endeavor to content himself with the Honor the King did him in
giving him a Title, and an Employment abroad, which he scarce took for a
Favor, and would have been better pleased His Majesty had bestowed it on
another.

My Mistress, proud and handsome as she is, wanted not the address to put a
value on her self, and sell His Majesty a Conquest of that importance, at a
rate suitable to her height of Spirit and Beauty: True it is, she has not been
admired for her wit, but that defect is supplied by the obligeingness of her
carriage, and women's Little Arts, which she makes use of so much to the purpose
of gaining the Monarchs heart, that never Prince was so deeply in Love as he:
he has that complaisance and care to please her, as never man had for any
Woman. And she has not lost the advantage of it, but is by degrees become
absolute Mistress of his Soul, and has reaped the benefit of her conquest in
all particulars, a woman that knows the World, and is studious of her interest,
can propose to her self. The Government of the Kingdom was in a manner in her
hands: every one made his court to her, and whoever expected Favors or
Rewards, must apply himself to Hattige, by whom all was granted, as the pipe
that conveyed the Royal bounty to the Subject: Past ages have furnished us with
Examples of this nature, and posterity may see the like, but not equal to this;
for it may be said, without stretching too much, the King of Tamaran took his
Crown from his head to put it on Hattige's: The first Day he saw her he fell
desperately in love with her: the great rise of my Mistress and her power at
Court, raised her many Enemies: yet her Pride and height of Spirit procured her
more hatred than her favor did jealousy: But the most considerable and most
dangerous Enemy she had, was Osman, chief Aga and Favorite to the King.

A Favorite and a Mistress are seldom seen to agree, either of them
endeavoring to engross their Masters affection, is consequently engaged for
the ruin of the Rival: yet persons of that character for the most part go
cunningly to work; but those I speak of declared open War one against the
other, being both great spirits, and willing to let the World see the advantage
they had one over the other: the King very prudent, and of a very peaceable
humor, sided with neither, but having a kindness for both, and knowing they
hated one another, he gave neither of them credit in any thing said to the
disadvantage of the other: Osman, after many vain attacks, resolved at last to
try what jealousy might work on his Master, and hoped his Passion, like that
of other Lovers, might split on that Rock: He applied himself diligently to
observe the Conduct of the Lady, and find out some considerable and well
grounded cause of suspicion, being thoroughly convinced his Master was so taken
with the Charms of the Lady, it would be no easy matter to disabuse him, and
that she had cunning enough to clear and work her self again into Favor unless
the crime were great and plainly proved.

My Mistress looked not like an Enemy to Nature, and her illustrious Lover
being (as usual) less amorous in his visits than he had been at first, it was
not improbable her constitution might force her to make use of a Gallant to her
mind, to satisfy her inclinations: at least the Aga thought so, and you will
find he was not deceived.

The Title of Mistress, and Chief Mistress to the King (besides the power it
gives persons of that Character) has introduced much Liberty into the Serrail.
Hattige who never stinted her self in any privilege she had, was in a manner
Sovereign there, not a person daring to contradict her in any thing: The Aga
was no less considerable, and somewhat more formidable, and having Money at
command (which is omnipotent at Court) he quickly by that means, had his Spies
in every Corner, who promised him a faithful account of my Mistresses Actions.

As glorious as it is for an ambitious Woman to see at her Feet every day a
person who commands all others, yet Monarchs are deceived if they think their
Mistresses are always true. No passion, but that of extraordinary love, can fix
a Woman's heart; Ambition alone is too weak a gage for their Fidelity; it
frequently happens, Princes owe their Amorous Conquests more to their quality
than merit; and accordingly they extend only to what is external and gross,
when Love and Inclination, frustrated of their expectations from them, and not
satisfied with pomp and with show, goes in search of satisfaction elsewhere.
Hattige loved the King, as most Mistresses of that kind use to do; that is, as
far as the power of a Monarch could make her Love a Man, who raised her above
all other Women; she reigned in all outward splendour imaginable; but amidst all
her Glories she was troubled she found not a Man she could Love for his own
sake. A Woman subject to such reflections as these, is hardly kept within the
bounds of her duty; my Mistress found it too hard a task not to transgress a
little, and being in search of one worthy her condescension, she cast her Eyes
upon Rajep, the Master Gardiners Nephew.

Rajep was a handsome Gentleman, young and vigorous, and had pleased other
Women, and was reputed to make his Fortune that way. She had twice or thrice
seen him, as she looked upon the sports as are usually shown for the
divertisement of the Ladies of the Serrallio, where Men Fight with Beasts for
the pleasure of the Women. Rajep was excellent at the sport, and always came
off with Applause and Admiration. Every blow he gave carried Death with it, and
made all the Company shout for joy, which reached my Mistresses heart. It Is not
unusual to find women affected with a Man's merit, upon occasions of that
nature; she was deeply sensible of the Applause and Honor bestowed by the
Company on Rajep. When she came from these Shows she could not forbear being
melancholy and pensive, even in the King's presence; She could neither eat,
nor Sleep. This troubled extremely the amorous Prince, who was so inquisitive
after the least concerns of the health and pleasures of his Mistress, that he
was more in pain than she, to see her languish as she did: He could not imagine
what she ailed, and was so much concerned at it, he could not rest for thinking
of it. The Lady was more and more Lovesick, and by degrees her passion grew so
upon her it altered her quite. The good King redoubled his Caresses no less
than his Care and Liberality; and if it had been possible, would have doubled
his Love: He prayed her every moment, if she loved him, to tell him the cause
of her trouble, and protested he would not stick, for her satisfaction, to
sacrifice his Life: So great, so true, and so tender a passion, might have
turned that false heart of hers, had she been capable of any love for him. But
Rajep was her man; the most charming in her Eye; and the most accomplished on
Earth. The King's bounties she thought were but her due; or at least
sufficiently requited in the superficial acknowledgments she made him; and that
if she loved him not heartily, 'twas not her fault, but his, who knew not how
to gain her Affection.

Such, Sir, is the fortune of Monarchs in love; when they are with their
Mistresses they commonly lay aside that Majesty which dazles the Eyes, and
affects the Hearts of Mankind; they go undressed into their Chambers, and make
themselves so familiar with their Mistresses, they afterward use them as
ordinary Men: The amourous Hattige, wholly possessed with her passion for Rajep,
languished under it, not knowing what remedy to use. Zara, a Greek Slave, and
her chief Confident, had a longing desire to know what the matter was; she
heard her sigh every moment; and, like a Woman of Age and Experience as she
was, she thought, if it was not for Love, there was no great danger: She was
not over hasty to know the Secret; but conformed her self so much to her
Mistresses way of living, that she neither eat, nor slept; but wept, and
sighed, and walked, just as her Mistress. At last, my Mistress having often
observed it, asked her what she ailed to afflict her self so: Alas, if you
knew, Madam, answers the good Matron, sighing, if you knew, says she again,
with a sorrowful Tone, what danger you run into by living as you do -- But what
should I tell you of it, who have so little confidence in me. You have no cause
to complain of that, Answers Hattige, smiling; for you know no person alive
knows more of my Secrets than You. Yes, Madam, relplyes Zara, till now, because
possibly you never were engaged in any thing might deserve the Name of a
Secret; but now that the time is come to try my fidelity, to make use of my
Advice and Addresses, you are content to afflict your self, as if you had not
Zara with you; Zara, who loves you, (if I may be allowed to say so) more than
her Life, which she would very willingly sacrifice for you: for what is the
matter, Madam, what would you have? wherein may I serve you? why do you not
make use of me? -- Thou speak, says the Lady, as if thou read what is in
my heart. And who is it, but can guess, replies Zara, what you ail? the only
wonder to me is the King has not taken notice of it, and I tremble when I hear
you sigh before him: for, when all is done, what is it you want for complete
satisfaction? if it be not that he loves you too much, and you love not him;
there is not that thing you can desire in the world but you have it already. I
tell you truly, Madam, I am afraid your Melancholy will at length make him
suspect something, and what he will think of it I know not. Thou say well,
poor Zara, replies Hattige, seemingly affected with the kindness of the good
Slave; and could I believe thee faithful enough to acquaint thee with all that
is in my heart, I doubt not but thy Advice might be to my advantage. If you
doubt my Fidelity, says Zara, you need only say nothing to me, for so you will
oblige me, in spite of my heart, to keep your Counsel: Yet I would have you
know, that for forty years I have spent in the Serrail, I have been always
looked upon as an Example of Discretion: There has not been here in all that
time a gallant Woman but I have served; and were we at leisure, could give you
a very pleasant account of them. In a word, Madam, I know who I am, and I know
what you want. Make use of me once more, and as soon as you please: Perhaps you
may not find me always in humor to pleasure you, but it pities me at present
to see you languish. My Mistress, who had before a good Opinion of Zara, and
clearly saw how necessary she was for her, resolved immediately to discover all
to her, though to save her modesty she turned the story thus.

Thou know, says she, I had a Brother who loved me, and I from a Child loved
him with the tenderest Affection: My Father, to prevent misadventures he
apprehended from the violent Inclinations we had one for another, parted us,
sending him to Candy, whence he never returned. Never were more Tears shed then
by me on that cruel occasion; and to this Day I have not wore out the sorrow
for the loss of him: But it is not that I have to say to you, dear Zara, you
know it already; what I am to acquaint thee with, is, I have seen a man so like
my dear Brother, in Mien, in Features, in Stature, in Actions; in a word, so
every way like him, I verily thought him the same; and I had without doubt
taken him for my Brother, had I not been told he was the Master-Gardiner's
Nephew. Who, Rajep, says Zara! Yes, Rajep, the very same,answers Hattige; as
high as Fortune raises us, see how cruelly she uses us sometimes; for, you may
believe, I could not see this man but my Heart bled afresh with grief for my
Brother; but the worst of all this, which I am almost ashamed to tell thee, I
have, by a strange Sympathy, the same inclination for him I had for my Brother;
and the sight of this Man has not only forced Tears from my Eyes, but sighs
from my heart: What would thou have me say more? I find my sels so unhappy,
that it is my ill fortune not to love any, but whom I cannot or ought not to
love.

Hattige with that dropped some Tears, which the officious Zara endeavored to
stop. No, no, adds Hattige, there is no Remedy for me but Death. The Age of
dying for Love is long since past, says Zara; trouble not your self with the
thoughts of a Virtue which is a Stranger to our times. What would thou have
me do then, says Hattige? You shall know, answers Zara, when you have told me
what it is you desire. And seeing Hattige in a study what to say, to give Zara
time to guess what she wished for; Would you see Rajep, says Zara? would you
have me bring him to your Apartment --? Ah my dear Zara, cries the amorous
Lady, embracing her tenderly! how pleasantly thou flatterest most passionate
desires; could thou do that for me, thou would Eternally oblige me; but I
am heartily afraid for thee, and would rather dye than any harm should happen
to thee on my account. Take no care for that (says Zara) this is not so great a
matter for me to effect. I have already taken my measures how to bring it
about; do but write a Billet to Rajep to advertise him of his good Fortune, and
let me alone with the rest. My Mistress, to encourage her the more to serve her
faithfully, presented her with a Gold Chain, and assured her it was but the
Earnest of what she would do for her. Pen, Ink, and Paper being brought,
Hattige writ this Billet to Rajep.

LOve, as well as Fortune, sometimes bestows favors where least expected: A
Lady desires to see you; the access will be somewhat difficult, but you will
not repent the pains you shall take; usually the dearer we purchase any thing
the better we esteem it: Prepare yonr self to receive the good Fortune is
offered you, and to purchase it with the peril of your Life: Your Courage is
known, and if you find Fortune as favorable as Love you cannot be unhappy.

Zara took the Billet, and went to give it an Eunuch she confided in most; she
had several she employed on such Errands, whose Faithfulness she bought with
good ready Money: she carefully instructed him she sent on this Message, and
conjured him to Secrecy. But what trust is there to be reposed in those who
are always for him that gives most? Zara's pay was not comparable to the
Aga's; and that Eunuch being one of his Spies, you may believe he carried him
the Billet in confidence of a good reward. Osman received it as the best
Present could be made him; and impatient to see what it contained, he retired
into his Closet; opened it; knew the hand; read it over and over with that
extremity of revenge, that attends the desire of pleasure, when in a hopeful
way of being Master of the Life or Reputation of an Enemy.

He paused a while e're he came to a resolution what to do with the Billet; to
Copy it out would signify nothing, nothing being more to easy then to deny
what we have not written; to keep it, were to put a stop to a business, which,
(to appear of considerable consequence) must be carried on further: Having
thought well of it, he was of Opinion it would be best to keep the Original,
and send Rajep a Copy, which he caused a Woman to make of it, and send it to
Rajep; who knowing neither the Character, nor the Person that writ it, would be
easily taken in the snare: The Messenger very faithfully delivered Rajep the
Billet; the Gallant, who loved no sport better, was so proud of the Honor he
received by it, that he would willingly have gone presently to see what they
would have with him: But his time was not yet come, he knew not the Lady who
had so much kindness for his Person. He thought of several, but this Eunuch
belonging to the Serraillio, the Billet in all probability came from thence,
where Rajep was altogether unacquainted. He could not imagine Hattige should be
the Person; she, who was the proudest, as well as handsomest, Lady of the
Kingdom, and the King's Principal Favorite: He would have asked the Eunuch,
but feared he might spoil all by being too curious: This made him content
himself with asking a few Questions for some further light; but finding, by the
Answers, all he was to hope for at that time was the Billet; he dismissed him
with this Answer.

THere is nothing too hard for me, when concerned in the Service of Ladies:
It Is the duty of a civil Person, to endeavor to oblige them: I take such
delight in it, I always think my Life well exposed in their Service: You may
guess, Madam, how ready I am on such an occasion as this; let me but know the
way I am to take, no Obstacle shall stop me: I dye with impatience to engage in
the Affair, and if Fortune be not wanting to her duty, I shall quickly be where
Love would have me.

The Eunuch was liberally paid by Rajep that moment for betraying him; he gave
him a fair Diamond, and the honest Agent, in acknowledgment of the favor, went
directly with the Billet to the Aga; who, ravished at the good success, caused
a Copy to be made of this as of the former Billet, and sent it to Hattige.

The passionate Lady at the return of the Eunuch, having read Rajep's Answer,
was so overjoyed, that the whole Serrallio rung of the News; she embraced her
dear Zara a thousand times over; she caressed the very Eunuch, who (you see)
deserved it well at her hands; she rewarded both liberally, and promised them
so largely, the performance would have ruined her: The fair Lady was so
impatient she writ a new Billet on the morrow, and the Eunuch, who had served
her so Faithfully with the first, was trusted with the second: He carried it
(as he had cause) to the Aga, who opened it with as much joy as the former, and
found in it these words.

A Sight of you is enough to convince one, you are a very gallant man, and that
one cannot hazard too much to engage with you: Make good use of the Sentiments
you rasise in those that see you; do as the Moor shall tell you, and you will
quickly have reason to thank Love for his favors.

Osman having read the Billet, asked the Eunuch the particulars of his new
Embassy; who told him, He carried Rajep the Assignation of a Rendezvous at
Night, with the hour and the manner he was to be introduced. The Aga more
joyful of the news than can be expressed, caused a Copy to be made of this Billet
by the hand that had copied the other, and dismissed the Eunuch to pursue his
Commission: Rajep, who did not expect so great a progress in so short a time,
thought himself highly obliged to the fair Lady unknown, who saved him the
Troubles and Inquietudes of longer delays. His Answer was this.

WHatever you think of me, Madam, I have not vanity enough to fancy I can merit
the favor you do me. I acknowledge I owe it entirely to your Goodness; and if
I have any thing worthy of it, it is the extreme passion I have had for you now
a whole day; a passion so violent, had you delayed any longer my happyness of
seeing you, it would have certainly been the death of me. I will do as
directed; and if I fail of my design, it shall not be for want of Love; it will
be entirely Fortune's fault, which will undoubtedly be for me, if she favor
those who are deepest in Love, as she does those who are boldest in Action.

The Aga was glad of this Billet also; had it copied; and ordered the Eunuch to
bring him word as soon as Rajep entered the Seraglio; which he punctually did
about one a Clock in the morning. It was a little too late to carry the News to
the King; but it was an Occasion to good to be lost: He went his ways, and
found the King just going to Bed. The King surprised to see him come into his
Chamber; What (says he) Osman, up at this time of the Night! Nothing but good
Fortune should keep a Man so long awake. Who knows (says the Aga) but it is that
brings me hither. You are come a little too late (says the King) and I am so
well pleased with my good Fortune to day, I will not rise to go in search of a
better. Hear me (adds the King, observing Osman very desirous to interrupt him)
I will tell you part of the Pleasure I have had this Evening, and shall not
relish it so well, unless I acquaint you with it: You must know, that Hattige,
whom (in spite of the hatred you have for her) you will acknowledge one of the
handsomest Women you have ever seen, was fallen of late into so strange a
Melancholy and Grief, that nothing could divert her: She did nothing but weep;
and her Tears troubled me so, that at last I believe, I should have died for
Grief; so great is the Love I have for her: This Day more charming (to Me at
least) and more beautiful than ever, (though not without some languishing in
her Looks, which showed she was not thoroughly well at Heart) taking pity of the
Condition her Sadness was bringing me to: Sir (says she) embracing me with
extremity of Tenderness, I see well enough what you suffer for my sake: Were my
Life only concerned, I would dye a Thousand times, rather than tell you the
cause of my melancholy; but the care I have of your Health, far dearer than
mine, and the Concern I am under, to see you so altered in few days, will not
permit me any longer to conceal from you the cause of my sadness. I must tell
you then, though I were sure to lose your Affection by it, my grief proceeds
only from a dream I had lately, which made such impression on my spirit, I
cannot to this moment get it out of my thoughts. At that, she stopped, not able
to proceed for weeping and sobbing, which she could not forbear; and I had much
ado to persuade her at length to put an end to; and pressing her more earnestly
to go on, and tell me her dream. Alas! (continued she, sighing) may it not be a
fatal Prediction out of my own mouth against my self? I dreamt, Sir, I saw you
in Roukia 's arms, the Master Gardiner's Wife, and was not able with tears or
reproaches to force you thence. Can you be so false, and will you not endeavor
at least to divert the blow Heaven threatens me with?

Ah, Sir, rather let me die, than ever see this come to pass. Here her grief
seized her more violently than ever, and she fell half dead into my Arms. You
may believe, dear Osman, I said many things to her to bring her again, and
persuade her out of the thoughts of the Dream, which you know signifies
nothing. I have often heard talk of Rouchia; but as beautiful as they report
her to be, I never had the curiosity to see her. I was so satisfied with the
lovely Hattige, for whom I have resolved to keep my self entirely, and stick to
her alone. To end my Story, you must know, I prevailed with her so far, with
oaths and kind words, that I disabus'd at last, and left her perfectly cured of
those suspicions of falsness she had entertained against me. She recovered her
former Gayety of humor, and was kinder than ever, having expressed to me all the
tenderness and strength of an extraordinary Passion; I stayed with her longer
than ordinary, and am more in love with her than ever. I am but newly come from
her, and to tell you the Truth, had scarce the power to leave her* Pray stay a
little longer, (says she still) as I was going. And still one moments stay
procured another, full of love and of kindness; which seemed to increase still
as she staid me: I could entertain you all night with the pleasure I had in the
Closet of that charming Woman; and yet not tell you all, which, you know, is
not discretion in a Lover to do to his Confident, though never so faithful. But
what think you of her tenderness for me? Was ever woman in love so alarmed at
a Dream? And must I not love her more than ever, for having endured what she
did, without daring to acquaint me with it? It Is true, (says the Aga very
seriously) what you have said, is surprising, but not to that degree you
imagined. Give me leave to acquaint you only, that a Man for whom I have the
highest respect and veneration, being passionately in Love, as you are, with a
Woman, one day in confidence gave me an account how pleasantly he had spent
some moments in her Company; and that she had given him a taste of all that the
most tender and passionate Love has of sweet, and of charm; and that he
thought himself the happiest Lover on Earth. You would think your self much
abused, (said I) if all those transports of Love and of tenderness you have
been so taken with, were but a Dose of Poison to cast you into a sleep; and
that the Lady you speak of, is at this moment in the Arms of another. There was
nothing so true, Sir, (adds the Aga) as what I told him; that man, if he had
pleased, might have been an eyewitness of it. I could have let him have seen
his Mistress in Bed with another man, so far beneath him, as a Subject is
beneath a Prince.

Osman, Osman, (says the King) you shall not make me jealous: I believe
(continues he, looking earnestly on the Aga) such a thing might happen. Women
are now adays so treacherous, there is no trusting their Caresses. But I am
very well satisfied I cannot be concerned in so infamous an Example. I know
Hattige and know her too well, to believe she ever had kindness for any but me.
However, (replies the Aga) it is of you I am speaking all this while; and since
I must be plain with you, and that the honor of my King is concerned in it,
you are the Person so basely dishonored. It Is that charming Hattige, whom you
love and adore so, it is she betrays you this moment, in the manner I have told
you. The King, astonished with the sudden stroke of such terrible News, was
speechless a while; but presently after, looking angerly on the Aga; As long as
your invectives, Osman (says he) extended only to the pride and excessive
Expenses of Hattige, I had the patience to bear with them, as having some
ground of Truth; but her Reputation being in question, wherein mine is so
deeply concerned, I shall think very ill of you, if you accuse her without good
proof to convict her: It Is now almost three Years since I saw Hattige, and have
reason to know her better than any: Had there been another in the Kingdom
greater than my self, or were any one my equal in it, I might peradventure have
some apprehension she might be guilty of such a Crime: I say, peradventure; for
I doubt very much, whether she would in that Case be false to me. But
considering her pride and height of Spirit, you shall never make me believe she
can abase her self to think of any thing below me, unless I see it with my
Eyes: Do not I see how she uses all the World, and that there is not a more
ambitious Woman living? Certainly she loves me. Yet I am persuaded, she would
love me more, were I greater than I am; for nothing but Greatness can satisfy
that proud Soul of hers. I knew very well, (answers the Aga, sighing for pity)
Thus prepossest, or enchanted rather, as you are, in favor of that Lady, what
I should say against her, would make little impression on you: I do not desire
you should believe it, if you have not a mind to it: yet be pleased to come,
and see it with your own Eyes? What you! Can you let me see, (cries the King
very angrily) when I am but just now come from her? Well Sir (says the Aga)
What you say is true, but it is no less true, that if you please, you may find
her with another in her Chamber, if you please to take the pains of going
thither. Ah! (says the incredulous Prince) I can have no more patience: But
have you considered, Osman, how highly I shall resent it, if I take the pains
to get up, and you cannot convict her of the Crime you charge her with? The Aga
very calmly answers; I am well assured of what I say; and have no cause to fear
your Resentment, if I have no more to do than let you see what I promised. The
King got up, and having put on his Nightgown, with his Turban, and Sword, he
went straight toward the Seraglio with Osman, holding him by the hand, as if
he had feared he would have given him the slip. This is the Scene, (says the
King at his entrance) where, what you have promised me, is to be seen; but take
heed you bear not a part in the Catastrophe. The Aga told him, 'twas a plain
matter of Fact would be presently discovered. The King observing him come on so
resolutely, and with joy in his face, as a man going to a Triumph, began (not
altogether to believe him, but) to fear there was something in the matter: And
it made him the rather apprehend some untoward Adventure, that he knew Osman a
Man of good sense, and not easily mistaken; and one, who without very good
grounds, would not have engaged in a business of that nature: So that the King
knew not what to think. He would not for his life have given him that advantage
over his Mistress; especially after the Story he had just then told him. And
now all the Kings care was to make the design of the discovery miscarry, though
she were criminal: When they were got within two or three steps of Hattiges
Apartment, and had no more to do but draw the Curtain, the King seemed, as if
he knew not whither he was to go, nor what he had to do. His Guide, jealous of
his Honor, and eager to make him an Eyewitness of his shame, was forced to
push him on, and mind him there was no time to be lost, if he would find them
so together as was necessary for a clear Conviction, and if he staid any
longer, the whole Serrallio would know they were in: The King heard him not, or
made as if he had not: He was busying himself with needless precautions of
shutting up Doors, which (besides that there was no need to have them shut)
made a great noise if they were stirred; of placing Guards in needless places,
and calling for help, that they within might hear him. In a word, to mad the
Aga (who spent his breath in telling him he must not stay, but go directly to
Hattige) for one step he advanced he went back two: At last he ordered the
matter so that the Gallant was aware of his coming, and had time to escape, so
that when the King was come to the Lady's Chamber, the Bird was flown, and no
other sign of her guilt, but a little more than ordinary finery, and a dress
very different from what the King left her in, which would have past for good
proof with a Lover less blind than he: Hattige had the dexterity to invent
several pretenses to take off the suspicion of any design; and to be beforehand
with the Monarch, she told him, he had pleased her so well that Evening, that,
to charm him on the Morrow more than ever she had done, she had tried on some
new Dresses, and he was come most luckily to tell her how he liked them. Yet
she must confess her self a little surpised at his sudden return, and
extraordinary Visit; and that either his passion for her was increased that
Evening, or that he had some particular Reasons for it, which she could not
guess, but might destroy all the pleasure she took in seeing him the second
time. The King, perplexed at what he saw, answered her very coldly, as if he had
not been satisfied with her Excuse, and let her know by his looks, he had some
suspicion of the Bravery he found her in; yet he durst not condemn her, as
wanting sufficient reason for it. Osman, who staid in the next Room, and had,
by his Masters fault, lost so excellent an occasion, was ready to eat his
Fingers for madness, raving and exclaiming against the weakness of his Patron,
and calling him all the Names his anger could suggest.

The good Prince, who had too much good nature to be proof against the obliging
Kindness and Flatteries of his Mistress, was not only quickly persuaded to
believe all she said, but (which is most incredible) he had the Goodness to
tell her the reason of his Visit, and all that the Aga had acquainted him with.
Then it was it rained Torrents of Tears; then was her Hair pulled by handfuls,
her Head-gear and Clothes tore all to pieces and a thousand other Actions of
Despair so extraordinary, that the King to appease her, was forced to ask her
pardon. Osman knew nothing of all this, when his Master entered the Chamber
Osman was in, and with rears in his Eyes prayed him if he loved him, to go make
the innocent Hattige some reparation of Honor: This put Osman into such
indignation he almost lost his respect to his Master, who continuing obstinate
to have him make a submission so unjust and unbecoming a Man of his Quality,
Osman took out the four Billets which he had of purpose brought with him, to
justify what he had said, if there should be occasion, and showed them the
King, asking him if he knew the Character of those Hattige had written. Then he
prayed the King to give him leave to retire, which he granted him, more for
shame he knew not what to say to him, than for any other reason he had to get
rid of him: What an astonishment was the poor Monarch in, at sight of the
Billets? It was not in his power to come to himself; he walked all alone about
the Room, with his head to the ground, (pressed down, you may believe, with the
new weight it bore) and his Heart full of extraordinary Conflicts and violent
Emotions.

My Mistress, (surpised the King stayed so long) was afraid the Aga might
spoil all, and mar what her tears had so well mended, and would go her self to
see what the matter was: She found him musing as a man in a maze, and going up
to him, and embracing him, in that fond and obliging manner, where with she
charmed him when she pleased; What troubles you now, Sir, (says she,) that you
use me so cruelly? Any new trick of the Aga's? Will he never have done
contriving of mischief? Ah Heavens! How unfortunate am I (adds she, wetting his
Face with the Tears that fell from her Eyes) to see you so easy to believe
those horrible Calumnies that Villain invents of me? With that she fell as half
dead into his Arms, which so softened the Heart of the kind Monarch, he could no
longer resist such Charms; but embracing her with unparalled Tenderness and
Sorrow, carried her in his Arms, and laid her on the Bed, praying her, with
Tears in his Eyes, to come to her self again, otherwise she must expect to have
him die with her.

This excess of Tenderness was too little to comfort the afflicted Fair One:
She would know further, what the Traitor (so she called the Aga) had told him
of new, and protested she would not cease crying till he had told her all, and
she had justified her self from all his Calumnies. The good King was very loath
to let her see the Billets, fearing without doubt it would be hard for her to
justify her self against them; but the desire he had to find her innocent,
made him give 'em her; telling her, he was well assured, 'twas a new Imposture;
and that he very well knew, 'twas an usual thing to counterfeit hands. She took
the Billets, and began to read them; but with terrible Acclamations: Heaven!
(says she) Can man be so malicious? Well Sir, (adds she) what Arts, and what
Industry are made use of to ruin me, and destroy me in your Opinion? And will
you make nothing of it; but pass it by, and take no care to revenge me? Assure
your self, I will without more ado, cause to morrow morning aMaraboug to be
made, where I Will bury my self alive, unless you do me Reason, and clear my
Reputation from so criminal an Imputation, which reflects no less on You than
on Me. You have a Heart of Stone toward a poor Woman, who has quitted all for
Love of you, and made her self a Sacrifice to your Passion; and in the mean
time. permit your self to be abused by a Favorite, a Villain, whose Spirit and
Ambition you know; and he can prevail with you, not only to do what ever he
pleases, but to believe the strangest and most impossible things in the World.

What a shower of Tears sell with these words? She had a Storehouse of them,
and could command them thence in what quantity she pleased: The King did all he
could to quiet her; he promised to vindicate her, and let her see very
suddenly, he was not for Osman: Strange Weakness! But Kings in love are Men,
and not Gods.

On the Morrow, the Aga was with the King at his rising, but received in a
lamentable manner: He complained of him, and reproached him (you see with what
Grounds) and at last banished him, forbidding him his Presence, till he should
be sent for. Osman obeyed without Reply. He might have made more stir, by
producing the Moor; but after Usage so hard and unjust, he would not be at the
Pains; but chose rather to be thought to be in fault, and at distance from a
Master so easy to be seduced by the Flatteries of a Woman, than to justify
himself for undeceiving him.

Many were amazed at the Favourite's Fall; some rejoiced at it, especially my
Mistress; who having now near the King no Enemy, but what she slighted, allowed
her self to take her full swinge in her Amors, relying on the blindness of the
good Prince, whom she thought she had laid too soundly asleep, to fear his
waking a good while. Her trouble was to discover how the Aga came by the
Billets: there was no color of reason to suspect Rajep, who was not only too
honest, to be capable of such Treachery, but obliged by joint interest not to
accuse her. The Eunuch, who had been the Mercury of the Intrigue, was the most
suspicious. She sent in search of him, but Zara could have no news of him, and
so the Treason came out. Hattige failed not to charge the Mistress of her
Intrigues, to make better choice of those she employed, and whom she trusted as
Messengers in matters of that importance.

The King was too Amorous not to be subject to jealousy. He could not put out
of his head those Billets written in a Character so exactly like Hattiges,
though he knew Folks have the art of counterfeiting hands: And taking time at
his leisure, to examine in private, and weigh with himself all the
Circumstances of that Evenings Adventure, it made him for a while very unquiet,
and full of vexation. At last, he resolved for his satisfaction, and ease, to
observe in person, the Conduct of his Mistress, to rid himself at once of the
Suspicions that tormented him, or the Passion he had for her if guilty: He
bethought himself of a Stratagem for the purpose, which hit very luckily.

He had the privilege to enter the Seraglio, when he pleased, through Doors
made of purpose, the Keys whereof were in his custody. The Day he intended to
put his Design in Execution, he spent almost all in Hattiges Lodgings, paying
her all the Amorous Devoirs he used to do, with more than ordinary Gaiety and
Tenderness; insomuch that she thought him better satisfied than ever of her
Fidelity to him: Besides he staid of purpose, much later than ordinary, though
to the good Ladys very great trouble, it being a Day of Assignation for Rajep,
who with the impatience of a fortunate Lover, waited Zara's coming: But when a
Person who is jealous knows how to dissemble, he deceives the most mistrustful.

The King from Hattige's Lodgings went into his own, to dress himself like a
Bedowin (so they call the Moorish Women of the Mountains, of whom there are
commonly great numbers in the Serallio) his Face he covered with a black Vail,
and his Body a white Blanket, and put on a pair of Linnen-Drawers, and black
Stockings, which is all the Equipage of that sort of Women, when they are in
the Towns; for in the Country they go as God made them. The King in his new
Dress slipped softly and alone into the Seraglio, and posted himself before the
Door of his Mistresses Apartment; where, to avoid suspicion, he laid him down
on a Bench, as the Bedowines use to do.

It was a Gallery you must of necessity pass through, whether you went in or
out of my Mistresses Lodgings: At one end of it was a Lanthorn, which had a
Light in it all Night; but the King being at the other end of the Gallery, it
was almost dark there. He had not long been on the Watch, but he discovered the
Enemy, though he had no great mind to ask, Who goes there: He never bid them
stand, but let them come on undisturbed, that he might have them where he
desar'd. 'Twas even Zara, leading another Bedowine by the hand, whom the King
prepossest with suspicion, presently believed such another Woman as himself.
And to speak the truth, the Bodowin's Stature and Gate confirmed his
conjecture. Zara went up to the door, never minding the Sentinel, and turning
toward her Bedowin, bid him have a moments patience, and she would go to her
Mistress for Orders for his Entrance. The King had time then to take a full
view of the Bedowine; who turning about toward that side where the King lay,
perceived there was something in humane Shape on the Bench, and being now in an
Enemies Country, the Bedowin thought She could not be too cautious, and for
fear of leaving behind her fomething that might hinder her retreat, thought
good to make up to what she saw, and examine nearer at hand what it was:
Fortune, being commonly favorable to those Love exposes, ordered it so, that a
corner of the Blanket the King had wrapped himself in being untyed, the curious
Bedowin discovered part of a Sword, which being Enameled with Vermillion, in
that little light there was, gave the Bedowin enough to know 'twas time to look
about her, and not safe to be there. Accordingly She went softly to the other
end of the Gallery, and so down the Stairs, and away out of Doors; which she
was very glad of, having escaped a scowring, being fully persuaded the Sword she
had seen, threatne her Life.

The King, who thought he had not given his fellow Beaowin the least suspicion,
could not fancy her marching back was to run quite away. He got up to see what
was become of her: Zara, arriving, took him for the Bedowin she had left at the
door, and wisper'd him in the Ear, he might enter, and be kindly received. The
King, glad of the mistake, followed his Guide, leading him by the hand, a way
he knew better than any one alive. He was no sooner got into Hattiges Chamber,
but she took him about the neek, hugging him in her Arms with the Transports of
a Woman amorous as she. Dear Rajep, (says she) how glad am I to see thee,
having spent all this day with a King, whose Caresses are torments to me? Thou
must make me amends by a thousand Transports of Love. This was an excellent
beginning for the Monarchs Entertainment, who took all patiently, not stirring
from under his Disguise: The Lady more hasty than he, to make good use of those
pleasant moments the presence of a Lover, beloved as he was should produce,
couldnot endure that so little delay. Her longings, more prevalent than her
Modesty, put her into a fit of charming Wrath against the coldness of her
insensible Lover: she made him a thousand Reproaches, and would have tore off
with her own hands his Vail, and his Blankets, and the rest of his fine dress:
What, Rajep, (says she) with an amorous Indignation) do you expect that I
should unmask you? Have you no more Desire to see and embrace me? Is the time
you purchase, with the peril of your life and mine, of so little Value, that
you can afford to lose so many precious moments? No soomer had she said this,
but down dropped the Disguise. Zara, who had helped her Mistress to undress the
false Bedowin, first discovered the mistake, and ran away with a shrieck that
frighted her Mistress, who was never so surpised as to see 'twas the King.
Hattige very luckily swouned away for fear, for it is very probable the injured
Monarch would otherwise in the beginning of his fury, have been transported
into some act of violence against her, which might have mis- become him. But
seeing a Woman almost dead at his feet (though she did but counterfeit) his
fury vanished, to give place to his pity, which seized him with that
Tenderness, that made him sensible, false and ungrateful as she was, he could
not forbear loveing her still. He called to the Slaves of the Apartment, and
ordered her to be laid on a Bed, where it would have pleased him to approach
her with her Falsehood; but finding his Resentment too weak for his good nature,
melting at sight of an Object so amiable, though false, he retired.

The next day Osman was called to Court, where he had from the King a very
favorable Reception, to make him amends for his former hard Usage. He told
him, he was but too much convinced of the ill Conduct of Hattige, against whom
he let fall the most opprobrious Language imaginable; protesting he would for
the future use her as the basest of Women. The Aga, being a dextrous Courtier,
and not unacquainted with Lover's Relapses; knowing where lay the Weakness of
his Prince, said not a word for, or against her; only prayed him to believe, he
had not in his Kingdom, a Servant more faithful, and jealous of his Master's
Glory, than him. But that he was afraid if his Majstey saw that Woman again,
things would return to their former course. The King blushed at these words, as
reproaching him with his frailty. Yet he swore a thousand Oaths, it should
never be so again, which his Heart mis-gave him he would not keep, as it
afterward happened.

As for Rajep, Order was given to apprehend him. Meharen, the Master-Gardiner,
having no Heir but that dear Nephew of his, when he had the News of what had
past in the Seraglio, and the Order against Rajey, threw himself at the King's
Feet, but was presently rejected. Yet his Friends at Court appeased the King in
some measure, and prevailed with him to change the Sentece of Death, past
against Rajeb, into that of Banishment during Life.

My Mistress the first, the second, and third day of her Disgrace, saw not the
King: This was a long time for the amorous Prince, who used to be scarce an
hour away from her. Acquaintances of that nature are not lost, without a great
deal of pain. She had Friends she employed, who every moment acquainted the
King with the lamentable condition her Repentance had brought her to, being so
pined away she was not likely to live an Hour. The fourth day the Prophecy of
Osman was fulfilled. The King foftned with the sad News, melting into
Tenderness, sighed, staggerd, and at last, following his Inclination, went to
give her one Visit more, under pretense of taking his Revenge of her, being
ashamed, without doubt, of so unbecoming a Relapse, after the noise he had made
of the Falsness of that Woman. To excuse himself, he said he would go to her
only, to take from her those Jewels he had given her, who deserved not to wear
auy thing belonging to him. The Aga, who knew his Master well, and of what
Consequenee that Visit might be, would have diverted him dexterously, by taking
the Ladies part.

And telling him, It did not become a generous Prince, as he was, to repent of
his Liberality, especially to Women. But if he designed only to frighten her,
(which he doubted not, was all he intended) it would suffice, as he conceived,
to send any one to her from his Majesty, without doing her the Honor of a
personal Visit. The Counsel was good, but unseasonable for a Lover, who was
going in search of what the other would have diverted him from. The King
answered, he knew what he did; and that in some Affairs he loved to follow his
Humor, without any Advice. The Aga by this judged all was lost, and that the
King would be engaged deeper than ever. He shrug'd and retired, unwilling to be
Witness of an Action, which would be charged half upon him, if present. The
King was not displeased as his retyring, and perhaps things would have gone
otherwise then they did, had the Aga been there. The King came to Hattiges
Apartment, where presently, without staying to give her notice of his coming,
or calling for the Keys of the Closet where the Jewels were, he caused the door
to be broke open; entered it, and finding the box (they were in) open, he fell
to viewing them over, and taking particular notice of them, as it were to give
time to his perfi^ious Mistress to come, and appease him. She fell down at his
Feet, with her Hair about her Ears, and embraced his Knees with that
irresistible tenderness, he took her up, and led her into the Closet: what
Reconciliation was made there, I know not; but certain it is, the King left the
Jewels behind him, and returning two hours after, made her new Presents.

This agreement by degrees gathered such strength, that the Amorous Prince
visited her oftener than ever, and seemed to have forgotten, not only what he
had said of Hattige, but all that had past; which for a Lover of his Character
was of consequence enough, never to be forgotten. It was talked of abroad, but
not much to his advantage. Only the Aga said not a word of it. Being politic,
he knew there was no remedy, and that it was an incurable Infirmity in his
Prince, whose Ascendant was Love: So that the Aga held it imprudent in him, to
ruin his Fortune to serve his Prince against his will; and was confident,
Hattige was a Woman of that humor, she would destroy her self at last.

Rajep being banished, and Hattige more addicted to Gallantry than ever, (the
King having caused her only to change her Gallant, and add to her former, the
Pleasure of Variety) Zara, who through his means, was again taken into her
Favor, was employed a new to find out one with whom she might break those
Oaths of Fidelity she had newly made to the King. Hattige did no longer mince
the matter to this Slave, so well acquainted with her Concerns. And the good
Matron, who knew her Mistress desired a Gallant, as well out of the Infirmity
of her Nature, and Weakness of Temper, as to please her Inclination; resolved
to find her out one, with whom she also might do her Business. The King, on the
other side, who after he was convinced of the Falseness of Hattige, began to
love her less, was very desirous of a new Mistress, and fell in love with
Roukia, as Hattige had foretold. It was an Inclination he was strangely
surpised into, and perhaps in a manner not to be paralelled.

Women, besides the natural Beauty of the Face, which chiefly gains them
Admirers, have a Thousand other ways to engage Men to love them; for their
Voice, their Wit, their Humor, their Shape, their good Mien, and other
Qualities, capable to produce great Effects in the Hearts of their Lovers. But
I scarce dare tell you, how Love brought the King enamored of Roukia, who
being one of the Handsomest Women of the Kingdom, charmed him by that part, of
which she took the less care, because she would have been ashamed to show it
him, and would not have exposed it to the Light, but for necessity, and without
dreaming it could be the cause of so lucky an Effect. Excuse me, Sir, (says
Razi) laughing, if I enlarge no further on this Sublect. You may guess by what
I have said, few Fish are caught with that Bait.

One Evening, about Sunset, the King from the Terrasse of the Garden of the
Seraglio, looking through the Trees, had a sight of Roukia in that pleasant
Posture: The Sun, who seemed to stay to guild with his Rays, an Object so
charming to that Prince, never saw any thing whiter, or better shaped. 'Twas in
truth a Masterpiece of the kind, and (notwithstanding the unpleasing Function
it was about) inflamed the Heart of the Royal Spectator, who did all he could
to see a little more; but Love would not permit it, being resolved the part he
had first seen, should have all the Glory of that Conquest. The morrow a
Courier (for Gallantry) was dispatched with a Billet to Roukia, to this effect.

I Love you, Madam, and love you with a Passion no less tender than new: I will
not tell you how you have wounded me, but it was no less than an innocent
Treason. I have heard say, you were dangerous to see, but not of that side I
saw you: Others run away from the sight of that, wherewith I am taken, and it
was my Fate to feel the Power of your Charms, by that which is commonly least
charming: However I am more in love, than any man living; and what will become
of me, when I see you as I ought? I cannot tell. I have realon to fear an
entire Defeat. I dye with impatience to expose my fels to your most powerful
Charms. I am preparing for you that Triumph, this Evening. Let me not languish;
otherwise you will be the Death of your King, whom you have already too cruelly
wounded, not to pity him a little. The Moore, who brings you this Billet, will
tell you what is to be done. Adieu.

Thus it is our Kings declare their Love: they never sigh in vain. They need
but say, I love you, and I will, and the business is done. Our Women think it
their duty to obey them in matters of Love, as our Men in Affairs of State.
Roukia, inclinable as the rest of our Countrey-Women, in things of that nature,
was so charmed with the Honor of being written to by the King, that, without
examining circumstances, she presently returned him this favorable Answer.

SIr, you are no less Master of our Hearts, than our Lives: You shall never
find me other, than full of Respect and Obedience toward you: Your Will is a
Law. And Nothing shall be too hard for Me, when You command it to be done. The
Direction I have from the Moor shall be observed; You must only take care to
employ Meharen about business: All things else will assuredly be favorable.
And if you love me as much as you say, you will save me part of those pains
that attend the Impatience of one in Love, when forced to wait long.

The King received this Letter with the joy of a Lover, who was to be happy
that day, which seemed long to him; who was to stay till night, before he could
go to the place of Rendezvous. He was so wholly taken up with his new Passion,
and the pleasures he promised himself from it, that he never thought of seeing
Hattige, which he seldom failed to do. A Commission was presently made ready to
send Meharen out of Town. Night being come, the King went alone, and without
noise into the Garden of the Seraglio, where the Comedy was to be acted by him
and Roukia, who at the hour appointed came in by a Ladder he had caused to be
brought for the purpose.

This enterview was charming on either side: The night was not so dark, but the
King could discern Roukia's excellent Shape; and judging the Features of her
Face to be answerable, he made no doubt but she was beautiful, as she was
reported: But what charmed him most, was her admirable Wit, which she showed on
all occasions, to make him amends for what the Night hid from his Eyes. The
King was transported at it. And to tell you the truth, they spent not much time
in Complement, but were quickly familiar, as if they had been acquainted many
years. It Is a privilege Kings have, to make more way in a day, than others in
a Month.

Roukia, no less proud of the Honor the King did her, and the Dignity likely
to attend it, than she was of his love, did her utmost endeavor to deserve it,
and with admirable success; for she gained his Esteem no less than his
Affection. She said a Thousand pretty things, which he was ravished at, and made
him (very obligingly for her) blame Love for having been so slow in bringing
him acquainted with her, who deserved best of any his A fection, and his Care:
They were got into a Grotto, convenient enough for an Entertainment, almost
like that of Aeneas and Dido; and were there for some time, without
Interruption. I will not disturb them, (continues Razy, smiling) to give you an
account what past there between them. You have been in Love, I believe, and may
guess what discourse they had. The King it seems was well pleased with it, for
he resolved to pass the rest of the Night there.

The Summer is the best Season for Rancounters of Love: but this being a
Gallant used to Success, afforded less matter of discourse than one, who had
been less fortunate would have done; and at length he fell asleep with his Fair
one. Love, who had more Business to do in the same Garden, allowed him but a
short time to rest. Roukia, hearing a Noise, awaked him to tell him of it. At
first, he could hardly believe it, the place being inaccessible to any but
himself, and Meharen, as Master-Gardiner, whom he had sent abroad, and
therefore had no apprehension of: He hearkened more attentively, and could hear
ones voice, and afterward his steps: Before he would proceed farther, he was
willing to know who were so rash to enter that Place, which it was Death to do
by Day, without his Permission; he was scarce got up, but he sees them approach
to come into the Grotto. It was a spacious Place made of purpose for a
Coolingroom in the Heats of Summer; and had in it several Beds of Turf, very
prettily made with Pots of Jessamin Flowers, and other Sweets, all about. In a
word, it was a place picked out for the Kings Pleasure. It appeared, by the
manner of the new Comers entry, they were no strangers to the Place. They chose
a Quarter not far from the King's. But it was so dark, it was impossible to see
one another. He let them seat themselves at their ease, and had observed they
were two, but could not discern whether Men or Women. One of them, whose voice
the King presently knew, says immediately to the other; It Is the finest place
in the world, to laugh at the Jealous, and to be quit with them. He has
sometimes brought me hither, where I have been forced to spend with him many a
tedious quarter of an hour. This was Hattige: The King was extremely surpised,
not knowing how she should possibly have come into the Garden; but he was the
more surpised, and Roukia also, at the answer of the other, whom both knew to
be Meharen: I confess, Madam, (says he) he deserves not to possess alone the
Affections of a Lady beautiful as you are, but he is my Master. And nothing
but a Passion, great as that I have for you, could have prevailed with me to be
false to him, as I am. Nothing but the extremity of your Beauty, whose charms
are irrisistable, could excuse such a Crime. But let a man value himself never
so much on his Honesty and Integrity, yet a Passion raised in him by a Person
so amiable as you, will be Proof against all Batteries of Duty, and easily
master it. It Is but in jest, Meharen, (says Hattige) that you raise these
Scruples: I am false, as you are, but that is nothing with me. It Is a fine thing
to be false, if you know how to do it handsomely. I have a Heart will be its
own Master, and love one to day, and another tomorrow. What would become of Men
and Women, if, when they engage in kindness with one, they must absolutely sell
themselves, and not be allowed to change, when they grow weary, or have a
greater Inclination for another. It Is a natural Right to bestow our Affections
where we please, and when we please to revoke the Gift: And wretched are they,
who enjoy not that Liberty: Our Sentiments are subject to Change, as other
things; and Love as well as Nature is not charming, but in Variety: For
Example, Meharen, to day I am for You, but three or four days hence I will not
undertake but I may be for another. And it would be Injustice in you, to expect
I should be truer to You, than I am to the King. True, Madam, (replies Meharen,
smileing) I have no Reason to blame in you that amiable Inconstancy, to which I
owe my Happiness: But would you say as much to the King, Madam? You may
believe, (says She I glory not in these Maxims before him, not for fear he
should follow them, but to avoid giving him Cause to have an ill Opinion of Me:
Were He of my Humor, I think I should love him the better, and perhaps I hate
him for nothing else, but that he loves me too constantly. I have endeavored
handsomely to engage him to be false to me, insomuch that I told him one day, I
dreamed I had seen him in your Wife Roukia's Arms, whom I knew to be a handsome
Woman, and hoped he might have a mind to her, or the Curiosity at least to see
her; but my Address was lost upon a Man obstinately faithful, and produced no
other Eruit but nauseous Assurances of his Truth and Tenderness for me. You did
not much oblige me in that particular, Madam, (says Meharen) and when you have
occasion again to dream, to be rid of one troublesome to you, let me entreat
you it may not be at your Friends cost. How, (replies Hattige) would you take
it ill the King should do as much for you, as you do for him? Yes without
doubt, (says Meharen) for I do it not for that purpose, that he should do as
much for me. Well, (answers Hattige) if he do not, another will. I fear not
that,(replies Meharen) I know my Wife very well, and am persuaded She is Fool
enough to die, rather than do me such an Jnjury, though the King should tempt
her. She quarrels with me every day, for but letting the Slaves come into her
Chamber; and I dare engage once more, she would rather dye than appear to
another Man, though the best of my Friends.

This pleasant Dialogue had very different Effects on the two Auditors, who
were ready sometimes to laugh, and sometimes to be angry: The King all the
while had Roukia in his Arms, and squeezed her Hand when they spoke of her. She
did as much to him upon the like Occasion. True it is, he had small Kindness
for Hattige after he had found her false, and less a great deal after he fell
in love with Roukia. But it cannot but vex one to see a Mistress (though
forsaken) in the Arms of another, especially of one Inferior to himself:
Setting aside the Crown, yet Meharen was not comparable to the King for Vigor
or good Mien: He was not very old, yet not so young as the King, and a hundred
times harder favored.

Pleasant as the King was, at dumb Raillery, with Roukia, and pressing her
hand, yet he was mad to hear what was spoken; and any one, but Meharen (of whom
he took very pleasant Revenge) should have felt terrible Effects of his Anger.
Roukia, but for Hattige, had born her part of the Sorrow: but finding by her,
her Business with the King went on the better, and that she had paid her
Husband in his own Coin, she thought she had all the Reason in the world to
rejoice.

But this new pair of Lovers had their Design, and were not come into the
Grotto only to talk: the Scene was going to alter. But the King was so little
complaisant, that he had not the Patience to see the best Act of the Play; but
rising up with a great noise; Meharen, (says he, with a voice would have made
the most Confident quake) Is it thus you serve me? Is this your Execution of
the Orders I gave you? It Is hard to represent the astonishment, the fear and
confusion of our Shepherd and Shepherdess, when they heard the King. Meharen
fell at his Feet, with his Face to the Ground, and not able for some time to
say a word. And you False One, (says the King to Hattige) you Baggage without
Honor or Truth, is this your requital of the Obligations I put upon you, in
making you what you are?

There was harsher Language in the case, but I will not trouble you with it: I
must draw to an End. The Master-Gardiner being a little recovered of his
Fright, though laboring still under the Apprehensions of Death, did all he
could, (not to excuse himself, there being no color for it, but) to take all
the Fault on himself, and make Hattige appear less faulty, whom he would needs
endeavor to save, by offering his Life as a Sacrifice for her. The King said
he would accept of it, provided a Person he had with him would be content, and
with that he made Roukia draw near, who had not yet appeared on the Stage.

Meharen was one of those Husbands, who though they love their Wives well,
cannot forbear hunting other Men's Game. He had been in love with Hattige when
she was at the Janissaries. And the choice the King had made of her for his
Mistress, had but increased Meharen's Passion: So that he had several times
applied himself to Zara, whom he knew to be a Mistress of that Trade, and found
faithful on other Occasions: The Liberty he had to enter at pleasure the Garden
of the Seraglio, contributed much to the good Fortunes Zara procured him. But
as for Hattige, she thought her then so inaccessible, she had almost dissuaded
him from any thoughts of her, till the Disgrace of his Nephew, which, instead
of frighting Zara, encouraged her to make a Trial of what he desired her; who
no sooner had the Oppertunity of speaking to Hattige, but the Bargain was made.
Little did Meharen think it must have cost him his Wife, and his Consternation
was yet greater, when he heard her Voice, than when he heard the Kings: He knew
not what to do or say, he saw himself paid in his own Coin, and without cause
of Complaint: He puffed out his Rage in great fighs. The King triumphed, and to
increase Meharen's despair, and the pleasure he took to overwhelm him with
Grief and Confusion, he commanded him to acquaint him with the Particulars of
his Intrigue with Hattige, how he came acquainted with her, and how he got her
out of the Seraglio. Our unfortunate Adventurer was forced to obey him, and
gave him an Account of the Passion he had had for her many years, and was
renewed after his Nephews Adventure, which let him see Hattige was not
insensible: That Zara had been his Confident, and that very day appointed for
their Interview, like a Man that leaves all for Love, he had not Power to
execute his Orders: As to her coming out of the Seraglio, it was through a
Window of her Apartment toward the Garden, and that she was let down in a
great Wicker-Basket: The King had the Curiosity to go see the Machine, and
found it in a Posture to help up the fair Lady, who had deserted it. But it was
his Pleasure Roukia should go up in her Room, and that her worthy Spouse should
weigh her up instead of Hattige, whom the King gave him in exchange, though not
to his Satisfaction. However it was the Kings Favor to him. It was his
Majesty's Goodness to do it: And I know not how he could have used him better.

Thus got Roukia into Possession, not only of the Kings Kindness and Care, but
of Hattige's Apartment, and all that belonged to her, who had not removed or
taken with her any of her most Precious things: yet Hattige was so far from
being troubled at it, that she loved her Pleasure and Liberty so well, she
would have given more than ever she was Owner of, to be out of the Seraglio.
But Meharen, grown wiser by Roukia's example, kept Hattige as close, as if she
had continued in the Seraglio. This quickly produced Disputes and Quarrels
betwixt them, till at last they grew weary one of another. Hattige to be rid of
him pretended a Revelation from Heaven, which the Turks are very subject to,
and told him she was required to make a Voyage to Mecha, otherwise her Sins
would never be pardoned: The Cause was specious enough to oblige Meharen to
give her her Pasport, though he had not (as he had) a mind to be rid of her. He
gave his Consent to the Pilgrimage, and sent her to Tunis, recommending her to
Mahomet Bascabey, his intimate Friend, and praying him to furnish the fair
Pilgrim with a Vessel to carry her to Alexandria.

This, Sir, says Razie, is the Story of my Mistress. You see I have not spared
her, that I might give you a true Account of all her Adventures, which none
knew better than I, who have been with her ever since she was taken into the
Seraglio, but never approved her Conduct; therefore she endeavored still to
hide it from me, yet I knew all she did. Certain it is, had her Soul been
Beautiful as her Body, there had been nothing more perfect under Heaven. She
would charm you, Sir, did you see her, and it is pity a Man as the Captain of
the other Vessel should have her in his hands. She would be far better in
yours. The Knight answered, he had a desire to serve her Mistress, but not to
make an Advantage of her. That he had been in search of her on no other Design:
And if it were possible, he would at the first Oppertunity set her at Liberty,
and all those of her Vessel. But it must be kept secret, lest if his Friend any
way suspected it, he might put a stop to their good Fortune. Razie amazed at so
great Generosity in a Knight of Malta, who ordinarily use not too well those of
her Nation, knew not what to think of it, but took it for a Miracle. She
thanked the Knight for the Favor he gave her hopes of, and was carried back to
her Vessel, laden with Provisions; which the other Women were the more
surpised at, having been ill used by the other Captain, whom they thought no
more inhumane than this.

That Night the Knight did but think of the Adventures of the Lady, and as bad
as she had been represented, yet being young, he could not choose but have a
mind to see her; but he was afraid, the sight might cost him dear, since he
found by hearing the Story of her, he had more than an indifferent Inclination
for her. Few Knights of Malta, of his Age, would have been so scrupulous:
Curiosity, if not Love, would have prevailed over all other Considerations. But
this (who was Honesty and Generosity it self) made it his Business to serve the
Lady, without the least hope of Recompense. Yet he loved to do things civilly,
and was willing before he went any further, to speak once more to Gourdan, and
was preparing to go see him, just as Gourdan came to him, a little more gay
than ordinary. Well Sir, (says He) how like you your Company? I hope you will
excuse me the easier for what Love made me do. I can easily excuse,(answers the
Knight) the Love one has for a fair Lady; but cannot excuse a Man who uses them
ill, as You do. I am more troubled at it, (says the Corsair) than you think,
who know not as I do, the Women of this Country: they are humoursome, and will
never love a Man, but when they are forced to it by ill Usage. That Is a scurvy
piece of Policy, (replies the Knight) and becomes not a civil Person. Believe
it, (adds He) it would be more for your Honor, to send her back into her
Vessel, than do her the least Violence. He spoke these words in such a manner,
as made Gourdan redden, without answering a word. The Knight proceeded to say,
I know You will not take my Advice, but I would do my Duty to mind you of it,
and if you have any Value sor me, you will leave the poor Slave at Liberty, at
least, to love or not love you: for whatever you have to say of the Customs of
the Women of this Country, you see the ways you have used to win her, have not
yet taken, but ended quite contrary to your wishes. She is not an ordinary
Woman, to be threatened, and ill used into Compliance. And could you have your
will of her, pray tell me what Pleasure could you have of her, but would
reflect with Disadvantage on a Man of that Esteem You are of in our Order.

This opened Gourdan's Eyes; he imagined the Knight had been told of the Ladies
Beauty, and was fallen in Love with her, which might be the reason he spoke in
that manner, and hoped perhaps he would be such a Sot to quit her to him: These
were Gourdan's thoughts, who turning to the Knight; All your Rhetoric, Sir,
says he, smiling) will not serve your turn, you are too young for me. And
without making a fine Speech, as you have done, I will only tell you, I will
keep my Turk; and let her love me, or not love me, she shall not stir from
Aboard me. But, Captain Gourdan, (answers the Knight, somewhat more coldly) is
this Turk yours, that you can dispose of her in this manner? and have you more
Right to her than I? I do not intend to take her from you: I have already told
you my mind as to that -- I know not, (replies Gourdan,haughtily) what your
Thoughts or Intentions are; but I will sooner part with my Life, than that
Woman; and shall take him for my Enemy, who shall but think to make me quit
her. The Knight, little valuing the words of a Man, whose Jealousy disturbed
the little Sense he had, would fain have persuaded him by fair means. What I
demand, (says he) is but reasonable and just, and if you are my Friend, as you
have often assured me, you will not deny my Request, or at least, you will not
force me to use the means to set this Woman at Liberty. You will find it a hard
matter to do, (says Gourdan furioufly) and with more Strength than you are
Master of: and so went his way. This was high Language enough, for a man as the
Knight was, and aboard his own Vessel; but being as moderate as the other was
brutish, he chose rather to let him go, than offer him any Affront.

This was the last Visit they made one another; Gourdan was mistrustful of the
Knight, and watched narrowly over his Prey: But his Lieutenant gave the Knight
an account of all, and offered him his Service: The Knight was so just, he
desired no other Service of him, but to deliver a Billet he would cause to be
written to the fair Slave. The Lieutenant promised it. Razie was sent for,
because the Knight, though he understood and spoke well the Moors Language,
would not write it: when Razie was come, she wrote thus to her Mistress.

MAdam, A Man Generous and Gallant, as he, whose Captive you are, is Uncivil
and Brutish, is desirous to restore You and Us our Liberty: Make ready for the
first Wind that serves, and hang a Cord at your Window, that when the time
comes, you may have Notice.

The Billet was sealed, and carried privately to Gourdan's Lieutenant, who
presently conveyed it to the fair Slave, by the Eunuch who was his Friend. The
poor Lady was overjoyed at the News; but had been so accustomed to ill
Fortune, she doubted very much to obtain a Happiness she had so little reason
to expect: That Villain of a Pyrat, (for so she called Gourdan) had tormented
her that day worse than ever; and she was resolved, if he came again, to throw
her self into the Sea. The Billet brought her in a manner to Life again, and
she never prayed to Mahomet so heartily, as she did then to the Wind, by which
she expected her Liberty: What hands soever she should fall into, she thought
it would be a Happiness, if she could but escape the hands of that brutish
Captain. One Night, as she least thought of it, she saw a Man come in at her
Window, which at first frighted her; but his countenance made her recover her
self. It was the Knight of Malta. It Is time, Madam (says he) to free You from
your Chains: It Is the bravest weather in the world to return to Tunis; make use
of it, and allow me the Pleasure of doing this small Service to a Person, who
deserves better to be served by all the world, than ill used as she has been. I
cannot tell, whether Hattige was more taken with the Knights good News, or his
good Qualities; but after some Consideration, she was so affected with him, to
thank him; she embraced him, and was not able to say a word: She was a-Bed; and
as there is nothing so handsome as a beautiful Woman a-Bed, he was so charmed
at the sight of her, he was as much disordered as she, and knew not what he
did. Having by her Actions expressed all the Acknowledgments possible. I believe,
Sir, (says She) Heaven has sent me the Succor you bring; but sure I am, the
World has not a Man so Generous and so Handsome as You. The Knight had the
Gallantry- to return her Kindness for Kindness; and helping to dress her, being
in haste, he instructed her what to say, and what Course to steer to avoid
meeting with the Corsair. To end my Story, the fair Turk was not long a
dressing. 'Twas not a time to be curious in it: She put on no more than was
absolutely necessary, and (had the Knight pleased) would have got out of the
Vessel just as she got out of the Bed. The Seamen were stirring, and fitting
the Rcpes to make for Malta,-though the Wind was not altogether for them: The
Knlght helped the fair Turk to get down at the same Window he got in at, into a
Canoe, he had provided ready under the Poop, and presently with the Favor of
the Night they gained one of the Prizes, wherein he designed to send her: He
took out thence all the Christians that guarded the Vessel; and having taken
leave of the Lady, who would have been longer glad of his Company, he parted
with a great deal of Trouble to go to his own Ship; where he gave Order, as
Gourdan did in his, the Anchor should be weighed, that they might Sail for
Malta.

FINIS.

