THE PRINCESS OF Montferrat, A NOVEL; Containing Her HISTORY And the AMOVRS OF
THE Count of SALVCES.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently and M. Magnes, in Russel street in
Covent Garden. 1680.

TO Her GRACE THE DUCHESS OF ALBEMARLE, etc.
May it please your Grace,
DEdications are now become so necessary, that such Books as appear without
them, meet with the same Fate as Men abandoned by their Tutelar Angels, Scorned
and Neglected, not thought capable of entertaining, nor worthy to be looked
upon; but when addressed, the more illustrious Patronage is, the greater is the
Opinion of tbem, and the more kindly are they received. These reasons have
caused several to present you, Madam, with Works of this kind, and have Obliged
me to make your Grace an Offering of this Amusement. I could never have hoped
to have procured Pardon for this Presumption, if that your goodness were not
known to be infinite, and that your Grace being generally acknowledged to be
the best Judge of these sort of ProProductions, I fancied it would have been
injurious to your Prerogative to have offered them, and sought elsewhere for
Protection, and that it had been as great a Crime, as for a Subject to have
done homage to any other than His true Sovereign.

These, Madam, were the incitement, to the Ambition of having your Grace at the
head of this Translation, whose only name is a perfect Elogy, and though
without the Attendance of those vast Advantages of Birth and Fortune, which
your Grace possesses in the highest Degree, would still have been the greatest
and most admirable Person in the World, by what You have received from Nature.

Writers now flock to You, Madam, as to the Fountain of all Perfections, not
only to be owned and countenanced, but also to copy and admire those
Excellencies, which the Most Famous Princesses of the World have been
celebrated for, and which so abound in Your Grace, that there needs no more to
the Composing the Compleatest Panagyrick, than to say, the Duchess of
Albemarle, in which Words are comprehended all those Extraordinary Qualities,
which all the Earth have ever had in Veneration. So glorious a Prospect firing
me with the Zeal and Pride of laying this Piece at Your Graces Feet, I humbly
beg it is acceptance, and leave to declare the most Profound Respect, with which
I am,

May it please your Grace, Your Graces Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant.
E. S.

THE PRINCESS OF Montferrat* A NOVEL.
LEWIS of Montferrat was a Prince who with the qualities of a great Hero, so
abounded with those of a gallant Man, that he was the Inclination of Ladies, as
well as the esteem of brave Men. He was only heard spoken of in the World; and
never honor, nor virtue had a better Example. In the mean time with so many
reasons that that Prince had to be content with himself, he was not, as People
imagined. There wanted something to his felicity which rendered him as all other
Men. He had Married a Wife of an Illustrious Birth, of a Merit as great as her
Birth, and far more than can be expressed; But by whom after ten Years
Marriage, he had not had a Child, and that displeasure alone infected all that
there was agreeable in the Glorious State of his Life. Vows, Prayers and Alms
were not spared, the Italians are much given to them: At last Heaven seemed to
be moved, and sent him a Daughter as Fair and as Perfect, as if she had come
from Heaven it self. This good Prince, signalized his Joy by a Fortnights
Feast, which he ordained through all his Territory; but which was cruelly
interrupted by the Death of the Marchioness, that happened a few days after her
being brought to Bed. There was never seen in so little a time so much Joy and
so much Grief as in the Heart of that Prince, who passionately loving his Wife,
paid very dear by so sensible a loss, for the Present Heaven had just made
him. He would have abandoned himself a thousand times to his despair, without
the extreme tenderness he had already conceived for that Infant, whom he looked
upon as a Succor that had been sent him from above, against the misfortune
that was to happen to him. It was without doubt the only thing that could
render him capable of some reason, and make him survive the Death of so aimable
a Princess.

Briscida, it was thus, they called that Child, who had promised so much Beauty
the first days of her Birth, made appear, with the succors of some Years, a
thousand times more than could have been hoped. All seemed to augment in her
from moment to moment, and the Charms of her Person, that would not have been
said, at the Age of ten or twelve Years, that they could have mounted to a
higher point of perfection, increased after in such a manner, that every day
one found in her some new Subject of Admiration. Her gate alone had at that age
something so great and so agreeable together, that she drew the Heart as well as
the Eyes of all the World. I design not to draw her Picture, I could not, if I
would, she had a thousand things which cannot be described, as her Eyes, her
Complexion, her Neck, her Arms, her Hands; all in fine had in her an
extraordinary perfection, and a Beauty very difficult to be imagined. Yet all
these Charming visible qualities were nothing, when they were compared to those
of her Soul, there was found in her a vivacity of Wit, and at the same time so
solid a Judgment, that she surprised the clearest Wits. She was never seen to
be deceived in any thing; and her Penetration proceeded to divine the greatest
Secrets. In fine, if ever Soul appeared fair by the bright marks of Virtue, it
was certainly that of that young Princess; the noise of her Beauty ran far, and
near: Nothing was spoken of in Foreign Courts but Briscida, and all those who
had seen her, and understood Beauty, did agree that there was not a finer
Person, nor nothing so rare to be seen in all Italy; that fine Country, which
has almost always been the first Pilgrimage of those who have the least loved
traveling, became in the time of that Princess a common Road of People, who
had the least Curiosity: And Rome, that famous City, never invited so many
People by all its famous Antiquities, as Cassal, by the Beauty alone of
Briscida. It was the place where she resided, as the ordinary residence of the
Marquess of Montferrat. There was hardly a young Prince or Lord in Europe, who
thought not himself obliged in Honor, to make thither a Voyage, as a necessary
point to the reputation of a well-bred Person; and Monarchs, who could not so
far dispense with themselves, took care to send thither their Limners, to have
the Picture of that fair Princess. From thence it came, that the Court of
Montferrat, which had been formerly one of the least of Italy, was one of the
most numerous, as well as the most gallant of Europe. The Marquess, a Prince
who very well understood himself in all things, entertained People there, with
so much Sweetness and Generosity, that it was still a new Charm to invite
Strangers thither.

So fair a Princess, Heiress of a State as that of Montferrat, was without
doubt a brave Match for what Prince soever. Several had already aspired to her:
but the Marquess, who extremely loved her, or rather, who loved nothing in the
World but that Daughter, was not able to part with her so soon.

Amongst all the Illustrious Pretenders, was seen Lewis of Bavaria, Count
Palatine of the Rhine, eldest Son of the Elector of that Name. This Prince who
might aspire to so fair a Conquest, made appear in that Court an extraordinary
magnificence in all things, and made his Love much talked of. He was handsome,
well made, and had Wit: But there was seen in him a kind of sufficiency and
contempt of all others, which made him not much beloved, especially by the
Princess, who could not hinder her self in the least Rancounters, from showing
him how little Inclination she had for him. This Prince was not at all
discouraged, he had more Ambition than Love, and that first Passion is not used
to turn things to its disadvantage: he daily invented new Parties of Hunting,
Dancing, Masquerading, Tournaments, and other the like Divertisements: wherein
he always wone the Prize, as well of Gallantry as of bravery, spending at a
rate that ruined all those who would imitate him. All these advantages, rendered
him fierce and proud, he being likewise naturally so, insomuch that he made
himself insupportable to all the World. But Fortune, who sometimes pleases her
self with reverses, to abate the pride of those who too much flatter themselves
with their happy Successes, made him meet with a Gentleman more strong than
himself, and who cruelly traversed him in all his Designs.

It was at a famous Turnament that this began, and of which the Princess was to
give the Prize. The Count Palatine had already done all there that could be
expected from a Gentleman, so perfect as he. There was no body more came to
dispute with him the Prize, and the Princess was upon the point of delivering
it him; when they saw a Man enter into the place, whose admirable Countenance,
and the good Air he had on Horseback, made all People at that instant judge he
was no common Person. The Count stopped for sometime to behold him, and found,
as well as all others, he had something extreme Warlike. He had no other Train
with him than a Gentleman of the Horse, and a Page; who carried his Lance. He
was set out after a rich and superb manner. His Arms glittered, and had a
mavelous effect in the Sun, who being upon the end of his Carreer, seemed
only to spread his Rays for the better sparkling of the Jewels he had about
him. The time pressed them to engage, and making only a half turn of the Lists,
as a defiance to the Count, who prepared to receive him; he bowed his Lance,
and let his Horse go, who came thundering upon his Enemies with an impetuosity
that never had had the like. The Count Palatine did almost the same thing on
his side: and being met with a check, which resembled something more furious
than that of two Men, their Lances broke upon their Breasts, through the two
terrible strokes they received there. But their Force, their Address, or their
Fortune were not equal: for instead, that the Unknown did only shake a little
in his Stirrups; the Count Palatine, after having wavered some time in the
Saddle, could not keep himself there, but fell upon the Ground. An advantage so
considerable over a Prince, who was already the Conqueror of all the others,
cast the Assistants into so great an astonishment, that they all shouted. It
was not known, who this valiant Man was, he came into the Lists with his Helmet
down, and all People had a desire to see him. The Marquess de Montferrat,
fancied that he was Philippo Mario Visconti, a Prince much renowned for the
fine Actions he had done, and who had already been seen in that Court: and in
that Opinon, seeing him approach to salute him; You only hide your self from
us, My Lord, said he to him, to make your self more admired, and the more
agreeably surprise us; But we are already so accustomed to all those glorious
Actions you do every day, that how unknown soever you would appear, you would
still be discovered by what you perform. This Gentleman who never in his Life
had been at Cassal, although he was pretty well known to the Prince, well
perceived he was mistaken, and lifting up his Helmet, he let him see instead of
the Son of the Duke of Milan; Gaspard de Saluces only Son of the Marquess of
that Name; whom the Marquess having seen several times at the Army, was not in
much trouble to know. He immediately embraced him, he carressed him with the
greatest tenderness in the World, and presented him to his Daughter,
accompanying that honor with a thousand things he said to his advantage.
Briscida gave him the Prize of the Turnament, with so much the more pleasure,
that he had won it from a Prince, for whom she had naturally but little
kindness; and to whom she had some regret of doing that honor, insomuch that
there was then an agreeable change in her mind, which by the arrival of that
Prince, passed all of a sudden from Vexation to the Joy she had of not being in
that pain: And perhaps it was to that disposition of contrary Sentiments, that
Gaspard de Saluces owed all the good reception she made him; for it is true,
that she received him, not after her usual manner, and with that severity, she
was accustomed to receive all those of the like rank; but with a sweetness and
ways so engaging and so generous, that it seemed, she would in some fashion
acknowledge the kindness he had just done her.

That amiable Princess who had Charms enough, without producing new ones, at
that instant so powerfully surprised the Eyes and the Soul of that young Hero,
that he remained almost without Motion; his Courage abandoned him, and he lost
his very Speech: But his silence, his Eyes and all the actions of his Person
spoke for him, and made the Princess know a part of the Joy he had in seeing
her. The Marquess, who began at first to speak very obligingly of him, gave him
time to come to himself a little, and his Wit, as the Son breaking out from
under some Clouds, taking new Forces, did flourish so many several ways, after
that small Eclipse, that they were as much charmed to hear him speak, as they
had been astonished to see him fight. He gave his hand to the Princess to
accompany her to her Apartment, whither all the considerable Persons of that
Court, having followed them, were ravished to consider him more nearly. The
Marquess came afterward; and seeing him surrounded in with all those fine
people, he thought, armed as he was, that a longer entertainment might
incommode him; and that it would do him a kindness, to disingage him. It is in
a Doublet, My Lord, said he to him very gallantly, and as a Gentleman at the
Bedside, that the Ladies would see you. You will there find perhaps more
dangerous Enemies than in the Lists, wherefore you had best prepare your self
for it. It is true, My Lord, answered the Count of Saluces, those Enemies are
to be feared you speak of; but since there is no honor to resist them, one may
find a Comfort in being Conquered. After these Words, which he expressed with a
very passionate action, he took leave of the Princess and retired. The Marquess
offered him an Apartment in his Palace, which he civilly refused; for that he
well knew that they daily expected there the Queen of Sicily, and the Duke of
Savoy, who were two persons of a Rank to leave little place left.

In the Evening there was a Ball; and the Count de Saluces, Who would not let
slip so fair an occasion of seeing the Princess again, who had charmed him,
prepared to appear there one of the neatest. He succeeded therein to a Wonder;
for besides that he was naturally so in his Person, all that he had, and all
that he put on, had an Air gallant and suitable. He came then to the Ball,
where he was expected with much impatience, for all the World had a desire to
see if he had as good a mien in his Clothes, as in his Armor. There was a
noise through all the Hall at the same time he appeared, that the Ball was
something Interrupted: They pressed one another, some to see him, some to make
him place, and made a sort of Confusion very agreeable for him. He was dressed
after the French way, which is a Nation which gives Modes to all others, and
that Dress perfectly well became him: But it was neither the Richness, nor the
Novelty of the Trimming which most drew the Eyes of the People; it was the
Grace and the Air of his Person, which Charmed the Hearts of those who looked
upon him. Never was Man better made than he; he danced, and it was with that he
quite Surprised those who had not yet been won with the Qualities that had
already been taken notice of in him; for it was impossible to acquit ones self
better. The Ladies, and especially those who had the Reputation of Beauties,
and pretended to Conquests, formed in admiring him a thousand Designs upon his
Liberty, but it was the Affair of Briscida; and a Fear reserved for her Charms.
He was so much Transported with the Pleasure of seeing her, that he was hardly
himself.

The Count Palatine, who had not yet appeared at the Ball, came there a little
after him, in Masquerade, accompanied with some Persons of the Court, who like
him sparkled with the Gold and Jewels they had upon their Clothes. This Count
no sooner saw Gaspard de Saluces, than that he conceived a cruel Jealousy,
which with the vexation he had already had, of being conquered by him, in the
sight of Briscida, finished the rendering him one of his most Mortal Enemies. He
had a Fierce and Impetuous Spirit, incapable of Suffering any thing that was
above him, especially from those he esteemed his Inferiors; Restless,
Suspicious, troubling himself with all things, and in his actions more
passionate than any Man: Otherwise, as I have already said, well made of his
Person, and brave to very rashness. He quickly perceived the change there was
for him in the Minds of the Ladies, that all was turned for the Count de
Saluces, and that that New Comer would have the better of him in all things,
and in effect it was yet more true than he believed it. No body was took notice
of but Gaspard de Saluces; and they all disputed who should do him the most
Honor.

These were cruel blows to the Count Palatine, to whom they had already rendered
the like Complaisancies; and who had flattered himself that any other than he
could not merit so much. The Masque he had very conveniently taken, helped him
to hide the effects that Sight produced in his jealous Mind; and not desiring
to be long the Witness of the Glory of his Rival, he went from the Ball,
leaving for some time the rest of the Company much in pain, who knew not what
was become of him.

The Ball ended; and if there had been a Prize to have been given, without
doubt the Count of Saluces would have won that of Dancing, as well as that of
the Turnament. He went away loaded with the Praises of those who could give
them, and who knew how to give them. The Princess was one of the first who
rendered him that justice; and she looked upon him so obligingly in seeing him
depart, that that little favor did much help toward his passing, with more
Tranquiliry, the rest of that Night, than he would have done. It is true, that
it was not to be expected that he could pass it without disquiet, being full,
as he was, of the Idea of Briseida, which however he would not have drove away
for the most agreeable Sleep of the World; at least, if it had not represented
her to him in all his Dreams.

It is thus that Love is used to insinuate it self into hearts. It begins by a
Flame of Joy, which spreads it self through all the Body, and with which a
Lover i^ so Enchanted, that he believe there is no greater felicity in Life
than that of Loving. Those Excesses however give too much Pleasure to last
long, with a Passion so violent, and which is seldom without trouble. Gaspard
de Saluces had too clear a Wit to be long dazzeled with such Illusions: and
coming by little and little to make Reflection upon what his Hopes were
founded, so much joy he had felt in his Soul, to have seen Briscida, he
perceived his Error, and that he had no reason to rejoice; and as if he had
from thence foreseen a part of the Misfortunes, which were to happen to him
from that fatal sight, he could not retain some Tears, which fell from his
Eyes, and which made him take the Resolution, of Opposing a budding Passion,
which could not but render him very Unhappy. But it was not an Affair so easy
as he imagined, to efface the Image of Briscida in a Heart, where it had
already took Impression.

What can I pretend, said he in himself, from the Ardour I find my self
transported with? What can I hope from a Princess, to whom so many other
Princes, greater than I, pretend? Who Love her, who Serve her; and who have not
yet been able to obtain any thing from their Services, no more than from their
Love? Though I should be, continued he, more happy than they have been, what
proportion is there between the State of my Father, and that of Montferrat,
that should make me be preferred before so many Rivals? and what appearance is
there that a Princess, Severe and Ambitious, who regards no body, should dain
to cast her Eyes upon me? No, no, my Heart, thou must undeceive thy self,
though thou were made for Briscida, she was not made for thee; and it is in
vain that -- He could not make an end. His heart gave the Lie to all he had
just thought, and he thus Replied. What is Love so terrible, that it must be
shunned with so much Weakness? Thou say that Briseida is above thy hopes,
that thou can not pretend any thing from her after so many other Princes;
well then, content thy self with loving the most Amiable Princess in the World.
How many is there of those who are above thee, who are reduced to the same
necessity? She can be but one Man's, and there will be still Unhappy ones enough
to comfort thee for the same loss.

This was the discourse of a passionate heart, that argued not very right. Love
is only nourished with hopes; and this only pleasure of Loving is not capable
to content a passion so full of Desires. He would have comforted himself with
the Misfortunes of others; but it is in Love that this happens, where all is
regulated only according to ones self; where one would be always the possessor.
The Count of Saluces* who was not ignorant of one of these Truths, although he
had never yet been in Love, concluded from thence that he loved but weakly,
since his heart gave him Counsels so little suitable to Love. I should be
likewise surprised, said he, after a little Reflection, that having always been
so difficult to engage my self, I should have rendered my self at the first
sight of Briseida. Am not I at Cassal the same that I was in all the Courts I
have been? and of so many fair Ladies I have seen, has there been one that has
made me sigh, but as much as I pleased? I ought to know my self better,
continued he, still deceiving himself more, and not to take Sentiments of
Esteem, which are perhaps something extraordinary, because the Object is so,
for Sentiments of Love.

How different is a Lover from what he was wont to be, when he knows not
himself how he is Embarassed in the middle of all those Winds which Fear and
Desire raise? He argues according as the one or the other of those two Passions
represents it self to his Imagination: Sometimes it is Desire that Commands;
and sometimes it is Fear. He takes their Counsel by turns: he Resolves, he
Wills, he Repents, he Advances, he Retires, he Takes, he Leaves; In fine, never
more Designs, and never less Execution.

Gaspard de Saluces, after having been thus almost all the Night, agitated with
all these different Tempests, seeing the Day come, would rise to go seek some
solitary place where he might dissipate them. Cassal is in the best Situation
of the World, for places proper for Amorous Pensiveness. There is all round it
a thousand agreeable Walks, whether along the Po, which washes it is Walls, or in
the Fields, which are the finest that can be seen. But nothing is so Charming
as the Park, which besides several Natural Beauties, has a Thousand Adomments
of a vast Expense that the Marquess has made there, there are Green Arbours,
Grotto's, Terraces, Walks, Fountains, and in fine all manner of Ornaments,
which certainly render it one of the finest Parks in the World. The Count in
going from his Lodging passed by Chance before the Gate of that Park, and
finding it open, without knowing what it was, the convenience more than any
thing else, invited him to enter, and walk there. He went from Alley to Alley
without stopping, nor almost taking notice of the Beauty of the place, so
possessed was he with his Ideas; and he came at length to a Circle of Trees,
which was one of the finest things in the place, and where all the great Allys
met and ended. It is not without trouble one gets in: Because there is no Door
but what is composed of a double Row of Trees, whose Bodies are interlaced with
those kind of Shrubs which serve for Natural Walls. There is seen in the middle
of this Circle a Fountain, out of which there comes many Water Spouts* which
Sprinkle the Borders; and all round several Green Arbors, where you hardly see
day. There was only this place that was capable of making our new Lover
something recollect himself from his profound pensiveness; and it was in one of
those Arbours that he would go and sigh, without other Witness than Darkness
and Silence. He was followed thither by the Idea of Briseida, which so
possessed his Mind, that overcome with the thoughts he had upon this Subject,
as much as with the ill Night he had passed, he fell asleep upon a Grass Couch,
where he had seated himself. A little Repose was without doubt a great comfort
to him, if in all that time his mind had not been disquieted with a thousand
troublesome Dreams, which denounced him as many Misfortunes. It seemed to him,
in in fine, that he saw the Princess, who reached to him her hand, to draw him
from a Precipice, where he thought to have been lost, and told him with a clear
and intelligible Voice, You pretend to my Heart, Count; I consent to it; you
shall have it, but it will cost thee thy Life. She had hardly pronounced these
words, when he saw the place where he was converted into a Sea of Blood, from
which he endeavored in vain, as they do in Dreams, to get out; and swet with
Labor. Thereupon he awaked, all afrighted with the Circumstances of this
Dream, of which he had still so strong an Idea, that he seemed to see Briscida,
that Precipice and that Blood after the same manner it had been represented to
his Imagination. He would immediately quit the place, that in making him see
the most amiable Princess of the World, inspired him with so terrible Visions;
but he was hardly at the Door, than that Briscida presented her self to his
sight, only followed by one of her Women, and in an Undress, who walked in the
space that there is between those Arbours and the Fountain. A rencounter so
unforeseen, with what he had just Dreamt, put him into a perfect Confusion. He
remained as in an Ecstasy, without Speech, without Action, without the least
Motion, his Eyes fixed upon that Charming Princess, but in a posture, which
with the trouble and the change there was upon his Face, would have made one
believe that he was going to expire. Briscida appeared no less surprised than
he; and was some time without knowing what Resolution she should take; but the
Rules of her Devoir, from which she was not used to swerve in the least, having
made her know to what she exposed her self, obliged her to return, after having
saluted the Prince; who as if his Senses recovered his first Forces, by the
Degrees she went from him; Ah Destiny! cried he, lifting up his Eyes and Hands
to Heaven, since you have thus ordained it, I defend my self no longer, I will
die for the Love of her. These Words were pronounced with so much of transport,
and with a Voice so high, that the Princess who was not yet got out of the
Circle of the Trees, heard them, and could not hinder her self from turning her
Head toward him: And she saw him in the Posture I have just told. That Action
was not remarqued by the Count, from which he might have drawn favorable
Conjectures for himself; but the consent he had just given his Heart to abandon
himself wholly to the Love of Briseida, made his Mind a little more calm; and
he returned home, less burdened with Grief than he went out.

He only employed himself all the rest of that Day, in thinking of the
happiness of that Adventure. He knew not if it was the Princesses Custom, or
Hazard, that had made him meet her there; but be it as it would, he still
rejoiced at it as a piece of good Luck, and considered her Arrival as that of
the Sun, which was come to dissipate all those sad Clouds, with which those
Horrible Dreams had obscured his Mind. Not but that, as the Sentiments of
Lovers have their Turns and Returns, he found he had Committed some Faults,
which vexed him, as having let the Princess go away, without speaking to her,
not to have been the first to have ceded the place, to have Interrupted her
Solitude; and in fine a thousand other the like Subjects, of which he Accused
himself, as of great Crimes. Lovers are thus Ingenious to trouble themselves
sometimes. Yet when he came to make Reflection upon the manner she had beheld
him, it seemed to him, that it was with an Air favorable enough; and that her
Eyes had nothing of a displeased Person: As in effect he had reason; and if he
had not been strongly possessed at her first Appearance; and that he could have
judged with his usual Penetration, he would have seen all that he could hope of
the most happy Presages for his Love, for it is certain that that aimable
Princess, having not been able to be the Mistress of her self in that Occasion,
almost suffered to be seen, all that there was in her Mind of Trouble, Emotion
of Joy and of Fear, and a hundred other different Motions, which that sight
excited in her Soul; and which made her change Color two or three times; she
had already passed a very cruel Night, full of Sighs and of Tears, that the
Combats, Reflections and Reproaches had torn from her Heart. All this costs
dear to a Soul, that never knew what was disorder of Reasons, nay nor disquiet
of Mind.

The first time she had seen the Count de Saluces, she found something so great
and so particular in him, that she took an extreme pleasure to consider him
from one end to the other. Afterward the Combat he had against the Count
Palatin, the Victory he had gained over him, the Pleasure he had therein done
her; All these things, I say, so Glorious, and so Favorable for him, had made
some Impression upon her, or at least formed Admirable Dispositions to a
particular esteem, which were quite Established the Evening he came to the
Ball. Sentiments so new produced too extraordinary Effects in her mind, for her
to be long time without perceiving them; but far from striving against them,
she would Authorize them by reason. What, said she in her self, if there be a
Man who is above all others by his Merit, can one hinder ones self from having
something more for him? Do not I see, that all the considerable Persons that
are here, follow that Maxim, that they all Commend him, they all Court him,
they all Honor him, and treat him after a different manner from all others?
But her Mind, which was not capable to suffer it self to be long abused with
such weak Enticements, taking Forces from her Reason, which still held firm;
What is it that I do, replied she a moment after, with contrary Sentiments? I
give him Arms to conquer me. Is it thus that one strives against a Passion that
would render it self Mistress of my Soul? And thou, my Severity, what is become
of thee? Thou basely abandonest me; but no, continued she after a Moment of
Reflection, what can I fear? I have perhaps an esteem for that Prince, but
which will never come to Love. I am not a Fool: And all his Merit as great as
it is, cannot blind me to that point, as to make me forget what I am, and what
is my Duty. If I render him Justice, I shall render it likewise to my self.
There is some difference between the Count of Saluces and the Princess of
Montferrat; and my Heart, which hardly considers those who are it is Equals,
will not easily stoop to him, whom it sees below it.

Briscida deceived her self, Inequalities do nothing in Love. A Heart mounts or
descends, as it pleases that Passion, and it is not often known which will have
the better. There needs only sometimes one simple Charm, or nothing, to serve
it for Weight. But it was, that that severe Princess, (seeing her self hurried
whether she would or no, whither her Inclination drew her) would have hid her
Weakness from her self, not to be obliged to resist him.

A certain Joy seized her as soon as she saw him come to the Ball, mingled with
I know not what fear, that she would not that any other but her had felt the
like; and she in some manner trembled at the Marks of Esteem the other Ladies
gave him, and as if she was already afraid of losing him. But that which most
lively touched her, and which made her bethink, her self, was the displeasure
she felt when the Ball was ended, and that she saw him upon the Point of
Retiring. She then feared the Sequel, quitted the Company, lest the change
there was in her Mind, might be discovered by her Countenance.

As soon as she came to her Apartment, she retired into her Cabinet, where a
number of Sobs, of Sighs, and of Tears, overwhelmed her at the same time. She
asked her self the reason, without being able to find it, and was so much the
more afrighted, that she began to learn the custom of these tender Sentiments.
Her Woman, who knew not what she did thus long alone, and who saw that her Hour
of going to Bed was long passed, went and knocked at the Door of her Cabinet,
to ask her, if she would not be Undrest; that noise made her Recollect her self
a little, to think of the Condition she was in, and not being willing to appear
before them in that disorder, she was there still some Moments before she went
out, endeavoring to settle her self, and told them at her return to her
Chamber, that she was not well. They put her to Bed, where she hoped to have at
least the Liberty of thinking and laboring to cure her self of a Disease,
which already pressed her so much, as to make her afraid of the Consequences.
But herein, she deceived her self; for Night, Solitariness, and Thinking, are
not good Remedies for such a Passion. Never so many sorts of Disquiets as
assailed her in her Bed. Persons of that Character suffer extremely in such
like Conjectures.

Briseida had never been in Love: She knew nothing more of Love than what she
had read in Books: But it is easy to become knowing in it, when one is once
engaged. I had best imagine, said she to her self, that it is nothing but
Esteem, what I feel for the Count de Saluces: I have esteemed several People in
my Life, but never after this manner, and my Heart proceeds too far: from
whence should proceed the trouble that the sight of him alone gives me? Why
always thinking of him? And these Sighs and these Tears that I find stealing
from my Heart, what do they not tell me! Ah! It would perfect my ruin to
conceal it from me any longer. Thou Love, base Heart! Thou that did so
highly value thy self for being insensible! Thereupon she reproached her self,
endeavoring to call back into her Mind all that was most capable to turn her
from the Precipice she saw her self led to: but to no purpose; for all her
Efforts did only discover more clearly to her her Weakness, and the more engage
her.

Love makes more way in such great Souls, than in those that are weak, because
it makes use of all, and neglects nothing to conquer them entirely. Day came at
length, after so terrible a Night; and not being able to stay in Bed, where far
from getting rest, she was assailed by so many different Pains, she rose to go
and take a little Air, and try to soften her ill Insolitude. She called Dorisa,
one of her Women, in whom she most confided, and bid her dress her. Dorisa,
much surprised at this Design, answered it was yet very early; and that there
was no Body up in her Apartment; but seeing that this did not change her
Resolution, she did what she was Commanded, and gave her the Clothes she would
have; and without any other Attendance, they both descended the Balcony that
had stairs into the Garden, and from thence they went to the Park, which was a
Place more Retired, where the Princess, who at that Hour would not be seen by
any body, had a Mind to walk. Dorisa followed her, much in pain, to know what
Disease the Princess had, who was not used to do thus at the other times she
was indisposed. This, I say, embarrassed her; and she would gladly have been
able to have penetrated into the secret; for to have imagined that her Disease
lay in the Heart, and that there was Love in this Change of Humor, she knew
her too well to dare only to conceive the least suspicion. Nevertheless it was
that. It was Love which having made Briseida lose her rest, led her to the
Park, and Conducted her to the same place, where was the Count de Saluces. But
with what Astonishment was she seized, when she saw him come out of the Arbor.
But a Moment before, she had said to her self, My God, what would become of me,
if I should now meet him; and she no sooner saw him, than that she believed
Heaven concerned it self in it, and that it would be to no purpose for her to
defend her self.

She was some time without knowing effectively, what was become of her self,
and if then, as I have already said, Gaspard de Saluces had had the Liberty of
his Senses, and that he had observed her, he would have seen in her Face and in
her Action the most sensible Marks he could have hoped of his Happiness. For in
the first Moment she suffered her self to be transported with the Pleasure so
charming a surprise gave her: And she was hardly come to her self, when
remembering what she was, and what Modesty required, she forced her self from a
place so dangerous to her.

But at the Exclamation this Prince made, she could hardly restrain her self
from stopping and answering him. That Day was less cruel to both Parties, than
the Night.

The Count despaired of nothing; and the Princess content with having
comprehended by his Words, as well as by his Action, that he Loved her
passionately, was much delighted, and it eased the pain that her Reason gave
her of the too advantageous Sentiments which she had for that Prince.

In the Evening the Marquess had advice by an Express Courier, that the Queen
of Sicily was but fifteen Miles from Cazal, and that she hoped to make her
Entry the Day following. All the Foreign Princes and Lords who were in that
Court prepared themselves to accompany the Marquess de Montferrat, who was to
go meet that Illustrious Queen. They had all great and Magnificent Equipages,
which they yet endeavored to augment in that Occasion, where there was only
required Pomp and Show.

The Count de Saluces who had been at Cazal but one day, with a Train of a
Knight Errant, was the only one of whom nothing extraordinary could be
expected; and yet, in the little time he had, it may be said, that he
surpassed, not only all Expectation, but all that a greater Prince than he
could have done in several Days. It is true, that it was not so much to do
Honor to the Queen, as to please the Princess; and as he had the finest Mien
of any Man in the World, there was no body made such a show as he.

Marguerite of Savoy, Wife of Lewis de Anjou King of Sicily, of Naples, etc.
Being to go to the King her husband, who had newly took possession of those
Kingdoms, designed in leaving Provence, where she retired, to see her Brother,
Duke Lewis of Savoy, with whom she was to Confer about Affairs of Consequence;
and Cazal was chosen for the place of their Interview. Not but that he would
have willingly had a place less out of his Sisters way, or some City in his own
State; but she had thus desired it for Reasons, of which the most Important
was, she had a desire to see Briscida, of whom she had heard so much talk. That
Queen pretended much to Beauty, and she had already a long time desired with an
Extreme passion, to have some pretext to satisfy her Curiosity, that she might
her self judge, if all that was said of that fair Princess was true.

Women do not usually do one another too much Justice upon that Chapter, and
are the first who are deceived in what concerns themselves. This Queen was
certainly one of the most perfect Beauties; and there was none but Briseida who
could dispute with her the first place. She had after her a great Train of
People; and it is to be imagined her Equipage was something very Magnificent,
she being to make therewith her first entry into those two Kingdoms; and
haughty as she was, she had forgot nothing for the making it the most Glorious.

The Marquess had no sooner met her with all those Princes, than that she
alighted out of the Coach where she was, more to show her self, than for any
other reason of Ceremony; and she mounted upon a fine Barb, which she managed
with the best Grace imaginable: She had upon her Head a Coronet in form of a
Helmet, covered with Diamonds, and shaded with a number of Feathers, which had
upon her a most Charming Effect: All people were ravished to see her; and those
who had fancied there was only Briseida in the World, were ready to unsay it,
and knew not who had the advantage. She, for her part, was no less charmed, to
see with the Marquis so many young handsome Lords, with Equipages and Trains so
rich, so neat, and so pompous: She easily judged that they were persons of the
first rank, the most part of whom were invited to Cazal by the Beauty of
Briseida: She considered them all, the one after the other, and asked their
Names of the Marquess. Gaspard de Saluces was one of those, who was the least
set off with Gold and Jewels; yet whose Gracefulness immediately drew the Eyes
of the Queen, and of whom she first informed her self; she took notice that he
was extreme thoughtful; but his discourse appeared not less agreeable.

When she was about two hundred paces from the City, Briseida met her, with all
the Principal Ladies of the Court splendidly dressed: That interview was fine,
and had something very singular between two such Beauties as they were; for
they caused admiration in one another, and without doubt jealousy. There was a
Triumphant Chariot prepared for the Queen, which had followed Briseida. They
both mounted into it, and entered the City with the sound of an infinite number
of Trumpets, and a terrible noise of Canon. But Gaspard de Saluces had neither
Eyes, nor Ears, since he saw Briseida; and though the Queen looked on him, and
spoke to him, his answers were not like what they had been, and had his Eyes
still fixed upon that Divine Princess.

She came at length to the Palace where she was regalled with a noble
Collation, after which the Maquess conducted her to the Apartment he had
prepared for her, being the neatest and richest that ever had been there. One
part of the Night passed in Ceremonies and Compliments usual in such occasions,
after which all retired to leave the Queen in the liberty to go to Bed. All
people confessed she was one of the Fairest, and one of the most amiable
Princesses that was under the Heavens; but there was none so well persuaded as
the Marquess de Montferrat; and though in an age something advanced, Gallant as
he was, his heart was not impenetrable to such fair Charms. The Count Palatin,
in whose mind Ambition would have raised a revolt, did likewise agree to this
truth. That engaging sweetness he found in the Queen, and which he called the
true Charm of Souls, was in his Opinion capable of causing greater perfidies
than he meditated. Briseidia was a haughty Princess, that treated with a
coldness that proceeded to contempt. She had not favored him with one obliging
look in two months he had served her, and sighed for her; and he saw that a
Queen full of Charms, and of whom the Conquest would be the most glorious in
the world, honored him at the first sight with a thousand goodnesses; Vanity
at least made him think so.

It is after this manner that these proud Minds treat Love: They appear in the
beginning all full of ardour; but it is a fire which goes out at the lure of
another that that passion which rules them counsels them to follow, in the
hopes of a better Success. The Marquess and this Count found themselves
possessed with esteem for the Queen of Sicily; but with an esteem, which in so
little time had advanced too far, not to be quickly converted into Love. Thus
esteem ordinarily goes before, or rather Love masks it self with the Figure of
esteem, the better to seduce us. The fair Queen likewise on her side felt
something new in her, which she knew not how to name; and which hindered her
from sleeping: It was neither for the love of the Marquess, nor for the love of
the Palatin, she hardly thought of them. So much honor she had received, so
much pomp, so much magnificence that had been made for her, in some manner
contented her proud mind; but in the heart, she felt I know not what, which
troubled all the joy so glorious a day ought to have given her. Briseida, and
the Count de Saluces, were as two Stars, which in entering Cazal, foretold her a
thousand Cruel pains she was to suffer there. The Beauty of that Princess,
which she found yet more perfect than she could have imagined, gave her
troubles she had never tried for any Woman; and so many Charming qualities she
had observed in that young Prince, terribly allarmed her Heart, which she
feared to lose and to lose to no purpose, near so fair a Princess. She had
brought with her Julia, Daughter of Count Palamedes. Who she tenderly loved,
and who lay ordinarily with her. That Maid heard her often sigh and turn
incessantly in the bed; yet durst not ask her what she ailed; but at length the
disquiet she had geting the better of her Moderation: I know not, Madam (says
she to her) what is the matter, but either you are not well, or something vexes
you, that is not to come to my knowledge. The Queen only answered her at first
with a great sigh. She wished, without doubt, that Julia would divine her
Disease, without obliging her to declare it: But seeing her self pressed more
than once, and having all manner of Confidence in her, she could not conceal
from her any longer, that she had her mind something embarassed. Have you well
considerd, Julia, (said she to her) the Princess of Montferrat? How do you find
her? Is she not the handsomest Person upon the Earth? It is true, Madam,
(answered Julia, something surpised at that Question) that she appeared to me
pretty, as in effect she is: But I shall do her Beauty no injustice, if I say,
that I know as perfect, and which, without lying, is much more Charming: For
you know, Madam, that to be pretty, and to please, are two things; and that one
may possess the one, and want the other; and that misfortune is happened to the
Princess of Montferrat; who being otherwise a perfect Beauty, has not, at least
in my Opinion, that which most touches Peoples hearts, which are particular
Charms, which often have the better of the greatest Beauty. Would to God,
Julia, said the Queen to her, embracing her very tenderly, as being pleased
with what she had just said, that all the World were as thou art. I confess,
Madam, replied Julia, that the Princess would not touch me: But should she be
to the Eyes of all others wholly different to what she is to mine, and to say
more than is possible to say, that she had as many Charms as you have, that
Reputation of Beauty does it at this present give you so much disquiet that you
lose your rest; and though that Princess were as fair as you, should not you be
still above her, one of the greatest Queens upon the Earth? I ask your pardon,
Madam, pursued she seeing the Queen gave her no answer, if I dare tell you,
that this surprises me from a Wit as reasonable as yours. If you knew your self
well, you would judge better of your self; and would not trouble your mind
about an advantage which no body dare dispute you. I avow, answered her the
Queen, that I am extravagant, in having so ridiculous a suspicion: But what
will you do if I cannot help it? Leave me as I am, or say nothing to me: For I
should fear to fall perhaps into a worse Estate than that in which you see me.
Julia replied no more, and kept silence some time. She knew not what to
comprehend from the ill humor of the Queen, which was so unusual. She judged
'twas not the Beauty alone of Briseida, which caused so great a change; though
it was a very nice point, for a pretty Woman: In so much, that she believed,
and with Reason, that there was something more in her Mistresses mind, which
she would have gladly known. I will not, Madam, said she to her some time
after, enter further into your secrets, than you will permit me to dive; but if
I was suffered to tell you what I think, I know you so well, for the Queen of
the World, who gives the best Judgment of things, that I cannot believe, that
it is only the Beauty of Briseida, that has so possessed you for these two or
three hours, that you do nothing but sigh: Give me only the liberty to question
your sighs, they will tell me perhaps the Truth of a disease you endeavor to
disguise. I heard those sighs, continued she smiling; and if I understand them,
they were not sighs of Envy. Julia was not deceived; and that which made her
speak thus boldly, was, that she knew the fair Queens heart, which was not the
most insensible of the world: As she had an infinite deal of Wit, she had well
foreseen, that of so many handsome young Princes there was in that Court, there
might be some one who better pleased her Mistress than the others. The Queen
could not deny it in the end: But she at the same time assured her, it was
nothing but pure esteem, and not the least sentiment of Love. So pure an
esteem, replied the cunning Julia, would make me sigh, Madam, as you do.
Perhaps, replied the Queen, blushing a little, that there is some tenderness
mingled; but do you believe that one cannot have tenderness without having
Love? That is true, Madam, replied Julia, who had no mind to contradict her
therein; but that is very nice. After that she pressed her no more, well
imagining, that the Queen, who could not sleep, would not fail to renew the
discourse, to tell her her self all she desired to know.

How loath soever a Woman is to make an amorous Confession, it must be allowed,
it is a very great ease to the Heart, when one can find a Person in whom to put
Confidence, and who is capable of such kind of secrets: One is so full of these
beginnings of Love, that there is no greater pleasure, than to discharge ones
self a little, upon some one who knows how to use Compliance. The Queen sighed
more than ever, to the end Julia might return to the assault. That Maid knew
it; and saw very well what she would have. But either out of malice or revenge
she would not understand her; at length however, as out of pity, she renewed.
Well! Madam, said she to her, you will not grant that it is Love. Alas! the
Queen answered sighing, it shall be all that you will. Why then, said Julia, do
you make so great a mystery of it to me? Do you esteem me, or rather do you
love me so little, that I must needs force this secret from you? Do not wonder,
Julia, replied the Queen; I would not know it my self. Do you believe it so
easy to confess ones weaknesses, that there is no need of being pressed to it?
It is not requisite to have so much pride, as I have: And I know no body but
thy self, to whom I would, though it were to save my Life, make the like
Declaration. Julia heard her; but was not of those false pretenders to
discretion; who to mend their own Reputation, would have endeavored to have
given her an ill description of Love. She was too clear sighted, not to see
that the Queen failed in her Conduct. But she was neither old enough, nor of a
humor to make remonstrances to her; which besides would have been very
useless, as all those are, that are made to Lovers: What she desired, was to
know the name of that happy Conqueror: She fell to talk of all the Princes and
principal Lords of that Court, to praise the merit and good mien of each one in
particular, to begin from the Marquess down to those who made the least of
Figure proper for a Lover: But the Queen did not seem to be touched with the
least sentiment of esteem for any of those she had named: Malicious Julia had
cunningly and designedly forgot the Count de Saluces, of whom she had more
suspicion than of any other; not only because that Prince was made after a
manner that it was hard for any sensible Woman to see him, without having for
him advantageous sentiments; she had likewise remarked, that the Queen had with
her Eyes examined him more than once with a great deal of pleasure; she was not
mistaken, and what she expected happened, for the Queen impatient, that after all
she had said to the advantage of the one and the other, she spoke not of him
whom she thought above all; but thou, said she to her, who are so knowing in
Beauty and the good mien of people, from whence comes it, that you tell me
nothing of the Son of the Marquess of Saluces: Is it, continued she, with a
little blush which flew into her face, that you have not observed, that there
was not one of those you have named, who had so good an Air, nor was so well
made, as he, and if thou have heard part of those things, he said to me from
the beginning, prithee tell me, if one can have more wit than he has. That is
true, Madam, answered Julia smiling, but I was willing you should say that your
self, hoping you would acquit your self better than I. Ah! Julia, cried she, I
knew what you would say, thou haste discovered all; I care not, I have told you
too much not to let you know the whole. You must not, replied Julia, make an
Obligation to me of what costs me all my Address: For you see, Madam, I know
nothing from you but what I am fain to divine. What will you do, replied the
Queen, laughing? It is not but that I had a desire to declare to you all; but
as I have already said, When one is proud and pretends to glory, one has a
great deal of pain to bring any thing to light, that accuses us of weakness. If
you knew the pleasure you did me in sparing me a part, you would not take it
ill that I make you languish after such a secret. A man as the Count de
Saluces, said Julia, has methinks wherewith to justify a Woman, for having some
inclination for him: For it is certain he is quite differently made from
others; and I believe it very pardonable when one has some little weakness for
Gentlemen of his fashion. But I find it no less difficult, to be able to keep
to the sentiments of esteem you speak of, when one is so well persuaded of the
merit of a man, in whom there is found so many qualities, which serve for
excuse and for pretext, to pass further and to proceed to Love. The Queen
answered her, that however she promised her self it, and that esteeming that
Prince, as she esteemed him, she had made for him all the paces she could make,
and that there would be nothing more. I now know, continued she, that there are
men of a certain Character, who have a strange Authority over the minds of
Women: For in fine, to have made me sigh from the first time I saw him, is what
I never would have believed, though he had come from Heaven. I said however,
not long since, out of I know not what Spirit of Prophecy, that if for my
misfortune I should ever meet a man, as I imagined him, made just as the Count
de Saluces, all my Spirit could not hinder me from having a kindness for him.
What foreknowledge, Julia, and how we are made each one to have his weakness:
However, added she seeing she was not interrupted, I will see I am faulty in
not faulty in not defending my self better than I do. For in fine, what will
all this come to? If I love, am I sure of being beloved? The Count of Saluces
came not to Cazal for the love of me, and it will not be for me that he will
stay there. He knows not the sentiments I have for him, nor shall he know them
if I can help it as long as I live: What delight can I expect from this
whimsey, and how unfortunate should I be if I should further engage my heart,
and that his should already be possessed by Briseida. It is true, I have been
told, he has been but four days in this Court. But I have seen him so pensive,
that I fear I am come too late by four days, or too soon, to have any thing but
trouble. This, Julia, this is all my disquiet; and if thou comprehendest it
well, thou will find, that it is the greatest, with which a nice Soul, as mine,
can be oppressed. Help me, if thou love me, my dear Julia, to get light into
this affair: Let us observe both the one and the other, for I shall not be at
rest, till I am well assured what there is in it. Briseida, perhaps will not
distrust me, and that we may discover this mystery, I will seem to have so much
Confidence in her, that she shall be forced to put some in me; and she will
tell me, without doubt, the sentiments she has for that Prince.

Thus the Amorous Queen passed the Night with Julia; she was not so much to be
pitied as Briseida: A heart which can so easily render it self, is not sensible
of half those ills, that another which defends it self indures: She permitted
her self all things; nay, and took delight, fair as she was, in imagining that
the Count de Saluces was going to be her Lover. But the Princess of Montferrat,
whose virtue a little more severe, did not suffer her to entertain her self
after the Queens mode, had not the least sweetness to comfort her for the ills
she suffered; by so much the more cruel, in that she was obliged to conceal
them; and yet could not Conquer them; they kept her Company Night and Day, and
left her not a moment of repose. The Beauty of the Queen of Sicily did still
produce new troubles, which gave her cruel allarms; and this in truth was that
which then most disquieted her. She would not have been in so much pain perhaps
without Gaspard de Saluces. It was for the love of him, above all, that she had
a desire to have the better of the Queen of Sicily; and in that design, she was
no sooner up, than that she took a thousand Cares, to repair the bad effect of
the two Nights she had past so ill: But whether she found her self not so
handsome as usual, or that it appeared to her thus out of the great desire she
had to be more than ordinarily, she could never content her self; and went
again to bed, under pretext of some indisposition, an excuse always ready for
Ladies, when they find not in themselves Beauty enough to appear in the light.
The Queen on her side was busied to the same end; and to lay inevitable snares
for the Counts Heart. She consulted sometimes her Glass, and sometimes Julia;
and saw no body enter her Chamber, of whom she did not ask, how they liked her
that day. She was dressed like an Amazone, which was then the mode, and the
most advantageous for her, as the most dangerous to the Eyes of men; and if
ever Woman showed Beautys in that Habit, it was certainly that charming Queen.
The Marquess was the first who came to make a mortal Essay; and so many Charms,
whose power he was already but too sensible of, brought him into that confusion
that he had hardly the force to speak to the Queen some disordered words. She
to whom the like Triumphs of her Beauty had already hapened, did only smile;
and being willing to encourage the Marquess by flattering him: It cannot be
said, my Lord, said she to him after a very obliging mannner, that you are not
very exact in doing the honors of your Court; for from the evening to the
morning, you forget nothing to oblige your Guests. Ah, Madam, answered the
Marquess sighing, if there was nothing, but what you see, you would be but
little obliged; and I should have but little to do. The Queen, who immediately
comprehended, by the passionate tone with which he spoke, what he meant, had no
mind to make him explain, for fear of engaging her self too far in a discourse
of which she would not understand the least. Not but that at another time she
would have made it her divertisement to have a Gallant as the Marquis; but in
the beginning of a passion the least amusement is a burden, and does only help
to incommode. Wherefore she fenced it off by making him a thousand questions
upon indifferent things, till that the Palatine came, who perplexed her no less
than the Marquess, who was as confused as she: For already spurred on by his
passion, and not knowing when he should find so fair an occasion of declaring
it, he could not help the being vexed at the other for coming so unluckily to
incommode him. But the Palatine, who had the same design with the Marquis, was
no less disappointed and out of humor, than he. They both made several
Compliments to the Queen, who suffered them with patience enough, yet would
have been glad to have been rid of them, to the end the Count de Saluces
coming, as she expected him, she might entertain him in particular; that
uneasiness made her turn her Head every moment toward the Door, as any one
entered the Chamber; still hoping that it would be him. At length, being
overcome with impatience, or rather some motion of Jealousy seizing her; being
told the Princess was not well, she suspected the Count de Saluces might be
with her; without ground however, those liberties not being permitted in those
Countries, especially at the hour she fancyed. But of what suspicions is not an
Amourous mind susceptible! in fine, she was not at rest, till she had prayed
the Marquess to lead her to his Daughters Chamber, to learn from her the news
of her health.

Briseida saw her enter as a Sun, that came to vie with her in Beauty and in
Brightness. There past Compliments between them which lasted some Moments;
after which the Conversation was general. At length came Gaspard de Saluces,
who immediately drew the Eyes of all the Company: He had this in particular and
usual to him, that wheresoever he came he made himself considered above all the
others. The Princess blushed at her first seeing him, and if the Queen had took
the pains to have observed her then, as she had resolved to do in all
Occasions, she would easily have discovered a truth, which she might have read
in the Princesses Face; but perhaps it was better for her she did not. It is
true she was so confused her self, with her own disorder, that she had not time
to think of examining that of others. It was she whom Gaspard de Saluces first
saw at his entrance into the Chamber; and who so strangely amazed him with the
Force of her Charms, that he would have been surprised without the succors of
Briseida. The Queen observed it with a great deal of Joy, but she did not long
enjoy that pleasure; because he had no sooner turned his Eyes toward the
Princess, than she saw her Charms defeated. Ah cruel adventure for so fair a
Queen, who had despised the Conquest of several Kings: She was vexed to the
very heart; yet she had so good Opinion of her self, as not to yield to any
Other; and that a Woman always flatters her self very easily in what concerns
her Beauty; she returned to the Charge; she Eyed him, sighed at the same time,
she cast her Eyes upon him, smiled upon him, spoke to him very obligingly: So
many advances ought to have produced some effect, but it was little or nothing.
The regards of that happy Lover past over her as lightning, but fixed upon
Briseida, and it was perceived they were not removed from thence without pain.
Ah my God, what vexation! She would then, if she had been able, have cast away
all the advantageous thoughts of him; but a heart cannot easily retire, it must
march on with Love, and when once you have made the first step, it seldom
suffers you to look back: She for some time kep^ silence, entertaining her self
with the unhappy state of her tenderness. Heavens! What have I done? (said the
poor Queen,) I have given my Heart for nothing: I have put it into the Hands of
a Man, who is possessed by another, and what is most shameful for me, is, that
I am not able to take it back: Yet perhaps I am deceived (added she a moment
after) the too much Passion we have for things, makes us often mistake; and
Love is always ingenious in giving us trouble, the Art knowing Hearts by the
motions of of the Face, is not the most certain in the World; and the most able
have been sometimes therein deceived. She had time to make all these
Reflections, although she was in Company; the mind goes much faster than the
Senses; and there being a great many Persons concerned in the Conversation, it
did not languish for some moments of thoughtfulness or absence of mind of the
Queens. Ah Heavens! it is but too true, renewed she sometime after, having
surprised the mutual looks of the P^incess, and of the Count, What do I here? I
only serve for a Witness of the happiness of their Hearts. Where upon she rose
of a sudden, Saluting and taking leave of the Princess, she took the pretext of
going to Mass; but in truth it was to carry with her the Count, to whom she
gave her Hand to Conduct her, while that the Marquess and the Count Palatine
were retired into a Cabinet to discourse in particular about some affairs. It
was a cruel Honor to Gaspard de Saluces, that the Queen did him, because
knowing how to make use of occasions better than any man, he would not have
failed in that, to have entertained the Princess, whom he would have found
almost alone, by the Queens Absence. He was however to dissemble that little
displeasure, by so much the more sensible, that he left behind him the Count
Palatine, whom he considered as the most dangerous of all his Rivals. Briseida
was as little pleased as he with the Queen, whose Action, besides the jealousy
it gave her, did not seem to her according to the Rules; because it was for the
Marquess her Father, to have rendered her that devoir, whom she might have
waited for a moment. But the Impatient Queen had only followed the only motions
of her Heart, which at that time did not permit her to regulate her self
according to the forms of the World.

What good mien soever the Count de Saluces put on, she had at first took
notice, she had made him no Compliment in drawing him from the Princess; I well
see, My Lord, said she to him smiling, I do you a diskindness. In what, Madam,
answered her the Count at the same time? much surprised she had divined so
rightly what he had in his Soul: is it not, because the Grace you do me will
make several jealous, and procure me Envyers? You do not esteem perhaps enough,
replied she, that Grace, to fear it will have that effect. The most Ambitious
of all men, replied the Count, would place it above all he could desire; and
you would have a very ill opinion of me, Madam, if you should believe -- I will
believe, interrupted she him, all that you will but tell me seriously, if it
will make amends for the pleasure, I should have done you in leaving you with
the Princess. I ask your Pardon, Madam, answered the Count, with a confused
Air, if I say, I know not what you mean. Ah! Count, replied she sighing, I
perceive, I proceed farther than you would have me; and that you do not judge
me capable of being in that your Confident. You are in the right, pursued she,
and I assure you, I am less fit for that with you, than with any person in the
World: The Rank you hold in the World, Madam, answered the Count, does not
suffer any one soever to treat you after that manner; but though you were a
person as others, what Confidence could a man make you, that has been here but
two days; and who had never any other passion, than what honor inspires. There
needs so little time, replied the Queen with a languishing tone, to change the
affairs of a heart, that I know people who came since you to Cazal, and yet
find themselves perhaps worse. And for honor, continued she, I am certain it
is of no force against Love. Gaspard de Saluces was going to repartee to this,
and perhaps would have acquitted himself but ill; but to his good Fortune, the
Marquess and the Count Palatine, who had had notice, that the Qeen was going to
Mass, joined her at the same time, and accompanied her to the Palace-Chappel;
where during the Devotion, Gaspard de Saluces did nothing but think of what the
Queen had said to him. He was extremely surprised; and knew not after having
examined all the discourse, what interest the Queen should take in his
Sentiments, to oblige her to take the pains, as she had done, to discover them.
He perceived there was more than curiosity in it; but he was not vain enough to
believe, she had been thereto incited by any motion of jealousy, or by any
interest of Love.

Those people who have the most merit, are usually those who flatter themselves
the least. Not but that the Count was so clear sighted, as to observe that the
Queen treated him a little better than the others; that she considered him,
that she might have some particular esteem for him, which managed with a little
care on his part, might one day procure kindness; but it was a perfidy he would
not think of; having no design to take care, but only to merit the esteem of
Briseida: Yet as it was something very glorious, the having some part in the
mind and in the favor of so Great and of so Fair a Queen: He could not hinder
his mind from being sometimes possessed with those thoughts. What would there be
in it contrary, said he then, to the Sentiments I owe the Princess, if the Qeen
of Sicily had some little esteem for me, and I a great deal of respect for her:
She is a person above all I can pretend to; My heart is wholly Briseida's, and
there is no danger of the least Treachery. A more perfect Lover, or at least a
Lover better instructed in the Maxims of Love, (for he already loved the
Princess, as much as one could love,) would have been scrupulous, only to wish
that the Queen esteemed him; and would never have be thought himself to render
her greater respects, than those that were due: But he was a Novice, who
fancied that to be all in Flames for the object he loved, was all he had to do.

The Devotion ended: Yet the Queen being still accompanied by the Marquess and
the Palatine, she was hindered from renewing the discourse she had begun with
the Count de Saluces: They conducted her to her Apartment, where Dinner was
brought up at the same time, and served after the most sumptuous manner that is
possible to be imagined; and where all the Principal Lords of that Court dined
with her; as she had desired; to the end there might be the Count de Saluces,
who could not dispense coming: She was to pass the Afternoon in seeing the
Palace, which was certainly a fine building; but of all the Curiosities the
Pictures were of the greatest value. The Queen loved them much and understood
them perfectly: And therefore stayed a long time to consider them, and
discoursed of them with the Princes after a very skillful manner, knowing at
the very first of whose hands they were. The Marquis who could give a better
reason than the others, as being better informed than any body in what
concerned all those pieces, was he who maintaining the chief of the
Conversation, and did not fail, when he met with some stroke of Love well
represented, to make of it a particular application; at which the Queen did
only laugh, as a Gallantry of old time. From the Gallery of these Pictures they
went to the Garden which the Queen was desirous likewise to see; and in truth
it very well deserved the being seen by so fair a Princess, for it was one of
the finest Gardens of Italy. Thitherto the Conversation had been General, and
less with the Count de Saluces, who was become pensive, than any body; but in
the Allies and Grottos she saw, she hoped Fortune would furnish her with
occasions of finishing the discourse she had begun with him in the morning: But
then came Briseida, as if it had been to traverse that design. She was just got
out of her Bed, and was glad, in keeping company with the Queen the rest of the
day, to go walk with her: The Queen received her with that dissembled joy, in
which Women excel; and judged she should not have it in that Garden, all the
pleasure she had promised her self, or at least it would be attended with a
great deal of vexation. The Marquis, who conducted the Troop, lead them toward
a Fountain, that was in a very agreeable place; in which he had chosen to feast
the Queen. He helped her to walk on one side, and the Count Palatine on the
other; insomuch that the Princess fell to the Count de Saluces share, who did
not receive that honor without trembling, though with the greatest joy
imaginable. She was in an Undress, as a person who was something indisposed;
but great and true Beauties never appear better than in their naturals, and
when they borrow nothing from art; they are neglects which the Italian's call
Artifices,

Le sue negligence sono le sue Artifici. There was seen in the person of the
Queen a Love all glittering with pomp, filled with Flames and Darts, with which
he fired and wounded all those that durst regard him; and in Briseida a tender
infant which touched, but after a delicate manner; and the poison was by so much
the more dangerous, in that it seemed sweet and innocent; and that it was not
mistrusted: Not but in that negligence, there was found the Pomp and Majesty
there is in the Infants of Kings. But it was not this that had the greatest
effect.

The Count de Saluces, who fancyed to have viewed Briseida in her greatest
Beauty the first time he had seen her, was much astonished with the new Charms
of that day, nay his admiration passed astonishment, and I am not able to
express the Joy with which he was transported. He lost his very sight; and
sought for himself, as a man that knew not what was become of himself. There
are few people, who can rightly comprehend these sorts of Ecstasies, at least
without having been as much in Love as the Count de Saluces, and with a Beauty
as that of Briseida's. He was sometime without speaking to her: She on her
side, was much the same, and all their entertainment was made in looks, more
eloquent a thousand times and more persuasive than the finest words imaginable.
The Queen, who walked before, being uneasy and jealous of what passed behind
her, between those two Lovers, gave very little attention to all the two
Princes said to her, who had the honor to Conduct her. But it was to no
purpose she listened, it was a mute Language, into which she could not
penetrate: She was perceived to be in a continual agitation of mind, which made
her turn her head every moment to observe them, and said in passing some words
of raillery and of kindness to the Princess, to engage without doubt the Count
de Saluces to answer her. The Palatine little contented with this procedure,
would willingly have been angry if he had durst; and suffered extremely in the
ill Figure he fancied he made. But the Marquess, who was a little more in love
than he, had likewise a little more complaysance for the Queen.

They came at length to that Fountain, which was certainly a wonder of Art.
There was seen a naked Man, who cast water from several parts of his body, and
round him in a Basin there were Women, making several postures, in getting off
their Smocks. The entertainment was composed of Music, of a Ballad, and of a
Collation, but all so gallantly and so well ordered, that the Queen highly
commended the Marquess, and would have been extremely satisfied with him, if he
had given her a little more liberty than he did, and have let her walk all
alone, or at least with whom she pleased; for it was what she sought; but he
followed her over all that Garden, with an application which fatigued her, she
passionately desiring to discourse with the Count de Saluces, and not being
able to do it, as I have said, by reason of the Marquess, she would at least
hinder the Princess from having that pleasure and advantage above her, and went
still to interrupt them as she saw them together.

The Palatin, who observed by the Queens Face, that the Marquis acted a
troublesome part, would not imitate him, but amused himself in laughing with
Julia, believing it no time lost that was spent in gaining that Maid, which
might be a means to come into the Queens favor. That Charming Princess had an
Air of Liberty and Gayness, that procured Pardon, for what would have been
Criminal in others. Italy, is a Country of Formalities for the actions which
pass in public, but the most dissolute in the World, for those that pass in
particular. The Queen, who thought her self above all peoples talks, would not
take the trouble to constrain her self; she talked, laughed, flattered,
sometimes this, and sometimes that, and managed her self not in the least: But
above all, she had a design upon the Count de Saluces, with whom she longed to
speak in particular, if it was only to make the Princess jealous. The
inseparable Marquess had two or three times made her lose an occasion; but at
length, a Labyrinth furnished her with the most favorable one imaginable. It
is true, that it was requisite to be a Woman, and a Woman in Love, to find so
good an one without premeditation. Come, said she, with a brisk Air, there is a
Labyrinth, which appears to me very proper for a Play I have imagined; I will
go hide myself in it, and the first of you three, speaking to the three
Princes, who shall find me, I will give him the Scarf I wear on my Arm.
Thereupon, without staying for their Answer, she ran to hide her self in the
Labyrinth, whither the Marquess followed her presently after; and blessed a
thousand times Love for a Play, which seemed to him, to have been only invented
to render him happy: For as he had frequented the place, he did not believe
that that Scarf could fall into any other hand but his; and that he thus might,
the occasion being so fair, discover his passion to the Queen.

The Count Palatin, in whose Heart, the inequalities of the Queen had not
wholly extinguished the flame of his new passion, found his hopes revive at the
proposal of that Play, in which he hoped to make better use than any body of
the juncture, if he was so happy as to gain the Scarf. The Count de Saluces,
who was only of the Party, because they engaged him, was not very hasty to do
as they did. He was not willing to dispute with them that prize, having before
his Eyes, all that he desired in the world, which he would not have quitted for
a Scarf; nay, not for all the Queens of the Earth. The Princess made him
several railleries, and told him two or three times, laughing, that if he
delayed any longer, he would come too late; not but that she was extremely
ravished with the little earnestness he seemed to have; but she thought her
self obliged to make upon him that little War; to which he answered after a
manner, that made her know the little part he took in that Play; and that he
was not of it, but because he could not excuse himself from it.

The Queen expected him with the impatience of a Lover. That Labyrinth was made
after a manner, that at each turn there was an Arbor so covered with boughs,
that you could hardly see any light. She staid in the first she found, and had
already seen the Marquis and the Count Palatin pass by, who run after her with
an unparrallelled Ardour. The Count de Saluces, whom she infinitely longed to
see approach, came not. That Prince walked with a neglect, which ill answered
the Queens desires. Must I, said she, looking through the branches which
composed that Arbor, give my self to day so much pains to oblige a man who
despises his own Fortune, after a manner so cruel and so shameful to me. Ah
Heavens! continued she sighing, I see what Briscida costs me: I left him with
her and he cannot quit her; wherefore I must go and reproach him. But what a
Fool am I, renewed she a moment after, I should give her wherewith to Laugh and
Triumph over me; and if I can, I will only give her trouble and jealousy. I
hate her already as my greatest Enemy; and I know not what I should do, if I
was persuaded he loved her: He will not come -- In saying that, she saw him
advance, but with an Action so pensive and so indifferent, that she would then
have rather chose that he had not come at all; and she begun seriously to
repent of all she had done for him. Does he deserve, said she in considering
that negligent Air with which he walked, not the heart which I have but too
much given him, but the Scarf I prepare for him? Should not one say, that he
would give time to his Rivals to carry it from him? How he goes! Is it Love
that guides him? No, no, Cruel Consequences of the action of that Unthankful!
fear nothing! You are but too true; I will not suffer my self to be longer
abused by my too great passion: I perceive that he has not the least sentiment
of tenderness for me; and that he thinks of nothing but Briseida, whom he has
left against his will.

Notwithstanding she had all these reasons to be dissatisfied with the Prince,
perceiving he passed without seeing her, though she had placed her self at the
entrance of the Arbor, where she was yet she could not help calling of him.
What advances for a Queen, and a heart must needs be strangely seized by Love,
to resist so much Confusion. Count de Saluces, said she to him blushing, Is it
thus you seek me? What do you dream of? Ah, Madam, cried the Count, much
astonished to see her, you surprise me; and I did not think my self so happy.
Yes very happy, without doubt, replied the Queen; but to whom do you believe
you owe this happiness? It is true, replied the Count, that it is not to
Fortune, at least without I call thus the Grace you do me; which is certainly
very great; and your Goodness -- Yes my Goodness, interrupted she, allow one
has a great deal for people that do not deserve it. I should easily, answered
the Count, agree to what you say, Madam, at least in what concerns me: If I was
to have deserved that goodness by my Cares and by my Services, the time having
been so short since I had the honor to be known by you; but if a great desire
of rendering you them by all the actions of my life, joined with the extreme
respect I have already for you, might be considered as meritorious: I should
not despair of one day rendering my self worthy. You might hope sooner, replied
the Queen, in whom the Counts last words had something sweetened the bitterness
of heart; some people are more able, continued she, than others; I know not of
which number you reckon your self; but I very well know that I have done to day
for you, what I never did for any body. Nothing could be said more obliging,
and words so advantageous from the mouth of so fair a Queen ought to make some
impression upon the Spirit of the Count; but the time was too short, since he
had quitted Briseida; yet his action had something so passionate, since he was
fallen in Love with the Princess, that his least word seemed to be full of
Love. Thus the Queen who could not so well penetrate into the bottom of his
Heart, entertained some hopes, and was contented with this tender outside. How
easy it is to deceive our selves? when one loves, one gives a favorable
interpretation to the least appearances, and one takes all for kindness. That
Charming Queen contented with those of the Count, gave him her Scarf: but after
the most gallant manner possible, and would needs tie it her self on his Arm.
The Marquis and the Count Palatin, run at the noise there was made in the
Arbor, and came both there almost at the same time, and found the Queen tying
the Scarf on the happy Count de Saluces. The Marquis could not see the Fortune
of his Rival without conceiving a cruel jealousy; but the Count Palatin, more
malicious, and naturally more mistrustful, immediately guessed into the truth
of the adventure, extremely vexed to see that the Count de Saluces every where
triumphed over him.

The Queen was not at all confused at their sight, and preventing what they
might say; you see, My Lords, said she to them, I am true to my promise, and
that it is not to no purpose that one has taken pains to seek me. We see it
very well, Madam, answered the Palatin; and what is more, that one needs not,
when you please, go very far to find you. They are the usual hits of Fortune,
replied the Queen, who quickly comprehended what he meant: and if made us buy
what it gives us, we should be but little obliged to it for its presents. One
attributes sometimes to Fortune, replied the Count, favors which do not belong
to it: Yet it is true, continued he with something of sweetness, that it would
be more easy to comfort ones self for having failed on that side, than of the
other which I imagine. The Queen who perceived whither these words tended, had
no mind to answer him; but turning toward the Marquess, whom she saw pensive
and melancholy, she gave him her hand* with a smile, which was some comfort to
him in his misfortune; and they went all together out of that Labyrinth.

Briseida amused her self during that time with gathering Flowers in a plot, of
which she made a Nosegay for the Count de Saluces. It was a gallantry, she
thought her self indebted to him, after the trouble he had showed to quit her
to run after another; which obligation she was resolved to repay. But what a
vexation and what a surprise was hers, to see him return with the Queens Scarf!
She blushed, and her jealousy then excited so great a disorder in her Soul,
that it almost ruined all that Love had there advanced. I am played upon, said
^he, the Traitor abuses me by his Actions and by his looks; he had reason not
to be in haste; the Queen had given him the Word; and he very well knew where
she was, otherwise he would not have found her so soon.

Yet to render Justice to the Count, there was seen in his Face, and by the air
with which he carried the Scarf, the joy he had. The Princess notwithstanding
all her anger, observed it; and to tell the truth, that manner of indifference,
too visible in the Count, was a great succor to her heart. But the Queen, who
had that time prepared her self to observe he^ had no sooner seen her change
Color, than that she was assured of her tender sentiments for that Prince; and
therefore considering her as her declared Rival, she took pleasure in
augmenting her trouble. You see, Madam, said she to her, with an air of
raillery, that the Count de Saluces is a lucky man, he was the last that run
after me to seek me; and yet is the most fortunate. That happens sometimes, the
Princess answered her smiling; but I know not from whence it comes, that he
appears not very proud of so fair a Fortune; for he seems not to have the more
joy. The Queen had remarked it as well as the Princess, for the Love of whom
she believed the Count affected that Coldness. She would willingly have seen,
what he would have answered to that himself, but finding he did not speak* not
to ^em in without an answer* I am, s^i^ she, regarding him with an obliging
^ir, so content, with what he said to me thereupon in particular, that I
willingly pardon him the moderation he shows in public. Discreet people,
continued she, are used to do thus. It is to be very much, replied the
Princess, and perhaps a little more than ought. Briseida in that little dispute
she had with the Queen, doing the business of the two amorous and discontented
Princes, they did not interrupt her; nay they desired that the discourse might
have proceeded; but I believe neither the one nor the other found pleasure in
it, and therefore had no desire to pursue it.

They went out of the Garden in the same order they walked thither; that is to
say, the Marquis and the Count Palatin led the Queen, and Gaspard de Saluces
the Princess; this last resolving to make better use of his happiness, than he
had done in the beginning of the walk, especially seeing the occasion was going
to escape him, asked the Princess, for whom she had prepared that fine Nosegay
he saw in her hands? It was for your self, answered she him, if you had been
less happy than you are. I am on the contrary, replied the Count, the most
unhappy of all men, not to have merited it, since you designed it me. Is it not
enough* replied she smiling, to have a Scar^? It would be too great a fortune
in one day. That Fortune, Madam, replied the Court, has not been favorable to
me, if in giving me a Scarf, it deprives me of a present which comes from you,
What! said the Princess, prefer some silly flowers which wither in a day,
before a favor, as that, which comes from the hand of a Queen; Count, you are
not sincere. Or rather, replied he, I am not interessed enough, to suffer my
self to be tempted by the richness of a present; and if things are only to be
valued, as one esteems them; I am sure I lose in this occasion; and not to
leave any thing for you to guess thereupon, added the Count blushing, I assure
you, I would have given a thousand Scarfs, such as this, for one Flower of that
Nosegay. It is too much, my Lord, said the Princess to him, ravished with Joy
to hear him speak after that manner, and one would gain well by you; if one
would believe you; But continued she, giving him the Nosegay, one ought to be
as generous, as you are disinteressed; and since you have so much kindness for
Flowers, I will make you a present of these.

The Queen, who continually turned her head on their side, no sooner saw the
Nosegay pass into the hands of the Count de Saluces, but to revenge her self on
the Princess, Well, Madam, said she to her, had I not reason to say, that the
Count de Saluces is a lucky man to day. I should perhaps have fancied so,
Madam, answered Briseida, if I could have made him as rich a present as yours:
But what passes in two or three hours cannot make the fortune of such a man as
he. Whereupon begun a new dispute, in which the Marquis and Count Palatin to
oblige the Queen, were of her side, and the Count de Saluces, who was obliged
by honor, if he had not been by Love, to take the Princesses part, maintained
it so agreeably and with so much Wit, that they were the strongest. Julia,
since the inclination her Mistress had taken for that Prince, studying him in
all his actions, was not put to much trouble to remark that he did not answer
the tender sentiments she had for him. She was extremely vexed, and would have
tore from him that heart, he so unjustly possessed; Yet she resolved not to say
any thing to the Queen, because it would rather proved mortal, than cure her.
We are never willing to be undeceived of the errors of our hearts; but she
designed to disabuse her by little and little It was a return very difficult,
and the Queen more passionate than ever, for that ungrateful man, would not so
much as suffer, her to speak of him without it was to take his part Lovers must
be always flattered in what they Love, otherwise they are not pleased.

The Charming Queen of Sicily was desirous on the Contrary that Julia should be
so Complaisant as to deceive her, as she deceived her self; and that she might
make her believe, that she was beloved by the Count de Saluces as she loved
him, in the recital she made her of what passed in the Labyrinth; she formed
the most agreeable adventure imaginable, and made that Count say to her a
thousand obliging things he had not said* Assurances and Oaths he had not
thought (...) motions of Fear and Passion he had not had* All which only raised
Julia's pity, she knowing the Contrary of all the susceptible Queen told her,
and that the Count might have had a great deal of respect, and that he might
show her as much of esteem, but that he was not sensible of the least
inclination for her. The day after there was a great Ball, and the Count de
Saluces, who begun to perceive, that the Marquess and Palatin were jealous of
him, and in love with the Queen, had a mind to divert himself to their Costs,
and to vapor that Evening with his fine Scarf. Never favor caused so many
bustles as that: The Marquis was not able to see the Count de Saluces without
being jealous; but his Daughter was much more cruelly troubled. She believed
that if the Count de Saluces had so little valued that Scarf, he would not have
made a show with it that day. There was only the Palatin who floting between
the inclination he had for the Princess, and that he begun to have for the
Queen, that is to say loving nothing, was not extremely troubled, only his
presumption gave him some vexation at the vanity of his Rival; but having
observed some alteration in the Eyes of the Marquis, he went to him and told
him in his Ear, that they had been both foold by the Queen; that she had had a
desire to favor the Count de Saluces; and that they had served for a pretext
to her giving him the Scarf. If I could believe what you say, answered the
Marquis, in whose Soul these words had destroyed, the little reason there was
left, I believe the Gallant would not long enjoy his good Fortune in my sight.
Take the pains, pursued the Palatin, to observe them, and you will see the
Intelligence there is between them. Once more, added he, seeing what he had
said made him pensive, that Scarf was destined before it was given, and it was
to much purpose we run for it. The Marquis remained some time without speaking,
and I believe the Reflections he then made, were cruel Reflections for his
heart. He already loved the Queen more than one could love; and he thought
himself played upon by a young man who apparently was his Rival. He was ready
to show his jealous resentment, but he could not without bringing upon himself
all the trouble especially with a Queen, who when necessary knew how to make
her self considered as such; and who would have laughed at him for it. In fine,
after many thoughts and designs which passed about this in his mind, taking a
resolution, he told the Count Palatin that he would hear the Queen upon it, and
afterward take such measures as were requisite, and that he was going to mask
himself to do it with the more liberty.

The Count let him go, being ravished in his Soul to have given an occasion of
breaking between his two Rivals, to have the better share on his side. With the
Ardour the Marquis went from the Ball, he could not long delay his Return to
accomplish his design. He appeared dressed after the Turkish Mode: His Shape
made him immediately be known. He boarded the Queen, who fell a laughing, and
asked him, what news from Constantinople? That the choice, Madam, answered he
softly in her Ear, you have made at Cazal is something unworthy of you, and
that the Count as Saluces is all the care of the fair Queen of Sicily. That
answer checked, and made her blush. What is that news, replied she, after some
effort, gone already so far? I had hoped, continued she, to have obliged the
Marquis of Montferrat, in making use of him in so agreeable a confidence; but
since it is no longer a secret, I shall not conceal it from any body: And to
perfect the raillery, she called, without giving him time to answer, the Count
de Saluces, who approaching: Speak to that Turk, Count, said she to him in
quitting that place, he has news to tell you, which perhaps will surprise you,
and you will see that you are not unhappy at Cazal. The Count fell a laughing.
He knew not the business; but approaching the Marquis, whom he had discovered
as the others; Mask, said he, if it be true what I am just told, I shall be
infinitely obliged to you: For there is no pleasure in being happy without
knowing it. But the Marquis outraged to the very heart, at the Queens manner of
treating him, retired without answering him, and went to unmask.

At his return he found the Ball was ended, and that the Queen was retired, as
likewise the Princess. He was surprised, for it was not yet late, but the
Palatin came very conveniently to tell him the Reason. Well, My Lord, said the
Count to him laughing, what do you think? The Queen -- Ah! talk not to me of
her, interrupted he, she is the blindest Princess under the Heavens, and I am
the most unhappy of all men. But tell me, continued he, how comes it they are
retired from the Ball so soon? It was the Queen, my Lord, answered the Palatin;
the cause of which you know better than I. She was the first that went away;
and not to disguise any thing to you, I fancy it was for the love of the Count
de Saluces, whom she, I do not say led but drew away with her, because in truth
he seemed to go against his will; you will find them still together in her
Chamber. This was perfectly mortal to the poor Marquis; he sighed two or three
times out of despair, he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and of a sudden quitting
the Count, he run to the Queens Apartment.

They may say what they will of young people when they are in love, they are no
extravagancies like those of an old man, who pretends to an art which passes
his Age. That of loving is only made for Youth, and when Love engages those
grizled Beards, he makes them act parts which appear by so much the more
extraordinary in that they act contrary to the Wisdom that is expected from
them. The Marquis was as different from himself since his being in Love, as he
was before different from all men. There was no more of that moderation he had
for all things, that staid and serious Air, that smiling mien to all the World;
how Love changes people! He was become pensive, out of humor, melancholy,
impatient, having no joy, but when he was with the Queen, so prompt, so violent
in all he ordered that it was difficult to serve and content him. But to return
to the Queen, who finding her self offended with what that Prince had said to
her, to render the raillery the better on her side, would be the first to make
it public, and turning toward the Princess, who longed extremely to know what
passed between her and the Marquis her Father, and why the Count de Saluces had
been called: By what I see, Madam, said she to her aloud, and laughing out of
Contempt, we are here in a Court, where Consequences are drawn from all things;
nay, and maliciously, for having given yesterday a Scarf to the Count de
Saluces, they consider me to day as his Mistress: And you, Madam, added she,
who gave him a Nosegay, will you be nothing to him? It is not for me, Madam,
answered the Princess smiling, to pretend any thing after you. You quit him
entirely to me then, replied the Queen? I have so little part in him, said
Briseida, that I may with ease tell you that I leave him to you entirely, It is
enough, replied the Queen, and turning toward the Count, who might have heard
all they had said upon his Chapter: You are then wholly mine, said she to him,
at least if you will not give the lie to people very penetrating, and who
believe they certainly know it. Come, continued she, without giving him time to
answer, bring me to my Chamber, and there we will see to agree on the
Conditions.

All this raillery passed with so free and so gay an Air, which was
particularly natural to that Charming Princess, that there was no body but
believed it to be mere Drollery. But the Count de Saluces had like to have
spoiled all; because at the same time he was going to obey her, Bris^ida looked
upon him after a manner that made him know the Queens jesting did not please
her, and rendered him almost unmovable, without knowing what he should do. The
Queen a little surprised in that he stopped, saw that he had his Eyes fixed upon
the Princess, and that it was that which retained him. What vexation! she
trembled for fear the affront would fall upon her; and using her utmost effort,
I find my self indisposed, my Lord, said she to him blushing, take the pains to
Conduct me to my Chamber. He had no way then to excuse himself. However the
Princess was displeased with him, and retiring to her Apartment, she passed
part of the night in complaining of him, and in crying, as if there had
happened to her some great misfortune.

The too happy Count had hardly conducted the Queen into her Chamber, when
making use of the same pre^ext she had done, would have retired for fear of
incommoding her, since she found her self ill. She fell a laughing, which was
enough to make him comprehend the Subject of her illness; but Gaspard de
Saluces not pretending to too much understanding in that occasion, and having
only Briseida in his Head, to whom he longed to return pursued his first
design; when the Queen, out of Countenance with a procedure so ungallant, told
him blushing, that her indisposition was over, that she had something to say to
him, and that she would tell him when it was time to retire. After that silence
reigned some time between them, apparently both much perplexed, but the Queen
was much more to be pitied, and those who can imagine what a Woman suffers that
loves, and who has as much honor and glory as a Queen, and yet finds her self
reduced to that Estate, would find it very difficult to describe it well. She
sp^ke at length but without looking on hi^ I ^m g^ing much to augment, said she
to him, the reports which people, perhaps something interessed, spread abroad
of you and of me. As you are not, Madam, answered the Count de Saluces, to give
an account to any body of what you do, I cannot believe there are people so
bold as to dare to censure you. May one, replied the Queen, rely thereon? One
may certainly, replied he, with a man who knows as well as I do what we owe,
Madam, to so great a Queen as you. It is true, said she, with a man so
indifferent as you are, it is ill done to talk as one does. Ah! for
indifferent, Madam, answered the Count, I can say that I am not: But -- No,
interrupted the Queen, You are only so for me; and I am sure one will never say
of you, what they say of the Queen of Sicily. She blushed in finishing these
words, and for fear her disorder should be observed by the Count, she rose, and
retiring into her Cabinet, You may, continued she, go: I have said enough, and
perhaps more than I ought to have said. What was now become of the Count de
Saluces Wit, at other times so gallant and so proper for all thing? it appeared
in this Conjuncture, when he had the most occasion for it, so new and so
childish, that it was hardly to have been pardoned had it not been for the love
of Briseida. That innocent Hero obeyed the Queen, who had no desire he should
obey her, and returned to the Ball; where perfectly to confound him, and to
make him desperate, he found not the Princess, who was the cause of that sad
fault he had committed.

Julia seeing him depart, entered the Chamber to know the news of that little
enterview. She found the Queen in her Cabinet lying upon a Couch; Who ^igh'd as
soon as she saw her: Come, Julia, said she, come comfort me for the choice I
have made of the poorest Gallant that ever was in the World. Would thou have
said it by his mien? One must say all to him, and likewise answer all for him.
My God! how innocent he is, I fancy he has never been in Love. Perhaps, Madam,
answered the Complaisant Julia, respect retains him; and that he is afraid:
What is it thou say, interrupted the Queen, that he is afraid? Can the
bravest of all men want heart, or at least Wit, near a pretty Woman? As they
were entertaining themselves after that manner, they saw the Marquis approach.
The Queen immediately bid Julia hide her self, to be witness of their
Conversation, because after what had passed at the Ball, it could not but have
something very rare. The Marquis, who at a distance had seen Julia's shadow,
and being prepossed with what the Count Palatin had just told him, fancied, it
was Gaspard de Saluces, whoby reason of him hid himself; and stopping at the
Cabinet Door; Apparently, Madam, said he to her with a disordered Air, you took
no great pleasure in the Ball? No, without doubt, my Lord, answered the Queen
very coldly, I there found my self incommoded, and came to seek repose here. A
man as I am, replied the Marquis, may perhaps interrupt it. Any man would at
this time, replied the Queen, but being in your House, it is not for me to
order any thing. You are Queen, Madam, and as much Mistress in my House, as if
you were in the middle of your own Dominions: Wherefore that Reason ought not
to make me excepted: But, Madam, pursued he, the Civil permission you give me,
does it only regard you? I should retire without pain if I could persuade my
self that; but as it is to favor another, you will pardon me, if you please,
if you must tell it me, more than once, if you will be obeyed. The Queen did
not at first comprehend the sense of these words; but having made Reflection
that the Marquis might have seen Julia, and have took her for another: She had
a mind to make him explain, to see which of the two were deceived; and still
pursuing the same point; My Lord, said she to him, I know not what you mean,
but once more I find my self ill; you are a Prince Gallant and discreet; and I
must confess a longer discourse would incommode me. It is then a discourse,
replied the jealous Marquis, with a Prince gallant and discreet, as I am; but
not with him who hid himself behind your Couch at my arrival. The Queen could
not here hold from laughing, which made him quite desperate, and not knowing
what Countenance to hold in the rage his jealousy put him in, he was going to
retire, but she who had too much interest to clear this mystery, and to draw
him out of error, prayed him to stay, and not yet changing the tone of her
voice, is any one hid here, said she, who is so dear to me, as you? tell who --
Yes, yes, Madam, interrupted He, I have Eyes, and the Count de Saluces is what
you want, for any other than him you are incommoded. Here is more news from
Constantinople, replied the Queen: But do you know, my Lord, pursued she, with
an Air a little more serious, that one is tired in the end, with all these
news? Thereupon she made Julia come out, and put the poor Marquis into so great
a Confusion* that notwithstanding all the disobliging things she said, to be
revenged on him, he had not one word to Answer. It is true, he did not merit
to be better treated, and his passion had done him a very ill Service. The
Conclusion of all that affair was, That the Queen being transported with her
Resentment, told him that she would leave his Country, and depart the day after
from Cazal; not pretending to be come into a Court where she was to give an
account of her Conduct to any body, or to be examined so strictly. She only
prayed him, for the Honor of both, that all things might be in order; to the
end the cause of her retreat might not be perceived; and that her departure as
well as her Arrival, might be in the Pomp, and with the Honors that are
requisite.

The unhappy Marquis retired into his apartment, loaded with all the poisons
that the like mistake was capable of making a man of his humor swallow, but
the most Cruel of all was the Queens Resolution, it was that which was almost
Fatal to him, and drew from him Tears, which he had not shed in more than
thirty years. Yet when he came to make Reflection on the Scarf she had given to
the Count de Saluces, and of the favorable manner with which she treated him
in the Eyes of all his Court, he wanted little of being Comforted for this
departure: Nay, he almost desired it. Is it possible, said he then, that so
great and so fair a Queen forgets her self to that point, that she manages her
self so little, that she favors a young Prince, who perhaps goes only to her,
because she descends to him, and that on the contrary, she contemns those who
esteem her most, and for whom it would be no stain to her Glory to have all
that kindness. It is thus, those old Masters of the Art Dogmatize; and thus it
is they Condemn their Mistresses, they look upon as Criminal all that is not
for them, the Rule is only made for others. At the Age the Marquis was of he
might give Lessons; but those came from too ill a Principle; and it was
jealousy inspired him with them: Yet they so well fortified him in the design
of letting the Queen depart, if she absolutely resolved on it, that being the
last thought he had, after having had all the Night a thousand of several
fashions, he rose, and in that Resolution he writ this Ticket to the Queen,
which he sent to her by one of his Gentlemen.

I am the most unhappy of all men, Madam, in having displeased you; but more
unhappy a thousand times since you will not pardon me. You are resolved to
depart, and to bring a Prince into despair. I say nothing to you thereupon; but
since you take so much pleasure, in treating so cruelly those who love you,
Madam, you must be suffered to have your will. The Gentleman who delivers you
this Letter is to receive your Commands, and you have only to order whither you
desire to go.

Lewis de Montferrat.


The Queen was but just awake when they brought her this Note. It was not very
much her design to depart: A thousand reasons of heart, as well as of the world
opposed it. She had not given a Rendesvouz to the Duke of Savoy, her Brother,
who was daily expected; to change so soon without reasons of Consequence, it
would have caused reports; and the Italians, who are a people the most
speculative of the World, and who reason upon all, would have given diverse
interpretations to this departure. Insomuch that she who wanted neither Wit nor
Judgment, having considered the Consequences of such a going away, had no mind
to it, though the Marquis seemed to prompt her to it. She easily guessed, that
it was the effect of an amorous vexation, which would last no longer than she
was willing; and that the least of her looks would change it into a very
violent passion. She would however still dissemble, and made answer to that
Gentleman, that within three hours she would be ready to depart; and that in
the mean time the Marquis his Master might come to see her, to whom she would
tell whither she had a design to go.

As the motions of jealousy are the most violent, they likewise pass away the
soonest; and repentances which always follow them, come after, to torment a
poor Lover; but it is sometimes too late that one repents. The Marquis de
Montferrat had hardly sent that Note to the Queen, than that he would have
recalled his Gentleman to have made another. He could not wait, without
trembling, for the answer she would make him; and he accused himself of
precipitation which would cost him his Life. Lovers, in the Condition this
found himself, are thus subject to irresolutions, which cause them a thousand
pains. They sometimes desire one thing, and then again another. Vexation and
Jealousy inspire Designs into their minds, that Love destroys with a return of
kindness; and yet it is Love which is the Author of that jealousy and of that
vexation. Thus one may say, That it is he which does and undoes the same thing
according as he pleases, or that he likes it. The mind which is usually more
proud than Amorous, will sometimes push its Idea to the end, especially when it
concerns Glory; but the Heart more tender than the Mind, having more
inclination for Love than for Noise, will not always follow it, and it is from
thence those Combats arise, they have so often together.

At length the Gentleman came, and rendered an account to his Prince of the
Commission he had given him, and of the Queens desire. What the Queen, cried
the frighted Marquis, is then resolved to depart; and without staying any
longer to make useless questions, he ran to the Queens Apartment, where falling
upon his Knees by her Bedside, in which she still was, He begged of her, after
so transported a manner, that she would yet stay some days in his Court, that
she believed, that he was downright in Love with her; which made her pity him.
She was a very good natured Princess, and who never knew how to hate any Body.
She pardoned him: The Peace was made, in Confirmation of which she gave him her
hand to kiss, which he took with an unparallelled Joy, so Charmed with that
favor, that he could not express his sentiments, but by transports.

In the mean time as all that preparation of Coaches and Horses had made a
noise at the Court, and that every Body expected to know, for whom it was; the
Queen, not to give occasion to the talkers of News to reason thereupon, thought
good, it being a fine day, to employ it in Hunting: Insomuch, that the Marquis
went to give Orders for what was yet necessary. Julia, who went halfs in in all
that happened of good or ill to her Mistress, had quickly her part of the last
Scene which passed with the Marquis, of which the Queen made her a pleasant
History. After that she would prepare her self for hunting; but she confessed
to Julia, as Childish as the Count de Saluces was, she should have but little
diversion if he was not there, as it was to be feared; because apparently the
Marquis would not take care to give him notice. Julia took upon her self to
engage him to be of the Party. One does a great many things to please a
Mistress one loves extremely.

The poor Count had not rested all the night. That Nosegay of Flowers he had
received from the Princess, had not filled him with so much joy, as the regards
she had glanced on him, when he conducted the Queen to her Chamber, had frozen
his Soul with fear; and as he had hoped to settle all right by a quick return;
he was severely punished in not finding her still at the Ball. He retired to
his Lodging mortally afflicted; and casting himself upon the Bed, he passed the
Night without suffering himself to be undrest, having Briseida always before
his Eyes; and likewise sometimes the Queen. He could no longer doubt of the
esteem the Queen had for him: So many goodnesses had shown it enough to him;
and as it was not for a young man as he to be cruel to a Person of that Rank,
and of that Beauty, he was in a deadly Confusion, when he thought of the manner
so ungallant, with which he went from her that Evening. What will she say of
me, said he to himself; for whom shall I pass? Will she excuse me for the love
of Briseida? No, no, I do not merit she should have so much indulgence for me;
and I believe she now hates me, as much as she before esteemed me; is this
breeding? She made it apparent that she had no mind I should quit her, and I
have done ill in doing it; though she had commanded me. I ought to have
followed her into her Cabinet, there to have entertained her some moments, and
have done what at (...) should for Women much (...), and of a much less Beauty,
than that (...) that Charming Queen: Must the Love I have for Briseida render
me the most ridiculous of all men? As it will render me perhaps the most
unhappy. Ah too lovely Princess, cried he thereupon, in making a stop by a kind
of reflection, why cannot you love me, as I love you, or why cannot I love
elsewhere, as perhaps I am beloved?

With what passion soever a heart is engaged, there are certain moments wherein
one takes pleasure to think one is beloved; especially when it is by some
Subject that deserves thinking on, as was the Queen of Sicily, and if once a
certain vanity thereon gets the upperhand of us, it is very difficult to be
quit of it. It is almost as strong as an inclination, and causes as great
effects. The Count de Saluces was wholly Briseida's. There was not in his Soul
the least design of infidelity; but as one is not always Master of ones
thoughts; he could not keep himself from some small return, when he thought of
the Complaisances so fair a Queen had for him; and if that is called perfidy,
it must be allowed me, that it is of those that the least repentance may
procure to be pardoned; and which never deserves Death. It extremely imported
him, that no body should perceive the passion he had for the Princess, which
the Marquis, who begun to have but little kindness for him, would without doubt
have opposed, not only because of the inequality of Parties; but because other
Princes pretended to it, who were much above him. Insomuch that that reason and
several others more, obliging him to keep his love secret, he thought that an
amusement with the Queen, since she already offered it, might be of great use
to him. But it was an affair very nice, and to which Briseida apparently would
not have agreed. The Queen of Sicily was not a person made after a manner to
serve purely for a pretext, and the Mistress who had trusted to it, would have
been abused without doubt: It was not a proposition to be made to a Maid of wit
as Briseida. It is true that the Count was not yet come to that, he had hardly
made her know by his actions and by his looks that he loved her. But in Italy,
where they have not so many means of explaining themselves as in other places,
all speaks; and looks make more way than in any place of the World (...)
sometimes conclude^* Yet as one is often deceived in their truth, they do not
always rely on them; and they have need to explain themselves otherways to be
well understood. Gaspard de Saluces passionately longed to come to that, to be
able afterward to act in concert with the Princess, and to make use of the
Queen, as she should judge it convenient. The beginnings of esteem he had
already received from the Princess, flattered him with some success; and
fortifying himself thereupon the rest of the Night, by many amorous reasons;
for it is easy to pesuade ones self what one desires; he got up in the morning
with the design of seeking an occasion to see her, and speak to her; when this
Letter was brought him.

More Care is taken of you than you merit; perhaps if you deserved it, one
should not be put to so much trouble. But with such as you nothing is of
Consequence. All are going to hunt, prepare your self to be of the Party, for
it is desired you be there; and without troubling your Head to divine from whom
these Notices can come, content your self with knowing that it is from one of
the most lovely Persons of the World, who would have a great deal of esteem for
you, if you knew better how to value such an esteem as hers.

It was Julia who writ to him this Letter upon the Queens account. He read it
again and again, several times; he sent for him, who had brought it, who was a
Footman without Livery, to know to whom he belonged; but seeing that his pains
were useless, he did not press him any more; but made this answer to that
Ticket.

I know not whether I have much merited the honor, or the reproaches that are
made me; but I am full of Confusion; and there are but very few things I would
not do, to repair* the one and to render my self worthy of the other. It is not
to be doubted but that I will be of that party; and if there be means to
justify my self, of what I am accused, I shall be extremely obliged to those,
who will show me the persons, to whom I have failed; and perhaps what shall be
done for me in the future will take other Motives, than the little Consequences
it may be of; I was never to my remembrance, reduced to that extremity: I hope
to correct my self, and to give a better Opinion of me, than is had at present.

This shows that the Count answered well enough to the gallantry that was made
him. He fancied it came by order of the Queen; for there was only she in that
Court, who could cause him to be writ to after that manner, and he was willing
in some manner to repair the ill Figure he had made the night before, of which
one had but too much reason to make him reproaches. In the mean time the
Hunting seemed to favor him, in the design he had to entertain the Princess
with the affairs of his heart; but as he was mounting his Horse, he was told
she would not be there, and that she was indisposed. What a despair for this
Prince; he took this unfortunate dissappointment, as a deadly Omen to his Love;
and that he should succeed in nothing; and without troubling himself with what
he had writ, he returned to his Chamber, where he walked a long time, thinking
what Resolution he should take; for he longed to speak that day to the
Princess; his Gentleman of the Horse, who was an old French Domestic, growing
impatient with expecting him, would go see what hindered him from following the
Queen, who was departed with all the Court an hour before. He found him in the
posture of a man, who raved, all sad, all pensive, at which he was much
astonished; for this was very new to the Count de Saluces. He knew not what to
say to him, but the Count, who saw him troubled without doubt at the Condition
in which he found him, and having occasion for him, knowing his experience of
the affairs of the World, was willing to trust him with his secret, and to tell
him the pain in which he was. Richard, thus was the Gentleman of the Horse
called, after having seriously listened to his Master, told him, that he did
not find he had so much reason to be afflicted, though he should not speak that
to the Princess; and that if he would write to her, he assured him that he
would himself deliver the Letter. The Count believed, in the impatience he was,
that it was the shortest and easiest for him; and relying upon the address of
Richard, in a time the Conjuncture was so fair, that all the Court was abroad,
he was willing to hazard a Declaration by Writeing; which he made in these
terms.

If a Man, Madam, who should dare to love you, and to tell it you, deserves
Death, I ought not to hope for your pardon; for never any body was so guilty as
I, of a Crime so Charming. I know all, and have considered all, and a thousand
reasons forbid me such a piece of boldness, but my heart has not listened to
them; and Love more strong than all the reasons of the world, has took so great
an Empire over it; that should it dye a thousand Deaths, it would not unsay it.
Order thereupon, Madam, what you shall think fit; if you please, it shall dye,
that bold Heart, but it is not possible for it to cease to Love you as long as
it shall have one moment of Life.

The Count de Saluces.


This Letter finished, Richard took it, and prayed his Master to rely on him
for the Success of that affair, and that he would quickly bring him good News.
The Count mounted on his Horse to go to the Chase, and his Gentleman of the
Horse went to labor on his side to succeed in the Commission he had took upon
himself. It was an enterprise something bold, in a Country where they are not
pardoned; but the passion he had to serve his Prince, would have made him
hazard much greater.

The Queen impatiently expected the Count de Saluces, who came not; and wearied
with not seeing him, in the time she had been a hunting, she incessantly said
to Julia; Well! Well, do you see how he comes? you did not write to him
obligingly enough, or rather the Princess has made him change his design. Julia
endeavored to Comfort her, and told her that the time was not passed, and that
some affair might have retained him, and that she believed him too well bred a
man to fail to come, after having promised it. The Queen was not at all of a
humor to divert her self with Hunting, so long as she was in that disquiet
whether he would come or not; and that change of humor was so remarkable in
her, who used to be in a Continual mirth, that the most indifferent perceived
it: The Marquis and the Palatin interessed in that affair, did all that was
possible to dissipate that extraordinary melancholy; but they succeeded so
ill, that on the contrary they augmented her ill humor by their importunity,
especially the Marquis, who thought to do wonders. The Count de Saluces at
length arrived to render her her former joy. She managed her self so little,
that she quickly let all the world see the pleasure she took in his arrival,
and there needed not very much penetration to divine the favorable sentiments
she had for him; hitherto she seemed as if she could not open her mouth: but
since the arrival of that Prince, her wit sparkled in all kinds. She proposed a
thousand sorts of Divertisements; of Courses, of tilting, of Shooting; and
would always be, or speak for the Count de Saluces against all others, from
whom indeed that happy Lover always carried the Prize: It may be imagined with
what Eye the Marquis and the Count Palatin saw all this: Into what despair they
were brought by the empressments the Queen had for that young Rival; and into
what rage to see him the Conqueror of all. I know very well, that that day
perfected the rendering them his most mortal Enemies; and the Marquis yet more
than the Palatin: Because Jealousy had a greater influence over him. In the
mean time that happy Rival seemed to have but little joy in what caused the
despair of others; and at which the proud Count Palatin was the most outraged.

The Count de Saluces mind run all upon the Success the enterprise of Richard
would have. How long are the moments in those occasions, when one expects the
sentence of Life or of Death! but of a Death by so much the more cruel, that
the Life would be the most happy that can be imagined. The Gentleman of the
Horse came not: He would have had him gone as fast as his mind. He had
accompanied him with his Idea as far as the Palace, from thence he had made him
enter into the Princesses Apartment; yet without being able to imagine how: He
had seen him speak to her her self, and had made him say things the most
touching and the most passionate for him in the World: After which the Princess
had took his Letter, was moved, and had made him an answer, such as he could
desire. By ill luck these imaginations lasted not long, for the Comedy changing
Face, they found themselves quickly destroyed by contrary visions* which
represented to him as if all were lost; that Richard had been discovered and
seized; and above all that, that the Princess had ill received his Letter, and
that she made no answer to it. Of what tranquillity was capable the Soul of that
poor Prince, amongst so many different Winds, good and contrary, with which it
was agitated, during the expectation of Richard? He arrived at length to render
it calm. His Prince, who continually turned his Head that way he was to come,
had no sooner perceived him, than that a trouble, mixed with fear and joy,
seized him, and did not quit him till he had learnt from his Servant all he was
to tell him.

He stole insensibly from the Company, and gained the Po, near which they
hunted, and whither his Gentleman of the Horse followed him. Well, Richard,
said he to him, when they were in a place, where no body could either hear, or
observe them, tell me quickly what I am to hope? Have thou succeeded? say, Must
I live or dye? Conceal nothing from me. What are the Sentiments the Princess
has for me? My Lord, answered the Gentleman of the Horse, you ought not to
despair of any thing; but I believe you would be more happy without the Scarf
you wear. Ah Heavens, cried the Count, should this Scarf be the cause of my
misfortune? It is at least all the reason, replied Richard, which was made use
of not to give an answer to your Letter. Learn me, replied sighing the
impatient Count, how all this is passed? For I do not comprehend it, and if it
is only that Scarf which makes me unhappy, I shall have quickly reason to
rejoice for my good Fortune.

My Lord, you must know, continued Richard; that having seen you on Horseback
to follow the Queen, I dressed my self like a French Courrier, and made one of my
Friends conduct me to the Palace, where I am not much known: I said I came from
France, that I must speak with the Princess to deliver her Letters from the
Dauphins Daughter; with whom all the World knows she has a Commerce of
Friendship; immediately I was suffered to enter, and was conducted to her
Chamber, where I found her very pensive, and very melancholy, lying upon a
Couch. There was only with her one of her Women, who likewise kept at a
distance. I approached her, and presented her your Letter; she eyed me, and
whether I appeared troubled in entering, or that she had some foreknowledge, she
seemed not to take it without trembling, nay, and changed Color in reading the
superscription. Without doubt the Character appeared to her New; and I saw her
Balance, if she should render it me, or if she should open it. I expected at
least that she should ask me from whence the Letter came; but she contented her
self with looking on me once again, without saying to me any thing, examining
me seriously, as if she would have read in my Face what she should believe. In
fine, Curiosity, or perhaps something more strong, mastering so much
irresolution, she broke it open, and kept her Eyes on it above a quarter of an
hour, with motions, which, if I may guess at by those of the Face, were not
disadvantageous to you. After that she went into her Cabinet, where she was
more than an hour; I believed it was to make you an answer; but calling for me,
and speaking softly to me, You are mistaken, said she to me, rendering me your
Letter; this is not addressed to me. Hold, carry that Letter to the Queen of
Sicily, for it is to her without doubt it is written. I am too old, Madam,
answered I her, to commit such a fault; it is to you my Prince sent me: And in
the Condition I left him, I should rather choose to dye, than to carry him back
that Letter: For the contempt he would see you make of it, Madam, would cast
him into utter despair. Well then, leave it with me, said she, being hardly
able to hold from sighing, and for answer tell him, that the Queen would take
it ill, that wearing her Scarf he should write to me the things he does: and
that for my part it is yet worse; and that I pray him it may be the last time.
In finishing these words she dismissed me, and shut her self up in the same
Cabinet. This, my Lord, has been the success of my Voyage, which I do not find
unhappy for a beginning; but if I durst take the liberty to give you advice,
being old in the World as I am -- It is done, interrupted the Count, as long as
I live, I will never wear any Scarf, but from the hand of Briseida. Thereupon
he fell to undo it from his Arm; when the Queen, who had not lost sight of him,
since he was separated from the Company, turned that way, and came just in time
to see him unty it; but with an importment and a fury, as seemed to her,
against that poor Scarf, that she was mortally vexed: And upon the point, that
Gaspard de Saluces was going to give it to his Gentleman of the Horse, she
advanced from under some trees, where she had stopped to see what he did: It is
to me, said she to him, seizing it her self, that it must be restored: For in
truth you are not worthy to wear it. The Count more surprised than he had ever
been in his Life, to see and to hear the Queen, thought she had heard all the
Conversation he had had with Richard, and was upon the point to avow to her
that passion he had for the Princess, to oblige her by that ingenuous
Confession to pardon him the action she had seen him do upon her Scarf: But the
Count Palatin arrived, who finding in the posture of the Count de Saluces
something of a man much surprised, and in the Queens Face vexation and choler,
holding the Scarf in her hands: The Palatin, I say, interpreting the thing
quite otherwise than it was, and advancing to speak; because both surprised at
his arrival said nothing more. Certainly, Madam, said he, the Count de Saluces
must have committed some great Crime against you, that you take from him a
Scarf Fortune had so liberally given him. Others would have made better use of
it. You take too soon, answered Gaspard de Saluces the Queens part, not to see
that it is for your self you speak; but it is enough, pursued he, that you had
it not, to believe at least you deserve it not so well: That is a thing
disputable, the Palatin repartee'd with a smile full of haughtiness, and -- No,
no, interrupted the Queen, who saw whither these words tended, It is for me to
decide. Hold Count, continued she, giving it to the Count Palatin, but do not
presume any thing from this present. I make of them, as things only obtained by
hazard; and those are not the good ones. Though this, Madam, answered the Count
Palatin, was such a one, it would be enough for me, that I received it from
your fair hands, to be infinitely proud. This discourse was again interrupted,
by the arrival of the Marquis, who with the gross of the Troop ranged himself
by the Queen. She foreseeing this would cause reports, and that it would be
surprising to see it in the hands of the Count Palatin, after having seen it on
the Arm of the Count de Saluces, was willing to give some color to this
affair, and therefore to prevent rumors, I come, said she laughing, from
punishing a deserter, who has separated himself from the Troop without leave.
It seems to me continued she, with the same tone of raillery, that a man whom I
had made my Knight, in giving him my Scarf, ought to be more assiduous with me,
or at least not to quit me without first letting me know. There were several
Repartees upon this, which made a kind of Conversation, in which several Lords
of the Court were engaged for the Count de Saluces's part; he defended himself
so weakly, and appeared so cold to all that raillery, that it was apparent he
was but little concerned as his disgrace: On the contrary he appeared to be
more and more of a better humor, whether it proceeded from the kindness he
believed the Queen had done him, in having acted thus; or that he did it, not
to let his Rivals have the pleasure to imagine he had any regret at what had
happened, as they did not fail to believe, though he laughed and raillyed as the
others. The Queen alone was deadly vexed. She knew not what reason could have
moved that Prince to do what he had done to that Scarf, after having worn it
two days in the Eyes of the all World. She easily fancied there was some
mystery in it, into which she could not penetrate, and that all the ill came
from that man with whom she had found him discoursing. The mind of a Woman goes
very far when she is touched to the quick, especially of a jealous Woman: she
had a thousand imaginations upon that affair: She made a hundred designs to
discover the Intrigue, and took care to have him spied, whom she thought the
cause of all that misfortune, to know whom he was, to whom he belonged, from
whence he came, and what he would do, during the Chase. But as it was already
Dinner time, the Marquis made toward that side where he had prepared a
magnificent treat, where all the Company came; and the Queen was there treated
after an extraordinary manner, considering it was in the middle of a Field.

They had hardly took away, when one of those she had set to observe the Count
de Saluces man, came and told her, that it was his Gentleman of the Horse, who
was to return to Cazal to carry a Letter that his Master had just given him;
but that he knew not for whom it was, and that he could draw nothing more from
him. The fair Queen lost no time, her jealousy gave her not a moment of truce,
and calling for one of her Gentlemen, in whom she much relied: She bid him take
with him three or four of her Guards, to disguise them, and to go watch in the
way to Cazal for a man, that he, speaking of her Spy, should show him; to
seize and search him, without doing him any hurt, and to take all the Papers
and Letters that should be found about him. The Gentleman executed very
punctually the Queens Order. He went and hid himself in a Wood, that was half a
League from Cazal, through which Richard was to pass; who no sooner appeared
than that four Horsemen, making show of going toward the City, seized him by
surprise, demanded his Purse; and found not about him any other Paper than a
Letter; the Gentleman immediately carried it to the Queen, while that the
others drew poor Richard into the thickest of the Wood to keep him till new
Order.

FINIS.

