A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THE Several Kinds of SOCIETIES, set up of late Years, for
carrying on the Reformation of Manners, and for the Propagation of Christian
Knowledge.
AFTER that the Virtuous Part of England had long complained of the infamous
Clubbs of Atheists, Deists, and Socinians, who, for many Years past, have
Labored to set up the pretended Oracles of misguided Reason, against the
undoubted Oracles of God; too many of whom, by their scandalous Lives, most
agreeable to their Principles, have endeavored to destroy in themselves, and
others, all Notions of Divine Things, and of the differences of Good and Evil;
it was thought necessary, by diverse serious Persons of the Church of England,
That the Children of Light should endeavor to be as Wise as they; and, by
forming themselves into Societies, should assist one another in their most Holy
Faith, and a Practice agreeable thereto.

These and the like Considerations, brought together a considerable Number of
such Pious Persons (about Twenty Years since) who met often, to Pray, Sing
Psalms, and Read the Holy Scriptures together; and to Reprove, Exhort, and
Edify one another, by their Religious Conferences; and their Number has been
daily so increased, that they make, at present, about Thirty Nine Societies, in
and about London and Westminster; and their Example has been followed, by
Devout Persons, in diverse other Parts of this Nation, and in Ireland,
especially in Dublin, where there are about Ten of these Societies, supported
by the Reverend Bishops and Inferior Clergy there: These Societies, and their
Methods and Orders, were inquired into, and approved by our late Queen of
Blessed Memory, and the late Excellent Archbishop Tillotson, and are greatly
esteemed by several Most Reverend and Right Reverend Bishops, who have made the
same Enquiry: And these are the Societies which are particularly called, THE
RELIGIOUS SOCIETIES, whose Rise, Progress, and Charitable Designs, are
Described and Recommended, in a Pious Discourse, by the Reverend Mr. Woodward.

But the Private Devotions, and Exemplary Lives, of the Members of these
Societies, were not sufficient to stop the Torrent of Vice, which had broken
down all the Banks of Reason and Religion; and therefore, about Ten Years
since, Five or Six private Gentlemen (Members of the Church of England)
Considering that the higher the Tide of Wickedness was, the more need there was
of opposing it; they resolved to Associate themselves, to make their utmost
Efforts for promoting the Execution of the Laws against Vice and Immorality,
and the suppressing of them by advisable Methods: And this Design, though at
first violently opposed by the Champions and Advocates of Debauchery, yet, by
the Divine Assistance, the Patronage of His Most Sacred Majesty, and His late
Most Gracious Queen, the Countenance of the Clergy of the greatest Figure in
the Church, particularly of His Grace the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, by his
Circular Letter, and the Zeal and Industry of the Persons engaged therein, has
prosper'd to a Degree, Exceedingly Great, beyond what Humane Wisdom did, or
could expect; for this Design Encountering no Man's honest Advantage, no ways
intermedling in Matters of Controversy, being directed by Men of considerable
Rank and Fortune, as Members of Parliament, Justices of the Peace, Lawyers, and
Eminent Citizens; and who are also of the clearest Character; and the Executive
Part managed by such who have refused even that part of the Forfeitures, on
Convictions, which the Law allows to Informers, least they should seem to aim
at Their own private Advantage; many Virtuous People of the too various
Denominations of Protestants amongst us, have readily agreed to join Hearts and
Purses in the Prosecution thereof; and this Union of Hearts and Affections, in
things so agreeable to all, who deserve the Name of Protestants, of Christians,
of Englishmen, or even of Men, has been of great use, to remove the
Prejudices, which many had taken up, against The Established Church, and
against one another; and has laid a Foundation of that Union, which may be a
probable means of putting an end to Schisms and Divisions, of restoring the
Primitive Discipline in the Church, and of teaching England to Keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

It is by the Endeavors of this Society (assisted by the Religious Societies
aforesaid) and diverse others since formed, and acting under the Influence of
it, that more than Twenty Thousand Persons have been Convicted for Swearing,
Cursing, or Profanation of the Lord's Day, in and about the Cities of London
and Westminster; and many of them, at least outwardly, Reformed thereby; and
the Prosecutions have been managed with so much Tenterness and Christian
Charity, that no just Cause of Complaint has ever yet appeared against them;
and by the Endeavors of one of these Societies alone, Three Thousand lewd and
disorderly Persons have been Punished within the same Limits: And it is of these
Societies, and their Rise, Progress and Success, that the World has had an
Account, in a Book, Entitled, An Account of the Societies for the Reformation
of Manners in England and Ireland; with a Persuasion to Persons of all Ranks to
be zealous and diligent in promoting the Execution of the Laws against
Profaneness and Debauchery, for effecting a National Reformation: Published with
the Approbation of a considerable Number of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
of the Honorable Judges of both Kingdoms.

But although the Success of these Societies was already very great, and though it
should be still more and more abundant, there seemed yet something more that
was needful to be done against Satan's Kingdom, and to promote the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ. The meeting together for mutual Edification, in Religious
Societies, is a probable means of making good Men better; and the Vigilance of
Societies, for Reformation of Manners, is likely, not only to keep ill Men from
growing worse, but to Convert and Amend them: But for the lasting Establishment
of our holy Faith, and the spreading of it in the World, there is a visible
Necessity of some special Care to be taken for the breeding up of Children in
Virtue and true Religion, for the reclaiming of those who Err in the
Fundamentals of Christianity, and for encouraging the Propagation of the Gospel
in our Plantations.

This Consideration moved some Persons of Honor and Quality, who had a true
Zeal for the Glory of God, the Salvation of their Brethren, and the Reputation
of our Mother Church, to Unite themselves into a Society, for the promoting of
Christian Knowledge both at Home and Abroad; and they applied themselves to
form Methods, and to find out means of accomplishing so glorious an
Undertaking; regulating themselves always by the Ecclesiastical Constitutions,
as the Societies for Reformation do themselves by the Temporal Laws of England.
And thus about March, Anno School/9, began the Society for promoting of Christian
Knowledge, which has, since that time, been daily increased, by the Accession
of many worthy Persons, who were desirous to be instrumental in so Excellent a
Design; so that at present it consists of a considerable Number of Persons of
Quality and Estates, Bishops, Eminent Clergymen, Lawyers, etc. besides their
Correspondents which are carrying on the same Work in all the Counties of
England and Wales, and in the Plantations beyond the Seas.

This Society meets Weekly to deliberate about what is Expedient for the
carrying on of those Pious Ends for which they United; and they have already
made a Progress beyond what could reasonably have been hoped for in so short a
time. They have (by their own Subscriptions, and others which they have
procured) bought great Numbers of Useful Books, for the furnishing of the
Plantations with Parochial Libraries, to invite Worthy Clergymen to those
Parts; by whose Labors, the Christians, who are there, may be Edified, and the
Gospel Propagated among the Unbelievers.

They have dispersed great Numbers of good Books for the Instructing of poor
Families in the true Principles of the Christian Religion. They are using means
for the providing Catechetical-Libraries in the smaller Parishes, to enable the
Inferior Clergy the better to perform their Duty of Catechizing, according to
the LIXth Canon, and the greater Parishes with Lending-Libraries, which will be
of great use to the Poorer Clergy, to assist them in the more successful
opposing of Errors and Heresies. And they have more particularly applied
themselves to the setting up of Schools for the Education of Poor Children,
many of which are Erected, and are now Erecting in the Country: In and about
London and Westminster, there are already set up about Twenty of them, in which
near a Thousand Poor Children, of both Sexes, are taught to Read the Bible, and
to repeat and understand the Church Catechism; and the Boys are besides taught
to Write and Cast Account, to fit them for Trades, and the Girls to Knit, Work
with their Needle, etc. to make them good Servants in others Families, or good
Wives and Mothers in their own; and by this means we have a fair prospect of a
great Reformation of the poorer sort (who are now so much Corrupted) by the
bringing up of such Numbers of them Piously, in a true conformity to the
Church, and in ways that lead them to be serviceable to the Public.

It is not doubted, but that all true Lovers of the Church of England, to whom
this Account shall come, will, with their Prayers, Countenance, and Assistance,
join in these Pious Endeavors, by which so much Good may be done to the World,
and so much Honor redound to our Holy Religion and the Established Church,
that our Enemies may have no room to charge us with the betraying the Interest
of our Church, by Supinity or Negligence, or with Coldness in promoting true
Piety and Religion at Home, or in spreading it Abroad in the remoter part of
the Earth: And we need not doubt but these blessed Designs will gain Credit to
this Church, both at Home and Abroad; and help to continue it, as it has
constantly been, since the Reformation, the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by J. Brudenell, in Jewin-street, 1700.


