THE NECESSITY OF A Present Repentance. IN A SERMON PREACHED Before the RIGHT
HONORABLE the LORD MAYOR, and COURT of ALDERMEN at GVILD-HALL Chapel, March
10th. 1694/5.

By WILLIAM BRAMSTON, Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by John Leake, for William Keblewhite at the Swan in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCV.

PROVE. Chap. xxvij. Verse 1. Boast not thy self of to Morrow; for thou know
not what a Day may bring forth.


THE Wise Man in this Religious Check, at the same time rebukes and cautions
those Slothful Triflers, whom he saw shuffling off the most necessary Business
of their Lives, what they themselves acknowledged must needs be done; but yet
vainly flattered their own Hearts, that they might enjoy this Day's Pastime,
and be early enough for that Work to Morrow: And certainly, it may most
properly be applied now to the Case of every Christian, fondly deferring his
Repentance, that most necessary Work, upon which Salvation it self depends: It
is not the Doctrine of Repentance, Men scruple to acknowledge; no, the
Scriptures are too plain, and peremptory in this Particular (Except ye repent,
ye shall all perish) for such as embrace them, to outface the Necessity of
Repentance: But the Point, wherein they are unsettled, is about the Time; though
they must Repent, yet this Day's Temptation flatters them, to Morrow will be
time enough; and then to Morrow's Lust advises, a Week hence will not be too
late: Thus, if Youth determines the Case, its warm and heated Blood, coneludes
the Duties of Repentance, namely, a Serious Constancy in our Devotions; the
Works of Mortifications and Self-denials to be most suitable to the Sedateness
and Gravity of Age: If we consult those in the Strength of their Years, their
Plea immediately is this, That they are now in the Prime of their Days, in that
part of their Life, which is most proper for the concerns of this World; in the
very Critical Moment, for advancing their present Honors, or Establishing the
Happiness of their Posterity: That they feel themselves Strong, and Healthy,
past those Dangers which encompass Youth, far enough from Death, and the Grave,
and therefore under no such pressing Obligations to be hastening their
Repentance, which will be more becoming our declining State: Nay, if old Age it
self be Umpire, it presently resolves, That it is more seasonable still to
cherish, than to check the perishing Heat, and even with one Foot in the Grave,
deems its most important Business which remains in this World, is to be still
Careful in Supporting Life: even then, when Men have gone on so long, they
think it too early still to look back, and because they find themselves greatly
disabled for Sinning, they are apt to imagine, that they are as greatly
disengaged from Repenting: Thus from the Cradle to the Grave, from the very
Beginning to the End of Life, we are all shifting and putting off the most
necessary Business of our Lives: Thus, though in all Degrees of our Age, as
Christians, we acknowledge it necessary to Repent; yet, in no degree of our
Life, to which we are arrived, as Men, do we judge it time to begin Repentance.
Give me Leave therefore, in Conformity to this holy Season, and upon the very
Importance of the Subject it self, here to take up the wise Man's Admonition,
and with the most religious Application, press upon you the absolute Necessity
of our present performing this great Work; show you how very unreasonable it
must be in us Christians, who acknowledge Repentance to be a Work so
indispensible toward our Salvation, that if it be not done before Death, we
must die for ever, to depend upon to Morrow to do it in, when we know not, in
what Circumstances this very Day may leave us: Now, this I shall endeavor in
these Three Particulars:

First, By showing you the dangerous Uncertainties, which all delaying Men have
to depend upon.

Secondly, How improper the Times resolved on by such Men to Repent in, will be
for the Work of their Repentance.

Thirdly, I shall make it appear, That there is no Excuse or Pretense
whatsoever which Men may now urge, in favor of their Delays; but what, if
seriously considered, must, even in Wisdom, oblige them to hasten their
Repentance.

I. As to the dangerous Uncertainties, which all delaying Men have to depend
upon.

Can any Thing be more dangerous and uncertain in the Business of our
Salvation, than that which has no Certainty in the Gospel of Christ? Now,
though it is true, its Heavenly Voice is this, Repent and live; yet, we may
observe, it still directs us to the time present: As for a future Repentance,
there is no such thing hinted at in Scripture. God nowhere calls upon us to
Repent to Morrow, or assures us, That our next Year's Penitence shall be
sufficient for this Year's Transgressions: No, all the Promises of his Help,
and of the Assistances of his holy Spirit for this Purpose, are given to such
as seek him early, to such as call upon him whilst he is near. Now, God is said
to be near us, when our Sins have not set us far from him: That is, when by our
long and habitual Impenitence, we have not chased his blessed Spirit far from
his Temple, which is our Body. If we address, before the vicious Distemper
grows inveterate, we may find Life and Consolation in the comfortable
Refreshments of God's Holy Spirit; but if we deferr and suffer him whilst he is
near, to forsake us, without working up our Souls for this Heavenly
Undertaking, can we imagine, we shall be able to perform it, at God's greater
distance from us? I am sure we have no Authority from God to presume we shall:
No, Those Men who are so willing to flatter themselves in the Persuasion, that
they may go on sometime securely in their Sins, that they shall certainly
return at last, and seek after God, would do very well to consider, that they
are without any Promise in the Scriptures, either that they shall have Grace
enough to return at last, or if they should seek him, that he will then be
found by them; nay, there is not one instance throughout the whole Gospel, that
a late Repentance, shall be available in such Men, who now knowingly and
wilfully deferr Repenting: I say, who knowingly, and wilfully deferr, upon
these two Accounts, 1. Because I take this to be the case of all us here
present; who, I trust have long since been baptized into the Faith of Christ,
and the Essential part of our Baptismal Covenant with God, is a present
Repentance. 2. I say knowingly, because this plainly sets before us, the
manifest difference between our case now, and that of the Thief upon the Cross
heretofore; which is the only instance that looks this way; and that such a
one, through the misunderstanding of which, too many Men, I fear, do deprive
their own Souls of this blessed Means of Salvation: To set your Understandings
right as to that particular, you may observe, That though in respect of this
Life, the Thief's Repentance was as late, as it is possible, that of the most
loytering of us all can be, even as late as Death it self; yet in respect of
the time when he came to the Knowledge of God, it was very early; even as early
as Faith began; he no sooner beheld the Glory of Christ's Majesty, but he
humbled himself under the sense of his own vileness; so soon as he knew God, he
renounced the World, and in a Penitential Confession, humbly besought Christ's
merciful Remembrance in his Kingdom: Now, if we reflect upon these
Circumstances, what can we discover in them which any ways relates to our own
Case, who have long enjoyed the Knowledge of God's Truths, and yet long lived
in an habitual Neglect of all the present Opportunities of Salvation; wilfully
confiding in the imaginary Hopes, in the vain Uncertainties, of a future
Repentance: I say, the vain Uncertainties of a future Repentance; for that
there is nothing, but Vanity, Danger, and Uncertainty in a future Repentance,
from the very first, to the last Circumstances of it; I shall farther make
appear in these following Considerations.

First, What certainty can there be in that, which depends upon so uncertain a
Foundation as the Life of Man? or rather let the Quaere go thus; With what
Wisdom shall any Man depend upon the certainty of that which is not now, and
which, that it ever be, must depend upon the certainty of our time to come in
this World, which may never be: who, as we are not able to add one Cubit to our
Stature, to make one Hair black, or white; so, much less can we presume, that
the certainty of Life is in our Power? If thou will repose the certainty of thy
Life in a Repentance hereafter, must it not then become thee, to ensure an
Hereafter for thy self to Repent in? If this be beyond thy reach, then consider
thou have shuffled off thy Salvation to that which is beyond thy Power, thou
have only purposed to Repent then, when, for ought thou know, thou shall be
no more. I see but one thing, with which impenitent Men may satisfy their
Consciences against the force of this Reasoning; and it is this: A Persuasion
that God is a Being essentially too kind, and gracious, to take Men out of this
World, before they have Repented, that is, whilst they are unfit to Die; but is
not this also vain, and an uncertainty, inconsistent with the most certain
Doctrines of God's Holy Spirit, which frequently acquaint us that the Wicked,
namely, such as the Deceitful and Blood-thirsty Men, shall not live out half
their days? And to argue this upon the common Principles of Reason, Can we in
reason believe, that there can lie any Obligation upon God to prolong our
lives, when it is our contemptuous Neglect of God's Grace, our daily Violations
of God's righteous Judgments, which now renders us unfit for Death? Can any Man
hope thus to put off Death, by his Rebellions against the Lord of Life?

2. As Life is uncertain, so is the continuance of God's Grace uncertain also;
nay, according to what our Lord has taught us in the Parable of the Talents,
it is almost certain, That, if we neglect or misuse it now, it shall not be
continued to us; for there our Savior plainly tells us, From him that has
not, shall be taken away even that which he has; that is, that Man that shall
not apply in the blessed Works of Holiness, and good Living, the Portion of
God's Grace this Day tendered to him, to Morrow he shall be left Graceless: And
then what certainty can there be of our Repentance, where there can be no
certainty of the Grace of God, without which, it is impossible we should Repent
at all, Repentance being the kindly Operation of his heavenly Grace, which
softens the Heart, and melts all our frowardness into contrition?

II. And thus I pass to the Second Thing propounded, and that is to show how
improper the times resolved on by delaying Men to Repent in, will be for the
Works of their Repentance:

We must either all resolve upon a present Repentance; (and oh! that any thing
I now speak may be able to effect such a blessed Resolution in us all) or else
we must fix upon such Seasons as these to Repent in: That is to say, either the
time of Sickness, the time of Old Age, or the time of Death. I shall therefore
distinctly examine each of these, and particularly show, how very improper any
one of them will be for the Performance of our Repentance.

1. Then; As for the time of Sickness, can this be a proper time to begin
Repentance, when one of the most comfortable Effects of a sincere Repentance,
indeed, the only Comfort it can afford us in this Life, is to refresh and
sweeten our Consciences upon our Bed of Sickness? Can Sickness be the proper
Season for Repentance, which requires a calm and sedate Soul, a free and
apprehensive Understanding, that may either occasion such heats as will
distract, such Fumes as may oppress, or those affrighting Apprehensions, which
may both confound our Senses and terrify the most judicious Faculties of our
Souls? Shall we then be best fitted to make our Peace with God, when we may be
all Agony and Distraction? when all the Faculties of our Souls and Bodies are
in Confusion and Disorder? Let us but reflect with our selves, how every little
Indisposition of Body indisposes our Souls; also, how often we have excused to
our own Consciences (if we have lived with any Conscience of doing our Duty to
God) the Omission of our Prayers and other religious Exercises, upon this very
Plea of the Illness of our Bodies; and if these ordinary Interruptions of our
Health do so far affect our Souls, as to divert us from the blessed Works of
Faith and Holiness, can we imagine, That a Sickness even unto Death, whose
Malignity lays hold on all our Powers, whose Rage or Stupefaction stops or
employs all the Faculties within us, shall prepare or dispose our Hearts with
more than ordinary Inclinations for the Works of Righteousness? Certainly we
must all think Repentance an easy Task indeed, if we can judge our selves
strong enough for that, when we shall be disabled for every thing besides.
Whether we shall have a time to be sick in, I mean, such a Space of time as may
be proportionable to the Occasions of our Transgressions, is such an
Uncertainty which no mortal Man can assure himself of: But put the Case we
might presume upon a fit of Sickness (which I must confess to be the very
Subject of the Argument I am speaking to,) yet after all, methinks it must be a
most unaccountable Piece of Discretion in any Man, to cherish one mortal
Disease; nay, such a Foulness in the Soul as is Impenitence, which tends to
Death and everlasting Destruction: To deferr I say, and put off its timely Cure
till another fatal Distemper shall seize, and so the more desperately endanger
him: Were there no other Considerations to convince us in this Partilar, yet in
this one, we may discover how improper Sickness must be, to be fixed upon for
the Performance of our Repentance; namely, because no Man can be certain what
Operations Sickness may effect in him, whether its Anguish may not harden, or
its Gentleness prevent his holy Resolutions to Repent. We have daily Instances
of such Distempers, which deprive Men of their Hopes and Wits together, and of
others too, whose indiscernable Decays too often lull them in Impenitence. And
now can Sickness be a proper Season for Repentance, which contains our Sorrows
for our past Irregularities, which is our actual returning into the Paths of
Health and Wisdom, when Sickness, many times, puts us but still more besides
our selves? Can that be the proper time to qualify our Griefs for Sin, which
has so many Uneasinesses, and Distractions of its own?

And thus I pass to the Second time, in which many purpose to Repent, and that
is the time of old Age: Where I shall not stand now to consider the
improbability, whether One in Five hundred of those who fix upon this time,
ever live to be old; nor yet that Observation which daily Experience seems but
too constantly to instruct us in; namely, That a vicious, and impenitent Youth,
too frequently concludes in a hardened, and an unrelenting old Age; but I shall
now suppose, That by the good Providence of God, we may all here live to be
old; and so reason upon this Supposition. Now then, Shall old Age be proper for
this Work? What? Shall that be mastered with seeble Joints, and trembling
Knees, which has so long been victorious over all our strongest Resolutions?
Shall the Dregs, and refuse of Life, be the properest Sacrifice for our God?
Shall we then be best qualified to set forth the Greatness of his Mercies, when
all those excellent Endowments, which God has blessed us with, on purpose that
we might glorify his Heavenly Majesty, have been consumed on Sin, and are worn
out in the Works of Unrighteousness? Shall that be our fit time, for the Fear
of God which is the beginning of Wisdom, when we are reduced to the Weakness of
Childhood? Can that be the fittest Season for us to take the Review of our
Lives past, when we have lost our Memories? that a time to look back, when we
shall scarce be able to see before us? In a word, Shall that be a fit time, for
a free, voluntary, and conscientious forsaking of Sin (wherein true Repentance
does consist) when Sin it self will forsake us? It Is wonderful to observe, how
Men act contrary to those received Principles of Wisdom which directs them in
other Matters, in this greater Business of their Salvation; if we examine them
as to their Concerns relating to this World, this Excuse they make for their
present Cares, Cravings, and immoderate pursuit after the Things of this World;
is this, To keep, and refresh them when they shall be unfit for Cares, to make
old Age happy, and easy. How insatiable are they in securing the greatest
Stores against that time, when the least may satisfy? But as for those
Heavenly Treasures which will be the more needful the nigher we approach the
Grave, they think it time enough to be seeking these, when they should actually
enjoy them. They think there is no Necessity to be careful for these which are
most necessary, till by the inveterate habits of their Vices, they are indeed
rendered unfit for all the watchful Cares of true Devotion: What a
Contradiction is here? That Men should pretend they would have their old Age
happy, and yet load it with all the Pains, and bitter Labors of Repentance?
Can old Age thus be happy, when all this may be too little; when we may cry and
not be heard, when we may weep, and languish, and Repent, and yet, like Esau,
find none to Comfort, none to restore the Blessing? When that God, whom now in
the Beauties of our Youth, and Perfection of our Age, we have contemned, shall
in his Wisdom and Justice contemn our craziness? Wou'd'st thou be happy when
thou art old? thou must then needs be Godly now thou art young: That which
often disturbed the Soul of David, was the sense of his Sins; though he lived in
an habitual Repentance, yet we find this frequently wounded him in the midst of
his Enjoyments. Let me, therefore, earnestly beseech ye that are young, or in
the Strength of your Years, to Remember your Creator now in these Days of Youth
and Strength: And that, as for many others, so especially upon these two
Considerations: First, Because, If ye will not Serve God now, whilst ye are fit
for the Services of the World, ye can expect no Blessings from God then, when
ye shall be past Transgressings. Secondly, Because, If ye will not Serve God
now, ye will not be Able to Serve him hereafter, there being no Service at all,
in that, it will be the effect of Impotency, and Necessity; it being no Service
at all to God, that thou will abstain from Sinning, when the vicious humor has
been fulfilled before, and thy Natural Decays render thee unfit for Sinning.
Consider it is now, in these Days of Youth and Strength, that Temptations flow
about thee; It Is now, that Ambition pricks, and the World besets thee with
Enchantments; It Is now, that the unruliness of thy Blood, and the evil
propensities of thy Flesh, prompt thee to Rebellion against thy God; and
therefore it must be now that is the properest Season for all the holy Actions
of true Devotion: If thou cast off the care of thy Soul now, think not that God
will take it up; think not that He will accept thy refuse, much less, in
Wisdom, or Religion can thou imagine, that notwithstanding thy present
contempt of so precious a Treasure, he will at last Exalt and Glorify thee.
Old Age, should God bless us with it, will be the beginning of our Harvest; the
time when we shall in some Measure, reap the blessed Fruits of a present Piety,
and Repentance; and therefore very improper to be appointed by us for the time
of Seed, i. e. for the time of beginning of our Repenting.

And thus I am brought to speak to the third Time resolved on by too many Men,
for the Work of their Repentance; which, though it be a Time which all must
come to, yet certainly, a later Hour they cannot think on, for it is the Hour of
Death. Now is not this a monstrous Resolution? I will begin then to live
righteously, when I may conclude with my self I shall live no longer: I will
there fix the Assurance of my Eternal Happiness, where I am taught, will end
all the Opportunities of making sure my future Happiness. Will thou, say
thou, Repent at Death? Will thou indeed, trust all to one Moment? then give me
Leave to represent unto thee, how desperately the State of thy Salvation
stands; thou will Repent.

Alas! It will not be in thy Power to Repent at Pleasure; it is neither he that
wills, nor that Man that now resolves, but of the Grace of God that we
Repent at all: And will it not be just in God, whom thou have so contentedly
forgot thy whole Life, either to forget thee at thy Death, or by withdrawing
his Grace, leave thee to be forgotten by thy self? Again, Why will thou deferr
till Death? Do thou think the time of this Life, which is given us on purpose
that herein we may make our Calling and Election sure, too early for us to be
working out of our Salvation? Will not Consolations be more seasonable in the
Hour of Death, than Sorrows and Remorse? Will it not be more comfortable to
reflect on a sincere Repentance past, than to depend upon such a sudden
Repentance, which may either not come, or if it do, have no Sincerity at all in
it; none I am sure, which any wicked Man that has not before, either actually
set upon a good, or reflected upon an evil Course, can possibly be assured of?
And my Reason is, because our Repentance may be as sick and weakly as our
Bodies; we may easily mistake the Weariness of our Limbs, for the Uneasiness of
our Souls; our present Impotency and want of Strength to Sin, for a real
Aversion to Sin; nay, for the very Reformation of our sinful Inclinations;
therefore, I shall conclude this Particular with the Opinion of St. Augustine,
who being asked his Thoughts of those who did then what too many now do, deferr
their Repentance to the last Moment, answers his Friend who put the Question to
him, in these Words, I avouch not that he can be saved, nor positively that he
shall be condemned; but if thou would be saved, O Friend! let me advise thee,
be thou sure to Repent now thou art well.

III. And thus I come to the last General Head of my Discourse, to show how
every Pretense or Excuse which Men may now make, in Favor of their Delays,
must, if seriously considered, even in Wisdom, oblige them to hasten their
Repentance.

One of the Excuses, with which some Men countenance their Delays, is this,
That upon the Examination of their own Ways, they find their Sins are yet but
small, and such as they may easily cast off at Pleasure: But give me Leave to
reason against these Deluders of their own Souls. Are thy Sins small? Then why
will thou deferr, since the Work of thy Repentance will be the lighter? May
they easily be cast off? Then why wilt not thou immediately part with them,
since the least Grain is infectious, and every wilful Detainment tends unto
Death? Again, consider, though they may be light now, yet the shortest
Continuance will make them heavier; their Guilt increases every Moment, and the
longer they possess thy Soul, the more violently will they keep Possession.
Another Excuse is, the contrary to this, namely, the Greatness of our Sins, and
the mighty Difficulties in Repentance: But may we not consider here, That
though the Work be great and difficult indeed, yet still it is necessary; and
again, That the longer we deferr, the more difficult we shall find the Task:
For, does the Burden of thy Sins feel heavy to Day, and can thou think to
Morrow's Weight will make it lighter? Is it not in this very Case of our
Transgressions, that we may apply that of the Holy Spirit, sufficient to the
Day is the Evil thereof; and then, must not every Day add to thy Tale, and so
the Portion of thy Repentance increase daily? But further, if it be really so
hard and difficult to subdue them now, whilst thou art in full Strength and
Vigor; and as thou may fancy, have length of Days before thee, can thou
imagine, that they will the easilier be removed under the Faintings of
Sickness, Decays, and Impotencies of Age, or the surprising Pangs of Death?
Do thou now fear their Greatness, and will thou not, by thy Repentance,
endeavor to prevent their growing greater; or can thou believe, that whilst
thou sinnest on, thy Account will the easier be made up at last? Is not such a
Conclusion as this, much more rational; that Work which is so hard and
difficult to Day, may, if we do not immediately set about it, indeed grow
invincible to Morrow? Another Pretense still, with which Men seem to satisfy
themselves under their Delays, is, The necessary Employments of Life, the
indispensible Occasions of this World: These, say they, often divert us from
the Work of Holiness; these are those things which ever interrupt us in our
Attempts this Way. But to answer this, no doubt, whilst we are in this Life,
subject to those Decays and Infirmities which require a Supply of the things of
this World for our Support, we must be allowed so much of them as is necessary
for our Replenishment; and consequently, so much time as is convenient for the
Obtainment of them: Yet after all, this World certainly is not the Christian's
Business, nor our time in it so much our own, that we may employ it upon the
World as we please: No, every Day of our Lives is so much God's, that in no
part of any Day, we may forget him; but then in some part of every Day, we must
needs forget all things besides him: The necessary Occasions of the World we
may give Room to, but then we must remember withal, that we ought not to make
more Necessaries than God has appointed: For Instance, we must not shorten the
Hours of our Devotion, to gain Time to spend upon our Lusts; or to secure to
our selves Opportunities, wherein to enrich our Stores with Superfluities;
whatever we may think of it, whilst we are in our eager pursuits after this
World, we shall all certainly find at the last, that God will never accept of
such an Account of our time from us, as this, spent upon my Pleasures, upon the
occasions of my Ambition, in the prosecution of my excessive Gettings, Ten,
Twenty, perhaps Thirty Years: these (God knows) are too often the indispensible
Occasions which prevent us in our Holy Duties: They are these Excesses in our
Labors, these superfluous engagements of our Pride (whereof we ought all
seriously to Repent) which chiefly hinder us, in the business of our
Repentance. Let us consider, That every Day, nay, every Moment, consumes
somewhat of the Thread of Life; and that of all Business, and Employments, none
is more requisite, than our making Peace with God; of all Necessaries, this one
thing is most necessary in us Christians, to mortify our Affections which are
upon the Earth, to cleanse our Hands, and purify our doubt Minds; to lay up
Stores in Heaven, and be every Day in the Works of Faith, Charity, and
Obedience; securing and improving our Interest in the Kingdom of the Father,
through our Lord Jesus Christ; the Sum and Substance of whose Gospel is this,
If we do now, whilst he gives us time for it, turn unto God in a true Faith,
and with a hearty Repentance, we shall at his Coming, be made Partakers of his
Eternal Kingdom, where there shall be no time to terminate our Enjoyments of
him. To which Blessed State, vouchsafe, O blessed Father, to bring us all,
through the Merits of Christ Jesus thy Son, to whom with thee, and the Holy
Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
Mr. Bramston's Sermon, of the Necessity of a Present Repentance, Preached
before the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen at Guild Hall Chapel, on March
10th. 1694/5.

Printed for William Keblewhite at the Swan in St. Paul 's Churchyard.


