A Course of Lectures UPON THE CHURCH CATECHISM IN Four VOLUMES.

VOL. I.

Upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers.

By a Divine of the Church of England.

OXFORD: Printed by Leonard Litchfield, Printer to the University, for the
AUTHOR, 1696.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD WILLIAM, LORD BISHOP of Coventry and
Litchfield, Lord Almoner to the KING.
My Lord,
HAving your Lordship's Commands for the Publication of these following
Discourses, I have reason to hope my Readers will prove candid and favorable
in their Censures, since they cannot but pay the greatest Deference to the
Judgment of a Prelate, whom all the Learned, both at home and abroad, do
unanimously rank amongst the greatest Divines, that this, or former Ages can
glory in. But that I may not too much lessen that Esteem, which the judicious
part of Mankind, at least, do justly bear to your Lordship, as the nicest Judge
in Things of this Nature, by proclaiming to the World that Encouragement you
have given to a Work, which no doubt will be found very defective: I am apt to
believe, and am forward to own it, that it might be more your Approbation of
the Design, than the Goodness of the Performance that has made your Lordship so
exceedingly kind to it, and its Author. And indeed if ever there were a
necessity of attempting any thing to promote Catechetical Instruction, there is
now too sad an Occasion for it.

Some Years since we thought it sufficiently hard upon us, that we were put to
the trouble of defending a Church, so excellently Constituted as ours is, by
susteining those slight Skimishes made only upon its Outworks; namely, against
its Rites and Ceremonies (Solemnities I would rather call 'em) so wisely
ordered for the more grave and solemn Administration of Divine Worship, and for
the better Edification of the Souls of Men. But alas the Enemy has now entered
through our Breaches into the very heart of our City (as St. Austin calls the
Church of God.) And as if there were an Universal Conspiracy made at this time
against it, All the Grand and Fundamental Articles, both of Natural and
Revealed Religion, are now either most furiously stormed by Atheists, Deists,
and Socinians on the one hand, or secretly and dangerously undermined by
Enthusiasts and Antinomians on the other. And if the next Generation should
grow worse in its Principles and Morals than the present, what Vengeance from
Heaven, even to the removing of our Candlestick, may we not fear? But
especially, what Indignation from God may not we of the Clergy dread, should we
suffer the Youth of our Nation to go abroad into the World, without having
first given 'em those Religious Impressions by good Principles, as will guard
'em from the danger thereof; and, especially, without having first prepossessed
the Minds of such, with a deep Tincture of Divine Knowledge, as are likely to
be the Leading Men in their Countries; and yet by a fatal mistake in Education,
are generally brought up in those Vndisciplin'd Societies, amongst whom the
Oracles of false and pretended Reason are more universally read, and more
highly applauded, than the Lively Oracles of Divine Revelation.

I know how deeply sensible your Lordship is of the growing Infidelity and
Heterodoxy of this Age; and how much it is your Opinion, that a constant Course
of Catechizing our Youth in the Fundamental Principles of Christianity, is the
only means that can effectually obviate and Cure those Great and prevailing
Evils. And if what I have here offered to the Public, may be at all
serviceable to any of my Brethren, in affording some useful Materials for their
own Composures of this kind, and in assisting any of 'em in their Method, I
have my End, and shall therein in sone measure answer, I presume, your
Lordship's Design; who, out of a pious Zeal to have this Work of Catechizing
universally set forwards by every Individual Minister in your Diocese, would
have the way so plained, that we might all proceed therein without interruption.

And sure where the Authoritative Injunctions of so great a Father and Governor
of our Church, are joined with such an unparalleled Industry in the discharge
of all the most Important and difficult Duties of the Episcopal Care, it is
impossible for us, who are under the Influence of your Power and Example, to be
Remiss in that which is the very principal part of Ministerial Instruction
incumbent upon us. For if we no sooner saw your Lordship entering upon that
Diocese, to which you were Translated so Happily to us (though so
disadvantageously to your own Fortunes) but we saw you apply your self with the
utmost Vigor to the Business of it, in Visiting not only your Clergy, but
Cathedral, Schools, and Hospitals. If in your Lordship's primary Visitation we
heard such a Learned Scriptural Proof of the JUS DIVINUM of the THREE DISTINCT
ORDERS, (and what Evidence of that Nature is not to be expected from one so
Mighty in the Holy Scriptures) as cannot but silence all Adversaries, and all
the Learned of our Nation would be glad to see made public: If we also saw at
the same time that Venerable Ordinance of Confirmation (even amongst those vast
Crowds that came to it, and with so great a Fatigue to your self) administered
with a particular Application of the stipulatory part, to every Individual
Person, that was duly attested to be sufficiently Qualified; and with that
Order, Gravity, and Solemnity, which raised in all, who were present, that
Value for it, which is due to it: If against every EMBER we see those wise
Precautions used, with Reference to the Candidates for Holy Orders, as would
effectually prevent the admission of Persons unworthy, upon the account of any
Immorality, or will wholly lay the Guilt at the Doors of those who are backward
to Inform their Church-Governors of the Miscarriages they know, in order to
their Correction and Remedy; and yet are most apt to raise their Outcries
against the Scandals of the Clergy: And if also in the Probation of those who
are permitted to stand Candidates, there is constantly such a Treasury of
Sacred Learning opened to 'em in your Explications of Holy Writ, as renders
those Examinations one of the most learned and useful Theological Exercises
that this Age does know; and is alone sufficient to render those in a good
measure Qualified with Scriptural Knowledge, who come not thereto altogether
prepared beforehand. And indeed, if agreeably to your Lordship's so useful
Examinations, those who have the Happiness to be conversant with you in your
Studies, do always see you searching the Scriptures, and do scarcely ever find
you without the Holy Bible before you; (though one would think the sacred Page
need be no more turned over by one, who seems to have it wholly by heart
already, both in our own and all the Learned Languages.) If farther yet we have
seen your Lordship, by a Method equally worthy to be admired and imitated, in
so short time, to have got such an exact Knowledge of a numerous Clergy, that
from the chiefest Rector to the meanest Curate, our Abilities, Lives, and
Ministerial Performances, seem not to be better known to our nearest
Neighbors, than to your self; and our Miscarriages and Neglects of Duty in the
remotest part of your Diocese, may almost as soon escape the Reproaches of our
own Consciences, as your Lordship's Notice and Animadversion: If in a word such
is your Lordship's Vigilance through all the Parts of a very large Diocese, as
is alone sufficient to confute those Voluminous Libels which were wrote some
Years since against DIOCESAN EPISCOPACY, as if an exact Discipline were not
practicable therein: If I say, such an Authority will not awe us, nor such an
Example of Pastoral Care will not animate us to discharge, as all the other, so
especially such an indispensably necessary a part of our Ministerial Function
as Catechizing (particularly at this Juncture) undoubtedly is, this were enough
to provoke Heaven to snatch from us the vast Benefit of such a Paternal
Government: Which Blessing that God may however continue to this Church, as it
is heartily desired by all that know your Lordship, (and are good enough
themselves justly to value the two best Things in the World, an unparalleled
Degree of Learning joined with an equal measure of the most ardent Piety) so
particularly it is the most earnest and devout Prayers to God, of

My LORD, Your Lordship's Most Obliged Most Obedient, and Most Dutiful Son and
Servant T. B.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HAving a Design, if God permit, and if I shall find this present performance
to be Heartily received, to publish a Discourse upon the Nature and Extent of
Ministerial, more particularly of Catechetical Instruction, which in the Nature
of it, I think, would be the most proper Preface to this Work; but is a Porch
too large to be prefixed to one single Wing of the Building; I shall only at
present Advertise my Reader of two Particulars, relating to this First Volume
of my Lectures; namely,

1. Whereas I proposed, Lecture the Fourth, in the Division of the
Subject Matter contained in these Preliminary Questions and Answers, to treat
both upon Divine Grace and of Prayer, as they are the means to enable us to
perform our part of the Covenant; and also to explain the Doctrine, and to
justify the Thing it self of Infant Baptism, or the admitting of Persons into
Covenant in the time of Infancy; as also the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers
therein, I was advised by some Learned Men to referr those four last Points,
and the Lectures upon 'em, rather to the latter end of the Catechism; the two
former to be treated upon, when I come to the Lord's Prayer, and the Question
which leads to it; the two latter when I shall come to the Doctrine of the
Sacraments, where my Discourses upon those Subjects will be founded upon
Questions and Answers more directly leading thereunto. And as to the Subject of
Renouncing the world, the Flesh, and the Devil, it was thought it might be of
good Use to enlarge upon that, there being nothing of vaster Concernment,
especially to Youth, than a plain and practical discovery of those various
Temptations which will arise from all these our Spiritual Adversaries, and are
likely to assault them above others. And because this Condition in our Covenant
with God, of Renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, does not again
recurr in any part of the Catechism to be more particularly handled, as the
others of Faith and Obedience do; for these Reasons it is, that my Exposition
of that Point has run out into a length so much improportionable to the rest,
insomuch that that part takes up half the Book.

2. That which in the next place I am to account for, is the 23d. Lecture;
which is an Epitome of a Book, styled the Measures of Christian Obedience, a
Work, I presume, both well-known and esteemed. That Reverend Author, had, in my
Opinion, given so full a state of the Condition of our Coveeant, viz.
Evangelical Obedience, that I thought I should do an Injury to my Catechumen,
should I pass it by, and give him a worse, and more imperfect one of my own.
Whether it would have been easier to me to contract that Discourse, than to
make a new state of the Point, such as I might call my own, I cannot readily
guess; but if it was, I hope some allowance will be given for taking one such
Rest as this may appear to be, since in the whole Scheme of Doctrine upon these
Preliminary Questions and Answers, I have been forced to tread in something an
unbeaten Path.

And now with my earnest Prayers to God, that he would give his Blessing to
what is herein no otherwise than honestly designed, I shall only at present
entreat the candid Reader, to put a favorable Construction upon what has been
here offered him, by one who is too sensible of his own Insufficiencies, to be
pertinacious in maintaining any thing against the sense of his Superiors; but
especially who is Religiously careful to advance nothing contrary to the
Doctrine of our Church: Which that I might not do, I have, and shall all along
endeavor to take in as much as I can, both of Matter and Expression from its
Established Forms and Offices.

ERRATA.
Page 19. l. 1. read Tenets. p. 28. l. 22. after and add shall. p. 40. l. 21.
r. Supreme. l. 49. after Represented add as. p. 69. l. 40, r. subdue. p. 79. l.
34. after not dele only. p. 82. l. 18. f. washing r. trashing. p. 83. l. 1. f.
certainly r. Certainty. p. 88. l. 25. f. worshipped r. worship. p. 124. l. 3.
aft. according r. to. p. 146. l. 51. f. feel r. feet. p. 155. l. 16. aft. which
r. if. p. 157. l. 14. f. banished r. debauched. p. 159. l. 48. aft. therewith a
full Period. l. 49. ends with a; p. 164. in the Margin r. Augus. p. 178. l. 20.
f. is r. are. p. 181. l. 4. aft. like r. concerning. p. 182. l. 28. f. Bards r.
Bawds. p. 183. l. 33. aft. Old r. or. p. 184. l. 30. aft. are r. there of our.
p. 186. l. 52. aft. mind r. it. p. 193. l. 9. dele too. p. 206. l. 27. aft.
failures r. are. l. 41. aft. intimating, f. of r. that. p. 211. l. 47 aft. be.
r. the. p. 218. l. 33. aft. Age. f. on. r. in. p. 225. l. 28. aft. Flesh r. 3.
What by ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. p. 240. l. 46. f. weary. r. wary. p.
159. l. 17. aft. and, f. that r. first. p. 262, l. 8. aft. such, f. which r.
as. p. 27 l. 25. f. relish r. wish. p. 276. l. 3. aft. First r. As to. p. 277.
l. 2. aft. of r. a. l. 11. f. appear r. appears. p. 278. l. 36. aft. etc. dele
and. p. 285 l. 47. aft. that. f. the r. if. p. 286. l. 42. f. Men's r. Men. l.
47. f. gropling r. groping. p. 290. l. 52. aft. God r. By. p. 294. l. 12. f.
their 1. our. p. 303. f. brak r. break.

A CATECHISM; That is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every Person,
before he be brought to be confirmed by the Bishop.
Quest. WHat is your Name?

Answ. N. or M.

Quest. Who gave you this Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, the Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my Name. First, That I should
renounce the Devil, and all his works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
world, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's
holy will and commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and do as they have
promised for thee?

Answ. Yes verily; and by God's help, so I will. And I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.

THE First Lecture. A Catechism, that is to say, an Instruction to be Learned
of every Person, before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
THIS is the Title of your Catechism, which you are now learning; and before I
proceed to discourse on the Catechism it self, I thought it proper, from these
Words, to define what a Catechism means, and to let you know the Benefit and
Use of Catechizing.

As for the Word (...), to Catechize, The Meaning of the Word Catechize.
it is often met with in the Holy Scriptures, particularly Luke 1.4. where it
is taken in the selfsame sense we now use it, wherein it does import a more
General Instruction in those Christian Truths, which are afterward to be more
particularly and distinctly learnt by us; for so St. Luke Dedicating his Gospel
to Theophilus, tells him Chap. 1. ver. 3, 4. Sensus loci q. d. ut ea quae olim
Catechumenus viva voce didicisti nunc before accertius cognoscas. Eras. in Loc.
That it seemed good to him, having had perfect knowledge of all those things
from the very first, to write them in order to him, that he might know the
certainty, or have a more full and particular Understanding of those things
wherein he had been before Catechized, (for so it is in the very Letter of the
Greek) that is taught only in General to prepare him for Baptism.

Hesychius, a Learned Grammarian, does give the meaning of this word Catechize,
by another which signifies to Build; and this does intimate to us the Matter of
which a Catechism must consist, viz. Of the main and fundamental Points of
Religion, such as are fittest to build up a firm and unshaken Christian withal.

Lastly, It is derived from (...), which signifies an inculcating and sounding
often in the Ear of the Learner, the Principles to be imbibed and fixed in his
Mind and Memory. So the Heathens, and so the Christians used the Word.

And this may suffice for the Importance of the Word, which I thought might not
be improper to Note, because it gives so much Light into the Meaning of the
Thing, and the Nature of a Catechism, which I shall therefore Define as
follows, taking the Title now read, with some Explanatory Additions, for the
Text upon which I shall Comment.

A Catechism is a general Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the
Christian Religion, The Definition of a Catechism.
necessary to be Learnt of every Person in order to his Confirmation; or the
solemn Renewing of his Baptismal Vow and Covenant with God, and the receiving
Benefit by the Bishop's Blessing, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands. In which
Definition you are told,

First, As to the Matter of which a Catechism is to consist: It is a General
Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, As to the Persons to be so Instructed: It is necessary to be Learnt
of every Person.

Thirdly, As to the End of a Catechism: It is necessary to be Learnt of every
Person in order to his Confirmation, or the solemn Renewing of his Baptismal
Covenant and Vow before the Bishop, and the receiving Benefit by the Bishop's
Blessing, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands. Of all which Particulars I shall
discourse to you in their Order.

And First, As to the Matter of which a Catechism is to consist: It is a
General Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion.

^tian Re^, What?
Christian Religion is out of Christian Principles to live an Holy, Good Life;
and together therewith to depend upon the Mediation of Christ with the Father
for us, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to our
Justification.

I. Moral Life an ^ial part ^hristia^
That Morality, or a good Life, is a necessary and essential Part of
Christianity, is expressly affirmed by St. James, 1.27. where he tells us, That
Pure Religion and undefiled, before God and the Father (or such as God the
Father will accept) is this, to visit the Fatherless and Widows in their
afflictions, and to keep one self unspotted from the world. Many seem to place
it in little less than Morality; but it is the Life and Soul of all Religion,
as in respect of God, to Love, Honor, and to Obey him; to Trust in him, and to
Resign one self to him; to Worship him, and to be Devoutly given: So in respect
of our Neighbor, to be Just and Charitable; and particularly, and especially
to Relieve those that are in Distress: And Lastly, as to our selves, to govern
our Affections, to subdue our Passions, to mortify our Lusts, and to moderate
our Desires: In a word, To keep the Heart and Life clean from the Defilements
of Sin. In this, I say, consists One main Part of Religion, in abstaining from
all Sin and Wickedness, and in a constant and steady Performance of all the
Parts of Virtue and Holiness.

This, I am sure, is a main Part of the Christian Religion, the Religion that
our Savior came to Plant amongst Men, for this St. Paul assures us, Tit. 2.11,
12, 13, 14. The Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men has appeared,
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed Hope, and
the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works. He appeared teaching us to
deny all Ungodliness; and he gave himself for us to redeem us from all
Iniquity. Hitherto indeed tended all he said, all he did, and all he suffered.
This was the Design of his excellent Sermons and Discourses, of his most
admirable Example and Life, and of his Death and Sufferings, to Root out of the
Lives of Men whatsoever is Sinful and Wicked, and to Implant in its stead all
the Parts of Virtue and Goodness.

But Secondly, It is not enough to make a Man a good Christian, II. To Act
Virtuously upon Christian Principles.
that he live a strict and unblamable Life; but it is moreover necessary to
render him such, that he act Virtuously upon Christian Principles: Both indeed
are necessary to the constituting a Man a true Christian. The most regular Life
that can be, except it be Acted upon Christian Principles, is but mere Morality
at the best; as the most Orthodox Belief that is, if it be Barren in good
Works, is but a dead Faith. Thus Temperance may be observed because of our
Health, and plain and punctual Dealing by the Men of Trade, because of their
Interest. Men may Fast and Pray out of Hypocrisy, and to appear Good to others;
and may distribute large Alms to gain the Applause of Men, as you may see Mat.
6.2, 5. And indeed considering that Godliness is profitable for all things,
having the promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come, 1 Timothy 4.8. And since of the Christian Religion it may be said, that Her
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace; Men may lead very
blameless Lives in all respects, because of the Advantage and Tranquillity of
Mind, that arises merely from a regular and orderly Conversation: But all this
will be accounted by God to fall far short of the Christian Religion, and will
entitle the Man to no Reward in Heaven, that acts upon no better Reasons nor
Motives than these: Verily I say unto you they have their reward, says our
Savior, Mat. 2.6.

Nay, He that lives an orderly, good, moral Life upon the Belief only that
there is a God, that his Providence and Care is extended over us, that our
Souls shall never Dye, but are capable of, and shall receive Rewards or
Punishments in another world, can be only said to be so far Religious, as the
good Moral Heathens were, who Believed and Acted upon the Principles of Natural
Religion only; and who having no other Law did by Nature the things contained
in the Law, Romans 2.14. But to constitute a Man truly Religious, and to
denominate his Religion the Christian Religion, it is farther necessary, that
he moreover Act upon Christian Principles, such as not the Light of Nature
only, but the Gospel of our Savior does reveal unto us, for in the day when he
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, it will be, St. Paul tells us,
according to his Gospel, Romans 2.16. And so main a part in his Gospel were the
Principles of revealed Religion, that he told the Corinthians, he determined
not to know any thing amongst them save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified, 1 Cor.
2.2. that is, the Means and Methods of our Salvation by a Crucified Savior
(which can be known only by Revelation) he was resolved should be so much the
Subject of his Preaching amongst them, that they might almost conclude he
himself knew nothing else, and did not much care whether they did also. Thus
the Christian Religion you see, is out of Christian Principles to lead an holy,
good Life.

Nor Thirdly, III. Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, that our imperfect
Righteousness may be accepted, also necessary.
Is it enough to render the Religion of us Christians complete, that by the
force of good Christian Principles we lead good Lives; but to together
therewith, we must depend upon the Mediation of Christ with the Father for us,
that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to our
Justification. For alas! the best of us all must consider this, that when we
have done all that is commanded us, we are but unprofitable servants, Luke
17.10. But alas! the best of us all do exceedingly fail in doing all that is
commanded us; for we have all sinned, and come short of the glory, or
Approbation of God, Romans 3.23. And therefore, as there is One Mediator between
God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. So we are strictly commanded
Col. 3.17. that whatsoever we do in word or in deed, we should do all in the
Name of the Lord Jesus. And particularly as to that so considerable part of
Religion, Prayer, it is ordained, we are told Joh. 15.16. That whatsoever we
shall ask of the Father in his Name he will give it us: And also as to that
other great Duty of Christian Worship, Thanksgiving, we are solemnly enjoined
Ephesians. 5.17.20. As we will show our selves not to be unwise, but understanding
what the Will of the Lord is, to give thanks always for all things unto God the
Father, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ: And In him we have boldness and
access with confidence by the Faith of him Ephesians. 3.12. The Meaning of which, and
innumerable other places, that might be produced to this purpose, is this, That
considering our own Vileness and Unworthiness, by reason of our Sins, we should
ground all our Hopes and Expectations of Favor and Acceptance, and Reward,
solely upon Christ: That we should offer all our Deeds to God, as Sacrifices
and Services unworthy of Acceptance in themselves, and as proceeding from us,
but pleasing and acceptable to God, only for his sake.

Such De^ndance the ^istinguish^g Character (...) a true ^hristian.
And now this I take to be the grand distinguishing Character of Christianity,
which ought therefore never to be omitted, when we pretend to give a full
Account thereof. As to a good Moral Life, some Pagans did arrive to great
degrees in Virtue (such as I wish may not rise in Judgment against us
Christians now adays:) And as for their Acting this upon good Principles, I
can hardly imagine, that those who had such noble and worthy Thoughts of God,
and of their own Souls, and who placed their Happiness in Purity and
Uprightness, were so much wanting in that Ingredient also of Virtue, viz. The
Acting it upon good Principles, as some do think. They seem to me only to have
wanted the Knowledge and Belief of some more and better Principles which we do
enjoy, to render their Virtue complete in that respect also. But that the best
of our Performances are so imperfect, that it was thought requisite in the
Divine Wisdom, that the Son of God should become a Sacrifice to expiate their
Guilt, and a Mediator with his Father to obtain their Acceptance, is what the
proud Hearts of natural Men never thought of, and no Religion but the Christian
ever taught: But on the contrary, when they had done well, they did proudly
overvalue it, and did arrogantly challenge the Reward, not as of Grace, but of
Debt.

Dependence ^^on Christ ^ecessary to ^ake down ^n Arrogant ^onceit of ^ur own
^ighteous^ess, a Tem^er of Mind ^ost displea^^ng to God.
And therefore to take down this proud and arrogant Presumption in us, so
natural to Man, and so dishonorable to God, together with his Design of making
us Holy, it was withal God's Intent by such a Dispensation of his Mercies, as
is given us in the Gospel, to create in us such a Reliance and Dependence upon
Christ for Salvation, as to expect it, not on the account of our own holy
Performance, but in the Virtue of his Mediation with the Father for us; for so
it is written 1 Cor. 1.29, 30, 31. That to the end that no flesh may glory in
God's presence, Jesus Christ is by him made to us Wisdom, and Righteousness,
and Sanctification, and Redemption, that so he that glories, might glory in
the Lord. And indeed it does exceedingly tend to the praise and glory of his
Grace, that he has made us accepted in the Beloved, as it is said in Ephesians. 1.6.
This does eminently set forth the exceeding Luster of his Mercy toward us in
the Gospel, that our Imperfect, if sincere Obedience, shall be accepted through
the Mediation of Christ. It does utterly exclude Boasting, and all occasions of
proud Reflections on our Parts, as if so mean an Obedience as ours, could
deserve such infinite Rewards, as are made over to us in the Gospel; a Temper
of Mind, which as it is very apt to get Entertainment in our Souls, so ought of
all things to be suppressed within us. And thus I have given you a larger account
of the Nature of the Christian Religion, than otherwise I should have done,
that I might clear the way toward coming to the Knowledge of those Fundamental
Principles thereof; which I told you are the proper Matter of a Christian
Catechism.

And now answerably hereunto, The Nature of Fundamental Principles.
the fundamental Principles of our Religion must be such Doctrines, as being
well understood, and thoroughly believed, do most powerfully and forcibly
persuade and move Men to be thus Religious; as to tend to destroy the Power of
Sin, to mortify our Lusts, and all wicked Inclinations within us, to render us
pious and devout toward God, just and charitable and peaceable Neighbors, and
sober, chaste and orderly Livers in this World: And which shall withal create in
us such an humble Opinion of our own Unworthiness, that when we have done all
that we can, to deny our selves, and have proceeded never so far in our Zeal to
good Works, we shall nevertheless, confessing that we are but unprofitable
Servants, depend wholly on Christ's Merits and Mediation, and in the Virtue of
his Satisfaction and Intercession alone, expect Salvation.

And now such is the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, An Enumeration of
Fundamental Principles.
particularly that part of it, the Vow in Baptism, wherein all do solemnly
promise and vow Repentance, Faith and Obedience; engaging to renounce the
World, the Flesh and the Devil. Whosoever considers this, sees what Obligations
ly upon him to deny himself the sinful Pleasures of the World, I. The general
Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace.
and to govern his whole Life and Conversation according to God's Commandments.
And whoever again understands the Constitution of this Covenant, knows that it
was obtained for him by the Mediation of Christ, who is therefore Styled, The
Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12.24. and therefore that on his Mediation
he must depend for the having those infinite Blessings made good to him, which
are promised therein to his Obedience.

And such fundamental Principles also in a prime Sense are the Belief of all
the Articles of our Christian Faith, as the Belief of God, II. The Articles of
our Christian Faith.
and of his Providence, that he is our Creator, Governor, and will Reward
every Man according to his Works. The Belief that Jesus Christ came into the
World, Died and Suffered to Atone for its Sins, and Preached the Gospel to
Reform it. The Belief that he gives his Spirit to sanctify us, and that he will
hereafter come in Person to Judge us. In a word, The Belief of all the Articles
of our Christian Faith. These are indeed the true Principles of our Religion,
for these are all of them (as I shall hereafter show) so many very powerful
Motives to reform our Lives, to forsake our Sins, and to follow Holiness, as
that without which we shall never see God. And these do most of them, influence
us, as to a good Life, so, humbly to rely upon God's Mercies through Christ for
the acceptance of it.

III. ^e Laws of Ten Com^^dments.
And such also are the Laws of the Ten Commandments, which contain the great
Instances of our Duty to God, our Neighbor, and our Selves; and to which all
others may probably be reduced. These Ten Commandments may properly enough be
styled the Principles of Religion; for as the Root is the Principle, as it
were, out of which all the Branches Stem forth, so out of these Commandments do
all the Duties of a Christian grow forth, like so many Branches; so that
whosoever shall well study and digest these Ten Summary Commands, shall
scarcely fail of growing up to be a Good Christian.

IV. (...) Doctrine Prayer, (...) of the ^raments.
And if to these we add the Doctrine of Prayer, and of the Sacraments, which are
the necessary Means, and appointed us by God, of our procuring and conveying
unto us his Assistance, to enable us to mortify and forsake our Sins, and to
become Holy: I do not know any other Principles that are Fundamentally
necessary, either to the promoting of a Good Life here, or an Happy One
hereafter; at leastwise so far, as to be the Matter of Catechetical
Instruction, and the Buisiness of a Catechist to inform you of them.

And indeed as these Doctrines are every One of them necessary to be Known,
Believed, and Practiced by every Christian, that may have the Means of Knowing
them, and may be taught them, being no other than the Covenant of Grace it
self, or those particular Articles contained in it, and which are expressly
Enjoined upon us by the Word of God to be Believed and Practiced by us; so our
Church does account them the only Fundamental and Necessary Principles that are
to be the Matter of a Christian Catechism. There are, it must be confessed, many
other useful Truths contained in the Scriptures; and those, who having first
laid the Foundation in these already mentioned, would go on to Perfection,
should endeavor, by Reading the Bible and other good Books, and by Attending
to the Preaching of the Word, to gain the Knowledge of them: But a Catechism
ought not to be crowded with any thing more than what is purely Fundamental to
a Good Life here, Catechism ^ht not to crowded any thing ^e, than ^at is pure^
^undamen^ to a Good (...) here, and ^ppiness ^eafter.
and Happiness hereafter. And if other Churches have filled their Catechisms,
either with many Unscriptural Tenets, as the Church of Rome has hers, or with
any doubtful and nice Doctrines concerning God's Election and Reprobation, as
many Others have done theirs, they have no reason to brag of their Abundance.
It is the Glory of our Church that she Imposes no other Doctrines, as necessary
to be Learnt by her Children, than those already mentioned, which are plainly
declared in Scripture to be Fundamental and Necessary Principles, whereon we
may securely build a Good Life, and the certain Hopes of Eternal Happiness; and
which are so firm a Rock, that the Religion and Hopes of Happiness founded upon
it, will not easily be destroyed by the most violent and boistrous Temptations
that the World, the Flesh and the Devil, shall Assault it withal, thereby to
Ruin it.

Thus have I Adventured in as few Words, as the Difficulty of the Argument
would give me leave, to show you the Nature of Fundamental Principles, and to
declare to you what Doctrines are to be accounted such, so far at least, as
they are the Matter of Catechetical Instruction, and the Buisiness of a
Catechist to inform you of them.

I have done this Point when I have told you, That a Catechism is A General
Instruction only, in the Fundamental Principles of Christianity. A Catechism is
a General Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of Christianity.
As a Catechism ought not to be crowded with any thing more than what is purely
Fundamental to a Good Life here, and Happiness hereafter; so even those
Fundamental Truths it ought to deliver in as short and comprehensive a manner,
as possible; for a Catechism is an Instruction that must be fitted to all, even
the weakest Capacities, and therefore it ought to be such a Form of sound
Words, as all can retain: And the more explicit and enlarged Knowledge of
these things is to be sought for in the Expositions and Comments that are given
of them in Catechetical Discourses, of which Nature I design, by God's Grace,
to Present you with some, until I have gone through your Catechism.

In a word, and to conclude this First Point: Such were the Ancient, and
Apostolical Catechisms.
Such a General Instruction in the Fundamental and most Necessary Points of
Religion, as we have given you an account of, was the Matter of which the
Ancient Catechisms did mostly consist, even in the time of the Apostles, and
such is the Catechism you are now Learning.

As to the ancient Catechizing in the Apostles times, as it is plain from the
Example of Theophilus, Luke 1.4. that the New Converts received their first
Notions of Religion by Catechizing, as was before observed: So Romans 6.17. we
read of a Form of Doctrine that was delivered to them, which the best
Interpreters suppose to have been a Summary of Christian Doctrine, or Body of
Catechetical Points: And what those Points were, which they first taught them,
we have expressly laid down Heb. 6.1, 2. from whence it appears, that those
First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ were, for the most part, the very
same I have now mentioned; viz. The Doctrines of Repentance, Faith, and of the
Sacraments: They are also called there the Foundation, which being laid, the
Apostle tells them, he will go on to perfect them by other Teaching.

And such a general Instruction also is the Catechism you are now Learning, and
which I am at present about to Expound to you. And such is our Church Catechism.
You have therein indeed given you a Summary Doctrine of all the Fundamental
and Necessary Articles of Christianity. And the Seed of these Catechetical
Points, if they be but received into well-dispos'd Hearts, will in time, by
God's Grace, produce a plentiful Crop of saving Knowledge: So that I may very
safely Affirm it, That whosoever of you shall learn to understand thoroughly his
Church Catechism, shall be sufficiently instructed to Salvation; and whosoever
shall live according to those Principles therein taught, need no more to render
him a good Christian in this World, and an happy Saint in the World to come.

And so much for the First Point in my Description of a Catechism, viz. The
Matter of which a Catechism is to consist; that it is a General Instruction in
the Fundamental and Necessary Principles of the Christian Religion.

Secondly, The next, are the Persons that are to be Catechized, The Persons
that are to be Catechized, are every Person.
and in the Definition I have given of a Catechism, it is said to be An
Instruction necessary to be Learnt of every Person. It is very certain that
whoever would be skilful in any Art or Science whatsoever, he must endeavor
first to understand the Principles of it. This is every Day's Experience: He
that would be a good Grammarian, or Latin Scholar, must first learn to
understand his Grammar Rules; you know it is impossible to read at all before
you know your Letters, or to read well till you can spell or distinguish
between the Syllables. In like manner, He that would be a knowing, and withal a
stable Christian (as it is every Body's infinite Concern to be both) he must
make it his Care and Business to become well instructed in the Principles
(those which we call the fundamental Points) of the Christian Doctrine: That
the way to Perfection in the Christian, as well as other Doctrines, is to begin
with the Principles of it, appears from that of the Apostle, Heb. 6.1. Leaving
the principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go on to perfection. Hereby
you see, that his Method in Teaching, was first to begin with grounding in the
Principles of the Christian Religion, and then to proceed to higher things; and
the same Method the Apostle took in teaching of Religion, the same must the
Disciples be supposed to do in learning of it. If the Apostle began with
teaching of Principles, the Disciples must begin with the learning of them. And
the Wisdom of laying first a Foundation of good Principles, and building our
Religion upon them, and the Folly on the other side of not laying a good
Foundation of such, is sufficiently represented in that Parable of our Savior,
Mat. 7.24. The wise Man, he there tells us, Built his house upon a Rock, or a
Foundation of good Principles, and when the rain descended, and floods came,
and winds blew and beat upon that house, it fell not, for it was founded upon a
Rock. But the foolish man he built his house upon the Sand, upon none at all,
or a very sorry Foundation; and mark the Fate of that Man's Religion, when the
Floods came, and the Winds blew and beat upon that House, it fell, and great
was the fall of it. A Person well grounded in the Principles of Religion shall
be able to bear the Shock of the fiercest Temptations, But a Person of no
Principles shall not be able to withstand the least. The necessity (...) every
Per^ns being well ^ounded in ^eligious ^rinciples by ^atechetical ^struction.
This Parable does excellently well set forth the Necessity of being well
grounded in Religious Principles, which can only be done, I have showed you, by
learning of the Catechism.

I do not say that Persons should be always in their Catechism; but when they
have laid the Foundation there, so that they cannot only say, but understand
it, by having had it explained to them; my advice then with the Apostle to the
Heb. 6.1. is, That leaving the principles of the doctrine of Christ, they
proceed to perfection, and farther to improve their Knowledge in Divine Things:
But this I say, that every Christian must lay the Foundation of his Religion
there; and if this has not been yet done, it is better late than never.

^he Contempt ^ereof is the ^fect of Pride and the cause (...) Ignorance.
Those who think themselves too Wise already, or too Good to submit themselves
to so mean an Instruction, as they ignorantly esteem Catechizing to be, I can
never promise my self much Good from them. Such indeed are generally
Self-conceited enough of their own Skill and Knowledge; but it is scarcely to
be imagined that they should not remain very ignorant in all sober and
substantial Truth; nor can they but be subject to fall into the grossest
Heresies and Errors, being untaught in those Principles, which are the only
Foundations of all saving Knowledge and true Religion, and the Touchstone to
try false Opinions by.

True it is; The Seeds of Virtue and Principles of Religion can never be too
soon Sown in Children's Hearts.
Children are the Persons that we do now commonly Instruct this way, and it is
requisite that even Children should be so Instructed; for the Seeds of Virtue,
and Principles of Religion, can never be too soon sown in their Hearts, that,
if possible, Religion may have the first Possession of their Souls, which is a
great Advantage, before that evil Examples, and bad Customs have corrupted
them: But in regard, Children, though they learn the Words, can understand but
little of the Meaning; and the Principles of our Religion being, for the most
part, deep Mysteries, hard to be understood; the fittest Persons to receive an
Exposition of these Things, However a clear Understanding of Catechetical
Doctrines is attainable only by Persons grown up to some Years of Discretion.
must be Youth grown up to some Years of Discretion; for even these first
Principles, if we regard the more clear, distinct, and satisfying Knowledge of
them, and the more orderly Knowledge of their Method and Dependence one upon
another, and the Knowledge of their useful Consequences, are strong meat,
belonging to them who are of full Age, even those who, by reason of use, have
their Senses exercised to discern between Good and Evil, as the Apostle's
Expression is, Heb. 5.14.

The Matter without doubt of Catechetical Doctrines is fit to be applied to
Persons of any Age, that are as yet but Beginners in the School of Christ: And
therefore, as we find in Church History, not only the most Learned of the
Primitive Fathers, as Pantaenus, Clemens, Origin, did open Schools of
Catechizing, by which means several Countries within few Years received the
Gospel: It is not below Persons of any Age or Quality to lay the Foundation of
their Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction.
So we also find from the same Histories, that Persons of all Ages, and of all
Qualities, did submit themselves to be Instructed this way, till such time as
they were perfected in the Mysteries of Religion. We read of Emperors, that
have stood amongst the Catechumens, or Persons Catechized, and of some who have
been Advanced from being Catechumens to be Bishops, the Highest Degree in the
Church, as the other in the State. Nor is it designed by our Church for the
Instruction of Children only: But a Catechism is an Instruction necessary to be
learnt of every Person, indifferently, before he be brought to be Confirmed by
the Bishop, as appears by the Title and Description of your Catechism, on which
Words I am now discoursing, which brings me to speak to what End Catechizing is
designed.

Thirdly, The End of Catechizing to prepare for Confirmation.
And it is designed to prepare you to be Confirmed by the Bishop. Confirmation
is an open Profession from the Mouth of One formerly Baptized, and now come to
Years of Discretion, made before the Bishop and the Congregation of Christ's
Church, of Consenting to, and Ratifying that Vow made in Baptism by his
Godfathers and Godmothers in his behalf, with a solemn Promise, Confirmation,
What?
that he will Endeavor in his own Person, according as was Engaged for him, to
Renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil, to Believe in God, and to Obey
him. This on the part of the Person Confirmed: And then on the Bishop's part,
It consists in his solemn Prayers to God, to enable the Party, by the Grace of
his Holy Spirit, to do the same; and in his Episcopal and Fatherly Benediction,
or Blessing of him, together with his Laying on of Hands, after the Example of
the Holy Apostles, to certify him of God's Favor and gracious Goodness toward
him. This is the Doctrine of Laying on of Hands, or Confirmation, entire and
unmaim'd in either of its essential Parts, according as it is delivered in our
Church, and is ordered to be Performed, both by those who come to this Holy
Institution, and by those who are Entrusted with the Administration of it: And
a Rite it is both greatly Necessary, and of singular Benefit in the Church of
Christ.

^onfirmation ^cessary.
And First, It is greatly Necessary, if you consider it only, as that wherein
you do solemnly Ratify and Confirm your Covenant with God; for if when you come
to Years of Understanding, you refuse, or wilfully neglect to appear before the
Chief Minister of Christ, I. ^s a solemn ^atification the Cove^nt with ^od.
the Bishop, there solemnly to declare and profess, That you will stand to that
Covenant, your Sureties in your Infancy did make with God for you; you may be
reasonably deemed to have Renounced the Covenant of Grace, and to have Repented
it was ever made in your behalf; to have Renounced that Blessed Covenant, I
say, and all claim to the precious Promises and Privileges thereof, which puts
you above the Condition of Infidels and Heathens, which are without Christ, and
strangers from the Covenants and Promise, having no hope, and without God in
the world, which the Apostle mentions, as a most forlorn and desperate
Condition, Ephesians. 2.12. So that it is highly requisite therefore, as you will not
throw your selves back into the sad and comfortless Rank and State of Infidels,
that you should Ratify and Confirm your Covenant when you come to Age.

II. ^s it consists (...) the Episco^^l Benedi^^ion, and ^aying on of ^ands.
Nor is it less necessary with respect also to that other solemn Part of it, the
Laying on of the Hands of the Bishop, together with his Prayers and Episcopal
Blessing. The whole Ordinance passes in the Scripture under this Title of
Laying on of Hands, that being so eminent a Part of it, and because of the many
Benefits that do accompany that Apostolical Rite. And so highly necessary is
the Laying on of Hands in Confirmation to be retained in the Church, that Heb.
6.1, 2. it is reckoned amongst the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ,
and together with Baptism, said to be One of the Foundation Doctrines of
Christianity. True it is, Laying on of Hands was used on other solemn Occasions
besides Confirmation, as particularly in the Ordination of Ministers, 1 Timothy
5.22. But however in this 6. Heb. 1, 2. By Laying on of Hands can be meant no
other than that used in Confirmation, it being mentioned immediately after
Baptism, which Confirmation is to follow, and numbered amongst those first
Doctrines of Christianity, which it belongs to all Christians indifferently to
be instructed in, whereas no other but that Laying on of Hands, used in
Confirmation, does Universally concern all sorts of People. So that
Confirmation, it appears, considered in both its Parts, is necessary to be used
in the Church of Christ.

^onfirmation ^eneficial.
Secondly, And as it is necessary, so it is an Ordinance of singular Benefit to
Men's Souls, if considered in its full Meaning and Extent. For why?

I. As the solemn Profession ^herein made ^mprints seri^us Thoughts and
religious Resolutions.
First, As to that solemn Profession therein made, Can any thing imprint upon
Men's Spirits serious Thoughts, and Religious Resolutions, if such a solemn
Declaration, as this, will not? I do here (does every Person that is duly
Confirmed say) in the presence of God and of this Congregation, Renew the
solemn Promise and Vow that was made in my Name at my Baptism, Ratifying and
Confirming it in my own Person, and acknowledging my self bound to Believe, and
to do all those things, which my Godfathers and Godmothers did then undertake
for me. And no Man that considers any thing, after so serious an Undertaking
upon himself, and in so Solemn a manner, can commit an ill Thing, but his
Conscience will afterward the more upbraid him for it, will rouse him up, and
awaken him to Repentance. Besides the Weight there is in the Profession it
self, the making it in so Solemn a manner, before so awful an Assembly, in the
presence of God, and before the Bishop and the Church of Christ, must needs be
a very singular Means to fix you in your Religious Purposes; for as long as we
are Men, and carry about us outward Senses, the Solemnity, whereby Religious
Actions are performed, will be found to add great Advantages to the well-doing
of them.

Nor again is Confirmation an Ordinance less Beneficial, II. As the Episcopal
Benediction, Prayers, and Laying on of Hands have Spiritual Blessings attending
them.
considered in its other part; in the Prayers, the Blessing, and in the Laying
on of the Hands of the Bishop. The Person to be Confirmed, having Renewed that
Solemn Promise and Vow that was made in his Name at his Baptism, Ratifying and
Confirming the same in his own Person: The Bishop does then proceed to Beseech
God to Strengthen him with the Holy Ghost the Comforter, and daily to increase
in him his manifold Gifts of Grace, the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the
Spirit of Counsel and Ghostly Strength, the Spirit of Knowledge and true
Godliness, and to fill him with the Spirit of his Holy Fear: And does moreover
add his own Fatherly Benediction in these Words, Defend, O Lord, this thy
Servant with thy Heavenly Grace, that he may continue thine for ever, and daily
increase in thy Holy Spirit more and more, until he come to thine everlasting
Kingdom.

And now if the Effectual fervent Prayer of any Righteous man avails much,
Jam. 5.16. how much more maybe expected from the Intercessions of One, who has,
not only on the account of his own Personal Righteousness, but by Virtue of his
Office also, an Interest in God, and the Privilege of an easier Access, and of
nearer Approaches to him in Divine Offices: And who is Commissioned to Pray to
God in the behalf of others, and is Authorized to Bless the People in his Name?
Why this is the Power and Privilege that the Priesthood had given them under
the Law and Gospel both: Under the Law, as you will see Numb. 6.24. Joel 2.17.
and also under the more Spiritual Dispensation of the Gospel, as may be seen
Jam. 5.14. So that much Benefit may, without doubt, be expected from the Devout
Prayers and Paternal Benediction, or Blessing of a Father of the Church, for
God will ever have a particular Regard to his own Institutions, and will Bless
those Means of conveying his Grace, which he himself has Appointed.

But then especially you may promise your selves a favorable Answer to the
Bishop's Prayers and Fatherly Benediction, when it is also accompanied with the
Solemnity of Laying on of Hands. This has in all Dispensations, before the Law,
under the Law, and under the Gospel, been Used both by Natural Parents, and by
the Spiritual Fathers of the Church, as a Solemn way of their Blessing. Thus
Jacob Blessed his Sons, Laying his Hands upon their Heads, Genesis 48.17. So Aaron
lifted up his Hands toward the People, and Blessed them, Lev. 9.22. And our
Savior also, When the little Children were brought unto him, he put his Hands
upon them and Blessed them, Mark 10. 16. No doubt those Great Persons did not
Intend hereby a fruitless Ceremony, but they did Design their Laying on of
Hands, together with their Blessing, should have a Spiritual Effect, or else
such Persons would not have Used it. But to put us out of doubt concerning the
Graces, that will Attend the Prayers and Benedictions, together with the Laying
on of Hands of the Fathers of the Church, we have a plain Instance thereof in
what Peter and John did, Acts 8.15, 17. who when they came down to the lately
Baptized Converts of Samaria, They Prayed for them, that they might Receive the
Holy Ghost, and then Laid their Hands upon them, and they Received the Holy
Ghost. And though the Gifts that then followed the Laying on of the Hands of the
Apostles, may be supposed to have been Extraordinary Gifts, because the Infant
State of the Church did then require such to Raise and Support it; yet the same
Laying on of Hands after the Example of the Holy Apostles, and that by their
Successors in the Church of Christ, the Bishops, may be expected to have still
such Graces accompanying it, as in this present State of the Church, will be
needful for you, and that thereupon the Fatherly Hand of God will ever be over
you, that his Holy Spirit will ever be with you, and that he will so Lead you
in the Knowledge and Obedience of his Word, that in the End you may attain
everlasting Life, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And thus I have at length
showed you what it is to be Confirmed by the Bishop, and withal how Necessary
and Beneficial it is to the Souls of Men, to be so Confirmed.

Catechism Necessary.
And now Catechizing, you are told in the Title and Description of that
Catechism which you are Learning, is requisite in order to this your
Confirmation.

I. ^o the solemn Ratifying of ^ur Covenant ^ith God.
And First in order to your solemn Renewing therein of the Covenant and Vow made
with God in your Baptism, and that you may Ratify and Confirm the same in your
own Person. For why? In your Confirmation you do Voluntarily and of Choice take
upon you that Profession of Christianity, which before, in your Minority, was
done by others in your behalf. And it is necessary before you take upon your
selves so great and weighty a Business, as the Performance of the Conditions of
the Covenant of Grace, that you be first Instructed, so as to understand them
well, both what those Conditions of Repentance, Faith and Obedience are; and
what mighty Blessings God Vouchsafes to make over to you in the same Covenant,
that should be an Encouragement, and reasonable Consideration to you, to
undertake so great and weighty a Charge. Just as in the case of a Person under
Age, who, by reason of his Minority, being incapable of himself to Enter into
any Covenants, his Trustees may do it for him: But when he is come to Age, and
must Seal to, and Confirm such Covenants himself, it is requisite he have them
Read to him, and be made to Understand what Advantages accrue to him thereby,
before he Confirm them in his own Person.

But why not this Instruction, rather before Baptism than Confirmation? It is
in Baptism that we Enter into Covenant with God, and Catechetical Instruction
should therefore properly go before that, you will say.

And in the beginning of Christianity indeed, when the Parties Baptized were,
for the most part, Persons grown up to Years of Understanding, who Abandoning
their Heathenish, or Jewish Principles and Practices, gave themselves up to be
Christ's Disciples, it was required that such, even before they were Baptized,
should be first Catechized in the Principles of Christianity, and be made to
understand the Conditions of that Covenant, which by their Baptism they were to
Enter into with God. And so it is still requisite, that all New Converts from
Paganism, or Judaism, or Mahometism, or any other contrary Religion, should be
likewise first Instructed before they be Admitted to Baptism, because such
being as well to Unlearn, as it were, their former false Religion, as to Learn
the true Christian Profession; they ought therefore to Understand both, e're
they can well Renounce that, or before they can Reasonably put on, or Embrace
this. But as to you who are the Children of Christian Parents, your Case is
quite different, for having no false Religion to Unlearn and Renounce, and
having a kind of Right of Inheritance, by Virtue of your Christian Parentage,
to be Baptized, even in your Infancy, into the Profession of the True; It is
therefore sufficient that you be Instructed, after your Baptism, in the Nature
and Tenor of the Baptismal Covenant, provided that when so Instructed, you
afterward appear Solemnly to Confirm it before Christ's Ambassador, the
Bishop.

But then it is highly necessary you should be so Catechized and Instructed
before you Personally undertake a Matter of so great Importance, that so when
you come to make a solemn and public Profession of such an Undertaking, you
may do it in a way and manner, that becomes reasonable and wise Persons to do
so great a thing in, who always know and consider the Weight and Consequence of
Matters of Moment, e're they will Solemnly make a Profession of them, or
Undertake them. So necessary is Catechizing in order to the Renewing and
Ratifying in Confirmation, that Covenant and Vow which was made in Baptism.

Nor Secondly, II. To the Receiving Benefit by the Episcopal Benediction,
Prayers, and Laying on of Hands.
Is it less necessary to your receiving Benefit by the Prayers, the Blessing,
and by the Laying on of Hands of the Bishop in Confirmation. As Beneficial as
these really are to all those, who shall come duly Prepared, yet it is certain,
that without some necessary Qualifications in such as come to be Confirmed
(amongst which, to understand the Nature, Terms and Conditions of the Covenant
of Grace, and seriously to Intend to Perform the same, are the first and chief)
none will be much the better for the Bishop's Prayers, Benediction, or
Imposition of Hands. These may be a Means indeed of Obtaining the Graces of the
Holy Spirit, to Enable those, that understand their Baptismal Vows and Covenant
with God, to perform such their Engagements, but they are utterly unlikely to
have any Operation upon those, who understand not what a Covenant of Grace does
mean. And therefore Catechizing, which is the only proper Means to give you
such an Understanding, must needs be exceedingly necessary to your being
Benefited also by what the Bishop shall perform in your Confirmation.

And so much for the Nature, Necessity and End of Catechizing, so far as the
Title of your Catechism does give us occasion to discourse of it. And if we
consider it so far only, you have a great deal of reason to value Catechizing
as a most necessary and useful Kind of Instruction, so as to need no great
Invitation to it. The Points you see therein taught, are the most substantial
and weighty Truths of Religion. The Persons to be so Instructed, are
indifferently any Persons of whatever Age, Sex, or Quality, till they come to a
competent Understanding of those most necessary Points, as has been Practiced
in the Apostle's Times, and the Primitive Church. And the End thereof you see,
is no less than to render you capable to Confirm that Covenant with God,
wherein are contained the Highest and most Valuable Privileges in the World,
and which cost the most inestimable Price to purchase them for us, even the
Blood of Christ, and which except you shall secure your selves an Interest in,
you are desperate and undone Persons.

And now each of these Considerations are Reasons sufficient to bring you to be
Catechized, and to make you value it, as a great Happiness you may be so
Instructed to your Soul's health. But that nothing may be left unsaid, to raise
in your Minds a due Esteem of Catechizing, and to persuade you to Attend it; I
shall over and above what the Title of your Catechizing directly leads me to
say concerning it, give you to understand several other good Uses to which
Catechizing serves, as so many Arguments to Invite you to it.

THE Second Lecture. A Catechism, that is to say, an Instruction to be Learned
of every Person, before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.
LAST Lord's Day taking these Words, which are the Title of your Catechism for
my Text (as I shall do the several Parts of the Catechism it self, till I have
gone through with it) and by Commenting upon them, I have given you an account
of the Nature, and End of Catechizing, and the Persons to be Catechized.

First, As to the Nature of a Catechism, It is a general Instruction I have
told you, in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion. Secondly, As
to the proper Persons to be Catechized, I have showed you, that it belongs to
all New Beginners in the School of Christ to be so Instructed; and indeed that
every individual Person, of what Age, or Quality soever, ought to lay the
Foundation of his Christian Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction. And Lastly,
The End thereof, I have showed you, is this, That you may be duly fitted and
prepared for Confirmation, both to Renew your Baptismal Vow before the Bishop,
and may be Qualified to receive Benefit by the Bishop's Prayers, Benediction,
and by his Laying on of Hands upon you.

Well, but there are several other good Ends and Purposes to which Catechizing
serves, and because the Knowing of them may increase your Esteem thereof, and
cause you the better to attend it, I will bestow One other Discourse in showing
you what they are, before I proceed to Expound the Catechism it self. And

Secondly, As for Confirmation, Catechizing requisite to prepare Persons to be
worthy Communicants.
so it is also requisite to fit and prepare you that you may be Worthy
Communicants in the Lord's Supper. Just as in Confirmation, so in the Lord's
Supper, we do solemnly, though not so publicly Ratify and Renew our Covenant
with God; and for the same reason therefore, that Catechizing is requisite to
prepare you for Confirmation, it must be also necessary to fit you for worthy
Communicants, that you may Communicate with Knowledge, and as Persons that
understand what they do. And alas! To what is it but to their having been never
Instructed in their Covenant by Catechizing, that so many come so Ignorantly,
or else not at all to the Lord's Supper. I say so Ignorantly, for as too many
of those, The want ^hereof the Occasion of People's Ig^orance con^erning the
Sacrament, and conse^uently
that do now and then Communicate, have but a slender Knowledge in the Nature
and Conditions of their Covenant; so too few do understand the Importance of
the Blessed Sacrament, that It is the New Covenant in Christ's Blood, 1 Cor.
11.25. that is, That it is the Seal of that Covenant, which was Purchased by,
and Ratified in his Blood: But such as have been thoroughly Catechized, as they
have been made to Understand the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace,
both the inestimable Privileges made over to them on God's part, and those
very reasonable Conditions to be performed on their own; so they have been also
taught, that One main End of Communicating in the Lord's Supper, is to Ratify,
and Confirm, and Seal this Covenant of Grace between God and Us. And then
those, that have been taught this, cannot come Ignorantly to the Lord's Supper,
nor consequently are in such danger of coming Unworthily, I. ^f Receiving
^nworthily.
for Ignorance of the Nature and Consequence of that Blessed Ordinance, is
generally as much the cause, as any thing, that any do approach Unworthily to
it.

Nor if the People of our Nation had been ever thoroughly Catechized, II. ^f not
Recei^ing at all.
would so many Abstain, as commonly do, from ever coming at all; for if all Men
were thoroughly instructed in the Nature, Terms and Conditions of their
Covenant, which it is the Business of Catechizing to do; as they would then
easily discern, that it is the highest and most inestimable Privilege in the
World, to be took into such a Covenant of Grace, wherein they have God Almighty
Engaging himself, and putting his Seal to it in the Sacrament, to make good to
them the most inestimable Blessings, Pardon, and Happiness, on the most
reasonable Conditions, Repentance, Faith, and Gospel Obedience: So, if they did
rightly understand this, they would then account it, as it really is, the
highest Privilege in the World, to be Confederates with God in so advantageous
a Covenant, and would think they could never often enough Partake at the Lord's
Table, whereby the oft'ner they come, they do more and more secure to
themselves those inestimable Benefits, made over to us by the Covenant of
Grace; and Engage, as themselves more closely to God, so God himself more
inviolably (as it were) to make good those Blessings to them. No surely, if all
Christians had been but Catechized in those Points, both what a mighty
Privilege it is to be in Covenant with God, and that Receiving of the
Sacrament is the Rite of God's own Appointment, of Confirming to our selves all
the Benefits of this Covenant, we should then have our People Daily crouding to
the Lord's Table, which they do now so profanely turn their Backs upon; we
should not then need so much to invite and entreat Persons to come, but they
would of their own accord Embrace all Opportunities of more and more Ensuring
to themselves these most invaluable Benefits, by often Coming.

In a word, A Man is no more fit to partake of the Lord's Supper, that does not
well understand the Nature and Terms of that Covenant, which he does therein
Ratify and Seal with God; than he is fit to Seal to Covenants and Leases, whose
Conditions and Obligations he never had so much as Read over to him, nor does
he know them. But Catechizing is the appointed and most proper Means of gaining
a competent Measure of Understanding, in the Nature and Terms of the Covenant
of Grace: Without having been Catechized therefore, a Man cannot be well
expected to Partake worthily of the Lord's Supper.

And this is the Second Use to which Catechizing does therefore serve, to
prepare you, that you may be fit and worthy Communicants at the Lord's Table.

Thirdly, III. Catechizing is Requisite to Persons being Edifyed by Preaching.
Catechizing is very Useful to render you Capable to receive Edification by the
Preaching of the Word, and to your Profiting by Sermons. That is certainly the
true and only edifying Preaching, which does most plainly lay open before you,
the Meaning, the Reasons, and the Importance of any Article of your Faith,
whereby you may best Know God, and the Necessity of Serving him; and which does
most clearly Explain to you the Nature and true Extent of your Christian
Duties, whereby you may Know what it is you have to do, and may be freed from
all causless Doubts and Scruples about the way of your Happiness: And lastly,
which does give you the most convincing Arguments and Reasons, to move and stir
you up faithfully to Discharge your manifold Obligations to God, your
Neighbor, and your Selves. Such as this is truly Edifying Preaching, because
this will, if you do duly attend to it, build you up perfect Christians in the
Knowledge and Practice of true Religion.

And now One that has been Catechized, so as to have a general Understanding in
the Nature of his Covenant; when such an One hears a Sermon upon any particular
Point of that Covenant, whereby he has more fully explained to him the Nature
and Attributes of God, and his Savior's Mediation, and of his own Duty, than
formerly in Catechizing could be done; and when he hears any good Reasons and
Motives given, whereby he should seriously apply himself to live so and so, as
becomes the Servant of such a God, and such a Savior, and One that professes
to pay him such Obedience: When a Catechized, Understanding Person hears such
Preaching as this, he finds his Understanding more enlightened with Heavenly
Truths, and his Will and Affections more bent upon doing as he has been
Instructed; and so (as in all reason he ought) he accounts such a Sermon truly
Edifying, and himself Edified thereby.

But the Ignorant and Uncatechized part of the World, when they hear a Sermon
(for want of Discretion to judge of its real Worth) such look only at some such
trifling Consideration, as the Vehemence and Noise of the Speaker; and if there
be but enough of that (as generally there is the greatest Show, where there is
the least of Substance) though they are made to know no more than they did before
of the Importance of any Article of their Faith, or of the Nature and Extent of
any Duty of Religion, they are however stunned into Admiration of they know not
what, utterly dis-regarding the most Instructing and really Edifying Preaching,
to the very great Prejudice of their Souls, and the utter hinderance of their
Improvement by our Ministry, in all useful and substantial Knowledge.

Besides, it is a mighty Help to the gaining Understanding in any Science
whatsoever, especially the Christian Religion, to have a general View given one
of the whole (which it is the Business of Catechizing to do) and to see how one
Point depends upon another, and do all sweetly agree together. For not to
mention other Advantages, by this a Man shall be able to Judge the better of
the Usefulness and Weight of any Sermon, or Religious Discourse on any
particular Point, as whether it does thoroughly Explain it, or does not take in
what does more properly belong to some other Matter. And by this a Man shall be
able also to judge whether the Preacher Builds upon the Foundation, Gold,
Silver, precious Stone, or Wood, Hay and Stubble; and shall be able to
distinguish between, and separate the Refuse and Dross of a Sermon and
Discourse from the weighty and substantial Parts of it. A Skill, which as it is
of vast Consequence, so it is but little understood by the Generality of
People, for want of having been well Catechized and Instructed in the
Fundamentals of Christian Religion.

IV. ^techizing ^essary to ^vent being ^uced into ^ngerous ^rors.
Fourthly, Catechizing is also requisite to secure you from being at any time
mislead into dangerous Heresies and Errors, by the Sermons and Discourses of
Men, Crafty to deceive, to the infinite Peril of your immortal Souls. There
must be Heresies, the Apostle tells us 1 Cor. 11.19. That they which are
approved may be made manifest. For God does permit them for our Trial, whether
we will stand steadfast to the Truth. And our Savior bids us Matthew. 24.45. Take
heed that no man deceive us, for many shall come in my Name, says he, that is,
will pretend to be Ministers of Christ, and shall deceive many. They will come
which all deceivableness, the Apostle tells us, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10. with so much
Artifice and Cunning, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very
Elect, Mat. 24.24. particularly of this sort are they, St. Paul warns us, 2 Timothy 3.6. Which creep into houses, and lead captive silly women laden with
Sins, led away with diverse Lusts, ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the Truth. A Character, than which nothing can more exactly agree,
to the Seducers of our Times, and the Persons, whom they do usually Practice
upon to draw aside, which are for the most part Ignorant Women, and the Effect
it has upon their Disciples and Followers, which is to make them great Talkers
and Pretenders to extraordinary Knowledge, but in reality not one Jot wiser in
the grand Points of the Christian Religion.

And now, if any of these cunning Deceivers should come to any of you, and
endeavor to Pervert you, how is it possible you should escape their Wiles,
except you shall be well Principled, so as thoroughly to understand the
Foundation Articles of your Religion: But Holding fast that form of sound
words, 2 Timothy 1.13. Having well imbibed the Principles of Religion, which are
taught in your Catechism; by these, as by a certain Touchstone, you will be
able to discover, what are True, and what are Erroneous Doctrines. Those that
agree with this Analogy of Faith, you may be certain are sound, what do
contradict them, you may be sure are false Doctrines. Catechizing is an
excellent Means, says Mr. Gouge, to keep Persons from the Errors and the
Heresies of the Times: For Persons well Catechized and Instructed in the
Principles of Religion, are in a great measure Antidoted against the Poison of
seducing Doctrines. And observe who are they, as he goes on, that are easiest
seduced by false Teachers, who are they that have embraced their Erroneous
Tennets, and you shall find that they are such, who were never well Catechized,
nor grounded in the Principles of Religion. As therefore you would not be
poisoned with the Erroneous Doctrines of false Teachers, take care to be well
rooted and grounded by Catechizing in the Knowledge of the Truth.

Lastly, Lastly, Catechizing is exceedingly Necessary,
Catechizing is exceeding Useful to preserve Youth from a lling into any gross
and wasting Sin, and especially any Ungodly Course of Living; Or if he has been
Seduced by evil Company, the having the Seed of good Principles sown in the
Heart, by a timely Catechizing, will be the most likely Means to recover such a
One out of the Snares of the Devil.

First, I. To preserve Youth from ever falling into an Ungodly way of Living.
It is exceeding Useful to preserve Youth from falling into any gross and
wasting Sin, and especially any Ungodly Course of Living. This was the Counsel
of the Wisest of mere Men, of Solomon, to Train up a Child in the way he should
go, and when he is Old he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. And that
excellent Moralist, Plutarch, in his rare Tract of Breeding of Youth, speaks to
the same purpose, that As soft Wax is apt to take the Stamp of the Seal, so are
the Minds of Children to receive in Instructions imprinted on them at that Age.
Let but your Youth be taught so much as they are capable to learn, concerning
the Nature of God, how that he is wonderfully Good to those that Love and Fear
him, and that he will be Terrible in Judgment toward those that Disobey him.
Let them be instructed how wonderfully Kind the Son of God was to them, as to
come down himself from Heaven to call them forth out of the wicked World
(wholly given up to the Service of the Devil) to serve their God and Maker. Let
them be taught betimes, as much as they are capable to understand of this, and
of their Duty to God and Man, and what a solemn Vow, Promise and Profession
they have made in their Baptism, not willingly to offend so good and gracious a
Savior, but to serve and honor him for ever: Let but these Notions take the
first Possession of your Minds, and it will be hardly possible for any
Temptation to prevail over you, and to draw you into Sin; you will then Blush
to hear the lewd and foolish Talk of the Godless Crew of hardened Sinners, you
will then Tremble at their bold Oaths; and you will be out of Countenance to be
so much as Seen in the Company of Drunkards. If they shall endeavor to
persuade you to join with them in their lewd Courses, you will have That within
you will quickly answer, I cannot, I dare not do so ill a Thing: I cannot be
guilty of so great a Piece of Ingratitude, as to offend so good a God, and
gracious a Savior as mine: I dare not be guilty of so high an Injustice, as to
violate my Covenant, Vow and Promise to him, for then he will eternally Punish
me: Away all ye workers of Iniquity, for I will keep the Commandments of my God.

But Youth untaught and unnurtured, quickly fly out into all manner of
Extravagances; for why? they know no better, they have received no good
Principles that should control them. Vanity, Youthful Lusts, and their wicked
Companions hurry them into such bold Villainies, as make us admire the Patience
of God, that forbears striking them quick into Hell, but on they go to provoke
him to the utmost; and how should it be otherwise, since they have no Notion of
the difference between Good and Evil: Nor any Principle within them, that
should in the least check them in the Pursuit of that which is Evil, and stir
them up to that which is Good.

True it is, It may too often happen, that One that has laid up in store a good
Foundation of Religious Principles, may be tempted, and much staggered in his
Constancy, and perhaps be overtaken in a Fault, so as wilfully to do an ill
Thing. But then observe the force of Religious Principles: Such a One will soon
bethink himself what he has done, his Conscience will quickly smite him, and he
will be immediately brought to Repentance (through the Power of good
Principles) and his Fall will but make him more careful of his ways hereafter.

Nay, It may sometimes happen, that a very towardly Youth (notwithstanding all
the care of his Parents and Christ's Ministers to bring him up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord) when got too soon from under the Eye of his Parents
and wise Counselors, and falling into lewd Company (with which this Age does
too much abound) may at first be a little Laughed out of Countenance by them,
(as is their wont) for being too Precise, Reserved, and Melancholy; and after
that be drawn by degrees into one Compliance after another with them in their
Ungodly Revels: Nay, and at length be so drencht in Sin, as to deface the whole
Image of God, that was wrought upon his Soul, so as to be even past all hopes
of Recovery. This is very rare, but yet however too often, whenever it is.

II. To Recover out of it when fallen therein
But even in this case, Secondly, The Power of those good Principles that were
early Sown, shall be wonderfully seen to the Glory of God, and the Praise of
good Education. Let Diseases, Distresses, Poverty, or any sore Affliction befall
a lewd and sorry Liver (as generally, sooner or later it does) either as the
Fruit of their Sin, or as a Chastisement from God to reclaim them. If the
Person afflicted has been One that was never Instructed in the Fear of God, he
is never the better, nor shall you hear so much as a good Expression from him,
nor any the least Signs of Amendment; for why? He Knows not what he is to do,
nor where he is to begin, nor does he distinctly know any good Reason wherefore
he ought to Amend; for Thanks to the Piety of his good Parents, he never had
any Principles of Good instilled into him; and therefore as all his Life time
he Lived like an Atheist, so he now does Die like a Beast: He was ignorantly
brought up, and he Dies ignorant and wicked both.

But if it shall happen, that One who had received the Seed of good Principles
within him, be overtaken with some sore Affliction, and God be so gracious to
him, as not to cut him off quickly in the midst of his Sins, but affords him a
leisurely Chastisement; such a One shall begin to be serious and to bethink
himself. He will recall to Mind what he once knew of God, and of his Duty to
him. Those good Principles that have long lain Buried under a Load of Sin, will
begin to stir within him. He will water them sufficiently with Tears of
Repentance, and they will begin to work and revive within. And when he is once
come to himself, so as to think seriously of Matters, with the Prodigal Son he
will soon resolve to Arise and go to his Father, and to say unto him, Father I
have Sinned against Heaven, and before Thee; and am no more worthy to be called
thy Son, make me as One of thy hired Servants, Luke 15.18, 19. The Seed of good
and religious Principles sown in your Hearts by Catechetical Instruction, may
well be compared to Seed, sown in the Ground by the Hand of the Husbandman. The
Husbandman's Seed may lie Buried in the Earth under many Clods, so as to be in
danger never to recover, but if the Rains shall descend from Heaven, so as to
melt and dissolve that burden of Earth, with which the Seed was overlaid, it
will then begin to work and revive, if it was good Seed, and may possibly bring
forth a very fruitful Crop. So here, if you do but take care to have the Seed
of good Principles sown in your Hearts, and should ye afterward almost
extinguish all good Motions within you, by laying on a continued Weight of
Guilt and Sin; and should God in Mercy hereafter; not pour down the Fury of his
Wrath, so as immediately to Destroy you, but Rain down upon you the gentle
Showers of Fatherly Chastisements, so as to melt you into Tears, and bring you
into a considering Temper; the good Principles that lay long Buried, may
possibly begin to stir, and to work in you a Repentance fruitful in good Works.

Nay, Such is the Force of good Principles, that even a serious Sermon, or but
the Discourse of a good Minister (especially of him, who first sowed them by
his Instructions) shall stir them up, and put them a working, to the Conversion
and Reformation of a Sinner.

In a word: Such is the Effect of good Principles, that by the Grace of God,
they are the likeliest way to preserve you in Innocence, and to prevent your
falling into any deadly Sin, and then you will be in a happy Condition; you
will then be of the Number of those happy Persons, of whom our Savior speaks,
that they need no Repentance, Luke 15.7. that is, such a severe, and sorrowful,
and painful Repentance, as Backsliding Sinners, and all Men of loose and wicked
Lives must go through, or be forced to Endure infinitely worse: Or if you shall
unhappily fall into any grievous Sin, or a Course of Sin, such may be the Force
of pious Education, or good Principles, as by God's good Grace and Providence,
to recover you out of the Snares of the Devil. These good Principles taught you
in your Catechism, may not perhaps at present be thoroughly understood by you,
no more than Children do the use of Letters, nor Schoolboys the use of Grammar
Rules at first, but they will stick by you (as One said) and be remembered when
you are more capable of Improving them, insomuch that it will be uneasy to you,
if you take care to be well Principled in your Minority, to be Wicked and
Profane hereafter; or if you should prove so (which God forbid) there will yet
be some hopes of Reclaiming you, because these things will some time or other
revive and awaken your Consciences.

And this is the last of those good Uses and Ends, to which Catechism serves;
(viz.) to Instill into you such good Principles, as will either prevent your
falling into Sin, (which is much the Happier for you) or at least recover you
out of it by Repentance; and which I have therefore insisted on, that I might
persuade you to have a due Regard to so useful an Instruction, as Catechizing
is, and to give a due Attendance to it.

And thus, as last Lord's Day I showed you, that one good End to which
Catechizing serves, is to prepare you for that necessary Work, your
Confirmation, that you may Publicly, and with Understanding (as those that
know what they do) profess before the Bishop, That you will be Faithful to your
Baptismal Covenant: So Secondly, I have to Day showed you, That it is for the
same Reason requisite to prepare you for Receiving of the Blessed Sacrament,
both by instructing you in the Covenant of Grace, which in the Sacrament we
Seal, and in the Meaning of the Sacrament it self, that it is the Rite of
Sealing it. Thirdly, I have now showed you, that Catechizing is very Useful to
render you understanding Hearers of the Word, when it is Preached, so as you may
receive Edification by it, and may be Profited by Sermons. Fourthly, That it is
requisite to secure you from being at any time misled into dangerous Heresies
and Errors, by the Sermons and Discourses of Men, crafty to Deceive, to the
Peril of your immortal Souls. And Lastly, I have now largely showed you, that
it is exceeding Useful to preserve you from falling into any gross and wasting
Sin, and especially any ungodly Course of Living; or if any of you shall
hereafter be Seduced (which God forbid) by evil Company, that the having the
Seed of good Principles sown in the Heart by a timely Catechizing, will be the
most likely Means to recover you out of the Snares of the Devil.

THE Third Lecture. What is your Name? And the Answer is made by the Christian
Name.
IN Two Discourses, on the Title of your Catechism, having given you to
understand what a Catechism means, and showed you also the Ends and Uses of
Catechizing; I shall now proceed by God's Assistance to Explain the Catechism
it self, and to give you the Meaning of its several Parts. And the first Thing
that offers it self to our Consideration, is the first Question in your
Catechism, (viz.) What is your Name? And the Answer you are taught to make to
it, which is your Christian Name.

Now this Question is not so idle and insignificant, as some may imagine, but
is asked upon very good Reasons; insomuch that I do think, they may give me a
very fair Occasion, to discourse to you upon these Three Heads.

First, To show you, that the Reason wherefore your Catechism begins with
Asking you, What is your Christian Name? Is to put you in Mind of your
Christian Profession, and of that strictness of Life, that is answerable
thereunto.

Secondly, They do give me occasion to Re-mind you, that the bad Lives of such
who bear the Name of Christians, do an infinite Prejudice and Dis-honour to
Christianity.

And Thirdly, To exhort you therefore to stand upon the Dignity of your
Christian Name and Profession, by living such good Lives, as may be an Honor,
not a Disgrace unto it.

And these Three Heads of Discourse, as they do naturally arise from this
Question and Answer about your Christian Name, so I know not any thing can be
more properly and seasonably Discoursed upon in the Entrance upon your
Catechism, as tending to warn you beforehand to Apply every thing you shall
hereafter hear, either in the Catechism it self, or in the Explication thereof,
to the Bettering of your Lives and Practices. To begin then,

First, I am to show you, that the Reason wherefore your Catechism begins with
Asking you, What is your Christian Name? Is to put you in Mind of your
Christian Profession, and of that strictness of Life, that is Answerable
thereunto.

It is thought sufficient to justify this Question and Answer about your
Christian Name (though there were no great Matter implied in its meaning) that it
is the Beginning of a Dialogue, it being the usual manner of Dialogues, or
mutual Discourses, managed between several Persons, (be the Subject of them
never so grave and serious) not to fall immediately Point Blank upon the main
Matter intended, but in such, they usually usher in the more material Points,
by such familiar Questions as this.

But not to insist on this, and many other good Reasons, that might be given;
though there be great Familiarity and Condescension in the Question, yet it is
not without good Reason and Consideration, that in the Entrance of this
Instruction in your Christian Religion, you should be first asked your
Christian Name. The reason wherefore the Catechism begins with Asking the
Catechumen his Christian Name, is to put him in mind of his Christian
Profession.
And the great Reason is, That at the Mention thereof, you might be prompted to
call to Mind what Religion and Profession you are of. You had your Christian
Names given you, at the same time you took upon you the Christian Profession;
you are therefore in the first Entrance of your Catechism (which is an
Instruction of you in this your Christian Profession) Asked, What is your
Christian Name? That you might call to Mind that most excellent Religion you
received together with it, and under that Name solemnly Promised and Vowed, to
maintain and cleave unto.

Your Surname you have derived down unto you from your Ancestors, and you
received it from your Natural Parents: But your Christian Name you received
immediately from the Mouths of your Spiritual Parents, your Minister, and your
Godfathers, who as your Proxies, did at the same time, they gave you a
Christian Name, undertake for you, that you should live a Christian Life, Holy
and Unblamable, as becomes those, who bear so Glorious a Title. You must
therefore consider what your Name is, and the Importance of it, that it is
Christian, and you must take care, that you Live not so, as to bring a Scandal
upon that Name, in any Sin and Wickedness; but so, as becomes those, who
profess Christianity, and wear the Name of Christians, In Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of your Lives. And as he, who has called you, is
Holy, so be ye Holy in all manner of Conversation.

The Force there is in a Christian name to make a Man lead a Christian life as
under that Name having Listed himself.
And there is indeed the greatest Force in our very Christian Names, to render
us Conformable to the Christian Doctrine, and whereby we may be persuaded to
live Christian-like, otherwise the Apostle would not have laid so much stress
upon our very Name and Profession of Christians, as he does, to persuade us
from that very Reason to live Holy and Christian Lives. Let every one that
names the Name of Christ, or upon whom the Name of Christ is called, depart
from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. For why? It is ever expected, that those, that
profess to be guided by the perfectest Doctrines, should answerably live the
most perfect Lives. The Heathens did therefore expect, I. A Disciple of a most
Holy and excellent Religion.
that their Philosophers, who gave the highest Principles and Rules of
Morality, should themselves exceed all others in a virtuous and orderly Course
of Life; and when they found any of their Philosophers a Tripping, and living
at the rate of other Men of looser Principles, how severely therefore would
they Reflect upon them for it? Now we Christians profess our selves the
Disciples of a Philosophy, that does infinitely exceed all others in the
Powerfulness of its Principles and Doctrines, and in the Holiness and
Strictness of its Commands. We have given up our Names, II. A Servant of a most
Holy and Just God.
and Listed our selves to be the Soldiers and Servants, not of a Lewd Jupiter,
a Wanton Venus, a Fiery Mars, a Revengeful Juno, a Drunken Bacchus, and a
Thievish Mercury: Such were the Heathen Gods, and no wonder then, that they who
did Worship them, should also Imitate them. But we have given up our Names and
Listed our selves the Servants of A God, that has no pleasure in Wickedness,
neither shall any Evil dwell with him; in whose sight the Foolish shall not
stand, and who hates all the workers of Iniquity; who will destroy all men
that speak leasing (that are crafty to Cheat and Deceive) and will abhor the
blood-thirsty and deceitful man, Psalm. 5.4, 5, 6. Nay, Who will rain upon the
Wicked, Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest; this shall be the
portion of their Cup, for the Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, his
Countenance does behold the Upright, Psalm. 11.6, 7. III. To fight against the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil.
Such is the God to whom we have given up our Names to serve: And we have
Listed our selves in our Baptism, under our several Christian Names, to fight
under his Banner against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, so as not to be
tempted or drawn off to commit any Injustice, or Unmercifulness, any
Intemperance, or Filthiness, any Act of Ungodliness, or Profaneness: In a word,
any Sin against him. IV. As under that Name he professes to Believe such
Articles as are the most powerful Motives to deny all Vngodlyness.
We have Engaged our selves under our several Names in the strongest Covenants,
in hopes of the most glorious Rewards, and out of fear of the sorest
Punishments, to be Faithful in our Obedience to him. We have openly Professed
under our respective Christian Names, firmly to Believe such a Set of Articles
(those of our Christian Faith) as are every one of them (as shall hereafter be
made appear) the most powerful Motives in the World, to make us Deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and Godly in
this present evil World. And under the same Christian Names we have all of us
professed, V. To Obey the most Righteous Laws.
To be Governed by such Laws and Commands of Virtue and Goodness, of Piety
toward God, of Righteousness to our Neighbors, and which lay down such
incomparable Rules concerning the Government of our selves, as the like are not
to be found in any other Philosophy. And Lastly, Lastly, As having under that
Name received Promises of most powerful Asistances to do all this.
We profess to have such Assistances derived to us from God, by Prayer and
Sacraments (those Means of his own Appointment to convey down his Aid and
Assistance to us, to Enable us to do these Things) as will make it not
extremely difficult to us, to live very excellent and good Lives.

Thus have we Christians under our several Christian Names (as under Hand and
Seal) professed our selves the Disciples of a Religion, that does infinitely
exceed all others in the Powerfulness of its Principles and Doctrines, and the
Holiness and Strictness of its Precepts and Rules: Of a Religion, that can
work, if its Dictates be followed, the greatest Miracles in the changing Men's
Natures and Tempers from worse to better; that can turn a ravenous Wolf into a
harmless Lamb, a furious Lion into a tender Kid; that is, the most savage and
violent Dispositions of Cruelty and Pride, into perfect Charity and Meekness.
And now, if we Christians should be found as Debauched and Evil Livers, as
Unconverted Heathens, as Lewd as Turks, as Griping as Jews, as Impious and
Profane as Atheists, how severely, and that deservedly, will the rest of the
Infidel World Upbraid us? What Dishonor shall we thereby do to the true God,
and our most Holy Religion?

Which brings me to the Second Thing proposed, which was to Remind you, that
the Bad Lives of those who bear the Name of Christians, do an infinite
Prejudice and Dis-honour to Christianity.

The bad lives of Nominal Christians do an infinite Prejudice and Dishonor to
to Christianity.
And alas! What bitter Reproaches have the Unchristian Lives of Christian
Professors, put into the Mouths of our Enemies, making them to say, that if we
Christians, did but Believe our selves, those Promises in Scripture, of such
mighty Rewards to Holy, Honest and Good Living, we should sure our selves live
better Lives: And when any of our Christians would persuade them to forsake
their own Superstition and Idolatry, and to Embrace our most Holy Religion, our
Unanswerable Lives have provoked them to return smartly enough upon us, Would
you have us to Believe the Truth of your Religion, which you do not seem to
Believe your selves.

It hinders the Conversion of Infidels.
And alas! This is the main Thing, the very Unsuitable Lives of us Christians,
that so Prejudices the Infidel Part of the World, Pagans, Turks, and Jews
against our most Holy Religion, and hinders their Conversion. It is the
Cruelty, and Covetousness of our Christian Merchants in the Indies, that makes
the poor Indians even Abhor our Religion, and Scornfully to say, That Gold, not
Jehovah is our God. Thus Is the Name of God Blasphemed amongst the Gentiles
through us, Romans 2.24. It is the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, which makes
Turks and Jews (both of them mortal Haters of Idols) to loath and despise the
Christian Worship.

It puts bitter Reproaches in the Mouth of Atheists, especially when Wickedness
is committed under the disguise of Religion.
But not to Travel so far, as the Indies or Turkey, to find out how much our
Living so unbecoming our most Holy Profession, has scandalized Persons, so as
to Abhor it; Observe the Men of No Religion amongst our selves, our Atheists
and Libertines, and what bitter Scoffs and Jeers may we daily hear them cast
forth upon Religion it self, when they see some, that make great outward
Professions there, guilty of so much Hypocrisy, Cheating, Cruelty, and
Rebellion; making their very Religion, a Cloak for the carrying on the most
wicked Things, as if the least Religious, the most honest Man. And now, if
there were but the least spark of Love and Honor in our Hearts for God and our
most Holy Religion, this were enough to make us careful to lead innocent and
inoffensive Lives, if it were only that we might not dishonor God and Religion
thereby, and might not bring a Reproach upon our Christian Name. Every Man that
desires the Honor and Reputation of his Calling and Profession whatever it is,
will live answerable to his Character, and not so, as to be a Scandal to his
Place. Few Men will endure their worldly Calling to be put at naught and
Reproacht.
And therefore, as we seldom see a Person of so abject and mean a Spirit, as to
endure with Patience, whatever Art, or Profession he is of, to be set at naught
and spoke against; so Men are generally, with respect to the Credit of their
worldly Professions, careful to act with that Decency and Becomingness, as
shall advance, the Reputation thereof. Hence the Lawyer, as he cannot
ordinarily (endure except he be a profligate Person) his Profession of the Law,
nor the Physician his, nor the Tradesman his, to be run down, Exposed and made
Ridiculous; so each of these will be, as much as possible, for maintaining in
their several Dealings a Reputation of Fairness and Honesty, as that alone
which will raise and preserve an Esteem for them. And how then comes it about
that a Christian can endure to hear his Christian Profession reproached and
scorned by reason of his scandalous Living? Whence is it, but from the greater
Zeal Men generally have for the Honor of their worldly Callings and
Professions, than for the Honor of their Christian Religion, Profession and
Calling?

And now therefore Thirdly, Let me Exhort you, An Exhortation therefore to
Christians to stand upon the Dignity of their Christian Name and Profession.
to stand upon the Dignity of your Christian Name and Profession, by living
such good Lives, as may be an Honor, not a Disgrace unto it: Let me therefore
Admonish you from this very Name, wherewith you are Honored, to render your
selves wholly conformable to those Christian Principles and Doctrines to which
you have given up your Names to be governed by, and which being taught you in
your Catechism, I shall by God's leave, with all the Plainness, and in the most
Useful manner I can explain unto you.

And pray let me Entreat you my Dear Youth, seriously and diligently to hearken
to me your Spiritual Father, that studies no less the Eternal Interest of your
Souls, and to make you Heirs of Heaven, than your Natural Parents do your
Temporal Interest to gather you Riches, and to leave you Estates in this World.
You have been Asked, and you have Answered to your Christian Name; and you see
with what Title you are dignified, (viz.) with the Name of Christians.

And first, Wonder not at what I say, those Titles of Honor, which we daily
hear sounding in our Ears, I. As that which is more considerable than Titles of
Honor.
and which are so much admired and doted upon; I mean the Titles of Emperors,
Kings, Dukes, Earls, Lords, ought to be accounted as very inconsiderable in
respect of our Christian Title. They are but Earthly Glories, and will soon
decay and vanish away, but this is of a Divine Original, which will never fade,
but will Ennoble you to all Eternity. I beseech you therefore seriously
consider this, and let a due Honor and Regard to so worthy a Name, continually
Admonish every one of you, that you never commit in your whole Lives, any thing
that does unbecome it.

I do also, Secondly, II. Because of that near Alliance there is between the
Christian Name, and Profession.
Entreat every One of you to consider the near Alliance there is betwixt your
Christian Names, and your Christian Profession, insomuch that they both began,
and will both end together. In your Baptism you put on both your Name and your
Profession of Christianity together, and if ever you should abjure your
Religion (which God forbid) you must also therewith abjure your Christian
Names, so near are they linkt one with another. And therefore let this ever
admonish you to Adorn your selves with Christian Graces, Temperance, Chastity,
Charity, Justice, Piety; and not to defile your selves with Heathenish, Brutish
Vices, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Cruelty, Infidelity.

Thirdly, III. Because the primitive Christians did in virtue of the Christian
Name resist the fiercest Temptations.
And is it Examples of this good Use of your Christian Name, that you want? Why
the Christians of Old took Courage from this very Name, whereby they overcame
all their Enemies, both Bodily and Ghostly, the World, the Flesh and the Devil;
and encouraged themselves thereby to the Discharge of their Christian Duties.
In the Virtue of this Name they extinguished their Lusts, they overcame Tyrants,
they put to flight the Devil. Their Persecutors with Fire and Faggot, and all
manner of cruel Torments, would have them forced them to Blaspheme Christ, to
sacrifice and burn Incense to Devils, to worship Idols. But they in the midst
of Flames and Torments would answer with Smiles on their Faces, We are
Christians, we cannot do these Things. Forbear your Assemblies and
Church-meetings, would the Heathen Persecutors say; We are Christians, and must
not therefore Forsake the Assembling our selves together, would they answer.
Such great things did the Primitive Christians perform under the Power of the
Christian Name. And let your very Christian Names likewise, my Christian Youth,
encourage you to all manner of Virtuous and Religious Practices, in imitation
of those Blessed Primitive Christians, and to the Examples of those, that shall
come after you.

IV. Because of the Indecency of Living unsuitable to the Christian Name and
Profession.
Nay Fourthly, Look upon it ever as a most monstrous piece of Wickedness, for
Christian Men, to live Antichristian Heathenish Lives, but on the contrary,
ever look upon your selves, as you are Christians, bound even in Decency to
Abstain from all Appearances of Evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. What shall you, that have
given up your Names to Christ, and are in Covenant with God, fight the Devil's
Battles? Know you not that your Bodies are the Members of Christ, and shall you
take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid,
1 Cor. 6.15. Shall you that are Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, walk in
Darkness? Have you Renounced the Devil, the World and the Flesh, and you for
all that yield your selves Slaves to the Devil, the World and the Flesh? You
Believe the Gospel, and all the Articles of your Christian Faith, and shall any
of you live as those, that neither know, nor fear God, nor dread the Devil? You
have vowed Obedience to God, and shall you trample under Foot all Laws Divine
and Humane? You have been dedicated to God, and have given up your Names to him
in your Baptism, and shall you live, as if you had been Listed in Satan's
Service? Nothing so contrary, so contradictory as these things.

V. That to quite other Purposes we gave up our Names ^o be Chri^tians.
Alas! Consider, Fifthly, That you have given up your Names unto Christ for
other Reasons, than that you should fight under the Devil's Banner, and do the
Works of the Flesh; Namely, That you might ever live to the Honor of God. You
have been called forth out of the World, not that you should add by your own,
to the Iniquities of the Times, but to nobler Purposes; that you might
re-establish the World now tottering, and ready to sink under the weight of
Wickedness, that you might re-establish it, I say, by the Practice of all
Christian Graces and Virtues. And for that Reason it is, you must consider,
that you Christians are called the Salt of the Earth, Matthew. 5.13. the Light of
the World, ver. 14. A Candle put upon a Candlestick, that it might give Light
to all that are in the House, ver. 15. And therefore, Let your Light so shine
before Men, that others may see your good Works, and Glorify your Father which
is in Heaven, is the Inference, the Command of Christ, the great Captain of our
Salvation, ver. 16.

And moreover, Sixthly, Every Christian has commonly that in his particular
Name, VI. Most Chri^tian Names ^fford some ^xamples of Virtue which should
prompt Christians to an Imitation of those who were Eminent under those Names.
whereby he may be excited to some noble strain of Virtue. It seldom happens,
that any one has a Name given him, of which there has not been some One before
him, renowned in History, either in the Scripture, or elsewhere, for some noble
Exploit of Virtue, or other. And now, my young Disciple, search the Scripture,
and other Histories, who, or what, He, or She was, and wherein thy Namesake
did Excel in any Goodness; and propose such a One for thy particular Example,
to whose Eminency in the like Virtue, do thou all thou can to arrive. Do thou
John bethink thy self often of that great Contempt of the World, that One of
thy Name, (viz.) John the Baptist did show, and of that burning Love to God and
Men, which the other, (viz.) the Apostle of that Name did express, and let the
One excite thee likewise to the like Contempt of the World, and the other to
the like Love of God and Men. A Peter should do well to call to Mind the ready
Confession of Christ, that the Apostle of that Name did make, and the
speediness and sorrowfulness of his Repentance, after he had Sinned, and let
the Thoughts of him make thee ready to give Testimony to the Truth and Faith of
Christ, and put thee upon a speedy Repentance, after every fall and backsliding
into Sin.

Let every Anne call to Mind that Widow of her Name, mentioned Luk 2.37. Who
though a Widow of fourscore Years and four, departed not from the Temple, but
served God with Fasting and Prayers, night and day. And let the Example of this
devout and happy Woman of thy Name, call thee Anne to the first beginning of
Prayers, Sacraments, and Sermons. Let every Mary bethink her-self of those
Mary's Famous in the Gospel, the One for her chaste Virginity, the Other for
sitting so Attentive at JESUS's Feet, to whom the Lord gave this honorable
Testimony, that she had Chose the better part, and preferred her before her
Sister Martha, who disturbed her-self too much with worldly Business, Luke
10.40, 41. and from her Example, learn not to entangle thy self too much with
the Cares of this Life, but chiefly to take care of Heavenly things, and to
apply thy self to Hearing and Devotion.

Lastly, Let me give it in Charge to you, that are Parents, And therefore
Parents are Advised to choose for their Children, the Names of Persons Eminent
for Virtue, not Infamous for Vice.
not to give to your Children any other Names, but what are of Note for their
eminent and good Examples, that they may have always before their Eyes whom
they may Imitate in their Virtue. Give them such Names, as if not Signalized in
Scripture, are at least in other Histories for some Good they have done: Or if
you give them the Names of any of your Ancestors, let it be of those, whose
Virtues have adorned, not whose Vices have disgrace'd the Age, they lived in:
Or of such who have left behind them a good Name to be Imitated, nothing Ill to
be Abominated by their Posterity, for those only are worthy to have their
Memory continued in the Names of their Posterity, but these are fit to be
Eternally forgot.

And thus, my Christian Disciples, having showed you the great, the very great
Obligation lying upon you, even from your Christian Names, to square your Lives
according to the Christian Rules, those Rules, that you have taught you, and
shall hereafter with God's Assistance, be explained to you in the Exposition, I
shall give you of your Catechism: And from several Considerations having
therefore urged you, to live with all the Care you can, according to that most
holy Religion, to which in your Baptism you have given up your Names, and under
your several Names have Listed your selves to maintain and cleave unto: What
then remains, my Christian Disciples, but that you apply your selves with the
greatest Diligence, in order to your living good Lives, to understand thoroughly
that Religion to which you have given up your Names? There shall be nothing
wanting, I do assure you, on my part, for I design, by God's assistance, to
Instruct you in all the Articles of the Covenant of Grace, and which are each
of them contained in your Church Catechism. It lies on your parts to be
teachable Disciples, constantly to repair here to be Catechized and Instructed
by me, to have attentive Ears, open Hearts, and faithful Memories.

And Oh! That I might always find you such! What Satisfaction would then accrue
to my self! What Profit to you! And how great and eternal Rewards to us both?
And that it may thus succeed with all of us, Pray let it be our constant and
fervent Desires to God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Fourth Lecture.
Quest. Who gave you that Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did promise and vow three things in my Name, First, That I should
Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked
World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should Believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's
holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do, as they
have promised for thee?

Answ. Yes verily, and by God's help so I will. And I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my Lives end.

AS the Compilers of the Catechism did very wisely begin with a Question and
Answer about your Christian Name, to the End, that at the mention thereof, you
might take occasion to consider the great Obligation, which lies upon you to
live according to that most Holy Religion, which under that Name you have
received; so in Commenting upon that Question and Answer about your Christian
Name, I have given you my self some preparatory Admonitions, accordingly to
make that good Use of those Instructions, shall be given you from your
Catechism, as to live suitably to them.

And being thus well prepared, I hope, to receive Benefit from what shall
hereafter be delivered; what remains, but that I proceed to Instruct you in all
the Material Parts of the Christian Religion, to the Belief and Practice of
which you have given up your Names? This, by the Assistance of God, I shall
endeavor to do, (and I beg your Prayers to obtain his Assistance) and in the
same Method your Catechism teaches you; Our Catechism gives an entire
Instruction in the Covenant of Grace, both generally and particularly.
and I am sure I cannot choose a better to do it in; since whatsoever is
necessary to be Believed and Practiced in order to Salvation, you have therein
taught you both generally, and particularly.

As to a more General Institution, you have the sum and substance of the
Christian Religion, and whatsoever is necessary to Salvation taught you that
way, in those Three Questions and Answers, which I have now read to you. The
sum and substance of Christian Religion, I. Generally in the 3 First Questions
and Answers.
and whatsoever is necessary to Salvation, is certainly contained within the
Covenant of Grace; for undoubtedly there can be nothing more of absolute
Necessity to Salvation, than what God himself has been pleased to Promise and
Ensure unto us, and we our selves have Engaged to perform. And now in these
Three Questions and Answers now read to you,

First, You have whatsoever pertains to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace
expressly delivered. I will instance to you the particulars, which pertain to
the Nature of it, and will point to the Words wherein they are taught.

And in the first place you are Instructed, what are the Terms and Conditions
whereof it consists, both on God's Part, and on Ours, in these Words, Wherein I
was made a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom
of Heaven, which are the Mercies and Favors made over to us on God's Part of
the Covenant; and in these, First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all
his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should Believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And Thirdly, That I should keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life, which are the
Conditions to be performed on our Part of the Covenant.

Secondly, You have here taught you the Gracious Importance of this Covenant,
we are put thereby into A State of Salvation.

Thirdly, You have an Account of the Original of it, and by whose Mediation,
you obtained so Beneficial and Gracious a Covenant, taught you in these Words;
Through Jesus Christ our Savior. It was through the Mediation of Jesus Christ,
that we obtained the Benefit of so Gracious a Covenant.

Fourthly, You are Instructed by whom, and how you have been called into this
State of Salvation, by Means of the Covenant of Grace. It was your Heavenly
Father, who has called you to this State of Salvation through Jesus Christ our
Savior.

And Lastly, You are Admonisht of the very great reason you have to thank God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ, for so exceeding great a Mercy, as his Calling
you into it. And I thank God our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to
this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Thus far you are
Instructed concerning what pertains to the Nature of the Covenant.

II. You have also declared unto you, by what Sacrament, or Solemnity you first
entered into it. It was in your Baptism, wherein you was made a Member of
Christ, etc.

III. You have then those vast Obligations lying upon you, Faithfully and
Conscientiously to discharge your part of the Covenant laid plainly before you.
This you own in your Answer to this Question, Do thou not think, that thou
art bound to Believe, and to Do as they have promised for thee? To which you
are taught to Answer, Yes verily so I will.

IV. You have farther yet, the Means whereby you shall be enabled to perform
your Part of the Covenant. The First, is the Grace, Help and Assistance of God.
And by God's Help so I will. The Second Means, both to obtain the Divine
Assistance, and to enable you thereby to discharge your Covenant, is Prayer
unto God. And I Pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in the
same unto my Lives end.

And Lastly, You have also Intimated herein, Two material Circumstances,
relating to the making of this Covenant betwixt God and You, viz. 1. The time
of Infancy, wherein you entered into it, implied in these Words, Wherein I was
made. 2. The Persons by whom, as Proxies, you were Initiated therein. My
Godfathers and Godmothers did promise and vow three Things in my Name.

I will endeavor to Explain all these Points unto you, in this First and
General Part, according as they are here taught you in these Questions and
Answers now read, as the Text, beginning

First, With what pertains to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace.

And in order to the Understanding hereof, it may not be amiss to premise
something concerning the more general Notion of such Covenants, as are usually
made betwixt Governors, and their Subjects. And such an One, if it be perfect
in all its Parts, and fully expressed, may be defined to be

An Agreement between the Two Parties, wherein there are Promises, The Notion
of a Covenant.
Rewards, or profitable Considerations made over on one Part, and certain
Conditions to be performed on the other. And wherein also, there is an
Obligation on the one side, of undergoing some certain Penalties, in case of
not performing those Conditions consented unto by him, and imposed on him by
the other.

A Covenant, I say, is a mutual Agreement between Two Parties; It is a mutual
Agreement.
for if it be not mutual, and both Parties are not consenting to the Terms, the
One to the making good the Promises, the Other to the performing the
Conditions, the Agreement is none at all, or it is not Perfected, nor is it
Obliging on either side. There may be indeed a Law given by one that is
Superior in Power and Authority, which the Inferior is bound to Obey, whether
he consent, or no, because he is placed by the Divine Ordinance, under the
Other's Command, and if he does refuse to Obey, he may be justly Punished; but
then such a Transaction is to be considered as the giving of a Law, not as the
making of a Covenant. Nor is this a slight Difference; for where a Superior has
given a Law, if the Inferior has also Covenanted, and consented upon good
Considerations, and upon the Expectation of promised Rewards to obey that Law;
such a Covenant does withal lay a farther Obligation on the Party, on whom the
Conditions ly to be performed, by virtue of his own Consent, to do it; so that
in the Violation of his Duty, in such a case, he shall be accounted, not barely
Disobedient, but a Covenant-breaker, which is added as a more aggravated Sin,
Romans 1.31. and therefore deserving a more severe Punishment.

As there are Conditions therein on our side, so express Promises on the other.
It was farther added in the Definition, That in a Covenant there are certain
Promises, Rewards, and profitable Considerations made over on one Part, on
certain Conditions to be performed on the other. And herein also, with respect
to these Promises, there seems to be another main Difference betwixt the
Imposing of the Law, and the Making of a Covenant. The Difference seems to be
in this, That in the Imposing of a Law, the Lawgiver does not necessarily
oblige himself to confer any Benefits, more than natural Equity does oblige him
to, and it is sufficient to the Validity of his Law to render it Obligatory, if
there be a Threatening of Punishments, great enough to deter the Subject from
the Violation of that Law. But a Covenant does imply something more comfortable
in the Notion of it, and therein the Party covenanting, though it be God himself,
does graciously Condescend to oblige and bind himself, by express Promises,
(and usually by some outward Solemnities, as visible Signs and Seals) to the
performance of such Promises. And here also is another very considerable
Difference betwixt the Obligations of a Law and a Covenant, that whereas on
performance of Obedience to the Laws of a Superior, the Subject upon such his
Obedience, can have only, by virtue of the Law, some general and faint Hopes of
Benefit, so far as is Equitable, and as those who do well, may expect to
receive well. But, by virtue of a Covenant, the Party promising has moreover
given to the other, a full assurance of certain Benefits to be made good to
him; insomuch that upon our Repentance and Confession of our Sins, God will
reckon himself in Justice and Faithfulness bound (since the giving of the new
Covenant) to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. So that in short, A Covenant lays a greater Obligation, than the mere
imposing of a Law does, upon both the Parties joined in Covenant; a greater
Obligation, I say, upon the One, to perform the Conditions, upon the Other, to
make good the Promises. And let this suffice to have remarked upon the more
general Notion and Nature of a Covenant.

A View of ^he Covenant ^f Grace.
But for our better understanding the distinct Nature and Notion of the Covenant
of Grace in particular, we must take our Rise from the very Creation, and
consider the several Dispensations of God, by way of Covenant with Mankind. And
to begin with the Covenant made with Adam, and in him with all Mankind; the
whole Proceeding stands thus: God having made Man ^pright, and ^n a capacity
^ever to have violated his Covenant, did Engage him ^o a perfect, ^xact, and
^nsinning O^edience.
God having made Man upright, and given him a great measure of Light to direct
him, and of Strength to enable him to do, as he should appoint; proceeded then
to make this very reasonable Covenant and Agreement with him. He agreed to
continue and increase that Light and Strength to him, and to reward his acting
according to it with immortal Life and Happiness, provided he making use of his
Understanding and Power, would persevere to obey his Maker's commands, which if
he should not do, in every particular Instance of Duty, he threatened him with
Death, and eternal Misery. But then leaving him to act according to that
freedom of Will, wherewith as a reasonable Creature he had endowed him, Man did
^iolate it
Man did by his own voluntary Disobedience, through the Cunning of Satan,
tempting him thereto, transgress the Law given him by his Maker, Genesis 2.17. and
did thereby cast himself into a State of Sin and Misery under the Bondage of
Satan, without any power, or possibility to recover himself out of that
wretched Condition. And thus he broke his Covenant with God, Sinned against his
Creator, and so forfeited all the Happiness, conveyed to him therein, both for
himself, and his Posterity.

And now was Man in a desperate and forlorn Condition: His own Sin had made him
liable to the severest Strokes of God's displeasure; and the Divine Justice,
and Wisdom, The Divine Justice Wisdom, and Holiness required satisfaction.
and Holiness would not permit the Almighty (however his Goodness inclined him
to Pity) to let his Sin go unpunisht, and to restore him to a capacity of
Happiness, without a valuable Satisfaction made to infinite Justice, such as
should show the Divine hatred of, and severity against Sin, for the security of
his Government in the World: And yet no Creature in the Heavens above, or in
the Earth beneath, was sufficient for so great an Undertaking, as to satisfy
for him, For There is no Man can Redeem his Brother, or pay God a Ransom for
him, for the Redemption of his Soul is precious, Psalm. 49.7. And what now shall
be done to rescue Mankind out of this miserable State? Why, Man being himself
incapable to make it, by less than suffering an everlasting Punishment.
when unhappy Man was in this desperate and forlorn Condition, past all hopes
of Remedy, or Recovery, then did God's unspeakable Goodness choose to appear;
for to the wonder of Men and Angels, he does himself find out this way, to
raise us out of the Abyss of Misery, into a State of Happiness again, that he
So loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16.

So infinitely great, I say, were the Mercies of God to us, The Son of God
undertook.
and so admirable was his Wisdom in the Expression of 'em, that he himself
contrived (when no one else could) this Expedient for our Deliverance out of
this desperate and forlorn State: First, I. To satisfy for the Breach of the
First.
Because his Justice must be satisfied for the Breach of his Covenant, and yet
on the other side he would not have us Eternally punished, he therefore gave
his own Son to Dye in our stead, and by the infinite Merit of his Sufferings,
to make Satisfaction to infinite Justice, which we could not, so 2 Cor. 5.21.
He made him to be Sin, or a Sin-offering for us, who knew no Sin, II. To Cancel
it, and in its stead to make a Covenant of Grace consisting of conditions
performable in our fallen State.
that we might be made the Righteousness of God in him. And then Secondly,
Because it was impossible to be Saved by the First Covenant, which required
Unsinning Obedience, which we in our fallen State could not perform; he gave
him therefore to Cancel the First Covenant, and by his Bloodshedding to
Purchase for us a Second, whose Terms and Conditions being more possible and
easy, we might be capable of obtaining Salvation under it. Hence is he styled,
The Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. And his Blood called, The Blood
of the New Covenant, or the Blood, by which the New Covenant was purchased, and
which was shed for many, for the Remission of Sins, Matthew. 26.28.

And the Terms and Conditions of this Second Covenant, Wherein Repentance,
Faith, and a sincere Obedience is accepted, instead of a perfect, exact, and
unsinning Obedience.
being no more a perfect, exact and unsinning Obedience; Repentance is
henceforward to be admitted as a Means of Reconciliation, and a sincere
Obedience, to the best of our Power, will be accepted; and Faith in God, and in
Jesus Christ, accompanied with Living like those, who Believe the Gospel, shall
be henceforward imputed to our Justification; so that we shall have our Sins
pardoned, and be received to Happiness: This in short was the Tenor both of
the First Covenant, made with Adam, and the Second, procured for us by the
Mediation of Jesus Christ. Not to speak here of the different Measures and
Degrees of its Promulgation; nor of that Legal Covenant whereof Moses was the
Mediator, and was made only with the People of Israel, and was annexed as an
Appendix and Codicil to this Covenant of Grace, for Reasons too many, and too
large now to be considered. For though to show how, that the whole Promulgation
of this gracious Covenant, was not made all at once, but that it seemed good to
the Divine Wisdom, that so stupendous and grand a Scene of Mercy, should not
be opened but by degrees; though to show this, I say, and the several Reasons of
adding this Legal Covenant to the Covenant of Grace, may be useful Points of
Divinity to be explained in their due time, yet I look upon 'em, as none of the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, but rather part of that Strong Meat,
spoke of, Heb. 5.14. which belongs to them who are of full Age, and have been
already competently well instructed, and and so to be no proper Matter of
Catechetical Doctrine.

To proceed therefore, and in a word, we may consider the Second Covenant, not
as such indeed, which is made betwixt a Master and his Servant, wherein the
Master engages to allow Meat, Drink, and Wages, on Condition the Servant will
perform unto him such and such Services, which are just and reasonable, and the
Servant is capable to perform, which expresses more the Nature of the Covenant
of Works, Do this and Live: But rather, (for this comes nearer to the Nature of
the Covenant of Grace, between God and us, which is full of advantageous and
profitable Considerations on our side) we may rather compare it, It resembles
Articles of Accommodation made through the Intercession of a Prince's Eldest Son,
betwixt him and his Rebellious Subjects.
I say, to an Accord, made betwixt a Gracious Prince, and his Rebellious
Subjects, as suppose some City, or State, wherein the Prince is graciously
pleased, through the Intercession of some great Favorite, to grant unto those
his Subjects, not only Pardon of their former Crimes; but moreover, certain
great Privileges and Freedoms, Protection, and several particular Favors,
Lands and Possessions, and the like; on Condition they will thence-forward
Renounce and Forsake all his Enemies, and place no farther Trust, nor
Confidence in 'em; and will not Disobey him for the future in any of his just
and reasonable Commands, but pay him a true and faithful Obedience to all his
Laws.

And much of the same Nature, I say, is the Covenant of Grace, made betwixt God
and all Christians, through the Mediation of his only Son, only with this
difference: That on God's part, the Benefits and Advantages are of most
infinite Value, which are made over to us his Rebellious and Disobedient
Subjects; and this upon the most reasonable, just, and easy Conditions,
considering the Assistance he affords us, by the Virtue of the same Covenant,
to perform 'em. For Almighty God, in the first place, vouchsafes us in this
Covenant, to be made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which are Mercies and Privileges of invaluable Benefit and
Advantage to us: And we on the other side, Engage, and Promise, but to Renounce
the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and
all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; to Believe all the Articles of the Christian
Faith, to Obey God's holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all
the days of our Life; which, I say, are most reasonable, just, and easy
Conditions, considering the Assistance he will afford us, to enable us to
perform 'em.

This will very clearly appear, by that time I have Explained to you,
distinctly, and severally, the Terms and Articles of this Covenant; both the
Advantages made over to us on God's part, and the Conditions to be performed on
ours, as they are taught you in the Words, now read to you.

And it is a Subject, indeed, that does extremely concern you to be well
Instructed in, and to be considered by you. None of you shall be able to
perform a Bargain, except you know, what you have bargained and agreed to do.
No One can discharge a Bond, except he knows distinctly what he is obliged to
pay; no more can any of you be able to perform the Covenant of Grace, except
you do well understand the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of it.

And, indeed, Little more of universal Concernment to be known, but the
Articles of this Covenant.
there is perhaps but little necessary to be known in Religion, besides the
Articles of this Covenant. We may without Prejudice to our Salvation,
doubtless, be ignorant of many Points, that are Canvast with Heat enough, in
the Controversies of Men of all Persuasions; but to know what inestimable
Blessings God has Promised and Ensur'd to us, and what we are to perform to
make our selves Inheritours of those Blessings, is what every Body, who
believes a future State, and the Immortality of his Soul, and that it is worth
his while, to study the Salvation of his Soul, must think it necessary, except
he can imagine it safe to take his Journey to Heaven blindfold, when he cannot
think of getting, but to his short Home here on Earth, without his Eyes open.

A distinct and clear Understanding of the Nature, Terms, and Conditions, and
of all that pertains to the Covenant of Grace, is, without doubt, of all things
in the World, the most necessary. The Catechetical Method most useful to that
Purpose.
And there is no Method of Instruction, whereby it can be so distinctly and
clearly known, as the Catechetical way: For not to say, that Preaching, now
upon one Head, and immediately after upon another, without any dependence and
coherence of the several parts of Christianity together, is not so likely to
give Persons a clear understanding of the whole Nature and Design of
Christianity, as may be requisite: The Catechetical way, by treating orderly on
all the Parts of our most Holy Religion, and by giving thereby, a distinct View
of their natural Connection with, and Dependence one upon another, has this
Excellency in it, no doubt, that thereby Persons shall be better able to judge
of the beautiful Contexture, and admirable Contrivance of the whole; and shall
easily discern what End it is, that Christianity aims at, and how admirably
every Part of it, is fitted to carry on that great End.

It is, without all doubt, a most useful Method of Instruction, and it would
soon appear to be so, in its happy Effects, would all Persons but lay aside
their unhappy Prejudices against it, as if it were proper only for Children, to
be Hearers thereof: Whereas, indeed, it is no ways unbecoming the Eldest, and
most Knowing Persons, to hear the great and fundamental Doctrines of Religion,
explained, and handled distinctly and clearly, and separated from all
unnecessary Mixtures.

But where all the Means and Methods of Instruction are little enough, to give
Men a sufficient Understanding in all that is necessary to Salvation; instead
of comparing 'em one with another, we had better to make use of all, and to
Pray to God to give a Blessing to all his Ordinances, that every one may be
useful to the Edification, and Salvation of every Christian; which, that they
may all prove, may God Almighty grant of his infinite Goodness, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

THE Fifth Lecture. Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.
THE Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Catechism, do give you a general
Account of all the Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, both of the
Privileges made over to us by God, and of the Conditions to be performed by
us. And these Words, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, expressing the
First of those invaluable Privileges made over unto us, in this Covenant, on
God's Part; I shall therefore endeavor, as well as I can, to Explain and open
to you, what they do Import.

Christ is in Scripture often styled, The Head of the Church, as particularly
Col. 1.8. And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, it is there said; and we
are also styled, Members of this Body, the Church. Thus Ephesians. 5.30. We are
Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bones; so that to be a Member of
Christ, is to be a Member, A Member of Christ, is a Member. of Christ's Church
or Part of that Body, of which he is the Head, or to be a Member of Christ's
Church: And to make it appear to you, how happy a Thing it is to be a Member of
Christ's Church,

First, I will show you, What kind of Body the Church of Christ is.

Secondly, What it is to be a Member of it. And then

Thirdly, What exceeding great and invaluable Privileges do belong to a Member
of Christ's Church.

And First, let us see, What kind of Body that is, which is called the Church
of Christ. And though it does not belong to this Part of your Catechism, to give
you a full account, of all that is Necessary to be known, concerning Christ's
Church, which may more properly be referred to that Article of our Creed, I
believe the Holy Catholic Church: However, since the High Privilege and
Dignity of any Member, as a Member, cannot be sufficiently understood, nor
valued, without knowing the Nature and Excellency of that Body, of which it is
a Member; I do therefore think my self obliged, in order to let you into a
through Understanding of what is meant by A Member of Christ's Church, and of
the greatness of that Privilege, to speak something largely, in this Place,
concerning the Nature and Constitution of the Church it self; and I shall
therefore Define it, and also Explain, and prove each Part of the Definition, I
shall give of it, as follows:

^^nition ^^ist's ^o.
The Church of Christ, is the universal Society of Christians, consisting both
of Lawful Governors and Pastors, and also of the People of God committed to
their Charge; and who are called forth out of the wicked World, by the
Preaching of the Gospel, to a holy Profession and Calling; Namely, To
Repentance from dead Works, to the Knowledge, Belief, and Service of the One
True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and to the Enjoyment of those
inestimable Privileges of the Gospel, viz. Most reasonable and excellent Laws
to Conduct 'em to Heaven, Divine Grace and Assistance to Enable 'em to Obey
those Laws, Pardon of Sins, upon Repentance, for the Violation of 'em, and
Eternal Life and Happiness upon sincere Obedience to 'em. And who, to the End
of being Incorporated into one Society, and of having God, to be their God, and
they themselves his People, have Entered into Covenant with him, at Baptism,
and do often Renew the same in the Lord's Supper, and are Incorporated thereby
into one Body, subdivided, indeed, into several particular Bodies, and
Churches, for the convenience of Government and Worship, but holding Communion
with one another, in One and the same necessary and fundamental Points of
Christianity, necessary to constitute the Church, under Jesus Christ, their
superior Head.

church ^ist a ^der'd (...), ^n some ^over^ some ^ed.
And First, The Church of Christ is the Society of Christians, consisting both
of Lawful Governors and Pastors, and of the People of God committed to their
Charge. The Church of Christ is not a Confused, an Undigested, Headless
Multitude, but a Regular and well-ordered Society. Hence, it is so often in the
New Testament called, The Kingdom of God, as Matthew. 21.31. The Kingdom of
Christ, as Rev. 11.15. and The Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 11.12. and the Members
of it, Children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.38. And Ephesians. 2.19, 20, 21. The
Members therefore are styled, Fellow-Citizens, Members of a Household, and Parts
of a Temple, all which Expressions speak the Church of Christ to be a Regular
Society of Men, combined and knit together by Laws, derived from some supreme
Head and Governor. A Society, I say, wherein some are Superiors, some are
Inferiors, some Governors, some Governed, and who altogether make up a
well-compacted Body of Men. This last cited place out of the Ephesians, speaks
the Thing out: Now therefore, says he to those, who are called into the
Church, ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the
Saints, and of the Household of God, and are built upon the Foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, that is Governors and Teachers, Jesus Christ being the
the chief Cornerstone, in whom all the Building, fitly framed together,
grows up into an Holy Temple in the Lord. Here, in this Description of the
Church, you have Jesus Christ the chief Cornerstone, or Head of the Building,
and Body; the Apostles and Prophets Foundation-stones, next unto him, and all
the rest of Christians Fellow-Citizens, depending upon Jesus Christ, their
supreme Head, and Others his subordinate Governors, and Teachers, next under
him, and the Whole represented a well-compacted Building. Or, to make it yet
more clear to you, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. it is said, that He gave some, Apostles: and
some, Prophets: and some, Evangelists: and some, Pastors and Teachers, for the
work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ. So that upon the
whole Matter, you see, that the Church of Christ is a well-ordered Society of
Men.

And I do withal say, that in the Constitution of Christ's Church it is
required, that the Governors and Pastors thereof be Lawful Ones, that is, such
as Christ has Commissioned to those Offices, because if they Usurp the sacred
Offices of the Church, without being lawfully Ordained to the same, by the
Successors of Christ and his Apostles, there will be very great danger of a
Nullity in all their Ministerial Acts and Offices. You must all needs
understand this, That those, who shall pretend to act in any Office, by the
King's Authority, without a true Commission, the King will be so far from
reckoning himself Obliged, to Confirm what they shall pretend to do in his
Name, that he will punish the Presumption of such Officers, and those that
adhere to 'em. And what reason have those to expect better Treatment from the
King of Heaven, who shall either take upon themselves the Ministry, or recieve
an Ordination to it from those Hands, who have no Power to Confer it, or shall
Adhere to such Usurping Ministers? To put the case as Favorably, as possibly
we can, it does not appear, that God is under any Promise, or Engagement to
hear the Prayers, that such Ministers shall put for the People, to convey the
Graces of his Holy Spirit, by the Sacraments they shall Administer, or to
Ratify the Pardon of those Penitents, whom they shall Absolve; whereas he has
assured the Church, with respect to his lawful Ministers, that whatsoever of
this Nature they shall do on Earth, shall be Established in Heaven, Matthew.
16.19. And we are farther told by St. Paul, Heb. 5.4. That under the Old Law,
No Man took the Honor of the Priesthood unto himself, but those who were
called of God, as was Aaron. And as to the Ministers of the Gospel, St. Paul
does sharply demand, Rom 10.15. How any shall Preach the Gospel, except they be
sent? So that it does extremely concern all Christian People, that the
Governors and Pastors of the Church be lawful Ones, such as are Sent,
Ordained, and Commissioned thereunto.

And now, if you would be well satisfied, who are certainly Sent, An Episcopal
Clergy undoubtedly such.
Ordained and Commissioned to Govern and Teach in the Church; it is beyond all
doubt, that Bishops are lawful Governors in the Church of Christ, and that
those, who are Ordained by their Hands, have Commission to Preach the Gospel,
and Administer the Sacraments, because they do undoubtedly derive their Power
by an uninterrupted Succession from Christ and his Apostles; for our Savior,
when he sent forth his Disciples into the World, to Preach the Gospel, and to
gather a Church, he told 'em, Mat. 28.20. He would be with them, or stand by
'em in giving Authority and Success to their Ministry, to the end of the World;
and yet for certain, for 1500 Years he did Authorize no other, than those
Episcopally Ordained, as the Histories of all Ages of the Church do testify; so
that it concerns you, who have not that Necessity to plead for not Enjoying
Bishops, and an Episcopal Clergy, as our Sister Churches Beyond Sea think they
have; It concerns you, I say, as you would be secure of being within the Pale
of a right Constituted Gospel Church, not to separate your selves from this,
wherein you are undoubtedly under a true Gospel Ministry. But to proceed

^e Church ^he univer^ Society of ^istians, ^ng in men ^all Nati^ as well of
(...) Gentiles, (...) of the ^^s.
Secondly, The Church of Christ is the Universal Society of Christians. The
Christian Church is not now confined to one particular Place, or Nation, as the
Jewish was; but is Catholic and Universal, spread over all the Face of the
Earth, and taking in all Nations of Men, as well those, who were Gentiles, as
those, who were Jews: For Christ is our Peace, and has made both One, and has
broken down the middle Wall of Partition between us, Ephesians. 2.14. The Synagogue
of the Jews consisted of one Nation, and the more solemn Parts of their public
Worship, were confined to one Place, as you will see, Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6. So that it
was rightly said, Joh. 4.20. Though the Woman of Samaria did Schismatically
question it, That Jerusalem was the place wherein men ought to Worship; For the
Temple was the only place in which the Sacrifices could be Offered, and wherein
the Priests could perform their daily Ministration; so that the Church, under
the Law, was an Enclosure divided from all the World besides. But our Savior,
at the opening of the Christian Church, assures the Woman, who demanded of him,
Whether in that Mountain, near to Samaria, whereon they both stood, or in
Jerusalem, were the place where men ought to Worship, he assures her, The hour
comes when neither in that Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, they should worship
the Father; that is, not there only, nor any where in so carnal a manner, Joh.
4.20, 21, 22, 23. But as St. Peter tells us, now under the Gospel, In every
Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him,
Act. 10.35. And therefore our Savior, when he sent forth his Disciples into
the World, to Preach the Gospel, and to gather a Church, he commanded them,
Mar. 16.15. saying, Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every
Creature. From whence we find them, in Revelations 5.9. Crying unto the Lamb,
Thou wast slain, and have Redeemed us unto God by thy Blood, out of every
Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation. So, that whereas concerning the
Jewish Church it was, that God declared formerly, Exodus 19.5, 6. That in
keeping his Covenant, they should be a peculiar Treasure unto him, above all
People, a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy Nation. Now under the Gospel it is
declared, 1 Pet. 2.9. with respect to Persons of all Nations, who shall come
within the Christian Church, that they are a Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should show forth the
Praises of him, who has called them out of Darkness, into his mavelous
Light: But then, I say, the Church of Christ, though it takes in Persons of all
Nations, yet it is still to be a Holy Nation, a peculiar People. For though it be
spread over all the World, yet

(...) consists of ^h, who are ^l'd out of (...) World, by (...) Preach^^ of
the ^spel, to a ^y Professi^^ and Cal^g.
Thirdly, It consists only of such, who are Called forth out of the wicked
World, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a Holy Profession and Calling. It is
not either Jews, or Gentiles, whilst they continue such, that are of the Church
of Christ; but it consists of those, who are Called out from amongst both. The
Church is a selected People, separated from the Profane part of the World, to
be a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a Holy Nation, a Peculiar People.
To understand which, you must know, that the World, at the Time of our
Savior's coming into it, was grown to a sad pass, and was miserably Estranged
from God. The World, indeed, soon after the Creation, began to fall off from
God, and to take part with the Devil: But by the time that our Savior came
into the Flesh, the Apostle declares, Romans 3.11, 12. concerning as well Jews,
as Gentiles, that there was none that understood, there was none that sought
after God; that they were all gone out of the way, they were all become
unprofitable, that there was none that did good, no not one. Particularly, as
to the Gentiles, they were charged, Romans 11.23, 24.28, 29. to have Changed the
Glory of the incorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible Man, and
to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things, and were thereupon given
up to Uncleanness, and vile Affections; and as they did not like to retain God
in their Knowledge, they were given up to a reprobate Mind, being filled with
all Unrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, etc. And as to the Jews, they had
in a manner wholly voided the Force of God's Laws, by their false
Interpretations, as you will see in our Savior's Sermon on the Mount, which
cost him so much Pains to clear the Text from their false Glosses, and to show
them the full Extent of their Duty, contained in the Law. This was the State of
both Jews and Gentiles, at that time: And therefore did Christ come to Call out
such, as would Obey his Calls, to Call 'em out, I say, out of the wicked World,
to a Holy Profession and Calling; for which reason he is said to have Saved us,
and Called us with an Holy Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. and in a great many Places of
Scripture, Christians are therefore styled, the Called; and Joh. 17.6. they are
said to be such, whom the Father had given our Savior out of the world, and
though they are in the world, ver. 11. that is, Live in the World, yet they are
not of the world, ver. 16.

True it is, It is not every Member of the Visible Church, that does
effectually Obey this Holy Calling, and in his Life and Conversation, shows
himself not to be of the World; and therefore it is, that the Kingdom of
Heaven, that is, the Church, is liken'd Matthew. 13.24. to a Field, in which
Wheat and Tares grow up together until the Harvest; and to a Net that was cast
into the Sea, and gathered of every Kind: But however, though too many of those,
of whom the Church is composed, are in their own Persons Ungodly, yet, I say,

Fourthly, They are Called, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a Holy
Profession and Calling, as Namely, to Repentance from Dead Works; I. Repentance
from Dead Works.
for so our Savior says, He came to Call the Sinners to Repentance, Matthew.
9.13. And thus also his Apostles Preached unto Men, that they should turn from
the Vanities of Idol-worship, unto the Living God, which made Heaven, and
Earth, and the Sea, and all Things therein, Acts 14.15. which is an Instance of
Repentance, that the Gentile World were particularly Called to.

And then as to the Knowledge and Belief of the only True God, II. To the
Knowledge, Belief and Service of the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
and Jesus Christ; the distinguishing Character given of the Church of Christ,
Joh. 17.2. is, that they are such, whom the Father has given him (or given him
out of the world, as it is ver. 6.) that they might have Eternal Life; and
this, he tells us, ver. 3. is Eternal Life; or the way by which we can only
come by Eternal Life, That we Know the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom he
has sent. The Gentiles they Knew not the only True God, but Owned and
Worshipped many Gods, and did Sacrifice to Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. And as for the
Jews, though they Believed, indeed, in the only True God, yet they Acknowledged
not his Son Jesus Christ, whom he had sent, to be also the True God, as he is
called, 1 John 5.20. And now both these Enemies to Truth, our Savior Calls the
world, Joh. 17. and in Opposition to both tells us, ver. 3. that this is Life
Eternal, to Know the only True God, and Jesus Christ, whom he has sent. So
that the Church of Christ are such, who are peculiarly Separated from the
World, to the Knowledge and Belief of the Only True God.

And they are such also, who have been Baptized into the Knowledge, Belief, and
Service of Three Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in that One Godhead,
Matthew. 28.19. And particularly they are such as are Baptized into the Name of
Jesus, Acts 19.5. that is, into the Belief, that Jesus is the Christ, or
Mediator between God and Man, for this is the great Fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity, as the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. 3.11. assuring us, that Other
Foundation can no Man lay, than that Jesus is the Christ. And he, that denies
that Jesus is the Christ, is the great Liar, and an Antichrist, 1 John 2.22.
But, whosoever believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is Born of God, 1 John 5.1.
that is, is Adopted into the Christian Church and Family.

^II. ^njoy the ^ledges (...) Gospel.
Fifthly, And as Christians are a Society of Persons, called out of the World to
Repentance, Faith, and Gospel-Obedience; so to the Enjoyment of those
Inestimable Privileges of the Gospel, viz. 1. Most Reasonable and Excellent
Laws, given by a most Great and Gracious Governor, to Conduct 'em to Heaven,
Laws writ in their Minds, and in their Hearts, Heb. 8.10. that is, Laws, which
are for the most part, the very Dictates of natural Reason. 2. They are such,
as are Priviledg'd with having great Measures of Divine Grace, and Assistance
to enable 'em to Obey those Laws, for, whereas the Law was given by Moses,
Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1.17. and is the Privilege of the
Church of Christ under the Gospel. 3. They are such, who have Assurance of
Pardon of Sins, upon their Repentance for the Transgression of those Laws, for,
with Respect to those of the Christian Church, God is pleased to say, Heb.
8.12. I will be Merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will I remember no more. And lastly, As to the Eternal Life and
Happiness, Christ does assure us, Joh. 17.2. that The Father has given him
Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as are given
him, or are given him out of the world, ver. 6. that is, that he has a Power of
conferring the Rewards in Heaven, to as many as come within the Pale of the
Church, if they do withal live in Obedience to its Laws and Constitutions. Thus
is the Church of Christ a Society of Men, called forth of the World, as to a
most Holy Profession and Calling, so to the Enjoyment of most singular
Privileges.

Church ^h, who (...) End of ^ncorpo^ unto one (...), and of ^g God (...) their
Sixthly, And they are such, Who to the End of being Incorporated into One
Society, and of having God, to be their God, and they themselves his People,
have Entered into Covenant with him. It is the Royal Charter granted by the
King, to the Members of a Corporation, or City, whereby they have certain
Privileges granted them from the King, and wherein they are Tied to discharge
certain Duties to him, and to One another, that makes 'em, of a confused
Multitude, to become a Corporation, or regulated Society. And those who stand
out, and will not accept of those Privileges, nor oblige themselves to their
several Duties, shall not be reputed of that Corporation, nor receive any
Advantages from it. And so it is here with that Society, which is called the
Church of Christ. It is the Covenant of Grace, granted us by the King of
Heaven, wherein we have the most inestimable Privileges, those contained in
the Gospel, graciously Ensur'd unto us, and most reasonable Duties both to God
and Man, required of us, that do embody and join us into one Spiritual Society,
the Church; and those who will not Enter into such a Covenant with God, are
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenantts of
Promise, having no hope, and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. But those who
have joined themselves in Covenant with Him, are No more Strangers and
Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God,
ver. 19.

And as by being United in one Covenant, Christians are Incorporated into one
Society; so by the same Means it comes to pass also, that they have God to be
their God, peculiarly, and they become his People. Thus Heb. 8.10. This is the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, that is,
in the time of the Gospel, I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a
People. It is the Nature of all Covenants, to Unite the Parties Covenanting
together, and to give to each Party an Interest in the other. I entered into
Covenant with thee, and thou becamest mine, Ezekiel. 16.8. So that by having
Entered into Covenant with God, we are Entitled to his particular Protection
and Care over us, and we give to him thereby a new and stronger Claim to our
Obedience.

Seventhly, I. In Baptism.
And Christians are thus Entered into Covenant with God, and thereby made
Members of Christ's Church in their Baptism: For as all the Members of a
Corporation, are not usually made Members of that Society, without some certain
Solemnities; so it pleased God, that no One should be Entered into Christ's
Church, and be made a Partaker of the Privileges of it, without that outward
Rite of Baptism; for so we find, that when our Savior sent his Apostles to
Found, and Build the Church, they received, as a Commission to call forth out
of the World, a Church, by the Preaching of the Gospel: So an Appointment to
Incorporate all Men therein, by Baptism; Go and Teach all Nations, Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Matthew.
28.19. And hence, 1 Cor. 12.13. it is said, That we are all Baptized into one
Body, or admitted by Baptism into one Church.

Eighthly, And they are Appointed to Renew the same, II. To Renew it at the
Lord's Supper.
by Feasting often together at the Lord's Supper. This was anciently, and is
still the usual Method of Uniting more closely together the Members of any
Society or Corporation, their Feasting often together at one common Table; and
for this Reason, amongst others it is, that the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
is Appointed in the Church of Christ: So the 1 Cor. 10.17. it is said, That we
being many are one Bread, and one Body, for we are all Partakers of that one
Bread.

Ninthly, And now upon all these forementioned Accounts, The Church one Body.
the Church of Christ is One Body. Thus Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6. There is one Body, and
one Spirit, even as ye are all called in one Hope of your Calling, one Lord,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and
through all, and in you all; where you see, that because all Christians are
called out of the World, into one Hope of their Calling, or to the Enjoyment of
the same Privileges, to one Faith, or to Believe one God, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, expressed here by one Spirit, one Lord, one God, and Father of all;
and because Incorporated by one Baptism, or by the Use of the same Sacraments,
that therefore they are one Body. The Covenant of Grace, that great Charter,
whereby we are Incorporated into one Society, is One and the same amongst all
Christians, containing the same Duties to be performed by all, and promising to
every One that performs those Conditions, the same Privileges. And all Men are
every where admitted and continued in it by the same Sacramental Solemnities,
and therefore the Church founded upon, and Incorporated by that Covenant, must
needs be One.

^divided (...) several ^icular ^es and ^ches.
Tenthly, This one Body or Society, the Church, true it is, is Subdivided into
several particular Bodies or Churches, both for the convenience of Discipline,
and Government, and also for the convenience of Divine Worship. For the
convenience of Government it was anciently divided into Diocesan Churches,
wherein, because no one Man is able to Govern so vast a Body, I. (...) the
con^ence of ^ernment, (...) Diocesan ^ches.
as is the whole Church of God, each Bishop had his particular Flock, arising
out of one City, and the Parts adjoining, to Oversee and to Govern. Hence we
read, Rev. 2. and 3. chap. of the Church of Ephesus, the Church of Smyrna, the
Church of Pergamus, the Church of Thyatira, the Church of Sardis, the Church of
Philadelphia, and the Church of Laodicea, all which were so many Cities in the
Lesser Asia; and the Bishops of those Churches are Styled, the Angels of those
Churches, in those Second and Third Chapters of Revelations. And the Elders, or
Bishops of these Churches, probably it was, that St. Paul sent for, to meet him
at Miletus, Act. 20.17. and to whom he gave that solemn Charge, ver. 21.28. To
take heed unto themselves, and to all the Flock, over the which the Holy Ghost
had made them Overseers, to feed the Church of God, that is, to Govern and
Teach the Church of Christ, which he had Purchased with his own Blood.

And as for the Convenience of Government, the Church of Christ was anciently
divided into Diocesan Churches, in which Constitution of the Church, each City
has its Bishop to govern and direct the Affairs of the Church: II. ^r the
con^ence of ^ship, into ^ticular ^gregati^
So for the Convenience of Divine Worship, and because all the Members of a
City, and the Parts adjoining, could not meet together in the same Place, was
each Bishop's See farther divided, into particular Congregations and
Assemblies, under the Care of its respective Pastors: Hence as to the Church of
Corinth we gather, that, as it was but one Church; in regard it had but one
Bishop, or Governor, for St. Paul directs his Epistle thus, Unto the Church of
God which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2. yet in that one Episcopal Church, being
there were several Congregations met together, for the Worship of God, we read,
1 Cor. 14.34. of Churches in the Plural Number, and this particular Order of
the Apostle, about the Decency of Divine Service, in those particular Churches,
or Congregations; Namely, that Women should keep Silence in the Churches. Thus,
true it is, the Church, which is but one Body, is Subdivided into several
particular Bodies, or Churches; both for the convenience of Discipline and
Government, and also for the convenience of Divine Worship: But however United,
by one Covenant, into one Body.
But however those several particular Churches were United into one Body, by
one Covenant; for the Church of Corinth, the Church of Ephesus, Smyrna, etc,
were all called to the same Holy Profession and Calling, to the same Faith in
God, and to the same Privileges of Grace, Pardon, and Happiness, as the whole
Church, and were admitted into that same Covenant, by the same Sacraments, as
the whole Catholic Church was; by which means They kept the unity of the
Spirit, in the bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3. And each of those particular
Congregations, also in the Church of Corinth, for Instance, were United also to
the Church of God, in that City, by holding no other than the Doctrine
Established in that Church: And by being United thereby to that particular Part
of Christ's Church, they were United also to the whole Body of Christ, and made
up but one Body, For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the
Members of that one Body being many, are one Body; so also is Christ, or the
Christian Church, for by one Spirit, we are all Baptized into one Body, whether
we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free; and have been all made to
drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. So that the Church of Christ, you see,
though divided into many Branches, or Members, is but one Body in the whole,
because United in, and by One and the same Covenant of Grace: And also in the

Eleventh Place, As also by holding Communion with each other, in Hearing the
Word, in Common Prayers, Sacraments, and in affording to each other mutual
Assistances.
Because all the several particular Churches are to Hold Communion with each
other. Now as to that Communion, which the Members of Christ's Church held with
one another in the Apostle's Times; (and sure their's must be a Pattern of
Church Communion) we are told, Act. 2.42. that it consisted in this, That They
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine,
that is, they continued constantly, and also steddily, without swerving aside
by Separation, in Hearing the Apostles Teach. They continued also steadfastly in
Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, that is, they Joined constantly and
frequently in the same Prayers and Sacraments. And lastly, They continued
steadfastly in the same Fellowship, by which is principally meant in the
Original, both here, and in several other Places of the Scripture, that
Communication of charitable Assistances, that all the Members did afford each
other, according to their several Wants and Necessities: For whether any
Sister-Church were under Persecutions, or any particular Christians did labor
with Want, the other Members of the Body did Communicate to the Relief of
either. And the Apostle did also appoint that to be done in the Christian
Assemblies, when they met together to Communicate in Hearing, Prayers, and
Sacraments, ordering, that The first day of the Week, which was the Day of
their Public Assemblies, every one should lay by him in store, as God had
prospered him, to this Purpose, 1 Cor. 16.2. So that if One Member suffered,
all the Members suffered with it, and there was no Schism in the Body, but the
Members had the same care one of another, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26.

In a word: Such was the Communion, which the Members of the Church held with
each other, in those Days, which made it one Church, that there was no such
thing as any separate Meetings, from those of the Apostles, and their lawful
Successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Flock, set up under the Pretense of
better Edification, and for more pure Administrations of Ordinances. No, no
sooner did any attempt to make such a Schism, but he was accounted a Gangreen'd
Member, and cut off from the Body for so doing. And so much was mutual Kindness
and Charity to be the distinguishing Character of Christ's Church, that our
Savior declared, Joh. 13.35. That by this should all men know his Disciples,
that they had love one for another.

church (...) into ^^dy, jesus ^its su^ Head.
And now Lastly, It only remains, to complete this my Explication of Christ's
Church, to show you, That this whole Society of Men, called forth out of the
World, to such Duties and Privileges, as has been spoke, is to be United into
one Body, as has been declared, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head. Every
Society of Men must have some supreme Head to keep it, both in Being, and
Order; and Christ is so much, to all Intents and Purposes, the Head of the
Church, that there is no respect, in which any thing is the Head of the Body,
in which Christ is not, in like manner, the Head of the Church. (...) Po^ Head
^^urch.
And First, There is the Political Head in every Kingdom, which is the Prince,
that gives Laws to his People, and Heads and Protects them against their
Enemies. And such a Head is Christ in that Spiritual Kingdom, the Church of
God, Whom the Father having Raised from the Dead, did put all things under his
Feet, and gave him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body,
Ephesians. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. And therefore pursuant to this Power, which was Given
him in Heaven, and in Earth, to give Laws to Mankind, did he Commission his
Disciples, and send them forth into the World, to Proclaim his Laws, to Teach
all Nations Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had Commanded
them; assuring them withal, that Lo he would be with them always, even unto the
End of the World, Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. that is, That he would be ever with
'em, to Head and Protect 'em against their Adversaries.

Secondly, There is also a Domestic Head, viz. the Husband, in respect of the
Wife; and so likewise is Christ the Head of the Church, and he is the Savior
of the Body, Ephesians. 5.23. And, indeed, the Holy Spirit does love to Represent him
as such a Head, as also by the Title of a Shepherd over the Flock, to signify
the Gentleness of his Government, and the Sweetness, and Goodness of his Laws,
tending all for the Good of those he Governs.

And Thirdly, There is the Natural Head of the Body, which is the Fountain of
Life and Spirit, from whence it is derived into all the Parts of the Body, to
enable and enliven all the Members thereof, to discharge their several Offices
and Duties: And in Allusion to this, ^ist the ^al (...) of the ^h.
is Christ said to be the Mystical Head of the Church, from whom all the Body,
by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment ministered, increases with the Increase
of God, Col. 2.19.

And thus I have at length sufficiently, in order to my Design of Explaining
this Article, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, showed you, What kind of
Body the of Church of Christ is. And, by the By, from what has been said, it
does appear, That the Church of Christ is a Spiritual Kingdom, put up in the
World by God, The Church of Christ, a spiritual Kingdom
on purpose to reduce Man to his due Allegiance to his Maker, and to destroy
the Dominion of Satan, which he had so long Usurpt over Mankind. It is a
Kingdom, as it consists of inferior Governors and Subjects, combined together,
by special Laws of Allegiance, to the Sovereign King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, and by Privileges granted, by that Supreme Head and Governor, to such
his Subjects; and therefore it is so often, in the Scripture, called a Kingdom:
But you see withal, it is a Spiritual Kingdom, by the Nature and Design of
which, God is to Rule in the Hearts and Spirits of Men, and therefore it is,
all over the New Testament, called the Kingdom of God, the Kingdom of Christ;
For Christ does Reign and Rule therein by his Gospel, as the Laws of that
Kingdom, over the Spirits of Men; and those are the People or Subjects of this
Kingdom, who own him for their King, and his Gospel for the Laws of this
Kingdom; and who do give themselves up wholly, both Body, Soul and Spirit, to
be Governed by those Laws.

And the Church is also often called in the Holy Scripture, the Kingdom of
Heaven, for indeed it is not a Kingdom of this World, supported with outward
State, and armed Forces, in order to promote, and to secure from those who
would Invade 'em, our temporal Interests; If my Kingdom were of this World,
then would my Servants fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, Joh.
18.36. but it is a Kingdom, or Society of Men, associated together, and Listed
to Fight under Christ, the Great Captain of our Salvation, against much more
formidable Enemies, than any Earthly Potentates; Even against Principalities
and Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against spiritual
Wickedness in high Places, Ephesians. ^.12. that is, against the Devil, and his
wicked Angels, who would despoil us of our Heavenly Inheritance. Listed, I say,
to fight under Jesus Christ, the Great Captain of our Salvation, for so he is
called Heb. 2.10. and to our Comfort, who are to fight under him, he has
already Spoiled these Principalities and Powers, and has made a show of them
openly upon the Cross, triumphing over them in it, Col. 2.15. So that our Work
is in a great measure already done under his Conduct, for he himself has
divested the Devils of much of their Power, he has thrown 'em out of their
Temples, silenced their Oracles, and does daily, by his Assistances, enable us
to Foil 'em. So that the Church of Christ, you see, is a Spiritual Kingdom.

But yet notwithstanding, that this Society, the Church, But yet
notwithstanding a Visible Society.
is a Spiritual Kingdom, both as its Laws are Spiritual, reaching to the
Government of the Inward Man; and also, as it is a Body Listed under a
Spiritual King, to fight against Spiritual Enemies: Yet however, from what has
been said, it does appear, that the Church, or Kingdom of Christ, is a Visible
Society of Men, consisting of such who make an Outward and Visible Profession
of Allegiance to Christ, having visibly, by an Outward Sacrament, Entered into
Covenant with him, and being such as do visibly Communicate together in his
Holy Ordinances. And therefore it is not only of such who by an inward, real,
and true Faith are United to Christ, that the Church and Kingdom of God, in
this World, does consist, but of all those outward Professors of Christianity,
who, by the Sacrament of Baptism, have Entered into Covenant with God. Such
indeed as besides an outward Covenanting, (which is certainly necessary) are
Renewed withal to the Image of God in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true
Holiness, are the only Persons of which the Invisible Church, as it is called,
does consist in this World, these perhaps being meant by the Little Flock, Luke
12.32. and of such only will the whole Church, in the World to come, be made
up, being, of The many that, are Called, the few that are Chosen, Matthew. 20.16.
But if we consider the Church of Christ in its full Latitude, and in that
imperfect State wherein it now is, on this side Heaven; many Hypocrites and bad
Men, as well as truly sincere and good Christians, do belong to it, for the
Church of Christ, here on Earth, is compared, Matthew. 13.24, 25. to a Field,
which contains Wheat and Tares growing up together, and to a Net, ver. 47.
wherein there are Fish, both good and bad. Such you see is the Nature and
Temper of that Body of Christ, his Church; concerning which I thought it
requisite to give you a more than ordinary full account, even in this place,
before we come to the Article, I Believe the Holy Catholic Church, because
that otherwise it cannot be so well Apprehended,

^t it is to (...) Member ^hrist's ^rch.
Secondly, What it is to be a Member of Christ's Church; which now the way being
so far cleared, I shall in few words show you. And from what his been said it
does easily now appear, that a true Member of the Church of Christ, is one who
belongs to that Society of Christians which consists of Lawful Governors and
Pastors, and of the People of God committed to their Charge, the one Ministering
in Holy Things, and the other Partaking thereof at their Hands. He is not a
Member of that narrow and enclosed Society of Worshipers, the Jewish Synagogue,
who by their peculiar Rites and Ways of Worship, were confined to one Nation
and Place, no more than he is one of the Gentile World at large; but he is one,
who either himself was called, or is descended of those who were called, from
out of the wicked World of Jews and Gentiles, to a Holy Profession and Calling,
viz. To the Belief of the One True God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; as also to
Repentance from dead Works, to serve Him the only Living and True God. And he
is called, as to Faith and Repentance, so to enjoy the Privileges of the
Gospel, and the Rewards of such Faith and Repentance; namely, Most Reasonable
and Excellent Laws and Ordinances, to Conduct him to Heaven, with a plentiful
measure of Divine Grace and Assistance also, conveyed by those Ordinances, to
Enable him to Obey those Laws; and he is one, who to the End of being of that
Society of Men, the Christian Church, and of having God a Friend to him, and he
himself a Servant of God's, has solemnly Entered into Covenant with God in his
Baptism, and continues often to Renew the same in the Lord's Supper, because
the Divine Goodness does in both Vouchsafe to make over and ensure to him those
exceeding Great and Invaluable Privileges, and most singular Benefits, as well
as he on the other side, does solemnly Engage to yield himself up to the
Service and Obedience of God. Farther yet, a Member of Christ's Church is one,
who is not only United to the Catholic Church in and by one Covenant, that is,
in the Profession of the same Faith and Repentance, and in the Enjoyment of the
same Privileges, and in the use of the same Sacraments: But also he maintains
this Union therewith, by Communicating with that particular Part of the
Catholic Church where he lives, and whereof he is a Member in particular; by
communicating, I say therewith, in Hearing, together with the rest of the Body,
the same Doctrine, in Joining in the same common Prayers, and receiving the
same Holy Sacraments; and Lastly, in Receiving from, and Administering mutual
Assistances to the Members of that Body, wherever dispersed, or however
distressed over the Face of the whole World, as there shall be occasion. And
lastly, a Member of Christ's Church is One, who belongs to that universal
Society of Men, called out of the World, to such Duties and Privileges, as has
been spoke, and is United into one Body, by the same means, as has been
declared, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head. And if you consider him as a
Member of the Kingdom of Christ, he is one who is Delivered by God from the
power of Darkness, and is translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col.
1.13. that is, he is one of those, who is delivered by the Gospel, from under
the Tyranny of Satan, under which the whole World was held Captive, and is made
a Subject to the Gracious Government of the Son of God. From what has been
said, it does plainly appear, I think, that such, and such a One only, is a
true Member of Christ's Church.

And in the Sense of your Catechism, which teaches all to Answer, That in their
Baptism they are made Members of Christ; every Person who has been admitted
into the Church by Baptism, is a Member of Christ, and shall continue such till
he is cut off by the just Sentence of those Governors in the Church, who have
the Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or Shut out; or till he cuts off himself
from that mystical Body, by a causless Schism and Separation, from any of its
sound Parts.

Every Baptized Person, I say, is a Member of the Visible Church. Every
Baptized Person is a Member of the Visible Church.
So the Apostle expressly speaks, Gal. 3.27. assuring us, that As many as have
been Baptized into Christ, that is, the Christian Church, have put on Christ,
or have put on that Relation to Christ that Members have to the Body. True it
is, amongst those, that are Incorporated by Baptism into the Church, many do
prove but very unsound and unfruitful Members; such as, though they are admitted
into that Holy Society, in order to their Edification, and through Conversion,
by the means of those Holy Ordinances, which Christ has appointed in in his
Church, do yet continue to be very bad Men, both in their Principles and
Practices. Hence it is said, Matthew. 22.10. that of those who are called into
the Wedding, that is, the Church, by the Servants or Officers of the
Bridegroom, that is, Christ, there are as well Bad as Good. Yet as appears from
that, and many the like Parables of our Savior, concerning the Materials and
Constitution of his Church, even such bad Men, when once Baptized into it, are
Members of it.

And shall continue to be Members of it, And shall continue such, (...) off by
^st Sen^^ (...) those, ^ave the (...) of the (...) to Re^^n, or ^^ut.
till such time as they are cut off by the just Sentence of those who have the
Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or Shut out. For this you are to know, that
Christ has given his Apostles, and their Successors in the Government of the
Church, a Church Authority, consisting in Receiving in, or Shutting out of the
Church. To Receive into the Church, is to Admit such as make a Profession of
Christianity; to Admit 'em, I say, by the Sacrament of Baptism, to all the
outward Acts of Communion. To shut, or cast out of the Church, is by
Excommunication to Exclude unworthy Persons from that Privilege of
Church Communion, to deny 'em the Liberty to Pray, or Receive the Sacrament, or
perform any Religious Office in the Public Assemblies of the Church. And now
accordingly has Christ appointed the Bishops and Governors of his Church, to
be as Shepherds to Oversee the Flock, as you will find, Act. 20.28. and has
given 'em The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 16.19. that is, Authority,
as to Admit into the Church, by Baptism, all who make a Profession of
Christianity; so to Expel out of it, by Excommunication, all those scabbed
Members thereof, who contrary to such their Holy Profession, either by their
pestilent Heresies, or by their scandalous Ill Lives, are Unworthy of it, and
in danger to Infect it. If they Preach, or anywise propagate any pestilent
Heresy, contrary to the fundamental Truths of Christianity, let their Persons
be never so acceptable, upon the account of some shining Virtues of Charity, or
their Doctrines never so Plausible, as pretending to Reason, they ought not to
be spared. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you,
than that which we have preached unto you, let him be Accursed; that is,
Excommunicated, and cut off from Church Communion, Gal. 1.8. So far was this
Blessed Apostle, so Zealous for the Glory of his Savior, from sparing others,
that he would not have himself be suffered to continue in the Communion of the
Church, were it possible he should be guilty of propagating Heresy: And so
likewise is any Person, guilty of a notorious and scandalous Ill Life. Why then
also are the Governors of Christ's Church commanded, To put away from 'em that
wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.13? And all the Members of the mystical Body, are so
far bound to take notice of such an Excommunication, as to disown and discard
such a Person, and to have no Society with him, so 1 Corinthians, 5.11. If any
man that is called a Brother, be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or
a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner, with such a one, after
Excommunication, they were not to Eat. In such Cases as these, indeed, an Evil
Member becomes no Member, and is to be to the rest as a Heathen Man, and a
Publican, that is, one that is out of the Church, Matthew. 18.17.

^ll he cuts ^elf off, (...) causless ^m and ^ation, (...) any of ^bund (...).
And so likewise is he, who cuts himself off from that mystical Body the Church,
by a causless Schism, and Separation from any of its sound Parts. I say, any of
its sound Parts, for wherever there is a true Church, if there be nothing in
its Doctrine nor Worship that is sinful, every Person is bound to Continue
steadfastly in the Doctrine, Prayers, and Sacraments, and Fellowship of that
Church, as in the Apostle's times they did, Act. 2.42. and to reject the
Communion of all other Parties and Sects of Christians, or otherwise he will
cut off himself from the Church, and will cease to be a real Member of it, as
the Finger ceases to be of the Body, when it is cut off from the Arm. Thus, in
either of these cases, indeed, shall a Person dis-continue to be a Member of
Christ's Church; when either he is Cut off, by the just Sentence of those
Governors in the Church, who have the Power of the Keys, to Receive in, or
Shut out, or when he Cuts himself off by a causless Separation and Schism, from
any of its sound Parts.

But otherwise, all Persons who have Entered into Covenant with God, and have
been Admitted into it by Baptism, are Members of Christ's Church, (as has been
already sufficiently proved, and need not again be repeated:) And so shall
Partake of those exceeding great Privileges, which belong to the Members of
it; which what, and how great they are, I come next to declare unto you.

THE Sixth Lecture. Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.
BY the Church of Christ, as has been showed, is meant a Visible Society of
Men, called forth of the World, to the Knowledge, Belief and Service of the One
True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and Professing the same in Opposition to
the Service of Satan, and all false Gods whatsoever, and also to all those
vicious and immoral Practices, which did so notoriously accompany the Pagan
Worship; and indeed professing an utter Hatred to all Sin, of any kind. And it
is a Society, as has been showed you, combined into one Covenant with God, by
outward Sacraments, and holding Communion with each other, under Jesus Christ
its Head.

And a Member of Christ's Church, you have also seen, is every One, who has
been Entered into this visible Society of Holy Men, and into this Covenant with
God, by Baptism, and who holds a constant Communion, without swerving aside
into separate Assemblies, with that Particular, True, and Orthodox Church,
whereof he is a Member, and in whose Verge he lives. Every such Person, I have
showed you, is a Member of Christ's Church, and will continue such, except his
Lawful Governors therein, should cut him off by a just Excommunication, or he
should cut off himself by a sinful and unnecessary Separation.

And now having sufficiently made it appear, in the former Discourse to this
purpose, First, what kind of Body that is, which is called the Church of
Christ, and also, Secondly, having showed you, what it is to be a Member of it;
it will be now requisite, that I should also Demonstrate to you, (in order to
make you sufficiently sensible of which, the Two former Points have been so
largely treated of) Thirdly, what vast and invaluable Privileges do
accordingly belong to every Member of Christ's visible Church. I say, to Every
Member of Christ's visible Church, for it is not my Business here to Enlarge on
the more peculiar Privileges of those, who are styled Members of the Invisible
Church, who are the sincere Part only of Christ's visible Church. Those
perhaps, I may also declare in few words by the By. But the Privileges, which
I am here concerned to Treat upon, and to Acquaint you with, are such as belong
to every Member of the Church I have been speaking of.

And these Privileges, The Privileges of our being Members of Christ's Church.
which do peculiarly belong to all the Members of Christ's Church, as they are
the Members of such a Body, whereof he is the Head, are these Two: First, a
most reasonable and excellent Body of Religion and Laws, together with most
profitable and edifying Institutions and Ordinances, appointed by Him, our
supreme Head and Governor, to conduct us to Heaven. Secondly, a sufficient
measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived down upon us, from Him our
mystical Head, and conveyed by those his Ordinances, to Enable us to conform to
his Religion, and Obey those Laws.

And the first Great Privilege, I. A most excellent Body of Religion, Laws,
and Ordinances.
which does peculiarly belong to all the Members of Christ's visible Church, as
they are the Members of such a Society, Is a most reasonable and excellent Body
of Religion and Laws, together with most profitable and edifying Institutions
and Ordinances, given and appointed us by him our supreme Head and Governor,
to Conduct us to Heaven.

We do enjoy, I say, thereby, The Christian Religion, and Laws, far exceed the
Pagan, Mohammedan, or Jewish.
The Privilege of a most reasonable and excellent Body of Religion and Laws,
far exceeding what any other People have ever enjoyed, to Conduct us to Heaven.
This is clearly to be seen, Heb. 8.8, 9, 10, 11. where God himself finding
Fault with the Jewish Covenant and Laws, as what could not make the Comers
thereunto Perfect, says, Behold, the days come, when I will make a new
Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; not according
to the Covenant, that I made with their Fathers, in the day when I took them by
the hand, to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for this is the Covenant that
I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will
put my Laws into their Minds, and write them in their Hearts, and I will be to
them a God, and they shall be to me a People. And they shall not teach every
man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all
shall know me from the least to the greatest; which remarkable Words, spoke
first by the Prophet Jeremy, as a Prophecy of the most happy State of the
Christian Church, by reason of the most excellent Covenant and Laws that would
be given it, beyond what was the State of the Jewish, do import, that even the
Jewish Covenant was not in it self Perfect, and such as could not be bettered
and improved, though it had God for its Author; (and sure then those
Superstitions, which derive themselves from no better Authors than the Devil,
and wicked Impostors, must be very bad) but that the Christian Covenant, and
Laws have such an inward, essential Goodness in them, that a Man's own Reason
would prompt him to Approve 'em as Best, and most Excellent; there being none
of its Doctrines, but what are highly agreeable to the best Reason of Man, and
all its Precepts being no other, than the Law written in every Man's own Heart.

And indeed the Christian Religion, whether we consider it, as compared with
the Pagan, or Mohammedan Superstition, and Jewish Dispensation, or in its own
Nature, it is a most singular Institution, and Body of Laws, and such as we
ought to Esteem it our very great Happiness and Advantage, above other Men,
that we are under the Government of 'em.

And First, consider the whole Body of the Pagan Superstition, The Pagan
Superstition ^d to no^, but to (...) humane ^^re.
and what else did it tend to, but to debase Mankind infinitely below the
Dignity of their Nature, and to Defile 'em much more than the very Brutes. The
Gods, which the Pagans worship, were at best the most Vile and Infamous of
Humane Race, viz. An Adulterous Jupiter, a Revengeful Juno, a Drunken Bacchus,
a Wanton Venus, a Thievish Mercury, and a Cruel Mars (not to mention how they
Bowed themselves before, and gave Divine Worship to the most poor and
contemptible, ^he Gods (...) Pagans ^iped, (...), at best, ^ost in^us Men (...)
Women.
senseless Creatures.) And when they Worshipped Adulterers, and Whores, and
Thieves, and Drunkards, what can be expected but that the Rites whereby they
served 'em, should be accompanied with the vilest Practices, such as were
answerable to the Nature and Temper of such Deities? Which was the occasion of
those Words of St. Peter, 1 Epist. 4.3. telling those, who had been lately
Converted from Paganism to Christianity, that The time past of their lives was
sufficient to have wrought the Will of the Gentiles, when they walked in
Laciviousness, Lusts, Excess of Wine, Revellings, Banquetings, and abominable
Idolatries; wherein is more than intimated, that the Idolatries of the Heathens
were usually accompanied with such villainous Practices. And indeed from the
Pagan Authors themselves we know they were so.

^y times (...) worship^ ^he very ^ls them^s.
But it was not only the vilest of Men and Women, but the Devils themselves,
whom the Pagans worshipped, and whom they were wont to serve, not only with
abominable Idolatries, accompanied with most lewd Practices (which however
hateful to right Reason, might be grateful to some sensual Spirits) but they
were forced to commit many times the greatest Violences possible to Humane
Nature in their Worship to those barbarous and cruel Devils, they Adored. and
that (...) lewd, ^arous, (...) cruel (...).
Thus it was the manner of the Worshipers of Baal to cut themselves with Knives
and Lancers till the Blood gushed out upon them, 1 King. 18.28. Nay, They
sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent Blood,
even the blood of their Sons and of their Daughters, whom they sacrificed unto
the Idols of Canaan, Psalm. 106.37, 38. Which was a Barbarity so horrid to
Humane Nature, that they were forced to make use of loud Instruments, at the
time of Sacrifice, to drown the Noise of the shrieking Infants. And at this Day
the Idol Vitsiputsi amongst the Indians, is said to have many Thousands slain
in one of his solemn Processions, it being usual for his Worshipers to throw
themselves under the Wheels of his Massy Chariot, on purpose to be crushed in
Pieces, by the Weight thereof going over 'em. Such are the lewd and barbarous
Rites of the Pagan Religion, not to mention any thing of those intolerable
slavish Fears, which always possess Idolatrous and Superstitious Religionists,
who are always in dread, lest they should ncense the angry and peevish Demon,
by every l^ttle Accident, and are ever upon the Rack, studying to please him by
innumerable little insignificant Observances.

^^e Maho^^n Reli^ is a vile ^^sture.
Nor Secondly, As to the Mohammedan Religion, is there any thing in it worthy of
God, whereby we should judge him to be its Author. First, it is a plain
Imposture and Cheat, pretending to be Revealed by God, to his Prophet Mahomet,
after the Jewish and Christian Religion, as a more perfect Institution than
either, whereas, indeed, look into the whole Matter, and inward Frame thereof,
and we shall find nothing in it, as One observes, but a Mass of foolish
Opinions, odd Stories, uncouth Ceremonies, compounded chiefly of the Dregs of
Christian Heresies, together with some Ingredients of Judaism and Paganism,
confusedly jumbled, or unskilfully mixed one with the other. But as to that
great Principle of it, which promises in Paradise a Thousand Years
satisfaction, arising from sensual Pleasures, and the Enjoyment of Women, to
those, who shall slay the Unbelievers, that is, Christians; (for so they do
call us especially, because we believe not in their Mahomet.) This one
Principle of their Religion, I say, is enough to debauch Humane Nature to the
lowest Degree of Naughtiness, by giving Encouragement to the Two worst of Sins,
Lust, and Cruelty; Its Principles tend to Lust, and Cruelty.
and accordingly the Effects of it are, That they give an unbounded Range to
their Lusts amongst themselves, and are Cruel and Blood-thirsty to all the
World besides, being Instigated by their very Religion, to fill the whole Earth
with War, Desolations and Misery; so that this is another Religion also, which
Tends, instead of Improving, to deprave Humane Nature, and to make it much
worse.

And Thirdly, As to the Jewish Religion, Judaism was an imperfect and unfinisht
Draught of Religion.
though that indeed was of a Divine Original, yet whether it were that the
Infancy of the World was not ripe for a more deep and manly Instruction; or
whether that particular Nation however, to whose Disposition and Capacity those
Laws and Constitutions were suited, was unfit for the highest and hardest
Lessons; so it was, that St. Paul calls their Ordinances, Poor and Beggarly
Elements, Gal. 4.9.3. And indeed as to the Ritual Part of their Law, the
Ceremonies and Sacrifices thereof, were for the most part Types and Shadows of
good things to come, Heb. 10.1. And as to the Moral Part, Moses for the
hardness of their Hearts, was forced to Indulge 'em, what the Perfection and
Purity of the Christian Religion, will by no means allow of, as may be seen in
the Case of Putting away a Wife for every Cause, Luke 19.8. But above all, it
is to be considered, that universal Love and Charity to Enemies, to all
Mankind, of what Nation and Religion soever they be, which does so nearly
resemble us to God himself, Who makes his Sun to rise on the Evil, and on the
Good, Matt. 5.45. was as it were a New Commandment to them, Joh. 13.34. And yet
such an unbounded Charity and Kindness, as this, is the great and necessary
Duty of Christianity. So that Judaism at the best, and before that it was
Corrupted by the false Interpretations put upon the Law, by the Scribes and
Pharisees, was but an imperfect Draught of Religion, begun by Moses, but left
to be finished by the more perfect Strokes of our Savior's Pencil afterward,
who is therefore said to have Come, not to destroy the Law or the Prophets, but
to fill 'em up, Matthew. 5.17. Thus Imperfect at best, was the Jewish Law. But
now consider

Fourthly, The whole Body of that Religion, Christianity a most excellent
Religion.
which Christ our supreme Head and Governor has given us, and under whose
Guidance we have the Happiness to be, as we are the Members of Christ's Church,
and nothing can represent God in more Noble Characters, and Glorious
Perfections; nothing can give a more Honorable and Rational Account of his
Proceedings with Man, both in his Creation and Redemption of him, than it does.
And as his Laws are infinitely beyond what the Wisdom of any Humane Lawgivers
did ever yet contrive for the good Order of Man in this World, and his real
Happiness both in this, and the World to come; so no Motives, nor Reasons can
possibly be more Powerful, than those, which Christianity does give us, to Obey
those Laws.

(...) Gives a excellent ^esentati^ ^f God.
As to the Nature of God, Christianity does plainly Represent him as a Being,
that has no manner of Imperfection in his Nature, but as One, that is Adorned
with all the most Glorious Attributes and highest Perfections possible. It
represents him to us so infinitely Wise, Just and Holy, and yet so wonderfully
beyond all Comparison Good and Merciful; and to add to all this, so intimately
Present to all we say, or do, so Omniscient in discerning the very Thoughts and
Intents of our Hearts, and withal so absolutely Powerful in doing whatsover he
pleases in Heaven and in Earth, that Shall not this his Excellency make us
afraid? Job 13.11.

(...) gives an ^ourable ^^nt of his ^eedings (...) Man^, with re^ce both ^s
Crea^^ and Re^tion of (...)
And then as to his Proceedings with Man, both in his Creation and Redemption of
him. Christianity gives us the most Plain and rational Account thereof in the
World. It gives us to know how that God made Man Upright, and being so, we were
at perfect Agreement with him; but that afterward we fell by Transgression
from him, and must have suffered the Doom of Rebels for so doing. It lets us
then know, That God taking Pity of us in this miserable Case, sent his own Son
to Preach Repentance, and to offer Terms of Reconciliation to us. And moreover,
because it was not consistent with God's Holiness, nor with his Wisdom and
Justice, as Governor of the World, to let Sin go unpunished, or to accept of a
Sacrifice and Satisfaction less infinite in Value, than he was in Majesty, who
was Offended, that he therefore gave this his only Begotten Son also to Dye for
us, and accepted of his infinitely Meritorious Sufferings here, instead of our
suffering Eternally hereafter; and as a sufficient Satisfaction to his injured
Justice, which we in our own Persons could not pay, without perishing
Everlastingly. Christianity does withal Reveal to us, that this our
High Priest, after having Offered himself for us here on Earth, a Sacrifice for
our Sins, he is now gone into Heaven, to Intercede with the Father, in the
Merit thereof, that it may be accepted to the Pardon of 'em. And it also
Informs us, that being Ascended to his Father, which is in Heaven, in order
fully to Reconcile him to Man, he has substituted his Holy Spirit here on
Earth, to perfect the Reconciliation and Conformity of our Natures to God, by
moving and moulding our Hearts to true Repentance, and Faith in him.

This is in short, that account which Christianity gives us, both of our
Creation and of our Redemption. And so every way Rational it is in it self, and
so exceedingly agreeable to the wisest Methods of Government in the World, that
though it was beyond the reach of our Reasons, before this whole Mystery of
Redemption was Revealed to us in the Gospel, to think of such an extraordinary
way for our Recovery out of a lost and undone Condition, and of Reconciliation
to God; yet now since it is Revealed, all the reason of Mankind, whose
Understandings the God of this world has not blinded, must own, that there is
no method of Proceeding in such a Case, could be more worthy of the Holiness,
Justice, Mercy and Wisdom of God, nor so likely to work Repentance in Man, nor
consequently more agreeable to the wise Governor of the World to take, than
this. So agreeable to the best improved reason of Mankind, are the Doctrinal,
and even the most mysterious Parts of the Christian Religion, that Religion,
which it is our Happiness, as we are Members of Christ's Church, to be under
the Direction of.

Nor can any thing be better contrived for the Happiness of Men, Its Laws a^^
excellently contrived for the good Order and Happiness of Mankind.
with relation to themselves, or others, than what the Laws of our Savior do
directly tend to. As to our selves, they do so powerfully tend to mortify our
Lusts and Appetites, those Rebels to our own Reason, to moderate our Passions
and Affections, which so violently rack and disturb our own Breasts; and they
are excellently fitted also, to make us so Humble and Self-denying, so
Temperate and Sober, so Chaste and Pure, as Men on Earth would appear to be
Angels come from Heaven, were the Laws of Christ universally followed. And
lastly as to Others, such Justice and Uprightness, such Charity and Kindness,
such Quiet and Peaceableness, does Christianity incline Men to, (upon which
account the State of the Gospel is represented, as that, In which nothing
should destroy, nor hurt in the holy Mountain, Isa. 11.9.) And let me also add,
such Prudent and Fatherly Care of Children, Servants and Dependants, do the
Laws of Christ prescribe, as would make a Heaven here upon Earth, were they
universally Obeyed. I say, were they universally Obeyed.

And yet to add to all this Excellency of Christ's Government and Laws, over us
already seen, so Powerful is our Obedience to all these Laws Enforced by those
mighty Principles and Motives of Christianity, And are Enforced by most
powerful Principles and Motives.
viz. The Articles of our Christian Faith, I mean, so very Persuasive and
Forcible are the Motives, which Christ does give us to the Practice of these
Virtues, beyond what was in any Reasons and Motives, which the Philosophers, or
even Moses did give, the Gentiles, or the Jews, to be in any degree Virtuous,
that this is another addition to our Advantage, in having Christ for our
Supreme Head and Lawgiver, and in being Members of Christ's Church. In a word,
so Honorable to God, so Perfective of our own Natures, and so Beneficial to
mankind are the Laws of Christ, and so well is our Obedience secured to 'em, by
those Principles he has taught us, that this very Thing does speak our
exceeding Great Privilege, in being Members of Christ, and under his Conduct
and Government, as our supreme Head and Lawgiver.

But especially this Advantage will appear to be very Great, if we consider,
How that together with those most excellent Laws, that he has given us, he has
also appointed us most Edifying and comfortable Ordinances, Another Branch of
this first Part of a Christian's Privilege, are most Edifying and Comfortable
Institutions and Ordinances.
to conduct us to Heaven.

Now by Divine Institutions and Ordinances, I do mean those positive
Appointments and Observations, which he has given his Church, and all the
Members thereof, for their Improvement in the Knowledge and Practice of his
Holy Religion and Laws. And that which our Great Lawgiver has done of this
Nature, is this; He has Ordained solemn and set Days, viz. The Christian
Sabbaths, for his own Service; He has Ordered that public Assemblies of all
Christians should be held upon those Days; He has Authorized and Commanded the
Publication and Preaching of his Laws at those public Assemblies; He has
appointed that Common Prayers, Supplications and Thanksgivings, for Divine
Grace and Assistance, to Enable us to perform these Laws then Preached, and for
other Mercies, should be jointly put up to him by all Christians on those
solemn Days, and public Assemblies; And lastly, he has Enjoined therein the
use of Sacraments, as means of Conveying such Grace and Assistance, and also as
Oaths and Obligations upon us to be Obedient to those Laws. All which are the
Privileges that do belong to the Members of Christ's Visible Church. And if we
compare 'em with what others want of this Nature, they are indeed most singular
Favors, vouchsafed only to such as are Members thereof, and which Aliens and
Strangers have no Right, nor Admittance to. And considered in themselves, they
are most admirable Advantages toward the Observation of God's most Holy Laws,
and in order to a Holy and Good Life.

I. ^lick Or^ances, the ^viledge of ^ry Mem^ of Christ's ^rch.
First, I say, All these forementioned Privileges do belong to the Members of
Christ's Church, to such as have been Baptized, and profess themselves to be
Christians. To understand which Rights and Privileges the better, you must
know, that as there are Two sorts of Members in the visible Church, so there
are Two kinds of Privileges that belong to each sort, as One rightly states
this Matter, each having those Privileges, which are proper and peculiar to
'em, according to the relation they bear to the Head, and their Fellow Members.

First, There are Members only by Foederal or Covenant Holiness, such are only
Born of Water, when by Baptism they are United to Christ and the Church, and
took upon them the Profession and Practice of the Christian Religion. Now the
Privileges that do belong to these, are of the same make with their
Church Membership, Outward, and consisting only in outward and public
Communion with the Church, in Word and Ordinances.

Secondly, There are Members by Real and Inherent Holiness, such as are, not
only Born of Water, but of the Spirit also, when by the inward Operation of the
Holy Ghost their Souls are Renewed after the Image of God, and made Partakers
of a Divine Nature. And the Privileges that do belong to these, are not only
the forementioned Ones, but together with them, others that are suitable to
their more spiritual Relations, Inward, and such as consist in the special and
particular Care and Protection of God, and in the more plentiful Measures of
his Grace, and in the more sensible Comforts of his Holy Spirit, according to
that of our Savior, Mat. 25.29. Unto every One that has, or Improveth those
Talents of Grace he has received, shall be given, and he shall have abundance.
So that these latter, and more peculiar Privileges indeed, do not belong to
every Member of the visible Church, but to those only, who are sincere in their
Profession of Christianity, and who, by their more than ordinary Piety, are
become Dear to God.

But then, as to Outward Privileges, it is not only the Duty, but it is the
Privilege, which of Right belongs to Every Member of Christ's Church, to
Observe the Lord's Day, to be Present in the Public Assemblies, to Join in the
Common Prayers, and even to Partake, when of Age, of the Lord's Supper. So we
find, Acts 2.41, 42. That the whole Three Thousand Souls, who received the
Word, and were Baptized, continued steadfastly in the Apostle's Doctrine and
Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

True it is, such is that more than ordinary Regard, that the Church, of Christ
has for the Lord's Supper, that most solemn Ordinance in the Christian
Religion, that when any Member becomes Scandalous for any Sin, he is to be
Suspended from Communion in that, till he amends: Scandalous Members to be
suspended from the Lord's Supper.
So it is ordered in the Rubric, before the Communion Service, that if any be
an open and notorious Evil-Liver, so that the Congregation be thereby Offended;
The Curate, having Knowledge thereof, shall Call him, and Advertise him, that
in any-wise he presume not to come to the Lord's Table, until he has openly
declared himself to have truly Repented, and Amended his former Naughty Life,
that the Congregation may thereby be saisfy'd, which before were Offended. And
the same Order shall the Curate use with those, betwixt whom he perceives
Malice and Hatred to reign, not suffering them to be Partakers at the Lord's
Table, till he Knows them to be Reconciled. But otherwise, till a Member become
Notorious and Scandalous for his Evil Principles, or Practices, he may claim
the Right to be Admitted to the Lord's Supper; for even Judas himself, before
he Betrayed our Savior, did Partake with him at the first Institution of the
Supper, as you will find, Matthew. 26.25, 26. So that as to the Outward
Institutions and Ordinances of Christ, they are Privileges, you see, that do
belong to all the Members of Christ's Church, to all such as have been
Baptized, and Profess themselves to be Christians. And now

Secondly, If we compare but these Outward Privileges of God's Holy
Ordinances, with what others do want of this Nature, they are indeed most
singular Favors, vouchsafed only to such as are Members of Christ's Church,
and which Aliens and Strangers have no Right, nor Admittance to. I. Christian
Ordinances are a singular Favor, which Aliens and Unbelievers do not, nor have
any Right to enjoy.
For alas! The Infidel part of the World, whether Jews, Turks, or Pagans, have
none of these Divine Ordinances amongst 'em. They neither Know the Lord's Day,
nor Hold any Assemblies thereon for the Instruction in his Laws; neither do
they Profess Belief in, nor Pray to the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost; and they are utter Strangers to our Holy Mysteries. And hence it comes
to pass, that those miserable People continue still in Blindness, Ignorance and
Barbarity; remain perfect Slaves to Satan, and their own Brutish Lusts, and for
the most part of 'em, are degenerated into such Inhumanity, Cruelty, and
Brutality, that Tigers, Wolves, and Vipers, the most Devouring and Venomous
Creatures in the World, are not so mischeivous to Mankind, as that Part
thereof, who either know not, or contemn God's Holy Ordinances, are one to
another: So true it is, what Solomon has Observed, Prove. 29.18. that Where
there is no Vision, or no Word and Ordinances of Divine Revelation, the People
perish. Which brings me

Lastly, To consider What excellent Privileges they are in themselves, II.
They are excellent Advantages considered in themselves.
And that they are upon Two accounts. First, As being most admirable Advantages
toward the Observation of God's most Holy Laws. Secondly, As being exceedingly
comfortable to those, who Enjoy 'em.

I. ^onducing ^htowards (...) Edifica^.
And First, Divine Ordinances are most Excellent Privileges, as being most
admirable Advantages toward the Observation of God's most Holy Laws, and in
order to a Holy and Good Life. For why? In these Holy Ordinances we have all
the Means both Outward, and Inward, afforded for our Conversion. As to the
Outward, you have the very Scriptures themselves, the Body of those Holy Laws,
publicly Proclaimed and Read out to you; the Scripture it self, I say, Which
was given by Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16 17. In these Holy
Ordinances again, you are not left to the Deceits and Whispers of a private
Spirit, but you have the Doctrine of the Church, collected into a Form of sound
Words, and containing all that is necessary, whether as to Faith, or that Love
which is in Christ Jesus, or which is required in the Christian Religion, 2 Timothy 1.13. You have this Collected, I say, partly by the Apostle's themselves,
and partly by others, the wisest and best Divines out of the Holy Scriptures,
and proposed to you as a Rule to walk by: And moreover you have the Ministers
of Christ constantly Applying both to your direction: The Ministers of Christ,
I say, who as his Ambassadors do Pray you in Christ's stead to be Reconciled to
God, 2 Cor. 5.20. Again, In these Holy Ordinances, you do not wrestle with God
for his Mercies, in the strength only of your own private Prayers, but you have
your Devotions mingled with the concurrent Prayers of all God's People, and so
by your joint Forces, after an humble, but powerful manner, do Besiege Heaven;
for the joint and united Prayers of Christians have, above all others, the
Promise of a Gracious Answer, Matthew. 18.20. Our Savior assuring us there, that
Where Two or Three are gathered together in his Name, there he will be in the
midst of them. And lastly, You receive herein, from the Blessed Sacrament of
the Body and Blood of Christ, that Food, which is necessary to the Nourishment
of the Soul, as Meat is to the Strength of the Body, the same Blessed Savior
of the World assuring us, as you will see, John 6.55. and the 63. compared
together, that His Flesh is Meat indeed, and that his Blood is Drink indeed.
And then as to the Inward Means of performing God's Laws, viz. The Grace and
Assistance of his Holy Spirit, this, as it is absolutely necessary to enable
our Weakness in this our fallen State; so it is no otherwise to be expected than
in the Use and Ministry of Divine Ordinances, as shall be presently seen.

In a word, The outward Ordinances, and Institutions of the Gospel, together
with the Holy Spirit accompanying them, are the only ordinary Means of
Conversion. Some may pretend to be above Ordinances, but Experience tells us,
that accordingly as Men do slight and neglect 'em, accordingly do they decay in
Grace and Virtue; and when once they begin wholly to lay them aside, they
become perfectly Graceless, and are given up to a Reprobate Mind, as is daily
seeni in such as make nothing of Profaning the Lord's Day, and do totally lay
aside Prayers and Sacraments.

^ost com^ble to Souls of those, who enjoy them.
Secondly, And they are not more Profitable and Edifying, than they are
Comfortabler to the Spirits of all Pious Souls, who Enjoy 'em. Holy David was a
most eminent Instance of this. My Soul thirsts for God, for the living God,
when shall I come and appear before God, Psalm. 42.2. See what earnest Longings
he had for the public Service. And I was glad when they said unto me, let us
go to the house of the Lord, Psalm. 122.1. And Psalm. 65.4. he expresses his
sense of this Matter, thus, Blessed is the man, whom thou choosest, and causest
to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts; he shall be sasisfy'd
in the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy Temple.

Alas! the inestimable Privileges and Advantages of Divine Ordinances, as the
Benefit of the Heat and Light, and all other common Mercies, are never
sufficiently valued, till most wanted. They are seldom sufficiently valued,
till most wanted.
In the abundance of 'em, we slight 'em, but when deprived of 'em, we see, we
cannot live the spiritual Life without 'em. This is most significantly
Expressed, Amos 8.11, 12. Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I
will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water,
but of hearing the words of the Lord. And they shall wander from Sea to Sea,
and from the North even to the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the word
of the Lord, and shall not find it. You see here, that the Famine of Bread is
nothing, in comparison with the Famine of the Word and Ordinances. I will send
a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of
hearing the words of the Lord; which is a much sorer Famine, for it is a
Famine, which will starve the Soul. And when they are deprived of the Word and
Ordinances, then shall they wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to
the East, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. And accordingly, we may always observe this Difference in Men's Esteem
of those excellent Advantages. In the outward Peace and Prosperity of the
Church, when the Church Doors are always open, and Prayers and Sacraments
constantly Administered, then how many, that live near the House of God, shall
seldom come at it; and how will others Profanely pas^ by it, even in time of
Divine Service? And how do People, when it is Plentiful, loath this Heavenly
Manna? But when Persecution at any time arises, and the Church Doors are shut
up, and Divine Ordinances are forbid, upon Pain of Death, how then shall you
see those very same Persons go many Miles, and with the utmost hazard of their
Lives, Assemble themselves together, and take the greatest Comfort imaginable
in Enjoying 'em? This the Experience of all Ages does Confirm; And God grant
our present Neglect; of his Holy Institutions and Ordinances, may not provoke
him to teach us also, how to Value and Esteem the Privileges and Advantages of
'em, by depriving us thereof. And thus I have at length showed you, how that
the First Great Privilege, which does peculiarly belong to all the Members of
Christ's visible Church, as they are the Members of such a Society, is a most
Reasonable and Excellent Body of Religion and Laws, together with most
Profitable and Edifying Institutions and Ordinances, given and appointed us by
Him, our supreme Head and Governor, to Conduct us to to Heaven. And now it is
time to proceed, and to show you, how that

Secondly, The Second general Pr^viledge bein to Members Christ's ^rch, is a
^cient mea^ of divine ^^ce and ^stance, ^ved from (...), the Head, and Conveyed
by his Ordinances, to Enable us to Conform our selves to his ^gion, and to Obey
his Laws.
We enjoy thereby a great Measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived down
from him our Head; and Conveyed by those his Ordinances, to Enable us to
Conform to his Religion, and to Obey his Laws. The mystical Body of Christ is
often compared in Scripture, to the natural Body of Man, and that as for many
others, so for this very good Reason, that as in the natural Body, every Part
partakes of Life, and Sense, and Motion, from the Head, so do we, by being
Baptized Members of Christ, of Grace and Help from him our Head, From whom all
the Body, by Joints and Bands, having Nourishment ministered, Increases with
the Increase of God, Col. 2.19.

(...) the same ^ns that ^^st is V^d to his ^^bers, is ^ce Con^d down (...)
him, as ^^d, to ^^e Mem^^.
Now it is easy to conceive, how Christ, as a Political Head, should give Laws
to his Spiritual Kingdom, the Church, and how, as such, he should Head and
Protect it, and every Member thereof, against its Enemies. But the difficulty
with some, is to conceive how, as from a Mystical Head, Divine Grace and
Assistance should be Conveyed down from him, to us his Members. But it is but
to consider what those Joints and Bands are, which Unite us to Christ, as our
Head, and we may then easily conceive, how we shall have Nourishment ministered
unto us, till we Increase with the Increase of God. For whatever are the means
of Uniting us to him, the same are the means also of Conveying the Influences
of his Holy Spirit down upon us.

(...) first Me^n of V^ betwixt ^ist, and Members, (...) be each ^^ber's V^ to
the ^^olick ^^ch.
And the First great means of Uniting cach Member to Christ, must be its Union
to the Catholic Church, the Body of Christ, not Cutting himself off from it,
either by Renouncing his Covenant with God, or by causlessly separating from
the Communion of that Sound, and Orthodox Part of the Church, whereof he is an
immediate Member; and by not giving just Occasion to the Officers of Christ's
spiritual Kingdom, the Church, to Excommunicate, or Cut him off for so doing.
For it is Just with the Mystical Body, the Church, as it is with the natural
Body of Man. If a Leg or an Arm should be Cut off from the Body, by a Man's own
Hand, or by the King's Officers, it cannot receive Nourishment from the Head,
and for lack thereof must soon Die. And so in the Church of Christ, a Heretic,
that for denying the Faith and Sacraments; and a Schismatic, who for breaking
the Communion, shall be Cut off from the Church, cannot ordinarily expect to
receive Supplies of Grace from Christ, the mystical Head, which by Keeping the
unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace, he might. But it is not sufficient,
in order to its deriving Life from the Head, that a Member be United to the
Body only, and to any of its Parts, but it is moreover particularly necessary,
that it should be United also to those principal Parts of the Body, where the
Blood and Spirits are formed, and from whence they are Conveyed to every single
Member. And therefore

II. Union to (...) Lawful ^ernours (...) Teach^ of the ^^ch.
A Second means of Uniting each Member to Christ the Head, and so of Conveying
spiritual Supplies of Grace down from him to such a Member, is its Unity to
those Lawful Governors and Teachers, which Christ has Appointed in the Church,
by Joining with 'em in the same Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, and by
holding Communion with 'em, in the same Holy Worship of God. The Lawful
Governors and Teachers in the Church of Christ, are the principal Parts in the
Mystical Body, as the Heart, the Liver, and the Brain, are in the Natural. For
as in the Natural, from these principal Parts are sent forth that Portion of
Blood and Spirits, which give Life and Strength to every single Member; so from
Christ's Ministers, is Communicated to all the Members of the Mystical Body,
that Nourishment, which maintains the spiritual Life in them. All this may be
fairly gathered from Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the Edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come into the unity of the Faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. In which Words, the Ministers of Christ's Church, whether
Extraordinary, as Apostles and Evangelists, or Ordinary, as Pastors and
Teachers, are said to be (...), for the Holding and Knitting together the
Church, and that from them each Member does immediately receive that
Nourishment of sound Doctrine, whereby he grows up to be a Perfect Man in the
Knowledge, and Practice of true Religion. And indeed, the Graces of the Holy
Spirit are Conveyed by those Ordinances, which they only have power to
Administer, which brings me

Lastly, To show how, III. The use of Christ's Institutions and Ordinances.
that next to the being United to the Church, and its principal Parts, the
Ministers of Christ therein, the great Bonds of Union to the Head, and means of
Conveying his Grace to the Members, are the Sacraments, and other Holy Offices
and Ordinances appointed for that Purpose; and of which the Ministers of
Religion, are the only Dispensers. For just again, as in the Body Natural,
there are Nerves that Branch from the Head through the Body, conveying the
Animal Spirits to every Member thereof; so in the Mystical Body, the Church,
there are the Ordinances, of Sacraments, Preaching, Public and Common Prayers,
and such like Holy Offices, Administered by Persons set apart for that Purpose,
to be the Conveyances of those ordinary Supplies of his Holy Spirit, which he
thinks necessary to preserve that Member in Health and Vigor. So that thus at
length you see, how that in keeping in Union with the mystical Body of Christ,
his Church, and with its Lawful Governors and Teachers, and in the use of
Sacraments, and other Divine Ordinances, those Conduits and Conveyances of of
his Holy Spirit to us, we shall have spiritual Life, and Strength, and Vigor,
derived down to us from Christ, our spiritual Head, in like manner, as in the
natural Body of Man, the Animal Life, and Strength, and Vigor, is derived down
to all the parts of the Body, from the natural Head.

And this is a most singular Privilege, if compared with that little, or
nothing of this Nature, which others, who are not Members of Christ's Church do
enjoy; and also it will pear to be a most exceeding great Advantage, if
considered in it self.

And First, If we compare our Happiness with Others, I. Divine Grace a most
singular Privilege, if compared.
we shall find it the peculiar Advantage of Christianity, which no other Law,
nor Doctrine so much as pretends to, that it not only clearly teaches us, and
strongly persuades us to so excellent a Way of Life, but provideth also Divine
Help and Assistance to Enable us to Practice it. If God would have Ordinarily,
(...) what o^ enjoy of Nature.
and in the way of a Constant Dispensation imparted so excellent a Gift to any,
to be sure it would have been to the Jewish Church; but we are told Joh. 1.17.
That the Law was given by Moses, but that Grace came by Jesus Christ, that is,
the Graces and Gifts of his Holy Spirit, as well as other Mercies and Favors;
so that though Moses delivered Legal Precepts, it is by Jesus Christ we shall
have the Assistance, whereby we shall be Enabled to attain unto Holiness. And
as to that Measure of Grace, afforded to Holy Men under the Law, whatsoever it
were, it was through him, the Promised Messiah, and in Virtue of that
Covevenant of Grace, Confirmed with Abraham before the Law; but the more
constant Influences of the Holy Spirit, and the fuller Measures thereof are
derived from him, down upon us now under the Gospel. And because of that more
plentiful Measure of Grace and Spirit Communicated unto us from Christ under
the Gospel, does the Apostle call the Gospel, the Ministration of the Spirit,
in Opposition to the Law, which he styles the Ministration of Death, 2 Cor.
3.8, 9. And does therefore so assuredly promise himself Success in his
Ministry, ver. 5, 6. Such trust have we in Christ to Godward, not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing, as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God, who has made us able Ministers of the New Testament, or
Covenant, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; where the Gospel is styled the
Spirit, as for other Reasons, so for this, in the Judgment of the Learned Dr.
Hammond, that Grace which is the Gift of the Spirit, is now joined to the
Gospel, which was not to the Law. In a word, and to speak in the Words of a
Learned Author, Other Laws for want of this, are in effect Ministeries of
Condemnation; Racks of Conscience; Parents of Guilt, and of Regret; Reading
hard Lessons, but not Asss;isting to do after them; Imposing heavy Burdens,
but not Enabling to bear them. But our Law of the Gospel is not such, it is not
a dead Letter, but has a quickening Spirit accompanying it; it not only
sounds through the Ear, but stampeth it self upon the Heart of him, that
sincerely does Embrace it; it always carries with it a sure Guide to all Good,
and a safe Guard from all Evil.

II. exceed^ ^dvan^ ^^nsider^^ (...) self.
And this Advantage, as it is proper to our Religion, So it is exceeding
considerable in it self. The Advantage is, that every Member in Christ's Body,
in what Station soever he be, shall have sufficient Supplies of Grace derived
down from Christ, our Head, proportionable to his Necessities, by those moans
of Conveying it, which Christ has appointed for that Purpose. I say, every
Member in Christ's Body, ^e Mem^^ Christ Supplies ^tiona^^ their ^n in church.
in what Station soever he be: For As we have many Members in one Body, and all
Members have not the same Office, so we being many, are one Body in Christ, and
every one Members one of another, Romans 12.4, 5. that is, there are different
Members in the Church of Christ, some are to be Governors and Teachers of
Others, and accordingly must be Endowed with a Spirit of Government, and Gift
of Teaching; and others are of a more private Capacity in the Church of Christ,
whatever they may in other Respects, and their Business is to keep a Conscience
void of Offense, both toward God and Man, and faithfully to discharge their
Duties to God, their Neighbor, and Themselves. And whatever, I say, those
several Duties are, which arise from their several Stations in the Church, they
shall have a competent measure of Divine Grace, Enabling them to discharge 'em.
They shall not have Gifts, that are necessary to the Discharge of other's
Offices, but not of their own; that is, a private Christian called to no Office
in the Church, is not to expect, nor ought to pretend to have received Gifts of
Government, and Teaching in a public Ministerial way, For God is not the
Author of Confusion, but of Peace in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor.
14.33. But every Member of the mystical Body, by keeping himself United to the
Head, in such ways, as has been showed, shall have such Graces and Assistances
derived down to him from Christ, who is that Head, as are necessary and proper
for him.

And, that too, in such Measures and Proportions, And also in such Measures as
according to different Times and Occasions in the Church, are wanting.
as, according to the different Times and Occasions in the Church, are wanting.
Thus in the first Plantation of the Gospel, when the Work was so Extraordinary,
that there was need of Miracles to convince the Jews of the Insufficiency of
Moses's Law, and the Gentiles of the Falsehood of the Pagan Superstition, then
did Christ bestow upon his Apostles diverse Extraordinary Gifts, viz. Of
Miracles, Prophecy, discerning of Spirits, diverse kind of Tongues, and the
Interpretation of Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.10. And as to all Christians in general,
as the Malice of Satan did then most violently rage against the Church,
Persecuting to the Death those, who would not Renounce Christ, and his
Religion; so all the Christians in those Times were very extraordinarily
Strengthened, no doubt, to Resist such strong Temptations. But now, that the
Church is Established, and the Truth of Christianity already Proved and
Believed, God does assist the Ministers of Religion only, with the ordinary
Graces of his Spirit in the discharge of their Ministry. And as to Lay
Christians therefore, except it be when the Orthodox are called out in any Part
of the World (as sometimes they are to this Day) to suffer for the Truth, they
receive no other than ordinary Assistances. But this both Ministers and People
are sure to do, in the use of those Means, that Christ has Appointed in his
Church for that Purpose; so very considerable, on many accounts, are the
Privileges, that do belong to the Members of Christ's Church.

THE Seventh Lecture. Wherein I was made a Child of God.
THE Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Church Catechism, as I have
already told you, do give you a general Account of the whole Covenant of Grace.
And these Words, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, being the First of
those invaluable Privileges, made over to us in this Covenant, on God's Part,
I have already explained, and opened to you what they do Import.

The next of those Privileges, made over to us in the Covenant of Grace, is
expressed in these Words, Wherein I was made a Child of God, in order to make you
sensible of the Vastness of which Privilege also,

First, I will show you what is meant in Scripture, and here in your Catechism,
by a Child of God.

Secondly, What an inestimable Privilege accordingly it is, to be a Child of
God.

that is ^^t in the ^chism by ^hild of (...).
And first let us Enquire, What is meant both in Scripture, and here in your
Catechism, by a Child of God. To understand which, we must Enquire into the
several meanings of this Phrase, in the Holy Scriptures, and then, in which of
those Senses it is to be understood, here in your Catechism, when every
Catechumen is taught to Answer, that In his Baptism he was made a Child of God.
And as to the several Acceptations of this Phrase, in the Holy Scriptures.

I. (...) the Son ^od by an ^nal Ge^^ion.
First, In the highest, most natural, and most proper meaning of the Word, there
is He, who is the Son, or Child of God, by an Eternal Generation, viz. Our
Savior Jesus Christ, who being Begotten of God the Father, from all Eternity,
in a peculiar, inconceivable, and inexpressible manner, so as to be Coequal,
Coeternal with the Father himself, is called the Only Begotten Son of God,
Joh. 3.16. But then, being he is in so peculiar and high a manner, the Son of
God, as infinitely to exceed, that wherein any one else, whether Angels or Men,
can be called his Sons, he cannot, in any measure, be meant here by a Child of
God, which signifies a Privilege common to many, as will be presently showed.

^ot every ^by Tem^^ Crea^^ which is ^ence too (...).
Secondly, There are those, who are the Sons of God by a Temporal Creation, and
such are Reasonable Creatures, both Angels and Men; both being called the Sons
of God, as you will see, Job 1.6. and Luke 3.38. And that, both upon the
account of the manner of their Production, which was by the immediate Power of
God, and because of their Spiritual and Immortal Natures, in which both do so
immediately resemble God. But this is an Acceptance too wide. That which is
meant here by a Child of God, is a Privilege, which all Men in the World do
not enjoy, but is the Favor, which is granted to a selected Body of Men, who
are separated from the rest of the World; Behold, what manner of Love the
Father has bestowed upon us, that we shoould be called the Sons of God, 1 John
3.1.

Thirdly, III. Nor such only who are Children of God, by spiritual
Regeneration, which is a Sense too narrow.
There are those, who are the Children of God by Spiritual Regeneration, by
being renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, and by being Created anew in
Righteousness and true Holiness. And these are such, Who have put off,
concerning the former Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt according to
the deceitful Lusts; and who have put on the New Man, which after God is
created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. They are such,
who are Born, not only of Water, but also of the Spirit, that is, who have not
only been Baptized into the Christian Church, but have been Sanctified by the
Holy Spirit, and have their whole Natures and Dispositions so altered for the
Better, that, from Vicious and Ungodly, they are changed to Virtuous and Holy
Dispositions and Inclinations.

And such a vast Change wrought in our Natures by the Word and Spirit of God,
may very justly give those, who Enjoy it, the Title of the Children of God; for
if in the way of Natural Generation, the Communicating of a Principle of Life,
and of suitable Operations, does found the Relation and Title of a Father,
there is as good Reason why in Regeneration, the deriving such Holy and
Heavenly Dispositions and Powers from the Word, and the Spirit of God to the
Soul, as give to a Man a Divine Nature, whereby he is a Partaker of the Life
and Likeness of God himself, should Entitle God to be also a Father, and such,
who are so Regenerated and Renewed, his Children. And accordingly in the Holy
Scripture we find, that such a derivation of Strength and Grace from the Word
and Spirit of God, does Entitle those, who are Renewed thereby, to be Children
of God. St. Paul not only attributing to the Ministry of the Word, a Power of
Begetting in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15: But withal expressly assuring us, that As many
as are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. So that he is
undoubtedly a Child of God, whoever giving himself up to the Guidance of God's
Word and Spirit, is thereby Sanctified wholly in his own Spirit, Soul and Body,
1 These. 5.23. so as to sudue and mortify every Lust, and every naughty,
inordinate and worldly Desire.

And indeed every truly Regenerate Child of God does do so; such a One does by
the power of the Word, and in the use and strength of that Grace, that God does
afford him, subdue and mortify every Lust, and every naughty, inordinate, and
worldly Desire. So we are expressly told, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is Born of God,
does not commit Sin, for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is horn of God; that is, a sanctified Child of God, does really hate Sin,
the very Temper and Bent of his Soul is against it; and as to living in any
gross and wilful Sin, he cannot without much Reluctance force himself to it;
his renewed Nature is so much contrary thereto. Such, I say, is every
Regenerate Child of God; and such indeed in a peculiar manner, ^ch indeed in a
pe^ar man^, and in (...) highest ^e, the ^ldren of ^l.
and in the highest and strictest sense of the Word, that it can be applied to
a mere Man, is a Child of God.

But then all, who are the Children of God, either in the sense of Scripture,
or of your Catechism, are not actually thus Regenerate. As to the sense of
Scripture, it is plain, as will presently appear, that every One, who bears the
Relation of a Child to God, is not Dutiful to his Father, ^ut every ^^d of God
^t actual^ Regene^ either in sense of ^^ture: of your ^chism.
which is in Heaven, no more than all Children are to their Natural Parents. It
is a monstrous Thing indeed, that any Child should be Undutiful to so good and
gracious a Father, but it is too true, that too many are so: Hear, O Heaven,
and give ear, O Earth, for I the Lord have spoken; I have nourished and brought
up Children, and they have rebelled against me, Isa, 1.2. And as to the meaning
of a Child of God, here in your Catechism, it is also plain, tht it; is not
only such as are Renewed in the Spirit of their minds, and do imitate God, that
are there to be understood; for every One, who is Catechized, is required to
Answer, that In his Baptism he was made a Child of God, whereas many
Catechumens are not actually as yet Renewed, and really Converted, and by their
own Fault, many will never be; so that a Child of God, by spiritual
Regeneration, and a God-like Imitation, expresses rather the Duty of every One,
what he ought to be, than the Notion and Nature of a Privilege, which many may
Enjoy, who in the mean time are not over Dutiful. So that a Child of God by
spiritual Regeneration, or a God-like Imitation, is a meaning of the Word, as
much too narrow to be the sense of it, here in your Catechism, as a Child by
Creation was too wide. To proceed then,

Fourth^^ Child ^od, as (...) in the ^hism, is one who by Ver^ ^f a Co^^t Rela^
Fourthly, There are the Children of God, by Virtue of a Covenant Relation, and
also by Adoption, who are neither all the Sons of God by Creation, nor yet on
the other side, such only as are Renewed in the Spirit of their Minds, and do
imitate God: But they are all those, who have been Baptized into the Covenant
of Grace, and have been Incorporated into Christ's Church, and who do profess
the true Religion, and themselves the Servants of the True God. Thus before the
Law, Genesis 6.2. the whole House and Posterity of Seth are called the Sons of
God, as on the contrary, the Posterity of Cain are called the Daughters of Men.
They are there called the Sons of God, because that in the Family of Seth, ^was
the ^^n of a (...) of God (...) the (...)
the Worship of the True God was continued and established, from which the
Posterity of Cain had Revolted. And so likewise under the Law, the whole Body
of the Children of Israel are called the Children of God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. and that
for this Reason, ^der the (...)
as it follows, ver. 2. because they were a Holy people unto the Lord, and the
Lord had chosen them to be a peculiar people unto himself, above all the
Nations that were upon the Earth. They were a Holy people unto the Lord, not
all of 'em by an inward and real Change in their Natures, but by a Foederal
Holiness, and by reason of their separation from the rest of the Idolatrous and
wicked World, by a Holy Covenant. Alas! as to their inward Holiness, this very
Body of Men, who were called the Children of God, are said Deuteronomy. 32.5. to have
Corrupted themselves, and to have not the spot of Children, but to be a very
froward Generation, Children in whom is no Faith, ver. 20. But their outward
Relation to God continued notwithstanding, and that whole Body of People being
in Covenant with God, were styled thereupon his Children.

And under the Gospel likewise, Under the Gospel.
all that are Members of the Church, and in Covenant with God, are styled his
Children. Thus 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. you will find, that with Relation to all
those, concerning whom God declared. He would be their God, and that they
should be his People, which are the express Terms of the Covenant betwixt God
and all Christians, as you will see Heb. 8.10. and with Relation to all those,
whom he commanded to Come out from among the Gentiles, and to be separate, and
not to touch the unclean thing, that is, not to Partake in their Idolatry,
which is the very Description of the Members of Christ's Church; I say, with
Relation to all these, he declared he would be a Father unto 'em, and that they
should be his Sons and Daughters.

And such are called Sons by Adoption, Also a Child of God, as meant in the
Catechism, is every One, who is so by virtue of Adoption.
concerning whom it is said, Gal. 4.4, 5. When the fullness of time was come,
that God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem
them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of Sons. Now
this word Adoption, is much used in the Epistles of St. Paul, to declare that
filial Relation toward God, which the Members of Christ's, Church are taken
into; and because the right understanding of the Nature and meaning of such
Adoption, will very much contribute to a right and through Explication of what
is meant by a Child of God, I will

First, Show you the Nature and Meaning of Adoption, both amongst the Jews and
Gentiles, amongst both which different People it was in use.

Secondly, I will then show you, how we Christians, especially such of us, who
are descended from the Gentiles, are accordingly Adopted to be the Children of
God.

And as to the First: Adoption Adoption, What?
(a Thing so well known both amongst Jews and Gentiles) was the Taking in of a
Stranger upon the want, or loss of natural Issue, into the Relation of a Child,
and into the Rights and Privileges of a Son by Nature. The use of it amongst
the Israelites, and the Privileges it gave them.
As to the use of it amongst the Israelites, we find Genesis 30. that Rachel upon
the want of Issue by her Husband Jacob, did Adopt, and take as her own Sons,
those of her Maid Bilhah, ver. 5.8. And so likewise did Leah, when she saw that
she had left Bearing, she Adopted, and took also, as her own Children, the Sons
of Zilpah. And several other the like Instances may be found in Scripture, as
in Jacob's Adopting Ephraim and Manasseh, the Sons of Joseph, to be his Sons,
Genesis 48.5. In all which cases it appears, that upon their Adoption, or being
took into that Relation of Sons to Jacob, Rachel, and Leah, they were Instated
into equal Privileges with the true and genuine Issue of those Persons, and
were accounted amongst the Twelve Patriarchs of the Israelites, equally with
the rest.

And as to the like Custom of Adoption, amongst the Gentiles, The use of it
amongst the Gentiles, and the Rights it conferred upon 'em.
you will see, Act. 7.21. how that Moses, when he was cast out, Pharaoh's
Daughter took him up, and nourished him as her own Son, that is Adopted him as
such. And by that Right of Adoption he would have Inherited the Crown of
Pharaoh, but that By Faith, when he was come to Years, he refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater Riches
than the Treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.24.26. Thus the Egyptians Adopted: And how
the same Custom did also prevail amongst both Greeks and Romans is a Thing well
known to those, who read their Authors, but need not here be further mentioned,
the Scripture use of this Custom being what it does most concern you to know.
To hasten therefore,

Secondly, I am now to show you, How We Christians, especially such of us, who
are descended from the Gentiles, are accordingly Adopted to be the Children of
God. How we Christians, especially such who are descended from ^he Gentiles,
are according, as has ^een spoke, ^he Adopted Children of God.
I say, how we Christians, for to the Jews did once pertain the Adoption, Romans
9.4. and that whole Church and Nation were once His Children, Deuteronomy. 14.1. To
understand which, you are to consider, that the whole World, who were the Sons
of God by Creation, having Revolted from God, to serve strange Gods, then did
God choose Abraham and his Posterity, to be a Holy Nation, a peculiar People
unto himself, and to that purpose did Enter into Covenant with him and them,
and so Adopted them to be his Children, instead of the rest of Mankind, who had
wholly forsaken him. To the Israe^tes did once ^ertain the Adoption.
And hence it is said, Romans 9.4. that To the Israelites did once pertain the
Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the
service of God, and the Promises. Thus the Jews alone were once the Adopted
Children of God.

And now the Question returns, How we Christians, especially such of us who are
descended from the Gentiles, are according, as has been spoke, ^ut that
Co^nant, by en^ring into which they ^ere his Chil^^en, was only ^emporary.
Adopted to be the Children of God. And you must know, that the Covenant given
to the Jews, was but a Temporary Law, to last only till they should be fit for,
and till the Son of God should descend from Heaven to Institute a better, and
more perfect One. Just as Children in their Minority are brought up under the
Discipline of the Rod, and Ferula, and of certain outward Observances, till
such time as they shall be fit for a more Manly Government; so Before that
Faith, (...) last only (...) the Pub^ation of the ^ospel.
or the Gospel came, the Jews were kept under the the Law, which was their
Schoolmaster, to bring them to Christ: But after that Faith, or the Gospel was
come, they were to be no longer under a Schoolmaster, but were to be the
Children of God, by Faith in Jesus Christ, after which ^^y, and all ^ristians,
^re to be ^ildren of ^d by faith Christ.
Gal. 3.23, 24, 25, 26. that is, after they were sometime Trained up, and
exercised to Obedience, by that severe Dispensation given by Moses, God did
design to prescribe 'em, by his own Son, he a more Reasonable Service, namely,
That contained in the Gospel; Ordering that That should thenceforward be the
Rule of Obedience, to all such as would be his Adopted Children: And
accordingly When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of
a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law, that they
might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5. that is, when that time was
come, wherein God saw it fit to lay that lower Discipline, the Law of Moses
aside, then God sent his own Son in Humane Flesh, who submitted to, and
performed the whole Law himself, to Redeem 'em out of that Slavery of Mosaical
Performances, and to receive them into the Participation of his Promises, and
to be his Children, without those Legal Observances, by Faith in Christ, and
Obedience to his Gospel. But the Jews being still of a Childish Disposition,
and fond of their Chains, as People, long accustomed to Slavery, commonly are,
would not forego their Legal Observances for the more Manly Religion, and more
reasonable Service of the Gospel of the Blessed Jesus. And thus refusing
Christ, But the Jews adhering to their Law, and refusing Christ, and his
Gospel, in whom God had predestined all to be his Sons, the Apostles turned
unto Gentiles, Preaching Christ, and Salvation to them, and to as many as
received him, to them gave he Power to be the Sons of God.
in whom God did predestinate us all into the Adoption of Children by himself,
according to the good Pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. the Apostles by the
appointment of God, did thereupon turn to the Gentiles Acts 13.46, 47.
Preaching Christ and Salvation by him, unto them, and to as many as Received
him, to them gave he power, or the Right and Privilege, as it is in the
Original, to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1.12. This is a remarkable Text to
our Purpose. In the Two Verses immediately before, viz. The 10, and 11, it is
said, He was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew
him not; he came unto his own, and his own received him not, but as many as
received him, to them gave he Power, or the Right and Privilege, to be the
Sons of God, even to them, who Believe in his Name. So, that by this time, I
hope it does fully appear to you, what is meant by a Child of God, especially
in that sense, wherein it is to be understood here in your Catechism. And you
see, as he is not every Child by Creation, which is a sense too wide; so
neither on the other side, is he only One, who is so by Regeneration, which is
a sense as much too narrow; but every one is such, who has Entered into
Covenant with God, and whom the Heavenly Father, has thereupon Adopted into his
Family, to partake of the Privileges, which belong to his Adopted Sons, which,

Secondly, What are the Privileges, which do belong to the Children of God, as
such.
Brings me next to Enquire what a Vast Privilege it is, accordingly, to be
made the Children of God. And truly upon Enquiry it will be found to be in
general the very same Privilege in Kind, but infinitely greater in Degree, (as
Heavenly Things are always greater than Earthly) which the most Tender and
Indulgent Father, that is withal Wise, as well as Good, can be supposed to
allow his own Children, In general, such as an indulgent, but wise Father, may
be supposed to allow his Children beyond Aliens and Strangers.
beyond what he will do to Strangers and Aliens. For is it natural to such a
One more easily to Pardon the Offenses of his Child, than of his Slave, more
favorably to overlook his Infirmities, more readily to hear his Requests, and
to instate him in a surer Title to his Possessions, than he will do others,
that have no such Relation to him? Why such are the Privileges our Heavenly
Father will allow to us, who are his Children by Adoption, above others, who
stand in no such Relation to him. He will be Just to all, but these are
properly Fatherly Kindnesses, and he will Indulge 'em to none therefore but
those, who are his Children. But more particularly, Particularly,


First, It is worthy our Consideration, I. Pardon of all Sins, upon hearty
Repentance.
that we shall have this inestimable Privilege, by being his Children, above
the rest of Mankind, namely. We shall have all our Sins Pardoned, upon our
hearty Repentance of 'em, upon Condition we forsake 'em, and return to God. The
unbelieving Jews and Gentiles, and all Persons remaining in a State of Nature,
who have not Embraced the Gospel, who have not been Baptized, nor have Entered
into Covenant with God, have no Assurance from him, that their Sins should be
ever Pardoned, though they should forsake 'em, because God never gave any Promise
of Pardon to any other but his Children, who are in Covenant with him:

And for want of their having any express Engagements and Promises from God, of
Mercies from him, does the Apostle therefore speak of the State of the
Gentiles, as exceedingly Uncomfortable, Ephesians. 2.11, 12. in these very remarkable
Words, Remember that ye being in times past Gentiles in the flesh, that at that
time ye were without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel,
Strangers from the Covenants and Promises, having no hopes of Pardon, and
without a God in the world.

But we Christians, who have Entered into Covenant with God, and so are his
Children, have the utmost Assurance possible, grounded upon the most gracious
and express Promises, that upon laying down our Rebellious Arms upon our
Renouncing of his, and our own most mortal Enemies, our Sins, and Coming over
to him, we shall have all our Sins Pardoned. Or rather as the Apostle himself
does Express it in the following, viz. The 13, 14 ver. But now in Christ Jesus,
ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, for he is
our Peace.

And indeed, that this Pardon and Peace with the Father, does more peculiarly
belong to us under the Character of his Children, who had formerly strayed afar
off from him, by our Sins, but are now returned Home to him, by Repentance; we
have Exemplified to us in that famous Parable of the Prodigal Son, Luke 15.
That Person, we there read, after a most Lewd and Riotous Life, after he had
spent and squandered away all his Substance, that his Father gave him, yet upon
his deep Humiliation, for his Vile and Undutiful Behavior toward his Father,
and his hearty Desires to return Home, and to his Duty and Obedience to him,
was thereupon admitted to his former Interest in his Father's Affections; Yea,
and received with more than usual Joy. Why, the whole Design of that Parable is
to show us, how our Heavenly Father will graciously deal with us, his Undutiful
and Rebellious Children; and that after, even a very Ill Life, upon our laying
down of our Sins, the forsaking the service of our Lusts, and Return to him, he
will graciously Pardon and Forgive us, his Children.

And, Secondly, II. being his ^ldren, he (...) not be so ^re, as to ^k what is
^e amiss, as Sins of In^ity.
being his Children, he will not be severe to mark what is done amiss, though
after our Return to him, through the Infirmity of our Flesh, we do not
altogether Live up to the Rule, by an Unsinning Obedience, provided we watch
carefully against the common Infirmities of Humane Nature, and do not wilfully
Indulge our selves in any of 'em. The Rigor of the First Covenant would admit
of no less than a Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning Obedience, the never Offending in
any One Point. In the day thou do Eat thereof thou shall surely dye, Genesis
2.17. But here under the Second, our Father deals with us with the Indulgence
of a tender Parent, who does not throw off his Child, and withdraw his Kindness
upon the smallest Offenses, and such as through Ignorance, Surprise, or the
like, cannot in this our fallen and corrupt State be avoided: But as a Father
pitieth his own Children, even so the Lord pitieth them that fear him, that is,
Who do not willingly displease him, Psalm. 103.13.

In a word, As the Pardon of Sins, whether great, or small, is a Mercy held out
to us only in the Covenant of Grace, so it is granted us under this very
Notion, of being Children of God, as appears from Mal. 3.17. where the Prophet
foretells the Happy State of Christians, upon this very Score, in these words,
And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, in that day, when I make up my
Jewels, and I will spare them, as a man spares his own Son, that serves him.
And more particularly yet, Ephesians. 1.3.5.7. Forgiveness of Sins is there
specified, as the distinct Privilege of Adopted Sons, in these words; God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, having predestined us unto the Adoption of
Children by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his
Will; in him we have Redemption through his Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins,
according to the Riches of his Grace.

And, Thirdly, which is an Appendage to this same Privilege; III. To the
Children of God is granted an easier Access by Prayer, to the Throne of Grace,
for Pardon of Sins, and other Mercies.
A Child of God, upon the Score of such his Relation, is permitted to have an
easy Access to the Throne of Grace; and is admitted to Address himself in
Prayer to God, as for whatever other Mercies he stands in need of, so for
Pardon of Sins, when he has Transgrest, with a full Assurance of a gracious
Answer. The Gentiles, who served no Gods, but what their own Imaginations
created, did it after a Slavish manner; for how could they be sure the Offended
Deity was to be Entreated, when he had Revealed no such thing unto 'em? And so
did the Jews also, who served the True God, it was in a Servile manner too, for
when they had committed an Offense against the Law, they were to provide their
Sacrifice, and bring it to the Priest, and he was to Offer it for 'em, whilst
they stood at a distance. But now the Veil of the Sanctuary being broke, upon
the Death of our High Priest, We have therefore the Liberty to enter into the
Holiest, by the Blood of Jesus, by a New and Living way, which he has
Consecrated for us, through the Veil, that is to say, his Flesh: And having him
our High Priest over the House of God, we may hence-forward draw near with a
true Heart, in full Assurance of Faith, having our Hearts sprinkled from an
evil Conscience, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22. that is, Every Christian, provided he
comes not with the guilt of any unrepented Sin upon his Conscience, may himself
now Offer up his own Prayers to God through Christ, without the Mediation of
any other Priest, or Sacrifice, and that with a full Assurance of being
graciously heard and answered.

And that this Faith and full Assurance, with which we may Approach unto God,
to Pray to him for the Forgiveness of Sins, is our Privilege only, as we are
the Sons of God by Adoption, is plain from St. Paul, Romans 8.15. Ye have not
received the Spirit of Bondage again unto fear, as under the Law, but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry unto God, Abba Father. And
again, Gal. 4.6. Because ye are thus made his Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father.

And now Lastly, If there be any other very considerable Privilege, Lastly, A
Child of God is more surely instated in the Inheritance of Heaven, than others.
accruing to a Child of God, from such his Relation, it is, That, God will more
surely Instate him in the Inheritance of Heaven, than he will do others, that
have no such Relation to him: And, indeed, if Children of God, then Heirs, we
are told. Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. But the
Vastness of this will be best considered by us, when we come to the Explication
of that Third, and the last of those Privileges made over to us, on God's
Part, in the Covenant of Grace; viz. What it is Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

^he infinite ^sen we ^son we ^veto praise ^d for these ^dvantages.
And now, upon the Review of what has been said, in the Exposition of this
present Article, In what Admiration of God's Goodness may we all of us cry out
with St. John, 1 Epist. 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God? And what infinite
Reason have we, ^he infinite ^^son we ^ve to praise ^d for these ^dvantages.
with St. Paul, thankfully to Praise him for it, Ephesians. 1.3.5. Blessed le the God
and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Blessed us Christians, with all
Spiritual Blessings in, and concerning Heavenly Places, and Concerns of the
World to come, through Christ; having Predestined us to the Adoption, and
Privileges of Children, by Jesus Christ unto himself, according to the good
Pleasure of his Will.

He Adopted us to be his Children according to the good Pleasure of his Will.
This Privilege, that we should be his Children, is Attended with very rich
Advantages, all which have accru'd to us, not from any Merit and Desert of
ours, being supposed Enemies unto him; but only from his free Goodness toward
us, which was pleased so to determine it. And as it is both Great and Free, we
ought certainly, with all possible Acknowledgments, to Magnify and Extol, both
his infinite Condescension and Goodness, and our owa unspeakable Privilege and
Dignity therein. Indeed, for God to be a Father by Creation and Providence (as
One observes) though it be a Mercy, yet it is no Privilege; for in that Sense he
is Parens rerum, the common Parent of all things: But, that God should be thy
Father by Adoption, that he should make thee his Son, through his only Begotten
Son, that he should rake up Dirt and Filth, as thou art, and lay it in his
Bosom; that he should take Aliens and Strangers near unto himself, and Adopt
Enemies and Rebels into his Family: Register their Names in the Book of Life,
make them Heirs of Glory, Coheirs with Jesus Christ, his Eternal Son, as the
Apostle does admiringly re-count it, Romans 8.17. This is Mercy and Miracle both.
It is, indeed, an invaluable Grace and Favor, that we should be Adopted his
Children, were it only for this, that he will be ready to Pardon our Sins and
Infirmities, and will Admit us favorably to Address, our Selves, and Prayers
to him. But this Privilege of being his Children will farther appear, to be
beyond all Expression, Great, since, if Children, as the Apostle infers, Romans
8.17. then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ; If a Child of God,
then, which Crowns all the rest of his Covenanted Mercies, Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which yet, it is said we shall be; But what, and how Great
that Third, and Last Privilege of the Covenant is, I am in the Explication of
the next Article to declare unto you.

THE Eighth Lecture.
And an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven. HAving hitherto spoke to the Two
First Privileges, made over to us in the Covenant of Grace, that thereby we
are First made Members of Christ, and Secondly, Children of God. Having both
Explained to you the Meaning and Importance of those Two Articles, and laid out
to you the Vastness of those Privileges and Advantages, contained therein; I
come now in like manner, to Explain to you the Third, which is, that we are
made thereby Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven. And indeed, this Last does
necessarily follow from the other: For as St. Paul speaks, Romans 8.17. If
Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with Christ.

This is the Perfection of all God's Promises and Favors, vouchsafed in the
Second Covenant. It comes last, and Crowns all the rest. And it will be the
certain Reward of all those, that persevere to the end of their Lives in
well-doing, and in sicere Obedience (notwithstanding all Temptations to the
contrary) to God's most Righteous Commands. Be faithful unto Death, says our
Savior, and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. And that you may
thoroughly understand the vast Greatness of this most extraordinary Privilege,
made over to you by Covenant, so as to be excited thereby to render your selves
worthy to be Partakers thereof; according to my usual Method I will Explain to
you,

First, What is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, What it Imports to be an Inheritour of it.

And then Lastly, I will lay out before you, the Vastness of our Privilege, in
being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And First, I am to Explain unto you, By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant in
Scripture, either First, the Kingdom of Grace in this Life, or Secondly, the
Kingdom of Glory, in the Life to come.
what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. The Kingdom of Heaven is an Expression
we do meet with above Thirty times in the New Testament; and I think we may
safely say, That we are constantly to understand by it, either First, The
Kingdom of Grace in this Life, or Secondly, The Kingdom of Glory in the Life to
come.

By the Kingdom of Grace in this Life, The Kingdom of Grace, the Gospel State.
mean, that Happy and Blessed State of us Christians, now under the Gospel,
wherein we Enjoy the Happiness of Living under a Government, wholly made up of
manifold Graces and Favors; having a most Gracious God, governing us by most
Gracious and Reasonable Laws, affording us a plentiful Measure of Divine Grace
and Assistance to perform these Laws, and proposing to us most Encouraging
Rewards in Heaven, to stir us up to a diligent Observance of 'em.

It is this happy State of Things, under the Title of the Kingdom of Heaven,
whose near approach John the Baptist foretold in the Wilderness, saying,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, that is, the Kingdom of the
Messiah, or the State of the Gospel, whose Great, Fundamental, and Gracious
Law, is this, that all Sinners must Repent 'em of all their former Sins, and
upon their Repentance they shall have most Eminent Mercies, bestowed upon 'em.
And it was this State also, concerning the undue Entertainment of which by the
Scribes and Pharisees, our Savior complained, Matthew. 11.12. saying, that From
the days of John the Baptist, even till then, the Kingdom of Heaven suffered
Violence, so that the Violent took it by force; that is, the Publicans, and
Sinners, and Gentiles, who were looked upon by the Jews, as those, who had no
right to the Messiah, and so as violent Persons, as Invaders and Intruders, did
crowd into the Church at the Preaching of the Gospel, whilst the Scribes and
Pharisees ungratefully and proudly stood off. So again, Matthew. 13.24. The
Kingdom of Heaven is likened unto a Man, which sowed good Seed in his Field;
that is, the State of the Gospel, or the Success of our Savior's Preaching in
the World, is so resembled. And so likewise in several other Parables of the
like Nature, by the Kingdom of Heaven is to be understood the state of the
Gospel here on Earth; which sure does show the exceeding great Dignity, Worth
and Excellency of the Gospel State, far beyond any other Dispensation, either
Patriarchal, or Mosaical, which the World had ever Received from Heaven before.

^he reason (...) the Gos^ State ^ld be dig^'d with (...) Title of (...)
Kingdom (...) Heaven.
And indeed upon a near View of the Nature and Design of the Gospel
Dispensation, we shall see sufficient reason, why that State, above any other,
should be so honorably Entitled the Kingdom of Heaven. And the reason is not
only because the same God governs us, and that by the same Laws of Eternal,
Unalterable Righteousness and Goodness, as in Heaven, but also because this
Blessed Government of God over us by the Laws of the Gospel, does directly tend
to render us so exactly like the Blessed Saints, Because (...) directly ^s to
ren^ Men so ^tly like (...) Blessed ^ts, the ^bitants ^he King^ of Hea^
those Inhabitants of Heaven; for where the Gospel of Christ does so far
prevail upon Men, as through the Grace of God to make them diligent and careful
to Obey him, according as they have Covenanted with him, it does bring in such
an excellent State of Things, as makes a kind of Heaven here upon Earth; for
where the Gospel does so far prevail, as to be sincerely Obeyed, it causes that
The Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the
Kid, and the Calf, and the young Lion and Fatling together, and a young Child
shall lead them, and it causes that they shall not hurt, nor destroy in all the
holy Mountain, for the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea, as was long time since Prophesied, Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.
concerning the State of the Gospel; that is, it files off the roughness, and
sweetens the cruel and savage Humors of Men, so that instead of tearing and
tormenting one another like Beasts and Devils, it makes Men Gentle, and Kind,
and good Natured, like Angels, like Gods to one another. A State certainly
which may very well deserve the glorious Title of the Kingdom of Heaven, being
so contrary to the Kingdom of Darkness, and the State of Hell, where there is
nothing but Malice, Rancour and Rage do reign among those unhappy Beings, that
do inhabit that Place. And thus you see that in Scripture, by the Kingdom of
Heaven is sometimes meant the State of the Gospel, the same God governing us
therein, and by the same everlasting Laws of Goodness, as in Heaven, and so as
to render us of like Tempers and Dispositions with the Saints in Heaven. A
State so nearly resembling that of Heaven, that the Condition of the meanest
Christian now under the Gospel, is, for that reason, preferred before that of
the greatest of Prophets under the Law; Verily I say unto you, among them, who
are born of Women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist,
notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, the Gospel
State, is greater than he, Matthew. 11.11.

But though this be very frequently the meaning of the Kingdom of Heaven in the
New Testament; and for that reason, This is not the meaning of the Kingdom of
Heaven, here in the Catechism.
I have took such particular Notice of it, that so you may know how to
understand that Metaphorical Expression in those many Scriptures, where you
will meet with it in that sense; yet it is not the proper and immediate Meaning
of the Word in Scripture, nor is it so to be understood here in your Catechism.

But Secondly, the Kingdom of Heaven does, if not most frequently, II. The
Kingdom of Heaven signifies the Kingdom of Glory.
at least most properly signify in the Scripture, the Kingdom of Glory; and
accordingly here in your Catechism it is solely to be understood of the
glorious and happy State of Angels and Saints with God in Heaven. For Instance,
In this sense it is to be understood, Mat. 5.3. where the Kingdom of Heaven is
promised as the Reward of the Poor in Spirit. And so ver. 20. where it is said,
that Except our Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, into
the State of Glory. And in this sense only it can be understood, Mat. 7.21.
where our Savior declares, that Not every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will of the
Father, which is in Heaven; that is, not only those, who barely profess
Christianity, but those, who sincerely Practice according to such a Belief and
Profession shall be received into Glory. The Profession alone will gain
Admittance into the Visible Church here on Earth, but nothing less than a
Living up to it, will give an Entrance into the Kingdom and State of Glory,
with God and his Holy Angels, and Saints in the Highest Heavens.

And a most Noble and Glorious State we may be sure this is, This, a most noble
and glorious State, as being dignified with so honorable and glorious a Title,
as the Kingdom of Heaven.
or else it would not be Dignified with so Honorable and Glorious a Title, as
the Kingdom of Heaven, a Kingdom being the Top and Height of all Earthly
Glories, as Heaven is a Place, which comprehends all future Excellencies. To
denote therefore that most exalted State of Bliss in Heaven, it is, that this
State is called the Kingdom of Heaven. And truly there is nothing in this
World, wherein we can imagine the greatest Glory and Happiness, as a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Throne, a Marriage, a Feast, but are set forth as Emblems to represent
to us the Joys and Glories of our future State. And yet, as if a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Throne were infinitely too short, to set forth the Joys and Glories of
Heaven, and those infinite Blessings, Hence all ^ose things (...) this world,
^herein we ^nceive the ^ghest Glo^^ and Hap^ness, are ^'d, as Em^ems, to set
(...) our future ^lory.
that do await the Sons of God, Saint John tells us, It does not yet appear
what we shall be, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now we are the Sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be, only this we know, says he, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. Nay, and as if the
highest Contentments and Satisfactions of this Life were but mere Nothings, as
to any thing in 'em, whereby they may represent the Joys above, St. Paul tells
us, 1 Cor. 2.9. That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, nor has it entered into
the Heart of Man to conceive the things, which God has prepared for those,
that love him; Nay, and though he was caught up to the Third Heaven, into
Paradise, and so did both see and hear the Glories and Triumphant Joys of that
Place, All which ^ings come ^^rt of ex^essing it.
yet the Things, which he saw, and heard were unspeakable, he tells us, which
it is not possible for Man to utter, for so it may be rendered, 2 Cor. 12.4. So
that in short, the Kingdom of Heaven does import a State of the most excessive
Glory and Happiness, that our Natures can be capable of receiving; A State so
unspeakably Honorable and Delightful, that though the choicest Things of this
World, those Things, that yield the vastest Contentments, are made use of in
Scripture to represent them to us, yet they are but the mere shadows of the
Glories and Joys in the Kingdom of Heaven; and after all, there is abundantly
more than can be Expressed, or Imagined by us. And therefore this must suffice
here for the Explication of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven, the
particular Character of whose Joys, being what more properly belongs to that
Article of your Creed, The Life Everlasting, shall there be given you. And now

(...) Inheritor (...) the King^m of Hea^n, What?
Secondly, Let us next see, what it is to be an Inheritour of it. An Inheritour,
or Heir, both in Scripture, and in common Language, does import something of
Privilege more than ordinary: Thus Genesis 21.10. we find, that Sarah would not
endure that the Son of the Bondwoman should enjoy the Privilege to be Heir
with her Son. And as to common Account, every Body knows that an Heir has a
considerable Privilege above the rest of the Children, and what it is, I shall
define as follows;

An Heir is ^e, who has ^egal Right ^d Title to (...) Possession ^^de over to
(...).
An Heir among Men is one, that receives, from Parents, or Predecessors, either
by nearness of Blood, or by Adoption, by Entail, or by Will; or whatever other
Method of Conveyance, a sure Right and Title to a Possession. And here perhaps
it might not be difficult to show how that an Inheritour of the Kingdom of
Heaven is made such by something, that bears a near Resemblance, at leastwise,
to all these Ways and Methods, whereby Men become Heirs to Temporal
Possessions. But not to insist upon any nice Comparison in these Matters, it is
sufficient to Ensure unto us the Benefits of Heirship, even to the Kingdom of
Heaven, that those, who are in Covenant with God, are frequently in Scripture
styled Heirs; and particularly Heb. 1.14. Heirs of Salvation, and that they are
in like manner, and to all Intents and Purposes as much Heirs, Such who ^ve
Entered ^o the Co^nant of ^ace, are in ^e manner Heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven, as Children are Heirs.
as Children are Heirs, for thus the Apostle argues, If Children, then Heirs,
Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. And if a Son, then an
Heir through Christ, Gal. 4.7. So that we may safely say, That as an Heir is
One, whose Estate is not precariously depending upon the mere Will and Pleasure
of another, but so settled and secured to him, as to give him a Legal Claim and
Title thereto, so long as he does not forfeit his Title, by not performing the
Condition on which his Title depends; so an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven is
One, who does not depend merely upon the Vncovenanted Goodness of God, for his
hopes of Heaven and Happiness; but he is One, to whom God through Christ, has
vouchsafed to grant a Legal Claim and Title thereto, by giving his solemn
Promise, and engaging his Truth for the Performance, that he will infallibly
bestow upon him the most unspeakable Joys of Heaven, provided he swerves not
from his Allegiance and Obedience to him, but Renouncing all God's Enemies, the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, will Believe in him, and Obey him truly and
faithfully all the days of his Life.

I do say, (and pray mark it) That God, through Christ, It is through Christ
alone, not owing to the Merit of our Obedience, that we are Entitled to the
Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven.
has vouchsafed to grant us a Legal Claim and Title to this Inheritance; for so
it is said, that we are Heirs through Christ, Gal. 4.7. And far be it from any
to imagine, that there is any thing of Merit, or Worth in our imperfect
Obedience, whereby of it self it should deserve such a precious Inheritance. It
would be an Arrogance and Presumption in the highest Saint, that ever lived,
and such as would render him more liable to be punished for his Pride, than
rewarded for his Virtue, should he pretend to Claim Heaven, merely upon the
Score of his own Sanctity; or should he pretend a Claim and Title to the
Inheritance of Heaven at all, otherwise than through Christ, and because God
has promised it. However, since God has been pleased to Ensure it to us by
Covenant, we may safely call it a Right, which God, who is Faithful in all his
Promises, and Just in all his Dealings, will never debar us of; except by our
Disloyalty and Disobedience to him, we forfeit all Right and Title to it. Which
brings me to my

Third Proposal, The Vastness of a Christian's Privilege, in being made an
Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven.
which was to lay before you the Vastness of our Privilege, in being made
Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven. And if we do but consider it, it will
soon appear to be both in it self very great, and in Comparison of what the
rest of the World enjoys, a very singular Privilege, this, of being made
Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven.

I say, In it self very Great. Indeed, what can be greater, than to have the
invaluable Possessions of Heaven, I. It is in it self a very Great Privilege
to have the invaluable Possessions of Heaven, so settled and ensur'd, as to have
a legal Claim and Title thereto made over to One.
so settled and ensur'd to us, as to have a Legal Claim and Title thereto, made
over to us in Christ. We see, as to those Earthly Possessions, how an Heir does
value his Condition above the rest of the Children, not only on the account of
a greater share, commonly in the Estate, than the rest; but because of the
greater security he has of Enjoying those Earthly Possessions; An Inheritance
being an Estate, for which he does not so precariously depend, as has been
showed, upon the mere arbitrary and uncertain Will and Pleasure of another, but
a Right, which without breach of Justice cannot be detained from him. It is the
Privilege of an Heir, that he has all the Security, that the Engagements of an
Honest Person, and the Solemnities of a Covenant can give him, to make him a
Title; but when the Kingdom of Heaven is the Possession, and when he, who
cannot deceive, has solemnly settled this Inheritance upon us; this is a
Privilege so much beyond what Words can express, that it is far easier to be
Admired, than Uttered.

II. If compared with what others enjoy, ^t is a singu^ar Privi^edge.
An as it is in it self exceeding Great, so it is, if compared with what Others
enjoy, a very singular Privilege, This, of being made Inheritours of the
Kingdom of Heaven. To be made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, I say, is a
very singular Privilege, which those, who are without Christ, and who are
Strangers to the Covenants and Promise, do not enjoy. True it is, a few of the
more Contemplative and Thinking amongst the Gentile Philosophers, did raise to
themselves some faint Hopes, The best a^ongst the Moral Hea^hens could have but
^aint Hopes, built upon un^ertain Con^ectures, of a ^uture Hap^iness.
and doubtful Expectations of a future Happiness after this Life. They
considered the noble Nature of the Soul of Man to be such, that nothing in this
Life is of that Excellency, as to give it a full Satisfaction; and as to the
Body, they looked upon it more, as the Prison of the Soul, than any Advantage
to it, and therefore they did hope to be delivered one Day from its
Incumberance; that the Soul might be at liberty to Act freely, without such a
clog of Flesh washing it in all its noble Flights and Operations: But then all
this was in them but Conjecture, what possibly might be, not what certainly
would be their Happiness. And being but a faint Hope, And their Hopes being
^aint, they could not in the Strength ^hereof overcome great Temptations.
and uncertain Expectation, built upon doubtful Reasonings of their own, and
more their Wishes and Desires, than what they could certainly promise
themselves; they were not able to support their drooping Spirits, under any
great Difficulties, and to overcome in the Strength of such an Expectation, the
greater Temptations and Trials of their Virtue: But did generally shrink from
their Virtuous Professions, when to Act honestly, was become dangerous. But the
Christian's Expectation of an Inheritance in Heaven, being founded upon the
Express Promises of the God of Truth; But the Christian's Hopes are sure and
steadfast, being founded upon the express Promises and Covenant of the God of
Truth
and those Promises given in Covenant, and so Confirmed by an Oath, as it were,
For God, willing more abundantly to show to the Heirs of Promise, the
Immutability of his Counsel, Confirmed it by an Oath, that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
Consolation: These things being so, the Christian has a hope, which as an
Anchor of the Soul, is both sure and steadfast, Heb. 6.17, 18, 19. And his Hope
being thus built, not upon uncertain Conjectures, but upon the express Promises
of God, who cannot lie; there is no Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so
great, that such a Hope will not be able to overcome; And being such, there is
no Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so great, which he may not overcome.
But he, that has this Hope, purifieth himself, even as God is pure, 1 John
3.3. And may with St. Paul be persuaded, That neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature shall be able to separate him
from the Love of God, which is in Christ, Romans 8.38, 39. Thus certain are the
Christians hopes of Heaven, it being Instated upon him, as an Inheritance. And
having his Hopes so well grounded, there is no difficulty in the way of Duty so
great, which he may not overcome by the Strength thereof: Whereas the best of
the Moral Heathens had but uncertain Conjectures to ground their Expectations
of future Happiness upon; and their Hopes thereof being so Weak, they presently
yielded to the Assault of every great Temptation.

But besides, whatever certainly an honest Pagan, And whatever certainly an
honest Pagan might have, that God would reward his Virtue, yet depending only
on the Vncovenanted Goodness of God, he could promise himself no greater a
measure of Happiness, than what his good Deeds did of themselves deserve, which
must fallvastly short of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven.
that lived up to the Light of Nature, and the Dictates of Right Reason (if any
of 'em can be supposed to have done so) might have, that the good God would
reward his Virtue: Yet having only the Equity and Vncovenanted goodness of God
to depend upon, he could promise himself no greater a Measure of Happiness,
than what his good Deeds did of themselves deserve; which considering the
Imperfection of the best Actions of the best of Men, whoever lived, how short
must that fall of what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. But a Christian, to
whom God has Covenanted, to make sure a Crown of Glory, may, without
Presumption, rely upon him, to make good the same.
But the Christian, whom God has Covenanted withal, and to whom he has
condescended to Oblige himself to make sure a Crown of Glory, that fades not
away, 1 Pet. 5.4. may without Presumption rely upon God's both Truth and
Goodness, to make good to him the same, notwithstanding when he does all that
he can, considered in himself, he is but an Unprofitable Servant, as the best
are. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith, henceforth, says the Apostle, (and so may every good Christian say the
same) there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which God, the
righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day; and not to me only, but to all
them, who love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Such is the Christian's
Privilege, above a Pagan, in being made an Inheritour of the Kingdom of
Heaven, in that it is his Inheritance, he may assure himself of it, though his
imperfect Virtues considered in themselves, could never Entitle him to such an
Eternal and Exceeding weight of Glory.

In short, It is Jesus Christ alone, who has brought Life and Immortality to
light through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. As Life and Immortality is brought to
light through the Gospel; so by Embracing it, and by coming into Covenant
alone, Salvation can be expected.
And as he only has brought it to light, that is, made a clear Revelation of
that Life and Immortal Happiness, laid up for Righteous Men in Heaven, which
was not before so certainly Revealed; so it is only through him, and by
Believing, and Embracing, and Coming into his Covenant, the Gospel, that
Salvation must now be hoped for by any; for so we are also Assured, Acts 4.12.
and that there is no other Name under Heaven given among Men, but Jesus only,
whereby we must be saved; so that this Invaluable Privilege, this exceeding
great Advantage of being made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, is made
over, and certainly Ensur'd to such only, who are in the Covenant of Grace; and
is the Third and Last of those Excellent Privileges and Advantages contained
and held forth therein. But then the Kingdom of Heaven is the certain
Inheritance of the sincere Christian, who in the Exercise of Mercy, Meekness,
Piety, and all other Christian Virtues, And to a sincere Chrstian, who is
faithful in the Covenant, the Heavenly Inheritance is certain
which he has Covenanted with God to perform, does faithfully discharge his
Part of the Covenant; as is most solemnly declared, Matthew. 25.31, 32, 33,
34.46. with which I shall conclude this Point. Says our Blessed Savior there,
When the Son of Man shall come in his Glory, and all the Holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the Throne of his Glory. And before him shall be
gathered all Nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
Shepherd divides the Sheep from the Goats, and he shall set the Sheep on his
right hand, but the Goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his
right hand, to his Charitable, and Pious, and Faithful Servants, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World. And as the Wicked shall go into everlasting Punishment, so the
Righteous into Life Eternal.

A sum of those invalu^ble Privi^edges, made ^ver to us, ^n God's ^art in the
Covenant of Grace.
And now to sum up those infinitely Gracious and Invaluable Privileges, made
over to us on God's Part, in the Covenant of Grace; hereby we are made, First,
Members of Christ, that is, are made Members of that Body, of which Christ is
the Head, viz. The Church; and so have, together with a most excellent Body of
Religion and Laws, all necessary Grace and Assistance, Conveyed and
Communicated to us Members, from Him, the Head, to Enliven, Support and Enable
us to go through all our Task of Religious Duties, and Christian Performances,
required at our hands.

The Second Privilege is, That we are also hereby made Children of God, that
is, having Embraced Christianity, and being Incorporated into the Church of
Christ, we are thereby Adopted and Chosen out of the rest of the World by God,
to enjoy this grand Privilege of Sons, to have Pardon granted us when, with
the Prodigal Son, we return Home to him, to our Offended, but Gracious Father,
by Repentance: And we shall find him not over-severe, in respect of our lesser
Failings, and the unavoidable Infirmities of our Nature, but shall always have
him ready to hear our Prayers for Mercy, both in respect of our greater and
lesser Transgressions.

And Lastly, The Third Privilege, you have been now told, is this, that to
complete All, We are made Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, that is, have
secured to us a Right and Title to the unspeakable Joys and Glories of Heaven.
A Privilege, which considered in it self, is exceeding Great, and as all the
rest, if compared with what Others enjoy, is a very singular One.

These now are the inestimable Privileges, made over to us in the Covenant of
Grace. Privileges, which as they are of infinite Advantage to us, so we shall
never fail of obtaining 'em, if we will but take care to perform the Conditions
required on our Parts; and so, First, Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of the
Flesh, on Condition, Secondly, That we will Believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith. And Thirdly, Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk
in the same all the days of our Lives. Which Conditions, and what they Import,
I come next to declare unto you.

THE Ninth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
I Have already Expounded those infinitely Gracious and Invaluable Privileges,
made over to us, on God's Part, in the Covenant of Grace; having showed you,
what it is to be a Member of Christ, what it is to be a Child of God, and
lastly, what to be an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven; as also, what are
the vast Benefit contained in those several Articles; I am now come to Explain
to you likewise the Conditions of the Covenant; those Conditions, without the
Performance of which, those Mercies will not be Conferred on us.

For this we must seriously consider, that the Benefits now mentioned to be
made over to us, as they are in themselves exceeding great, so as almost to
equal us with the Blessed Angels; and as they were purchased for us at no less
a Rate, than the precious Blood of the Son of God; so we must not expect that
Benefits so infinitely great, and dearly Purchased, shall be Conferred upon us,
without any thing to be done on our Parts, to express our Value of them; much
less if we continue in Rebellion against God, and instead of him, serve under
his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; or will be Infidels and
Unbelievers, and will remain Disobedient to all his most Just and Righteous
Commands. No, it is not to be imagined, that God will be so Easy, so fond of
Sinners, as would reflect upon the Wisdom and Discretion of a mere Man. But as
he does propose to us Invaluable Blessings, so he does require from us a
Reasonable Service, and the Performance of most Equitable Conditions; amongst
which, this is the First, that we should Renounce etc.

And as I have already Explained to you the Importance of those vast Favors on
God's part; so I will proceed now to do the same, as to those Conditions on
ours, showing you

First, What it is to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, Whereof the First
is, to Renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh.
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.

Here is as much Matter as can possibly be crowded into so few Words. A great
Part of the Christian Life is discharged in what these Words do mean: For our
Christian Race is represented in Scripture to be for the most part a Warfare
against several very Powerful Enemies, both without and within us. And these
Words do Instruct you both what those Enemies are, and how we must War against
them. Wherefore, if in the Explication of Words so very full of Meaning, and of
such vast Concernment to be understood by you, I shall be forced to run out
into some considerable Length, you must have Patience, and you must give good
heed to what I shall Discourse upon them, answerable to the Benefit, may accrue
to you from the through understanding thereof. That which I shall do toward
the Explication of them, shall be this;

First, I will show you who the Devil is, and what are his Works, what is meant
by Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works, and how absolutely necessary it is
we should do so.

Secondly, I will also show you what is meant by the Pomps and Vanity of this
wicked World, and how far you must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps
and Vanity.

Lastly, I will in like manner, open unto you, what is to be understood by the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and how far we must Renounce them.

And, First, I am to show you who the Devil is, what are his Works, what is
meant by Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works, and how absolutely necessary
it is we should do so.

The Devil, his Names, and their importance.
Whereof First, Let us enquire who the Devil is. And in Scripture he is called
by different Names, whereof some do import his Rank and Place, as Baalzebub,
signifying him to be a Prince of Devils; and some his Wickedness and Enmity, as
(...), signifying a Calumniator, or a false Accuser; Satan, an Adversary; from
his Fury and Murderous Temper, he is called a Roaring Lion; and from his Craft
and Lying Policies, an Old and subtle Serpent; and from both perhaps he is
called the Dragon. There are many Legions of 'em in Number, but One supreme in
Power; and He it is, who is Chief of all the Enemies, both of God and Man, that
presents himself at the Head of all the rest, being that Arch-Rebel and Traitor
against God. He was once one of the highest Angels, and is now that Arch-Rebel
against God.
He was once, as seems from his Superiority to Michael the Archangel, who upon
that account Durst not bring a railing accusation against him, Jude 8.9. The
highest Angel, the most glorious Spirit, and the First be-like of all the
Angelical Orders: But not content with that vast Power and Glory, that God had
bestowed on him, but Envying that God, that gave it, and affecting, perhaps, no
less than a Sovereignty himself; He, with many Legions of the lower Order of
Angels, He, with many Legions of Inferior Angels, whom he drew into the same
Conspiracy, is Banished Heaven.
whom he drew into the same horrid and ungrateful Conspiracy, Revolted from
God, and set himself to Oppose his Government. But no sooner did this wicked
Apostate frame so horrid a Design, but the All-knowing and infinitely Powerful
God of Heaven and Earth perceiving his Intentions, immediately hurled him down,
and all his wicked Crew of ungrateful Conspirators, from the Battlements of
Heaven, into those dark Mansions of Sorrow, which we call Hell, there to be
Reserved in everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great
Day, Jude 6. as the due Punishment of his so black and ungrateful a Treason
against his Sovereign and Bountiful Creator. But so far was this hardened Rebel
against God, from Repenting of his Villainy, even under the sad Experience of
the woeful Issue of it, That he is ever since acted with the highest Spirit of
Revenge against his God; Being acted with a Spirit of Revenge against God, he
afterward withdrew Mankind to join with him in his Rebellion.
and because he finds it in vain to Attempt any thing immediately against God
himself, he studies and endeavors all he can ever since, to wound him in his
Authority and Honor. For no sooner did the Almighty Create the lower World,
and place Man in the midst of it, as of a Temple, to set forth his Praises, and
to glorify his Creator's infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness in this so
stupendous a Work of the Creation; but this grand Enemy, Attacks him with all
the Subtilty and Policy of a Traitor, tempting him to dis-believe his Maker's
Goodness and kind Intentions toward him, to cast off his Authority, and
disobey his Laws, and rather to follow his pernicious Counsels. The Arch-Rebel
prevails, and the whole Representative World of Men, Adam and Eve, Revolted
from their God, and took part with the Devil. And though God condescending
himself to propose Terms of Accommodation in a Savior and Redeemer, which was
for to come, recovered a part of Mankind, both before and after the Flood, and
afterward selected the whole Nation of the Jews to be a peculiar People unto
him, set apart to serve him; yet through the Instigation of Satan, the greater
part of Mankind were absolutely the Devil's Vassals, And prevailed so far, till
God's Authority was almost utterly Banished from amongst Men.

Which occasioned the Son of God's coming into the World, to recover Mankind.


serving him in abominable Idolatries, Sorceries, Witchcrafts; and being
Instigated by him, to all manner of Villainies, Vices, and Sins whatsoever,
whereby the Laws of God could be transgressed, or his Authority utterly
Banished (as far as lay in their power) from amongst the Sons of Men. And thus
the Devil usurpt an Authority over almost the whole World for many Thousand
Years, till such time, as our Savior came amongst us to Preach Repentance, and
to recover us to the Knowledge, and the Service of the One True God, which was
the occasion of his Coming.

So that you see the Devil is that Arch-Rebel, who with his whole Legion of
Infernal Spirits, are continually mustering up all their Forces, against the
Authority of God, and drawing wretched sinful Men into the Conspiracy; and
whose Quarrel is for no less than Dominion and Empire, who shall be King, God,
or Satan. And thus you plainly see, who the Devil is.

Secondly, Let us enquire what are the Works of the Devil; The works of the
Devil in general are
and from what has been said, his Works in general do appear,

First, To be Sin.

And, Secondly, The tempting of us to Sin.

His first work was to Sin himself, by transgressing God's Laws, I. Sin.
and despising his Authority. His next work was to Tempt and Inveigle us
likewise into the same Violation and Contempt of the Divine Laws and Authority,
by committing of Sin.

And the first general Work of the Devil is Sin, for so it is expressly
affirmed, 1 John 3.8. The Devil sins from the beginning, and for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil, that is Sin. By Sin God's Authority is thrown off, which is the Devil's
constant work.
By Sin the Laws of God are transgressed, his Authority thrown off, his
Government disowned, and his Power defied; and as the Devil made himself what
he is, by thus sinning at first; so this is his continual Practice, his
constant Work ever since: And whosoever in imitation of him, does likewise at
any time Transgress, or walk contrary to the Laws, the Rules, the Ways that God
has set, (especially if knowingly and wilful) does thereby in like manner,
Whoever ^^erefore does ^ilfully sin, ^oes strike at ^od's Autho^ity.
as the Devil did, throw off God's Authority, disown his Power, and defy his
Government, and so does do the Works of the Devil. Which one Consideration
should make you abominate even the least Sin, but especially it should make you
infinitely fearful of Sinning wilfully against your Maker. Most People, alas!
In these degenerate Times, make but a Mock of Sin, For which ^^ason no Sin
^ught to be ^he subject of any Man's Mirth.
and make it the subject of their Mirth and Laughter, when committed by
themselves, or others, for want of seriously considering this to be its Nature.
But the Commission of the least wilful Sin, would be dreaded by you, and
frowned upon in others, if you would but consider how high it strikes, even at
God himself, and whom it Advances to his right of Dominion over the World, even
the Devil.

Some Sins ^ore particu^arly the ^orks of the Devil.
But as there are some particular Sins, which are more directly levelled against
God's Authority, and express more of the natural Temper and Disposition of
Satan, and are more his own Practice than others; so of those we may say, that
they are more particularly and especially the Works of the Devil.

I. ^uch as are ^irectly le^el'd against ^od's Autho^ity, viz. I^olatry.
And first as to those, which are more directly levelled against God's
Authority, and are therefore Sins of Satan's own Invention, to draw us off from
God; of this sort we are to reckon Idolatry, or the Worshipping of other Gods,
besides him, the Only True God; whether it be that of the Barbarous Nations,
who worshipped the Devil himself; or whether that of the Gentiles in general, and
some Gentiliz'd Christians, as the Papists, who Worshipped the Creature, (...),
above, besides, or together with the Creator, as that place, Romans 1.25. may
indifferently be rendered. The Idolatry of either Kind, either the Worship of
Devils, Heroes, or of Saints departed, does more particularly bear upon it the
Character of a Work of the Devil, because it is more direct^^ levelled against
God's Authority, giving his Honor to another. And

Sorcery, ^harming, ^itch-craft, and Conjur^ng, as also ^esorting to ^uch as
use those unlaw^ul Arts.
Of the same sort is Sorcery, and Charming, and Witchcraft, and Conjuring, as
also the Sin of those wretchedly wicked Persons, who Resort to Conjurers, and
Charmers, and Witches, White, or Black (as some do foolishly distinguish them,
for both do deal with the Devil, by unlawful Arts) whoever, I say, do resort to
any such Persons, or such as are so reputed, to enquire out their lost Goods,
or what shall be hereafter their Fortune, or to receive Directions for Health,
or Thriving; or if they use themselves any Spells and Charms to these, or the
like Purposes; such do commit a principal Work of the Devil, because they hold
thereby a Commerce and Correspondence with Satan, who is God's most bitter
Enemy, and do put their Faith and Confidence in him for Help, making him, viz.
the Devil, instead of God, their Staff and Stay: And lastly, do commit that
Sin, which is the particular Invention of the Devil, and is therefore often in
the Holy Scriptures, as for Instance, Deuteronomy. 18. Detested as such an
Abomination, and Threatened with such heavy Penalties, as must argue those, who
can use such unlawful Means for Health, or for finding out lost Goods, to be
even utterly destitute of any Fear of God, and such, who wholly give themselves
up to fear, and serve only the Devil; and I hope therefore, as common as it is,
it will be Detested by you. But the Divine Indignation is so fully Expressed
against all the Sins of this Kind, in this 18th of Deuteronomy. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.
that I must not forbear to give you the very Words themselves, as those, which
are most likely to Deter you from such high Provocations. There shall not be
found amongst you any one that uses Divination, or an Observer of Times, or an
Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits, or a
Wizard, or a Necromancer; for all that do these things are an Abomination unto
the Lord: and because of these Abominations, the Lord thy God does drive them
out from before thee. For these Nations, which thou shall possess, hearkened
unto Observers of Times, and unto Diviners.

A Second sort of those Diabolical Sins, II. Such as express more of the
Devil's Temper, than others, viz. Pride.
which may be more particularly styled the Works of the Devil, are those, which
Express more of the very Natural Temper and Disposition of Satan, than others:
And such are Pride, Envy, and Malice. That Pride is the very Temper of Satan,
may be gathered from 1 Timothy 3.6. He was Tempted by that Glorious Condition, in
which he was Created, to conceive highly of his own Dignity, and Greatness, and
Merits; and to have towering and ambitious Thoughts of Usurping to himself a
greater Power, and larger Province, perhaps, than God had given him; and for
this his Pride (and his Rebellion the Effect of it) he was cast out of Heaven,
and Excluded the Blessed Mansions of the Poor in Spirit, whose is the Kingdom
of Heaven, Matthew. 5.3. And it does therefore concern every One of you, to take
care of harboring in your Breasts the least Degrees of Pride and Vanity, and
of being Exalted in your own Minds, upon the account of any thing, you Enjoy
above others, whether a more flourishing Condition in the World, or greater
Success in your Affairs, or upon the account of your greater Skill and
Knowledge, Lest, being lifted up with Pride, you fall into the Condemnation of
the Devil, as it is in the now cited Place of Timothy. And indeed Pride, in
whatever ways it shows it self, ought most carefully to be Subdued and
Mortified, as a Sin most truly Diabolical; for it is to be considered, That
though the Devil be the first Author of all Sin, and instigates to every Kind,
yet there are many, which Satan himself cannot commit: As for Instance, He
cannot be Drunk, nor commit Lewdness, and the like, himself, because these are
committed only in, and by the Body, whereas he is a Spirit; but yet he is
Naturally Proud and Ambitious: And therefore, though those other, as being more
visible and sensible, are more Scandalous in the Eyes of Men; yet this more
Spiritual Wickedness, Pride and Ambition, and a Pharasaical Censoriousness, and
Thinking more Highly of One-self, and more Disrespectfully of Others, than is
meet, are more truly Diabolical, and have more in their Nature of the Devil's
Temper.

And as Pride, so Envy Envy.
is another of the Devils Qualities. The Devil, through his Pride and
Rebellion, having lost that high Station and Dignity, he once enjoyed in
Heaven; and seeing Man exalted to a Capacity of obtaining a Share in that Glory
and Happiness, from which he is excluded: He is possessed with the utmost Envy
both toward God and Man; Envying God the Service of us his Creatures, and us
both the Happiness of serving so Good a Master, and those infinite Rewards,
which will be given us, for our faithful Service and Obedience to him.

And from this his Envy proceeds that Rancourous Malice Malice.
also, wherewith he is ever since Acted, so as to be continually Contriving how
to do us the greatest Mischief; from whence he is called our Adversary, the
Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. Envy and Malice are indeed the very Natural Temper and
Disposition of Satan; so that he seems to be wholly made up thereof. 'Twas
Pride, as One said, made him Envious, his Envy, that made him Spiteful and
Malicious, all which together make him a Devil. And therefore, as you would not
appear to have something Diabolical in your very Natures, Let all Bitterness,
and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and Evil-speaking be put away from you with
all Malice; and be Kind one to another, Forgiving one another, even as God, for
Christ's Sake, has Forgiven you, Ephesians. 4.31, 32.

III. Such as are more the practice of Satan himself, than other Sins, viz.
Murder.
Lastly, There are some Sins more the Devil's own Practice, than others, and do
therefore deserve to be more particularly Styled the Works of the Devil: And
there are these Three, Apostasy, Murder, and Lying, which are expressly
mentioned as his own Sins, in that One remarkable Place of Scripture, Joh.
8.44. The Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth,
because there is no Truth in him: When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his
own; for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. He was a Murderer from the
beginning. He delights in humane Gore; and no doubt the vast Slaughters of Men,
which have been made in Bloody Wars, have been through the Instigation of
Satan, stirring up Ambitious Princes unjustly to Invade their Neighbors
Countries, that he might Glut his Appetite with Blood: And for the same Reason
he Obliged the Pagans, his Worshipers, to offer Men in Sacrifice to him. And
there is no Duel fought, but he is first at the making of the Challenge, and
then at the Murderer's Elbow to direct the fatal Thrust. In these last sort of
Murders, he hopes to do Two Works at once, to destroy both Body and Soul in one
instant; and to be sure he will never fail being present, where he can, to all
Intents and Purposes, so effectually do the work of a Destroyer, as he is
styled, Revel. 9.11.

Apostasy.
He abode not in the Truth. Hereby is denoted his Apostasy, and Falling off
from God, and his Service; another of Satan's principal Works of Sin. And if
any of you, who have given up your Names to Christ, to be his Disciples and
Followers, should hereafter, instead of Renouncing the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil, as you have solemnly Professed in your Baptism, give your Selves up
to the Service of Satan, of Mammon, and of your filthy Lusts; why, you will be
reckoned amongst those, that are Apostates from God, and are turned aside after
Satan. 1 Timothy 5.15. Nay, and if you should fall off from the Truth (as it is
here Professed in this Church, of which you are Members) to any Heretical
Doctrines, you will Imitate Satan in his Apostasy, who abode not in the Truth.

^^ng, and ^^^ially Ca^^iating and Evil-speaking.
When he speaks a Lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar, and the
Father of it. A Lie was that whereby he deceived and ruined Man at first (...)
shall not surely dye, said Satan, Genesis 3.4. So contrary to what God himself had
Threatened our First Parents, in case they should Eat of the forbidden Fruit):
And it is by erroneous and false Doctrines (which as Tares he sows in the Field
of the Church) whereby he has undone so many Souls ever since. You must
therefore Abhor a Lie, or Speaking that which you do not Know to be exactly
agreeable to the Truth of Things, as you will not make your Selves Children of
such a Father, the Devil. And especially you must beware of that sort of Lying,
whereby you will most nearly Resemble him, and that is in Slandering and falsely
Accusing of any One to the Ruin of his good Name. Satan is particularly
Stigmatized in Scripture for this sort of Lying, and is therefore called The
Accuser, or Slanderer, of the Brethren, which accuses them before God, Day and
Night, Rev. 12.10. and it is observable, that 1 Timothy 3.11. where Women are
charged not to be Slanderers, nor false Accusers, the Word in the Original is
(...), not to be Devils, which should be a Warning to them, as they would dread
so Black a Character, to avoid Entertaining one another with Backbiting, and
speaking Evil of their Neighbors; which yet I am afraid is the most usual
Conversation, when that Sex do meet together. Indeed as the pernicious Lie,
uttered for the Hurt, or Disadvantage of our Neighbor, is the most truly
Diabolical; So all sorts of Lying whatsoever renders such as are Notorious for
it, Contemptible and Vile amongst Men, and Odious to God: as does sufficiently
appear by the Place and Company, they are Ranked with, Rev. 22.15. Without,
that is, Hell, are Dogs, and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a Lie; which should make you of all
things in the World, my Dear Youth, to Beware of this Odious, Hellish Sin of
Lying; and I do the more earnestly press you to Hate and Abhor it, because
Youth are most apt to be Addicted to it. And so much for Sin, considered as a
Work of the Devil. And now,

Secondly, We should proceed to consider that other great Work of Satan, his
Tempting of us to Sin. But this, as it has been his great Employment ever since
the Creation of Mankind, and will be so, as long as there are Men on Earth to
be Tempted by him: And as his Methods of Temptation are very many, and very
subtle, and it does infinitely concern us, Lest Satan should get an Advantage
of us, that we should not be Ignorant of his Devices: For these Reasons, I do
think it may be profitable to you, if I make that great Work of his, his
Tempting us to Sin, the Subject of some particular Discourses by themselves, in
order to a more full and distinct State of that matter; as indeed it is very
requisite you should be thoroughly Informed, if possible, of the Temptations of
Satan, what they are. And therefore leaving that Part for the present, I shall
proceed to finish this Lecture with showing you,

Thirdly, what it is to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin, To
Reno^nce, a Wo^d of ^arious Importance, according to the Renounced.
already spoken of, and how necessary it is we should absolutely and entirely
do so. To Renounce, is a Word, that is applied in our Baptismal Vow to several
things, even all our Spiritual Enemies, that would draw us into Sin. The Devil,
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the
s^^^^l Lusts of the Flesh; they must all of them be Renounced by us. And as the
Word Renounce does carry in it a great deal of Meaning, and is of various
Significations, according to the Nature of the things to be Renounced: So what
it does particularly signify, with Reference to each of them, will best be
understood by considering its Importance, as applied to every One of those
things.

^enounce ^evil, in ^ence of Ancient ^ch, was ^sclaime Usurped ^nion and ^ority
o^ Mankind.
And agreeably therefore to the Explication now given of the Devil. To Renounce
the Devil, is, no doubt, to Disclaim his Usurpt Dominion and Authority; or to
leave off having any Communication, or Agreement with him, or having any Hand
in his base and ungrateful Rebellion against God.

This was, no doubt, what the Primitive Church understood by Renouncing the
Devil, (for they are Words of a very ancient Use in the Church of God.) The
Devil, at the first Rise of Christianity especially, had obtained a Visible
Kingdom, and that a Universal Monarchy, in a manner, over the World: Hence he
is called, The Prince of this World, Joh. 14.30. He had also his Temples, and
his Altars, and his Sacrifices. The things, which the Gentiles Sacrifice, they
Sacrifice unto Devils, and not unto God, 1 Cor. 10.20. As also many lewd and
bloody Plays, and pompous Processions were made in Honor of him, and he was
therefore in Effect, The God of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. And now, when any were
Converted from Paganism to Christianity, the Primitive Christians did expressly
require, from all, that were Admitted into that Kingdom of God, the Church of
Christ, a public and open Renunciation, or Abjuration of him, or an utter
Disowning and Abandoning the Devil's Authority; and the Paying any Homage,
Service, or Obedience to him, by Worshipping of him, or his wicked Angels, or by
going to those Plays and Processions Instituted in Honor of him. Thus does
Tertullian, an ancient Father, inform us in his Book De Corona, wherein
reciting the ancient Customs of the Church, he tells us, That just before any
were Baptized into the Christian Religion, they made a solemn Profession, Aquam
adituri, ibidem, sed aliquanto prius in Ecclesia, sub Antistitis manu
contestamur nos Renuntiare Diabolo, and Pompae, and Angelis ejus. Tertul. de
Corona.
both at their Entrance into the Water, as also a little before they had done,
when under the Bishop's Hands, that they did Renounce the Devil, his wicked
Angels, and Pomps; that is, those solemn Processions of the Heathen Gods, and
those Lewd and Cruel Plays, used amongst the Pagans, which were the Ceremonies
of State, as it were, in Satan's Kingdom. All subjection to the Devil, and all
usage of those Rights of his Kingdom, they did utterly abandon and forsake. And
this was what was meant in the Primitive Times by Renouncing of the Devil.

Renounce (...) Works of (...), was in ^r Sense, (...) Abandon (...) Forsake
^ry Sin, as ^ng the pro^ Service ^he Devil.
And to Renounce his works of Sin, must accordingly signify in their Sense, to
disclaim, abandon, or forsake every Sin, as being the proper Service of the
Devil; and in the real Meaning of it, no less than a throwing off God's
Authority, and a disowning his Power. For if you will read over Romans 1. you
will find, that People upon their forsaking of the True God, to serve other
Gods, (which were many of 'em at least, no other than Devils) did thereupon
fall into all manner of Sin and Wickedness, as you will see largely described
in that Chapter. And if you will also look into the Sixth Chapter to the
Romans, ver. 11. you will see, that Christians by being Baptized, Were to
reckon themselves to be dead unto Sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ
our Lord. So that in the Original, and first meaning of the Words, as to
Renounce the Devil, was to abjure and disclaim the Power and Dominion of Satan,
and to leave off having any Communication, or Agreement with him, and any Hand
in his base and ungrateful Rebellion against God; so to Renounce his Works of
Sin, was to Disclaim, Abandon, or Forsake all, and every Sin, as being the
proper Service of the Devil; and in the real Meaning of it, no less than a
throwing off God's Authority, and a dis-owning of his Power. This, I say, was
the first Meaning of the Words, in the first Ages of the Church.

Nor are they to be Interpreted in a much different Sense at this Day. For
Satan has his Kingdom still in the World, The Words are to be understood in
much the same Sense at this day; Satan having his Kingdom still in the World,
and even amongst Christians, and the Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of his
Kingdom, being still Obeyed by the greatest Part of Mankind.
and the Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of that his Kingdom, are Obeyed by the
greatest Part of Mankind. The Barbarous Nations amongst the Pagans, do directly
serve him at this Day; and it is many a Christian's Lot, who is cast amongst
'em to be forced, either to Join with 'em in such Impious Service, or to suffer
Death with Torments, for refusing. And even in the Christian Pale, though his
Power is much weakened here, since the Coming of our Savior, to what it was
before, yet still, as Christ has his Church, so Satan has his Synagogue amongst
us; and too many there are, within the Limits of Christendom, who do openly and
avowedly Obey no other, than the Laws of his Kingdom. All your Atheists and
Deists, who Blaspheme God, and the Christian Religion; and all your Profane
Swearers and Cursers, whom you shall hear every Hour in the Day to Dare God, as
it were, by their horrid Oaths and Imprecations to Damn 'em, that is, to send
'em to the Devil; and all those, who Resort to Charmers, and Conjurers, and
Fortune Tellers (as many Thousands do in this Nation:) All these, I say, are
the open and professed Subjects of Satan's Kingdom. And how many Lewd and Riotous
Livers are there amongst us, who do little else but the Works of the Devil, and
Obey no other Laws, but those of Sin? So that as you will Renounce the Devil,
and all his Works, in that Sense, wherein the Church does at present understand
the Words, you are with all possible care to avoid being of the Number of such
Men.

And I know no more that need be said at present, This Renunciation for the
most Part the same with Repentance.
to explain the Importance of the words, Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
except it be this; That if we consider such a Renunciation, as the Act of One,
who has been heretofore a Slave to Satan, and a Servant to Sin, then it
signifies to Forsake and Abandon the Service of Sin and the Devil, formerly
Lived in; and so being a Ceasing to do Evil, and a Learning to do well, is the
same with Repentance. But if it be the Act of One of those, who may be said to
need no Repentance, of which sort are Infants, who have never committed Actual
Sin, then to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, does mean a firm
Resolution, never to side with him in his Rebellion against God; and as
carefully as he can, to avoid the committing of any Sin, as being that, whereby
God's Rightful Authority is cast off, and the Devil's Usurped Dominion submitted
to. And so much for the Meaning of Renouncing the Devil, and all his Works.

The Devil, and all his ^orks of Sin ^ust be abso^utely and en^rely Renoun^ed,
because,
And now Lastly it remains, that I should show you, how that it is necessary, we
should Absolutely and Entirely Renounce the Devil, and all his Works. As to
those other Enemies to our Souls, the World, and our own Flesh, there is some
Temper to be used, being neither of 'em are Absolutely, and in themselves Evil,
but only by accident, when the World is too intensely Beloved, and our Flesh
too much Indulged, to the Prejudice and Hurt of the Soul; and therefore there
are some Degrees of Affection and Regard allowed to both them. But the Devil is
the Evil One, and he is by way of Eminence and Singularity styled, the Wicked
One in the Holy Scripture, as Matthew. 13.19. There is nothing but E^il proceeds
from Satan.
and 1 John 2.13.19. So that there is not the least Good, and nothing but Evil,
proceeds from him; and therefore no manner of Agreement is to be made with him;
What Concord has Christ with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.15. Nor are we to imagine we can
divide our Service betwixt God and him; We cannot serve God and Mammon, Matthew.
6.24. So that the Devil is Absolutely and Entirely to be Renounced by us.

And Sin, ^hether we ^^nsider it in (...) original ^ause and nature; (...) in
its sad ^ffects and ^onsequents, (...) the utmost ^vil.
And so likewise must his Works of Sin. Sin as Sin, is entirely Evil: Consider
it in its Original Cause and Nature, and consider it in its Effects and
Consequents, and there is not a worse Evil in the World than Sin: View it in
its Original and first Cause, and it is a Brat of the Devil's, the Firstborn
of Hell. And view it again in its Nature, and it is a Choosing of quite other
Ends, than what the Wise and Good God has Appointed us, and ordained us for;
and is a Going quite cross to those Laws and Rules, which he has given us. And
then consider it next in its sad Effects and Consequents, and there is no Evil
in the World to be Compared to it. It is a Sin, says One, which turned glorious
Angels into hideous Devils, and tumbled them down from Heaven, to Hell: It is
Sin, that filled the the World with Woes and Plagues, brought Death and
Diseases, and a vast and endless Sum of Miseries into it. It is Sin, that
torments and terrifies the Conscience, that kindles Hell Flames, Exposes the
Soul to the eternal and direful Revenges of the great God: And in a word, Sin
is so perfectly and only Evil, that the worst of Things here, were they free
from the Contagion and Evil of Sin, would be Excellent and Amiable. So that Sin
also is Absolutely and Entirely to be Renounced by us; and there is no one Sin,
nothing in the least of Sin, that may willingly be complied with.

therefore no ^ne Sin, nor any thing the ^ast of Sin, ^ust willing^^ be
complied ^ith.
I say, No One Sin, nor any the least of Sin, for so Poisonous a thing it is in
spoiling of every thing, that is Good in Man, that if we shall allow our selves
but in One single Sin, it will utterly spoil all our other Righteousness. If a
man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all, Jam.
2.10. And One such single Allowance will stop God's Ears against all our
Prayers: If I regard Iniquity in my Heart the Lord will not hear me, Psalm.
66.18. Nay so absolutely an Evil is Sin, and so Absolutely and Entirely it is
to be Renounced by us, that the least Sinful Action is not to be committed in
order to attain the greatest Good. So little a Sin, as an Officious Lie, must
not be told, no not to save a Man's Life: Nor a Pious Fraud, nor a Holy Cheat
committed to promote the Good of the Church, and to Secure and Propagate what
we take to be the True Religion: For if the Truth of God has more Abounded
through my Lie unto his Glory; why yet am I judged as a Sinner? Whereas he who
tells such a Kind and Serviceable Lie, will certainly be Judged as such; and
as it follows, Whosoever shall say, Let us do Evil that Good may come of it,
his Damnation is just, Romans 3.7, 8. So that every Christian must Absolutely and
Entirely Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin.

And indeed it is but to consider, And indeed if the Nature of Satan, and of
Sin, and the horrid Consequence of yielding to either, be well considered, it
is hardly possible, not absolutely and entirely to Renounce both.
as well as know the Nature of Satan, and of Sin, and the horrid Consequence of
yielding to either of them; and it is impossible any should not Absolutely and
Entirely Renounce, that is, utterly Detest, and Avoid, and Beware of them. As
for the Devil, why? Even the Perversest of People, the Israelites, when it was
solemnly put to their Reason and Consideration, who to serve, God, or the
Devil, could not without the utmost Detestation think of the latter. If it
seems Evil unto you, says Joshua to them, Josh. 24.15, 16. to serve the Lord,
choose you this day whom you will serve; whether the Gods of the Amorites, in
whose Land ye dwell, (and those Gods were no other than Devils) but as for me,
and my house, said he, we will serve the Lord. And the Result was, That the
People answered and said, God forbid, that we should forsake the Lord to serve
other Gods. God forbid: The very Thoughts of such a Thing, when they came to
Consider it, was Odious to them.

And if we did but Consider the odious Nature of Sin, we should not more Abhor
the Devil himself, than Abandon every Sin: For why? He that commits Sin is
of the Devil, we are told 1 John 3.8. Such a One is of the Devil's Party, he is
a Sharer in the Devil's Rebellion against God, and in his wicked Designs to
destroy God's Authority: And though he be not a Devil himself, yet he is near
Akin to him, and shall Partake with him, as in his Rebellion, so in his
Punishment: And who, that Considers this, can stick Entirely to Abandon and to
Abhor so foul a Thing as Sin is?

But however, whether People will Consider it or no, However this if we do not
do, we shall forfeit all Right and Title to those infinite Blessings held forth
in the Covenant of Grace.
so necessary it is, that every Christian should absolutely and entirely
Renounce the Devil, and all his Works of Sin; that this if you do not do, you
will forfeit all your Right and Title to those infinite Blessings, held forth
to you in the Covenant of Grace, and Purchased for you by the Blood of Christ.
If you do not utterly Renounce the Devil, by having nothing to do with him in
his foul Rebellion against God, you will be accounted no Members of Christ's
Church, but of the Synagogue of Satan, as the Apostatizing Gnostics, those
great Enemies of God are called, Rev. 2.9. and that for their Halting betwixt
God and Satan. And except you do also utterly Renounce his Works of Sin, by
abandoning every known Sin, as that, whereby the Divine Authority is thrown
aside, and his Power disowned, you will be so far from being the Children of
God, that you will be styled no better than Children of the Devil: For
whosoever is Born of God does not commit Sin, it is said, 1 John 3.9. that is,
does keep himself strictly from all deliberate Sin: And in this the Children of
God are manifested, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not
Righteousness is not of God, as the same Apostle goes on, ver. 10. And who else
is it, think ye, but he, who Overcomes both the Devil, and all his Works of
Sin, that shall ever Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? Why he, and none else,
shall Inherit so inestimable a Blessing, we are assured, Rev. 21.7, 8. He that
Overcomes shall Inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my
Son: But the Fearful and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and Murderers, and
Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall have their part
in the Lake, that Burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the Second Death.
So necessary upon these several Accounts it is, that, according as has been
Explained, you should Renounce, that is, Disclaim, Abhor and Abandon the Devil,
and all his Works of Sin: Which that you may all of you do, God Almighty grant
of his infinite Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

THE Tenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works.
I Have already showed you, First, who the Devil is, and Secondly in Part, what
are his Works. All Sin whatsoever, I have showed you, is a Work of the Devil;
but there are some particular Sins, which being more directly levelled against
God's Authority, and expressing more of the natural Temper and Disposition of
Satan, and being more his own Practice, than others, do more particularly
deserve the Title and Character of the Works of the Devil; and what they are I
have showed you.

Secondly, And as Sin, so his Tempting of us to Sin is another main and
principal Work of the Devil. And I have reserved this Subject of Satan's
Temptations, to be particularly handled in some set Discourses by themselves,
that so I might have more room to Expose 'em to you; there being no subject in
Practical Divinity of greater Consequence and Concernment to our Souls, than to
be thoroughly Informed in the Ways and Methods of Satan's Temptations.

Now to Tempt one, in the general Notion of the Word, To Tempt, is to make a
Trial of a Person.
does barely signify to make Trial of a Person, either by Words, or Signs, by
Promises, or Threats, whether or no he will do such a thing. And the Tempting
of a Person may be Morally Good, or Evil, according to the End, for which such
a Trial is made. If the Trial be of a Person's Virtue, To Tempt, a thing
morally Good or Evil, according to the End thereof.
only that Occasion may be afforded him to give an Experiment and Proof
thereof: that so if he do well, he may be Rewarded; if Ill, that his Hypocrisy,
and the Corruption of his Heart may be discovered, and he himself Humbled with
the Sight and Sense thereof to his Amendment. There is nothing may hinder a
Governor especially, thus to Tempt any one; and therefore to Tempt a Man to
this End, To Tempt a Person, in order to prove his Virtue, or discover his
Corruption, consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness of a Governor;
and thus God ^d^es Tempt Men.
may very well consist with the Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness of God. And
accordingly we find in Scripture Two Eminent Instances of God's Tempting
Persons to both these Purposes.

And First we find, That God Tempted Abraham to try his Faith, and to Reward
him for it. And he did it to as high a degree, as was ever heard of, bidding
him to Take his Son, his only Son Isaac, whom he loved, and to get him into the
Land of Moriah, and to offer him there for a Burnt Offering, Genesis 22.12. The
Trial was severe enough; but God did put Abraham upon it with no other design,
but that he might have occasion given him to exercise his Faith in God. And by
giving such a Noble Demonstration thereof, as to Resign up his own Son to be
Sacrificed at God's Command, and with his own Hands too, I. Thus he Tempted
Abraham to try his Faith, and to Reward him for it.
he might thereby Testify both to God and Man, how much he Trusted in his
Maker; and thereupon might obtain the Honor upon Earth, to be accounted the
Father of the Faithful, among all Generations of Men; and in Heaven, to be the
Highest in the Ranks of all Humane Inhabitants, it being the Privilege of the
greatest Saints to be Lodged in Abraham's Bosom. And to the same Gracious
Purposes it is, that he does Tempt his Faithful Servants, when at any time he
lets loose the Enemy of the Church upon 'em, to persecute and destroy 'em: It
is to the Intent, that giving an extraordinary Proof of their Faith, and
Constancy, and Patience, and Love to him, he may extraordinarily Reward 'em.
Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for his Names sake, being certain to
receive an Hundred Fold, and to Inherit everlasting Life, Matthew. 19.29.

II. Hezekiah, to discover his Hypocrisy, and to Humble him in the sight
thereof.
Secondly, We find, That God Tempted Hezekiah, in order to discover to him his
own Hypocrisy and Corruption, and the Pride of his own Heart, that he might be
humbled in the Sight and Sense thereof. For Hezekiah being lately Recovered
from a mortal Sickness, by the miraculous Providence of God: The Princes of
Babylon sent their Ambassadors unto him to enquire of the Wonder, that was done
in the Land, and God left him to try him, that he might Know all that was in
his Heart, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. that is, God did Providentially order the Coming of
those Foreign Ambassadors upon this Errand, to try Hezekiah, whether he would
take this occasion before those Idolaters, who put their Trust in those, which
were no Gods, to Glorify the True God of Israel, for so miraculously Recovering
of him. But he being more Intent upon setting out his own Grandeur, than God's
Glory, took care only To show them all the House of his precious Things, the
Silver, and the Gold, and the Spices, and the precious Ointment, and all the
house of his Armor, and all the house of his Treasures, 2 Kings 20.13. Upon
which God did severely Reprove and Humble him by the Mouth of his Prophet
Isaiah, ver. 17, 18, 19. for such his Ingratitude, Pride, and Vanity. And so it
is with every One of us. There is a great deal of Pride, and Vanity, and other
Corruptions and secret Hypocrisies, which ly lurking in our Hearts; and we our
selves are Ignorant thereof, and how we shall prove till we are tried, and some
Providential Occasion draws it out: And then if God's Word, or Ministers, or
the Rebukes of our own Consciences make us sensible thereof, we are much
Bettered, and God has his Gracious Ends in our Amendment. So that thus you see
to what gracious Ends God does Tempt us; namely, Either to prove our Virtue,
that he may Reward us the better for it, or to discover our Hypocrisy and
Insincerity, that we might be Humbled in the Sight and Sense thereof, and be
thereby amended.

^hese Temp^ations of God ^e therefore (...) no since to (...) Reno^^ced but to
be Rejoiced in, because for ou^ Good.
And these therefore are such Temptations, as we are in no Sense to Renounce.
But indeed We have reason to count it all Joy, when we fall into these diverse
Temptations of God's ordering, Knowing this, that the Trying of our Fa th
works Patience, Jam. 1.2, 3. They give us an Opportunity of Exercising the
Noblest Virtues of Christianity, Faith, and Patience, and such exalted Strains,
and glorious Heights of Religion, as cannot be Exercised but in a State of
Temptation and Trial: and consequently they give us an Opportunity of
Treasuring up to our selves the greatest Rewards in Heaven, which we shall be
sure to Obtain, if we come off clearly and innocently from under Temptation; it
being declared, Jam. 1.12. that Blessed is the Man, that endures Temptation,
for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has
promised to those, that love him.

Or if they are Trials for the Discovery of our Corruptions, they prick the
Bladder of Vanity, let out the Corruption, and we become better, and sounder
for it ever after. These Trials of us are not made by God for his own better
Satisfaction and Knowledge of us, for he is the Searcher of the Hearts, and the
Tryer of the Reins, and Knows what is in Man: But for our own Conviction, and
the Discovery of us and our own Sinfulness, to our selves, than which Knowledge
nothing certainly can be more useful to us. To such gracious Ends you see are
God's Temptations, which are not therefore in any sense to be Renounced by us.
Well, But

Secondly, A Temptation to Ensnare a Person into some Sin, that so God's Anger
may be kindled against him.
There is quite a different End in some sort of Temptations, and They are
merely to Enforce or Ensnare a Person into some Sin, that so God's Anger may be
Kindled against him, and the Person may be punished for his Transgression; and
in this Sense Let no Man say when he is Tempted, I am Tempted of God, for God
cannot be Tempted with Evil, neither Tempts he any Man, Jam. 1.13. No, the
Temptations that are made to this End, do arise from other Authors than God;
either from our own Lusts, and so it follows, ver. 14. Every Man is Tempted,
when he is drawn aside of his own Lusts, and Enticed, And the Person punished
for this Transgression is Wicked and Malicious; and so the Devil, together with
the World, and the Flesh, do Tempt us.
Jam. 1.14. Or from the World, particularly from wicked Persons in it: And thus
the whorish Woman Tempted the young Fool, Prove. 7.18. Or chiefly and originally
from Satan: Hence in many Places of the Scripture, particularly Matthew. 4.3. and
1 These. 3.5. he is styled the Tempter; and from his unwearied Diligence in
Tempting us, he is said to be continually walking about seeking whom he may
Devour. He is here by way of Eminence called the Tempter, because he is the
Chief of all those Enemies of ours, which would withdraw us into Sin. He is the
grand Engineer, that puts the World, and the Flesh on work, that does Order and
Appoint which way they shall Batter us, and does Direct and Manage their
several Temptations.

And now, The vast concernment it is to us, to know his Temptations.
as it does infinitely concern you to Know his Temptations, and in what Ways
and Methods he usually Tempts Men, Lest Satan should get an Advantage over you:
So by the Help of God, I will discover to you his manifold Policies and Wiles;
for though he be himself a Spirit, and his ways also are not always visible to
mortal Eyes; yet through the Discoveries, that God has made to us in his Holy
Scripture, we are not Ignorant of his Devices, 2 Cor. 2.11. And I do think they
may all of them, in a manner, be Reduced to these Four Heads.

First, Such whereby he Attempted the whole Race of Mankind, The several Heads
of Satan's Temptations.
to draw it off from Obedience to God, to do Service to him.

Secondly, Such as he levels against the Church of Christ, the true Servants of
God, either utterly to destroy it from off the Face of the Earth, or at
leastwise to Corrupt its Notions of God and Religion, so that by our very
Religion we might Dishonor him.

Thirdly, Such whereby he Attempts to Overthrow Men of greater Eminency, on the
account of their Station, Order, or Piety, upon whose Fall many Others are
likely to Re^olt over to him.

And Lastly, Such whereby he Applies himself to any Persons ind^fferently, to
draw them into Sin.

All these his Methods of Temptation I shall consider severally and distinctly,
and shall discover 'em to you, that you may avoid the Force of 'em. And I shall
confine my self mostly to such Discoveries, as the Scripture does give us:
There being no other certain way of distinguishing Satan's Temptations, from
those, which arise from other Principles, but by Revelation only.

By what Methods he first Tempted our first Parents, and still does continue to
Tempt us.
And First, Let us Consider his first and more general Temptations; those
whereby he Attempted the whole Race of Mankind, to draw it off from Obedience
to God, to do Service to him.

No sooner did God Create Mankind, but this Inveterate Enemy to the Divine
Authority, had the Boldness to Attempt the drawing off from their Allegiance
the whole Race of Men, to join with him in his wicked Rebellion against their
Maker. This he did in Corrupting our First Parents; Knowing, that if the
Fountain were Poisoned, all the Streams that Issue thence, must needs run muddy
and defiled, as it accordingly happened: For By that One Man Sin Entered into
the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all
have Sinned, Romans 5.12.

And the Means whereby he Attempted the Universal Rebellion of Mankind, were

I. By insinuateing into the Minds of Adam and Eve false Notions of God, and an
ill Opinion of their Maker and Governor, particularly with respect to his
Justice and Mercy.
First, By Insinuating into the Minds of Adam and Eve false Notions of God, and
an ill and mean Opinion of their Maker and Governor. This is the Method of all
great Traitors, who Head a Party against their Prince, either to create
unreasonable Jealousies and Fears, or undue Thoughts concerning him, especially
concerning the Proceedings of his Justice and Mercy, in the Minds of his
Subjects. And this Policy, as Satan does Inspire 'em with: So he Practiced it
himself to the Destruction of Mankind. Yea, and has God said, says he slily to
the Woman, Ye shall not Eat of every Tree of the Garden? Genesis 3.1. This is a
most cruel Piece of Tyranny and Oppression, to lay before a Man Objects that
are grateful and pleasing to his Appetites and Senses, and then to forbid him
the Use of 'em. And what, though you may Eat of all the Trees but One, why not of
every Tree? Why should a Man's Appetites be restrained from any Thing that is
delightful in this World? But however you need not be afraid, for though God does
deal so hardly with you, as to deny you those proper Enjoyments you might take;
yet it cannot be, that he will destroy you for your Disobedience in so
reasonable a case. He will be more favorable to you in the End, however he
threatens you now. What, Of the Fruit of the Tree which is in the midst of the
Garden, has God said, ye shall not Eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest
ye dye? And the subtle Serpent said unto the Woman, Ye shall not surely dye. It
cannot be, but he must be more Favorable to you than so; he may Threaten you
to Frighten you, But ye shall not surely dye. But all such ^onceits of (...),
are to
And by this very Method of Satan's Infusing; by our Entertaining false Notions
of God's Justice and Mercy; of his Justice, as if he commanded us unreasonable
Things, and laid grievous Restraints upon our Lusts and Appetites; And by
Entertaining false Notions of God's Justice and Mercy, do Men generally
Encourage themselves in Sin at this Day.
and by conceiving unduly of his Mercy, as if notwithstanding the severity of
his Threatenings, he would in time Relent, and like an Easy and Fickle-minded,
Man Reverse his own Judgment and Decrees against sinners: By these ill Notions,
I say, of God's Justice and Mercy, do the general Part of Mankind, to this Day,
Encourage themselves in sinning against their God, and in Rebelling against his
Authority. This is One of the more General Policies of Satan, whereby he did at
first, and does still endeavor to draw all Mankind, to venture upon a Revolt
from God.

But whatever Conceits of this Kind do at any time enter into your Hearts, you
are to Renounce and Abhor, But all such Conceits of God, are to be utterly
renounced and cast out of our Thoughts, as Diabolical Suggestions, most
destructive to our Souls.
and immediately to cast them out of your Thoughts, as the undoubted
Suggestions of Satan, on purpose to take off your Fears, and to lull your Souls
into a most dangerous security in a Course of Sin. No sure, the Laws of God,
which he has given us, you must consider, are most Just and Reasonable in
themselves; and yet farther to Encourage us to Obey 'em in the most difficult
Cases, he has Propounded infinite Rewards in Heaven to those, who shall
persevere to the End in well-doing; but on the contrary, to discourage
Disobedience, he does Threaten as infinite and eternal Punishments in Hell, to
all licentious and wicked Living. And as he will not fail of Bestowing the
former, so there is no reason in the World to fancy he will forbear to Inflict
the latter. It was not without the highest Reason, and perhaps because nothing
less than Eternal Punishments are sufficient to restrain Sinners from those
Pleasures of Sin, which are present, that he did Threaten to Inflict such at
first. And when Laws so Reasonable in themselves, and whose Obedience, neither
the Goodness of the Lawgiver, in so bountifully Rewarding, nor the fear of his
Power in so terribly Punishing, can secure, are basely Transgrest, and Trampled
upon by base and ungrateful Rebels against the Majesty of Heaven: what reason
is there any Sinner should promise himself, That God will not Punish the
Trangression of 'em to as high a Degree, as in his Word he has Threatened? And
for any Man therefore without any Ground at all, but his own sond Wishes and
Desires, he might not be so Punished, to to Promise himself, That God will after
all forbear him, is such a desperate Piece of Madness, as can never enter into
the Hearts of any, but those, whom Satan has Insatuated and Befooled to their
Ruin and Destruction. Wherefore you must take care, that you Abandon, and
utterly cast out of your Souls the very first Motions of such Thoughts, looking
upon 'em as no other, than Suggestions from Satan, whenever they enter into
your Minds: And in so doing you will Renounce, as it highly Concerns you, that
First and most dangerous Temptation of Satan.

Secondly, The next of these more general Policies of Satan, II. By Corrupting
the Understanding and Reason of Man, by putting him upon curious Enquiries
after ^^ess Mat^ and upon ^^king a ^^ul Expe^^ent of the ^^erences be^en Good
(...) Evil.
whereby he did at first, and does still endeavor to draw all Mankind to
venture upon a Revolt from God; was his corrupting the Reason and Understanding
of Man, by putting him upon curious Enquiries, into vain and unprofitable
Things; and by inciting him to make an Experiment what was in Sin, in order as
he pretended, to enlarge his Knowledge: But in reallity with a design to draw
over his Soul a thick Cloud of Ignorance, that so he might lead him blindfold
into any Sin and Misery. In the day ye shall eat thereof, says the Serpent,
then your Eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods knowing Good and Evil,
Genesis 3.5. that is, to confine your Knowledge to the narrow subject of God's
Laws, and to study only to know how you may please your Maker, is an Injury to
that Noble Faculty, your Understanding, whereby you may be Equal with God
himself, if you please; and therefore that nothing may escape your Knowledge,
that you may understand all that, which is Good for Man, try the Experiment of
knowing Things forbidden, as well as allowed. (...) Mind of ^n natu^^ desirous
^ncreasing ^^wledge.
And this indeed was a most exquisite and refined piece of Policy, such as Hell
it self could not invent a more effectual One to ruin Man withal; and yet One
whose Mischief was less discernible. A hungry Stomach does not more eagerly
crave Meat, than the Mind of Man does naturally desire Knowledge, which is Food
to the Intellectual Part, as Meat is to the Bodily. And if it be Useful and
Good, it adds Nourishment, and Strength, and Vigor to the Inward Man, as
wholesome Diet does to the Outward.

^xperimen^ Know^ge of Sin ^^ds the ^^son, and ^^fies the ^^ce of spi^^al
things.
And now behold here the deep Policy of Satan, that when the Reasonable Soul of
Adam did hunger and thirst so eagerly after Knowledge; and when possibly he
thought it might make him able to steer his Way toward Happiness with greater
certainty and safety, if he should once Experimentally know Evil, as well as
Good, (as we commonly know a Way the better ever afterward, which we have once
mist) Satan by Tempting him to commit Evil, instead of Enlightening his Mind,
did thereby quite extinguish the Candle of the Lord in the Soul of Man, Divine
Knowledge: so that instead of discerning his Way to Heaven, thenceforward he
was not able so much as to guess at it. For why? Sin like Mud, does strangely
foul and defile the Soul. It stirs up the Lusts and Appetites within a Man, and
these rising upwards, do wonderfully cloud and muddy a Man's Reason. Sin does
even turn a Man Topsy-turvy. It puts the Affections, Lusts and Appetites
uppermost and tumbles Reason and Judgment down; and therefore, Just as in a
Vessel, which has a Sediment in the Bottom, but clear Liquor in the Top, if you
turn it up, the Dregs mixing with the purer Part, makes that, which was clear
as Crystal before, become very foul and muddy: So in a Soul defiled with Sin,
Reason can no longer see where the Way of its Happiness does lie.

The Truth of it is: To spend too much of our Time, and of our Thoughts in
gaining the Knowledge of Things, And even ^re Curiosi^ after less ^ofitable
^ings, takes (...) from the ^^owledge of ^^d, and our ^^ves, and (...) Means of
^^ppiness.
in themselves Lawful, as in the Laws of our Country, or in the Mysteries of
Trade, will too much take a Man off from Enquiring into, and will hinder the
Knowledge of God, and of our selves, and of the Means of being happy in Heaven,
which does infinitely more concern us. Hence Not many wise Men after the Flesh,
not many Mighty, not many Noble were called, 1 Cor. 1.26. But if Men seek to
Enlarge their Knowledge by Experimentally knowing of Sin, and with Solomon,
Give their Heart, as to know Wisdom, so to know Madness and Folly; they will
not only soon perceive with him, That it is but Vexation of Spirit: but they
will find it will extremely stupify their Sense and Apprehension of spiritual
Things. And being frequently and habitually committed, will cause in them such
a Reprobate Mind, as will disable 'em at length to know any difference between
Good and Evil.

And by this very Wile does he to this Day bring such an Ignorance in Religious
Matters, By these Means he brings that Ignorance in Divine Matters, which
reigns in most Men's Minds.
as does apparently reign in the Minds of some Men. Some he engages in nice
Enquiries after a Thousand other things, to draw 'em off from ever looking into
their Bibles. And as to Others, by decoying 'em into one Sin after another, he
does at length improve their Knowledge of Evil to that degree, that at last
they come to know nothing of Good; nay, to have so little a sense of it, such
stupify'd Apprehensions concerning it, as to Call Evil, Good, and Good, Evil.

And then having once blindfolded the Reason of Man with the Ignorance of
Divine Things, what Sin and Misery is there, And being spiritually ignorant,
Men are easily led into whatever Sin and Misery.
That Satan does not most easily lead Men into? For why? Good and Useful
Knowledge, such as the Knowledge of God and of our selves, and of our Duty to
him, is the Eye of the Soul, whereby alone it can see its Way, and steer its
Course safely toward Heaven: Whereas on the other side, Ignorance of God and
Religion, is the same in the Mind, as Blindness in the Eye; and therefore as a
Blind man may with the greatest Ease be drawn aside into Pits, and over Rocks
to his Downfall and Destruction, and it is next to impossible he should ever get
safe to his Journeys End: so an Ignorant Man in Religious Matters must needs be
an easy Prey to Satan and False Deceivers, and he cannot possibly tell how to
steer his Course safe toward Heaven, but must almost necessarily suffer
Shipwreck of Body and Soul in Hell. So that this Policy of the Devil, in
Corrupting the Understanding and Reason of Man, by putting him upon curious
Enquiries, and a sinful Experiment, in order as he pretended, to enlarge his
Knowledge, but in reallity with a design to draw over his Soul a thick Cloud of
Ignorance, that so he might lead him blindfold into into any Sin and Misery, is
a Depth of Satan that was, and still is most Fatal and Destructive to our
Innocence, and to our Happiness.

And this therefore is another Wile of Satan's, This therefore another Wile of
Satan's, which must be carefully avoided.
which you must also carefully avoid. You must above all things Beware of ever
making Experiments of the Pleasures of Sin, vainly deceiving your own Souls
with the Expectations, that having once known what is in 'em, you will the more
Abhor'em for the future. Few of those, who do make such sinful Experiments do
afterward return to a sound, and sober Sense of things. Not that they find any
reason to stick to those Courses, but because the ways of Sin are mere Mazes,
which once Entered into, are hardly got out of; and because Sin often
committed, does at length scar the Conscience, and drives away the Holy Spirit,
and so the wretched Sinner becomes utterly Ignorant of God's Ways and Happiness
therein. And in their Ignorance what Pits of Destruction are there, which Satan
cannot draw them into. You must therefore, I say, above all things endeavor,
as to Expel all Ignorance of Divine Things out of your Minds: so the great
Causes thereof, of Satan's Contrivance, namely, Curiosity after vain and
unprofitable Things, which will divert you from what does infinitely more
concern you, viz. The good State of your Souls; and you must carefully beware
of Experimentally knowing Sin, the Commission and Acquaintance with which, will
draw a thick Cloud of Ignorance over your Minds, as has been spoke. And hereby
you will also Renounce and Defeat another considerable Temptation and Wile of
Satan's, to draw us into a Course of Sin.

III. (...) Bribing (...) Affecti^^ (...) with ^^ething ^est our ^rts, and ^her
than ^blige and (...) which, will com^ anything (...) is Evil.
A Third of those First and more general Methods of Satan's Temptations, whereby
he did in the Beginning, and does to this Day Inveigle the greatest Part of
Mankind into many a sin, Is by bribing their Affections with something that is
nearest their Hearts, and rather than disoblige and lose which, they will
commit any thing that is Evil. Thus he did Tempt Adam to partake of the
forbidden Fruit, by the solicitations of his Wife Eve, Genesis 3.4.6. Adam must
needs have Loved his Wife Eve above all Things, and even equally with himself,
she being Bone of his Bone, and Flesh of his Flesh, Genesis 2.23. And Satan
therefore if he could make sure to his Party such a Favorite, what might he
not obtain of him? He knew it, and therefore he Tempted Eve first, and by her
Importunity, gained the Consent of Adam, and so he also Transgrest.

^d bywhat^^ we most ^^e our Af^^ions upon, (...) he still ^^eigle us to (...)
what is ^^bidden.
And the same is also still his Method to Ruin us. If there be any thing, which
we do particularly place our Affections upon, he will be sure to Inveigle us by
the Persuasions of that to do the forbidden Thing. If Achan once begins to set
his Heart upon the Wedge of Gold, and the goodly Babylonish Garment, then, though
it be an Accursed Thing, he will put the Discovery of it to the Venture. If
Gehazi once begin to hanker after the Talent of Silver, and the Two Changes of
Raiment, that shall put him upon Lying and Cheating to obtain them; And the
love of Money is the root of all Evil, we are told, 1 Timothy 6.10. And the like
may be said of any thing else, whatever is our Darling, shall be his Instrument
to Tempt us. And therefore it does nearly concern us, as we will preserve our
selves free from the Danger of Satan, and all his snares, to have a Jealous Eye
upon what we do most love, that it do not Entice us into Sin by his Art in
managing of it. and there^^e our Sa^ur would ^^ve us bear ^^t Indiffe^^cy of
Af^^tion to^^rds our ^^arest Rela^^ns, as to be ^^le to For^^e them, ^^d their
In^^ests, ra^^er than ^od.
And therefore does our Savior Caution us in such unusual Terms against Loving
too much our very nearest Relations, telling us, That if any one come to him,
and Hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be his Disciple, Luke 14.26. that
is, he would have us to take care, we bear that Indifferency of Affection
toward even our nearest Relations, as to be able to Forsake them, and their
Interests (which they and the World will count Hating of them) rather than God,
and lose his Favor; for that otherwise, if we set our Hearts too much upon
them, they will prove a dangerous Snare to us, and a Man's greatest Enemies, as
to his real Injury and Hurt, will be those of his own House and Family, because
he does most Love them. It is a very great Temptation to be too warmly Affected
toward any thing on this side Heaven; Satan will be sure to Tempt us thereby,
if he can, to Set our Affections, not on things Above, but on things of the
Earth, so contrary to what we are commanded, Col. 3.2. We must therefore
cautiously Beware least he Attack us on that side.

Lastly, by ^iting their Lusts and Appetites after the forbidden Fruit, by
proposing the fairest Objects, and most delicious Dainties to their Senses.
Fourthly, And Lastly, to complete the Rebellion of Man from God, and to render
the Apostasy of our First Parents such, as should Reflect the greatest
Dishonor upon our Maker, Satan did excite their Lusts and Appetites also,
after the forbidden Fruit, by proposing the fairest Objects, and the most
delicious Dainties to their Senses. And when the Woman saw that the Tree was
good for Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eye, she took of the Fruit
thereof and did Eat, and gave also unto her Husband with her, and he did Eat,
Genesis 3.6. What could be more Dishonorable to God, than for Persons owing their
Life and Being, and all that they Enjoyed to God's Bounty; and living in the
midst of Paradise, and having all manner of Earthly Comforts flowing in upon
them, so little to Value God, and his Favors, as to Sacrifice all their
Interest in him, for the poor Enjoyments of One forbidden Fruit? Was not this
to Undervalue him to the lowest Degree? Why, this Satan did, by proposing to
their Senses such Objects, as being exceedingly Delightful, and extremely
Pleasant to Behold and Taste, might most easily prevail upon them, to Transgress
their Maker's Laws in Obtaining of them.

And by the very same Methods does he prevail to this Day upon the far greatest
part of Mankind to Rebel against God. And by the same methods does he prevail,
to this day, upon the far greatest part of Mankind to Rebel against God.
He was so well assured of the Efficacy and Power of this Temptation, that he
endeavored to Overthrow even our Blessed Savior by it. He takes him up into
an exceeding high Mountain, and showing him all the Kingdoms of the World, and
the Glory of them, he says unto him, All these things will I give thee, if
thou will fall down and worship me, Matthew. 4.8, 9. But the Second Adam being
God, as well as Man, could not be Foiled; though the First was so easily taken
with sensible Things. For Man being made up very much of Sense, so that nothing
enters into the Soulbut through the Doors of our Senses, we are easily prevailed
upon by what Gratifies our Senses.
But it is not so Happy with the Rest of Mankind, who being made up very much
of Sense, so that nothing enters into our Souls, but through the Doors of our
Senses, we are by nothing so generally prevailed upon, as by Outward things,
and such as please our Senses; and therefore the Devil does particularly apply
himself to Tempt us this way. He presents Riches, Honors and Pleasures to our
outward Senses, and dazles them with their Glory and Beauty, and by that would
Tempt us to purchase them at the Price of our Innocence.

And indeed the far greatest part of Sinners are wrought upon to Rebel against
God, and are made Slaves to Satan's Kingdom, by this last Method of his, In
Tempting our Lusts and Appetites by Sensible and Outward things. They are but
few in Comparison, (some only of finer Parts and clearer Intellectuals) that
are Tempted to Offend God by a Curiosity of Knowing every thing, though useless
and sinful: But the far greatest Part of Mankind are gross in their
Understandings, and such Carnally-minded Men place their whole Happiness in the
Enjoyment of such things, as gratify the Bodily Part of their Natures; and
therefore by the Presentation of those things to their Senses, with all the
Advantage that Satan has Skill enough to put 'em off withal, their Lusts and
Appetites do wholly desire these things.

And as Satan does Excite our Lusts and Appetites to covet Unlawful things, by
whatever pleases any of our Senses; Especially the Senses of Seeing and Tasting.
so especially by those Objects that do Gratify the Senses of Seeing and
Tasting: Hence as to the Lusts of the Eye, How many look so long upon a Woman,
till they have committed Adultery with her already in their Hearts? And as to
our Appetites, How many Belly-Gods, with Esau, Sell their Inheritance for a
Mess of Pottage?

But our being taken only with sensible and outward Things, is such an high
Ingratitude to God, ^ut our being ^^ken only with Outward things, is ^^ch an
high ^^gratitude (...) God, who ^ath provi^^d so much ^^tter for us, ^^d such
an ^buse to our ^wn Souls, which are ca^^ble of Rel^^hing higher ^njoyments,
(...) is not to be ^ndur'd.
and such an Abuse to our own Souls, as is not to be Endured. What can show
more Ingratitude to God, than to despise those Noble Enjoyments, which he has
prepared for purified Souls in Heaven; and to choose to feed upon the Husks of
sensual Pleasures here below? And as to our own Souls, Why should such
excellent Beings, of such exquisite Faculties, capable of relishing those Pure
and Heavenly Joys above, be clogged and surfeited with those cloying Vanities
of this World? Which after they are once Tasted, are sure to sit very Heavy,
and are never well digested by the Mind and Conscience; and the Soul can never
be at Ease, till by Confession and other Acts of Repentance, it has thrown 'em
up again. But the Vileness of thus submitting the Mind to drudge to our Senses,
and to study only to please our Lusts and Appetites, will be more properly
Exposed, when we come to show you how far, and in what sense you are to
Renounce the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

To sum up then what has been hitherto said concerning those Temptations, and
Means whereby at first Satan overthrew the whole Race of Mankind; and drew it
off from their Obedience to God, to do Service to him, and does still so
successfully Overcome so many: Whether it be by infusing into your Thoughts ill
Apprehensions of God, particularly of his Justice and Mercy; or by diverting of
your Minds by needless Curiosities, from improving of your Souls in Divine
Knowledge; and especially, as is his wont, by stupifying of your sense of
Divine Things, by trying what is in sinful Pleasures: Or whether he shall at
any time Tempt you to Commit what is sinful, by the Enveiglements and
Enticements of what you do entirely Love and Affect: Or lastly, By proposing to
your Lusts and Appetites, what is pleasing to your Senses. In which of these
ways soever it is, that he Attempts you, you must stoutly Resist him. And being
he was not successful in these ways of Temptation against our First Parents
alone, but has been also Versed in the same for many Thousand Years ever since;
and therefore must be supposed to have grown very skilful in the management of
'em: It does therefore concern you, with more than ordinary Diligence to Guard
your selves against 'em. And in so doing you will go a great way toward
Renouncing that great Work of his, his Tempting us to Sin; concerning which,
what is farther to be spoke, must be deferred till the next Opportunity.

THE Eleventh Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THAT Great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin, being the Subject of
our present Consideration; and in order to the full Discovery of what so much
concerns you, having already showed you, First, By what Temptations and Means
he overthrew the whole Race of Mankind, and drew it off from Obedience to God,
to do Service to him: In pursuance of the same important Subject, concerning
the Temptations of the Devil, what they are, and in what Ways and Methods he
Attempts our Ruin; I am,

Secondly, To discover to you, What Temptations Satan levels against the Church
of Christ.

God recovers out of the Fallen Race of Mankind a Body of Men, the Church, to
his service, Listing 'em under Jesus Christ to Fight against Satan. The Devil
Enraged to have his Prey snatched out of his Teeth continually Attacks it.


such as he Levels against the Church of Christ, the True Servants of God,
either utterly to destroy them from off the face of the Earth; or at leastwise
so to corrupt the Notions of God and Religion, that by their very Christianity
they may dishonor him.

Soon after that Satan had seduced the whole Race of Mankind into a most
unnatural and ungrateful Rebellion against their Maker; did God of his infinite
Compassion to the woeful State of Man, in slavery to so base a Tyrant, as the
Devil, Appoint his own Son to be the Great Captain of our Salvation, and gave
him Power and Commission to List a Church Militant out of the rest of the
World; who being directed by his Word, and assisted by his Holy Spirit, should
continually fight under his Banner and Conduct, against this wicked Spirit, the
Devil; and discharging their Parts well in this Warfare, should in another
World be eternally Rewarded with Honor by him. But the Devil Enraged, as a
Bear bereaved of her Whelps, to have his Prey thus snatched away out of his
Teeth, by One mightier than he, sets himself with the greatest Vigor to ruin
this Body of Men, who are Armed by God, on purpose to destroy his Kingdom; and
does therefore, both with the Fury of a Roaring Lion, and with the Cunning of a
Subtle Serpent, continually Attack it; endeavoring all he can, either utterly
to Destroy the Church of Christ from off the Face of the Earth: Or at
leastwise so to corrupt its Notions of God and Religion, that by Religion it
self it might dishonor him.

And his first and chief Endeavors were, His First and chief Endeavors are
utterly to destroy it from (...) the Face the Earth.
utterly to destroy the Church of Christ from off the Face of the Earth;
Toward the understanding of which, we must know, that God the Father gave
Commission to his Son to raise this Church Militant, immediately after the Fall
of Man; and the War between Satan and the Church was Proclaimed in these Words,
This he En^avour'd to (...) in the Per^^ of Abel.
I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between her Seed and thy
Seed; it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel, Genesis 3.15. And
no sooner was this War Proclaimed, but this cruel Murderer, the Devil (for a
Murderer he is said to have been from the Beginning) thought to have cut it off
at one Blow in the Person of Abel, And when ^^erwards ^^cruited in ^^e Family
(...) Seth, yet (...) Reduced it ^ain by the ^oody Po^^rity of Cain Eight
Per^^s in the ^^ys of Noah When after ^^e Flood, ^^d chose ^raham and (...)
Posterity be a special ^ople unto ^mself, Sa^^ endea^ur'd utter^^ to have
ex^^nguisht that ^^ople by his ^^rvant Pha^^oh.
to slay whom he Instigated his own Brother Cain, that Cursed Servant of Hell.
And though God, in the Person and Family of Seth, did recruit the Church of
Christ; yet the Posterity of Cain, being a Barbarous and Bloody sort of Men,
did so far prevail and bear down all before 'em; that the True Servants of God
were reduced to the Number of Eight Persons, and were drove into a very narrow
Corner, even into the Compass of the Ark. Thus he prevailed over the Church of
God, so as almost to Extinguish it before the Flood.

Nor did his Fury burn less fiercely against it after: For when God giving a
Bill of Divorce to all the Nations of the Earth, who had so Vilely played the
Harlot in serving of Idols, that is, Devils, did choose Abraham and his
Posterity to be a Special People unto himself, above all the People that were
upon the face of the Earth, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Though One would have thought, that Satan
might have been contented with such large spoils, as all the Kingdoms of the
World besides; and that, as he had little reason to Envy the Maker of all
Things, the faithful Allegiance of such a handful of Men, as were the People of
the Jews, in comparison of the rest of the World: So he would let God alone
with 'em. Yet so it was, that from the first Infancy of the Jewish Church (when
by Pharaoh he endeavored utterly to have extinguished that People, causing all
their Male-Children to be slain by the Order of that Bloody Tyrant) till the
time of our Savior's coming into the Flesh; we find it to have been his
continual Exercise, to stir up the Potentates of the Earth against it: And in
all ^riods till ^r Savior's ^^ning, he ^^r'd up the ^^olatrous ^^ations their
^eighbours, ^^ecially the ^our Monar^^ies to har^^ss them.
And there is hardly a Period of Time to be found, but either he stirred up the
Neighboring Nations, especially the Four Monarchies of the World, mentioned
Dan. 2. to Molest, Harrass, and to Captivate 'em; or Instigated their own
Kings, to Persecute and Destroy those, that would remain the Worshipers of the
One True God.

But above all did Satan then Exert his Malice, soon after that our Savior
came amongst us, and that Christianity began to take Footing in the World;
when, as God's Goodness to Mankind did most wonderfully appear in this their
Deliverance; so did Satan's Envy and Fury burn so much the fiercer against both
God, and Man. To his infinite sorrow he found himself dispossessed of a great
Part of Mankind, ^ut soon af^^r that Christ ^^peared in ^^e World, ^^d he most
^^gorously ^cert his Ma^^ce against it.
over which he had born before so absolute a sway. He saw his Altars thrown
down, his superstitious Mysteries derided, his Magical Arts discovered, and the
Kingdom of Light shining through his Kingdom of Darkness, and Exposing it to the
public View and Scorn of the World; and this was a Hell to him, as bad, as
that to which he is to be for ever Chained, and he called it a Tormenting of
him before his time, Matthew. 8.29. No sooner therefore did God out of Pity to
the whole Race of Man, whom he beheld holden in miserable Bondage to Satan,
send his own Son To preach Deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of sight
to the Blind, to set at liberty them that are Bruised, to preach the acceptable
Year of the Lord, as it is, Luke 4.18, 19. No sooner was Satan aware of this,
but he endeavors to stifle the naked Infant of Christianity in the Cradle, as
it were: So that for the first 300 Years we hear of nothing but of bloody
Persecutions.
And for the first Three Hundred Years we hear of nothing but of bloody
Slaughters of poor Innocent Christians, who were haled to the Devil's Altars,
and were Tempted, either to Blaspheme God and Christ, and to burn Incense to
the Cursed Idol, or were most miserably Tortured, were tore Limb from Limb,
thrown into Flames of Fire, exposed to the Fury of wild Beasts, and forced to
undergo the most studied Torments, that the Devil, and cruel Men could invent.

True it is, The Bloody-minded Emperors of Rome, The Emperors of Rome the
Instruments, but Satan the Instigator.
and the Governors of Provinces were the immediate Instruments of inflicting
those Sufferings upon the poor Christians, but the Devil it was that did
Instigate, and set them on work; and accordingly throughout the Revelations we
find the Warfare described, as betwixt the Saints and the Dragon, (which in the
Language of that Author, signifies the Devil,) so that he is to be looked upon,
as Chief in the Temptation.

And elsewhere to this Day, no sooner shall any Pious Persons, And wheresoever
any Attempt is made to Convert a Country from Paganism, he does Instigate the
Princes and People thereof, to Persecute and Destroy the Preachers of the
Gospel.
who are Zealous to propagate Christianity, enter into any Country in order to
Convert it, by Preaching the Gospel unto them; but he immediately raises up his
Militia against 'em, and by Instigating the Princes and People of those
Countries to Persecute and Destroy 'em, he endeavors to beat 'em off from his
Quarters: Insomuch that scarcely any Church has been yet planted in any Part of
the World, but the Blood of Martyrs has been its Seed. Such has been ever, and
is to this Day, the Violence of Satan, in Opposing and Hindering the Gospel from
once Entering his Usurped Dominions.

Nor is he on the other side less Industrious, in driving Christianity out of
those Countries, which it had once Possessed; and that he has done with such
great Success, that many Kingdoms, And he is no less Industrious to drive
Christianity out of those Countries, whereof it had once possession. And he has
an Antichristian Party within the Bowels of Christendom, most sadly weakening
Christ's, and most effectually promoteing the Interests of his own Kingdom.
which were once Christian, are since Revolted, either to Paganism, or Idolatry
again, or to another Religion of Satan's Invention, I mean Mahometism;
insomuch, that if you divide the Earth into Thirty equal Parts, Paganism does
at this Day possess Nineteen, Mahometism Six, whilst the Christian's Share is
but Five Parts: as those, who are best skilled in Geography and History do
Inform us.

And moreover, as a Politic Prince will above all Endeavor to Bribe to his
Interests, a Party of Men within his Enemies Dominions, the more effectually to
Promote his own Kingdom, and to Extend his Monarchy: In like manner has Satan,
in all Ages of the Church, had his Antichrist in the very Bowels of
Christendom; that is, a Succession of Heretics, who Having a Form of
Godliness, but denying the Power thereof, 2 Timothy 3.5. under the Name and
Profession of Christians do sadly weaken Christ's, and most effectually Promote
the Interests of Satan's Kingdom: And who have spilt more Blood perhaps in
Establishing their Heresies, their Idolatries and Superstitions, than was ever
done by Heathen Rome, and all the other Pagan Persecutions put together. So
much you see it is the Endeavor of Satan, utterly to Destroy the Church of
Christ from off the Face of the Earth.

And now ^hristians ^so far to ^ounce Sa^ with re^ to those persecute^
Tempta^s, as to ^it to the ^st Suffer^s, which ^an and his ^ked In^aments can
^lict, ra^r than de^ Christ or (...) Truths.
And now the Question is, What it is, And how far we are to Renounce the Devil,
with respect to these his persecuting Temptations, and fiery Trials. And if it
should be the good Pleasure of God, for Ends best known to himself, to let
loose the Fury of the Dragon upon us, (as there is hardly any Age, from the
very Foundations of Christianity, down to our present Times, in which he has
not, and does not in some Part or other of the Church, exercise the Faith, and
Patience of the Saints;) Why then our Part must be, after the Example of those,
who have gone before us in the Fiery Trial, to submit to the forest Sufferings,
which Satan and his wicked Instruments can Inflict upon us, rather than deny
Christ, or his Truths. Millions, I say, of Martyrs and Confessors have gone
before us in this way of Renouncing the Devil, and his Persecuting Methods of
Tempting: And the time would fail me to tell, what Trials they had of cruel
Mockings and Scourgings, yea, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments; how they
were Stoned, were Sawn asunder, were Tempted, were Slain with the Sword; how
they wandered about in Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, being Destitute, Afflicted,
Tormented, Heb. 11.36, 37. And all this they suffered, rather than they would
Deny the Faith, or in the least Comply with Idolatry, or Heresy, or with any
Sin and Wickedness, to which Satan and his Instruments would have forced 'em.
And so must we likewise, we must all of us in the same manner utterly Renounce
the Devil, and Resist unto Blood his Tempting us to Heresy, or Sin, if called
thereunto; our Blessed Savior having made it the indispensible Condition of
all his Followers so to do, Matthew. 16.24. If any Man will come after me, let
him Deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me.

And indeed those are the Happy men, who are Persecuted for their Adherence to
Christ and true Religion, against Satan and his wicked Inventions. Blessed are
they which are Persecuted for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 5.10. There Persecution tends in the End, both to their own
greater Reward, Great is their Reward in Heaven, ver. 12. And to the farther
Increase and Propagation of Truth; when the Devil has done his worst, the True
Church of Christ, like the Palm Tree, being found to spread the wider for being
Oppressed. And therefore

II. When those ^ody Me^ods fail, ^atan then ^^es endea^our so to cor^pt Men's
^otions of ^od and Re^gion, that (...) their very ^hristianity ^^ey may
dis^onour him.
Secondly, When these Bloody Methods fail him, and instead of extinguishing
Christianity, the Blood of the Martyrs proves the Seed of the Church; then with
all the Art and close Contrivance possible, does he endeavor to Corrupt Men's
Notions of God and Religion, so that by their very Christianity they may
Dishonor him.

The Dishonor of God, and the Debasing his Authority amongst Men, together
with the Subjection of Man to himself, and the Ruin of our Souls, is the Thing
he Aims at; and provided he compasses this End, he cares not by what Means it
is, whether by Force or by Fraud: And accordingly he has his Titles given him
in the Scripture from both, where he is called a Lion from his Fury, a Serpent
from his Subtilty. And indeed, if by the former he Has Slain his Thousands, by
these He has Destroyed his Ten Thousands: So that of all his Methods to Ruin
us, it does infinitely concern us, That we be not Ignorant of these his Devices.

Now these Politic Methods of his, These Politic Methods of his, discovered
to us under the Parable of a malicious Enemy coming privately in the Night, and
sowing Tares where the Husbandman had before sown good Seed.
whereby he Endeavors To Corrupt Men's Notions of God and Religion, so that by
their very Religion they may Dishonor him, are discovered to us in the Gospel,
under the Parable of some malicious Enemy, who coming privately in the Night,
sows Tares where the Husbandmen had before sown good Seed. The Parable runs
thus, Matthew. 13.24. The Kingdom of Heaven is liken'd unto a Man, which Sowed
good Seed in his Field; but while Men slept, his Enemy came and sowed Tares
among the Wheat, and went his way: But when the Blade was sprung up, and
brought forth Fruit, then appeared the Tares also. And in the 37, 38, 39, ver.
Our Savior himself gives us this Explication of it. He that sows the good
Seed is the Son of Man; the Field is the World; the good Seed are the Children
of the Kingdom, that is, the Ministers of Religion, and their good Doctrine:
The Tares are the Children of the wicked One, that is, Heretics and their Evil
Principles; The Enemy that sowed them is the Devil: Like a skillful Husbandman
he is choice about the Nature of the Seed, the Temper and Preparedness of the
Soil, the Fitness of the Season, and the skillfulness of the Seeds-man.
From which Parable and Explication of our Savior's we may observe, That the
most skilful Husbandman is not more curious about the Nature of his Seed, the
Temper and Preparedness of the Soil, and the Fitness of the Season, and the
Skilfulness of the Seeds-man, than Satan is choice and considerate about the
Nature of his Erroneous Doctrines, the Preparation of Men's Minds to Receive
'em, about the most proper and seasonable Times of dispersing 'em, and the
Capacity and Qualities of those his Agents, whom he Imploys to sow them in the
Souls of Men.

And First, As to the Nature of the Seed, he takes care his Heretical Opinions
and Practices should bear some Resemblance of Divine Truth, in order to conceal
their Discovery.
First, I do take it to be infinitely worth your while to consider, That those
Heretical Principles and Opinions, which Satan does choose to Blend with
Christianity, Do generally bear some Resemblance of Divine Truths, in order to
conceal their Discovery: So that as the Tares, which the Enemy sowed, were not
Distinguishable till the Wheat grew up, and bore Fruit: So the Heretical and
Impious Doctrines of Satan's infusing, can scarcely be Known, but by their
Fruits, to which way of Trying 'em our Savior does therefore direct us.

And thus he does usually Gild over his Errors, Thus especially he Gilds his
Errors, where the Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine, as here I. When
under the plausible Appearance of Advanceing God's Honor, in some of his
Attributes, he renders him Odious and Despised in Others.
with the Resemblance of Divine Truth, especially in those Churches and
Countries, where the Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine. And I think I
cannot do you better Service, than to Instance in some of those pernicious
Errors, both in Faith and Practice, of this Kind, which do at present Infest
this Church and Nation; that so you may be Cautioned against the Entertainment
of them.

And First, It is usual with Satan here amongst us, Under the plausible
Appearance and Color of Advancing God's Honor, in some of his Attributes, to
render him Odious and Despised in other. Thus for Instance, By infusing into
Men's Hearts a Belief, that God has Created the far greatest Part of the World,
on purpose to manifest his Dominion, and Power, and Justice, in Damning them
afterward for their Sins; he Robs him of the Honor of being a Gracious,
Merciful and Good God, to the utter abolishing of all Veneration toward him,
and Love of him: Insomuch, that the very Atheist, who denies there is a God,
does not so much Affront him, (as even a sober Heathen thought) as those, who
think so Dishonourably of him.

II. When under ^^e Color of ^dvancing ^ospel truths, ^^e propagates ^eresies,
which ^o undermine ^eligion and ^he Necessity, ^f a holy Life.
Secondly, Under the Color of Setting up, as the most precious Gospel Truths,
some Opinions, that seem to have a great Resemblance of Truth, he brings in
such Heresies into the Church, as do utterly undermine Religion, and the
necessity of a good Life. Thus by his Teaching, that Christ has so Paid the
whole Debt for our Sins, that the vilest Wretch that Lives, need no more but be
Persuaded, that he is an Elected Person; and that the Promises belong to him,
on the Assurance of his particular Election; and that such a Faith as this will
save him: By Virtue of such an Opinion (of Satan's infusing, no doubt) you
shall too often find, an Envious Malicious Viper, a Covetous Worldling, a
Rebel, and an Adulterer, even before his Sins are Repented of, talk of
Recumbing, and Leaning upon Christ, and Roling upon the Promises (as they are
pleased to Express it) with more Assurance than the best and holiest Livers,
and the faithfullest Servants of Christ.

III. When he tea^hes to prefer ^ome eminent Christian Duty, or some Part of a
Du^y, or one Way of per^orming a Duty, to the ^isparagement of another.
Thirdly, A most fatal and mischievous Delusion of Satan, rise amongst us in
this Nation, at this Day, is his Teaching Men to prefer some Eminent Christian
Duty, or One Part of a Duty, or One way and manner of performing a Duty, to the
Disparagement of another. Thus you shall often see some careless, whether they
come to Prayers or not, so they can be but at the Sermon; and others on the
contrary, say, they care not whether they shall hear a Sermon in their Lives,
so they can have but Prayers. But the most notorious Cheat he puts upon Men, is
his infusing into their Hearts to Prefer One Part of a Duty, to the utter
Contempt of the Other. Thus because in the Worship of God, in Prayers and
Praises, to perform this with an Hearty inward Devotion, is principally
required; and we are commanded, As to prefer Prayer to the neglect of
Preaching, or Sermons to the contempt of Prayer.
that since God is a Spirit, Christians must Worship him in Spirit and in
Truth. Hence vast Numbers of Men do conclude, that Outward Reverence, by
Kneeling, lifting up the Eyes, and the like, is a mere Outward Ceremony, not at
all necessary under the Gospel; insomuch, that God is now most highly
Dishonored, even in our Public Assemblies, where we come to do him Honor, by
the shameful want of Reverence, appearing in most People, by Sitting at their
very Prayers. As also pray^ng in Spirit, ^o the regard of Bodily Worship.
So true it is what One said, That such a rude and slovenly Kind of Religion,
has made its way into the World, by this Policy of Satan, and such a shameful
Carelessness in Divine Worship; that should a Stranger to our Religion come
into our Assemblies, he could not by the Carriage of the Generality of People
imagine, what they were Doing; and that they were Worshipping of the Glorious
Majesty of Heaven, would perhaps be One of the last Things he could Conjecture.

And Extemporary Prayer to the utter Contempt of Forms of Prayer.
But the most fatal Error of this Kind, the most mischievous to the Church and
Nation, and to Men's Souls therein, Is the Preferring a way of performing a
Duty, that is Vnpracticable by the Generality of Christians, to the utter
Disparagement of another more easy, and no less acceptable way of discharging
it. This is eminently seen in Advancing Extemporary Prayer, as the only
Spiritual way of Worshipping, and in raising Prejudices in the Minds of
Christians against Forms of Prayer, as not Spiritual enough, if at all Lawful.
It is very certain, that the far greatest Part of Christians are utterly unable
to Conceive for themselves, much less before others, such Prayers, or Praises,
as are proper for their Occasions, and fit to be Offered in Decency and Honor
to so Great and Wise a Majesty, as God is. And this considered, if Prayers of
other Godly Men's; nay, of a a whole Church's composing, must not be Used; does
it not necessarily follow, that this Principal of all Christian, of all Natural
Duties, must suffer, if not a total Neglect, at leastwise, that it must be
very indecently and rudely Performed, and in too familiar a manner with God, as
is too usual? Why, woeful Experience does plainly show us, that for this very
Reason it does. And therefore, though no Church, through the Care of its Pious
Bishops, and Pastors, By this latter Means, Satan has utterly Defeated those
excellent Helps we have in our Church, and brought in a great Neglect of
Public, Family, and private Devotion.
did ever Abound with more excellent Forms and Helps, and those better fitted
for Public, Family, and Private Devotion, than our Church does at this Day;
yet upon the account of Men's Prejudices, which they have been taught to
Entertain against Forms of Prayer, as not Lawful, or not Expedient, or not
Spiritual enough: Never did Persons so sadly Profane the Worship and Service of
God, so heartlesly join in the Common Prayer, so scandalously throw aside
Family Religion, and so universally, I fear, neglect Private Devotion, as now
they do. I fear, that those who so zealously decry Forms of Prayer, and that on
purpose to Advance in its stead a more Spiritual way of Worship, as they think,
will take it ill, that their darling Opinion should be Entitled to the Policy
of so ill an Author; but, if considering the Mischief, together with the
Cunning there does appear upon Examination, to be in Satan's Contrivances to
Ruin Religion, and to draw us off from God; we may safely Conjecture any
Doctrine, that is Pernicious in its Effects, when Plausible in its Appearance,
to be of his ^^vention: surely that, which under the Color of Advancing a more
Spiritual Worship, does so fatally destroy all Religious Worship, has another
Spirit for its Author, than is commonly Pretended.

And thus you may perceive, by these few Instances, whereby you may be enabled
to make a happy Conjecture concerning the rest, how Cunningly Satan does Gild
over, and Disguise his Errors with something of a Resemblance to Divine Truth,
in order to prevent their Discovery: And this he does, especially in those
Countries and Churches, where Men do Thirst after Divine Knowledge, and to that
End do Search the Scriptures. The Devil's main and principal Care indeed, is to
keep out the Word of God from shining upon any People; and at first he bends
all his Forces to keep off the Preachers of it, that so the World being
detained in Ignorance, they may not know how to Repent and Return to God: But
when the Light of his Holy Gospel does once begin to shine upon any People,
then all his Endeavors are to Corrupt and Deprave it with false and forced
Explications, and to multiply Controversies and Contentions in Religious
Matters, to teach Men to Scruple every Thing, and out of a scrupulous Humor to
divide and sub-divide into innumerable Sects and Parties, stirring up each to
Persecute and Destroy the other; that whilst the different Parties contend so
furiously with one another, he may securely Triumph over all, and bring the
Holy Scriptures at last into Contempt with Profane and Atheistical Men: As if
they were the Occasion of all those Wars and Confusions, that are occasioned in
the World by Religious Disputes; when alas! He alone, by managing the Lusts and
corrupt Humors of sinful Men, is the cause thereof. So St. Jude, ver. 19.
These be they who separate themselves, Sensual, having not the Spirit. They
have not the Holy Spirit of God, though none make more confident Boasts thereof,
than Schismatics and Separatists usually do: But the Spirit, which they have,
is the Spirit of Satan, and of Sensuality whatever Godliness and Purity above
other Men they pretend to.

II. As to the ^emper and ^reparation (...) the Soil, (...) Churches ^here the
^criptures ^re locked up, and Igno^ance pre^ails, he im^ses the gros^st
Heresies, ^s Articles of ^aith.
But, Secondly, Is the Soil better prepared to his Mind? I mean, Is there no
Prophecy, no Teaching? Are the Scriptures Locked up in an unknown Tongue, and is
a Cloud of Ignorance drawn over a whole Church? Why then he throws off the
Veil, and walks as at Noonday: And there is no Error and Heresy so gross, there
is no Doctrine so contrary to Truth, that he will not Impose as an Article of
their Belief. There is not that Ceremony so Absurd, Trifling, and Ridiculous,
which he will not Introduce into such People's Worship: And there is no
Immorality so bad in Practice, which he will not teach such People securely,
and without Fear of Damnation to commit.

And I do call such Souls, who know not the Scriptures, and are utterly
Ignorant of Divine Things, a Soil better prepared to his Mind; because he can,
with the greatest Ease, reduce such back to his Ancient Paganism and Idolatry,
or something like it, which above all things he desires; Especially he
^^troduces I^olatry and ^uperstition, ^hereby he is ^ost immedi^tely and
di^ectly served.
because by Superstition and Idolatry he is more directly and immediately
served. As a Politic Prince, he will make great Advantages of the Divisions of
another's Subjects: But the Idolater is his immediate Slave, and therefore an
ignorant Soul, as being most proper to sow that Wee^ in, is the Soil he does
most of all like. But he has a wonderful skill in suiting his Seed to any Soil,
so that whatever People's Interests, or Lusts do incline 'em to Believe, he
will never fail to suggest such plausible Arguments, as will most probably take
with 'em.

III. ^s to the fit^ess of the ^eason, he is ^exterous in Accomodate^ng his
Coun^els, his Acti^ns, and his ^anner of ^cting to such Seasons, as are most
proper to his Purpose of seducing Mankind.
Nor, Thirdly, Is Satan less Subtle in Distinguishing, which are the most fit
and advantageous Seasons of sowing his Tares of corrupt Doctrines in the Field,
or Church of Christ. Indeed, his great Dexterity and Policy is eminently seen
in suiting his Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of Acting, to such
Seasons, as are most proper to his Purpose of Seducing Mankind. And though it be
his constant and perpetual Endeavors, to Exercise his utmost Enmity against
the Seed of the Woman, and to Establish his Kingdom amongst Men: Yet to fit his
Counsels to proper Seasons, to suit 'em to the several Ages of the Church, to
the Studies, and Dispositions, and Occupations of Men, that so he may commit no
Blunder in his Politics, is his great and mighty Care and Cunning. Of which,
amongst other Instances that might be given, I will choose but One.

In the dark and ignorant Ages of the Church, which were from about the Ninth
Century, till toward the Time of the Reformation, when Men's Studies and
Dispositions savored wholly of Superstition; we hear of nothing so much in the
Stories of those Times, as of the Apparitions and Visions, Hence in dark and
ignorant Ages, nothing so common as the Apparitions of Saints, as was pretended
to introduce the belief of Purgatory, Image Worship, and the like Superstitions.
that the Founders of their several Orders, and superstitious Doctrines did
receive: Insomuch, that no New Order of Monks and Friars, nor any New Doctrine
of Purgatory, Image Worship, Prayers to Saints, or any Pilgrimage to the Shrine
of some Saint departed, was to be Invented; but either the Virgin Mary, or some
other Saint, is said to have Appeared, and to have Appointed it. And as
Legendary and Fabulous, as were the Histories of those Times, I am apt to
Believe there were such Apparitions, as I am thoroughly persuaded, that Samuel
did Appear to Saul: But then, as it was not really Samuel himself, for his Body
was in the Grave, and his Soul in Paradise (and it was not in the Power of the
Witch of Endor, to Raise up the One from the Dust, much less to Recall the Other
out of Heaven;) but the Devil, who did assume Samuel's Shape: So it is more
than probable, he might appear in the Resemblance of the Blessed Virgin, and
Others, to seduce the superstitious People of those Times into Idolatrous
Practices, who throwing aside the Scriptures, Gave heed to Fables and Doctrines
of Devils. It was infinitely then the Interest of his Kingdom so to do.

But pray Observe his different Policies at this Day. And in learned and
Philosophical Ages he is as shy in appearing, lest he should destroy the
prevailing Sadducism.
Now we live in a Learned and Inquisitive Age, wherein Men are naturally very
suspicious, and not easy to Believe what they do not see. And therefore partly
through such an incredulous Temper of Mind, and partly through a Spirit of
Atheism and Sadducism now Reigning, many, like the Sadducees of Old, will
Believe no Spirits. And therefore now we do very seldom hear of any Apparition,
and the Atheist cannot obtain One, though he desires it, and would go many Miles
to see One. The Reason is plain. Should the Devil appear to him, it would
convince him there are those Invisible Powers, which now he denies; and
therefore Satan, who is so Politic, will be as backward to appear now, as he
was forward then: Because it is as much his Interest to detain Men in Atheism
and Sadducism in this, as in Superstition in former Ages.

Fourthly, IV. As to the skilfulness of the Seedsman, Satan is wonderfully
cunning in making choice of fit and proper Instruments, and in furnishing those
with the proper Arts of Deceiving, and with suitable Qualities, whom he employs
to sow the Seed of corrupt Doctrine in the Souls of Men.
And that there may be nothing wanting to complete his Delusions, Satan is
wonderfully cunning in making choice of fit and proper Instruments, and in
furnishing those out, both with all the plausible Arts of Deceiving, and also
with suitable Qualities, whom he employs to sow the Tares of corrupt Doctrines
in the Souls of Men. This the Holy Spirit is particularly careful to Inform us
of, and to Forewarn us against 'em; especially 2 Cor. 11.14. where the Apostle
tells us, That As Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light (which he
is, when under the plausible Appearance and Color of Advancing God's Honor in
some of his Attributes, and of setting up Gospel Truths, as he would have 'em
taken to be, he does Introduce Heresies, and Vile Practices into the Church;
that do most effectually undermine God's Authority amongst Men, and wholly
Overthrow all Reverence to him:) So that those Teachers, his Agents, who do
Infuse any of his false Doctrines into Men's Hearts, Are deceitful Workers,
transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ, ver. 13.

They are deceitful Workers, Teaching the Doctrines of Christianity by Halves,
sometimes Advancing Morality, and a Virtuous Life, with the Neglect, if not
with the Contempt of, and in opposition to an Orthodox and sound Faith;
sometimes on the other side, placing all Religion in Believing aright
concerning God and Christ, and decrying the Interest of Good Works in our
Justification before God. And to the End they may be the better fitted to
Deceive, he is not wanting to Furnish out his Instruments with all the most
plausible Arts of Deceiving. And their deceitful Working is usually in the very
same manner as the Devil's was. That wicked Spirit would have Tempted our
Savior desperately to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple, and
to presume upon God's working of a Miracle to preserve him in so doing. And to
Encourage him therein, he quotes a Text of Scripture, which is in Psalm. 91.11,
12. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, and they shall bear thee up
in their hands, lest thou dash thy Foot against a Stone. In the Quotation of
which Place of Scripture, you may observe, he leaves out what makes against
him, which are these Words, To keep thee in all his Ways. The Words Entire are,
He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all his Ways;
meaning, That so long as a Man keeps himself in the Ways of God, and in the Use
of those due Means, which he has prescribed; he will not fail to Preserve him.
And in the very same manner do most Heretical Deceivers delude the World. They
will pretend the highest Veneration and Respect for Scripture, and none are so
apt to quote it for every Thing they say, as they: But then if you observe
them, they either leave out such Expressions, as make against them, or consider
not the Scope and Meaning thereof, with reference to the Context and Meaning of
the foregoing and following words, or they put some forced and violent
Interpretation upon 'em, not at all agreeable to the meaning thereof in that
Place. Thus they are deceitful Workers.

And, They will Transform themselves into the Apostles of Christ, putting on
the Garb and outward Appearance of Apostolic Virtues and Graces, when they go
forth into the World to disperse these their Errors. Indeed Satan is careful to
furnish those, whom he sends out with suitable and agreeable Qualities,
according to the Nature of those Errors they are to sow in the World. If their
Business is to undermine the Faith of Christians, to disparage the more
mysterious Doctrines of Christianity, of a Trinity of Persons in one Divine
Nature, ^^ch as place Religion Morality, ^ll be ador^ with ^u^nity.
and of the Divinity and Satisfaction of Christ, and to place the whole of the
Christian Religion in Morality, and a Good Life; why then he will adorn his
Agents with the fair and plausible Virtues of Humanity, and Courtesy, and
Civility of Manners, which are most taking amongst Persons of better Quality,
the likeliest Soil to sow Heterodox Opinions of that Nature in.

But on the other side, Is it his Design to starve that Part of Christianity,
which consists in the Practice of moral Virtues, and to Represent it all as
Mystery? ^^ch as turn ^ll into My^^ry, shall be ^^ied with ^^ting.
Why then his Agents shall have the Gift of Uttering themselves in Canting
Phrases, and obscure and dark Forms of Expressions, that seem to have something
of Mysteriousness in them. And all they Teach, it shall look as if it were
Inspired, being poured forth with mighty Noise and Vehemence, accompanied
sometimes with Tremblings and Shakings, as if under some strong Impulse from a
Spirit within.

And yet to see the Crooked Windings of this Subtle Serpent, And yet sometimes
the Crooked Serpent by Men seeming Godly, will propagate Principles extremely
Immoral.
you shall observe (which is a wonderful Artifice of Satan) even those very
Persons, whose Doctrines do directly tend to render an Honest and Upright
Conversation very insignificant in Religion, to be notwithstanding themselves
very Demure, and in outward Appearance sanctified Persons; no Swearers, nor
Riotous Livers, and free from those gross and scandalous Immoralities, which
some of the Professors of a much better Religion are perhaps notoriously Guilty
of; insomuch that the undiscerning Part of Men do often Embrace those very
Heresies, which naturally and directly tend to Encourage Sin, and Dishonesty,
and Unmercifulness: And in a word, To render Men secure in the Practice of any
Wickedness merely for the sake of the appearing Holiness of those Men's Lives,
who teach those Principles tending to Immorality. And this is an extraordinary
Reach in Satan. That Impure Spirit is sometimes content, that some of his
principal Agents should not be immorally Wicked; for by a few such Men's
seeming Godliness, he Propagates those dangerous and destructive Principles,
which will make Multitudes become securely, and without Remorse of Conscience,
Villainously Wicked.

And now there is not a greater Difficulty perhaps in the whole Christian
Warfare, The most difficult Part of a Christian's Warfare is to preserve One
self untainted with Heretical Pravity, colored over with the Varnish of
Gospel. Truth. But yet by Trying it by proper Rules it may be done, viz.
than to preserve One-self untainted with Heresies, and the most poisonous
Errors, colored over with a mere Resemblance of Gospel Truth.

But however, as difficult as it is, no honest Mind, that will be careful to
weigh those Poisonous Doctrines, and the Persons who Propagate them in the
Balance of the Sanctuary; that is, by those Rules, which the Scripture has
given us: But may be able to discover the Lightness and Vanity of both, and so
to Renounce both one and the other. And that which every one is to do, that he
may Renounce them, is not to be too easy in Entertaining 'em, because Plausible
at first appearance; but Impartially to Try and Examine by a true and
infallible Touchstone, both their Doctrines, and those, who Propagate them,
whether they Be of God. Thus we are directed, 1 John 4.5. Beloved, Believe not
every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because many false
Prophets are gone out into the World.

And how shall you do this? Why the Scripture does give you Two most infallible
and plain Rules whereby to do it. The one Matthew. 7.16. The other the Verse
immediately following the now cited Place of St. John. That in Matthew is this,
I. By its Tendency to an Ill Life. II. By its Taking off from our Dependence
upon the Mediation of Christ, for the Acceptance of a good One.
You shall know them by their Fruits. If their Doctrines are apt to Infuse into
your Minds any unworthy and undue Thoughts of God, or any Seeds of Impiety,
Injustice, Uncleanness, Uncharitableness, Sedition, Rebellion, in a word, if
they do Countenance any Immorality, etc. Let their Pretenses and Carriage be
never so fair and free from Scandal, to be sure they are False Prophets, and
the Devil's Agents. The Rule given us, 1 John 4.2, 3. whereby to discover the
Doctrines of Satan's Infusing, is this; Hereby know ye the Spirit of God; every
Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come into the Flesh, is not of
God. By Jesus Christ being come in the Flesh, is meant, that Jesus Christ took
our Nature upon him, that he might be a Mediator betwixt God and Us, to
Reconcile the Father to us, by his Satisfaction and Intercession for us. And
whosoever shall teach contrary to this, so as to take off our Dependence upon
Christ, let him seem never so Zealous for a Good Life, his Doctrine is of
Satan's devising.

The whole Design of Christianity is, no doubt, as appears from these Two
former Rules, to make us Holy in this World; and yet withal to create in us
such a Dependence and Reliance on Christ for Salvation, as to expect it, not on
the account of our own Holy Performances, which are so Imperfect, but in the
Virtue of Christ's Mediation with the Father for us. And whosoever will but
carefully Examine the several false Doctrines, so much Preached up at this Day
by our Enemies on either side, by these Two Rules, showing the Design of
Christianity, I am verily persuaded, will find most of them to thwart one Part,
or other of this Design; and that either they discourage Holiness, or if they
seem to stand upon the Necessity thereof, they decry the Necessity of our
Dependence upon Christ's Mediation for God's Acceptance of it to our
Justification; and so by one, or other of these Rules, we may discover them to
be Doctrines of Satan's infusing. Most of the Doctrines of the Church of Rome
do plainly tend to make Men secure in a Course of Sin; and those Antinomian
Tenets, wherewith some of our Dissenting Brethren are too much in Love, do also
tend to the same, causing us to depend so entirely on Christ's satisfaction, as
to make us neglect the Working out our own Salvation: On the contrary, the
Socinian, at the same time he pretends much for Morality, and a Good Life,
denies the Sacrifice and Satisfaction of Christ, and that God the Father gave
him to be an Atonement for the Sins of Mankind, and in the Virtue of his
precious Blood to Intercede in Heaven for our Reconciliation; so that he wholly
takes off our Faith, or Dependence on Christ for Justification. Thus may the
most dangerous Errors now in the Church of Christ, with a little Watchfulness
and Care to examine the Tendency of them, be discovered by you from whose
Suggestions they proceed, and that they are Tares of the Enemies, that is, the
Devils sowing, whilst the Husbandman was asleep.

But do you, I beseech you, carefully beware of such false Doctrines, and
deceitful Teachers; both which are Satan's Temptations to draw you unwittingly
to sin against, and dishononr God: And though his Agents seem never so Demure,
and appear never so Sanctified, who do teach Men such Doctrines; Beware of
those Wolves, who come to you in Sheeps clothing, you shall know them by their
Fruits. If they shall endeavor to instill into your Minds any undue
Apprehensions of God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, contrary to what you are
taught out of the Scripture in the Doctrine of our Church; or any pernicious
Opinions, that in their Nature and Tendency shall render an Holy, Good Life
unnecessary to our Justification; assure your selves they are no Ministers of
Christ, but of Satan: And are set on work by him to destroy God's Authority,
amongst Men, and to set up his own Laws in their Hearts, the Thing he aims at.
And so much for this Time.

THE Twelfth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, is to make as full a Discovery to you, as here
we can, of that Great Work of the Devil, his Tempting us to Sin: A Work so
eminently the Business and Employment of Satan, and so Dangerous and
Destructive to Mankind, and also managed in such manifold and cunning Methods,
that it ought particularly to be considered by us. The Devil, says a Father,
has nothing else that he does, but Tempt us to Sin; He neither Eats, nor
Drinks, nor Sleeps, nor does he any thing else but Tempt, Deceive, and Subvert
us. This is his Meat, this is his Honor, this is his Joy. In this he is
Indefatigable, and if he could have his Will, he would never cease Tempting us,
but that he is restrained by the Power of God.

And now in order to the Countermining and Defeating this mischievous Work of
his: First, Having showed you, by what Temptations and Means he Overthrew the
whole Race of Mankind, and drew it off from Obedience to God, to do Service to
him: And, Secondly, Having also laid before you, such Temptations as he Levels
against the Church of Christ, the true Servants of God, either utterly to
destroy 'em, or to Corrupt their Religion, that by that they might Dishonor
their Maker.

Thirdly, I am now to show you, III. Satan's great Industry is to gain over to
to his Party, or to Tempt to some scandalous Enormity such Persons as are more
than ordinarily Eminent for their Rank, their Order, or their Piety in the
Church.
That next to his Destroying and Perverting of whole Churches, his great
Industry is to gain over to his Party, or to Tempt to some grievous and
scandalous Enormity, such Persons, as are more than ordinarily Eminent for
their Rank, or Quality, their Order, or their Piety in the Church of God,

And, First, Such as are most Eminent for their Station or Quality.
First, Such as are most Eminent for their Station, or Quality. Hence Elymas
the Sorcerer, that Child of the Devil, applied himself so diligently to Sergius
Paulus, a Deputy, and Great Man in his Country, to turn him from the Faith,
Acts 13.7, 8. And hence as in that long Catalogue of the Kings of Judah and
Israel, how few were there, who were not Idolaters, and highly Infamous for
some high Abomination or other? So, since the World became Christian, how many
Kings of the Earth are there, who have Committed Fornication, that is, Idolatry
with the Whore of Babylon, and lived Deliciously with her, and how will both
they, and the Merchants of the Earth, Weep and Mourn over her, when her
Calamities come upon her, Rev. 18.9.11. It is Astonishing to consider how, that
so many of the Honorable, and the Rich, who of all Men living are Obliged to
be Grateful to God, for so many extraordinary Favors and Blessings, which they
Enjoy above other Men, should yet carry it so insolently against their Great
Benefactor, lifting up their Heads above the Heavens, as it were, Trampling
under Foot all Laws, both Divine and Humane; Such Men's ^ickedness, ^ot
altogether ^^om the ^emptingness (...) Riches, but ^e Industry (...) Satan, to
^et over such ^^ading Men ^o his Party. Such Men's ^xamples, if ^ad, of
malig^ant Influ^nce, because ^^onspicuous.
and both in Word and Deed denying and disowning any Powers above 'em. Why,
this is not altogether from the Temptingness of Greatness and Riches, which it
must be confessed, are alone a very considerable Temptation; but also from
Satan's more than ordinary Industry to gain over to his Party and Interest,
such Men above all others. For why? These are Generals, and Great Officers, as
it were, in the Church Militant; and these therefore, if they can be but
Prevailed upon to Revolt from God, all the Herd of Mankind besides will in a
manner follow of course.

There is indeed (Satan does very well know it) nothing that has a more
malignant Influence upon the Lives and Manners of Men, than the lewd and
profligate Courses of those, who are Eminent in Quality, or Power. Their
Examples are doubtless of vast Importance. As in this World they live in a
Crowd all their Life: So they pass not into the Other, without a Train of
Followers at their Heels. If their Examples are extraordinarily Good, they
bring many to Heaven along with 'em; if they have been Vicious and Naughty,
whole Troops follow to Hell after them; for Subjects, Children, Servants,
Dependants, all take after their Lord and Master, except it be very rarely: So
that those, who abound either in Wealth, or Honor, And will ^ring upon 'em ^he
Guilt, not ^^ly of their ^wn, but of ^^her Men's ^ins, because (...)
and do therefore think they have a greater Privilege to Sin than others,
because they have greater Temptations to it, than other Men, are miserably
mistaken; for as their Lives being public and conspicuous, lie more open to
the Observation and Imitation of the World, and therefore do cause more to Sin:
So they shall not have their own only, but the Sins of others (so far as they
have Influenced 'em to Sin) to Answer for.

And the Reason hereof is this. The Actions of Great Men have some Force of a
Precept with 'em, Their Acti^ns have the ^orce of a Pre^ept, as well as ^f a
Pattern, which Inferi^rs are afraid ^o show their ^islike of.
as well as of a Pattern; For as One well observes, Those who are much Eyed,
cannot Sin singly, both because Men of weaker Minds, and less Consideration,
look upon them as the great Masters of Knowledge, and Bravery, and therefore
strive to imitate, and be like them: And also, because they have many
Dependants, that hope to receive something from them, and to be some way
Bettered by them; and this they cannot hope to be, except they Copy out their
Examples, and show their Love and Honor, or rather Flattery to them, in
Endeavoring what they can to be like them. And therefore we do commonly see
the Generality, upon any Change, are ready to take up with the Religion, or
Transcribe the Pattern, and Ape the Actions and Vices of their Prince, or other
Governor; and their Faults, as well as Habits, shall become the Fashion of the
Country: So that an Unholy Prince, shall seldom have a Religious People; a
Debaucht Nobility and Gentry, a Devout and Orderly Neighborhood and Family; a
Wicked Father, Pious Children; or an Evil Master, Good Servants: But their
Actions have the Force, not only of a Pattern, but also of a Rule and Law,
which Inferiors and Dependants are afraid to go against. So that it is not to
be wondered, that the Devil should be more than ordinarily industrious to gain
over to his Party, such as are most Eminent for their Station and Quality. (One
such tall Cedar sweeps away with him in his Fall, all the lower Shrubs within
the reach of its Branches.)

But then it does infinitely concern Persons of Quality, Great Men therefore
(...) must of all others Renounce the Temptations of Satan.
of all Men Living, utterly to Renounce the Ways of Sin, because their ill
Examples are of such Bad and malignant Influence upon others. And they should
Renounce all the ways of Scandalous and Notorious ill Living, as they are
Influential upon others, not only for the sake of other Men, but also for their
own dear sakes. For alas! If a Man's own single Sins, unrepented of, will
Plunge him into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; how Deep into the bottomless
Pit must they sink, who have besides their own Personal Transgressions, the
Sins of many others pressing 'em Downwards, and loading 'em with all the Curses
of Hell for the ill Example, and other Motives to Wickedness, which they gave
'em? So that it concerns the Great Ones of all others to look to their Ways,
and vigourously to Renounce and Resist the Temptations of Satan to Sin and
Wickedness.

Secondly, II. Such as are most Eminent on the account of their Order, viz. the
Ministers of Religion.
The Devil is also wonderfully Industrious to Tempt into some scandalous Sin,
or wicked Course of Life; or at leastwise to Invent and Propagate some
scandalous Story, against such as are Eminent on the account of their Order;
viz. The Ministers of Religion.

We of the Sacred Function are designed in a more Eminent manner, it must be
confessed, to be the Light of the World, to be Candles set, not under a Bushel,
but on a Candlestick, that we may give Light to all that are in the House: So
that if he can draw a thick Cloud of Ignorance over our Understandings, and
bring Immorality into our Practice, what he may do with the rest of Mankind,
who are to be Guided by us, he does Rationally enough Conclude. He is doubly
Enraged against such, both because in the Nature and Design of their Office,
they are to destroy his Kingdom, and because the rest of the World do
altogether Eye them for their Pattern.

Hence no Temptation left untried to withdraw such into some scandalous
Enormity.


He is indeed doubly Enraged against us, both because we are the Men, who in
the very Nature and Design of our Office, are to Destroy his Kingdom; and
because the Rest of the World do altogether Eye us for their Pattern: Insomuch
that they are generally more Influenced by our Lives, than by our Doctrine; and
are exceedingly Scandalized, so as to think they may Sin with Allowance and
Excuse, if we our selves shall happen in the least to miscarry. For these
Reasons there are no Wiles, nor Artifices, nor prevailing Temptations, left
untried, whereby Satan does not Attempt to withdraw the Ministers of Religion
into some scandalous and enormous Crimes; so that when any of the Holy Order
happen to be overtaken in a Fault, it is not so much to be wondered at, as
having not only the same Natural Infirmities with other Men, but far more
furious Assaults made upon 'em, to Overcome 'em: That indeed there are so many
shining Lights, as this Church and Nation may justly Glory in having at this
Day, is because We are kept by the Power of God to Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.15. But
that a Minister of Religion should sometimes Fall, as well others, and that
very foully too, is not to be Admired at, much less made a matter of Reproach
to the whole Order, as it commonly is; since our Savior himself told Peter,
Behold Satan has a Desire to have you, (you above all Others) that he may sift
you as Wheat, Luke 22.31. And he did sift that great Apostle to the Purpose;
insomuch, that he did wilfully Deny his Master Thrice.

And hence ^he more In^ustrious a Minister is, ^he more In^ustrious is ^atan to
O^rcome him.
And indeed the more Eminently Industrious any Minister of Religion is found in
the Advancement of Christ's Kingdom, the more Industrious is Satan to Overcome
him. Hence without doubt it was, that he singled out, as St. Peter you see
before, so St. Paul, sending his Messenger, One of his Black Angels, to Buffet
him, as you will see, 2 Cor. 12.7. True it is, God in his wise and good
Providence did order that Temptation of Satan's to a good End, and to the
Advantage and Security of that Apostle: For he Gave him a Thorn in the Flesh,
and permitted Satan's Messenger to Buffet him, lest he should be Exalted above
measure, or to keep him Humble. But Satan no doubt did intend thereby (however
his Designs were Overruled by the Divine Providence, as is most usual) to
Overthrow St. Paul, because he was in Labors more abundant, in Stripes above
measure, in Prisons more frequent, 2 Cor. 11.23. that is, more Industrious in
Propagating the Gospel than others, and came not a Whit Behind the very
Chiefest of the Apostles, ver. 5.

And in the ^^ry way ^herein he is ^^st service^le to the church of ^^d, Satan
^es endea^ur to make ^n most ^ischievous.
And in the very way, that such are most Serviceable to the Church of God, Satan
does so order it, that they shall be Transported beyond the Bounds of
Moderation and Sobriety, (wherein for the most part, the Virtue does lie) into
such Excesses, as are Sinful Enormities. Thus, is any One Zealous in the Cause
of God against Sin and Wickedness, the wicked One will over-heat this Zeal into
Censoriousness and Bitterness, into Fierceness and Cruelty, and very often into
Faction and Schism. Again does he find a Person more than ordinarily Mortified,
and Devout and Heavenly minded; much given to Fasting and Prayer? Then will he
be buisy to let down into the Fancy of such a One, As by turn^g his Zeal ^to
Faction.
deluding Imaginations, and will tempt him by the sweetness of those Incombs,
and Indwellings of the Spirit, as he thinks 'em, to lay aside the plain and
easy Rule of God's Holy Word, ^is Spiritu^ Minded^s into En^usiasm.
as a dead Letter, and not Spiritual enough; and to give himself up to the
Guidance of the Impulses of a Spirit within him, as if they were immediate
Inspirations from God: By which fond Pretensions of Men, deluded by Satan,
infinite Prejudice is done to Christianity, and occasion given to Profane Wits
to deride real Prophecy, as Cheat and Imposture, of which we have lately seen a
most sad Instance.

(...) he cannot ^vail over ^n by real ^is-carria^, he will ^der him ^less by
for^d Calum^s.
But if this subtle Adversary, with all his Wiles and Artifices, cannot prevail
over the Man of God, but that still he is Baffled in all his Attempts upon him;
then he sets his Agents, Slanderers, and Whisperers, on work (for that their
Tongues are set on Fire of Hell, the Scripture tells us, Jam. 3.6.) to Invent
and Propagate Scandals concerning him. And he does Inspire the Calumniator to
raise those false and injurious Reports, either purely by Inventing 'em without
Ground, and thus even our Blessed Savior was accused as an Enemy to Caesar,
and a Sabbath-breaker; or by mis-interpreting of an innocent Behavior and
Action, as a scandalous Crime. And thus again was the Son of God himself, and
John the Baptist Traduced, and thus very frequently are the succeeding
Ministers of Religion Injured to this Day. The Son of Man came Eating and
Drinking, that is, He Affected nothing singular, nor differing from other Men
in indifferent things, and they say, Behold a Man Gluttonous and a Wine-bibber,
a Friend of Publicans and Sinners, Matthew. 11.19. On the other side, John came
neither Eating, nor Drinking, used extraordinary Fastings above other Men, and
they say he has a Devil, ver. 18. And so it also fares with the succeeding
Ministers of Religion. Is any One of a free, cheerful and sociable Disposition,
and does not wholly abstain from appearing in Company? Then he is a Drunkard.
Is he Frugal, and not given to Profuse Living? Then he is Covetous. Is he
Conscientious in maintaining the Dues of his Church, and will not suffer 'em to
be Lost or Invaded by the Sacrilege of Covetous Worldlings? Then he is
Litigious and given to Law, he is Covetous, and what not? So exceeding
Industrious, are Satan and his Agents, to Blacken the Reputation of the
Ministers of True Religion, (I say of True Religion, for you may always observe
with what Industry the real Vices of those, who are Ministers in Heresy and
Schism, are kept secret.) And the only Reason thereof is this, to lessen the
Authority of their Precepts and Example in the World, that they should not do
that Good, that otherwise they might.

It does in Truth so exceedingly concern the Interest of Christianity, It
wonderfully concerns the Interest of Religion, that the Reputation of its
Ministers be kept unsullied.
that the Reputation of its Ministers should be preserved unsullied; and so
injurious to Religion it self, are the Defamations of such Persons, that St.
Paul was careful to warn Timothy, that against an Elder, that is, against a
Minister, He should not receive an Accusation under Two, or Three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. Though a single Evidence that was Credible, was sufficient against any
other Person: But so much, on the contrary, it is to the Advancement of Satan's
Kingdom, Hence Satan and Satanical Men so Industrious to blast it.
and so Satanically are the greatest Part of the World disposed, that a
vilifying Story, or a scandalous Report against them is more readily Invented,
more easily Heard, and sooner Believed, nay, without any Ground at all
surmis'd, than against any other Person whatsoever. But let me tell you, that
no good Christian, that desires the Destruction of Satan's, and the Advancement
of Christ's Kingdom in the World, will be forward to hear, much less to Believe
and Propagate Defamations of the Clergy; as knowing it is the Policy of Satan,
to put it into the Hearts of uncharitable Spirits to surmise, and raise, and
aggravate little vilifying Stories of those in Holy Orders, as of some
Indiscretion committed: This to make 'em cheap, and more scandalous, and false
Reports of Debauchery and Immorality, to render 'em Odious in the world; and
both on purpose to render their Labors and Endeavors useless and ineffectual,
to the Reformation and Amendment thereof. And slanderous Reports lessen the
Authority and Influence of the Clergy almost as much as real Sin.


In short: Satan matters it not so much, whether by real Sin, or by slanderous
Reports, he lessens the Authority and Influence of the Clergy, his Avowed
Enemies, whose peculiar Business it is to destroy his Usurpt Dominion, and to
Propagate the Kingdom of God in the World. By real Sins indeed, he would rather
choose, if he could, and does therefore mainly Endeavor to have the Clergy
Blemished; but merely by raising the Scandal, be it as well False, as True, he
gains his End, according Machiavel, his great Secretary's Maxim, Fortiter
accusare and aliquid adherebit: Throw Dirt upon a Man, and the Stain will in
some measure stick. Such is the Censorious Humor of the World, as to think
there must be something in it, when a Slander is broacht; and so maliciously
are wicked Men bent against the Ministers of Religion especially, as greedily
to swallow every thing, that tends to lessen their Reputation. In a word, By
both he gains his End, which is, to have Religion it self wounded, through the
sides of its Ministers. And whether any of 'em shall really miscarry, or be
falsely Defamed for so doing, he knows, the world upon either account will Abhor
the Offerings of the Lord, and even a mere Slander will be such a stumbling
Block to many, As to make the Lord's People to transgress.

^t behooves the Clergy therefor so far to Renounce and Resist the Devil's
Temp^ations, as to ^ake care not ^nly to be ^eally Blame^ess, but also ^o
Abstain from all Ap^earance of Evil.
And this being so, since it is so much the Interest of the Devil's Kingdom, to
have us Ensnared by his Temptations, for which reason he does therefore Ply us
especially: And since the Generality of the World are so Satanically disposed,
as easily to receive the worst Impressions of us; it concerns us therefore, of
every Order, to follow these excellent Directions given by the Apostle more
immediately to the Higher, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4.6, 7. And we must take heed
therefore, that we be Blameless, Vigilant, Sober, of good Behavior, apt to
Teach, not given to Wine, no Strikers, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but Patient,
not Brawlers, not Covetous; but such as rule well our own Houses, having our
Children in subjection with all Gravity; not Novices, lest being lifted up with
Pride we fall into the condemnation of the Devil. And moreover it concerns the
Interest of Christ's Kingdom, that we have A good Report of those, who are
without, lest we fall into the condemnation of the Devil. And in a word, of all
Others, we must thereforetake care not only to be really Blameless, but also to
Abstain from all appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5.22.

III. Such as are signal for their extraordinary Piety and Virtue.
Lastly, The Devil is most incessantly buisied to Tempt to the Commission of
some scandalons Enormity, any Person indifferently, who is more than ordinarily
Holy. Satan exactly knows the Temper of the World, that if such a Person chance
to fall at any time into some notorious Sin, though he suddenly rise again by
Repentance, those who are Good will be mightily Scandalized and Offended
thereat, Good Men the Devil knows will be scandalized at such a ones Fall.

And the Atheistical will Triumph therein.

And withal the lapst Person will be rendered almost incapable ever after, etc.


and will be apt to despair of themselves, when they see one so much beyond 'em
in Piety, fall before 'em; that the less serious and looser sort of People will
rejoice to see a Good Man Trip, because this they think will countenance them
in their Impieties, and vicious Course of Living. And as for the Atheistical
and Debauched People of the World, that they will Triumph in it, and cry down
all Religion for Hypocrisy, when they see its greatest Examples, commit any
thing that is ill. This the Devil knows very well, and withal that after such a
Fall, the Lapst Person shall be rendered almost incapable ever after of
Converting others by his Example, or Exhortations. For as to his Example, though
he Repent never so heartily, and recover his former State with Advantage; yet
it will be a continual Blot in his Scutcheon, that he did so and so, like that,
Excepting the matter of Vriah, was in David's. And as for his Exhortations, let
him be who he will, whether Minister, Magistrate, Parent, or Master, that goes
about to Reprove and Admonish others; the Criminal, instead of being Convinced
and Bettered thereby, will presently Return upon him in Thought at leastwise,
if not in Word, with a Why did you do so your self? And now for these Reasons,
I say, the Devil lays a close Siege against a Person of Exemplary Piety and
Goodness. As for those, who are already Vicious, he reckons himself secure of
them; so he does not so much concern himself about them: He only throws a
Temptation now and then into their way, leaving 'em for the most part to follow
the Bent of their own Inclinations: But against this Bulwark of Religion,
Against this Bulwark of Religion, therefore the Devil draws up all his
Artillery.
a Person of bright and shining Graces, he draws up all his Artillery, and
levels all his Instruments of Battery. Thus he attackt Holy Job, when he found
that Prosperity would not corrupt him, he goes another way to work, and with
unheard of Afflictions, one following upon the heels of another, he endeavored
to force him to Blaspheme his Maker, and desperately to Curse God and dye. He
is a great Master of Politics, and therefore takes such Measures as a Crafty
General in the Conquest of an Enemies Country. A wise Commander will always lie
down before the Place of greatest Consequence, and upon the taking of which the
rest will fall in of Course; so the Devil, his great Attempt is to foil an
Exemplary Pattern of Religion, whose Fall he thinks will shrewdly stagger many
others.

But the incessant Industry of Satan to overcome a more than ordinary Piety,
and the Pride he takes therein, The Pride and Pains he takes in overcoming such
a One represented in a Parable.
I cannot better represent to you, than in the following Parable given us out
of Antiquity. Lucifer having sent forth his Officers to fill the World with
Death and Ruin, they all went on their several Errands: Upon their Return he
demands an account of their Proceedings, What Mischiefs they had done, what
Plagues they had scattered, and what Calamities they had sent amongst
affrighted Mortals. One of them more forward than the rest, Replies, He had
been a Fortnight wandering about, and at last had over-turned some Merchant
Ships at Sea, insomuch that both Men and Goods were lost. The Prince of
Darkness enraged at his Laziness, instead of a Reward, gave him an Hundred
Stripes, because he had done no more hurt all that time. Another Spirit stands
forth, and boasts that he had been for a Month together contriving how to set
such a City on Fire, and had at last Effected it, and he also was severely
Punished for his Idleness, and neglect of Accomplishing his Design sooner. At
last comes forth a Third, that had been Forty Years absent, and being asked how
he had promoted the Interest of the Black Empire; answered, Those Forty Years
have I been Tempting such a Religious Man to Fornication, and have at last
prevailed, and at this time he wallows securely in his Sin. Beelzebub
immediately rises from his Throne, hugs the mischievous Feind, Embraces the
Child of Darkness, and with Rhetoric fetched from Hell, commends him before all
the howling Crew, as having done a greater Exploit after Forty Years Travel,
than the other did by Afflicting and Consuming so many Men, Ships, and Houses
in a few Days and Weeks. The Moral and Design of the Fable is no other than
this: That if he can make a sincere Believer, weary of his Heavenly Mindedness,
and burning Zeal to God's Glory, he values that Piece of Mischief more than if
he Tempted a great many of those, who are already wicked, to greater Impieties.
And that not only because of the Pride and Glory he takes in Conquering such a
Hero in Christianity, but because to make One, who by his Exemplary Piety and
Virtue, was an Eminent Instrument in the Advancement of God's Glory, to become
by his Revolt from God, as great an Engine in promoting the Kingdom of
Darkness, is to his Credit and Interest both.

The more Exemplarily pious therefore any Man is, ^he more it concerns him ^o
beware of ^he Devil, and all his Temptations.
And this considered, the more Exemplarily Pious therefore any Man is, the more
it concerns him, to beware of the Devil, and not to think himself secure on
this side Heaven, from Satan's Temptations; but He that thinks he stands,
should take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. And therefore I shall bespeak such
in the words of St. Peter 2 Epist. 3.17, 18. Ye therefore Beloved, seeing ye
know these things before, beware lest ye also being led away with the Error of
the Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

In a word, and to sum up in short what has been spoke on this Point; I have
at length showed you, that next to the Destroying and Perverting of whole
Churches, the Devil's great Industry, is to gain over to his Party; or to Tempt
to the Commission of some grievous Sin, such Persons as are more than
ordinarily Eminent for their Rank, or Quality, their Order, or their Piety, in
the Church of God. And this being so; since such are the great Mark of Satan,
it concerns those excellent Persons, who are eminently Great, or Good, that
they do especially, and above all other Men absolutely, and entirely, and
utterly Renounce, and Resist all and every the Temptations of Satan, so as not
to yield to any of 'em. Such are to look upon themselves as the great
Commanders in the Church Militant, who are to lead, and to go before others in
the Battles of the Lord against Sin and Satan; but if any such should Cowardly
Give back in the day of Battle and Temptation, they put a stumbling Block, and
are an occasion to fall in their Brothers way, Romans 14.13. And what says our
Savior in such a Case? Matthew. 18.6, 7. Whosoever shall offend One of those little
Ones, which Believe in him, that is, discourage and drive from the Christian
Practice, by his scandalous Life, any the meanest of his Disciples, It were
better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he were
drowned in the Depth of the Sea. Woe unto the world, because of Offenses; he
adds, It must needs be that Offenses come, but Woe to that Man by whom the
Offense comes. So much it concerns Persons Eminent in any Kind, that they be
Good, as well as Great.

THE Thirteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING showed you, Who the Devil is, and What are his Works of Sin, and how we
must Absolutely Renounce both him and them. And as to that other great Work of
his, his Tempting of us to Sin; having showed you, First, By what Methods he
over-threw the whole Race of Mankind at first; and Secondly, how he does still
Endeavor the Ruin of the Church of Christ; and especially Thirdly, of those
who are most considerable for their Rank, or Order, or Piety therein.

I am now Lastly, Lastly, what Temptations Satan levels against all Persons
indifferently considered.
in order to a more full Display of that great Work of the Devil, his Tempting
us to Sin, to discover to you some of the more remarkable Temptations at
leastwise, whereby he applies himself to all Persons indifferently considered,
in the Church of Christ, be they High, or Low, to draw them into sin.

In the former Attempts upon all Mankind, upon the Church of God, and upon
those considerable and leading Persons therein, whose Fall sweeps Multitudes
along with 'em into Sin and Ruin; Satan showed more of his Ambition and Pride,
as in setting up for a Dominion in direct Opposition to God's: So in waging a
War with the greatest Bodies of Men, and the most considerable Leaders in the
Church Militant. But in these his latter Attempts upon particular Persons,
whereby that Spirit appears not content to Foil greater Numbers, but moreover
pursues his Victory to the picking up here and there every particular Stragler;
he expresses more of his Inveterate Malice, in that he is so wholly bent upon
Mischief and Destruction, as to stick at no Pains, and to leave no Methods
untried, whereby he may destroy every particular Soul amongst the the Sons of
Men.

And indeed the Devil's Temptations are the more dangerous, The Devil's
Temptations not easily known to be his, nor always distinguishable from those
of the World, and the Flesh, which are ^nag'd and ^ected by (...).
in that they are not easily known when they are his, and cannot always be
distinguished from such, as the World, and our own Flesh do give us; for which
Reason at the motion of these two latter, we do those things without Fear,
which if we knew the Devil had a Hand in, we should tremble at the Thoughts of
Committing. And indeed it is but seldom the Devil does immediately by himself,
actuate any One to do Evil; but generally he makes use of the World, and our
own Flesh, as his immediate Instruments, to move us to it: Whilst he himself
stands behind the Curtain, managing and directing those, our other Enemies, to
take their Advantages against us. However, so far as the Scripture does
discover to us any Methods of Temptations to be his, ^ome of the ^st consider^e
of his ^thods of ^mpting us ^covered.
we may safely ascribe 'em unto him. And some of the more considerable and
dangerous of 'em, I will lay before you:

As, First, The Devil does miserably delude People into his Power, by letting
'em alone to be Obedient to God in some Particulars, the better to detain 'em
perfect Slaves to himself in others. I. ^e permits, (...) not fur^r some in
^artial O^ience to ^d in some ^rticulars, (...) better to ^ain them ^fect
Slaves himself in ^ers.
This is called a Dividing between God and Mammon, Matthew. 6.24. And indeed
amongst the manifold Delusions of Satan, there is not a more fatal and
mischievous One to the Souls of Men, than the Hypocrisy of a partial and
Ununiform Obedience, which the Devil does willingly enough allow us in. I say,
The Devil does willingly enough allow Persons to be partially, or in part
Obedient; for when this Cunning Deceiver cannot prevail on some to be mere
Libertines, to throw off all the Bonds and Ties of Religion; to be as
Outrageous in Profaneness, Impieties, Villainies, Whoredoms, and all sort of
Wickednesses, as some of his Black Disciples are; he is then willing to
Compound the matter with such, and so that they will be his a little, he will
contentedly allow 'em to be God's very much: Knowing very well, that if we hold
out One disloyal Fort against God, retain but One Rebel-Lust, and give not up
the whole Man unto Christ, it will as certainly Condemn us, though not to so
great Degrees of Punishment, as if we were wholly Devoted to Satan, and gave
our selves up to follow all our Brutish Lusts; the word of God assuring us,
that Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and offend in Point, is guilty of all,
Jam. 2.10. And our Savior declaring to us, that he will not be served by
Halves, nor endure the Devil to share with him in his Kingdom over us; Ye
cannot serve God and Mammon, Luke 16.13. Thus the Devil knows it is his
Interest to allow Men to be partially Obedient to God.

^his a most ^al Delu^n, when ^ne Sins on^ of a scan^lous Name, ^e exchang^ for
contra^ Virtues, ^t with the ^etention of ^pieties of (...) higher Na^re.
And, There is not a more fatal and mischievous Delusion of Satan than this is;
especially, when the partially Obedient exchanges some Sins of a scandalous
Name, for their contrary Virtues, but lives notwitstanding in other Impieties
of a higher Nature. I say, when he changes some particular Sins only of a
scandalous Name, as his former Debaucht and Lewd Course of Life, for a quite
contrary One of Temperance and Chastity. He now assures himself, it was by the
motion of God's Holy Spirit he is become a new Man, as he thinks, and that he
is now infallibly safe. Thus have I often known those of the Sect of Quakers,
who have formerly been loose and riotous Livers, Triumph very much in their
present State, as certainly from God; because they no sooner became of this
way, but they ceased to be Drunkards, and Swearers, and lewd Companions, and
the like: Whereas, alas! The deluded Wretch has but Exchanged some gross Sins
of a more scandalous Name, for other Impieties of a higher Nature. For now
instead of the former more Carnal Sins, he has received into his Heart the more
Spiritual and Devilish Ones of Pride, and Haughtiness, and Contempt of others;
being so far from in Honor preferring other Men, that he will not give the
least Honor to whom Honor is due. He now decries the Inspired Writings of
God, as a dead Letter, and Blasphemously entitles every foolish and deceitful
Imagination of his own corrupt Heart, to the motion of the Holy Spirit;
preferring the latter infinitely before the former. Nay, he now denies all the
great Principles of Christianity; the Divinity, Sufferings, and Satisfaction of
Christ, with the Resurrection of the Body, as most of our present Quakers do,
and so is turned mere Deist at the best. And now who that considers this, can
think otherwise, but that the Unclean Spirit went out of that Man, only to
return into the House from whence he went out, and to take with himself seven
other Spirits more wicked than himself, that they entering in, and dwelling
there, the last State of that Man might be worse than the first? Matthew. 12.43,
44, 45. This is certain, Such the most Irreclaimable of all Sinners.
the most Irreclaimable of all Sinners are those, who have exchanged some ill
Practices, for others equally Wicked, and for impious Principles; for such do
fix themselves in a full Persuasion, that their present Way is of God, seeing
it is contrary to the former, which was undoubtedly the Way of Satan: Whereas
in Truth, both their former ill Practices, and their present evil Temper and
Principles, are the Children of the same Father, though unlike to one another in
outward Features. So fatal a Delusion it is of the Devil's, to allow Sinners in
performing a kind of Partial Obedience to God; nay to further 'em perhaps in
the throwing off some sensual and grossly scandalous Courses, that he may more
securely detain 'em Servants and Slaves to himself, in the less discernible
sins of spiritual Wickedness.

Secondly, Another usual Policy of the Devil's, II. By putting plausible Names
upon the worst of Sins, under that disguise he does cheat Persons into a good
Opinion of 'em, and then to commit 'em.
in corrupting of our Manners, is to Put plausible Names upon the worst Sins,
and under that disguise to cheat Persons into a good Opinion of 'em, and then
to commit 'em. And he had the Impudence to Tempt even our Savior himself in
this manner. He would have had him to throw himself headlong from the Pinnacle
of the Temple, alleging that God would give his Angels charge concerning him,
and in their hands they should bear him up, Matthew. 4.6. And this no doubt he
would have him believe, was a Trusting in God.

And in like manner, by a Satanical Device the Presumption of some, that they
are the Elect, is called their Faith, by which they shall be Justified: Rioting
and Drunkenness is called good Fellowship, and to be easily withdrawn into it,
the Effects of good Nature. Covetousness, Griping and Extortion, is termed a
providing for One's own, which he that does not do, is worse than an Infidel.
And on the contrary, to be Prodigal and Profuse, is to be Hospitable and
Charitable. Spite, Malice, and Revenge is called a Hating of of other Men's
Sins: And the most bitter and fierce Contentions, nay the most cruel and bloody
Persecutions, a Zeal for God, and true Religion; and when that Temper is justly
exposed to Hatred and Abhorrence, then a Lukewarmness, and a mere Indifferency
in matters of Religion, whether Truth, or Heresy prevails; Gallio's caring for
none of those things, is styled the calm and sweet Temper and Spirit of the
Gospel. Thus does Sin pass in the World currantly under the mask of Virtue. Sin
in that disguise gets Reputation amongst Men.
Vice appearing in its own Colors is so odious a thing, that no One but must
be ashamed to own it: But being adorned by the Cunning of Satan with Titles of
Respect, and in the shows of Virtue, it is looked upon with no evil Eye, but
gets Approbation and Reputation amongst Men. But the Devil gets a Passport for
several Sins into the World, not only by giving 'em the Name of Virtues: But,

III. (...) changing (...) Nature ^everal Di^e Graces, (...) that they ^enerate
in^ ^very great ^s.
Thirdly, By changing the Nature of several divine Graces and Virtues, so that
they degenerate into very great Sins. It being much the Devil's Policy to
Transport Persons out of that Moderation wherein Virtue does for the most Part
consist, into that Excess which much resembles it, but is really exceedingly
sinful and hurtful to Men's Souls. This we gather to be the Devil's Policy from
2 Cor. 2.11. where the Apostle advises the Corinthians to Forgive at the last,
that Incestuous Person amongst 'em, whom they had deservedly Excommunicated,
and to receive him to the Communion of the Church, being he had Humbled
himself, and Repented; and that Mercy he would have 'em show him, lest Satan
should get an Advantage over 'em: For we are not ignorant of his Devices, says
he, that is, lest the too long continuance of the Punishments they inflicted
upon the Penitent Offender, might be made use of by Satan to the hurt and ruin
of the Church, by hightning their Zeal against Sin into an Irreconcilableness
to the Sinner. And indeed there are many Sins and Virtues so near in their
Nature, that the Passage from one to the other is hardly discernible; insomuch,
that by the Art of Satan we easily slide from one to the other: As Obstinacy in
standing out against all Conviction concerning the Truth, is easily mistaken
for Constancy in the Faith, and the Love of our selves, for the Love of God.
But especially, that Zeal for God's Glory, now mentioned, a most Excellent
Grace in it self, is often, and that easily Transported into Cruelty, as we see
it was in St. Paul, who out of a Zeal for the Law, Beyond measure persecuted
the Church of God, and wasted it, Gal. 1.13. Thus by changing the Nature of
several Divine Graces and Virtues, so that they become very great sins, does
Satan easily betray us into them.

^ins thus taken are ^om Re^ed of.
And what is worse, Sin thus mistaken for Virtue is hardly ever afterward
Repented of; for whereas Sin, when it appears barefaced, and in its own
Colors, and is known to be so, is an ugly Monster, and is no sooner Committed,
but it scares the Conscience into Grief, Anguish, and Repentance; when it is
thus mistaken for real and true Virtue, it is not only securely, and without
the least Reluctance and Remorse committed; but is confidently Glorified in,
and the Sinner grows Proud of those Villainous Practices, for which he ought to
humble himself in Sackcloth and Ashes.

IV. ^y putting ^vices upon ^ertaking ^erities, ^ater than (...) can go ^o'
with, ^esign that ^n they ^w weary ^eof, they (...) together with those their
voluntary Severities, throw all Religion aside, as too Burdensome, and not at
all Practicable.
Fourthly, It is a most destructive Policy of Satan, To put New Beginners in the
Spiritual Life, upon greater Severities and Strictnesses in Religion, than they
are capable of, on purpose, that when they grow weary thereof, and cannot go
through with, they may, together with those their voluntary Severities, throw
all Religion aside, as too burdensome, and not at all practicable. This we
gather to be a Policy of Satan's, from that Prudent Advice of St. Paul's, 1
Cor. 7.5. which he gives to Married People; that Except it be with consent for
a time, that they might give themselves to Fasting and Prayer, they should not
prescribe to themselves too long Abstinences from one another, lest Satan
should Tempt them for their Incontinency, so we Translate it, but the Word in
the Original signifies, want of Ability to Contain, or Abstain: Which
Inability, or Weakness to go through any voluntary and under taken Piece of
Discipline, is an occasion of Temptation, and will be an Advantage to the
Tempter; by which, when he does at any time Attempt such a Person, he may
probably enough Overcome.

Which Inability, or Weakness, I say, to go through any voluntary and
undertaken Piece of Discipline, as of long Fastings, and Watchings at such set
Hours of the Night, or the Performance of certain Vows, which some do lay upon
themselves; these, though they may be serviceable to promote a spiritual Life, if
discreetly and advisedly undertaken by a Person, and with a just Consideration
had to his own Ability and Circumstances: yet they are greater Severities than
what many can go through with, and when imposed upon themselves by such, they
give occasion to Satan to Tempt 'em to throw off those voluntary Services,
together with all Religion, as not Performable by Flesh and Blood, or by any
thing short of Angels. Whereas indeed, it is not the Substantials of Religion,
such as our Savior prescribed, whose Yoke is easy, and whose Burden is light,
Matthew. 11.30. that are so; but those Accessories and Appendages to it, which
some do indiscreetly, and without regard to their own Capacities and
Circumstances, lay upon themselves.

And here it may be useful to let you know, what a Great Master in the
spiritual Life observes, Bona de Discretione Spirituum, Cap. 6.
The difference between God's Ordering, and the Devil's Management of Men in
these Matters.
concerning the difference between God's Ordering, and the Devil's Management
of Men in these matters. God begins with us at low Degrees, and gently leads us
from an imperfect, to a perfect State. He has regard to Persons and their Age,
and imparts one degree of Wisdom to the Aged, another to Youth, one to
Beginners, another to the Perfect. But the Devil on the contrary, observes no
Order, but darts into our Souls unseasonable Heats, and forthwith suggests
Excesses in Devotion. He persuades such immediately to undertake immoderate
Fastings and Watchings, and to mortify the Body by intolerable Penances. And
these Burdens, because they lay upon themselves without measure, they are not
able to bear; and then their Strength being broke, and the Vigor of their
Minds abated, they do at length backslide into mere Indifferency and Looseness.
And yet to see the crooked Windings of this wily Serpent, as much as he is for
screwing Persons up to Excesses in Religion.

Fifthly, Satan by Injecting of evil Thoughts into our Minds, to disorder and
disturb our Devotions, is very Industrious to Unhallow and Spoil those
Services, whereby we shall most really, and immediately, and directly Honor
and Glorify our Maker, and Benefit our own Souls. V. By injecting of Evil
Thoughts into our Minds at our Devotions, to unhallow those Services, whereby
we do really and most immediately glorify God, and benefit our own Souls.
The Devil being a Spirit, can find an Entrance into our Spirits by ways which
we are not sensible of. And being Diving Worship is the chief of all our
Services we pay to our Maker, as being that, wherein we do most immediately and
directly of all others, Glorify God, and derive down Blessings upon our own
Souls, if rightly performed; the Devil is therefore too too buisy about us,
when we are at our Devotions to unhallow and spoil 'em. Thus we read, Job 1.6.
that when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan
came also amongst them. And so likewise Zechar. 3.1. we find, that when Joshua
the High Priest stood before the Angel of the Lord, Satan stood at his
Right Hand to Resist him. And the Best of Christians also, who upon other
Objects of far less Concern, and at other times, can fix their Minds steddily,
do often complain, that sometimes in their Prayers they are strangely broken,
and the Intention of their Minds frequently taken off by odd Thoughts, roving
Fancies, and far fetched Imaginations. This sure cannot happen, but by the
importunate Urgency of some malicious Spirit, who is marvellously Industrious
to let and hinder us in nothing more, than in this most Glorious and Beneficial
Service, of our Prayers and Praises to Almighty God.

And thus he hinders the Efficacy of the Word.
And hence also in the Hearing of the Word, does he either bring a Drowsiness
upon the Hearers, so that even at the very instant, we the Ambassadors of
Christ are Proclaiming to sinful Men, those gracious Terms of Reconciliation
sent to them by us, from the infinite Majesty of Heaven: They will even sleep
all the time of its Delivery, or he will endeavor to possess their Minds with
such vain, wandering and worldly Thoughts, that the Seed sown, for want of their
Attention, can never take Root in their Hearts. And this not attending to, and
not considering what you are about, and what you hear, is expressly affirmed to
be from Satan, Matthew. 13.19. When any One hears the Word, and understands
it not, that is, lays it not to Heart, thinks not of it, nor considers it; for
so the Word Translate Understands it not, does import, then comes the wicked
One and catches away that which was sown in his Heart.

Sixthly, The Devil observes the outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, and
accordingly Tempts 'em to the use of unlawful and undue Means to remove those
Evils. VI. The Devil ^bserving the outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, he
accordingly Tempts them by the use of ^nlawful Means to remove those Evils.
Thus he dealt with our Blessed Savior, Matthew. 4.2, 3. And when he had Fasted
Forty Days, and Forty Nights, and afterward was an hungered, then the Tempter
came to him and said, If Thou be the Son of God, command that these Stones be
made Bread; that is, he would have him, out of an Impatience of waiting the
ordinary Means of satisfying his Hunger, to Tempt God to Feed him
Supernaturally, and by way of Miracle. And if a Man be Sick, and want present
Help in lawful Means, then will the Devil Tempt such a One, to seek his Remedy
by Charms and Spells, as a more short, certain, and easy way of Curing, than by
Physical Medicines; and no doubt the Devil may sometimes work extraordinary
Feats by these Methods, the better to keep Mankind in Dependence upon himself:
But it is a certain sign of want of Grace, and of none, no not the least Fear
of God in them, who shall resort in such Cases to Persons suspected to hold
Correspondence with the Devil, and shall make use of those means of Cure
prescribed by 'em, concerning whose Operation of any such Cure, no Reason in
Nature can be given, nor the Appointment of God pretended, that such Words,
though they may be Words of Scripture, should work such Effects.

VII. Knowing every particu^ar Person's inward Dis^ositions, he accordingly
presents such Objects to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to prevail over such
a Man to commit some grievous Sin.
Seventhly, The Devil knowing every particular Persons inward Temper and
Disposition, both of Body and Mind, better many times, than he himself does; he
accordingly presents such Objects to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to
prevail over such a Man to commit some grievous Sin. Thus is a Person of a
melancholy Disposition, to such a One he either aggravates the Matter of his
Discontent, or he will present to the Fancy so many frightful Objects, and will
load his Mind with such a multitude of black and dismal Apprehensions; that the
melancholy Wretch shall be weary of himself, and will fly from that worst of
Tormentors, he thinks, his own Mind, even to the Grave, and into Destruction it
self for Refuge. And hence it is, that so many miserable Wretches hang, stab,
drown, or shoot themselves, being thus Tempted thereto by Satan. And hence it
is, that Persons of a melancholy Temper of Mind are so apt, above others, to
be troubled with Blasphemous Thoughts, though Persons of great Piety, and such as
have all along Feared God, and kept his Commandments. Both these, and the
former Apprehensions are some of those Fiery Darts of the Devil, mentioned Ephesians.
6.16. cast into the Soul at such time, when they are least able to Repel 'em;
and that on purpose to disturb the poor melancholy Wretch to the highest
degree, so as to do Violence to his own Nature, and to Destroy himself; or to
force from him Expressions most highly Dishonorable to God, and Terrible to
Christian Ears to hear. But,

Eighthly, The great Battery of the Devil, VIII. Above all by Representing to
the Fancies of Men, the Convenience of Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the
Sweetness of Pleasures, he does thereby Bribe 'em to Rebel against God, and to
Sin against their own Souls.
whereby he does storm the Innocence, and shake the Constancy of the greatest
part of Mankind, Is his Representing to the Fancy of Men, the Convenience of
Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the Sweetness of Pleasures, thereby to Bribe
'em to Rebel against God, and to Sin against their own Souls.

This I call his great Battery, and usually therefore he does Assault us
therewith, not till all others have failed him. In this manner he dealt with
our Savior. When all his other Temptations proved ineffectual, The Devil
takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him all the Kingdoms
of the World, and the Glory of 'em. And says unto him, All these things will I
give thee, if Thou will fall down and Worship me, Matthew. 4.8, 9. But although the
Son of God was no more to be won upon by this, than by any of the former, to
comply in the least with the Designs of the wicked Tempter: Yet the Weakness of
the Generality of Men is such, that they are Bribed hereby, when nothing else
can prevail, to Apostatize from God, to do Injuries to Men, and to do the
greatest Abuses to their own Reason and Nature; and in short to commit every
Kind of Sin, whereby God is Dishonored, and they themselves shall be finally
Ruined.

And the Manner and Cunning wherewith the Devil manages these Temptations, is
extremely well worth your Notice. In his Representation of this World's Goods,
he shows only the fair outside to allure into Sin, industriously concealing
all that is hurtful therein, and would deter Men from it.
When he makes any Representation to our Souls of this World's Glory, he only
shows us the fairest Outside of those Things, to allure us thereby into Sin,
industriously concealing all that is vain, and vexatious, and stinging therein,
which would deter us from it. Thus he managed the matter with our Savior, and
thus he does still with us. In that World, and the Glory thereof, which he
showed to our Blessed Lord, there was a great mixture of Confusion, and
Disorder, and Crosses, and Vexations, and Troubles; but nothing of this did he
represent to his View, when he offered it to him as a Bribe; but only gave him
to see the Plenty, the Grandeur, the Beauty thereof, separated from the other
ungrateful and displeasing Part: And so he deals with us. He does very lively
present to Men the Advantage of Riches, how that Money commands all Things, and
then stirs up their Covetous Desires after it, so as to get it they care not
how, by Thieving, and Robbery, by Cozennage, and Extortion, and Sacrilege, or
by any unlawful Arts and Methods. He does dazzle their Eyes with the Splendour
and Glory of High Places, lets 'em see the Cap, and the Knee, and low
Obeisances, and the servile Flatteries made to the Grandees of this World, to
stir up their Ambition to wade through Seas of Blood, and to tread upon the
Necks of oppressed Provinces, in order to mount those Seats of Honor. And
lastly, he does very lively lay before their Eyes the Luxury and Wantonness,
and seeming Ease found in sensual Pleasures, and so inflames their Lusts and
Appetites after the Enjoyment of 'em. But he draws a dark shade over the
deformed Part of the World, that we may not perceive those manifold Troubles,
and Vexations, and Disappointments, and Punishments, attending these Things in
the unlawful getting of 'em, and the never-failing Remorses and Regrets of
Conscience, Amazing, and Distracting, and stinging with a Venom more inflamed
and furious than that of Scorpions, the Souls who wickedly pursue and attain to
those Things. All this dark Part he reserves till this World's Goods are so
unjustly got, to work upon their Shame and Despair, in order to promote his
farther Designs upon 'em, as you will see in his following Temptations.

IX. ^^ving pre^il'd there^ upon Per^s to com^ some gre^us Sin to ^ain them,
(...) then lays (...) shame and ^grace of ^ir Sins be^e 'em, per^ading 'em
(...) commit a^her horrid ^ckedness, to ^e from the ^s of Men (...) shame of ^e
former.
As, Ninthly, When any have been once prevailed upon by the Convenience, the
Beauty, the Honor, or the Pleasure of any of these Outward things, which the
Devil has presented to their Fancies, to commit Sin to obtain them: Then he
fails not to lay the Shame and Disgrace of their Sins before them, and will
persuade them to commit another horrid Wickedness, to hide from the Eyes of Men
the Shame of the former. Thus when he had Tempted David to commit Adultery with
Bathsheba, the Wife of Vriah, then must the Injured Husband be made Drunk, that
his Lying with his Wife might not be Discovered, when he returned from the
Battle; but that He and the World might think the Child Begotten was his own:
And when that would not make Vriah go in unto his Wife, then at last he must be
Murdered, by being put into the Front of the Battle, and then Treacherously
left to be Cut off by the Enemy, that she being freed of her former Husband, he
might without Scandal to the Eye of the world, Enjoy her as his own Wife. And
how often do we see the like Device to draw Men into Sin, Acted over and over
at this Day, and many lewd, ungodly Persons, after they have committed
Uncleanness, privately to Murder their own Offspring, to prevent the Shame and
Disgrace that will follow the Fact being known. And when Children and Servants
have done amiss, how commonly are they prompted to tell a Lie, nay, and
sometimes to Swear to it, that it may not be Discovered? The Devil well knows
that Sin is like laying a Train of Gunpowder, which if you Fire but One Corn,
it will presently give Flame to all the Rest: So one Sin committed, the shame
of that will engage you to commit another to hide the former. And therefore it
is, I say, the usual Policy of Satan, when he has Tempted any Person to commit
a Wickedness, then to lay the Shame and Disgrace thereof so sensibly before
him, that he shall again commit a worse, on purpose to cover the Knowledge of
the former from the Eyes of Men.

And then, Tenthly, X. Having once Engaged a Person into many Sins, he either
lulls him in Security, or drives him into Despair.
When he has once Engaged a Person into many Sins, either he will lull him into
a fatal Security, whereby he foolishly persuades himself, that God will deal
more mercifully with him, than he has declared in his Word; or else Satan will
not fail to present at last to such an enormous Sinner's Conscience, the
infinite Guilt and Horror of his Crimes to make him despair if he can, that
ever they will be Forgiven, they are so many and Monstrous: That so he may
never endeavor to Repent, or so much as fly to God in Prayer, to have Mercy on
him. At first he presented to the Sinner's Fancy nothing but the Beauty, the
Convenience, the Pleasure, the Glory of the Things of this World; as of the
Pleasures, Riches, and the Honors of this Life, with all their Advantages,
without any thing of that Sting, and Remorse, and Trouble, that must
necessarily attend them, if unlawfully pursued and obtained. But when by this
Means the Sinner has run on without the least stop, or stay into a vast Number
of wasting Sins, (some of them perhaps of such a Nature, that no Reparation or
Restitution can be made for them, as Adultery and Murder) Then will he pour in
all of a sudden, whole Broad-sides, such an Horror, and such an amazing sense
of Guilt, into the Soul of such a Sinner, that thinking it to no purpose to
Retreat, he shall push on to commit the most outrageous Villainies, till at
length when Death seizes him, he goes down into Hell, desperately Cursing the
Day he was Born, and Blaspheming that God, who gave him a Being.

And now Lastly, I shall not mention any other way, Lastly, there are those,
whom God does in a great Measure give up to the Delusion of Satan, Others whom
he does wholly Abandon to the Power of the Devil.
wherein Satan tempts Men, except it be when God in Punishment to some sort of
Sinners, does abandon them to the Devil, to be wholly in a manner Ordered and
Acted by him. And there are Three sorts of Sinners, that do seem to be thus
abandoned by God, and given up, some in a great measure, others wholly, to the
Management of Satan.

First, Such ill-dispos'd Minds, as out of Hatred to the Ways of God, and out
of Love to their own Lusts, do endeavor to possess their Minds with such
Principles, and do seek such Teachers, as will make Sin easy to their
Consciences, and will reconcile the Hopes of Heaven and a bad Life together.
And such are in danger of being justly left in a great measure to the Delusion
of the Devil. As to such Men, I. Such ill disposed Minds, as out of love to
their Lusts, seek after such Principles and Teachers, as will make sin easy to
their Consciences, are justly left to the Delusions of Satan.
because They receive not the Love of the Truth, that they might be Saved, God
does threaten to send them strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie, 2
These. 2.10, 11. And because the Generality of the World is so ill-dispos'd,
that it cannot endure sound Doctrine, which would discover, or hinder, or gall
their Consciences in their evil Practices; God does therefore most justly
permit so many to be deluded by Satan into the most vile Principles and
Practices. Hence no doubt has the Church of Rome in these latter Days, as 'twas
foretold it would, 1 Timothy 4.1. Departed from the Faith, giving heed to
Seducing, Spirits and Doctrines of Devils. And hence also amongst our selves do
so many particular Persons, When they will not endure sound Doctrines, heap to
themselves Teachers, having itching Ears, and do turn away their Ears from the
Truth, and are turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4.3, 4.

There are a Second sort of Sinners, II. Such as by a long Course of many
Damn^^g Sins have ^id wast the ^onscience, and have ^ffled all the Methods of
^od's Grace (...) Reclaim ^m, these are ^metimes, even in this ^ife, aban^on'd
by God (...) be acted by ^^e Devil.
who seem to be wholly abandoned by God, and yielded up to Satan, to be Tempted
by him at his Pleasure; and they are such, Who in a long Course of many damning
Sins that lay wast the Conscience, have baffled all the Methods of his Grace to
reclaim them, and have resisted and grieved his Holy Spirit so long, till Grace
be wholly withdrawn from them: Such are called Children of Disobedience, Ephesians.
2.2. which in the Phrase of Scripture does signify Persons extremely
Disobedient; and of such it is said in the same Verse, that the Evil Spirit
works in them. He does act them as the Soul does the Body, and does hurry
them into such vicious Extravagancies, and to commit such outrageous Impieties,
that they seem to be Devils Incarnate. Thus did the Devil enter into Judas,
Luke 22.3. after he had formerly Baffled all the good Admonitions of our
Savior to reclaim him from his Thievery, and other Villainies, and at length
spurred him on to commit the Blackest Crime, that ever was heard of, even to
Betray the Lord of Life into the Hands of his Enemies. And there are many
ungodly Wretches now adays, who do seem to sin with so much Enmity and Despite
against God, that it is hard to say, whether they are not Devils in Humane
Shapes. But it is the same thing; they have sinned themselves to that Degree,
that God has given them up, and the Devil seems to Animate them.

And lastly so ^e Witches, Magicians, and Conju^rs, who ^ave Cove^anted away
^th Body and ^oul to the ^evil, on ^ondition he ^ill be for ^me time at ^eir
Beck to ^ecute their ^ile and ma^cious Pur^ses.
A Third sort of Persons abandoned by God (and that utterly) to the Power and
Management of Satan, to actuate them as he pleases, Are Witches, and Magicians,
or Conjurers, such as was that Woman of whom we read, 1 Samuel 28. And these are
a sort of miserable Wretches, so far forsaken of Grace, and the Fear of God,
that they have expressly Covenanted away both Body and Soul to the Devil, on
Condition he will be at their Beck to Execute their vile and malicious
Purposes. For Envy, Malice, and Revenge seems to be the Soul, that animates
these Children of the Devil; or else the Pride and Vanity of doing Wonders, and
an insatiable Curiosity of knowing those secret Things to come, which belong to
God alone to know, has put 'em upon making such a Contract with Satan. And
these wretched Miscreants sure must be supposed to be utterly shutout from the
least Glimpse of God's Favor, and cast out of his Protection, and to be wholly
under the Power of the Devil. The thing is self-evident, so as not to need any
Pains to make it appear. And in all Probability, they have also their Eternal
Damnation sealed in this World, Even before they go hence, and be no more seen.

And thus I have at length showed you, as before, Who the Devil is, and what
are his Works of Sin, and how you are to Renounce both him and them: So I have
now laid open before you, as fully as I could (not indulging mere Conjecture,
but fetching my Discoveries from the Holy Scripture, from which alone we can
learn any thing of Certainty in such a dark Subject;) I say, I have fully laid
before you those manifold Methods of Temptation, whereby he did, and does still
Attempt, First, The whole Race of Mankind; Secondly, The Church of Christ;
Thirdly, The most Considerable and Leading Persons therein; and Lastly, Every
single and individual Person indifferently amongst us.

Upon the ge^eral View of ^he Works of ^he Devil, both of Sin and Temptation,
it does appear, his Drift is no less than to usurp God's Throne, and to draw
the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion against the Majesty of
Heaven, with himself.
And upon the general View of what has been said it does appear, that the whole
Drift of that wicked Spirit, and of all his Works, both of Sin and Temptation,
is no less than to Usurp God's Throne, and to put up a Dominion in Opposition
to his, and to draw the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion
against the Majesty of Heaven, owning him, the Devil, for their Lord and Master.

It Is indeed a thing almost incredible, that a Creature could possibly be
guilty of such impudent Pride and Ambition, as to justle God, as it were, out
of his Throne, and to Arrogate to himself the Homage of all the Creatures; but
yet it appears to be plainly so, by his Tempting even of the Son of God himself
to Worship and Adore him, and in his Plying him so diligently with one
Temptation after another, never letting him rest, till he saw there was no
Hopes. He perceived, that his Coming into the World was to Destroy his Kingdom,
and therefore he first Attacks him in the Wilderness, thinking he had him at an
Advantage, after a long Fast of Forty Days, and that in his Hunger he would do
any thing to get Bread. And when our Savior alleged his sufficiency in God
alone, without material Bread, he then takes him up into the Holy City, and
sets him on the Pinnacle of the Temple; bidding him, if he were so confident
of God's Protection and Preservation of him, to cast himself down from thence,
and no doubt he would order his Holy Angels to receive him. And when in that
also he was Repulsed, Satan tried him farther yet, and taking him into an
exceeding high Mountain, where he gave him a Visionary View of all the Riches,
Glory and Splendour of the World, and proffered him, that if he would Fall down
and Worship him; that is, Desert the Service of the God of Heaven, and coming
over to him, would Propagate and Promote his Kingdom, and do Homage himself,
and cause all others to do the like to him: This, if he would do, Satan
Promised him all these Things would he give him. Thus like a Politic Prince,
who would Bribe with Riches, and Honors, and Preferments, the General of
another's Army, to come over to him, and to Betray into his Power all his own
King's Subjects: So did the Devil Tempt our Savior the Great Captain of our
Salvation, to Revolt himself from God, and to bring over the whole Church along
with him. So infinitely Bent is Satan upon the Dishonor of God, and our
Slavery and Ruin; which as it is enough to rouse us up to make a most diligent
Enquiry, till we fully discover all the Arts and Methods, whereby he would
Accomplish it: So it will, I hope, sufficiently Justify my having been so long
in laying before you, Who the Devil is, and what are his Works, both of Sin and
Temptation.

Lastly, And now it remains only to show you, What it is, and how we must
renounce this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin.
and then I shall have done this Point, What it is, and how we must Renounce
this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin. The word Renounce, I
before told you, is a Word that bears various Significations, according to the
Nature of the Thing to be Renounced by us. And as the Devil being that
Arch-Rebel against God, whose Quarrel with him is for no less, than Dominion
and Empire over the World, who shall be King thereof, God, or Satan; and who,
with all his Legions of Infernal Spirits are continually mustering up all their
Forces against the Authority of God, and drawing wretched sinful Men into the
Conspiracy. As the Devil being such, to Renounce the Devil, as I have told you,
is to disclaim, or leave off having any Hand with him in his base and
ungrateful Rebellion against God. And as to his works of Sin. As by Sin God's
Laws are Transgrest, his Authority thrown off, his Government disowned, and his
Power defied: So to Renounce his works of Sin, must signify to disclaim, or
abandon every Sin, as a thing most dishonorable and provoking to God, because
it implies a throwing off his Authority, and a disowning his Power. As this is
to Renounce the Devil and all his works of Sin: So as to that other great Work
of his, his Temptations of us, ^he Temp^ons of the ^vil are (...) only pro^y
Renoun^, when (...) are Re^d by us.
those will properly be then only Renounced, when they are Resisted by us; a
thing which we are Commanded to do, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil; as also, 1 Pet.
5.9. Whom Resist steadfast in the Faith.

But how shall such weak and impotent Creatures as we are, be able to Resist
such a mighty Spirit, or rather such a powerful Host of Spirits, as the Devils
are? For are there not Multitudes of 'em surrounding of us, as appears by one
Man's having a whole Legion of 'em cast out of him? And did not the great
Fiend, the Ring leader of 'em own to God, that it was his Employment to Go to
and fro in the Earth, and to walk up and down in it, Job 1.7. to find out such,
whom with the greatest Probability of Success he may assault, and to see
against what weak part of 'em, either in Body or Mind, he may most
advantagiously raise his Batteries? Nay, and is it not said, 1 Pet. 8.9. That
as a roaring Lion, he continually walks about the Earth, seeking whom he may
devour: So that besides his Industry and Policy, he does with the greatest
Violence and Fury oftentimes set upon us? These things considered, Is it
possible for us to Resist him, or is it not then in vain for us to Endeavor
it? Or by what Means, you will say, shall we be able to do it?

But notwithstanding all the Multitude, the Policy, nor the Fury of Devils, we
need not be Disheartened; for as we are Commanded in the forecited Place of
St. Jam. 4 7. To Resist him: So we have a Promise of being successful when we
do. that they (...) be suc^fully Re^d.
Resist the Devil and he will fly from you: And you will be able effectually to
Resist his Temptations, these Three ways.

First, By keeping your Selves always Sober.

Secondly, By Watchfulness, that you may not be Ensnared by them.

Thirdly, By Prayer to God to Protect you from them.

I. (...) must keep (...) selves al^ys Sober.
First, If you will effectually Resist Satan's Temptations, you must preserve
your selves always Sober, or else you will be deprived of Reason, and the Grace
of God, whereby alone you can Resist them. Thus 1 Pet. 5.8, 9. Be Sober,
because your Adversary, the Devil, as a Roaring Lion, ^obriety. I (...)
opposite to ^unkenness, (...) necessary ^eservative ^ainst Sa^'s Temp^ions.
walks about seeking whom he may devour, whom Resist steadfast in the Faith.
And indeed Sobriety, as it is contrary both to Drunkenness, and Passion, is a
great and most necessary Preservative against Satan's Temptations. Drunkenness
is a thing does so Overwhelm all the Powers of the Soul, that whilst a Person
is in that Condition, he has little, sometimes no use of his Memory,
Understanding and Judgment, so as to have any Thoughts of Good and Evil, or to
discern between what is Fit and Reasonable, and what is Hurtful and Brutish.
And only the Lusts and Appetites of a Man are then awake, ready to hurry him to
whatsoever Extravagancies he shall be Tempted. And do you think, that the
Devil, who is so Cunning in Timing his Temptations, will then be Idle, and not
strike in with the Season, and at such an Opportunity present to the Wretch,
when deprived of Reason and Grace, such Baits as shall be likeliest to take
him? Why, this to be sure he will; and hence we hear of so many brutish
Extravagancies, and sinful Frolicks, so much Lewdness, Swearing, Robberies and
Bloodshed, acted and committed in Drunkenness: Such great Reason there is,
that as you would preserve your selves from Sin; so likewise must you preserve
your selves Sober and Free from Drunkenness, otherwise you will be Overtaken
therewith.

And likewise Sober and Free from Passion, II. As opposite to Passion.
in which case Persons are as much deprived of Reason, as in the other, and are
hurried on to the like Commissions; and the Devil will be alike ready, both to
Influence the Passion, and to suggest Provocations, if Sobriety does not strike
in, and moderate. Hence is the Passionate and Violent Tongue, said to be Set on
Fire of Hell.

Secondly, Watchfulness is another Means to Resist Temptations. II. Watchful
over those our weaknesses, especially where Satan will be likeliest to Attempt
us.
Thus again, in order thereunto, in the same Place of St. Peter, 1 Ep. 5.8, 9.
it is said, Be Sober, be Vigilant. He is Vigilant for his Part to do you
Mischief, and watches all Advantages, to get you into his Power and Reach: And
it lies upon you to be as careful to Guard your selves against all his
Batteries, which he Plays against you. He surrounds the Soul, and views it on
all sides: And this great Enemy of Mankind, says a Father, does there lay his
Snares of Deceit, where there is the greatest Probability they will take us. He
knows to whom he may best apply the Heats of Lust, before whom he may spread
the Table of Gluttony, and to whose View he may display the Enchantments of all
sorts of Luxury. He considers the Temper of Men's Minds, and whom he can
disorder with Grief, and whom he may deceive with Joy, whom he can oppress with
Fear, and whom he may seduce with Admiration, and into whose Breast he can most
easily Infuse the Poison of Envy. He examines the Customs of Men, he considers
what are their Cares, and he searches which are our prevailing Affections. And
by that he takes occasion to do us the greatest hurt, to which he sees we are
most violently addicted, and about which he sees us most industriously
Employed. Like an Enemy, who Besieges a City, does always assault the weakest
part of the Walls: So does he attack the Soul, where he perceives its greatest
Infirmities. Such infinite Reason have we to consider our own Natures, and to
keep a particular watch on that side, where we are most Blind, and to set our
selves with the greatest Vigor to Resist and Repel the Temptations, wherewith
he will assault us there. And this is the Second way given you in Scripture to
Resist Satan's Temptations, viz. Watchfulness and Diligence to know our selves,
and to discern his Temptations, that so you may not be Ensnared by them. The

Third, Is by Prayer to God to Protect you from them. And Thirdly, we must be
constant and fervent in Prayer to (...) to pro^ us from (...).
Thus Jam. 4.8. after we are commanded to Resist the Devil, and he will Fly
from us; as an effectual way so to do, we are bid to Draw nigh to God, and he
will draw nigh to us; that is, if we will make our humble Addresses to God by
Prayer, he will be ready to assist us against all his Temptations. And indeed
there is extraordinary Reason, you should diligently and earnestly Pray to God,
to Protect and Preserve you from Satan's Delusions. The Devil is a Spirit, and
therefore is naturally Endowed with a great deal of Knowledge, abundance more
than we Men are capable of attaining to. And moreover, by the Experience of
many Thousand Years, from the Creation of the World, unto this Day, he has
greatly Improved himself in all manner of mischievous Cunning and Subtlety; so
as not to be Ignorant of any way, whereby he may most successfully prevail over
us, to draw us into Sin. Both which things considered, we were not capable to
Cope with him, if left to our selves. But our Comfort is this, that the Devil
can go no farther than his Chain; and as the Divine Goodness will not Permit
him to attempt whom, and how he pleases: (It was not before he had Leave, that
he could Tempt Job, 2.6.) so in reference to all sorts of Temptations
whatsoever, we have a most sure word of Promise, 1 Cor. 10.13. that God is
Faithful, who will not suffer you to be Tempted above that you are able, but
will with the Temptation also make a way to escape, that you may be able to
bear it. But then, if you would have him a Protector always ready at Hand to
assist you, you must, as was said, Draw nigh to him, and he will draw nigh to
you.

What shall I say? Why, what farther Directions are necessary for Resisting of
Satan's Temptations, together with an earnest Exhortation so to do, are given
you in those most Excellent words of the Apostle to the Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12. with
which I shall conclude. Finally Brethren be strong in the Lord, and in the
Power of his might; Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the Wiles of the Devil. For we wrestle not against Flesh and
Blood, but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the
darkness of this world, against Spiritual wickedness in high Places: Wherefore
take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to stand in the Evil
day, and having done all to stand: And so goes on in several Verses, showing
with what Armor you must prepare your selves, wherewith to defend your
Innocence against the Assaults of Satan, viz. with Truth, or the Knowledge of
the Gospel, with Righteousness, Charity, Faith, the Hope of Salvation, and the
Word of God: And then adds, as I before directed you, That you must Pray
always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all Perseverance.

THE Fourteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING already, in order to the Explication of these Words, showed you, Who
the Devil is, what are his Works, what is meant by Renouncing the Devil, and
all his Works, and how necessary it is we should absolutely do so; I come now,

Secondly, In like manner to Explain unto you, What Is meant by the Pomps and
Vanity of the wicked World, and in what sense, and how far we must Renounce the
wicked world with its Pomps and Vanity. Three things here to be explained, and
accordingly Renounced: 1. The world; 2. The wicked World; and 3. The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked world
What is meant by the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and to show you in
what Sense, and how far you must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps and
Vanity.

To Renounce the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World. There is not a word
here but will require some Explication. As to the word Renounce indeed it may
suffice, what I before told you, that it is of various Significations,
according to the Nature of the Thing to be Renounced by us: And there being
Three Things in these Words necessary to be Explained,

First, The World; Secondly, the wicked World; and Thirdly, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World; I will Expound to you the Meaning of each, and
will withal show you in what sense, and how far you are to Renounce every One
of them.

And First, I am to show you, what is meant by the World, and in what Sense,
and how far you are to Renounce the World. The World in Scripture does
generally pass under a very bad Character, and for the most part is mentioned,
as what does directly oppose God's Glory, and our own Happiness. Thus Jam. 4.4.
Know ye not that the Friendship of the World is Enmity with God, and whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is an Enemy of God. And on the
contrary, Gal. 6.16. St. Paul gives this Character of himself, The World a
great Enemy to God's Glory, and our own Happiness.
That through the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, the World is Crucified unto
him, and he unto the World. And, 1 John 5.4. it is universally declared, that
Whosoever is born of God, overcomes the World: And therefore in the Second
Chapter of the same Epist. 15, 16. we are commanded, Not to love the World,
neither the Things that are in the World, being assured, that If any man love
the World, the love of the Father is not in him. And indeed, if we shall search
throughout the whole Book of God, we shall find such frequent and earnest
Commands to Renounce this World, and to beware of its Temptations, that
nothing, except Satan the Ringleader of all our Adversaries, seems to be a
more Mortal Enemy to the Happiness and Salvation of Mankind, than this World.
And all this considered, as also, that it is made so material a Part of our
Baptismal Covenant to Renounce, as the Devil, so the World; I think it concerns
you to be well informed, what is meant both in Scripture, and your Catechism,
by that World, which you are so obliged to Renounce, and in what sense, and how
far you are to Renounce it.

And a more nice and critical Enquiry and State of this Matter is the rather
necessary, because the World, as hardly as it is spoke of, is not absolutely,
and in its own Nature Evil, as the Devil is; for considered in it self, it is
the Creature of God, and consequently very Good, according to that Divine
Testimony given thereunto, Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing that he had made, and
behold it was very Good: And it is only Evil accidentally by our Abuse of it.
That therefore you may Err on neither side, neither despise the Workmanship of
God's Hands, to the Disparagement of God's Goodness, in giving us of his
Creatures for our Use and Convenience; nor too much Dote upon the Creature, to
the Neglect of the Creator, which is a Degree of Idolatry: It is to be
considered both generally and particularly.
I will, with what Skill God shall enable me, state this whole matter to you,
and show you, What is meant by the World, and in what Sense, and how far you
are to Renounce it. And for the more full and complete Explication of this
Point, I will do it, both Generally and Particularly.

I. By the world in general is meant that whole Frame of Nature, which we
behold, and all that variety of Creatures, which it contains, and is given us
by the Bounty and Goodness of God, for our Use and Benefit.
And First as to the World in General, it is visible what is meant by it, viz.
The whole Frame of Nature, which we behold, with whatever is contained therein.
True it is, the World is put many times in Scripture, as Joh. 7.7. and often
elsewhere, to signify Evil Men, because that the Wicked make up the greatest
Part of Men in this world. But this is an improper and figurative meaning of
the world, Evil Men being but a part of the world, and in this Sense will
better be considered by us under the next general Point to be spoken to, viz.
The wicked World. But Matthew. 4.8. and in innumerable other Places of the
Scriptures, by the World is meant, that whole Frame of Nature, which we behold,
and all that Variety of Creatures, which it contains, and is given us by the
Bounty and Goodness of God, for our Use and Benefit.

And now the great Question will be, In what Sense, and how far we must
Renounce the World, in this Sense of the Word. And there are not ordinary
Mistakes about it; For some shall Cry out most grievously against this World,
as the Author of all their Sin and Misery; and therefore many have endeavored
to fly out of it, as it were, into Deserts, living separate from Mankind, and
without the Conveniences of Life, as the Hermits of Old; and into Cloisters
and Monasteries, as the several Orders of Monks and Friars at this Day in the
Church of Rome. The world in this Sense is not in it self Evil, but only
accidentally, by Man's abuse of himself, or it.
But certainly the World does not deserve to be so spitefully used, as the
Words and Actions of Superstitious and mistaken Men do import. For to use the
words of a great Man, The World is certainly in it self Good, and is not Evil,
but accidentally by Man's Abuse of himself, or it. It does contain a general
supply of Objects answerable to the Desires of our sensible Nature, and the
Exigencies and Conveniences of it: It is a great Shop, full of all sorts of
Wares, answerable to our Wants, or Conditions. There is Wealth, and Places, and
Delights for the Senses; and it becomes an Enemy to us, by reason only of the
Disorder and Irregularity of those Lusts and Passions, that are within us, and
by reason of the Overvalue, that we are apt to put upon them. They are indeed
Temptations, but they are only Passive, as the wedge of Gold did Passively
Tempt Achan, but it was his own Lust and Covetousness, that did him the Harm.
The Rock does not strike the Ship, but the Ship strikes the Rock, and breaks it
self.

Nay, this World, as it is not Evil in it self, Considered in it self it is
very Good, and convenient to us.
so most certainly it is full of Goodness and Benevolence to us: It supplies
our Wants; it is accommodate to the Exigencies and Conveniences of our Nature;
it furnishes us with various Objects, and Instances of the Divine Goodness,
Liberality, Bounty; of his Power, and Majesty, and Glory; of his Wisdom,
Providence, and Government: which are so many Instructions to teach us to Know,
and Admire, And as it is not absolutely in it self Evil, so neither is it
entirely to be Renounced; but being Good in it self it may insome measure be
desired and enjoyed by us.
and Magnify him; to walk Thankfully, Dutifully, and Obediently unto him; to
teach us Resignation, Contentedness, Submission, and Dependence upon him. A
good Heart will be made the better by it; and if there be Evil in it, it is
such as our own corrupt Natures occasions, or brings upon it, or upon our
selves by it; and it is a great Part of our Christian Warfare and Discipline to
teach us to use it, as it ought to be used, and to subdue those Lusts and
Corruptions that abuse it, and our selves by it. So that the World you see is
not absolutely, and in it self Evil, nor is it consequently entirely to be
Renounced by us: But it is in it self Good, and as such it may in due measure
be desired and enjoyed by us.

Nevertheless through our own Corruption, Nevertheless through our own
Corruption, whereby we abuse the good Things of the world, it becomes
accidentally the occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from
God, our sovereign Good
whereby we abuse these good Things of the World, which the Divine Bounty has
bestowed upon us for our Support, Comfort, and Convenience, the World becomes
Accidentally the occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from
God, our sovereign Good. And how the World does accidentally become the
occasion of much Sin committed by us, and as such, how far it ought to be
Renounced, I take to be a Point that is very requisite you should be well
instructed in.

And the Case you must know betwixt Us and the World stands thus: Man is a
Compound Being, made up of Two different and distinct Natures, a Body, and a
Soul; the one purely Material and Earthly, the other Spiritual and Heavenly;
the one Inferior, the other Superior in Worth and Dignity; the one Mortal and
Perishing, the other Immortal and Everlasting. Hence Man is by some called
(...) Akin to Two Worlds, the Knot, as it were, that ties 'em both together, or
the Button that fastens 'em one to another. How the World becomes so.
Now Man consisting of these Two Principles, according to One whereof, and that
the Principal, he is nearly allied to God, (for according to his Soul, he is
the very Image of God) it is very reasonably required of him, That he should
chiefly mind Heaven, and Heavenly Things, his near and chief Relations, (if I
may so say) which he is Everlastingly to enjoy; and that he should not much
concern himself with the Things of this world, which he must shortly leave
behind him, and then all Relation betwixt 'em will cease. But all the time of
his Pilgrimage here, Living and Conversing for the most part with the Things
below, he becomes sooner acquainted with them, and they with him, they have an
easier Access to him than Heavenly Things, and have therefore greater
Opportunities to court his Affections, and to win upon 'em: So that in the End
it too often falls out that St. Paul's Rule is lived Counter to, and Men
generally Set their Affections on things below, and not on things above.

(...) what man^ it does ^ptivate us, (...) draw us ^m God.
The manner how the world Captivates, and Enslaves, and Draws the whole Man in
Triumph after it, is this; It presents to the Senses Riches, Honors and
Pleasures, and dazles 'em with their Glory and Beauty: Men's outward Senses
being so extremely taken with these, do easily bribe the Affections to love 'em
above all other, and cause 'em to Covet and Lust after 'em. The Affections
becoming hereby most eagerly desirous of 'em, do put a false Biass upon the
Judgment, so that our Understanding and Reason usually becomes thereby so far
Corrupted, as to dictate to the Will, that these outward and sensible good
Things, are the Objects, which are above all others worthy of its Choice. And
thereupon the Will does immediately choose the present Objects of Sense, the
Riches, Honors and Pleasures of this World, prefering 'em far before spiritual
Things. And thus the whole Man, Body and Soul is made a Slave to the world, and
neglects Heaven, and minds not to perform the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, the way thither.

(...) far there^e as it en^ges our Af^tions too ^sely to it, ^s to make (...)
Inordi^ely, and ^egularly (...) mind it, ^d to neglect (...) great Con^n, the
Bu^ess of Re^ion, it is to ^^e Renoun^ and Re^^ed by us.
So that upon the whole Matter, the world is so far only our Enemy, and to be
Renounced and Overcome by us, as it Engages our Affections too closely to it,
so as to make us Inordinately and Irregularly (that is, with an Affection to
it, or any Thing in it, beyond its due Desert,) to mind it, and too much to
neglect our great Concern, the Business of Religion, and the Performance of the
Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, our way to Heaven and Happiness. So long
as we wear these Earthly Bodies about us, we are permitted the Use and
Enjoyment of worldly Things, provided in Things lawful, and in Degrees
allowable.
So long as we live in this World, and are Parts of it our selves, and carry
these Bodies of Earthly Materials about us, there is no doubt but it is
necessary for us, and we are permitted to be concerned in it, and we may
without scruple gratify our selves with the Enjoyments of it, provided it be in
Things lawful, and in degrees allowable, and that we suffer not our Hearts and
Affections to be too much fixed upon it. But in regard our Souls, the principal
Part of us by far, are the Natives of Heaven, and are only as Pilgrims and
Tenants here Below, to stay but for a short Time: (For As the Dust shall return
to the Earth, as it was, so the Spirit shall return to God, ^t being our ^uls,
our ^ncipal ^rt, are soon (...) remove to ^eaven, we ^^st chiefly (...) our
^fections on ^ings above, ^d mainly ^^eavour to ^ain them.
who gave it, Eccl. 12.7.) we must therefore Set our Affections chiefly on
things above, on God, the Society, Interests, and Enjoyments of that
Ever-blessed State, making it our main Business to Possess, to Attain, and
Enjoy them; and not on things below, the foolish Interests and Satisfactions of
this perishing and transitory State here on Earth, Col. 3.2. And so far as the
world, or any thing in it Inveigles our Hearts and Affections to fix upon it,
and seduces us to commit any Thing sinful, and hinders to mind the Business of
Religion, and the Performance of the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, our
way to Happiness, and everlasting Satisfaction, it is to be Renounced,
Rejected, and Overcome by us: It is the Matter of a Christian's Warfare, and
the subject of his Victory. And so far as this, Whatsoever is born of God,
overcomes the World, 1 John 5.4. and in this sense St. Paul Professes, Gal.
6.14. that The world was Crucified unto him, and he unto the world. And thus
you see in General in what sense, and how far we are to Renounce the World.

But Secondly, II. Concerning the World, considered in its Particulars, and
those Temptations result both from the Good, and the Evils thereof.
For the more full and complete Explication of this Point of Renouncing the
world, it being a Matter wherein it concerns you to receive the most distinct
Directions; I will farther consider the Particulars of which this World is made
up, and will also show you in what sense, and how far you are to Renounce each
of 'em. And here it is observable, that when we come to take a nearer View of
the world in its Particulars, it does not then appear, as it does in the
General, to have nothing in it but Good, but to contain withal a great mixture
of Evil; and indeed to be in the present State thereof almost wholly made up of
Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. And both the Good and the Evil Things thereof do
give us considerable Temptations to Sin.

Now the Good Things of this world are summed up under these Heads, The Riches,
Honors, and the Pleasures it affords. The good things of this World, Riches,
Honors and Pleasures; the Evils, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions. And
Things of a middle Nature are the different Callings, Conditions, and Cares of
this World.
And its Evils on the contrary may be reduced to Poverty, Disgrace, and those
Afflictions of all sorts, which in innumerable ways do assail us. And there are
also some Things therein of a middle Nature, as different Callings, Conditions,
or States of Life, and the Cares of this World, which are the Appurtenances to
it, and afford great matter of Temptation and Trial to us therein: And in what
Sense, and how far you are to Renounce it, with reference to each of these, I
will endeavor to show you.

And, First, As to the Riches of this World: These are not in themselves
Hurtful, but Good, and are bestowed by the Divine Providence upon those that
have 'em, to very excellent Purposes and Uses, that they may do Good therewith,
and that not only in providing for their own Household, but also by Stewarding
them out to the Support and Advancement of Religion and Virtue, I. As to
Riches, these are not in themselves Hurtful, but Good, and are bestowed upon us
to good Ends and Purposes.
to the Relieving the Poor and Distressed, to the Encouragement of Industry,
and in many other ways which the Laws of Piety and Charity do direct. And those
who enjoy 'em, have great Advantages of doing Good therewith, to others
Comfort, and the Benefit of their own Souls.
And those therefore on whom God has bestowed Wealth, have admirable Advantages
put into their Hands, to do Good therewith, to the Comfort of others, and to
lay up to themselves Treasures of Reward in Heaven by their good Works.

Nevertheless it was no hard Censure our Savior passed upon Riches, in saying,
That a Rich man shall hardly enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.23.
For both Scripture, Nevertheless Riches are a mighty Temptation, whether we
con^^er Men as ^etting, Pos^ssing, or as ^arting with (...) Losing of ^em.
and daily Experience tells us, that Riches are a very great Temptation to
manifold Sins and Offenses against God, and that whether we consider Men with
respect to their Getting, Possessing, or their Parting with, or Losing of them.

First, Consider Men in the State of getting Riches, and St. Paul tells us, 1 Timothy 6.9. That they, who would be Rich, fall into a Temptation and a Snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction and
Perdition. And our own Experience also gives us to see, I. In the over^^ger
Pursuit (...) Richesmen (...) run them^lves into ^any griev^^s Sins.
how many horrid and black Crimes, and into what miserable Snares, so as never
to be able to disentangle themselves out of 'em, do Men run themselves into, by
an over-eager Pursuit of Riches. A dividing betwixt God, and Mammon, is the
lowest Degree of Sin, that is occasioned hereby, which yet God will not endure,
as you will find, Matthew. 6.24. The Neglect of Religion, and Contempt of
Heavenly Things is the next. And it is not seldom we see, that Men to raise
themselves Estates in this world, will not stick at Oppressing the Poor; at
Cheating of Orphans and Widows; at Corrupting of Witnesses and Juries, and
Forging of Evidences; and to add Impiety to Injustice, to get but a small
Pittance of worldly Wealth, they will Rob God in his Tithes and Offerings, by
Sacrilegiously detaining those Dues, which were allotted, both by the Laws of
God, and Man, for the Maintenance of the Worship of God, and his Ministers; a
Sin compared by St. Paul with Idolatry it self, Romans 2.22.

As also into ^any misera^le Snares, so ^s to behard^ ever able (...) disent
angle themselves ^ut of 'em.
And then, as to the Temptations and Snares, into which Men, by the unjust
acquiring of Riches, do often Entangle themselves, it is indeed Terrible to
consider, how they do frequently thereby run themselves into such a Condition,
that like a wild Beast entangled in a Net, they cannot get out. For when once
Riches are got by any methods of Wrong, or Robbery, there must be an entire
Restitution of all that has been unjustly gained, or ever the Man can be said
to Repent, or hope to Recover the Favor of God. And yet this Restitution,
after many and repeated Acts of Injustice, becomes almost Impossible to be
done: For why, the Love of Money is so near to the Miser's Heart, that he can
sooner spill the Blood thereof, than part with it. And if that, which he has
Ill-got, has not Thriven with him, as seldom it does, why then he has not
where-withal to Restore to every Man his own, without reducing Himself and
Family to extreme Beggary; which how hard a thing it is to bring himself to,
and in Practice how seldom heard of, I leave it to your own Observation to
Inform your selves. So that you see into what a miserable Temptation and Snare,
Men do Entangle themselves by grasping after unlawful Gain. For as Resti^ution
is necessary to Peace with God, so it is ^xtreamly difficult to be willing, or
^ble afterward to make it.
They have it not in their Will, or if in their Will, not in their Power to
make Restitution, and yet without Restitution they can have no Peace with God;
and therefore such at length do usually fly for Refuge from their upbraiding
Consciences, if not into utter Atheism, as is usual with other great Sinners:
At leastwise they will shelter themselves under some lewd Anti-nomian
Principles, which teach Men to rely upon Christ, and to roll upon his Promises,
notwithstanding any Extortions, Oppressions, or other unrepented Sins, they may
be at the same time Guilty of; for which Reason perhaps your Dealers, and Men
of Business, are so apt to be found at the Feel of Fanatic Teachers. Such
Temptations to Sin are Men liable to in the Getting the Riches of this World.

Secondly, And no less also are those subject to, who do Possess them. II. And
no less Temptations are those subject to, who do possess 'em.
Experience tells us, that a great Estate, is a very great Temptation to
Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and Insolence, to Irreligion toward God, and a
Profane, Idolatrous Trust in Riches: And in a word, to Commit the highest
Offenses toward God, their Neighbor, and Themselves. I say, to Idleness and
Luxury, the former whereof is the Rust of the Mind, the latter is a Canker,
that devours and destroys the Body. And how great a Temptation to Idleness and
Luxury Riches are, is eminently seen in the Case of the Rich Man in the Gospel,
Luke 12.19. He had no sooner got his Barns and his Coffers full, but he Sings a
Requiem to his Soul, Soul thou have much Good laid up for many Years, take
thine Ease, Eat, Drink, and be Merry. And so likewise, they are a strong
Temptation to Pride and Insolence, and that in Respect both to God, and Man. As
to his Behavior toward God, how apt is the Rich Man, in the midst of all his
Successes, to Sacrifice to his own Net, and to Burn Incense to his own Drag, as
the Prophet words it, Hab. 1.16. that is, to Attribute all to his own Wit and
Policy, and Conduct, exclusive of God's Providence? And then, as to his
Carriage toward Men, how often do Riches make those, that have 'em, to carry
themselves with a most unreasonable Haughtiness and Disrespect toward Persons
of lower Fortunes, to look upon Men of little, or no Estates, as the Cattle
only, and Vermin of the World, and to treat 'em as their Slaves and Vassals, as
if they were not Creatures of the same Kind with themselves, and had not Souls,
as Precious in God's sight, as their own? And then, as to Irreligion, and
Insolence toward God: The impious Contempt of God, and of all that is Sacred,
which Men in the midst of their Abundance do cast upon that Bountiful
Benefactor, who Gave 'em all things Richly to Enjoy, cannot be more exactly
described than in the Case of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32.13, 14, 15. He made him
ride on the high Places of the Earth, that he might eat the Increase of the
Field; but Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed fat, thou art grown
thick, thou art covered with fatness, then he forsook God, which made him, and
lightly esteemed the rock of his Salvation. But as to that Profane and
Idolatrous Trust in Riches, which is so Detestable before God, this is so much
the natural Effect of Wealth, that very good Men will be apt to slide into that
very sinful Temper of Mind, if they do not take care. In my Prosperity I said,
In the Possession of Riches, Men are Tempted to the highest Offenses against
God, their Neighbor, and Themselves.
I shall never be removed, Holy David confesses it of himself, Ps. 30.6. So
great you see are the Temptations, which do also arise from the Possession of
Riches. They Corrupt both Body and Mind, by Idleness and Luxury: They cause Men
to Insult over their poorer Neighbors, and sometimes even God himself too, by
Pride and Irreligion. And in Confidence of their Riches Men Idolatrously put
their Trust in their Wealth, instead of the All-sufficient God of Heaven.

But Lastly, The great Sins of all, But Lastly, the great sins of all are
occasioned by a Lothness to part with, and a Fear of Losing 'em.
which Men are in danger of Committing, on the account of their Riches, are
those, which are occasioned by their Lothness to part with, or their Fear of
losing 'em. By a Lothness to part with their Riches is all that Niggardliness,
and want of Charity and Good works occasioned, which many Rich are most guilty
of, and sometimes none more so, than those, who have most to spare, and who are
to look upon themselves, as indeed but Principal Stewards under God, (...) a
loth^ to part (...) Riches, (...) Vn^^ifulness ^^en.
the sovereign Benefactor, and who must give an Account to him of their many
Talents of Riches, how they have distributed 'em, in doing Good therewith. This
was that Tenacious Temper of Mind, for which the Rich Dives will be for ever
Infamous, as long as, the Gospel, that is, as long as the Sun and Moon
endures; and for which he is for ever irreversibly Doomed to Hell Torments. He
would not spare so much as the Crumbs which fell from his Table, to Relieve the
Poor Lazarus, his Heart was so much set upon his Wealth.

from the ^of losing (...) Apostasy (...) God.
But the great Sin of all, which the Rich are in most danger of Committing, is
occasioned by their Fear of Losing their Riches, and is no less than an
Apostasy from the Faith, and a Denial of the Truth. Our Blessed Savior tells
us, that Whosoever he be, that forsakes not whatever he has for his sake, and
the Gospels, he cannot be his Disciple; and to leave Houses, Lands,
Possessions, and whatever worldly Enjoyments, if you will not Renounce the
Gospel it self, or those Truths contained therein, and will not embrace Errors
contrary to it, is always the hard Condition that Christians are put upon in
Times of Persecution. But how hard a Thing is it for a Rich Man to do this? A
poor Wretch may be content to leave his uncomfortable Mansion, and to Resign
this laborious tedious Life, in hopes of gaining Rest, and eternal Glory
thereby, rather than strain his Conscience: But for a Rich Man to take a
Farewell of his stately Houses, delightful Gardens, his silent Grots, and shady
Walks, his rich Furniture, goodly Farms, and his heaps of Silver; to leave
these, and fly into Banishment, endure Poverty, labor with Hunger, and starve
with Nakedness; all this to preserve a good Conscience: It is a hard Saying, a
shrewd Temptation! He will be apt to desire his Settlement, may be, on this
side Jordan, rather than he will pass over the Flood, into the Land of Canaan.
He will be very apt to build his Tabernacle on this side Heaven. The Temptation
is indeed Great, and many have fallen under the Power of it. Several have past
very shrewd Brushes in their way toward Heaven, and yet have not been able to
withstand the Shock of this Temptation. We have a famous Instance of this in
the Young Man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19. This Person came to our Savior, with a
mighty Desire to know, what he should do to Inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, and
reckoned up a many extraordinary Acts, that he had done already in order to it,
(insomuch that in another Gospel it is recorded, our Savior Loved him very
much) But the Holy Jesus told him, that if he would Be perfect, he must go and
sell what he had, and give to the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven,
and that he must in Poverty and Affliction come and follow him; When the young
Man heard that saying, he went away sorrowful, for he had great Possessions,
says the Text, ver. 22. And thus you see what Temptations Riches will give you,
whether you consider your selves as Getting, as Possessing; or as Parting with,
or Losing of them.

^n what sense and how far Riches are to ^e Renounced
And now the great Question will be, In what Sense, and how far you must
Renounce the Riches of this World in all these respects? And in the General I
can safely tell you, that Riches are not of that Evil Nature in themselves,
that you must absolutely Renounce, or Reject 'em. We read of a peevish
Philosopher, In General, being they are not Evil in themselves, they are in
Cases only to be renounced by us, wherein we cannot without Sin Pursue,
Possess, or retain them.
amongst the Grecians, one Crates, who threw all his Wealth into the Sea, he
would have nothing to do with it. And there are a sort of Men amongst the
Romanists, those whom they call Begging-Friars, who Vow Poverty, and place a
very great Part of their Religion in that very sinful Trade (if there be not a
very great necessity for it) of Begging. But Riches are not of that Nature,
that they need be so absolutely Renounced and Rejected by us. They may be
Innocently enough, both Sought, Possessed, and Retained. And it is only in such
cases wherein you cannot, without Sin, Pursue, Possess, and Retain 'em, that
you are obliged by your Baptismal Vow to Renounce and Reject 'em; and that is
in these Cases following.

And First as to the Getting of Riches, As First, Riches considered in the
Getting, no Man must so put his Heart upon 'em, as to esteem 'em his chiefest
Good and Happiness.
you must not set your Heart upon 'em, so as to esteem 'em your chiefest Good
and Happiness; for this is an eternal and an unalterable Rule, both in Reason
and Religion, That the chiefest and most absolute Good deserves our chiefest
Esteem, and choicest Affections: And that lesser Goods to be less esteemed and
loved. And therefore God, and Heavenly Things being our chiefest Good, and the
Riches of this World being Good only by derivation from him, and that in
infinitely lower Degrees, we must by no means suffer the Riches of this Life to
have an equal share in our Esteem and Affections with God, and Heavenly Things.
No: Mammon is too base a Competitor, that we should divide the Empire of our
Hearts betwixt God and him; No man can faithfully serve two Masters; for either
he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and
despise the other. Ye cannot serve God, and Mammon, says our Savior, Mat. 6.24.

And, Nor must he labor after 'em with immoderate Care, so as to neglect the
great Duties of Religion and Devotion.
You must by no means labor after the Riches of this World with immoderate
Care, so as to neglect the great Duties of Religion and Devotion. Martha, you
know, was much troubled about her Household Affairs, at a Time and Opportunity
given her to hear our Savior's Heavenly Discourses, and Divine Instructions;
and our Savior rebuked her for it, telling her, that Mary had chosen the
better Part, in laying aside her worldly Business, to attend that more
important Affair, the Enriching of her Soul, Matthew. 10.41, 42. And you must
take care, lest you also Incurr that, and a worse Rebuke, by spending the
Lord's Day, set apart by Divine Appointment, wholly to the Service of God; lest
you spend it, I say, in worldly Business, and in Projects of Gain: Or indeed
any Day in immoderate Carkings, so as to omit either your Family, or Private
Devotion. And must Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness, and
all these other things shall be added unto you, in such measures, as shall be
needful for you; and you must therefore after lawful Endeavors, leaving the
Success to God, Take no further Thought for the Morrow, Mat. 6.33, 34.

But above all, in your Pursuits after this World's Wealth, Especially he must
beware of Enriching himself by unjust Means.
You must beware of Enriching your selves by any unjust Means. This is called
by the Wiseman, A making have to be Rich, because that those, who are bent
upon unlawful Gain, think plain and honest Dealing too slow a way of increasing
their Substance: But he withal tells 'em, that They, who do so, shall not be
Innocent, Prove. 28.20. that is, shall Involve themselves in great and terrible
Guilt, as has been showed you. And let me tell you withal, whenever you shall
come to Cast up your Accounts between God, and your own Souls, a Thorn will not
prick your Flesh with half that Anguish, as the Reflection upon an Ill-gotten
Estate will pierce your Consciences: So that above all things it does concern
you to Renounce all false and deceitful ways of getting Riches, remembering how
the Prophet pronounces a fearful Woe to him who builds his House by
unrighteousness, and his Chambers by wrong, that uses his Neighbors service
without wages, and gives him not for his work, Jer. 22.13. And especially you
must beware of getting by Defrauding those, ^^^ticularly by Sacri^^ge.
who Minister about Holy Things. The Generality of the World do now adays seem
to value no Gain like this; but as it is declared by the Prophet Malachi, 3.8.
to be the worst sort of Robbery; so it is the certain way to bring a Curse upon
all a Man's Substance: As on the contrary, a very free and liberal Payment of
Tithes to the full Value, will bring a certain Blessing. All which you have
fully declared from the Eighth, to the Thirteenth Verses. So that in a word,
all unlawful Gain, whether by Robbing God, or Man, you must take care of.

^oever has ^ustly gain^ any thing ^^st renounce by make^ Restitu^n thereof.
But if it has been your sad Misfortune to have brought such a Guilt upon your
Consciences, you must then Renounce those Riches in the most proper and
immediate Sense of the word, that is, by Restoring speedily to the full, and
rather more than less, to all those whom you have any ways Injured, as Good
Zacheus did: Behold Lord, if I have taken any thing from any man by false
Accusation, that is, Wrongfully, I here restore him Fourfold, Luke 19.8. Thus
far you must Renounce the Riches of this World, with respect to the Getting of
them.

II. ^^^ches con^^^er'd in the ^ssession, are ^be renounc^ by paring those
Su^^^fluities ^ich tempt ^leness and ^uxury, ^ide and In^^^ence, and (...)
Idolarrous ^ust in Ri^^es; and by ^^stowing it Pious and ^haritable ^es.
Secondly, Riches considered in the Possession, are to be renounced by paring
off those Superfluities, which tempt to Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and
Insolence, and an Idolatrous Trust in Riches; by paring off that
Super-abundance, I say, and bestowing it to Pious and Charitable uses. Idleness
is a Life, for which no Man Living can give an account to God, or Man, there
being no Man so Great, or so Rich, as that he can pretend to have been Born to
live Idly, and to be exempt from that Use and Service, which every Person
owes both to Church and State, as he is a Member of both those Bodies. The Eye
cannot say unto the Hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the Head to the
Feet, I have no need of you; God having so tempered the Body together, that all
the Members, both Comely and Uncomely, Honorable and Dishonorable Parts,
should have the same Care one of another, 1 Cor. 12.21.24, 25. And as Idleness,
so is Luxury a Crying Sin, as will appear by considering the fearful Doom
pronounced by St. James to such Rich Ones, as wanton it in nothing but
Pleasure. Go to now ye Rich men, weep and howl for your Miseries that shall
come upon you, ye have lived in pleasure on the Earth, and been wanton; ye have
nourished your Hearts as in a day of Slaughter, Jam. 5.1.5.

And as to Pride, For any Person, be he never so Wealthy, to be pufft up by his
Estate, to carry it Proudly and Insolently toward other Men of lower Fortunes;
(the usual Effect of Riches) this also is a thing severely Threatened in the
now cited place of St. James, viz. Chap. 5. ver. 1.5, 6.

But as to that Exalting themselves against God, in an utter Defiance of his
Laws, which so many Rich and Great Men are subject to, Who, when God has fed
them to the full, do then commit Adultery, and assemble themselves by Troops in
the Harlots houses, and are as fed Horses in the Morning, every One Neighing
after his Neighbor's Wife; shall I not Visit for these things, says the Lord,
shall not my Soul be Avenged on such a People as this? Says God by his Prophet
Jeremy 5.7, 8, 9. Sure such an insolent Contempt of God's Laws, and haughty
Pride against him, will most terribly provoke his Indignation at the last. And
so,

Lastly, will a Profane and Idolatrous Trust in Riches, to which the wealthy
Ones are so extremely liable. God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 52.5. He shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy
Dewlling Place, and root thee out of the Land of the Living. And who is this
that he will serve so? Lo the Man that made not God his Strength, but Trusted
in the Abundance of his Riches, and strengthened himself in his Substance, ver.
7. The Reason wherefore Men do so much Covet after, and so closely Hug their
Riches, is because they take 'em to be a sure Security against all Misfortunes
and Troubles, and will be a Refuge to 'em, they think, in the Days of Calamity.
But alas! There is nothing more Uncertain, and indeed more Dangerous to the
Owners thereof, than Riches. They can neither Fence off Death, nor Sufferings,
but do most usually bring on both, and that both from the Reason of the thing,
as they Excite the Envy, and are a Bait to the Covetousness of others to
Dispossess him, who Enjoys 'em; and by the just Judgment of God, when Men have
unlawfully got, or abused 'em.

And now all this considered, since Idleness and Luxury, Pride and Insolence,
and a Trust in Riches, are so highly Provoking to God; and since the Rich are
so extremely liable to these, of all others: The Possessors of great Estates
would do well and wisely too, so far to Renounce 'em, as to Pare off those
Superfluities in their Fortunes, and to bestow all that to Pious and Charitable
Uses, which Tempt 'em to such Pernicious Vices. Nor is this a more hard and
unreasonable Lesson, than what was given by our Savior in a like Case. Matthew.
5.29. says he, If thy right Eye offend thee pluck out, and cast it from thee,
for it is profitable for thee that One of thy Members should perish, and not
that thy whole Body should be cast into Hell. And so we may say in this. If
Superfluity and Abundance, and more than is necessary, to provide a Person of
those Conveniences, which are requisite to that State and Condition, wherein
Providence has Placed him in the World, does directly tend to those Vices now
named; then it is much better, that with Crates he should even throw away that
Superfluity: For much better it is, that his worldly Wealth should sink into
the Bottom of the Sea, than that it should sink him, both Body and Soul, in
Hell. But there is no Necessity for any Man to throw that away, which God has
bestowed upon him for better Uses. Take care to do Good therewith, and then it
will Open unto you the Gates of Heaven. In so doing you will Renounce those
Superfluities of an Estate, as to your own proper Use, but however it will
return into your own Bosoms at last, with infinite Advantage and Interest.
Which brings me in the

^^d lastly, (...) suffering ^oss there^^ rather (...) Aposta^^ from the ^^th.
Last Place to show you, How far the Rich are to Renounce their Wealth, in
Parting with it in Works of Mercy, and in suffering the Loss thereof, rather
than Incur Apostasy. And to give you my Sense thereof in a few words. God, true
it is, does not always make it the Condition of a Disciple to Sell all that he
has, and to give it to the Poor, as he Commanded him in the Gospel, upon an
extraordinary Occasion. Nor does he always put us upon the fiery Trial, either
to leave all, or preserve a good Conscience. But however, there is doubtless
required a better Use to be made of Riches, and larger Distributions of what
God has Blessed them withal, to Pious and Charitable Uses, than most of our Rich
Ones do commonly think. And it is also required, that though we are not always
put to the actual Trial, whether we will follow Christ in the Adherence to
Truth, and by Renouncing of Error, or retain our Riches: Yet it is ever
required, that we should be readily disposed to Forsake all, and follow Christ,
suppose there were Occasion, which must be the Import of these words, Mat.
16.24. If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
Cross and follow me. Every One is not actually called to take up the Cross, by
abandoning his worldly Possessions, or in any other way; the Meaning must be,
that every Disciple must let this World's Goods hang very loose about him, so
that he could easily put 'em off, when called to it. And God, who searches the
Heart, and tries the Reins, sees whether we are so disposed, or no. And, though
he puts us not to the actual Trial, he will however Judge us, accordingly as he
sees we are actually disposed. And let this suffice for the present, whereby
you have seen, how far we must Renounce the World in general, and also in that
particular Instance of its Goods, the Riches thereof. There are several other
Ingredients of which this World does consist, and in what Sense, and how far
you must Renounce them, shall also, God willing, be showed you. But of this the
next Opportunity.

THE Fifteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, is to lay before you the Strength of those
Temptations, which do arise from the World in General, and the several Things
therein contained in Particular, whether, they be the Goods, or the Evils
thereof, or such as are of a middle Nature; and to show you in what Sense, and
how far you are to Renounce 'em. And as to such Considerations, which concern
the World in general, and also that first and principal of its Materials, the
Riches thereof, and which are necessary to he laid before you: This I have
already done, and now I am to pass on to the Consideration of

A Second of its Particulars, viz. The Honors thereof, and to show you what
they mean, and in what Sense, and how far you are to Renounce the Honors of
this World. What is meant by the Honors of this World, in whatsence, and how
far they are to be Renounced.


Honor is accounted one of the Principal of this World's Goods; and though it be
much supported by Wealth and Riches, yet it is often, and sometimes deservedly,
preferred before 'em. And Honor properly and strictly What is meant by Honor
properly and strictly.
does signify an inward Esteem bore to a Person, upon the account of some
worthy Accomplishments and Advantages he is possessed of; and this inward Sense
of his Worth, testified by some outward and suitable Respects, expressed either
by our Carriage toward him, or by our Speeches to, or concerning him. This is
what Honor does strictly signify: But to the more general and usual Meaning of
the Thing, What in the General Meaning of the Word.
both in Scripture, and common Language, by Honors are also meant the
Advantages, or Qualities themselves, upon the account of which Persons are so
Honored, and Esteemed, and Respected; and those outward Respects given 'em
upon the account of those Advantages.

And they may be reduo'd to these following, Nobility, or Gentility,
Preeminence, or Authority, and Dignities and Promotions, which are called Posts
of Honor: Also an High Esteem and Reputation amongst Judicious, Wise, and Good
Men, upon the account of a Person's Wisdom and Virtue, or some worthy and
glorious Action performed by him: Or, the Vulgar Applause of the Crowd of Men,
upon what they account Praiseworthy and Honorable: And lastly, the Outward
Expressions of Respect, either by Word, or Deed, usually given upon the account
of any of these. I shall consider all these Kinds of Honor apart, and allowing
to Persons, who any-wise deserve Honor, all that is consistent with Innocence,
I will show in what Sense, and how far they are to Renounce it, as it Tempts
'em to Sin against God, and to Trample under Foot his Authority and Laws.

I. ^obility, or ^^ntility.
And First as to Nobility, or Gentility: This is an Honor derived down upon
Persons from their Forefathers, who are supposed to have Ennobled their Names
and Families by some excellent Atchievments in Peace, or War, either in
Learning, Arts, or Arms, or whatever worthy Performances, whereby they have
signally Benefited their Country; ^he original nature of ^obility, or ^^ntility.
and who, upon that account, have been distinguished by certain Badges and
Titles of Honor, from the Crowd of Men, whose Ancestors have not been so
eminently Famous and Deserving. And such Honor as this is highly agreeable
both to Scripture, and Reason. In the Scriptures we do not only find the
Princes of Israel, Heads of the Houses of their Fathers, who were the Princes
of the Tribes, and were over them, Numb. 7.2. but also that they bore several
Coats of Arms for Distinction, which what they were, you may see Genesis 49. And
in Reason there is as great a Necessity, that there should be a Distinction of
Members, more or less Honorable in the Body Politic, as in the Natural, and
therefore in both, Upon some Members we bestow more abundant Honor, 1 Cor.
12.23. And indeed such a Distinction of Persons upon the account of their
Merit, or Desert of their Families, does serve to raise the Emulation of Men,
to Atchieve some noble and worthy Enterprise, and to shake off that Sloth,
which would otherwise Enfeeble their Activity. And for this reason it is, that
God has Planted this Passion of Emulation in Persons Natures, to rouse 'em up
to Imitate the noble Virtues, and great Examples of Others, that they likewise
might Transmit a Name worthy to be Imitated in future Generations. Such is the
Original and Nature of True Nobility, and so Reasonable and Useful it is in it
self.

The Abuses (...) is subject (...), and in that Instan^^s to be Re^ounced.
But as the best Things are liable to the worst Abuses; so it fares with this
sort of Honor. And the Nobleman, or Gentleman is apt to think himself
Priviledg'd above others, to trample under Foot all Laws, both Divine and
Humane; and to reckon himself above Reproof or Punishment, when he has done; to
despise and oppress the rest of Mankind, as if they were but a lower Rank of
Creatures, and had not Souls as excellent in their Natures, and as capable of
Improvements; as precious in God's sight, and as much the Heirs of Heaven, as
his own: Such are apt to fly at the greatest Distance from those worthy
Virtues, which Ennobled their Ancestors; and indeed to despise Religion, and
its chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em.

I. A Gentle^an, be he of what Rank ^r Quality so^ver, must ut^erly renounce
^ll that Honor, which pretends to place him above the laws of God, or Man, and
beyond Reproof or Punishment, when he has Violated either.
But, First, A Nobleman, or Gentleman, be he of what Rank or Quality soever,
must utterly Renounce all that Honor, which pretends to put him above the Laws
of God, or Man, and beyond Reproof or Punishment, when he has Violated either.
For so far is One of an Eminent Quality, from being at liberty to be an
Atheist, or Libertine, a Licentious, and a lewd Liver, a breaker of the Laws of
his Country, and a despiser of the Discipline and Orders of the Church; and so
far is he from being above Punishment or Reproof for such like Violations, that
he is Bound, above all other Men, to be a strict and orderly Liver; and upon
his Failure, is more open to Reproof, and more liable to be severely Punished:
Such a one is placed upon a higher Form than other Men, and consequently his
Deformities and Vices are more open to public View, and more easily discerned;
and the Multitude, which are always apt to observe the Faults of their
Superiors, will be sure to pass their usual Censure, How unbecoming is this
Man's Life to his Birth and Quality, and how does he he disgrace himself and
Family? So Injurious is he to himself. He is moreover by the Eminence of his
Birth and Quality, as A Light put, not under a Bushel, but on a Candlestick,
and so the World, who are always apt to imitate the Manners of their Superiors,
seeing his bad Example, will many of them Copy it out to their own Destruction;
so Mischievous is such a One amongst Men. And lastly, he has received far
greater Talents from God, than other Men, to employ to his Glory, which he has
abused to his Dishonor, he is ungrateful toward God. He has had the Examples
of more noble Progenitors before his Eyes, to raise his Emulation; he has had
the Advantages of a better Education, to improve his Knowledge; he has more
Time and Leisure to pursue it, more Riches to procure the Means of Attaining
it; he has more Authority to support Religion, and the Church, and he has a
greater stock of Reputation amongst Men, to Countenance both. And having thus a
greater share of Talents to employ to his Master's Honor, proportionably a
greater Measure of Improvement thereof, to the Advancement of God's Glory and
Religion amongst Men, will be required at his Hands; For unto whomsoever much
is given, of him shall much be required, and to whom Men have committed much,
of him they will ask the more, Luke 12.48. Such a One is bound above others to
be a strict and orderly Liver, and upon his Failure, is more open to Reproof,
and more liable to be severely Punished.
And now does any Man think when he has so much Abused himself, and Family,
when his Example has been so Mischievous and Infectious to Mankind, and when he
has turned all the Artillery, which God has given him to fight against Sin, and
the Devil, when he has Treacherously turned it upon God himself, will his
Honor bear him out in this? Or does he think himself above the Reproof of
God's Ministers here, or the Punishment of an Incensed Deity hereafter? No: He
is the Man to whom Reproof does particularly belong, and accordingly Herod the
Tetrarch was reproved by John the Baptist, for Herodias, his Brother Philip's
Wife, and for the Evils, which Herod had done, Luke 3.19. And in the World to
come, such a One, above all Men, will be Beaten with many Stripes, Luke 12.47.
So much is that Honor to be Renounced, which pretends to put a Man above the
Laws of God, or Man, or beyond Reproof or Punishment for the Violation of 'em.

Secondly, And so likewise is that to be Renounced and Detested, which exalts
Persons above their Brethren, to that degree, as to despise and oppress the
rest of Mankind, as if they were but a lower Rank of Creatures, and had not the
same God to their Father, Bodies formed out of the same Clay, and Souls as
excellent in their Natures, and as capable of Improvements; as precious in
God's sight, and as much the Heirs of Heaven, as their own. II. As also that
which exalts Persons above their Brethren to that degree, as to despise and
oppress the rest of Man^^nd, as if ^^y were but ^lower Rank (...) Creatures,
^^d had not ^^e same God (...) their Fa^^er, Bodies ^ormed out (...) the same
^lay, and Souls (...) Excellent (...) their Na^^res, and as ^^pable of
Im^^ovements; (...) precious (...) Gods sight, ^^d as much ^^e Heirs of ^eaven,
as ^^eir own.
This is indeed observed to be, for the most part, the Property of those only
of Vpstart Quality; for whether it be, that such are Transported above
themselves, by a sudden Rise of Fortune, so as not to know their mean
Beginning; or whether it be, that their Fathers being raised to their
Greatness, merely by Virtue of their successful Fortunes in the World, not for
any noble and worthy Performances, these have not that Vein of Magnanimity,
Largeness of Soul, Generosity, Courtesy, and Liberality, running in the Blood,
as it were, of some Families, whose Nobility was founded in some noble Exploits
of Virtue: Whatever may be the reason, it is generally observed, that your New
Gentry are apt, above others, to carry it with an unreasonable Haughtiness and
Disrespect toward their poorer Brethren. But alas! There is no Ground in the
World for this Distance, nor that Slavery they put 'em to. Have we not one
Father, and has not one God made us, Mal. 2.10. And was it not out of the same
Lump of Clay, that he made one Vessel to Honor, and another to Dishonor? And
when this Earthly Tabernacle of ours shall be dissolved, who shall be able to
distinguish betwixt the Dust of Princes, and their meanest Vassals? And is not
the Soul of the poorest Indian Slave, as Spiritual and Immortal, as that of the
Richest Merchant in Europe? And had it but the Education, which our Europians
have, it is capable of receiving as clear Notions of God, and of Religion, and
of Virtue, as any of us all. And no doubt, were it adorned therewith, and so
had the Image of God consisting in these Graces, restored within it, it would
be as Precious and Dear to him, and be received into those Mansions of Bliss,
from which, those proud Tyrants over their Fellow Creatures Liberty, will
certainly be Excluded, if they continue to treat 'em with such Distance and
Slavery. Sure I am, the Poor Lazarus is now in Abraham's Bosom, when the Rich
and Noble Dives, who treated him not with that Respect and Kindness, as he did
his Dogs, is scorching in the Flames of Hell. All which considered, it does
become the highest in Birth and Quality, to carry it with all due Humility and
Courtesy to the lowest, and to Renounce and Abandon those Thoughts of Honor
and Quality, which thrust away their Fellow Servants to the same God, so far
off 'em, though they may not have the Pretense of the Pharisee for so doing, nor
can say to 'em, Come not near me, I am Holier than thou.

III. Such ought ^ven to Re^ounce all ^retensions to Honor, who ^ave
degene^ated from those worthy Qualities, which Enno^led their Ancestors.
But, Thirdly, Those Persons ought indeed, even to renounce all Pretensions to
Honor, who have degenerated from those worthy Qualities, which Ennobled their
Ancestors. The true Nobility of those, who are really of Birth, or Quality, was
founded, as I have told you, in the Heroic and extraordinary Virtues of their
Ancestors; and therefore their Quality cannot be supposed to remain with 'em,
when those Virtues, which gave Being to it, are departed from 'em. But so it
is, that none are half so apt to Pride themselves in their Families, and to
talk so much of their Pedigree, as those who have the least of any true Worth
remaining in 'em: And sure, it is a sign they have but little of their own, who
do so much value themselves upon others Deservings; and seem to have nothing to
Brag of, but borrowed Titles. We have Abraham to our Father, was the constant
Cry of the Jews, when they had least of the Faith and Virtues of Abraham.
However, as apt as such are to assume this Honor to themselves, there is no
reason in the World, but what was purchased by the Merits of others, should be
forfeited by their ill Deserts, and that Vice should lose, what Virtue did
gain. And this our Savior and his Apostles did determine in the Case This the
Determination of our Savior, and his Apostles, in their Case.
of those Jews; Think not to say within your Hearts, we have Abraham to our
Father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these Stones, to raise up
Children to Abraham, Matthew. 3.9. that is, by having degenerated from Abraham,
you have forfeited your Title to the Name and Honor of being Abraham's
Children, and the vile Gentiles, as you account 'em, shall be taken into that
Dignity and Relation: For he is the Father of all them that Believe, though they
be not of the Circumcision. And accordingly in a true Estimation of Things, all
those, and those only are Honorable, who are Virtuous, though they cannot derive
their Pedigree from noble Ancestors. The Honor of my House begins with me,
and the Honor of thine, ends with thee, said a worthy Commander, in
Plutarch, to a Banished Wretch, who upbraided him with the meanness of his
Parentage.

Lastly, And such ought also, even to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor,
amongst Christians at leastwise, who despise Religion and its chiefest Virtues,
as Qualities beneath them. Lastly, and such ought to Renounce all Pretensions
to Honor, amongst Christians at leastwise, who despise Religion and its
chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em.
And yet those are the Persons, who take themselves to be the only Men of
Honor, who can talk most Atheistically and Profanely, whose Life and
Conversation is made up of Lewdness and Debauchery; and as to those grand
distinguishing Graces of Christianity, Humility, Meekness, and a patient
Enduring of Injuries and Affronts, who count them a mere Jest, which Men of
Quality and Honor, it is impossible, should submit to. But be it so, only let
'em withal consider, that Not many Mighty, not many Noble were called; but the
base things of the World, and things which are despised, has God chosen, yea
and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are, 1 Cor. 1.26.28.
And what then signifies their Honor, when God despises it?

But really it is not so, that your profligate and lewd Livers, be their Birth,
or Quality never so Great, are Honored and Respected amongst Men; for whilst
they continue in a mean and vile Slavery to their basest Lusts, they are not
only in truth and reallity miserable and wretched Caitiffs: But whatever they
think of themselves, they are indeed in the Eyes of others most Hateful and
Contemptible. True it is, the greatest Part of Men (and Pity it is, that so
many amongst Christians should still remain so Carnally minded) do look upon
the Man, who will not revenge an Affront, to be mean Spirited, and scarcely a
Gentleman; and the desperate Duellist is the more Honorable and Heroic in the
Eye of the World: Yet those who are thoroughly seasoned with Religion, and
Wisdom's Dictates, have other Thoughts and Apprehensions of such a One, and
count him the only Person of true Courage, and of a great Soul, who can despise
the vain Opinions of the Crowd, in the Pursuit of real Virtue. And above all,
the Meek and Forgiving Christian, has this Honor, that he has an easy Access
to the Throne of God, can come into his Presence with Confidence and Assurance,
whilst the other, though the Greatest Man on Earth for Quality, dares not
Approach him, without Trembling and Horror. And yet if vain Men will give the
Honor here to those, who are most Contemptible in the sight of God, But if
such are accounted Honorable ^ain Men, ^y are des^able in the ^es both of ^d,
and of ^ Wise and ^od Men.
(it is very unfit it should be so amongst Christians) however let the Humble
and Meek content himself with this, That here on Earth he has the Approbation
and Esteem of all Wise and Good Men, and shall receive in Heaven, from the
unerring Judgment of God, a Testimony before the whole Quire of Saints and
Angels, to his Infinite and Eternal Honor and Glory; a Testimony, I say, which
will far Exalt him above the Highest of Mortal Men, who consider their own
Quality, more than God's Glory, and prefer an empty Notion of Honor, before
the real and substantial Graces of God's Spirit.

The Sum ^w far Pa^nal Ho^ur is to be ^nounced.
In a word, and to sum up what has been spoke to this Point, Paternal Honor is
indeed in it self Useful and Valuable, as it puts before Men's Eyes the worthy
Deeds of their Ancestors, and as it Inspires 'em to an Imitation of 'em in the
most excellent and noble Instances, and Strains of Virtue. But so far as Men's
Opinion of their Birth, or Quality, pretends to put 'em above the Laws of God,
or Man, and beyond Reproof, or Punishment, when they have violated either; and
when it Exalts 'em above their Brethren, to that Degree, as to despise and
oppress the rest of Mankind, as if in respect of themselves, they were no
better than Brute Creatures: These are no other than mere Paganish and
Heathenish Notions of Honor, and must be Renounced and Detested by every
Christian. And indeed those ought, even to Renounce all Pretensions to any
Honor, who have basely degenerated from those noble and virtuous Qualities,
which Ennobled their Ancestors, and did constitute them Honorable. But
especially such ought to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor, amongst Christians
at leastwise, who despise Religion, and its chiefect Virtues, as Qualities
beneath 'em. So that thus you have at length seen, in what Sense, and how far
Paternal Honor is to be Renounced, that Honor which is derived upon Persons,
from their Forefathers by Nature.

II. (...) what sense, and how far ^ivil Honor (...) to be Re^ounced; ^hether
the ^avour of ^rinces, or ^he Effects of their Favor, ^osts of Ho^our.
Secondly, And now I am in like manner to consider Civil Honor, that which is
derived upon Persons, from the Fathers of their Country, or those who have the
supreme Power and Authority in a Land, and are next under God, the sole
Fountain of this sort of Honor. And it is either that, which is the Cause of
farther Honors, viz. The Favor of Princes; or the Honors themselves, which
they Conferred upon Persons deserving their Favors, as Pre-eminence and
Authority, Dignities and Promotions, which are usually called Posts of Honor:
As also those Titles and Distinctions, which do commonly accompany, and go
along therewith, and are the Effect of Princes Favors.

Now as to both these, there is no doubt, but in themselves they are Good and
Useful, and may be very Advantageous to the Purposes of Religion; for the more
a Man is in his Princes Favor, and the greater is his Authority and Trust; the
more he is supported with Power and Pre-eminence, and the greater Figure he
makes in the World, the more capable he shall be of protecting true Religion,
of rewarding and encouraging Piety and Virtue, and of discountenancing and
casheering Wickedness and Vice, as was seen in the Favor of Hester and
Mordecai, with King Ahasuerus, Hest. 8. But then except the Mind be first well
seasoned with Principles of Religion and Virtue, and ballasted with Humility,
Princes Favors, High Places, Precedences and Titles give great Temptations to
several Sins, and that both in the Getting, Possessing, and Losing thereof.

These kind of Honors, and outward Glories, are dazzling and bewitching Things;
These kind of Honors and outward Glories are dazzling and bewitching Things.
they draw the Eyes of whole Crowds upon 'em, gazing, and admiring, and almost
adoring those, who are Invested with 'em. They bring many humble Petitioners to
wait upon 'em; and these are the Men, who keep the World in subjection and awe
under 'em. And therefore in obtaining a Prince's Favor, many are tempted to
the grossest Flattery, in keeping it to the most servile and sinful
Compliances; and rather than lose it, to Sacrifice Innocence, and a good
Conscience. And as to the Honors themselves, the Glory thereof Tempts some to
grasp after 'em, who have no Abilities, nor Skill to manage 'em; the Denial
often causes those, who have real Abilities, but know it too well, to turn
Malcontents and Mutineers to the Shocking many times of Church and State. And
most Men are tempted to aspire after 'em, merely to serve their own Private
Ends, not the Public Good, by 'em: And lastly, to compass and purchase 'em by
most indirect and unlawful Means. In the Possession of 'em, Persons are apt to
grow Proud and Imperious, Unjust and Cruel, and at the best shall be much
diverted from minding the great Business of their Souls. And lastly, the hazard
of losing 'em are dangerous Temptations to many to Obey Man, rather than God,
that they may still Retain 'em.

But First, as to a Prince's Favor, But First, a Prince's Favor, though
extremely Valuable, when it can be had without Sin, yet no Man must Gain,
Possess or Retain it by wicked Arts, or sinful Compliances.
though it is extremely Valuable when it can be had without Sin; and Princes
ought to be Applied to, and Courted for the Favors Men expect from 'em, and
must be held in the greatest Veneration, as the Vicegerents of God upon Earth
by 'em; and no Wise, nor Good Man will forfeit, without necessity, the Esteem
of 'em: Yet no Man must wind himself into their Affections, by flattering of
their Vices, none must Obey their unlawful Commands, as the Duty of his Place,
nor must any for fear of incurring their Displeasure, choose rather to
displease God. There are several Instances in the Scripture of Good and Wise
Men, which show you how, and in what Case it is necessary for Men, so far to
deny themselves, as to Renounce their Favors, amongst which, take that of John
the Baptist, instead of many. This Just and Holy man was much in the Esteem and
Favor of Herod, who Observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things,
and heard him gladly, Mar. 6.20. Nevertheless this Holy Man was so far from
flattering of him, that he did not stick to Reprove him for his Incest, and for
all the Evils he had done, Luke 3.19. though to the Loss of that Prince's Favor,
and his own Life, Mar. 6.27.

Secondly, Proceed we next to consider, Nor Secondly, the Effects of their
Favors, High Places, and Titles of Honor.
what is necessary to be done with respect to the Effect of Prince's Favors,
those Honorable Posts, the Pre-eminence and Authority, the Dignities and
Promotions, to which they do Advance those, whom they Favor; and those Titles
of Honor and Distinction, which do usually go along therewith; and in the
Obtaining of these Posts of Honor, and Places of Trust and Power.

First, There must be no Grasping at that, which is above a Man's Capacities
and Abilities to manage to the Public Good. I. In the obtaining of ^hese, no
Man must grasp at that, which is ^bove his Ca^acities and Abilities to manage
to the Public Good.
For any Person out of a vain Opinion he has conceived of his own Parts and
Abilities, to undertake Business he is not able to Perform, and to meddle in
things he does not understand, is a great Injury both to himself, and others;
to himself, in exposing his own Insufficiency, which in a lower Station would
have lain hid, and never been Censured, nor Reproacht. He does injure others
thereby in perverting Judgment and Justice, through his Unskilfulness, in not
dispatching Men with quickness and dexterity in their Lawful occasions and
Business, and by keeping out those, who would discharge the Duties of such
Offices and Places, This Mischievous to ^he State.
much more to the Benefit and Satisfaction of the Public.

But this Ambitious and Pragmatical Humor of Climbing where they are not
Called, is most of all mischievous to the Church, This Mis^heivous to ^he
Church.
when Persons undertake to be Teachers of others, who have not Learnt
themselves; such were those of whom St. Paul speaks, Who desired to be Teachers
of the Law, when they understood neither what they said, nor whereof they
affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7. And such were some great Pretenders to Illumination and
Knowledge in the Apostles Time, of whom St. Peter complains thus, These are
Wells without water, Clouds carried by a Tempest, viz. From one dangerous Error
to another, by every Wind of Doctrine, as Clouds are from one place to another,
by a tempestuous Wind, 2 Pet. 2.17.

But the Psalmist was far from this pragmatical and meddling Temper, Psalm.
131.1. Lord, my Heart is not haughty, nor mine Eyes lofty, neither do I
exercise my self in great matters, or things too high for me. Much less does it
become others to be so; but all must so far Renounce (as great as is the
Temptation) the most Honorable Posts, as to decline and refuse those they are
not able to manage to the Satisfaction of their own Consciences, and the
Public Weal. And it would be happy for the World if all would do so.

But above all, this Modesty in declining those Undertakings they are not
fitted for, becomes the Laity, with respect to their Teaching of others, whom
it does not become To think more highly of themselves, than they ought to think
(as they do who set up for Teachers, who had not an Education for that Purpose)
but to think soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the measure of
Faith, Romans 12.3.

Secondly, And in the obtaining of these Posts of Honor and Power, Persons of
the best Capacities and Abilities, must not be over-eager and importunate in
their Suits and Applications to those, who bestow them; ^or Second^^ ought
Per^^ns of the ^^st Capaci^^es and ^reatest Abi^^ties be over-^^ger and
im^^rtunate in ^^eir Suites ^^d Applica^^ons to those, ^ho b^stow ^^em.
but having modestly made their Court to their Superiors, must contentedly
receive their Denial. It is the Ambition of Great Men, striving with one
another for the highest Places of Trust and Power in the Commonwealth, that
causes Factions, and Civil Wars, to the Destruction of their Native Country.
And it is the Pride of some, who over-valuing their own Abilities and Parts,
and thinking they are Injured, in not being Preferred to the highest Dignities
and Promotions in the Church, has caused those Schisms and Separations in it;
such choosing rather to be Ringleaders of a Party, than Subject to, and
Dependant on any. But though these public Posts in Church, or State may be
modestly sought by those, who are able to weild 'em, and need not be renounced
and declined by Men of Parts and Abilities, when duly called thereto: Yet none
of the greatest Capacities ought violently to thrust themselves into 'em, to
the Disturbance of Church, or State, Lest they perish in the Gainsaying of
Korah, who with his Companions, Dathan and Abiram, unduly and factiously
seeking the Priesthood, Numb. 16.10. Provoked God in so fearful a manner, that
The Earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their Houses, and all
the men that appertained unto Korah, and all their Goods, ver. 32. The
Consequences and Effects of Faction and Schism, are so very bad, that it is not
to be wondered, God should so remarkably Punish it, as he did, to the Example
of Others.

Wherefore a Person of the best Capacities and Abilities, if after some
reasonable Expectations, and a modest Importunity, he cannot yet hope to
prevail, he must submit to Authority and Order, acknowledge God's Providence in
it, possess his Soul in patience, and think that for some secret Corruption in
himself, or for some other just Cause, God is pleased that he should not at
all, or not yet succeed in his Suit. So that thus you see, how in the Pursuit
of Civil Honor, as High Places, and Posts of Honor, and Authority, Dignities,
and Promotions, that no Man must grasp at those, which he has not Abilities, or
Skill to manage; nor must Persons of greatest Abilities turn Malcontents and
Mutineers against the Government, in Church, or State, when defeated in their
Aims: But as they may modestly endeavor their own Advancement, so they must
contentedly receive a Denial, when for Reasons, best known to their Superiors,
they are put by their Pretensions. And this is all that is proper for me to
speak as to the Renouncing of this sort of Honor; it being not my Business to
Catechize my Governors, but rather to Instruct you, that you may be obedient
both to God, and Them. To proceed then,

Thirdly, There is another sort of Honor, consisting in the high Esteem and
Reputation, on which the wise and virtuous Part of Mankind have of a Person,
III. How far, and in what sense, that Honor which consists in the high Esteem
and Reputation of the wise and virtuous part of Mankind is to be Renounced.
occasioned by the excellent Qualities, and Divine Graces shining in him, or
upon the account of some extraordinary Actions performed by him. And this
indeed is a Subject, which it concerns all of you to have well stated to you,
there being no Christian but has, or ought to have a good Reputation, for his
good and excellent Qualities. And by what measures he ought to Gain, to Enjoy,
or to Retain it; and when, how far, and in what Sense he is bound to deny
himself in, or to decline it, is what belongs therefore to every One to be
satisfied about.

Now this is that Honor, which the Wiseman calls a Good Name, Prove. 22.1. and
tells us, it is rather to be chosen, than great Riches, and that loving Favor
is better than Silver and Gold. And yet to give us a higher Commendation of it,
Eccl. 7.1. he tells us, that a Good Name is better than precious Ointment. This
is what the Wiseman calls a Good Name, and is more valuable than Rich^^, or
precious Ointment^.
Now that he does compare and prefer it to precious Ointment, the reason very
likely is this, because in the first place, precious Ointment was a most
valuable Treasure in the Eastern Nations, as appears by Hezekiah's showing it
in a vain Ostentatious manner amongst the rest of his choicest Treasures, those
in the House of his precious things, to the Babylonish Ambassadors, 2 King.
20.13. Next it was what was used in the Consecration of Persons to the highest
Dignities and Employments, as to the Pre-eminence of a King, and the Office of
the High Priesthood, as you will see, Lev. 16.32. and 1 King. 19.16. It was
what cast forth, far and near, a most fragrant and delicious Scent to the
Comfort of others, and of those, who were Anointed with it; for no sooner had
Mary anointed the Feet of Jesus with her costly Ointment, but the house was
filled with the Odor of it, Joh. 12.3. Oils and Ointments were what Wrestlers
were formerly wont to use to prepare 'em for the Combat; for being of a
piercing Nature, when Chafed in, they would supple the Joints and strengthen
the Sinews very much, It shall enter like Oil into thy Bones, Psalm. 109.18. and
thereby greatly enable the Body for Action, make it Nimble, and Vigorous, and
fit for noble Exercises. And lastly, they were wont anciently to Embalm the
Bodies of their Dead therewith, as you may see, Joh. 19.14. to preserve 'em,
even after Death, from Stench and Corruption.

It is a more peculiar Blessing than any the greatest Treasures, and procures
better Security to our Persons and Estates.
And now the Advantages of a Good Name have something therein resembling, but
indeed far exceeding each of these, so as to render it much better than
precious Ointment. For in the first place, an excellent Reputation and Fame for
extraordinary Perfections, Divine Graces, and virtuous Performances, is
infinitely more valuable than the most most precious Treasures; for besides
that, it is a more peculiar Blessing, than large Manors and Possessions, Banks
of Gold, or Silver, than Indian Stones, and all things that are accounted
precious by Worldlings and Usurers; for these are things which are common to
the worst, as well as best of Men: Besides this, I say, an high Esteem and
Reputation for Goodness, is a better Security by far, than the greatest Wealth.
Now the Fundamental reason of some Men's amassing so much Wealth together, is
because they think they shall provide thereby against all the ill Events of
Fortune, and shall have wherewithal to fend for themselves in times of
difficulty and scarcity of Friends. But whereas in Dearths, Famines,
Persecutions, and Invasions, the more Wealthy any Man is, the more he is the
Object of Envy, and subject to Rapine and Violence: The very Reputation of
Uprightness and Integrity, Goodness, Mercy, Charitableness, will be a safe
Retreat and Shelter against the Storm. And this alone has delivered many a One
from Injuries, and Barbarous Usage, whom bolted Doors, and barred Gates, and
Armed Men to guard 'em, could not protect against the Insults of an Enraged
Multitude, and the Plunders of an Intruding Soldiery.

It is a necessary Qua^ification to ^he Episcopal Promotion.
Next a good Reputation, and an Honorable Esteem amongst Men for worthy
Qualities, is a necessary Qualification of those, who are to be Consecrated to
the Dignity of Bishops, and of the Priesthood, it being required that such must
have a good Report of those, who are without, 1 Timothy 3.1. Credit and Reputation
do yield an unspeakable Comfort to a Man's own self, It is com^ortable to a
Man's own ^elf.
when he has the Approbation of Wise and Good Men, giving the same Testimony as
his own Conscience to his worthy Designs and Performances. For which reason the
Wise man tells us, Prove. 15.13. That a good Report makes the Bones fat,
whereas a Person laboring under the Infamy of scandalous Vices, has both his
own Conscience, and other Men's Contempt of him, piercing him to the very Soul.
And with respect to others, A Good Name sends forth a Savor more sweet, And
smells sweet in the World.
than the most precious Ointments, to the Delight of all that are round about
him; whereas the very Name of an Unjust Oppressor and Exactor, of a Riotous and
Debaucht Liver, of a Knavish, or Perfidious Villain, is a Nuisance and Offense
to the Neighborhood he dwells in, and he is Hated farther than he was ever
seen.

What shall I say? A Good Name and Reputation in the World, It renders a Person
capable of doing Good in it.
renders a Person capable of doing Good amongst Men. It gives Weight to his
Counsels, Authority to his Reproofs: Nay, and not only his Presence, but the
very Imagination that he is Present, is enough to give a Check to any base and
unworthy Action, or wicked Design. Because I delivered the Poor that cried, and
the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him, unto me men gave Ear and
waited, and kept Silence at my Counsel, Job 29.12.21. Whereas if a Person of
known, or but suspected Vices, though Backed with the Power of a Master, of a
Parent, nay of a Magistrate, if such a One pretends to correct Sin, or to
enjoin the strict Observation of any Duty, that Part of Religion is thought the
worse of, and slighted the more for his concerning himself about it. And as a
Good Name renders a Man capable of doing much Good, so to have the Approbation
of others to his worthy Designs, puts Life and Vigor into his Contrivances for
the Public. And active in Promoting it.
It makes him Active and Zealous in the Prosecution of 'em, and gives
Refreshment to his tired Thoughts and Spirits, under the Fatigues of compassing
'em. And to Crown all, when such a One comes to Die, his Death is lamented as a
public Loss, or some Judgment befallen the Age, or Place, which was not worthy
of him. His Memory is sweet and precious, whereas that of the Infamous stinks
worse than his very Carcass; or as the Wiseman says, The Memory of the Just is
blessed, but the Name of the Wicked shall rot, Prove. 10.7. So Valuable in it
self, is that sort of Honor, which consists in the high Esteem and Reputation
of the Wise and Virtuous Part of Mankind, concerning a Person, occasioned by
the excellent Qualities and divine Graces shining in him, or upon the account
of some extraordinary Actions performed by him. And yet for your farther
Satisfaction, A desire of Reputation, and Credit, is a thing implanted in our
Natures by God.
that it is not only in it self a valuable Blessing, but may with due
Regulations be desired, enjoyed, and carefully retained by us, I am to tell
you, That God himself, who is not the Author of Sin, has implanted in the
Nature of every Man a love of his Credit, and a desire to have a Good Name
amongst Wise and Virtuous Persons; and this the Divine Wisdom has done, that
this desire of Credit and Reputation might be a Spur to excite us to Virtuous
Performances, and a Bridle to restrain us from lashing out into Sinful
Extravagances. Hence that of the Apostle, Will thou not be afraid of the Power?
Do that which is Good, and thou shall have Praise of the same, Romans 13.3.

And indeed, Lastly, It is a Duty incumbent upon all Christians, And to
preserve a Reputation untainted and unsuspected of Evil, is a Duty enjoined us
by his Laws.
to preserve their Reputation untainted, and, as much as possible, unsuspected
of Evil. So the Apostle, Phil. 2.15. Be blameless, ye Sons of God, without
Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation, amongst whom shine ye as
Lights in the world. And in the 1 These. 5.22. we are Enjoined to Abstain from
all Appearance of Evil. Some will pretend, so they can but Approve their
Consciences to God, they care not what Men say of 'em. But besides that, seldom
any grow shameless and regardless of their Credit, till they have lost all
sense of Conscience, as well as of their Honor: This is at best but a very
uncharitable Saying. It is every Man's Duty indeed, in the first place, to take
care of doing any thing, that is in it self Evil, and by which God is offended;
and if he cannot discharge his Conscience to him in a Good thing, without
incurring the Offense and and Censures of Men, he must in such Case be content
to approve his Actions to God only. But in Charity to other Men's Souls, we
must also with St. Paul, Act. 24.16. Exercise our selves to have always a
Conscience void of offense, as toward God, so toward men, by giving no
occasion to suspect us of Evil, and that because of giving no Offense, Lest our
liberty become a stumbling Block to them that are Weak, and an occasion of
falling in our Brother's way, which we are Cautioned against, Romans 14.13. and 1
Cor. 8.9. Besides, that if a Person be of ill Fame, though he may not deserve it,
all his Speeches and Actions shall be ill Interpreted, no Man regards what he
says, or does, his Proposals shall be suspected, his Counsels and Rebukes, though
wholesome and just, scorned and despised; the Man he speaks for, the side he
adheres to, the Cause he defends, and the Business he manages shall suffer
Prejudice, and speed the worse for the ill Opinion is held of him. So that as
the Father said, Nobis necessaria est Vita nostra, aliis Fama nostra. Angl. de
Bon. vid. Cap. 22.
"A Good Life is necessary to us, and a Good Name necessary to our Brethren.
And as we must labor to have a good Conscience toward God for our own sakes,
so also to have a good Report amongst Men for our Neighbors. So Valuable is a
good Esteem in it self, so desirable to be Attained, and so carefully to be
Preserved.

Nevertheless ^ven a Good Name is in ^me measure (...) be Renoun^ed by us, and
^he Tempta^^ons it gives (...).
Nevertheless, as useful as is the Honor and Esteem of Good Men, even this is
in some measure to be Renounced by us, and the Temptations also it gives us,
which are not inconsiderable. For the natural Desire of Honor and Credit
amongst Men, is apt to make us too eagerly to desire Praise, making our own
Glory the main End of the Good we do, or at leastwise to make us desire more
than is proportionable to our Deserts. When possessed of Reputation and Esteem,
we are apt to take it wholly to our selves, and not to refer it to God, to whom
the Glory of all that is Good in us, does properly belong; and to make it an
Instrument of our own Advancement only, neglecting to use the Authority, which
our Credit and Reputation in the World does give us, to discountenance
Irreligion, and to encourage Piety in the World. And sometimes Persons do so
much overvalue their Good Name and Reputation amongst Men, as to fly to undue
Means of preserving it; nay, to prefer the Esteem of Men more than the Honor,
that comes from God: In all which Cases there is great occasion for that
Renunciation and Self-denial, with respect to that Honor, which consists in an
High Esteem and Reputation amongst Men.

As First, we must so far Renounce the Honor that ^^ll accrue to us from our
good Works, as not to make our own Glory the End and Reason of any Good we do.
And, First, It behooves us so far to Renounce and Reject the Honor and
Reputation that shall accrue to us from our Pious or Good Works, as Not to make
our own Glory the end and Reason of any Good we do. We must Take heed that we
do not our Alms before Men, to be seen of them, otherwise we shall have no
Reward of our Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.1. But on the contrary, the
main and chief End of all we do, must be God's Glory; insomuch, that Whether we
Eat, or Drink, or whatever we do, we must do all to the Glory of God, 1 Cor.
10.13. And indeed so far should we be from affecting the Honors and Applauses
of Men upon the account of anything well done by us, that it becomes us rather
to walk as silently and retiredly in the ways of Virtue, as we can, never
endeavoring Ostentatiously to publish and proclaim our Pious and Good
Performances, declining Fame and Popularity, and modestly concealing our own
Praises and Excellencies: But when either the Glory of God, or the good of our
Brother is concerned and promoted in the Manifestation, Letting our Light shine
before Men, then, and to the End only, that others seeing our good Works, they
may Glorify our Father, which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16. For as One well
observes, We are rather to affect those things, which deserve Fame, than the
obtaining of Fame it self; because Honor must be the Effect and Fruit of
Well-doing, and not the chief Motive, or final Cause: Or, as Seneca expresses
it, It is good to be Praised, but better to be Praiseworthy. But then if our
Reputation and Praise does come in here, it is desirable enough, and is very
seasonable, and comes in its due place, as being subordinate to God's Glory.
And indeed it is most successfully obtained, when least sought after; every one
despising the most worthy Performances, when they see a Man aim thereby at so
low a Mark, as Humane Praise and Glory.

Secondly, We must not Affect, but Renounce and Refuse those Praises, which are
beyond, or above our Deserts. II. We must not affect, but renounce those
Praises which are above our Deserts.
We may moderately desire to be well Esteemed, but it must be in proportion to
our Virtues. For as it is Unjust to assume to our selves Praises, of which we
are no ways Deserving: So it is Vanity and Vainglory, to expect more than we
deserve: And, We must not be desirous of Vainglory, Gal. 5.26. And to this End
must therefore take care of Self-love, which makes us to magnify our own Parts,
and to lessen those of our Neighbor.

Thirdly, Persons, who have a great Reputation and Esteem amongst Men, upon the
account of some worthy Performances, Must beware of taking the Honor thereof
wholly to themselves, and of not Transferring it to God, to whom the Glory of
all that is Good in us, or excellently performed by any of us, does properly
belong. III. We must beware of taking the Honor and Respects given us for any
worthy Performances, wholly to our selves, and of not Transferring it to God,
to whom the Glory of all that is Good in us, does properly belong.
St. Paul, though He labored more abundantly in the saving of Men's Souls, than
all the rest of the Apostles, yet was so far from taking the Glory thereof to
himself, that he corrects it with a Not I, but the Grace of God, which was with
me, 1 Cor. 15.10. And so must all of us do, and instead of Glorying in our
selves, must Glory in the Lord, and say, Not unto us, not unto us, but unto thy
Name be the Praise, Psalm. 115.1. And the reason thereof is, that the good
Temper of our Souls is wrought in us by the Grace of his Holy Spirit; and if we
shall accomplish any worthy Design, besides that, it is owing to his Grace
assisting us, it is owing also to his Providence, which orders all those lucky
Hits, and favorable Circumstances, and all those other Advantages, whereby we
do bring it to Perfection: For Every good and perfect Gift comes from above,
Jam. 1.17. and, What is it that we have not received? 1 Cor. 4.7. We are not
forbid to receive Honor, says the Pious and Learned Bishop Tailor, but to seek
it for Designs of Pride and Complacency, or to make it rest in our Hearts. But
when the Hand of Virtue receives the Honor, and transmits it to God from our
own Head, the Desires of Nature are sufficiently satisfied, and nothing of
Religion contradicted.

IV. We must ab^^or making a Reputation ^or Religion ^n Instrument ^nly to our
^wn Advancement.
Fourthly, You must abhor that vain Hypocrisy of those, who make the Reputation
for Religion a mere Engine to screw themselves up into places of Power, and an
Instrument to promote their Trade only; but must chiefly use that Authority,
which your Credit and Reputation for Religion may give you, to discountenance
Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World.

You must Renounce and Abhor, I say, that profane Hypocrisy of those, who make
their Reputation for Religion a mere Engine to screw themselves up into places
of Power, and an Instrument to promote their Trade only. This is the known
Policy of a great many, who when they have a mind to usurp the Places of their
Governors, put up to be great Zealots for Reformation of Religion and Manners;
and when they have a design to Engross to themselves all the Trade of their
Neighbors, turn over to some Demure and Pharisaical Sect, that makes greater
Pretenses and outward Shows of Godliness, than their honest, but modest
Neighbors. But for any Person to presume to make so sacred and venerable a
Thing, as Religion really is, a mere Tool and Engine to mount themselves into
the highest Posts and Promotions, into Business and Trades, is so Sacrilegious,
so Profane an Impiety, such an Aggravated, such a provoking Pitch of
Wickedness, that if Hell be heated, as the Babylonian Furnace was, seven times
hotter than ordinary, for any sort of Sinners, surely it must be for those, who
do prostitute the Honor of God and Religion to such vile Purposes. And this
therefore is a Practice, which must of all things in the World be detested by
you. Certain it is, the mild JESUS was never known to utter Himself with so
much Indignation and Anger, as toward those sort of Men, who made the
Pretenses of Religion, a mere Instrument to serve their Ambition and
Covetousness. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour
Widows Houses, and for a Pretense make long Prayers, therefore ye shall receive
the greater Damnation, Matthew. 23.14. So that far be it from any of you, to make
so Sacred and Venerable a thing, as Religion, an Instrument only of Ambition
and getting Wealth.

But you must use that Authority, which your Credit and Reputation for Religion
may give you, to discountenance Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World. But
must use the Authority our Credit gives us to discountenance Vice, and to
encourage Virtue in the World.
A Person of approved Sincerity, and of known Piety, has upon that very
account, a very great Power over the Hearts and Minds of Men, as I have told
you; so that he can easily Mould 'em into the like Temper with himself, if he
will but seriously apply himself to that Purpose. And to this Purpose therefore
you must use that Credit, Reputation, and Authority you shall have with Men,
who think well and honorably of you, namely, to pull 'em back from running
headlong in a Course of Sin, and as Allurements to entice 'em to follow your
Example in those Virtues and good Parts, for which you your selves shall be so
Commendable. It is a Talent God has committed to you, to Trade withal for his
Glory, and if you shall neglect to lay out any thing of that Nature to your
Master's use, it will be required at your Hands, as you will see Matthew. 25.

Fifthly, As valuable as is a Good Name and Reputation amongst Men, You must
Renounce all undue Means of preserving it; V. As valuable as is a Good Name and
Reputation amongst Men, we must Renounce all undue Means of preserving it.
In which Rank I shall place, not only Duelling, that most Barbarous and
Unchristian Custom, amongst the great Ones: Such are Duelling upon the account
of Slanders amongst the great Ones.
But also going to Law upon every Scandal, so common amongst the Ordinary sort
of People when they slander one another. As to the former, That Person, who
Challenges his Slanderer to give him Satisfaction, as he calls it, in the way
of Duel, he seems to me to take the ready way to confirm the World in the
Opinion, that he was not Injured. The worst his Adversary could say of him, was
something which spoke him a very Ill Man; and herein he goes about to prove
himself the worst of Men, even a Murderer of his Neighbor, and a Felo de, and
consequently one that might not be unlikely to commit any other Wickedness. But
if it should take off the Scandal from him, in the Opinion of a foolish World,
what Comfort will that afford, when it is certain, that No Murderer has
eternal Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15.

Nor is it so agreeable to that forbearing and forgiving Temper, Going to Law
thereupon usual amongst common People.
which should be in every Christian, to go to Law upon words of Slander. Now
therefore there is utterly a Fault amongst you, because ye go to Law one with
another; why do you not rather take Wrong? That is, in matters of Trespass and
Fraud, if the Loss may be supported, or in Cases of Slander, wherein generally
speaking, there is a much more effectual way of clearing an injured Innocence,
than by Impleading of the Slanderer before a Magistrate: Why in such Cases do
you not rather take Wrong? I say, in such Cases there is generally a much more
effectual way of clearing an injured Innocence, than by Impleading of the
Slanderer before a Magistrate. For besides that, this sort of Lawing seems in
most, a piece of Revenge in the Party traduced, upon his Accuser, for
discovering some secret Wickedness, which he was ashamed to have published,
rather than with any Design, or Hopes of clearing his Innocence; insomuch that
he who comes off Triumphantly from the Justice of Peace, is seldom the better
thought of in the Neighborhood, and still they will be apt to think it was a
Work of Darkness, and only wanted a sufficient Proof: Besides this, I say, an
open and plain Discovery before Neighbors, of the falsehood and malice of the
Slanderer in the most mild and Christian way; or if such a Discovery cannot be
made, a Circumspection and Care to live so Inoffensively and Innocently, as no
one will believe the Calumny, this will in time work all evil Surmises and
Suspicions out of the Minds of Men.

Lastly, And we must utterly Renounce and forfeit the Esteem of Men, rather
than incur the Dis-favour of God. Lastly, we must utterly Renounce and forfeit
the Esteem of Men, rather than incur the dis-favour of God.
The best and wisest of Men are but Men still, and do often judge of other
Persons, and their Proceedings, not as they ought, or as God Judges. Thus we
see, When Jesus began to show unto his Disciples, how that he must go up unto
Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders, and Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed; then Peter took him up, and began to rebuke him,
saying, Be it far from thee Lord, this shall not be unto thee, Matthew. 16.21,
22. that is, he endeavored earnestly to dissuade him from so hazardous an
Undertaking, and would have him be more careful of himself. And so it often
happens to his faithful Disciples, especially his Ministers. If any more than
ordinarily Zealous of their Master's Glory, or faithful in his Service, shall
attempt to Reprove a great Man, or to oppose the Stream of Wickedness, or some
ungodly, but prevailing Customs, his Friends, too much savouring of worldly
Wisdom, shall violently dissuade him, not to be thus Righteous overmuch, as
they think.

But if it shall so happen, that in the Discharge of our Duty, we have not
their Approbation, be they never so Wise, or esteemed never so Virtuous, having
in the first place with all Sincerity considered what is necessary for us to
do, we must vigorously proceed in the Discharge of a good Conscience, let who
will condemn us of Rashness, or Imprudence.

And this is what the Apostle commands us, 2 Cor. 6.3, 4.8. He bids us Give no
offense in any thing, that the Ministry be not blamed; that is, he would have
us make it, in the first place, a special part of our Care, to Abstain strictly
from all things, that may give any just Offense, and Avert any from the Faith;
endeavoring to Approve our selves to all, that all Men may look on our
Behavior in the Gospel, with Reverence, and not with Censure: And so be
attracted to a Christian Life, not detered from it. But then he charges us
withal, In all things to approve our selves as the Ministers of God, in much
Patience, Affliction, by Honor and Dishonor, by evil Report, and good Report,
as deceivers, and yet true; that is, he would have us approve our Fidelity in
the Discharge of our Office by all proper Means, through the various Fates of
being reproachfully Treated by some, as well as respectfully by others, by
being Vilified, as well as Commended. So that thus at length you have seen, how
that that part of Honor, which consists in the Good Esteem and Reputation of
the wise and virtuous part of Mankind, though it is much to be valued in it self,
and may be lawfully Desired, comfortably Enjoyed, and ought carefully to be
Preserved: Yet there is great place for Renunciation, with respect both to the
Attainment and Enjoyment thereof; and particularly as to the Loss of it, that
we must so far Renounce it, as not to prefer the Esteem of Men before the
Honor, that comes from God.

Fourthly, And now I am to take into consideration the Honor, which is
conferred, not by the wise and virtuous part of Mankind, nor given always upon
the account of good Qualities, and worthy Performances; but the Esteem of
another sort of Men, and for the most part, for quite different Qualities and
Performances, viz. The Applauses of the Vulgar, and of the Crowd of Men, upon
the account of what they judge Praiseworthy and Glorious. IV. ^^w far that
^^nour is to Renounced, ^^ich consists (...) the Ap^^auses of the ^^lgar, upon
that they do ^count ^^aiseworthy ^^d Honou^^ble.


Now by the Vulgar, and the Crowd of Men, I do not mean barely Mechanics, and
the lower Rank of Mankind; but also that mixed Multitude, or Herd of Men, as
well High, as Low, Rich, as well as Poor, all of what Rank, or Degree soever,
who have little, or no Principles of Religion, or Virtue, all whose
Apprehensions of Divine and Religious Matters are mean and low, and not lifted
above the common Pitch, and to those Heights and Improvements given us by true
Philosophy, and the Christian Doctrine. Truly all such are accounted the
Vulgar, and shall be Herded amongst the Crowd, for me, whether they be clad in
Silks, or Furs, and fare Deliciously every day; or whether they work at the
Anvil, or follow the Plow, or beg at our Doors.

And by their Applauses, I do mean, that Vogue and Suffrage, that Approbation,
and whatever other Expressions of good liking, which they do commonly give to
bad Actions, and sinful Practices, as Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, Fighting,
Duelling, and the like. And these Applauses of theirs, are as common and great
a Temptation to most of those Sins, which are committed, as any thing
whatsoever, and must therefore be utterly Renounced, This sort of Honor must
be utterly and absolutely renounced.
Detested, and Abhorred by us.

So that if ever it should so happen, that you shall unhappily commit any of
those scandalous Sins (which God avert) and any of those profane and unthinking
Creatures, who make a Mock, a mere Jest of Sin, shall Applaud you for the same;
instead of being pleased thereat, you must take Shame to your self, and let 'em
know you are too much grieved and troubled at your having committed such Folly
and Madness, to be pleased at their Recital and Plaudits given it. No sure: A
Repentance consisting in Sorrow and Shame is what ought to follow Sin; but to
Glory in it, and to receive Applauses for it, is infinitely to Aggravate it.
And know this for certain, that Except you Repent, ye shall all likewise
perish, as many other Sinners, triumphing like Madmen in their Impieties, have
done before you, Luke 13.3.

And now Lastly, it only remains that I lay before you, In what sense, and how
far you are bound to Renounce those outward Expressions and Significations of
Respect, either by Word or Deed, which are usually given upon the account of
any of the forementioned Honors. Lastly, in what Sense, and how far we must
Renounce those outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word or Deed, which are
usually given upon the account of any of the forementioned Honors.
Hitherto we have considered Honor in its internal Parts only, as Birth and
Quality, Authority and Dignity, Reputation and Esteem, either for good, or bad
Qualities and Performances; and have showed you in what Sense either of these
are to be Renounced. And now I am to do the like as to that outward part of
Honor, whereby is expressed and signified to the Senses, the Eyes and Ears of
men, the Respect, which is born to Persons, upon the account of any of the
forementioned Honors.

And as to these outward Significations of Honor, they are made either by
Word, or by Deed. By Word; and they are either Divine Expressions of our
Veneration and Honor, viz. Those Names and Attributes peculiarly belonging to
God, or Humane Ones, as Titles of Honor, when we call a Person Lord, most
Gracious, most Excellent, most Noble, or the like; or Titles of Respect, as
when we call a Person Father, Master, etc. Also as to the outward
Significations of Honor by Deed; these are again either Divine, as Adoration,
or Religious Worship, Prostrating our selves on the Ground before God, and such
other Significations of our most excessive Self-abasement in respect of him,
and our infinite Distance from him; or they are Humane, such as may be also
used to Men, as bowing of the Body, bending of the Knee, baring of the Head,
etc. All which are Lawful, Innocent, and Dutiful ways of expressing our
Respects; and are also necessary, according as they are applied to Persons, to
whom by the Laws of God, and right Reason they are due.

And now the Question will be, In what Sense, and how far any Person is bound
to Renounce these Honors and Respects when conferred upon 'em.

And, First, No Created Being, either Men, or Angels, must suffer those
Respects to be given them, whether by Word, or Deed, which are proper and
peculiar to signify our sense of God's Majesty and Perfections. I. No Created
^eing, either Men, or An^els must suf^er those Re^^ects to be ^iven them,
^hether by lord, or deed, which are ^roper and pe^uliar to sig^ify our sense ^f
God's Majesty and Per^ections.
Thus you will see, when Paul and Barnabas had miraculously Healed A Creeple at
Lystra, who had never walked, the people would have done Sacrifice unto them,
as if they were Gods; but those Good Men no sooner perceived it, but in the
Abhorrence of the Blasphemy, Rent their Garments, and ran in upon them to
restrain them, crying out, and saying, Sirs, Why do ye these things? We also
are Men of like Passions with your selves, and preach unto you, that you should
turn from these Vanities, to serve the living God, Act. 14.14, 15. And no
doubt, but as the Angel also refused the Worship which John offered him, Rev.
22.9. So both the Blessed Saints and Angels above, do now with the utmost
Indignation, Renounce that Divine Worship given 'em by their Superstitious
Votaries, the Papists.

Nor must any Humane Creature forbear to Renounce, so as to express the utmost
Detestation and Abhorrence thereof, when any of the Divine Attributes and
Perfections are ascribed to 'em by the Flattery of sinful Men; for the want of
which Renunciation Herod you will see, Act. 12.21, 22, 23. was the most signally
punished by the Hand of God. It happened that upon a set Day Herod arrayed in
Royal Apparel, sat upon his Throne, and made an Oration unto the People; And
they gave a shout, saying, It is the voice of a God, and not of a Man; and
immediately the Angel of the Lord smote him, because he gave not God the Glory,
and he was eaten up of Worms, and gave up the Ghost; that is, because he
disclaimed not that Blasphemous Flattery of the People, God Executed that
remarkable Vengeance upon him. And this ought to be a Warning to those vain and
inconsiderate Women, who in the Courtships that are paid 'em, and the
Complements, which are usually made 'em, do suffer even Divine Attributes and
Perfections to be ascribed to 'em. Women therefore must with Detestation
renounce those Blasphemous Complements, wherein Divine Perfections are usually
ascribed to them.
Nay, and these they receive, not only without rebuking those that presume to
offer 'em, but with all the Complacence and Satisfaction in 'em. But surely
this will be required, not only at their Hands, who do so Blasphemously
Complement 'em, but at theirs also, who do patiently suffer God to be so much
Blasphemed in their Praises; and the same Vengeance, which overtook Herod, will
not fall short of them also, if they Renounce and Refuse not, with the utmost
Detestation, such Impiety. And it is indeed so common a strain of Wickedness,
that I thought it very requisite to Advertise you of it, and seriously to warn
you against admitting it.

Secondly, Every Man must renounce and refuse those Titles, and Respects, and
Precedences, which are not his due, but belong to Persons above him. II. Every
Man must renounce and refuse those Titles and Respects, and Precedences which
are not his due, but belong to Persons above him.
A Distinction of Titles and Respects is necessary to keep up Order and
Distinction of Men, and their Merits; and it is a great Disorder and Confusion,
when Persons either Take, or Receive such, as do not belong to 'em: So that one
cannot know who is High in Rank, or Reputation, or who is Low in the World in
respect of either. This is what the Wiseman complains of, Eccl. 10.5, 6, 7. as
a great Evil, and such as it concerns the Magistrate to restrain by Law. There
is an Evil, which I have seen under the Sun, as an Error, which proceeds from
the Ruler; Folly is set in great dignity, and the Rich sit in low place; I have
seen Servants upon Horses, and Princes walking as Servants upon the Earth.

Nay, Lastly, So far must any One be from Assuming any thing of this Nature
above him, that It becomes every Person out of Modesty, Humility, and good
Manners, to decline his due in this kind: And must ever Renounce the Entitling
and Placing of himself, and leave it to others. Lastly, And must in Modesty,
Humility, and good Manners, decline his due in this kind; and must renounce the
Entitleing of himself, and permit that to others.
This our Savior prescribes, Luke 14.8, 9, 10, 11. When thou art bid to a
Wedding, sit not down in the highest Room, lest a more honorable than thou be
bidden of him; but sit down in the lowest Room, that when he that bade thee
comes, he may say unto thee, Friend go up higher: Then shall thou have Worship
in the presence of them, who are at meat with thee. And the reason of this
Appointment of our Savior's, in so seemingly trivial a Case, was not only to
pull down our Ambition and Pride, but to promote Courtesy, and Civility, and
good Manners, which are very considerable Virtues in Society, and therefore to
be sure of good account in Christianity.

But the Contrary to both these last Instances, of Renouncing outward Respects
and Honors, is one of the great Vanities of the World, which shall be more
fully spoke to under another Head. But yet I must not dismiss this without
answering an Objection, or Two.

It is usual amongst other Titles of Princes, Objections against receiving
Titles of Honor, Respect and Precedence, Answered.
to ascribe to 'em the Attributes of most Gracious, most Religious, most
Excellent, and the like; which may seem to savor too much of that Flattery,
for admitting of which Herod was Punished: And the Absurdity seems to be the
greater, if those Princes happen to be Vicious and Ungodly. But here it is to
be considered, that Princes, and great Magistrates, as they are in an Exalted
Condition above the rest of Men; so those Titles must be given 'em, which shall
raise and maintain a due Veneration toward them, and their Office. And even
when the Persons Invested with those Dignities happen to be Cruel and Wicked;
yet such Titles, as most Gracious, most Religious, are not un-befitting their
Office, though they may not so well suit their Personal Character; and it is upon
the account of that, that they are given 'em: As it was upon the Score of his
Office, that St. Paul styled Festus, a Heathen Magistrate, most Noble, Act.
26.25.

Next it is urged against Receiving Titles of Respect, those words of our
Savior, Be ye not called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ, Matthew.
23.10. But in order to clear this, you must consider, that this is an Hebrew
Idiom, or manner of Expressing, in which Calling and Being, are all one, as
They shall call his name Emanuel, signifies, he shall be Emanuel, or God with
us. So here, Be ye not called Masters, is a forbidding of Men to be Masters one
to another. And in what Sense is this to be understood? Why, amongst the Jews,
you must know, those who took upon 'em to be Leaders and Teachers, did
challenge a blind Obedience from their Disciples and Followers, and required
'em to give up their Faith, to be absolutely Swayed by 'em: But our Savior
would have no mere Man pretend to be so much a Master over Men's Faith, as if
he were Infallible; in which Sense to be a Master, was our Savior's Right. But
otherwise, the Title of Master, as it signifies no more than a Humane Respect,
is no more to be refused, than that of Father: Which yet, as amongst the Jews
it was used to mean such a Principal of the School of the Prophets, as no Man
ought to contradict, was also forbid, Matthew. 23.9.

Lastly, It is objected against Persons of Quality being Placed, or Seated
higher than others in Religious Assemblies, from those words of St. James, 2.2,
3, 4. If there come into your Assembly a man with a gold Ring, in goodly
Apparel, and there come also a poor man, in vile Raiment; and ye have respect
unto him that wears the gay Clothing, and say unto him, Sit thou here in a
good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or sit under my footstool,
Are ye not then partial in your selves, and become Judges of evil thoughts? But
this Objection will be taken off, and this difficult Place cleared, if you
consider what is here meant by Assembly, and upon what account Respect of
Persons is forbid to be had to any one in them. Now by Assembly is here to be
understood a Court of Judicature, where Lawsuits are tried, for so not only
the word translated, Assembly, does elsewhere, as Matthew. 10.17. signify; but
there are several Expressions in this place, which do determine it here to this
Sense; as particularly when those, that ordered the Rich to sit in a more
Honorable Place, and the Poor in a less Honorable, are said to have a
Footstool, which did belong to Tribunals; and to be Judges of evil Thoughts,
that is, partial in their Judgments, Men that thought more of the Persons, than
their Causes.

And the reason why that sort of Respect of Persons in their judicial
Assemblies, the Placing of the Man of Quality in a higher, the Poorer in a
lower Place, which seems not to have been so material, was notwithstanding
forbid; was because this would have been looked upon, according to the then
Apprehensions of the Jews, as a Token of Partiality in the Judge: For as the
Learned Hammond upon the Place does observe, It was provided by a Canon of the
Jews, that when a Rich Man, and a Poor have a Suit together before their
Consistories, either both must sit, or both stand in the same Rank, to avoid
all marks of Partiality. So that this Place forbids not Precedence and Place to
be given, or taken, by Persons that are in Quality, or Authority, above others,
either in Church Assemblies, or in other Meetings; but only in the Judicial
Meetings of those times, and not then, but because that in the then
Apprehensions of Men, such Precedence would signify Partiality in the Judge,
that suffered it. So that it remains, that Titles of Honor, Respects and
Precedence may be received, when duly given. And I thought it requisite to take
off these Objections, both to clear these mistaken Places of Scripture, and
that you might not refuse To pay Honor to whom Honor is due, which is a Duty
upon all men, Romans 13.7. And which a foolish Sect amongst us do deny, chiefly
grounding the Rudeness of their Behavior toward their Betters, upon the now
mentioned places of Scripture, which they wrest, as they do the other, to their
own Destruction. Thus much upon this Occasion.

THE Sixteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAving undertook to give you a particular and distinct account, not only of
those Temptations, which arise from the World in general, but also from all the
particular things, whether Good or Evil, therein contained: And having already
surveyed the Riches and Honors thereof, and distinctly showed you in what
Sense, and how far you are to Renounce each of them, and every Particular
included in them. I come now to consider,

Thirdly, The Pleasures thereof, and to show you in what Sense, and how far you
are also to Renounce the Pleasures of this World. What Is meant by the Pleasures
of this World, in what Sense, and how far they are to be Renounced.


Now all Pleasure, of what Kind soever it be, does arise from the Agreeableness
of the Object with some Faculty that can perceive it. And therefore Pleasure in
general, Is that Satisfaction and Delight, which any part of our Nature
perceives, when its Appetites are gratified with what it desires. And as both
Soul and Body have their several perceptive Faculties and Appetites; so the
Gratification and Satisfaction, which is given to both, do cause different
kinds of Pleasure. And accordingly they may all of 'em, I do think, be reduced
to these Four, Rational, Sensitive, Sensual, and Recreative Pleasures.

And, First, As to Rational Pleasure: I. Rational Pleasure is very Excellent,
and Allowable.
This is that noble Satisfaction and sweet Delight, which the Soul perceives,
when it finds it self Improve in Knowledge, or in Virtue; or when it reflects
upon the Good it has done. As to Knowledge, the most delicious Dainties are not
so truly satisfactory to the Bodily Appetite, as real and useful Knowledge is
to the Rational; nor is Light more grateful to the Eye, than Knowledge is to
the Understanding. And all useful Knowledge, especially Divine, ought to be
sought after with all the Study and Industry possible, and we cannot too much
indulge the Appetite, which craves it: Insomuch that St. Paul did not cease to
pray for the Collossians, and to desire that they might be filled with the
knowledge of God's will, in all wisdom and spiritual understanding, Col. 1.9.
And to increase in Virtue, to get the victory over our Passions, to subdue our
Appetites, and the like, yields so great and pure a Satisfaction, that
Happiness it self is defined to be that Pleasure, which the Mind takes in from
a sense of Virtue, and a conscience of Well-doing; and of conforming all things
to the Rules of both. And then as to that sense of Joy and Comfort, which
Virtuous and Heavenly Minds do feel in doing Good; this is exceedingly more
Excellent and Exalted, than all worldly and wicked Pleasures, as is exemplified
in our Savior, who counted it His meat and drink to do the will of him that
sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34. which was To go about doing Good,
Act. 10.28. So excellent a thing is Rational Pleasure, and so much it is our
Duty, as well as Interest to gratify our selves therewith. But yet as Excellent
and Heavenly a Pleasure as this is, there is room for Renunciation, even with
respect to this. And,

First, No Man must make the end of his Knowledge to be the mere Pleasure of
Knowing, But First, no Man must make mere Pleasure the End of his Knowledge.
that is, we must not seek after Knowledge, merely for Knowledge sake, and not
for the Use and Instruction of our selves, and others. The true End of
Knowledge is to direct our selves and others thereby to Happiness both in this,
and the other World. And indeed such a Greediness, as is seen in some Men, of
swallowing up all sorts of Learning, and not letting others to partake of it,
and to be Benefited by it, is but a better sort of Sensuality and
Voluptuousness, and ought therefore to be Renounced by every Christian. The
greatest Goods are ever common: They were designed by God to be so, and by good
Christians they are made so. And Knowledge then being a principal Good, every
good Man is free in Communicating of that, and of Edifying others therewith;
and therefore it is required of a Bishop, whose Knowledge is supposed to exceed
other Men's, that He be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2.

Nor Secondly, must that Satisfaction and Delight, which arises from the sense
and Conscience of Good and worthy Deeds, be so much, because we are admired and
applauded for it, as because they are really in themselves Virtuous.
Secondly, And as to that Pleasure, which arises from the Sense and Conscience
of good and worthy Deeds, as much as we may be permitted to relish and enjoy
it, yet we must take care, that our Satisfaction and Delight be more, because
we are really Virtuous, and that we do Good, than that we be admired and
applauded for it; for We must take heed that we do not our Alms, or whatever
other Good, before Men to be seen of them; otherwise we have no reward of our
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.1. But to proceed,

Secondly, There is a Sensitive Pleasure, and that is when the Animal Life, or
the Bodily Senses are gratified with those Objects, which are agreeable to 'em.
All Pleasure, as was said, arises from the suitableness and agreeableness
between the perceptive Faculties, and the Objects that affect them. II.
Sensitive Pleasure, which results from the suitableness between the perceptive
Faculties, and the Objects that affect them, is lawful.
And our Bountiful Maker, as he has given the Animal Life many perceptive
Faculties, the senses of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, and Feeling; so he
has provided suitable Objects for all those several Faculties, and does allow
us to Gratify our selves therewith: For it is good and comely for one to Eat
and to Drink, and to enjoy the Good of all his labor that he takes under the
Sun, all the days of his life which God gives him; for it is his portion,
Eccl. 5.18. Nay, it is very necessary, that we should take Pleasure in
gratifying the sensible Cravings of our Nature, for if our Palates do not
relish our Meat, or if our Stomachs refuse it, we should starve. And indeed the
Comforts and Enjoyments of this Life, which we receive from the bountiful Hand
of God, is a great subject of our Praises and Thanksgivings to him. Thou
preparest a Table for me in the presence of mine Enemies; thou anointest my
Head with Oil, my Cup runs over, said Holy David, in a great sense of God's
bountiful Goodness toward him, in bestowing upon him so many worldly Comforts.
Thus these Sensitive Pleasures may be lawfully Enjoyed by us, and they are only
then, and so far to be Renounced, when they become,

Thirdly, Sensual, These Pleasures unlawful only when they become, Thirdly,
Sensual.
which when they do, they are indeed the greatest Temptations the World has to
draw us into Sin; and many Thousands there are, whom when nothing else could
Corrupt, have been miserably soiled by the Power of sensual Pleasures: Which
what they are, and how far to be Renounced, I come now to declare unto you.

And it is then, that these Sensitive Pleasures, which otherwise would be for
the Preservation and Comfort of our Nature, and the Matter of our Praises to
God: It is then, I say, that they become Sensual, and so are to be Renounced,
when they gratify only our corrupt and depraved Natures. As the sensitive
Nature craves such things as are suitable to it, and are necessary to its
Preservation and Comfort in this Life; and sensitive Pleasures are such as
arise from such allowable Gratifications: So the Sensual and Corrupted Nature
of Man craves these sensitive Pleasures beyond Bounds and Moderation: It
prefers 'em before Rational and Divine Pleasures. It appears to relish no
Enjoyments like those of Sense; it gluts it self with sensitive Pleasures, so
as to surfeit on these Sweets. Nay, and lastly, the Sensual Man does load and
burden his Nature therewith, so as to render it unfit for he Duties of his
Calling and Religion. These are the inordinate Cravings of the sensual Nature;
and when we gratify this corrupted Nature of ours, to this immoderate Degree,
with Sensitive Pleasures; then those Pleasures which were in themselves
allowable, become Sensual, and such as must be utterly Renounced by every
Christian. And as we will accordingly Renounce Sensual Pleasures,

First, We must not prefer Sensitive Ones in our Judgments, or Desires, either
before our spiritual Joy in God, or the eternal Joys of his Kingdom; As First,
when we prefer 'em in our Judgments or Desires, either before our spiritual Joy
in God, or the eternal Joys of his Kingdom.
which is what the Carnal Man does do; Which is, I say, what the Carnal Man
does do: For while the Flesh is the prevailing Ingredient in any Man, he only
relishes the satisfaction of the Senses: He cannot enjoy God, he cannot delight
in doing his Will, no more than a Swine can in clean Pasture, whose natural
Property inclines him only to wallow in the Mire. But when the Soul is
clarified and purged by the great Refiner, how sublime and satisfying a
Pleasure does it feel in the Love of God, and in his Service! As in natural
Feeding, when the Palate is in due Temper, our Taste commends our proper Food to
the Appetite, and the Appetite to the Stomach; but a foul Stomach dis-affects
the Appetite, spoils the Palate, and the most savoury and wholesome Meat is
loathsome, when the Disease is the Taster. Thus if the Soul be in its due
Temper, the Doing the will of God would be our Meat and Drink, mixed with a
sweeter Pleasure than those natural Operations are; but the Soul in the
unregenerate Man is so Corrupt and Carnaliz'd, that it has no taste of the pure
Delights of Blessed Spirits in Communion with God: Like the Israelites, who
despised the Bread of Angels, and impatiently longed for the Onions and
Garlic, and Fleshpots of Egypt. But this must no be our Temper, but with the
Holy Psalmist we must be able experimentally to say; The fear of the Lord is
clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of the Lord are true and righteous
altogether; more to be desired are they than Gold, yea than much fine Gold,
sweeter also than Honey, and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19.9, 10.

Secondly, And we must Renounce it as a great sign of a sensual Spirit, which
relishes no Enjoyments like those of Sense, II. When a Man relishes no
Enjoyments like those of Sense.
When a Person is observed to be wholly in a manner purveying for the Belly,
Cooking, or Ordering his Dishes, always commending, or rather quarrelling with
every thing he eats or drinks: No, the Discourses of Philosophical, wise, and
virtuous Minds, is even at the very Table of other-guess Matters, than of the
Excellency of that Dish, the Poynancy of such a Sauce, or the Flavor of such
and such Liquors. And with these Epicures we may justly Expostulate in the
words of our Savior: Are ye yet without understanding? Do ye not yet
understand that whatever enters into the mouth goes into the belly, and is
cast out into the Draught, Matthew. 15.17. And it is sure a sign of an
Understanding below the Excellency of the Soul of Man, to concern it self so
much about what in few Hours will go down into the Guts, the Sink, and the
vilest part of the Body.

Thirdly, It must be Renounced as a high and sinful Sensuality to glut our
Senses, so as to surfeit on these Sweets. III. When he gluts himself, so as to
surfeit on these Sweets.
There is nothing which does more decay Nature, which brings upon us more
desperate and incurable Diseases, and does more precipitate and hasten a sudden
Death, than Excess in the Gratifications of Men's Lusts and Appetites. But this
is grossly to abuse the Creatures of God, which were allowed us only for our
Use; It is to make but an ungrateful Return to him, for all his Bounties: And
is unnaturally to destroy our selves for the sake of a paultry Pleasure, which
vanishes in the very Enjoyment; of a Pleasure, which is mixed with more bitter
Ingredients than Gall and Wormwood: For even in their Laughter the heart of
those sensual Men is sorrowful, and the end of their mirth is heaviness, Prove.
14.13.

Lastly, The Deliciousness of those Pleasures must not cause any one to load
and burden his Nature therewith, to that Degree, as to render him unfit for
the Duties of his Calling and Religion; And lastly, when the Deliciousness of
of these Pleasures causes him to load and burden his Nature therewith, so as
to render him unfit for the Duties of h^^ Calling, and Religion.
in which respect those do Offend, who do so immoderately indulge the Appetites
in Eating and Drinking, that they are drowsy and sleepy even under the Messages
sent them from the King of Heaven, and delivered them by his Ambassadors, the
Preachers of his Word. No, the End of all Pleasure, as well as of Recreations,
is to render us not less, but more vigorous and lively in the Service of God,
and the proper Business of our Calling: Which brings me,

Lastly, To consider Recreative Pleasures, and to show you what they are, in
what sense, and how far we are to Renounce those sort of Pleasures. Now these
are merely of a middle, and of an indifferent Nature. Recreative Pleasures of a
mi^^le and indifferent Nature.
They are neither wholly Mental, nor altogether Bodily Pleasures, but may be
either. And they are neither necessarily Good, nor Evil, but either one, or
other, according as they are used: For when the Mind has been long intent upon
Study and Meditation, it may be very convenient to Unbend it, by giving our
selves some bodily Diversion, as Walking, Riding, or other innocent Recreation.
And when the Body has been long fatigued and wearied with Labor, it is
requisite to give it Ease; and it is no wise hurtful, either to Soul or Body,
to fall into a cheerful, provided it be an innocent Conversation. And indeed
the moderate use of innocent Pleasures and Recreations is both useful and
necessary. It enlivens Nature, brisks up our Spirits, and renders us more able
to set again about serious Business and Employment. For to intermix no
Gratifications, nor Diversions with our more serious Affairs, makes the Mind
unactive, dull, and useless.

But Recreations, the most innocent of 'em, are to be moderately and sparingly
used The most Innocent thereof are to be sparingly used.
by every Christian; for he that shall much indulge himself in the allowed
Pleasures of the World, shall quickly bring himself into a Frame of Spirit,
that will not easily endure Patience, Self-denial, and Mortification, and other
the more difficult and considerable Parts of Religion. Ease and Diversions
soften the Sinews, dissolve the Nerves, and are apt to render us Nice, and
Delicate, and Effeminate, a Temper the most unsuitable for any Soldier,
because it will utterly indispose him for Military Severities. Ease and
Pleasure therefore must be warily Indulged to, by the Soldier of JESUS, in
whose Warfare there are both Conflicts and Severities, far surpassing the
hardest, which other Wars engage us in.

No, if you will become Excellent in Religion, nay, keep but within the Bounds
of Innocence, you must innure your selves much to Christian Severity and
Reservedness; and the most harmless of this World's Delights are to be more
rarely used, than is commonly thought of. He that constantly eats a full Meal,
will not endure a Day of Fasting; and he that does not sometimes deny himself
in lawful Enjoyments, will be hardly able to Resist a Temptation to immoderate
Gratifications. But however, no Man should make Sports his Business, nor
Pastimes his Employment, no more than Cordials his Drink, nor Sauces his Meat.
To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under Heaven;
there is a time to weep, as well as a time to laugh; a time to mourn, as well
as a time to dance, Eccl. 3.1.4. And therefore such, who think they have
nothing else to do with their Time, must consider, that they have that precious
Talent given 'em to greater Ends, than to wast it in Divertisements.

Nay, and those whose Ample Fortunes in the World put them above the common
Condition of Mankind, and are not to eat of their Bread in the sweat of their
Brows, need not live by a Profession, and a Calling, would do well to consider,
that the greatest part of their Time ought to be laid out in doing Good in the
World; in being Useful and Beneficial to the Society whereof they are Parts and
Members. In enquiring into the Necessities of their poorer Brethren; in
contriving Ways and Means, both to Employ and Relieve 'em. And above all, in
promoting Religion, and the Honor of God amongst Men, so far at least, as
their own Authority and Power reaches, whether in their Families, or amongst
their Tenants, Neighbors and Dependants. And these are Employments, which will
yield both Satisfaction here, and will be rewarded with eternal Joys hereafter.
These are Employments and Pleasures both, and (which Pleasures seldom do) will
turn to good Account hereafter. And thus I have at length finished all that I
think necessary to say to you, concerning Renouncing either the World in
general, or those particular Good things, into which it is divided, viz. The
Riches, Honors, and the Pleasures of it. There was great variety of useful
Matter to be considered under these several Heads, and therefore I have been
the longer upon 'em: I shall be more short upon the rest. The next of which are,

Secondly, The Evils of the World, viz. Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions: The
Evils of the World are Poverty, Disgrace, and Affliction.
These are opposite to the other Goods, and they are Instruments, whereby
Satan, our great Adversary, does Attack us, when the other fail him, as is
eminently seen in the Case of Job, Chap. 1, 2.

But these are not so successful to Ruin us, as those, which are called the
Good things of the World, commonly are. There is less Variety in the ways
wherein these do Tempt us. And we do not open the Gates of our Souls to these,
as we do to the Enjoyments of this World: But do rather fortify our selves
against them. However there is Temptations in these also, and I will consider
'em as briefly as I can, and how they are to be Resisted by us. To proceed then,

First, As to Poverty, and Afflictions; (for I shall not consider these Two
altogether apart, the Temptations that either give us, being much the same)
These indeed, instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to Virtue, do very
often prove Mortifiers of Vice, and the great occasions of a Holy Life. Poverty
and Afflictions, instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to Virtue, do
very often prove Mortifiers of Vice, and the great occasions of a holy Life.
For besides that in a State of Adversity and Want, we are not so subject to
Pride, Insolence, and a Contempt of Religion; nor so liable to Luxury,
Ambition, and Covetousness, and many other Sins, which are too often the
Effects of a prosperous and flourishing Condition: The diverse sorts of
Afflictions and Adversities, as Sickness, Loss of Goods, and of Friends,
Poverty and Want, and the like, are naturally Advantageous, and do mightily
tend to the Increase of many the most precious Graces in the sight of God, as
might be easily made appear. These wean us from the World, and instead of
Setting our affections on things below, they do cause us to put our affections
on things above. Seeing the Vanity, Emptiness, Transitoriness, and great
Inconstancy of this World's Enjoyments, we are apt to thirst after those
Permanent, Certain and Everlasting Joys, prepared in Heaven for us. When
Afflictions, and Want, and all other Hopes and Expectations fail us, we do then
usually betake our selves to God, for Comfort and Support. And thus drawing
nigh unto God we become acquainted with him, and he then vouchsafes us some
Tastes of spiritual Delights and Pleasures. And then having Experienced the
ineffable Satisfactions, communicated to Pious and Humble Souls in their
Devotions, and Religious Exercises, we become Heavenly Minded, weary of this
World, And desirous to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all. Thus, I say, Afflictions and Adversities are many times, next under God's
Grace, great Helps to Piety and Devotion.

Nevertheless they are also very often great Temptations to many Sins and
Impieties, Nevertheless they are often great Temptations to many Sins and
Impieties.
and as such Satan does use 'em. They are apt to breed in us Impatience and
Discontent, and Envy at the outward Felicity of the Wicked. And Poverty in
particular, when it meets with Minds ill-dispos'd, and not seasoned with
Principles of Virtue and Honesty, Tempts 'em to Fraud and Theft. And generally
when Persons labor under Necessities and Wants, they think they have enough to
do to provide Necessaries for Themselves and Families; that they may therefore
dispense with the Exercises of Religion, and that it is enough for the Rich
Ones to frequent the public Worship and Sacraments. But in the

First Place, it behooves such, who labor under Poverty, or any Kind of
Affliction, to beware they be not Tempted to Impatience and Discontent. I. It
behooves those, who labor under Poverty, or any kind of Affliction, to beware
of Impatience and Discontent.
And there is little Reason we should be Tempted thereby into these Sins; for,
in good Truth, these Kind of Sufferings, in most Men's Cases, are Tokens of
God's Fatherly Love and Kindness, and of his Ordering all things for our Good.
So the Apostle, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives. This is as great a Paradox to Flesh and Blood, as
it is to a Child to be under the Discipline of the Rod and Ferula; to either of
which, No Chastening for the present seems to be Joyous, but Grievous:
Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness to
them, which are exercised thereby, ver. 11. These afflicting Providence tend
to mortify our Vanity, and to take of our Confidences in worldly Things, which
the Soul of Man in Affluence and Abundance is extremely subject to, and than
which there is scarcely a more sinful Temper of Mind: Such Reason had David
Thankfully to Acknowledge God's Goodness in 'em. I know, O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm.
119.75. And ver. 67. he professes, That before he was afflicted he went astray;
but now, says he, I have kept thy word.

Secondly, Those in the worst of Circumstances, must not Envy the outward
Felicity of the Wicked. II. Those, in the worst of Circumstances, must not envy
the outward Felicity of the Wicked.
The Psalmist declares, Ps. 73.2, 3.5. That his Feet had almost gone, and that
his Steps had well nigh slipped, upon this occasion; For I was Envious, says he,
at the Foolish, when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked, that they were not in
Trouble, neither were they Plagued like other Men. But what was the Consequence
of this their Prosperity, and Freedom from Afflictions? Why that Pride
compassed them as a Chain, and that Violence covered them as a Garment; they
set their Mouth against the Heavens, and their Tongue walked through the Earth;
that is, they became horridly Wicked and Profane upon it, ver. 6.9. And are
these Men to be Envied then? No, Go into the Sanctuary, as this Psalmist did,
that is, consult Religion, and you will understand their End, that surely they
are set in slippery Places; and that God will cast them down into Destruction,
ver. 17, 18. Wherefore fret not thy self, because of Evildoers, neither be
thou Envious against the workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 37.1.

Thirdly, In case of Poverty, in particular, You must be infinitely careful,
least to rescue your self out of it, you be Tempted to Fraud, and especially to
Stealing and Purloyning. III. A Person that is Poor, must be infinitely careful
least to Rescue himself out of it, he be tempted to Fraud, especially to
Stealing and Purloyning.
Poverty is indeed an Evil in it self, and it may be Avoided by us, provided it
be by lawful Means. And it is a Man's Duty indeed, by all honest ways, to
rescue himself out of such an ill Condition; as by Labor and Industry in an
honest Calling, to Relieve One from Want, and Cold, and Nakedness; and to
suffer any Hardships, rather than to run into Debt, and to prevent
Imprisonment. But however, whatever Distresses you shall fall into, you must
Resolve with Job thus, 27.2, 3.6, 7. As God lives, who has taken away my
Judgment, and the Almighty, who has vexed my Soul; All the while my Breath is
in me, and the Spirit of God is in my Nostrils, I will not remove my Integrity
from me; My Righteousness I will hold fast, and will not let it go; my Heart
shall not Reproach me so long as I live.

Lastly, Nor must any think, that because they are Poor, they are e're the more
disengaged from the Service of God, and their Attendance upon him in all the
Parts of Divine Worship, Nor lastly, must any think that because they are Poor,
they are e're the more dis-engaged from the Service of God, and their
Attendance upon him in all the Parts of Divine Worship.
Prayers, Sacraments, and the Hearing of the Word. But rather, because of their
Poverty, they may be expected, in reason, to be more Frequent, and more Devout
in Holy Exercises; for the less they have of outward Comforts, the more reason
they have to provide themselves of Spiritual Consolations, that they may not be
Miserable in both Worlds: And since this World Frowns upon 'em, to secure to
themselves those infinitely more Valuable Treasures in Heaven, to which the
meanest Cottager stands as fair a Candidate, as the greatest Nobleman. And,
indeed, such is the Regard our Savior has to 'em, that he made it a peculiar
Mark of his being the Messiah, that The Poor had the Gospel Preached unto them,
Matthew. 11.5. And so much for Poverty and Affliction, those Evils, which are
Opposed to Riches and Pleasures.

In what sense, and how far we must Renounce Disgrace, and the Temptations it
gives us.
The Last of the World's Evils is Disgrace, and this is Opposite to the Honors
of it. Now Disgrace is a thing, which Humane Nature is extremely sensible of:
And if it be generally a matter of Disgrace, to profess true and serious
Religion, it is wonderful how Men will shrink from it, who in their own Minds
have strong Convictions of it, and good Affections toward it. It was the fear
of this Disgrace, which made Nicodemus come to our Savior by Night, Joh. 7.50.
And though Many of the chief Rulers also Believed on him, yet, because of the
Pharisees, they did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the
Synagogue, for they loved the Praise of Men, more than the Praise of God, Joh.
12.42, 43. that is, They Valued their Reputation with Men, and their Places and
Posts of Honor, more than the Testimony of, and Reputation with, God himself.

But as the True Religion is here openly Professed amongst us; and generally it
receives no Disgrace heartily to Espouse it, and to Live up to it; but is
indeed a matter of Disgrace to do the contrary, except it be with some
profligate Debauchees of our Age: If it happen that you should Fall into their
Company and Acquaintance (which God preserve you from:) So the Temptations of
this Nature, which they will give you, to cool you toward the serious
Profession, and Practice of Religion, will be Considered hereafter, when I come
to speak of the wicked World, and the Temptations, which Arise from thence.

And thus I have considered, and laid before you, as the World in General, and
the Good Things thereof in Particular, viz. Riches, Honors, and Pleasures: So
on the contrary, the Opposite Evils of it, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions;
and have Discovered to you, the various Temptations each of 'em do give you,
and how you are to Renounce and Resist 'em. And now it only remains,

Lastly, That I do the like, and consider also some Things therein of a middle
Nature, viz. The Callings, Conditions of Life, and the Cares of this World,
which are the Appurtenances of it, and afford great matter of Temptation and
Trial to us therein: And in what Sense, and how far you are also to Renounce
each of these, I will endeavor to show you.

And, First, Let us consider the Callings of the World, I. The Callings of the
world, and how the Temptations they give, are to be Renounced.
and what Temptations they give us, in what Sense, and how far we must Renounce
and Resist them. Now a Calling is some settled Course of Life, wherein a Person
employs himself in some Business, such as Providence has fitted him with
Abilities for, and which he is Called and Appointed unto, to employ himself
therein to the Honor of God, and to his own, and the public Good. And there
is no Man, nor Woman, if not utterly disabled in Body and Mind, who ought not
to be of some such Calling: That is,

In the first place, every Man ought in a settled Course of Life to betake
himself to some Business. Every Man is to betake himself to some Business.
Adam, even in the State of Innocence was Enjoined to Dress and keep the
Garden, or e're he could Freely eat of every Tree thereof, Genesis 2.15, 16. And
since his Fall, it is as well the Duty, as it is the Curse of all his
Posterity, that In the sweat of our Brows we must eat of our Bread, Genesis 3.19.
So that every Child of Adam must now with great Industry and Application Employ
himself, in order to obtain the Necessaries or Conveniences of this Life. It
was indeed from the very Beginning, and even in Paradise it self, our Duty to
be Employed; but it is now both our Duty and Punishment, that we must Employ
our selves, even to the taking of Pains, every Man in his proper Calling.

And that Calling, which every Man is to employ his Time in, must be such, as
Providence has fitted him with Abilities for. It must be such as Providence has
fitted him with Abilities for.
As God has distributed to every Man, as the Lord has Called every one, so
let him walk, 1 Cor. 7.17. God has distributed to every Man some proper Gift
or other; and therefore every Man must Glorify God in some peculiar Calling, or
other.

And to whatsoever particular Calling any Man's peculiar Abilities do fit him,
to that he is to look upon himself, as preparatively Called, or Appointed by
God; And such he is preparatively Called and appointed to by God, with due
Abilities.
and lawful Authority in Church, or State is to determine his Call. God does
not ordinarily himself Point out any Person by an express Designation, as he
Called Bazaleel and Aholiab by Name, to do the W^rk of the Tabernacle, Exodus
31.2. But he distributes his Talents variously to all Persons, on some he
bestows the Gifts of Honors and Fortunes, as to Magistrates and Gentlemen; to
some the Gifts of Good Parts and Learning, as to Scholars, of whatsoever
Profession; and to some Skill in Trade, and in Arts, as to Dealers and
Artificers; and to the Inferior and Poorer sort of Men he gives Health and
Limbs, and whatever sits 'em for Toil and Labor. And to some he gives the
whole Ten Talents to Trade withal to their Master's Use, that is, Authority,
Riches, Learning, Skill in Business, and Strength of Body and Mind; and
accordingly of all he will require an Account how they have Employed their
Talents: For unto whom much is given, of him shall much be required, Luke
12.48. And the unprofitable Servant shall be cast into outer darkness, Matthew.
25.30.

Lastly, whatever Calling any Person is appointed to by the Divine Providence,
he must Employ himself therein to the Glory of God, and to his own, and the
Public Good. To whatso^^er Calling (...) is appoint^, he must ^ploy him^f
therein to ^od's Glory, ^^d his own, ^^d the pub^ck Good.
In the first place to the Glory of God, for that is to be the main End of
whatever we do, 1 Cor. 10.31. and also to his own, and his Families Good; For
he that provides not for his own, especially for those of his own House, he
has denied the Faith, and is worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy 5.8. And also, as
every Man is a Member of the Body Politic, he is bound to employ his Time, and
Parts, and Pains for its Welfare; for God requires, that As every Man has
received the Gift, that accordingly they should Minister the same one to
another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God, 1 Pet. 4.10. And no
Member of Church, or State, of what Rank, or Quality soever he be, but must
Employ, or Interest himself for the Public Good; For God has so tempered the
Body, or Humane Societies, together, that the Members should have the same care
one of another; and whether one Member suffers, he would have all the Members
suffer with it, as in the Natural Body; or one Member be Honored, he would
have all the Members rejoice with it, 1 Cor. 12.24, 25, 26. So that it is
necessary you see, that every Person should betake himself to some Calling, or
Business.

And now the Question will be, What is to be Renounced, with respect to the
Callings of this World.

And, First, It behooves all Persons utterly to Renounce such Callings and
Professions of Men in the World, as are directly sinful and wicked: I. All
Persons ^ustrenounce ^uch Callings and Professi^ns as are di^ectly sinful and
wicked.
Such are Bards, Pimps, Juglers, Conjurers, and the like Impious ways of
living, whereby some Wretches do so notoriously Minister to the Devil's
Kingdom, and so directly promote the Ruin of Souls, that to Name 'em, is to
Condemn 'em; and there need be no more said to render 'em odious to all those,
who have any the least degrees of virtuous Principles remaining in their Souls.
I shall only tell you, that the Guilt contracted by these is so exceeding
Great, and a sufficient Repentance for Crimes so very Black, so near to
impossible, that you must so far Renounce 'em, as to Detest the very thoughts
of Embarking your selves ever in these, or any other Callings, whereby Sin is
immediately and necessarily served, and the Damnation of those Souls, for whom
Christ dyed, so directly procured.

Secondly, It concerns all Persons to Renounce all such Callings, as tend to
the Hurt, not the Good of the Public. II. Such as tend to the Hurt, not the
Good of the Public.
The Public Good is the great End of all the diverse Callings of Men, as you
will see 1 Cor. 12. And consequently nothing ought to be took up, as a Calling,
which Impoverishes, or Corrupts the Manners of a People. And upon this Account
therefore I shall not doubt to Arraign, and I wish the Magistrate would
Universally Condemn, the Calling of such, who keep Tipling-houses merely to
harbor Vagabonds and loose People; and to draw Men into Riot and Excess, to
the great Impoverishing of many Families, and the Creating of scandalous
Breaches betwixt Husbands and their Wives. An Innkeeper, whose House is well
situated for the Entertainment of the Traveller, upon his lawful Occasions, is
of great use in the Commonwealth. And though there be more of Temptation in his
Calling than most others, yet if he takes care to prevent, as much as possible,
all Swearing and Drunkenness within his Doors, all Lewdness and Wantonness
amongst his Servants; and will do all he can to discourage Rioting to
unseasonable Hours, he will thereby do good Service to God, as well as his
Country, by such his Calling, and so Conscientiously managed. But your mere
Ale-house-keeping, where the whole Trade is to inveigle Persons into
Ill-husbandry, to the Expense of their Time and Money, and with all the Shifts
and Contrivances to detain 'em, when they are got in, is so great a Pest to
this Nation; occasions so much Immorality and Licentiousness; so much Swearing
and Profaness, Lewdness and Wantonness; such miserable Poverty amongst the
lower Rank of Housekeepers; such Brawls and Contentions betwixt Husbands and
Wives; and yields so much Harbor, and gives so much Encouragement to Thieves
and Robbers; that this Calling can hardly be supposed taken up in unnecessary
Places, by Virtuous and Honest Persons, but is generally the last Reserve of
loose and idle Livers, who would never endure to Labor in an honest
Employment. And therefore I would not have you, though you should be brought into
the sorest Want, and be pincht with extreme Necessity, ever take up so
dangerous a Calling: I do say very moderately, so dangerous a Calling; for at
best, there is the utmost danger of Ruin to your Innocence therein, and no One
sure, who has the least tender Regard for his Soul, will take up such a
Calling, where there is but the least Possibility left of escaping the Loss
thereof. And in this Rank also, as extremely Destructive to Religion and
Morality, I think I may safely place the Calling of Players. I know how Touchy
many will be on such Persons account. I shall therefore choose to express my
Opinion, concerning their Calling, in the Words of a very Learned, and
Judicious Bishop of our own Church; who does acknowledge, That should they be
Tried by the Bench of Fathers, and Councils, of Old; would have it put to most
Voices amongst later Divines, both Popish and Reformed, they would be utterly
Cast and Condemned; most holding, not the Calling only, but the very Practice
and Thing it self Unlawful and Damnable: And how Pernicious they are to
Religion and Manners, I shall have Occasion to show hereafter.

Thirdly, Christians must Renounce all those wicked Arts, whereby some do Abuse
the most worthy and useful Callings, III. All sinful Arts in the most useful
Callings.
to serve their worldly Ends. And indeed there is no Calling, though never so
good in it self, but has its Temptations attending it, and Persons of ill
Principles and dishonest Minds, will sadly comply therewith. Thus even in the
Ministry, the most excellent and useful Calling in the World, since such
Multitudes will not endure sound Doctrine, and few of the Greater sort
especially, will without the utmost Indignation brook a Reproof; many are
therefore Tempted to Temper their Doctrines to the Humor of their Party; and
others to wink at the most scandalous Offenses and Immoralities, those great
Reproaches of Christianity. But if we should be wholly in telling you your
Privileges in Christ, which the most Carnal Minds will love to hear of, but
little in Instructing you in the Duties of Religion, which are so necessary to
the gaining of an Interest in him (which some sort of People will call a Legal
Preaching) we might perhaps thereby make our selves Dear to a Party, but we
should be Unfaithful to Christ. So again, should we forbear to Reprove the
Envy, the Malice, Pride, Censoriousness, and Covetousness under the Mask of
Religion, of the Hypocrite on the one side, or the open and scandalous
Profaness and Debaucheries of the Libertine (who calls himself of our Church)
on the other, we should be reckoned amongst those wicked Prophets Ezekiel. 13. who
humored and flattered the Opinions and Vices of God's People, and must expect
that heavy Doom pronounced against such in that Chapter.

And indeed as every other Calling has its particular Temptations belonging to
it: So what is worse, most Men think they may Honestly enough comply therewith,
and do think it indeed a necessary part of their Profession so to do. Thus the
Lawyer (a very worthy and useful Profession in a Commonwealth, as being that
whereby Property, and Right, and Peaceableness should be maintained amongst
Men) may be Tempted perhaps, to think it a Part of his Profession to encourage
Strife, and foment Differences; and that the Malice and Revenge, the Wrath and
Bitterness; the Slanders and Evil-speakings; the Strife and Contentions, which
are other Men's Sins, must be his Livelihood: And that he must make himself
Acquainted by Drinking hard, with the worst sort of People, that he may gain an
Interest himself in 'em, and get into Business. So likewise the Tradesman will
plead, that the Importunity of Customers, who will certainly beat down the
Price of his Commodities, as low as they can, does make it necessary by
Protestations, and Equivocations, and Lies, to set off his Wares to the best
advantage. And how few are Country-Dealers, who do not think it necessary (or
they cannot pay a hard Rent, and maintain a Family) to take advantage of the
Ignorance, or Necessity of their Neighbors; and not only to conceal the
Defects, but by plain downright Lying and Avouching, that their Beast is
upright and sound, put it off for more than it is Worth. Thus some Men, of all
Professions, will think they must do, or else they cannot Live. And indeed, if
Men could not get a Livelihood, but in a way and trade of Sinning, Persons of
Callings, and Professions, and Dealers in the World, wouldly under a shrewd
Temptation.

But tell me, must Men sell their Souls to the Devil for ever, for the Gains
here, we know not how soon we must leave? We count Esau a foolish, as well as
profane Person, who in Extremity of Hunger, sold his Birthright for a Mess of
Pottage, Genesis 25.33, 34. And what is that Christian, who shall sell his Eternal
Inheritance for a Thing, in comparison, of no Value?

But I can see no necessity of foregoing a Livelihood, or of yielding to the
Temptations of a Calling. Indeed, if by a Livelihood Men did not mean living in
Superfluity, Vanity, Luxury, which neither God, nor Nature has made necessary
to any Man's Being, nor indeed Wel-being in the World: If they meant no more
than getting an honest, and moderate Provision, suitable to the Station and
Condition Providence has placed 'em in, I do not know, but generally Men do
better provide for themselves, by plain and honest Dealing, than by serving
their Interests, by any sinful Art, or Cunning whatsoever. I do believe it is a
true Proverb, generally speaking, that Honesty is the best Policy; and Men
Thrive, though but slowly by it, yet better and surer than by Cheating and
Overreaching. And it is almost every One's Observation, That a little
Substance honestly got is a Comfort to the Owners, whilst the Estate that is
ill got wastes like Butter in the Sun, and derives down a Curse upon those on
whom it descends.

But however, though it be not so, that Honesty is the best way to Thrive, and
though your Temptations should be never so great, and your Wants never so
pressing, you must suffer that Want, or suffer worse. And you would do well to
consider, that those who will rather suffer Want here, than by sinful Ways
provide a Relief, shall be sure not to want the Love, and Mercies of God
hereafter, and that will abundantly Recompense for all defect of Advantages in
this World.

Fourthly, You must Renounce all Levity, and Desultory Skipping from one
Calling to another. IV. All Levity and Desultory Skipping from one Calling to
another.
This may seem rather a Politic, than Religious Precept, because in common
Observation it is seldom seen, that the Man of several Trades and Callings does
Thrive, and that the Rolling Stone never gathers Moss. But it is an
Instruction, which is also of a Religious Importance, for 1 Cor. 7.20. Every
Man is commanded to Abide in the same Calling, wherein he was called. And though
it may be Lawful to lay down One, and to take up another Profession, or Trade,
when either absolute Necessity enforces it, or lawful Authority enjoineth it;
or a Concurrence of weighty Circumstances faithfully, and discreetly, and
soberly laid together, seems to require it; as the Judicious Bishop Sanderson
Stateth this Case: Yet this must be done, as he says, with all due Caution; as
First, not out of Lightness, and Unsettledness; nor Secondly, out of the
Greediness of a Covetous, or Ambitious Lust; nor Thirdly, out of Sullenness, or
Discontentedness at our present Condition; nor Lastly, out of Envy against our
Neighbor, that lives by us.

But above all, that Change of Callings is to be Renounced, as the highest
Profaneness, when Laymen and Tradesmen, nay, Women (as amongst the Quakers, so
expressly contrary to the Commands of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.34.) do
Sacrilegiously usurp the sacred Office of the Ministry, and set up for Teachers
without a lawful Call, or Ordination thereunto. Nor is there any Force in what
they will pretend, from Rev. 1.6. where it is said of all Christians in general,
That Christ has made them Kings and Priests unto God, and his Father; for the
same is spoke, Exodus 10.6. of the whole Jewish Nation, that They should be a
Kingdom of Priests, and an holy Nation. And yet we find that the Priesthood was
so much a separated Office amongst them, and so dangerous to be Usurpt, that
Korah and his Company paid dearly for Attempting it, Numb. 16. as also Vzziah,
as you will see, 2 Chronicles. 26.16. etc. The reason of that high Expression, Rev.
1.6. wherein Christians in general are called Priests, is the same as in Exodus
For as the whole Jewish Nation were there styled a Kingdom of Priests, and a
holy Nation, with respect to the Pagan World, from whom they were to be as much
separated by a peculiar Holiness, as the Priesthood amongst 'em was from the
People. So we Christians, such is our Holy Calling, are to be as much separated
and distinguished from Jews and Gentiles both, by our Holy Living, as the Gospel
Ministry are by a sacred Character, from the rest of Christian People.

No certainly, all those of the Laity, who usurp the Office of the Ministry
should learn Sobriety, and to keep themselves within the proper Bounds and
Limits of their Callings, considering that equally now, as in the Jewish
Church, The Priest's lips should keep Knowledge, and that they should seek the
Law at his mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 27.

V. Any, Calling whatsoever is to be declined for which a Person is not
Qualified, both by Education, Abilities, and Inclinations.
Fifthly, And that you may not lightly, and with a worse Imputation than that of
Inconstancy, change your Calling; Decline that Calling whatever, how
Creditable, or how Profitable soever it be, for which you are not Qualified
both by Education, Abilities, and Inclination. The great Fault in this respect
is commonly the Parents, who Predestinate, as it were, their Children to such
Callings, as they please themselves, without consulting those other Requisites
now named, to make them Excellent and Useful to themselves, or others therein;
and this is the reason, that so many mis-carry in their Callings, to their own
Ruin and Disgrace, and the Disappointment and Damage of others in the Business
they undertake.

Especially Callings of great Importance, such as the Ministry.
And according, as is the Importance of any Calling, accordingly does it the
more concern Persons, both for their own sakes, and the World's, that they
decline such as they are not fitted for by a suitable Education, by competent
Abilities, and Gifts, and by a strong Inclination thereunto. Now the Ministry
is a Calling of the vastest Consequence in the World, even the Salvation of
many Souls, depending upon a Man's being duly Qualified thereto. There ought in
the first place to be a suitable Education, in those Schools of the Prophets,
our Universities, given to such as are Candidates for it, that they may be
prepared thereto by the Knowledge of those learned Languages, wherein the
Inspired Writers did Pen the Holy Scriptures, and by many other Arts and
Sciences, which are Handmaids to Divinity, and can there only be sufficiently
attained to. There ought next to be great Abilities and Gifts, both Natural
Parts, and Divine Graces, and a good share of all sorts of Learning acquired by
much Study, and great Industry, to make an useful Divine; there being no one
Profession in the World, which requires to its Perfection, such an universal
Knowledge, as Theology does. And to all these there must be added strong
Inclinations to the Holy Office; Inclinations to it, not upon the account of
the Preferments, and Dignities that attend it, but for the Works sake;
Inclinations indeed to be an Instrument of God's Glory, and of the Salvation of
Men's Souls therein. And now, if a Person of no good Abilities, or Gifts should
be determined to the Ministry, it is a Sacrilegious Profaneness of equal Guilt,
as it is Impiety in some Parents, who think such of the most promising Parts
amongst their Children, an Offering too good for the Lord. Or if a Person of a
suitable Education, and of great Abilities, that fit him for it, should enter
into it with an unwilling Mind, is often too great a sign of unsanctify'd
Affections, that would be for greater Liberty and Gaiety, than the Gravity and
Seriousness of his Profession will allow him; and the Fop should be counted
unworthy of it. Or lastly, if there be never so strong Inclinations to be a
Teacher, without the Preparations of an University Education, and learned
Abilities, as well as Divine Graces, it shows the Person to be One of those,
who Desiring to be Teachers of the Law, understood neither what they said, nor
whereof they affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7.

And indeed in any Calling whatsoever, there must be a joint concurrence of
every one of these forementioned Qualifications; for if any one of 'em be
wanting, that Person will be unsuccessful in his Calling; insomuch that if
there be never so suitable an Education and good Abilities, if there be wanting
that one other Requisite of strong Inclinations to such a Course of Life, the
Business of it will be carried on with Sloth and Negligence, which is the

Sixth Thing, that must be Renounced, as to any Calling. VI. Idleness in any
Calling is to be renounced.
Idleness has the same Effect in any other Calling, as Solomon observed it had
in the Husband-man's, concerning whom he tells us, That going by the Field of
the Slothful, and by the Vineyard of the man void of Understanding, lo it was
all grown over with Thorns, and Nettles had covered the face thereof, Prove.
24.30, 31. Thereby the Understanding of the Scholar is overspread with
Ignorance; the Manners of the Gentleman with Barbarity and Savageness; and
Poverty and Nakedness do enter, through Sloth, the Houses of Tradesmen. But on
the other side, how comfortable are the Fruits of Industry, either in Man, or
Woman? Particularly as to the Woman's Industry, there is such an Account given
thereof, Prove. 31. from the 10 ver. to the End of that Chap. as shows the
mighty Happiness to Husband, Children, and Servants, where such a One is the
Mistress of the Family; and her Character ought to begot by Heart, by every
Person of her Sex. And therefore the Effects of Sloth being so dismal and
miserable; but the Fruits of Industry so very advantageous and comfortable,
according as the Wiseman advises, Eccl. 9.10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to
do, do it with all thy might.

Well, but it is enough you will say, for those to be Industrious, Idleness not
allowable, no not in Gentlemen.
who are to Live by their Calling: But as for such, who enjoy a sufficiency and
plenty of the Necessaries, Conveniences and Superfluities of this World; what
occasion is there that they should be Industrious: For as it is commonly said,
What is a Gentleman, but his Pleasures?

But give me leave to Answer in the words of an excellent Person, that if this
be true, If a Gentleman be nothing else but this, then truly he is a sad Piece,
the most inconsiderable, the most despicable, the most pitiful and wretched
Creature in the World. If it be his Privilege to do nothing, then it is his
Privilege to be Good for nothing, to be a mere Weight and Burden upon the
Earth; nay the Pest and Plague of Mankind, since the Soul of Man is that active
Power, that if it does not actuate and employ a Man in doing Good, it will
certainly in doing Mischief: So that to say thus of the Gentleman, or Man of
Fortunes, is highly to Reproach him. But the Contrary is most certain.

And no Man, be he in never so flourishing a State and Condition, must give
himself up to Idleness, as being One of the greatest Temptations in the World
to Sin, and in it self a Life very displeasing to God.

It is one of the greatest Temptations in the World to Sin.
Idleness, I say, is one of the greatest Temptations in the World to Sin. So
great a Temptation indeed it is, that the idle Person Tempts the Devil to come
and Tempt him. That wicked Spirit Continually walks about the Earth, seeking
whom he may devour; and spying a Person to be Idle, he infallibly lies down
before him. He musters up all his Forces to beleaguer that Man, sends for the
like idle and licentious Persons as himself, and those with all possible
Allurements inveigle him to join with 'em in their wicked Courses. And his Mind
being taken up with no honest Cares, the Devil throws into his Soul a Thousand
ill Thoughts, and base Designs, and lewd Imaginations to corrupt him, and make
him yield. And the greatest of Men and Saints, have been Overcome merely by
being found Idle, as we have an eminent Instance in David, 2 Samuel 11.2. Who
walking on the roof of his House, his Mind then roving, and being untackt from
honest Cares, that Temptation seized on him, whereby he was plunged into that
woeful Miscarriage, in the Matter of Vriah, which did create him so much Sorrow,
did make such a Spot in his Life, as was never washed off, no not with his Tears
of Repentance: So excellent was the Advice of the Father; Be always doing
something, that the Devil may never find thee Idle.

And is it self a very great Sin.
Nor is the Idleness of Persons in a plentiful and flourishing Condition, in it
self less a Sin, than it is a Temptation to other Sins. These are the Persons,
who have Talents given 'em, and their Idleness is expressed by Hiding their
Talents in the Earth, Mat. 25.25. which how great a Sin it is, is evident from
our Savior's severe Menaces thereupon, calling such an idle Person a Wicked
and slothful Servant, and commanding him to be cast, because an unprofitable
Servant, into outer darkness, where should be weeping and gnashing of teeth,
ver. 30. It is remarkable, that here the wicked Servant is so severely Doomed,
not for mis-employing, but for being Idle, and not employing his Talent: So
that no Man's Condition, be it never so Plentiful, will excuse him in Idleness.

The last Thing to be Renounced, with reference to a Calling, is the Living
above it. Lastly, no Man must live above his Calling.
This is what the Vanity and Pride of many, both Gentlemen, Tradesmen, and
others, do Tempt 'em to; but the Issue thereof is in a short time to be Needy
and Borrowing, and consequently Contemptible, and to meet with Scorn instead of
that Respect they seek, by making an outward Appearance and Flourish. But the
worst of it is, when Men are of this Humor, to live above their Calling, in
order to maintain their Port and Pride, they are forced, if Gentlemen, to
oppress their Tenants; if Tradesmen to cheat and overreach their Customers,
and to use all the evil Arts of Getting. And as to the latter, when they so far
scorn the Meanness of their Profession, as to throw it aside, it is not seldom,
that in the End they take to the Highway, as the only Means of maintaining
themselves. In short therefore to prevent the fatal Effects of both these last
Evils, Idleness, and living beyond a Man's Calling, my Advice to young Persons
is to be Industrious, till such time at least, as they have laid up a Stock,
whereby they may afford to live more at Ease, and not to throw off the meanest
Calling, till they are able to live Creditably without it. And so much for the
Callings of the World, and what is to be Renounced with Relation to them.

Secondly, Let us consider amongst those Things of the World of a middle
Nature, the different Conditions and States of Men therein. II. Amongst those
things of the World of a middle Nature, the the different Conditions and States
of Men therein are to be considered.
And the greatest Part are in the State, either of Masters, or of Servants. And
the whole World are either Single, or Married Persons.

And First, as to the State and Condition of a Master, there are very great
Advantages and Opportunities, which the Head of a Family has of doing Good
amongst those of his Household; insomuch that if he keep up an orderly and
religious Discipline in his Family, it will be no hard matter for him, so to
form the Principles and Practices of his Servants and Dependants, as to be able
to undertake with Joshua, 24.15. that he, and his House, shall serve the Lord.

But yet this, as all other Conditions of Men in this World, I. A Master has
great advantages of doing Good.
is liable to be Abused to great degrees of Dishonor to God, and Injury to the
Souls of Men, as namely when those, who are Masters do so far exceed in their
Commands, as to give no leisure to their Servants to provide for the Good of
their own Souls.

But such a Dominion as this must be utterly Renounced, and it should be a
Thing never heard of amongst Christians, that a Servant should be such a Slave,
as to be treated no better than a Brute: But all that Dominion is to be utterly
Renounced amongst Christians, which treats Servants no better than Slaves and
Brutes.
And as Pasture is the only thing provided for the latter, so bodily
Necessaries should be the only thing took care of for the former. No, every one
that will expect Abraham's Blessing and Favor with God, must have Abraham's
pious Care of the religious Education and Government both of his Children and
Servants; concerning whom it is Recorded, that God did Impart unto him a very
great secret, under the Notion of a singular Favor, upon this very Account,
That He knew he would command his Children, and his Household after him, that
they should keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, Genesis 18.19.
So that when any of you shall grow up, or arrive to that Condition, to be the
Heads of a Family, this must be also your Care, and you must utterly Renounce
the Treating your Servants at that Distance, as if they were not
Fellow Servants with you to the same God.

Secondly, The next Condition, or State of Life in this World to be considered
of, is that of Servants. Now a Servant amongst Christians, if he be not
Barbarously and Un-christianly used, is not the most unhappy State: The State
of Servants not in it self unhappy.
Though he has not his Master's Liberty, yet if he has less of his
Licentiousness, he is the happier Man. But yet if it falls out so, that the
Master and Family, he happens into, be Disorderly, Debauched, and Wicked, he is
in a State of mighty Temptation, and in great danger of being Corrupted: And
therefore

First, It concerns every Person, who is to live by a Service, I. It concerns
every Person, who is to live by a Service, to avoid such where there is neither
the means of Religion, nor restraints upon Sin.
to Renounce and Refuse those (if extreme Necessity, and want of Better, do not
compel him to Accept of such) where a great deal of Wickedness is practiced
without Control, and little of the Fear of God is to be seen amongst Masters,
or Servants. We do daily pray to God, Not to lead us into Temptation, and those
who are sincere in their Prayers, will not voluntarily throw themselves into
such a dangerous place of Temptation, as is a wicked Family; where not only the
ordinary Means of Grace, the reading of the word of God, and daily Prayers are
wanting: But the Examples of both Head and Members do influence to an Imitation
in Lewdness, Drunkenness, Injustice, Cursing, Swearing, and all Impiety; and
where Profaneness does so far prevail, as to instigate 'em to break their Jests
upon Religion and Virtue. Alas! it is a very difficult thing for Youth to be
thoroughly seasoned with Principles of Virtue, even by all the Instruction and
Care of Ministers, Parents, and Masters. How then must it be next to a Miracle,
if they fly not out into all manner of Licentiousness, when the Corruption
within is heightened with the Examples and Encouragements of all about 'em, and
those too, Persons upon whose Favor they depend.

Secondly, But since Idleness and want of Employment does expose a Person to
Temptation, even more than such Services; and if Necessity shall force you into
those, where little of spiritual Improvement, but all manner of Temptations to
Sin, is to be expected: why then with Joseph in the House of Potiphar, Genesis
39.8. you must put on the most steadfast Resolutions to preserve your Innocence,
II. In the most Irreligious Families a Servant shall happen into, he must put
on a steadfast resolution to preserve his Innocence.
and must make a Covenant with your Eyes, Ears, and all your Senses, that they
do not Offend. And when Divine Providence has disposed you there, Divine Grace
will not be wanting to your own honest Endeavors, to preserve you from Evil.

Thirdly, The next State, and that wherein the greatest part of Mankind in this
World are found, is the State of Celibacy, III. The State of Celibacy
advantageous to Devotion, and in Times of Distress.
or the single Life; and St. Paul, speaking to those which are Unmarried, tells
'em, It is Good for them if they Abide so, 1 Cor. 7.8. and that upon Two
Accounts: First at all Times, because of the greater Freedom and Vacancy for
Meditation, and Divine Employments therein; He that is Unmarried cares for the
Things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord: Secondly, and more especially
in Times of Persecution, or the Approach of Sufferings coming upon the Church
of God, and because of the present, or impendent Distress, ver. 26. But yet
this State is the most subject to Unchaste Desires, and Lewd Practices, if not
powerfully restrained by rooted Principles of Virtue. And therefore

Even the State of Celibacy it self must be Renounced and Forsaken, by those
who cannot contain, This must be renounced, when Persons cannot Contain.
according to the Advice of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.9. They who cannot contain
let them Marry, for it is better to Marry than to Burn: For alas! when Persons
Morals are once Corrupted in this Kind, it is very rare, that either Man, or
Woman, returns to that just Abomination and Abhorrence, which all Christians
ought to have of the very Thoughts and Expressions of Uncleanness, according to
that of St. Paul: But Fornication, and all Uncleanness, let it not be once
Named amongst you, as becomes Saints; Neither Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking,
nor Jestings, which are not convenient, Ephesians. 5.3, 4.

Lastly, the Married state has its Advantages.
The last State of Persons I shall here mention, is that of the Married, a State
Ordained by God, Matthew. 19.4. and the more to be liked, that besides the mutual
Supports and Comforts afforded to each other therein, many, both Husbands and
Wives, do owe their Conversion to Christianity; and from a wicked, to a good
Life, to the prudent and discreet Instruction of one, or other, of the Married
Couple, 1 Cor. 7.16. Nevertheless there is Danger in this, as well as in other
States. In Times of Distress, they are apt to be Tempters to one another, to
sinful Compliances; and at all times are Plunged into worldly Cares, and He
that is Married cares for the Things, that are of the World, 1 Cor. 7.33. and
that too often to the great Hindrance of Religion. And therefore

First, All Solicitations from either Husband, or Wife, must be utterly
Renounced, I. All Solicitations from either of the married Couple must be
renounced, which would Perswad^ to sinful Compliances in times of Distress.
when out of worldly Regards, either He, or She, would dissuade from a
Conscientious Discharge of Duty, and a Faithful Confession of any part of
Christianity, in which case, we must even Hate Wife and Children, etc. Luke
14.26. as has been already spoke.

Secondly, And even in the Married State, all those worldly Cares, which choke
up, or disturb Religion, must be utterly laid aside, as will be fully showed
you under the Next, and

Last of those Things pertaining to this World, which afford great matter of
Temptation to us, viz. The Cares thereof. Now as to the Cares of this World,
true it is, we have many worldly Interests and Engagements to mind, we have the
Necessities, both of our own Persons, and of those who belong to us, to serve.
II. And Engage too much in worldly Cares
Nor is any thing prepared for us without Industry and Endeavor; so that by
the Necessity of our Condition we are, every One of us, more or less, some in
one way, some in another, engaged in worldly Affairs. Hence it is, Lastly, the
Cares of this World, the last of those Things pertaining to it, in some measure
necessary.
that some Care about the Things of this World is allowed us; nay, and indeed
we are commanded to continue in the Calling, wherein God has set us, 1 Cor.
7.20. and we are warned, that we be not slothful in Business, Romans 12.11.

But the great Unhappiness and Sin of many in this difficult case, is this;
That a moderate Concern for the Things of this World being Allowable, they are
apt to Overwhelm themselves in a multiplicity of Cares: As also to let the
Cares of this world to Alienate their Affections from God, and Heavenly Things;
and to withdraw their Attention from him, in those Divine Services, they are
bound to Pay him. And few, who are far engaged in Temporal Designs and Cares,
know when to Retire from the world, and to throw them off; so as to give
themselves a sufficient Time to prepare for a better Life. But as necessary as
worldly Cares, are in most men's Circumstances; yet

First, It becomes Christians to Renounce that Multiplicity of Cares, I. It
becomes Christians to renounce a multiplicity of Cares.
which distracts their Thoughts, and shows 'em to have no other Aims, but at
this World. And yet so it is, that some Men fill their Heads with innumerable
Projects, and do so Overwhelm themselves with Variety of Business, that they do
scarcely allow themselves time to Eat and Sleep. But to be in a perpetual Hurry
after this World's Goods, and to be so over-solicitous for our future Provision
in it, is an Argument of Men's Discontent with that Condition, wherein
Providence has placed 'em; and of an anxious Fear, they shall not be
sufficiently Provided for by God's Blessing, concurring with an honest Industry
in their Affairs: And is such a Care, as however it might become Pagans, who
knew little of the Doctrine of God's Providence in this Life, and of his
Treasures of Bliss, provided for us in another; Yet is infinitely unbecoming
Christians, who are thoroughly Instructed in the Divine Providence and Care over
us, and his future Provisions for us; and is therefore so strictly forbid us,
Matthew. 6. from the 24th Verse, to the End.

Secondly, It behooves us Christians so far to Renounce any Worldly Care, as it
does Alienate our Affections from God, and Heavenly Things; II. Every worldly
Care, so far as it does alienate our Affections from God, and Heavenly Things.
and withdraw our Attention from him, in the Services we are bound to Pay him,
as is too often. I say, as is too often. For hence it is, that so many do
neglect Holy Duties, both Public and Private, and that they Perform either
with so little Devotion. Hence it is, that many come so seldom to Church; or
when they do, that they carry themselves in the Performance of Prayer, Praises,
and at the Hearing of the Word, with so much Coldness, Laziness, and want of
Attention. And hence also it is, that at Home there is so seldom any
Family-Prayers, and Reading of the Scriptures, and good Books. And I wish, That
rising up early, and sitting up late, and eating the Bread of Carefulness, may
not hinder some from Paying any Devotion to God, as much as Privately by
themselves, every Morning and Evening. And yet this is the least that can be
implied in those Precepts of Luke 18.1. Men ought always to Pray, and 1 These.
5.17. where we are enjoined to Pray without ceasing. And to be Negligent, or
Inattentive, through the Encumbrance of worldly Cares, at the Hearing of the
Word, was the thing for which our Savior Reproved Martha, who was Cumbring her
self with much Serving, when she ought to have Listened to our Savior's Divine
Instructions, as Mary did, for which He Commended her, Luke 10.40, 41, 42. And
therefore it behooves every Christian, when he enters into the House of God, or
into his own Closet, wholly to lay aside all worldly Cares for that Time, and
to say to 'em, as Christ to his Disciples, Stay you here, whilst go and Pray
yonder.

^astly, All ^anner of ^^rldly Care, ^^en Ad^^nc'd in ^ars.
Lastly, All Persons, whether more, or less engaged in worldly Cares, when grown
in Years, should wholly in a manner throw them off, and Retiring as much as may
be from the World, should employ the remainder of their Time in clearing their
Accounts with God and Man, and in preparing themselves for the Great Trial. And
yet it is commonly observed, that the farther Men advance in Years, the more
Covetous and Worldly they grow; but this is the most unreasonable and absurd
Thing, that can be: For what means the Cares of this World, but to provide for
our selves, or Posterity? Now as to our selves, the nearer Life draws to an
End, the less of temporal Provisions are necessary. And as to Posterity, the
best Provision that can be made for them, is what may be enough to be a
Foundation for their Industry, and not so much as will dis-engage 'em from
Business and Employment; for to leave 'em great Estates, is but to expose 'em
to the Temptations of Idleness, Luxury, and the worst of Sins: To which, as all
Men in great Possessions are liable, so none more than such, who have been
suddenly raised by the Covetousness of a worldly Miser. As therefore those Men
of Business, who would be counted the only Wise, will not show themselves in
the End the greatest Fools, when they have Advanced far in Years, at
leastwise, they should look upon that Advice of the Prophet, as particularly
directed to them, Set thy house in order, for thou shall surely dye, and not
live: Such Men have received more Talents than others, and therefore they ought
to take more time to State their Accounts, that they may come off at the Great
Audit, with the Approbation of having been good and faithful Servants.

In a Word, and to Conclude this Head, The Consideration of the World, upon
which we have been so long, you would do well to bear those Scriptural
Instructions always in Mind, To set your Affection on things above, and not on
things on the Earth, Col. 3.2. Not to Love the World, 1 John 3.15. To be
Careful for Nothing, Phil. 4.6. And to take no Thought for to Morrow, Matthew.
6.34. The Meaning of which Expressions is, That we should Love God, and
Heavenly Things in the first Place, and Abandon all immoderate Cares concerning
Worldly Things. That we must bestow much more of our Care, how we may Serve God
acceptably, a d provide for the Immortal Happiness of our Souls, than how to
Attain this World's Goods. And in an honest Industry and Endeavor, to Attain a
Sufficiency thereof, to carry us through this Vale of Misery, we must commit the
Success of all our L^bours to God, and trust him with the Event, who will take
care, That all things shall work together for Good, for them who Fear him, Romans
8.20.

THE Seventeenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THE Point that we are now upon, being to lay before you the Strength of those
Temptations, which do arise, First, From the World, Secondly, From the wicked
World, and Thirdly, From the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World: And as to
the First, First, Having sufficiently discovered what Temptations to Sin we
shall meet with, both from the World in General, and the several Things therein
contained, in Particular, I come now,

Secondly, To give you a Survey likewise too of the wicked World, and to show
you also in what Sense, and how far you are to Renounce the wicked World. II.
What Is meant by the wicked World, and how far, and in what sense we are to
renounce it.
And by the wicked World can be properly meant no other than wicked Men, there
being no Creature on Earth, besides Man, that is capable of doing any thing
morally Good, or Evil, so as to be styled from the latter, Wicked.

And if you would be farther satisfied, who these are, who may be so styled; it
seems to me, that it is not every Sinner however, Thereby is meant such as make
it their Business, like that wicked One, the Devil, to Tempt others to Sin.
that either in the Language of the Scripture, or in common Account, is called
a wicked Man: But it must be some One of a more than ordinary Impiety, so as to
approach something near Satan himself in Sin and Wickedness, that can deserve
so Black a Character. Now the Devil is often termed in Scripture The wicked
One; and particularly Matthew. 13.19. he is so styled on the account of his
Tempting others to Sin. His catching away the Word which is sown in Men's
Hearts, or his Injecting of vain Thoughts into the Minds of the Hearers, that
they may not be Converted by the Preaching of the Gospel: (one of his ways of
Tempting us to Sin, as was before showed) It is this that gave him that
Character of the wicked One. And on the very same account of his Tempting the
World to Sin, is his great Agent, Antichrist called also, 2 These. 2.8. That
wicked One. He is termed in the 4 ver. He that opposes God, and here in this 8
ver. he is styled The wicked One, because of his Coming after the working of
Satan with all deceivableness of Unrighteousness, as it follows, ver. 9, 10.
that is, because he imitates the Devil by his cunning Tempting of others into
Sin, and by deceiving 'em into Unrighteous, Irreligious Courses, he is
therefore called the wicked One. And upon the same account therefore, as those
only are properly wicked Men, who are guilty of some notorious Crime
themselves; so especially such, who make it any part of their Business to
Corrupt and Tempt others to Sin, are the wicked Men of the World.

And according to those Degrees of Tempting, of which Men are guilty, are they
to be esteemed more, or less Wicked, and Diabolically so. Some Men's
Temptations are less Extensive, and reach no farther than the Neighborhood,
where they are known, and the Company they converse with. But others there are,
whose Temptations may reach even unto the utmost Parts of the Earth; such are
those, who propagate and promote by their Writings, or Discourses, Atheistical
and Heretical Principles: And such are most of our Modern Writers of
Play-Books, and Songs, whose Plays and Poetry seem designed to nourish
Profaneness and Immorality. Now such Temptations as these will extend to all
Parts, where things of that Nature shall reach, and will be Temptations in all
Ages, so long as there will be found wicked Men like themselves, to propagate
and promote the same. The former sort may be compared to an Inferior Rank of
Evil Spirits, whose Province of doing Mischief is more narrow and confined: But
the latter are, as it were, Master Devils; Like roaring Lions, they are
continually walking about the Earth, seeking whom they may devour.

And now you must heartily Renounce, and Refuse to Conform your selves to those
wicked Men, either First, By becoming Tempters your selves of other People: Or,
Secondly, By yielding of your selves to be overcome by others Temptations.

First, You must renounce that Diabolical Wickedness of becoming Tempters your
selves of other Persons. I. We must renounce that Diabolical Wickedness of
becoming Tempters our selves of other Persons.
Renounce, do I say? You must Abhor, Abominate, and Detest this their
Wickedness of Corrupting others, and of Tempting 'em to Sin, as being a
Practice, that of all others will render you likest to the Devil. And I am sure
you would of all things in the World detest this Piece of Villainy, if you would
but attentively consider that One remarkable place of Scripture, showing you
the high Impiety of such a Wickedness. It is Acts 13.8, 9, 10. Elymas the
Sorcerer withstood Barnabas and Paul, seeking to turn away the Deputy from the
Faith: Then Paul filled with the Holy Ghost, set his Eyes on him, and said, O
full of Subtilty and all Mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all
Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Do
you see here with what unusual Indignation, and in what severe Language the
Apostle does bespeak this Wretch, merely upon his Endeavoring to Tempt the
Deputy from the right way of the Lord.

And surely not without Reason; for certainly it must be a terrible
Consideration to any One, that he has been the Instrument and Cause of
another's Damnation. It is a terrible thing to have been an Instrument of
another's Damnation.
For should such a One ever hereafter return to a right Mind (and he will be
infinitely miserable, if he does not) as his Repentance, if it be sincere, will
make him a Lover, not only of his own, but of other men's Souls: So what
Anguish will it give him, to think, that it is to be feared, there are now those
in Hell Flames, whom his ill Example, or vicious Conversation, or base and
corrupting Flatteries in wicked Courses, or Discouragements to Virtue, or
Encouragements to Sin, have sent there, never to be Retrieved.

It is an Injury to men's Souls, in some Cases hardly ever, in other
simpossible to be Repaired. It is an Injury to Men's Souls, in some Cases hardly
ever, in others impossible to be Repaired.
If his Temptations have been of that sort, as to reach no farther than he was
Known, or was Conversant, a very Eminent, and very signal Repentance may, in
some measure, put a stop to the Contagion thereof; so that they spread no
farther (though not that altogether, for some perhaps, whom he has Corrupted,
will never be Reclaimed, though he be never so great a Penitent, and Labor
himself never so much their Conversion:) But if his Temptations have been of
that more spreading and lasting Kind, now spoke, and he has been One, that has
Wrote Ill Books, been a Broacher of Pestilent Heresies, an Author of lewd
Plays, or wanton and profane Verse, the Mischief and Poison of such
Temptations do fly beyond his Recalling; and though he may Burn 'em with his own
Hands, yet others will Rake 'em out of the Ashes. And it is the Opinion of some
of the Ancients, that such Temptations as these, will affect his Happiness even
in Heaven it self; insomuch that according as the Mischief thereof does daily
spread, and more do continue to be Damned thereby, proportionably such a One
will still fall thereupon lower, and lower in Glory. I know nothing in Reason,
or Religion, that contradicts this Opinion. However it be, certainly it is the
highest Misfortune can befall any One, that he is, or ever has been amongst that
Rank of Sinners, whom the Scripture does so peculiarly Style the wicked, and
that because of their so near Resemblance to the Tempter himself. These are the
Persons by whom Offenses come, and it is a terrible Threatening, that of our
Savior's, Matthew. 18.6. to such, Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones,
which believe in me, that is, any-wise Tempt, Gall, Discourage, drive from the
Faith and Practice of a Christian, any the meanest Person that comes to me;
whosoever shall do this, It were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged
about his Neck, and he were cast into the midst of the Sea: So that of all
things in the World, it concerns you, to take care, ye never become Tempters of
others to Sin, and either to omit that, which is Good, or to commit that, which
is Evil.

Secondly, Nor does it less concern you to refuse Conforming your selves to
wicked Men, when they shall Tempt you; II. We must refuse to Conform our selves
to wicked Men, when they shall Tempt us, viz.
which they will do, when either First, by their ill Examples, they shall
Influence you; or Secondly, by falling into their Company, they shall Entice
you; or Thirdly, by their Flatteries they shall Corrupt you; or Fourthly, by
their Discouragements to Virtue, and Encouragements to Sin they shall Engage
you; or Fifthly, by their Persuasions they would Prevail upon you; or Lastly,
by their Customs would Constrain you to Sin. And I will show you, how by all
Means you must Renounce, or Refuse to Conform your selves unto their evil Ways,
in any of these Cases.

And, First, That you must renounce, or refuse to Conform your selves to the
evil Examples I. By their evil Examples.
of wicked Men, which would Influence you to Sin.

It has been ever observed, that Examples have a much greater Influence
Examples have the greatest Influence upon us; especially
than Precepts, and that most are readier to do what they see, than what they
hear. More particularly, there is a great Inclination in us to follow the
Examples of Sin; especially if many, if the Examples of those, for whom we have
an high Esteem, and of whom we do stand in great Awe.

And, First, We are especially inclined to follow the Examples of Sin; I. If
Examples of Sin.
For Sin is what our Corrupt Nature is of it self disposed to; and if moreover
Examples do come in to help us forward, these will highten our Desires, and
silence our Consciences, and give us some plausible Pretense to Sin. It looks
like some Act of Modesty, and Self-denial, to deny our own private Judgment,
and to go along with the Crowd; when our Flesh is craving, and our Lusts are
up, it is a strange Encouragement to us to Sin in Company, and fulfill 'em. This
heartens us against our Fears, and abates the Dread of Punishment, which would
follow the Satisfaction of our Lusts. Now if we are Punished for 'em, it will
not be we alone, and it is a Comfort to have Fellows in Miseries, and a Man
dares both do, and suffer many things in Company, which he would have been
dis-hearten'd to have ventured on singly.

But, Secondly, We are still more hearten'd to Sin, if the Examples thereof are
Common, and Many. II. If common, and many.
For why? Besides that there is a great deal of Proneness and Propension in all
our Natures to Vice and Wickedness, the only Restraint upon our Inclinations,
that we break not out suddenly into all Exorbitancy of Ungodliness, is as
inwardly from the Innate Turpitude and Baseness of Sin: So outwardly from the
burning and shining Lights, and glorious Examples of Virtue, that are abroad in
the World. Now our inward sense of the Filthiness of Sin soon ceases, when we
see it Practiced by the most, and those as shrewd, and as wise Persons as our
selves; and from without, there can be no Upbraiding and ill Report, in giving
swing to our naughty Desires, if Vice has once got its Multitudes of Followers,
and the Generality of Men of its side.

Thirdly, But farther yet, Examples of Sin are very Contagious, if they are the
Examples of such, for whom we have a great Esteem. III. If of such, for whom we
have a great Esteem.
Persons of all Sects and Parties in Religion fix upon some in their own way,
as very excellent Persons, and exact Patterns, fit to be imitated in all they
do, (as if Men were not Men still, and the Best were not subject to Mistake and
Failing) whatever Duty of Christianity these Men, whom they particularly
Admire, seem to have but a small regard to, they do not think it at all
necessary, because such a Good Man, would not, if it were, be wanting in it,
they think. And so as to any sinful Practice on the other side: Why should I
scruple to do so and so, thou will say, when such a One, and I am sure he
understands what he does, sticks not to do the like. He is a wise Man, a good
Man, nay, and a Scholar, and yet does so and so, nor does he fear going to
Heaven for all that.

Fourthly, But above all, the Examples of Sin are the most prevalent, when they
are backed with the Authority of those, whom we stand in awe of. IV. If of those
of whom we stand in awe.
These are the Men who will expect, not only to be Obeyed, but Honored. And if
we Ape and Imitate 'em in all their ways, we may hope thereby to obtain their
Favor. If we show a dislike of their Courses, we may have reason to fear their
Displeasure. And what is it that two such active Springs in our Nature, as our
Hopes and Fears are, will not force us to, or drive us from? So powerful you
see are the Examples of Sin, when they are backed with all these Advantages.

And now the Examples of Sin have all these Advantages in 'em, to influence you
to Conform your selves unto 'em. Ever since the unhappy Fall of Man, there is
in every Child of Adam a great deal of Proneness to Sin, rather than to Virtue.
Alas! We carry a Principle about us, which is not only buisy and ready to close
with the Temptations of others Examples, but is forward to betray us to Sin,
though we had few Examples for it. Nay, evil Inclinations, and corrupt Desires
are so powerful within us, that even the best Instructions, and the most pious
Examples, and all other good Means and Helps, are daily found too weak and
unable to Overcome 'em. And yet as if all this were little enough, there are
far more Examples abroad in the World of Wickedness, than of Goodness; insomuch
that by the World in Scripture, simply taken, is often meant no other, than
wicked Men, they make up so great a Part thereof. And not only too many Great
Men, whom you have an Awe of, do give most abominable Examples of Profaneness,
Lewdness, Drunkenness, etc. to their Inferiors; but to come nearer Home to you,
too few of your Parents and Masters, I am afraid, are Examples to you of
Religion, and of the Fear of God. Nay, and perhaps some that you have an Esteem
for, and you may take for Good Men, may be Examples of Schism and Separation,
and of breaking the Unity of the Church, and despisers of the Sacrament, or in
one Kind, or other, not so Good as they should be, not entirely and uniformly
Good.

And now what must you do in this Case? Why by all means you must Renounce and
Refuse Conformity to such bad Examples. We must by all Means renounce and
refuse Conformity to such bad Examples: For
You must by no means follow the Examples of Sin, be they who, or what they
will. Let them be never so many, you must not follow a Multitude to do Evil,
Exodus 23.2. It will not afford the least Ease to the Torments of the Damned,
that they are the many, and that the Saved are the few. Nor must the Examples
of the Greatest, no, nor of those you count Good Men, be a Rule to you, when
they vary from the Laws of God. There is no Man so Great, Wise, or Good, that
he can dispense with God's Laws, and absolve you from your Allegiance to the
Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth. This Great Man, or that Parent, or Master,
to flatter and please whom, you do follow their Examples in sinning against
God, and your own Soul, cannot afford you Protection from God's Wrath, nor
Rescue you from under the Stroke of Divine Vengeance: No, but he shall be as
liable to it himself, as the poorest Slave.

No, First, a Christian, a Soldier of Jesus Christ, is called out to Combat
against the wicked Examples of the World, as much as against any one sort of
Enemy in his Christian Warfare; I. A Christian is called out to Combat against
the wicked Examples of the World, as much as against any one sort of Enemy in
his Christian Warfare.
and be they never so many, never so mighty, he must not be overborn by 'em,
so as to Conform himself unto 'em, and either Renounce his Faith, or commit any
Sin by the influence of such numerous and mighty Examples. We read the 2d of
Kings, that in the Days of wicked Ahab, the whole People of Israel were so
Apostatized from the true Religion, that Elisha thought there was but himself
left alone, who had not through the influence of so many Idolatrous Examples,
and the Power of that wicked Prince (together with the Corruption of their own
Hearts, so prone to Idolatry) he thought there was Not one man left in Israel,
who had not bowed his knee to Baal. But he was never the more staggered for all
that, but preserved himself notwithstanding, a true Worshiper of the True God.
And for the Encouragement of you, who are Children and Servants, if it has been
your misfortune to be Born of wicked Parents, and Bred up in ungodly Families,
consider that There was found some good thing toward the Lord God of Israel,
for which God had a Regard to him, even in Abijah the Son of wicked Jeroboam,
who made Israel to Sin, 1 King. 14.13. And Obadiah preserved himself a good
Man, even in the House of wicked Ahab, Chap. 18.13. And so must you likewise,
as you will approve your selves faithful Soldiers of Jesus Christ, be wrought
upon by no Examples to comply with Sin.

Nay, secondly, to Confront their bad Examples with an excellent One of his own.
Nay, Secondly, So far must a Christian be from Conforming himself to the
Examples of wicked Men, which would Influence him to Sin, that he is called
forth to do more, Namely, to confront their bad Ones, with an extraordinary
good One of his own; and in the midst of an Evil and Adulterous Generation, he
must show himself an excellent Example of Religion and Virtue. Hence it is,
that in the Fifth of St. Matthew, of us Christians it is said, that we must be
the Salt of the Earth, ver. 13. that we must be the Light of the World, and a
City set on a Hill, that cannot be hid, and a Candle, not put under a Bushel,
but on a Candlestick, ver. 14, 15. And lastly, we are there commanded, ver. 16.
To let our Light so shine before Men, that they may see our good Works, and
glorify our Father, which is in Heaven. It is therefore, that we are thus
Represented, because, that by the Excellency of our Examples, we must be as
Salt to a corrupted World, to Season and Recover it from its Corruption; that
by the Eminency of all Christian Virtues and Graces, shining in our
Conversations, we must Enlighten the dark World; and lead 'em, by the
Brightness of our good Examples, into Holiness and Purity of Living. So much it
lies upon you, not to Conform your selves to evil Examples, that would lead you
into Sin, that by the Goodness of your own, you must draw others off from it.

II. When they shall Tempt and Entice us by their evil Company.
Secondly, You must Refuse to Conform your selves, as to the Examples, so to the
Company of wicked Men, when falling amongst 'em they would entice you to join
with 'em in Sin. As there are a great many more of bad Examples abroad in the
World, than good Ones: So the Infection thereof is a great deal more taking,
when a many of those bad Men are met together in Company, than when they remain
asunder from one another. And so much Charm there is to Bewitch, The Company of
the Wicked extremely Infectious.
or Power in ill Company to Enforce others to sinful Compliances, that even
sober and good Men, when it is their Misfortune to fall amongst such, shall
hardly preserve their Integrity, and come off from amongst 'em with as much
Innocence, as they went in; but either through the Noisiness of their Companions,
forgetting that Guard they have at other times over their Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds; or for Fear of being Reproacht as morose, dull, or ill-natured, shall
too far many times comply with the Rest of the Company, both in Speaking, and
Acting, what is not very consistent with the Duty and Reservedness of a
Christian. But as for the young, ignorant, and inconsiderate Part of Mankind,
Good God! What Mischiefs are such drawn into, through the Enticements of Evil
Company. Your lewd Companions indeed, as they are usually very Buisy in doing
Mischief, and Corrupting others; and will wonderfully Triumph and Rejoice, when
they have Perverted a Sober Person, and made him as Bad as Themselves: So they
are above all Industrious, to Corrupt and Ensnare Youth, that they may
Propagate a Generation, as Wicked as they have been. And how will they Hug
themselves, when they have Debaucht an innocent Young Person, and made him at
any time Drunk, or betrayed him into Lewdness, or any other Wickedness;
especially if of promising Hopes, and of ingenious Parts; and how many Wiles
shall be used to Ensnare him again? Their Mouth is full of Deceit and Fraud,
under their Tongue is Ungodliness and Vanity, they ly lurking in the Thievish
Corners of the Streets, to wait for the Innocent, to draw him into their Net,
Psalm. 10.7, 8, 9.

If you look into the particular Miscarriages of Men in the World, Most of the
Miscariages of Men owing thereunto
what a Lamentable thing it is to consider, How many hopeful Youth have woefully
Miscarried through wicked Company? How many have we known go Abroad into the
World, the Hopes of their Families, the Expectations of their Country, and the
most Promising Persons of the Nation, but Falling into ill Company, have proved
the most outrageous Fiends on this side Hell? And what Vices, what Villainies
are there, that Evil Company has not drawn 'em into?

What shall I say? It is Evil Company, that makes the Youth an Atheist. This
makes Men Atheists
Alas! The unwary Stripling no sooner goes into the World, but these Factors
for the Devil lay hold on him; and with all the wily Insinuations, and cunning
Artifices, with Arguments best suited to the Temper of the Young Man, they
Persuade him to join with 'em in their lewd Courses. They do usually Enter him
at first in your Taverns, and those Places of public Entertainment, that are
something more Remote from, and ly, as it were, only on the Highway to Sin.
They next carry him from thence into the very Suburbs of Hell, those Houses, I
mean, where such Scenes of Lewdness are seen and acted, as would Profane the
Place we are in, to mention, as are not fit to be spoke to Chaste Ears, nor
indeed can Enter your Thoughts, without leaving behind some base Defilement.
And now if he has that Talent, which they call Wit, such a share at least, as
will enable him to talk Profanely, to break Jests upon Scripture, and, Oh
Brutish Stupidity! Oh desperate Madness! To Blaspheme, and fly into the Face of
God Almighty; they feed his Vanity with loud Applauses, and cry up to the Skies
his Wit and Parts. And by this he thinks himself sufficiently furnished, to be
an Apostle of Satan's also himself; and henceforwards you shall see him, to be
Intent wholly upon this very thing, to draw all others into the same Damnation
also along with him.

Alas! It is nothing but Evil Company, Libertines.
that Emboldens the Young Man for lewd Pranks. At first he is Ashamed to have
his Name up amongst lewd Companions, and his Natural Modesty will not let him
look an Harlot in the Face; but they soon Laugh him out of that Clownish
Shameface'dness, so that he can at length Sin with Impudence enough, can Glory
in his Shame, and Brag of more mad Exploits, than he was ever guilty of
Committing; and is with the greatest Ease drawn aside to his Destruction, by
every lewd Harlot, that lies in wait for him; as Solomon most excellently
observes, Prove. 7.

It is evil Company, that draws so many into the sad Trade of Thievery and
Robbery. Thieves, and Robbers.
They entice and inviegle others to join with 'em in those desperate
Undertakings, in which so many miscarry, that not One in a Hundred, that being
once Engaged, can rid himself of 'em, or comes not at last to some End of
Shame, or Sorrow. And there are few of those, who are Condemned for Theft, or
Murder, when they come to Dye, but woefully complain in their Confessions, that
it was evil Company, that brought them to it. Come say they, with those in the
Prove. 1.11, 12, 13. Let us lay wait for Blood, let us swallow them up as the
Grave, and whole as those, that go down into the Pit, we shall find all
precious Substance, fill our houses with Spoil, cast in thy Lot amongst us, let
us all have one Purse.

It is evil Company, that makes Men Drunkards Drunkards.
and Sots. There is not One at first however, that loves Drinking for Drinking
sake: It Is the Witchery of good Fellowship, as they falsely call it, that first
Enters 'em, and afterward holds 'em in that Course of Living, to the Ruin of
their Families, their Estates, their Health, their Bodies, their Souls; and all
that is Precious in this, or the other World.

It is Evil Company, that often keeps some from Church, and the Worship of God,
Withdraws from the worship of God.
that persuades some to idle at Home, others to wander in the Streets and
Fields, whilst they should be a serving of God in his House. What shall I say?
It is Evil Company, that discourages from all Good, and hardens Men in all
manner of Sin and Wickedness.

The fairest Vessels have split upon this Rock, the most promising Hopes and
Expectations of Families, of their Countries, have been Ship-wrackt, have been
lost in this Sea.

Evil Company therefore if of all things to be abhorred
But let me add the Wise-man's Advice, Prove. 1.10, 11. etc. My Son if sinners
entice thee, consent thou not, nay my Son walk not in the way with them,
refrain thy foot from their path. No, go not into their Company, Evil
Communications corrupt good Manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. It Is dangerous even to Talk
with 'em, but Associate thy self to 'em upon no account. There is Contagion and
Infection wherever they are. Thou may enter a House infected with the
Plague, tread upon the Adder's Nest, put thine Hand into a Lion's Den; but on
no Hand enter the Society of those Sons of Belial, who seem to defy Heaven with
Oaths and Blasphemies, strive to load themselves with so much of that Hellish
Guilt, as if they feared they should not sink deep enough into the bottomless
Pit. Beware of 'em; their Houses are the way to Hell, going down to the
Chambers of Death.

And, First, Particularly you that are Young Women, let me warn you to shun the
Company of those Young Men, I. Young women must shun the corrupt Conversation
of young Men.
be they who they will, who shall offer to talk loosely, and lewdly, and
wantonly before you. I am afraid that Filthy Communication, and foolish
Jesting, which are not convenient, are too much the subject of Conversation,
when the Youth of both Sexes meet together, especially amongst such of lower
Rank, and who have not been Blessed with the best Education and Breeding. But as
to offer at Filthiness and foolish Talking before you, is the greatest Affront
any can give you, as signifying no good Opinion they have of you; so Young Men
will not have the Confidence to Entertain you so Indecently and Rudely, if at
the very first Offers of that Nature, you shall appear to conceive that Anger
and Indignation, as infinitely becomes the modesty of your Sex to put on. And I
am sure you would, both heartily detest such Conversation, and not fail to show
your Detestation thereof, if you would seriously consider what the Apostles
says of it, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Fornication and Uncleanness, let it not be once
named amongst you, as becomes Saints: Neither Filthiness, nor foolish Talking,
nor Jesting, which are not convenient; For this know, that no Whoremongers, nor
unclean Person, has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God, and of Christ. Let
no man deceive you, for because of these words comes the wrath of God upon the
Children of Disobedience. Pray observe this whole Passage of St. Paul. Wanton
and lascivious Discourse is as Infectious as the very Plague, and kindles such
a Fire of Lust, as without Repentance will certainly bring you to the Fire of
Hell: Therefore fail not to express your utmost Abhorrence thereof; and if you
cannot stop it, fly from those that utter it, as from Persons infected with a
Plague Sore, having such an Air of Anger, and Indignation, and Abhorrence, as
you go off, as no Man dare thereafter disturb you with the like.

And indeed, Secondly, it concerns all sort of Persons of either Sex, both
Young and Old, as they would prevent Infection of evil Company, II. All Persons
of either Sex, both Young, and Old, as they will prevent the Infection of evil
Company, must take all possible Care to avoid it.
and considering how dangerous it is to be taken therewith: And how the
Tincture of their Manners and Customs, with whom we do frequently Converse, is
observed to slide insensibly into our Imitation, so as to be hardly ever after
wore off: All these things considered, It concerns you, I say, to take all
possible Care to avoid the Company of bad Men. I say, to avoid it, if it be
possible; for it is not always, nay it is very rarely in this State of the
World, that it can be done: For if ye must not Company with the Fornicators of
this world, or with the Covetous, or Extortioners, or with Idolaters; then must
ye needs go out of the world, said St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5.10.

The Truth of it is, your Employment and necessary Occasions, as to most of
you, is, or will be such, that you will unavoidably be drawn forth into the
World; and the World we know is full of Atheistical and profane Persons, and
common Swearers, of Drunkards, and riotous Livers, of debauched and lewd
Companions; and lastly, of the Contemners of God, and Religion; and I am afraid
it is the general Conversation now adays, of those Companions, to break Jests,
and laugh at one another upon these their Dishonours done to God, and Religion,
whereby they Do not only do ill things themselves, but have pleasure in them
that do them, which St. Paul does add, Romans 1.32. as the highest Aggravation of
all Impiety. To speak freely, and not to flatter the present State of the
World: I am afraid you shall seldom go into Promiscuous Company, but some such
you shall meet withal. And now the great Enquiry will be, What shall be done in
this Case?

Why, Thirdly, Truly when it thus happens to you, that your Employment, and
necessary Occasions draw you forth into the World that which you have then to
do, is to refuse to Conform your selves to the Manners of such Company. But,
Thirdly, when Employment and necessary Occasions draw Men forth in to the
World, they must refuse to Conform themselves to the Manners of ill Company.
First, By discountenancing their Profaneness and Riot.
But, First, you must with all wariness and circumspection watch, lest framing
your selves to the Humors of profane Persons, you countenance and encourage
'em in what is sinful and wicked, and so partake with 'em in their Sins, and
make their Guilt your own. Nay, but on the contrary, you must at leastwise by
a pious and discreet Behavior, and by showing a dislike and uneasiness at
their Hellish Talk, discountenance the Folly of those that do thus Offend.

II. By diverting 'em by useful Discourse from both.
Secondly, You must not fail, to do what you can, to divert the Company you
happen amongst, from Riot and Excess, and from vicious and filthy Talk, by
drawing 'em, with what Dexterity possible, into more manly Discourse, and into
a more Christian, sober, rational Conversation.

III. If all Methods fail, by openly Reproving them.
But, Thirdly, if after all, if all these wise and modest Methods will not do,
but on they will go, and good Sense must give way to such unsavory
Entertainment: Why then then there is no help, but you must boldly and bravely
Rebuke their impudent Folly, and openly Reprove it.

For why? You must consider, that you have Listed your selves in your Baptism,
To do this Service to God we are particularly Listed in our Baptism.
the Soldiers of Jesus Christ, and no faithful Soldier will patiently hear
his General abused, his Honor trampled upon, his Commands slighted and
scorned, but will stoutly stand up in Vindication of him, and his Orders. As
you will not therefore be accounted in the Day of Judgment, such as have
Deserted the Great Captain of our Salvation, Jesus Christ, you must not stand
by, and tamely suffer profane Wretches to dishonor God's Holy Name and Word,
by their unsavory Oaths and Speeches, and you must not cowardly permit 'em to
Brag of their Contemptuous breaking of his sacred Laws, without Rebuking their
Wickedness, and stoutly standing up in Defense of him, and them.

We shall be much discouraged from this by Men.
You must expect, I will own it, to meet with but rude Entertainment, for such
your Fidelity to your great Master. You shall be sure to be accounted Fools,
Mad and Rude for your Pains. And it is odds, but you shall be reproacht as
Hypocrites, that would fain seem Better than others, but can privately be as
Bad as they.

But have infinite Encouragements to such Fidelity from God.
But consider, the more you suffer for the Honor of your Lord, the more like
good Soldiers you behave your selves, and the better he will reward you.
Consider what a glorious Thing it is to be Evil spoken of for Well-doing:
Blessed are ye when Men shall Revile you, and say all manner of Evil against
you, falsely for my sake; Rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
Reward in Heaven, Matthew. 5.11, 12. Consider your Savior and Leader, who
suffered worse Reproaches, and The Disciple is not above his Master, nor the
Servant his Lord, if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how
much more shall they call them of his Household, Matthew. 10.24, 25. Consider that
a Christian must not fear the Face of any Man, but must suffer Martyrdom, it
self, in the Cause of Christ, if called out to it: Fear not them which kill the
Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, but fear him who is able to destroy
both Body and Soul in Hell, ver. 28. Nay, consider lastly, that this Standing
up resolutely for the Honor of God and Religion, is the next Degree to
Martyrdom, and will be rewarded like it. It is called a Confessing of God
before Men, and on the other side, a fearing and forbearing to appear in His
behalf, a Denying of him; and consider what our Savior declares concerning
such, who do so Confess, or Deny him: Whosoever shall Confess me before Men,
him will I Confess before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever shall
Deny me before Men, him will I also Deny before my Father which is in Heaven,
Matthew. 10.32, 33. So much it concerns you to refuse Conformity to the Evil
Company of the World: And so much for this time.

THE Eighteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
THAT which I am now upon is, to Forewarn you against the Temptations of the
wicked World, by showing you the dangerous Ones you shall meet withal, from the
Wicked Men of the World, and in what Sense, and how far you must Renounce both
them, and their wicked ways of Tempting others to Sin. This I have already
done, as to their Evil Examples, and Evil Company, and have delivered these
Instructions to you, that by God's Help may, I hope, be sufficient to prevent
your being infected by the Poison of either. But the wicked Men of the World,
have other ways of Tempting Men to Sin, and what they are, and how bravely you
must Resist them, I am next to declare unto you.

III. Flattery a great Temptation to Sin.
Thirdly, Then, amongst the greatest Temptations proceeding from Evil Men, we
may deservedly reckon their Flatteries. Now the Flatterer is One, who observing
the general Self-love and Pride of Mankind, who cannot endure Reproof, or any
thing that shows a Dislike of what they say, or do, does compose himself to
Admire and Extol, or at leastwise to Approve, as Well-done, very bad Actions,
or at best such, as if Good in themselves, are but indifferently Performed.

The Ground of his Flattery, I say, is That immoderate Self-love The Ground
thereof our own immoderate Self-love
he observes Natural to most Men, whereby they do extravagantly esteem and
admire their own Performances, and can see no Defects therein: And therefore,
whoever shall endeavor to discover their Faults, though in never so Prudent a
manner, to any of these Self-admirers, he is presently looked upon as One, that
either envies his Abilities and good Qualities, or as St. Paul was to the
foolish Galatians: He is therefore become his Enemy, because he tells him the
Truth, Gal. 4.16.

And now the Flatterer observing this predominant Humor in him, puts on the
Vizard of a Friend, And composes himself to Admire and Extol, or at leastwise
to Approve, as Well-done, his very bad Actions, or at best such, as if Good in
themselves, are very indifferently Performed. The Flatterer's care is to
Please, not to Profit him, to whom he pretends to be a Friend, to make a Prey
of the besotted Self-admirer, and therefore sooths him up in his Vices; he
calls his Profaneness, Wit; she that is Superstitious, Devout; the Prodigal and
Profuse, he styles Bountiful and Liberal; and the Covetous Worldling, from whom
he expects an Estate, or Legacy, he Extolls to his Face, for his Prudence in
managing his Affairs: The Oaths and Curses, the Riot and Debaucheries of the
wicked Crew he happens amongst, he laughs at, as brave Exploits, and applauds
them as the Standards of Wit and Bravery. And as to such things, which are
tolerably well Performed, but might be Bettered, for fear of mortifying the
Vanity of the Creature, whereby he might possibly displease him, he discovers
nothing of that, but all is Well, and admirably Performed.

And now this Flattery to the Vices and Imperfections of Men is of mischievous
Consequence to 'em. So Prove. 26.28. This Flattery keeping Men ignorant of the
good or ill Qualities in 'em thereupon.
A flattering Mouth works Ruin; and 29.5. A man that flattereth spreads a
Net. For why? The Flatterer, as Plutarch observes, endeavors to make every Man
his own Cheat, by keeping him ignorant of of the good and ill Qualities, which
are in him, whereupon the Good never come to Perfection, and the Ill grow
Incorrigible.

By this means, I say, The Good never come at Perfection. The Good never come
to Perfection.
There is many a Person of a Generous Temper, who delights to do Good to
Mankind, whose Head is working for the Public, and loves to relieve the Needy;
but all this it is visible he does too much out of Ostentation, and to get the
Praise of Men, and so loses his Reward from God: But now if he had but a
faithful Monitor, that would fairly represent to him the Vanity and
Affectation, that appears in the Good he does, and which others can see, though
he himself is not sensible of. And that it is but to direct it to a right End,
and then he will obtain a Reward in Heaven, and moreover merit the Praises of
Men too: A little of this Sincerity and Freedom would make that Man an
excellent Person, whom now his Vanity and Braging of the Good he does, renders
Troublesome and Hateful even to those, whom he most Obliges. There is also many
a One, who in his Projects concerning his own Advantage, and that of the
Public, out of an over-fond Conceit of his own Methods, disdaining to ask
Counsel; or if he did, they flattering every thing, and not sincerely giving
their Advice; the Design it self therefore, and the measures of obtaining it,
though Good in the main, has for that very reason alone mis-carry'd: So much does
the Self-flattery of our own Hearts, joined with the Flatteries of other
Persons, hinder our Good from arriving to Perfection.

And the Ill that is in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible. And the Ill that is
in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible.
Thus there is not a greater Cause at this Day of that Profaneness and
Impudence in Sin and Debauchery, than the Assentations, Smiles, and other
Tokens of Approbation given by base Flattery, to horrid Wickednesses; whereas
would every Christian, as he is infinitely bound to do, express his Dislike,
his Abhorrence, his Scorn of the Debauchees, and their Debaucheries, when they
are openly Committed, or impudently Bragged of, the impious Sinners of this Age
would then endeavor to be Private however, not Affect, as they do, to be
Public in their Villainies. This base Flattery, of which there are but few, who
are not Guilty, in not putting a Frown at leastwise, instead of a Smile, upon
impious Doings, has tended extremely to harden the young Reprobates of our Age
to their own, and the Nation's Ruin; for indeed, as the excellent Plutarch
Expresses it, When Vice is Extolled, so that a Man is induced to Sin, not only
without Regret, but with Joy and Triumph, and is hardened beyond the modesty of
a Blush for his Enormities: This sort of Flattery has been fatal to whole
Kingdoms. And though indeed the Great Ones are most subject to it, because they
of all Men, will not endure Reproof; yet there are not any so mean, we see,
whose Vices are not Applauded amongst their Companions, rather than
Reprehended, and who are not therefore hardened thereby into all manner of
Wickedness. In a word, It is this sort of Flattery, which amongst all Ranks and
Degrees of Men, Has strengthened the hands of the Wicked, that he should not
return from his wicked way, Ezekiel. 13.22. So mischievous a Temptation, you see,
is Flattery; it hinders all sorts of Persons from improving their Virtues, and
encourages 'em to the highest Pitch of Wickedness. And now what must be done in
this Case, that you may effectually Renounce it, and avoid the ill Effects of
it? And in order thereunto,

First, Let me Advise you, with the excellent Philosopher now mentioned, that
We Cashire every vain Opinion of our selves, I. In order to Renounce flattery
we must Cashire every vain Opinion of our own selves.
whose Inbred Flattery only disposes and prepares us to a more favorable
Reception of that from without: For he who loves to be Flattered, is doubtless
sufficiently fond of himself; and through abundance of Complaisance to his own
Person, not only wishes, but thinks himself Master of all those Perfections,
which may Recommend him to others. But did we reflect upon our own Nature and
Education, and consider what gross Imperfections and Failures, mixed with our
Words, Actions and Affections, we should not lie so open to the Attempts of
every Flatterer, who designs upon us; and we should be well prepared to
Renounce and Reject all his deceitful Flatteries, which must be done: For

Secondly, Having thus dis-possest your Breasts of an immoderate Self-love, you
must So far renounce and reject the Flatteries of Men, as to take it kindly,
when you are Reproved. II. We must so far Renounce the Flatteries of Men, as to
take it kindly to be Reproved.
And indeed you are to Esteem and Love him, as your truest Friend, who deals so
Ingeniously with you, as frankly to discover to you your Imperfections and
Failings of any Kind, and freely to reprove you for your Faults. David desired
such a Friend, who would thus Reprove him, Psalm. 141.5. Let the Righteous smite
me, and it shall be a Kindness, and let him Reprove me, and it shall be an
excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head; intimating of the Flatteries of
wicked Men, which in the other Translation are called precious Balms, would
mortally wound him. And Solomon, who best knew what Wisdom was, and the methods
of Attaining it, does most frequently speak of Reproof, as a most excellent
One, The Ear that hears the Reproof of Life, abides among the Wise; He that
refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul; but he that fears Reproof,
gets Understanding, Prove. 15.31, 32. But on the contrary, to hate Reproof,
is in his account the Highway to Error, Ruin and Destruction. Thus Prove.
10.17. He that refuses Reprooferreth. and 15.10. He that hates Reproof shall
dye. and 29.1. A man of Reproof, that hardneth his Neck shall be destroyed.
This indeed, as any other Discipline is distastful to Flesh and Blood, but it
is in it self the most profitable sort of Correction, for A Reproof enters
more into a Wise man than Stripes, Prove. 17.10.

And as you must bring your self to that humble and low Opinion of your own
Perfections, and to that sense of your Faults, Especially the Reproofs of Gods
Ministers are to be kindly received and regarded.
as to take kindly the Reproof of a Friend, and to amend upon it; so especially
you are to receive, with all Reverence, and Respect, and Kindness the Reproofs
of God's Ministers, tending either to better, or reform you. Of all Men living
it must not be expected from us, to favor you in any thing amiss, to smile
upon your Extravagancies, to speak only Comforts and Consolations to you, when
we come to deal with your Consciences, which ought to be searched to the Bottom
by us, and the Corruption let out. This was that Flattery, which Jeremiah
reprehends, and severely threatens in the Prophets and Priests of his Time,
6.13, 14, 15. But our Business is by Preaching, Catechizing, and all the
Methods of Instruction, to give you a through Understanding of all the Terms
and Conditions of that Covenant, wherein you stand Engaged to God; to be
Watchmen over your Souls, in order to discover your Errors and Failures
therein; to direct you for your better Improvement in those Graces, whereunto
you have already attained; and you must expect it from us, to frown upon your
Follies, and boldly to Reprove you, when we perceive you to Transgress our
Great Master's Laws. And you must receive all this at our Hands, not only as a
necessary Discharge of our Duty, but what you must apply to your own
Improvement and Reformation. And this if you should not do, your Ruin will be
imputed to it. Hence Solomon warns the Young Man to beware of sinful
Extravagancies, Lest he be brought to Mourn at the last, when his Flesh and his
Bones are consumed, and to own as the cause of all this, That he hated
Instruction, and that his Heart despised Reproof, that he obeyed not the Voice
of his Teachers, nor inclined his Ear to them, that Instructed him, Prove. 5.11,
12, 13. So far therefore is the Flattery of wicked Men to be Renounced, that
Reproof on the contrary is to be Kindly received. But

Fourthly, Wicked Men will proceed farther to Tempt others to Sin, even By
their false and fallacious Argueings against the Necessity of a Holy Life. IV.
Wicked Men Tempt others to Sin by their false and fallacious Argueings against
the Necessity of a Holy Life.
One would think there should be none professing Christianity, that should
openly Plead for Sin; but yet such Factors and Agents Satan has amongst us, as
will openly Avow his Cause, and will endeavor to Persuade you, that you are
not Obliged to that Strictness of Living, which we Preachers are continually
sounding in Men's Ears.

And to this Purpose you shall hear them Argue so hotly, that God no doubt is a
Merciful Being, and will not surely for the Sins of a short Life, Condemn the
Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. And as to the Duties of Religion, you
shall hear 'em argue, that they are hard Sayings, and who can bear 'em. And as
to themselves, you shall hear these Men often Pleading, that they are made of
Flesh and Blood, and therefore sure God will not require Men, upon the Hazard
of Salvation, to mortify the Flesh; and that they are set in a World full of
Temptations, and abounding in Delights and Pleasures; and that therefore God,
who has Placed 'em in it, will not command 'em upon Pain of Damnation, to
Overcome these strong Temptations, and to deny these Pleasures of the World.

These are the common, and pernicious, and licentious Argueings of Men, to
persuade both themselves and others into such easy Notions of God and Religion,
that they may Sin with more Security, and less Fear. And this has been a
powerful Art in all times; and such Arguments as these Men are most ready to
Believe, because they love the Thing they Plead for, because they favor their
Lusts, and grant 'em so much Liberty in what they long for, the satisfying the
Flesh, and enjoying the World.

All which wicked Reasonings we must fortify our selves against; as when they
Plead
But do you beware, and fortify your selves well against those false Argueings
of Sinful men, in Behalf of their Lusts, and against the Strictness of
Religion, whereby they would Persuade you, as well as themselves, into a sinful
Security, and withdraw you from, or slacken you in your Duty. They are false
and fallacious Arguments, that would persuade us to Comply in the least with
Sin, for there is nothing more plain in Scripture, than that Sin must with all
possible Care be avoided. It tells us positively, That we must deny all
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present World, Tim. 2.12. And that all that name the Name of Christ, must
depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19. And that all true Christians must be
Cleansed from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. And in order to Perfection, that they must Cut off
right Hands, and put out right Eyes, when they offend 'em; that is, any Lusts
that are so dear and useful to you, as these Members are, Matthew. 29.30. What
shall I say? It tells us, that the Friendship of the world is Enmity against
God, and that whosoever will be a Friend of the world, is an Enemy of God, Jam.
4.4. And then as for the Punishment of Sin, there is not One but has the
Penalty of Eternal Death and Misery, if Unrepented of, affixt to it.
Particularly, Rev. 21.8. it is said, that the Fearful, or those who Apostatize
from the Faith out of fear, And unbelieving, and the abominable, and Murderers,
and Whore-mongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have
their part in the Lake, which burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the
second death. This the Word of God does assure us, and then for Men to raise to
themselves Hopes of Impunity, so contrary to the express Declarations of
Scripture, when if they shall be mistaken, and find after all, God's
Threatenings to prove real, (as there is infinite Reason to believe they shall)
this is certainly the most desperate Presumption in the World.

But if you consider these Arguments asunder, there is no strength in 'em
wherefore any should venture to rely upon 'em. For in the first place, it is in
no wise Inconsistent with God's Mercy, for the Sins of a short Life, to Condemn
the Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. I. That it is inconsistent with
God's Mercy for the Sins of a short life to Condemn the Guilty to an Eternity
of Woe and Misery.
His Mercy is sufficiently satisfied in laying no Tyrannical Impositions upon
us, as Satan and all false Gods have done upon their superstitious Votaries. It
is yet a farther Demonstration of his Mercy, that our virtuous Performances,
though they are their own Reward here, yet they shall be also abundantly
Recompensed hereafter. He does moreover let us see his Mercy in his long
Forbearance of us, notwithstanding, that by our numberless Provocations, we do
Grieve his Holy Spirit. But he has given us the greatest Discoveries of his
Mercy, beyond what could ever enter into the Hearts of Men to expect, when he
gave his own Son to be an Atonement and Expiation for our Sins, that his
Justice might not proceed against us; and when he sent him to us with a
Covenant of Grace, as an Act of Pardon, proposing to us, not only a perfect
Reconciliation with our offended God, but infinite Rewards in Heaven, if we
would return to our due Obedience, and Pay him no other but a reasonable
Service. I think this is sufficient for Mercy to do; and if such immensurable
Mercies will not win upon us, it is time that as severe a Justice should then
take place; for we are to consider God as the supreme Governor of Men, and
Justice is as necessary an Attribute in Government, as Mercy.

Nor is his Severity, in Punishing the Sins of a short Life, with an Eternity
of Woe and Misery, but what is agreeable to his Justice and Wisdom, as supreme
Governor of the World. It is necessary in all Governments, that the Laws
thereof should be enforced with such Penalties, as shall be sufficient to deter
People from the Transgression of those Laws. And therefore the Penalties being
future, it is necessary they should be vastly Great, to Over-balance the
Profits, or Pleasures of Sin, which are present. It may seem hard indeed at
first sight, in Humane Governments, that a Person for Clipping a Piece of
Silver, which bears the Image and Superscription of Caesar, or for Stealing it
from another, should forfeit not only his Goods and Chattels, but also his Life
it self; but yet since upon the Temptations of present Profit, bad Men will
adventure to commit such Facts, and the Authority of Laws cannot otherwise be
kept up, nor Men's Rights and Properties preserved: It is not thought by the
Honest Part of Mankind, Inconsistent with the Wisdom and Justice of Governors,
to inflict even such Punishments, as extend to the loss of Life. It is these
alone are sufficient to Outweigh the present Consideration of Profit to the
Offender, and effectually to move him to live in Obedience to Government; and
therefore these, as great as they be, are esteemed but Just and Equal. So here
in the Government of God over us: The Pleasures and Profits of Sin, to compass
which, Men will Transgress the Laws of Heaven, are but short, true it is; but
yet being present, and the Punishments Threatened to 'em being apprehended, by
most Sinners, to be at a great distance, they are therefore generally
prevailing, and Men for that Reason do venture to Transgress the Laws of God,
(a Thing of worse Consequence than the Violation of Humane Ordinances;) and
therefore it is no other, than what can be expected from the Justice and Wisdom
of the supreme Governor of the World, to inflict such infinite and eternal
Punishments. In short, Divine Vengeance, as well as Humane, must be such as
will Over-balance the Reasons and Motives to Sin. And the Pleasures and Profits
of Sin being present, and the Divine Punishments not taking place but in
another World, according to the Fundamental Rules and Reasons of Government,
they must be Infinite and Eternal, and all little enough, or otherwise they
will not be sufficient to secure our Obedience to the Laws of Heaven. So that
there is no Strength in this Argument of Sinful Men, against the Justice of
Eternal Torments, in the behalf of their Lusts, whereby they would persuade
you, as well as themselves, into a most dangerous Security, and withdraw you
from, or slacken you in your Duty.

Secondly, Nor are the Duties of our Religion hard Sayings, which no Man can
bear, II. That the Duties of Religion are hard Sayings which no man can bear.
as they will likewise plead. All the Duties enjoined us in the Gospel, respect
either God, our Neighbor, or our Selves. Those to God, as we find 'em laid
down in pure and undefiled Christianity (undefiled, I say, with the Inventions
of Men) are no superstitious, senseless, and uncouth Observances, so much the
matter of all other Worships besides the Christian; but are all of 'em indeed,
a most reasonable Service. Those which respect our Neighbor, are no other than
Acts of Justice, Peace, and Charity, the contrary of which would destroy Humane
Society, or make us Beasts of Prey one to another. And as to those Duties we
owe to our selves, why, they are no other than, that we should truly and justly
Value our selves, neither overmuch by Pride, nor too little by letting base
Lusts to reign over us, or the inferior Part of our Nature, to Domineer it
over our Reason and Understanding, the Superior, and in all Equity the
governing Part of us. And what is there hard in all this, that we should
Quarrel with our Duty, except we count it hard, that God, who has made us
reasonable Creatures, would not suffer us to Transform our selves into
unreasonable Brutes.

Thirdly, And this is a sufficient Answer also, to that other Pleading of
sinful Men, That they are made of Flesh and Blood, and therefore sure God will
not require Men, upon the Forfeiture of Salvation, if they do not, to Mortify
the Flesh. III. That they are made of Flesh and Blood, and that therefore sure
God will not require Men upon the Forfeiture of Salvation if they do not to
mortify the Flesh.
For these Men, who Plead thus, ought to consider, that they consist of Soul
and Spirit, as well as of Flesh and Blood; and as the Soul is Superior, and
the Governing Part within us; So it is highly Reasonable it should have the
Obedience of the Other: And this is all the Mortification, which Religion puts
the Flesh to. It would keep it in Subjection to the Dictates of right Reason,
and that is all. And though this Mortification of the Flesh is to be exercised,
by Imposing some Severities sometimes upon the Body, as by Fasting and
Watching, etc. Yet this is no more to be complained of, than that Refractory
Children, and Servants, and Subjects must be sometimes kept up under
Discipline, as there shall be occasion.

Nay, but Lastly, say these Men, God has set us in a World full of Temptations,
and abounding with sensual Delights and Pleasures; and he therefore, who has
Placed us in it, sure will not Command us upon Pain of Damnation, to Overcome
those strong Temptations, and to Deny these Pleasures of the World. Lastly,
that God has set us in a World full of Temptations, and abounding with sensual
Delights and Pleasures; and that he therefore who has placed us in it, will not
command us, upon Pain of Damnation, to overcome those strong Temptations, and
to deny these Pleasures of the World.
And we'll grant it, that he has Placed us in a State of Probation and Trial,
where we have sensual Pleasures and Delights, and many other Temptations,
besetting us on the one side, as well as the Rewards of Heaven, awaiting us on
the other; and where were the Virtue, and what Place would there be for Reward,
if there were not those Difficulties to Overcome? But in short, there is not
any thing Unreasonable, nor a Hardship unsupportable in any thing, that God has
Enjoined us; for the same Almighty Goodness, which gives us the Command to do
these things, gives us also the Will and Power to Obey, and besides proposes to
us Enjoyments infinitely surpassing those Worldly Pleasures, as the Rewards of
such Obedience. And so I have given you sufficient Answers to those false and
fallacious Argueings of sinful Men, against the Necessity of a Holy Life, I
know 'em to be too common in the Discourses of such Persons, who love their
Lusts, and therefore I thought it requisite to Fortify you against them.

But to proceed, Fifthly, Wicked Men will not be content by the secret
Influence of their Examples and Company only, nor by their false and fallacious
Arguments to Tempt you to Sin, but Will moreover sometimes add Kindnesses and
Promises to oblige you to do ill Things, and on the contrary will much
discourage you, nay sometimes Threaten you, to forbear your Duty. V. Wicked Men
will add Kindnesses and Promises to Oblige us to do ill Things, and on the
contrary will much discourage us, nay sometimes Threaten us to forbear our Duty.


The Kindnesses of Friendship are of all things the most Engageing, and if your
Choice of a Friend has not been so discreetly and happily made, but he happens
to be a wicked Man, who upon the Score of former Obligations laid upon you,
will require in Return, that some ill Thing should be done by you to serve his
Interest, you will be drawn thereby into a very great Snare; for besides that,
there is in very many, whom we call Good-natured Men, such an Easiness of Mind,
that they can hardly deny any thing to those, who have once Obliged 'em; but
are ready to Pleasure and Comply with 'em, though in things most directly
contrary to their own Minds and Inclination. Besides this, if you should refuse
to Gratify in any thing, One that has done you former Kindnesses, the World
will be ready to call you Ungrateful, the most odious Reproach, that can be
cast on any One.

Nay and wicked Men will not sometimes stick to Bribe you also with Promises
and Proposals of Profit and Advantages, if you will serve 'em in their ill
Designs. This One would think not so dangerous a Temptation to Sin, because
more open, and not so Insinuating a way as the former; but God knows, too many
do knowingly and wilfully barter away their poor Souls, and plainly sell 'em to
the Devil, contracting to commit this, or that Sin; as for Instance, to take a
false Oath, to forge Writings, to make a Lie in another's behalf, upon the
Promise, or Intimation of some Reward for so doing. Thus will wicked Men, some
by Kindnesses, some by Promises, Oblige you, if they can, to serve 'em by your
Sins.

And some on the other hand will be no less Industrious by Discouragements, nay
Threatenings to hinder you in the discharging your Duty, and a good Conscience.
Religion will sometimes put you upon doing those things, that will prejudice
your worldly Interests, and stir up the Wrath of those, that are Superior to
you. And indeed in this Case, a Man's worst Enemies shall be those of his own
House; and when either you must Sin, or Suffer, none will be so forward to
Tempt you to Sin, rather than to Suffer, as your nearest Relations and
Acquaintance: And what must Wife, and Children, and Family do, if you should
talk of Forsaking all, and of following Christ in the Preservation of a good
Conscience, will be Argument, that the Friend of your own Bosom will strongly
urge you withal.

But the more common Temptation discouraging Men in the Discharge of their
Duty, especially such as are of a low Rank and Condition in the World, are the
Frowns and Threats of those, that are above 'em. Hence a Minister in low
Circumstances, shall venture hard, if he offers to Reprove a Great Man, though a
Great Sinner. And you shall scarcely ever know an Officer, though never so
strictly obliged thereunto by his Oath, present, in order to Punishment, the
Man of Power and Interest in his Parish, for his Oaths, his Riots, and the most
outrageous Immoralities, which he so scandalously commits.

I. ^indnesses (...) not cor^ us to Sin.
And now what shall be done, with reference to these manifold Encouragements to
Sin, and Discouragements to Virtue, which you shall meet withal from wicked
Men? Why, in the first Place, have a special Care you be not Inveigled by the
pretended Kindness of any Person, be he who, or what he will. Let not the
Obligations of your Friend, or Acquaintance cause you to strain Truth, when you
are called to give Testimony in his Cause. Take care you be not then wrought
upon by any Sense of Kindness to Perjure your selves for him, by declaring
either more than Truth, or by speaking not the whole Truth, when it would make
against him. Consider what Kindness has been done you, if you must sin against
God, and your own Soul, to Pleasure your Friend in Return for it; It was but a
Bait to take you, a Snare to Entrap, and a pleasant Poison given to destroy
you. You ought indeed, as an honest Pagan says excellently well, to be
assistant to him in his honest Endeavors, but not in his Knaveries; in his
Counsels, not in his Tricks; in appearing as Evidence for him, but not in a
Cheat; and you must bear a share in the Misfortunes of your Friend, but not in
his Acts of Injustice.

II. Promises ^t not bribe
Secondly, As to any Promises, wherewith wicked Men may so Tempt you, as to Hire
you to Sin, God forbid, there should be a Necessity to bid you Reject and
Detest them. But if there be any need to Fortify any here against such a
Temptation, the mere Foolishness of the Bargain you will make, will
sufficiently move you to Spurn at them; for if it be an unprofitable, a very
unprofitable Bargain, though a Man should Gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul, as it is said, Mark 8.36. Oh! What ill Husbandry, what Stupidity is it,
for a Trifle of worldly Wealth, or Advantage to barter it away?

III. ^courage^ts must (...) hinder us ^n dischar^g our ^y.
And Thirdly, As for those who shall hereafter discourage you from suffering for
Righteousness sake, when called thereunto, by laying before you the Ruin you
will thereby bring upon your selves and Families; why you must consider, that
in such Case, our Savior tells us, that a Man must even Hate Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and his own Life
also, or he cannot be his Disciple; and that whosoever does not bear his Cross,
and come after him, shall not be his Disciple, Luke 14.26, 27.

^r, Fourth^ must ^reatnings, (...) Frowns ^ght us ^n it.
Nor Lastly must a Soldier of Jesus Christ be frighted out of the way of his
Duty, or Awed into any sinful, or slavish Compliance, by the Threats and Frowns
of any Man living: Shrink not from the Exercise of Religion and Uprightness,
because many about you, and they perhaps Above, or Richer than you, are profane
and lewd, and utterly regardless of any thing that is Good, and moreover do
Discourage and Affront it. For this if you should, you will most certainly
offend your Great Lord and Master, the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and who has
called upon you, not to fear a mortal Man; no, though he could Kill the Body, but
to be afraid of displeasing him rather, who is able to destroy both Body and
Soul in Hell; Yea, I say unto you, fear him, Luke 12.4.

And now, Lastly, I cannot call to Mind any other Temptations, Lastly, The evil
Customs, which have prevailed in the World, are a powerful Temptation to Sin.
usual amongst wicked Men, to Tempt others to Sin, besides Some Evil Customs so
rise amongst many. That the Heathen Idolatries, and those filthy Practices,
committed in 'em, were so universally Complied with, by all sorts of Men in the
Pagan World, was, because they were Commended and Established by Public
Custom. Many of their wisest Men and Philosophers, had other Conceptions of
God, than to think it was fit, to Change the Glory of God, into the Similitude
of an Ox, that eats Grass; and thought also, he ought to be Worshipped, not by
Fooleries and Impurities, but with a chaste Mind and a clean Heart. And yet even
those Men submitted to Common Custom, and whatever they thought, or spoke
Privately, amongst themselves, they acted and spoke in Public, as the rest
did. And it was to the Prevalency of Custom, that the Apostle imputed those
Enormities of the Ephesians, before their Conversion, telling 'em, that In time
past they walked according to the Course of this World, Ephesians. 2.2. And indeed so
great is the Power of Evil Custom, that it does still, amongst Christians,
constrain Persons to do many ill Things, even contrary to their Nature and
Inclinations, as well as Religion. And when grown prevalent and common, it does
strangely take off the sense and fear of Hurt, in the most Unchristian
Practices.

Custom, I say, does still amongst Christians, constrain Persons to do many ill
Things, even contrary to their Nature and Inclinations, as well as Religion.
Hence among the Men of Honor, as they would be thought, shall many become even
Self-murderers, merely in Compliance with Custom; insomuch, that those Persons,
who of all men Living, have most reason to preserve their Lives, having all
their good Things they can ever expect, in this World, yet desperately spill
one another's Blood in your cursed Duels. It is no Inclination in these men, I
dare say, to be so Prodigal of their dear Lives, that makes 'em so desperately
throw 'em away; but merely out of a Cowardly Fear, they should be Branded with
Disgrace, for not complying with so common a Custom, amongst Persons of their
own Character. So again, among Persons of all Ranks, you shall have men of no
manner of Inclinations to Intemperate Drinking, yet when they come to any Great
Man's House, where it is the barbarous and brutish Custom of Drinking Men hard:
Yet at such times they will not scruple to Exceed very far. It is the Custom of
the Place, they will say, and they were forced to it, they could not help it.

And Custom also, Custom takes off the Sense and Fear of Hurt in the most
Unchristian Practices.
when grown prevalent and common among Societies of Men, will strangely take
off the Sense and Fear of Hurt in the most Unchristian Practices. Hence,
amongst Seamen and Soldiers, the most outrageous Whoredoms and Adulteries,
and the most execrable Oaths and Curses, are hardly accounted amongst the
number of Sins. And all the Arts of Cheating and Overreaching, nay of
downright Lying, and Swearing to the Soundness and Goodness of bad Commodities,
is little scrupled amongst some sort of Dealers, the thing is grown so common.
And Custom it is, which is so commonly Pleaded for the Omission of most
necessary Duties, as well as the Commission of most horrid Sins. Hence do
Multitudes make not the least scruple of Absenting, their whole Lives, from the
Blessed Sacrament, because it is so common amongst many to do so. Thus
powerful, you see, are the Evil Customs of the World, so as almost to force
Men, whether they will or no, to do many ill things; and what is worse, to
sear their Consciences in the Commission of the worst Sins, and in the
Omission of the chiefest Duties.

A Christian ^ust coura^ously and ^gorously re^unce, and ^ithstand the ^orce of
all ^ful Customs ^hatsoever.
And now, what must a Christian do in this Case? Custom we know is a Second
Nature, and when it has been of a long Date, Time out of Mind, as the Phrase
is, it pleads Prescription, and obtains the Force of a Law amongst Men. So that
be a Custom never so contrary to Honesty, Sobriety, to common Sense and Reason,
or any the Laws of Christianity, an old Custom must not be broken; it is the
Custom of the Place, and must be kept up: Such are the Sentiments of the Vulgar
in this matter. But you must resolve with all Courage and Stedfastness, like
true Soldiers of Jesus Christ, to Renounce and Withstand the Force of all
sinful Customs whatsoever, and not to suffer your selves to be overborn
thereby into any sinful Compliances.

When Christianity was first Preached amongst Men, such barbarous and brutish
Customs had of a long time prevailed over the greatest Part of the Heathen
World, that many Practices which the mere Light of Nature would teach Men to
Abandon, as Sins and Wounds of Conscience, Were, as the Learned Dr. Hammond
observes, Embraced by whole Nations at once, and continued in without any
Check, as innocent, sinless Qualities, Nature and Reason being so early
engaged, and silenced by popular Custom, and vicious Education, that many knew
it not to be a Sin to Steal, or Rob, if they were so Cunning, as not to be
taken; others to Kill, and Eat their Aged Parents (conceiving that by this
means they gave 'em a more Honorable Burial;) others to throw themselves
murderously into the Flames, to accompany their Dead Princes out of the World.
Many the like irrational Sins, through some local Customs got the Reputation,
not only of sinless and lawful, but of laudable also. But all who Embraced
Christianity, as they were obliged by their Baptismal Vow, to forsake those and
the like Heathenish Customs, (for to such this Vow did particularly relate) so
they did presently beat them down wherever the Christian Religion prevailed,
insomuch that in few Ages, there were not the least Footsteps thereof
remaining. And so must you likewise vigorously withstand all Customs that are
Immoral, wherever, and by whomsoever, and how long soever they have obtained.

Such only as are Immoral are to be Renounced.
I do say, All Customs that are Immoral: For I do not mean, that a Christian
must turn Cynick, a dogged and sower Lump of Earth, surly, and uncivil, and
quarrelling with the innocent Modes of Humane Society. That is as much a Fault
on the other side, to think that Christianity, the calmest and the sweetest
Religion in the World, does oblige Men to ill Manners. But those Customs, the
Force of whose Temptations I would have you all to Resist, and utterly to
Renounce, are such as I before mentioned, and which are apparently sinful and
wicked, either tending to lessen the Guilt of Sin, or to make it none at all.

I am sensible there is something of Difficulty in this Part of our Warfare
above any other. Barely to refuse Compliance with, but much more to oppose Evil
Men in their sinful Customs and Practices, will mightily provoke their
Indignation. He sails against the Wind that does so, and swims against the
Stream. He shall have Multitudes will thwart him, and will load him with hard
Reproaches; will call him singular and precise Fool for his Pains, and what
not? He must have a great deal of Courage that opposes a Multitude in doing
Evil, or will not comply with 'em in it. But such must the Soldier of Jesus
Christ be, One that dares Incur the greatest Displeasure, rather than shrink
from his Duty; and One that will not be afraid to show his Dislike of any
vicious Customs, when there is just Occasion for it.

And this indeed is true Courage, The greatest Courage required to this Part of
a Christian's Warfare.
to despise all Opposition in the way of Duty, and he that can Unconcernedly
pass through a Multitude, Reproaching and Vilifying him for his Pains, in
Pursuit of Virtue, is more Heroic and Brave, than he that with his Sword in
his Hand cuts open a way to the Taking of a Fort. He that Reproves a Sin, or
Renounces an Ungodly Custom, may have more of true Fortitude, than he that
Pushes on through drawn Swords, for it is a sign he fears not those Weapons
which wound deepest, an embitter'd and envenomed Tongue.

It is plain beyond all Contradiction, I do think, Cowardice the Cause of
Complying with the Custom of Duelling, or any other Custom of Sinning.
that when Men in Opposition to their Inclination, and Reason, and Religion
dictating the contrary, do comply with others in Drinking of Healths to Excess,
in profane or loose Talk, or the like: It is plain, I say, that it is out of
fear of Reproaches, and for want of Courage, that Men do thus Sin. Nay, I dare
be bold to affirm, however like a Paradox it may appear to some, That it is out
of Fear, and for want of true Courage, that Men fight Duels, when they are
Provokt, or Affronted. They are afraid, that if in Compliance to our Savior's
Doctrines of Meekness, Patience and Forbearance, they should put up Affronts,
they would be Reproacht and Scorned by the Multitude, and be termed Cowards,
and therefore do desperately (but enough against their secret Inclinations, I
dare say) betake themselves to this Barbarous and Foolhardy way of showing
themselves Men of Honor.

But true Courage and Bravery, Philosophy, and Religion, and the sober Reason
of all wise Men tell us, will despise the vain Opinions of the Unthinking and
Impious Crowd, which, for the most part, are in the wrong; and will steddily
pursue what is Virtuous, and Fit, and Reasonable, and Religious,
notwithstanding the foolish Reproaches of the Many. So that to retain One's
Integrity and Virtue, and an unpolluted Conscience, in the midst of common and
prevailing Customs of Sin and Vice, I dare be bold to assert, the Noblest and
most Heroic piece of Courage.

And accordingly it will be Rewarded with a Noble Testimony by our Blessed
Savior, when to have his Testimony will be beyond the Applauses of the whole
World. To Renounce and Oppose the Irreligious and Profane Customs of wicked
Men, is an Eminent piece of Christian Confession, and He who Confesses him
before Men, the same will the Son of Man Confess, Own as his Faithful Servant,
and Applaud as a Noble Confessor, before the Angels of God, Luke 12.8.

And let this suffice, to have spoken concerning the wicked Men of the World,
that you must so far Renounce both them, and their wicked ways, as Never to
become Tempters your selves of others to Sin, nor to yield your selves a Prey
to other Men's Temptations, but must utterly refuse Conformity to them, and all
their ways, whereby they would have you Offend God, and Violate your Covenant
with him, and your Vows in Baptism, and thereby Forfeit all your Title, and
Hopes of Happiness.

THE Nineteenth Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.
HAVING fully Surveyed the World, and all therein contained, that is fit to be
Renounced by every Christian: And having also Represented to you those
Temptations, which are given by the wicked World, and how we must Resist them;
I come now to Explain unto you, what is to be understood by the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and to show you, how much it behooves Christians to
Renounce, and to Despise them. And First, We will consider the Pomps. And
Secondly, The Vanity of this wicked World.


And, First, As to Pomps, these as they were part of the Pagan Idolatries: So
they were what the Primitive Christians were more particularly concerned to
Renounce. But however, since the same Renunciation of the Pomps of this World,
is still retained in our Church, though the very same Things, which were at first
meant thereby, are perhaps become Obsolete, and out of Use in Christendom: And
yet it is not to be supposed, but that our Church had respect to something
still in Use in the Christian World, as fit to be Renounced, under that Title,
by every Disciple of JESUS: I shall therefore, together with a short Account of
the Meaning of Pomps, in the Sense they were Renounced by the Primitive
Christians, take care, especially to show you, what amongst us is most
Analogous to the ancient Heathenish Pomps, and bears such a near Resemblance to
'em, as to render these, our modern Pomps, fit also to be Renounced by every
Christian.

And, First, I. Thereby were anciently meant those pompous Spectacles, Plays
and Scenical Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters.
By Pomps were Anciently meant (in the Opinion of our Learned and Excellent Dr.
Hammond) those Pompous Shows and Spectacles exhibited by the Emperors, and
Great Men of Rome, in the Roman Theaters, wherein Multitudes of Captive
Wretches were put to Slay one another in their Sword-Plays, for the Diversion
of the People. And indeed it is not unlikely, that thereby may be meant, not
only those Bloody Sword-Plays, but all those Scenical Representations and Plays
whatever, Acted in Memory of their false Gods, upon their Great Festivals,
which were sometimes so very Lewd and Impious, (for Instance those, which were
Acted in Honor of Flora,) that the People of Rome were ashamed to proceed in
'em, Valor. Maxim. Lib 2. Cap. 8.
whilst Cato, a Person of Renowned Virtue amongst 'em, was present in the
Theater. They were also wonderfully Pompous, and the Scenes Magnificent, the
greatest Grandees of Rome appearing at 'em, and having their proper Seats, or
Boxes, appropriated to each Order and Rank of Great Men, according to their
Degrees and Qualities. And here also very likely it was, that the Lewd Crew of
both Sexes met together to make their Assignations; for near to the Circus and
Theater, there were those Stews, where they withdrew to act their vile
Abominations.

Our Modern Plays no less Inferior to 'em ^n Impiety, ^han in Pom^ousness.
And now, that which Approaches in these our Days, nearest to those sort of
Heathenish Pomps, and which in Pompousness and Magnificence of Scene, are not
much Inferior to them, are those Profane and Lewd Plays, Acted in our Public
Play Houses, where, for ought I know, more Souls are now Murdered, than in the
former were Bodies; more Profaneness uttered, and more Lewd Assignations made,
than at the Pagan Theaters: And how infinitely unfit then is it, that those
kind of Diversions should be suffered in a Christian State, or that Persons
professing Christianity should be permitted to go near 'em? The Primitive
Fathers looked upon the Theaters and Play Houses, as no other than the Devil's
Territories, insomuch, that it happening once, that when a Christian being
prompted by Curiosity, to be present at the Spectacles therein, was possessed by
the Devil, the Father was not at all Startle'd at it, but readily owned, that
Satan had a Right to take that Person Captive, whom he found within his own
Precincts. And if those, who frequent our Modern Play Houses, Est nihil omnino
damnosius, quam Spectaculis assidere, quando per Voluptatem facilius and
proclivius obrepant vitia. Quid me existimas dicere? Avarior, Ambitiosior,
Luxuriosior, imo vero Crudelior, and Inhumanior redeo. Coel. Rhodi. Ant. Lib.
Octa. c. 7.
do generally return thence possessed with a Spirit of Profaneness, Lust, or
Vanity, it is but what may reasonably be expected, for though all Evil
Conversation is Infectious; yet Vice does then most easily Insinuate it self
into our Dispositions, and Flies to the very Heart, when the Poison is mixed
with Pleasure, Wit, and Smartness of Conceit.

And having ^ch a malig^ant Influence upon Faith, and Manners, ^^ght never to
^e frequented (...) Christians.
And now, since it is Universally agreed amongst all serious Persons, that a
more Irreligious Spirit did never Reign upon any Theater, than has in this last
Age on our Modern Play Houses: Since (as is the general Complaint) in these
Houses Piety is so strangely Ridiculed, the Holy and Reverend Name of God
Profaned, and his Glory and Interest rendered so Contemptible and Vile: Since
the Youth especially of our Nation, are so allured hereby into the Love of, and
Delight in Idleness, excessive Vanity, Revelings, Luxury, Wantonness,
Lasciviousness, Whoredoms, and such Debaucheries by Oaths, Looseness of
Conversation, and corrupt Atheistical Principles: Since our Gentlemen are here
taught to Deride Religion, to Dissolve in Luxury, to Abandon themselves to
their Pleasures, to be Debauchers of Women, to be Profuse and Extravagant in
their Expenses, and to be entirely Libertines: Since the Young Ladies of our
Nation, are here thoroughly Instructed in Intrigues and Assignations, to Scoff
at the prudent Reservedness and Modesty of the best of their Sex, to despise
the wise Instructions of their Parents and Guardians, to be Disobedient to
their Authority, and at last, without their Knowledge, or Consent, to Marry
themselves to some loose, or lewd Libertine: And indeed since the Minds and
Manners of the Great Ones especially, of both Sexes, are thereby so foully
Corrupted, and their Affections so sadly alienated from the Love of God and
Goodness: All these things considered, 'twere greatly to be wished, our
Play Houses were totally suppressed. However, in the mean time, I think it
concerns all, that will be secure from ever Apostatizing from the Faith of
Christ, and a Religious Life, so far to Reject these our modern Pomps, as never
to Enter within those Houses, where these Plays are acted.

Secondly, By Pomps, in the Sense of the Ancients (as some do think) are meant
the Solemn Processions of the Heathens, II. By Pomps in the sense of the
Ancients were meant, the solemn Processions of of the Heathens in Honor of
their Gods.
wherein they carried the Images of their Gods, through the Streets of the
City, in a most Pompous manner, all the Priests, Magistrates, and People of
Rome, as Tertullian does Represent it, Attending and Paying their Veneration
toward them.

And answerably to these, without the least straining of the meaning, in the
present State of the Church, may be understood, those Idolatrous Processions
amongst the Papists; The Idolatrous Processions of the Papists, in honor of
the Saints, answerable to these;
where sometimes the Images of the Saints, sometimes the Host, is carried in
the same Solemn manner, as among the Pagans, were the Images of their Gods: And
the like Adoration and Worship required from all, who accompany, or
accidentally fall amongst 'em, out of Curiosity to observe their Vanities. And
as amongst the Ancients, those were Censured as Partakers with the Heathen in
their Idolatry, who went along with them, or were public Spectators of 'em, as
thereby signifying to the Eyes of Men, their Allowance and Approbation thereof,
and of the Idolatry they contained; and were certain to be cast out of the
Communion of the Church for the same: And must not therefore be joined in.
So those Protestant Gentlemen, who Traveling into Foreign Countries, out of
Curiosity to observe the Popish Vanities, shall Voluntarily appear amongst the
Train accompanying them, cannot be thought more Favorably of. And if through
Force they are Compelled to join in the Adoration of those Images, and shall
rather comply, than suffer, they are wanting in Discharging that great Duty of
Confessing of Christ, which is so strictly required at our Hands, as ever we
expect to have him Confess us before God, and his Holy Angels.

Thirdly, By Pomps may be meant reductively, III. By Pomps Reductively, may be
meant the Revels and Dru^ken Riots of our Youth, at Wakes and Festivals.
all those Revels and Riotous Meetings of Youth, whereby our Great Festivals
Piously Instituted by the Church, to be kept with Joyful Thanksgivings to God,
for his singular Favors vouchsafed to the World, as at such times, are so
sadly Profaned by Drunkenness, lewd Songs and Ballads, profane and wanton
Discourse, and the like. The Generality of our common People, seem to apprehend
nothing Spiritual in the Great Feasts of Christmas, Easter, and Whitsuntide.
And a Holyday is with them, the Profanest Day in the Year. But I will be bold
to assert, with the Learned Dr. Hammond, that besides these other Senses of the
Word Pomps; All the sinful Courses, that are used by Men in their Times of
Jollity and Festivity, the Luxury, and Riot, and unlawful Gaming; and all Kind
of Excesses (which are but a Copying out the Heathen Bacchanals) are Pomps to
be Renounced by every Christian. All Riot and Excess, lewd and wanton Actions,
and Discourses are Sins, and that far greater, and more punishable in
Christians, than in Others; particularly than in Jews, whose Promises of an
Earthly Plenty are not so contrary and irreconcilable with Corporal Excesses,
as are the spiritual Joys, that are the Christian's eminent Portion under
Promise. And therefore these are turned out of the World by Christ, and by him
transformed and changed into spiritual Celebrations, blessing and praising God,
into Feasts of Charity, and sober Hospitality, and Bounty to the Poor, instead
of those outward, costly vain Pomps, which the Eye of the World is so pleased
with.

^hese to be ^stain'd ^m.
And therefore, as I would advise you to be little fond of Wakes, and such like
Meetings of promiscuous Company, where little Good, Quacunque ex causa fuerint
producti Primo, nil est perniciosius morum Integritati. Quippe turba omnis
utique animo gravis and noxia; nec enim quos extulisti mores unquam refers;
nemo non rubignis aliquid aut imprimit, aut Nescientibus allinit. Coel. Rhodgi.
Lib. Octav. c. 7.
and a great deal of Ill is commonly learnt: So especially, let me Entreat you,
never to take into your Hands, much less to learn those wanton Ballads by
Heart, which do insensibly convey the Poison of ill Morals into the Soul, and
such a dis-relish to spiritual Thoughts and Exercises, as can many times be
never wore off. And so much for the Pomps of the World.

Secondly, And as the Pomps, so you are also to Renounce and Reject the Vanity
of this World. ^nity of the ^orld, (...) What?
And what indeed that does mean, it is not so hard to guess, for we have it
every Day before our Eyes. And that which I do suppose is chiefly thereby
meant, are all Affectation of Grandeur and Greatness in sumptuous Houses, rich
Furniture, uppermost Places, Titles of Respect, and costly Apparel. True it is,
these things are not in themselves purely and absolutely Unlawful, but may be
enjoyed without Sin, by those who are lawfully possessed of 'em. Nevertheless
these have an Aptness in them, more than most other things of the World, to
corrupt Men's Minds, and to Alienate their Affections from the Love of God, and
Goodness: However the Affectation of 'em is undoubtedly a Sinful Vanity to be
Renounced by every Christian. And such vain Affectation does appear in these
Cases following:

First, As to sumptuous Houses, and rich Furniture, when Persons out-go their
Ability I. When Persons ^ut-go their Ability, in ^uilding and Furniture.
in compassing those things, to the Ruin, or great Prejudice of their Families
and Posterity; and do Build and Buy, not paying the Labourer, and the
Tradesman; and when with all their care to Beautify and Adorn their own Houses,
they care not how Ruinous and Indecent the Houses of God do lie. Thus to affect
Sumptuousness, I say, is a sinful Vanity. Thus the Prophet Jeremy, 22.13, 14.
pronounces a Woe unto him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his
Chambers by Wrong, that uses his Neighbors Service without Wages, and gives
him not for his Work; that says, I will build me a wide House, and large
Chambers, and cutteth him out Windows, and it is cieled with Cedar, and painted
with Vermilion. And as for those who build, and deck, and trim up their own
Houses, and suffer God's House to be in Ruin and Decay, to lie uncomely and
nastily, they had best to consider how ill God will take it, as appears from
that of Hag. 1.4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in the cieled Houses, and
this House lie wast? And in the Verses following, he denounces a Consumption
on all they have, for such Impiety. So sinful a thing is the vain Affectation
of sumptuous Houses, and rich Furniture, when joined to the Prejudice of
others, and the Contempt of God, and so fit therefore to be Renounced by every
Christian.

Secondly, II. It appears in striving for Precedence.
And so likewise is the vain Affectation of the Uppermost Places. This is a
Vanity, that is perhaps more usual amongst the lowest Rank of People, (which
One would least expect) than those of Birth and Quality, though it is in none so
unseemly as in them. I have with Admiration beheld Farmers, nay, poor Tenants,
nay, Labourer's Wives, swell till they almost burst with Envy, at their
Neighbor's Stepping before, or Sitting above 'em; and even in the House of
God, so expressly contrary to our Savior's Rule, Not to seek the chief Seats in
the Synagogues: I have known 'em strive for the uppermost Places, and to be
whole Months, nay, Years afterward out of Charity, and that almost beyond
Reconciliation, merely upon the account of Precedence: A thing so unseemly, and
so odious a piece of Vanity, especially in those of lower Rank, that I can
hardly forbear to express my self with Indignation concerning it; but I shall
only advise you in the Words of our Savior, Mark. 12.38, 39. to beware of
imitating the Scribes and Pharisees (the worst Patterns you can follow) Who
love the chief Seats in the Synagogues, and the uppermost Rooms at Feasts. It
is a Pride and Vanity fit only for Scribes and Pharisees, the Proudest Men on
Earth, but infinitely unbecoming the Disciples of the Meek and Humble JESUS,
who when they strive for Place, it must be, not to take, but to give it, In
Honor preferring one another, Romans 12.10.

Thirdly, Again of like Nature to this last piece of Vanity, is the Ambition,
and vain Affectation of Titles of Respect and Honor above ones Quality and
Degree; and the desire to be esteemed by others more Virtuous and Good, III. In
affecting Titles above ones Quality, and to be esteemed Virtuous above ones
Desert.
than we really are in our selves. The meanest Persons that are now adays,
will take it ill, if they have not those Titles of Respect given them, which do
not at all belong to them, and for Distinction sake, are due to those above
'em. And even Good Men, who can heartily own, and sorrowfully bewail in their
Confessions to God, that they are vile Sinners, will hardly endure that others
should say so, or think so ill of 'em. But so far should we be from affecting
such Respects, as are above our Merit, that we should not over-eagerly desire
those that are deserved, and due to us; nor must we Plume and Pride our selves
when we have 'em. To do otherwise proceeds from an Ambition, which ill-becomes
the Disciples of Him, that was so exceeding Lowly; Who, though he was Lord of
all, yet came here into the World, not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister,
Matthew. 20.28. And we should not be angry with others, that do think, or speak
ill of us, but at our selves, that we deserve to be so thought, or spoke of.
And herein also we have our Blessed Savior for our Example, who though He he did
no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth, when he was Reviled, Reviled not
again, 1 Pet. 2.22, 23.

Fourthly, The last Instance of sinful Vanity does appear in the Affectation of
costly Apparel and Ornaments, IV. In the vain Affectation of costly Apparel and
Ornaments: As
when Persons exceed what becomes their Rank and Degree in what they wear; when
they are proud of their Clothes and Ornaments; when they Adorn themselves to
undue Ends and Purposes; and lastly, when they spend too much Time, and at
unfitting Seasons therein.

I. When Per^^s exceed ^^at becomes ^^eir Rank ^^d Degree, (...) what they ^ear.
First, As for the use of costly Ornaments, for Distinction sake, it seems to be
intimated by our Savior, when he says, that Those who wear soft Raiment, are
in Kings Houses, Matthew. 11.8. And no doubt, as Honor is to be paid to whom
Honor is due, so a Distinction in Habits, according to the Dignity and Quality
of Persons is allowable and useful; but this Distinction is quite lost, when
Persons of lower Rank do strive to be seen as early in a new Dress, and as Rich
in their Attire, as those that are above 'em.

II. When they ^^e proud of ^^eir Orna^ents.
Secondly, And the Vanity is Intolerable, when Persons of either Sex, of what
Rank and Quality soever they be, grow Proud of their Dress, so as to be pufft
up in their own Minds on so mean an Account; and Insolent, so as to despise
others, for want of the like; as if outward Ornaments can add any thing to real
and inward Worth: When alas! we every Day behold many an ignorant, empty,
stupid Wretch; and many a vicious Beast, flutter in a gaudy Garb, when those
Minds, that are best adorned with Wisdom and Virtue, choose but plain and mean
Apparel. But such vain Self-admirers would do well to consider, how ill it
fared with Herod, when Arrayed in his Royal Apparel, and receiving the profane
Applauses of the gazing Crowd, he forgot himself, And gave not the Glory to
God, as you may see, Act. 12.21, 22, 23. He was eaten up with Worms; and if
those Worms were Lice, it was a Punishment exactly suited to his Pride.

III. ^hen they a^dorn them^^lves to un^^e Ends and ^urposes.
Thirdly, But the Vanity of those is most odious in the sight both of God, and
Man, who Deck themselves to inflame Lust in the Beholders, and like Her
mentioned, Prove. 7.10. Meet men in the Attire of an Harlot. It is a kind of
Adultery, says the Excellent Hammond, in that Woman, who not only Exposes and
Prostitutes her self to the Eyes of Men, but so Dresses, and sets her self out
to that End she may be thus Looked upon, and call to her self the Eyes of all
Men. If she strike not, wound not others, she shall yet be Punished; for she
has mixed the Potion, prepared the Poison, though she has not given the Cup to
Drink: Yes, and has done that too, though none be found, that will Drink of it.
It seems, there is a piece of Christian Chastity required of Women in this
Kind, that is not generally thought on, but would be carefully practiced, if
all of the Female Sex would seriously read over, and consider that admirable
place in Isaiah 3. describing the Vanity and Wickedness of Women in this
Respect, and the Anger of God toward 'em for it. It is a Character of Women's
Vanity too long here to give you, but begins at the 16th Verse of the 3d
Chapter, ending at the 25th. and you had best read it at your Leisure, and you
cannot too often meditate upon it. Our Church is pleased to Condescend in one
of her Homilies, to consider the Excuses that such make, who paint their Faces,
and deck themselves in Gay Apparel, and Dress immodestly, That it is to please
their Husband, to delight his Eyes, and Retain his Love toward them; but she
plainly tells them, That thereby they go about to please others, rather than
their Husbands; that it is to provoke others to Tempt 'em, to deceive their
Souls, by the Bait of such Pomp and Pride, and that they make of the indecent
Apparel of the Body, the Devil's Net, to catch the Souls of them, which behold
'em

But Fourthly, and Lastly, Lastly, when they spend too much Time, and at
unfitting Seasons therein.
the Pride and Vanity of those is Sacrilegious, who spend so much of their Time
in this weighty Business every Morning, that they have not room to say their
Prayers; nay, who are so long and critical in Decking themselves on the Lord's
Day, that the Service of God is almost over before they can force themselves
from their Glass: Such, I say, are plainly Sacrilegious in Robbing God of his
Portion of Time, and employing that in setting forth their own Glory, which
should be wholly spent to his Honor. And they are most injurious to their own
Souls in Decking their Carcasses with outward Ornaments, when they should be
Adorning their Souls with inward and Divine Graces. But alas! they that are
much occupied, says our Homily, in caring for things pertaining to the Body,
are most commonly Negligent and Careless in matters, that concern the Soul.

Well, But after all I am sensible, I have fallen upon as Nice a Subject as any
can be Handled, there being Nothing wherein the World will, with so much
Uneasiness bear a Contradiction, as in this Point of its Vanities, and
especially in the matter of Apparel: For whilst some are so Strait-lac'd, as to
Censure every thing, that is Ornamental in our way of Living; and so many
others, on the contrary, are so strangely Profuse to a high degree of Vanity,
it is hard to determine this case, so as not to incur the Prejudice of one, or
other. I will therefore choose to give, in the Words of the Learned Dr.
Hammond, the true State of this matter, showing what Allowances, without
imputation of Vanity, may be granted in the Use of Ornamentals; and how far, on
the other side, they are to be Renounced by you.

And herein this Great Father of our Church gives this prudent Advice, That
none go above what the Soberer and Graver sort of his Quality and Condition do
use; that they Abstain, as much as may be, from the frequent Changing and
Inventing of Fashions, from the being earliest in every New Dress, or from
Singularity of Apparel, used on purpose, and on that Affectation, because it is
Singular; for all these seem so far to Betray the sinful Principle, that though
it is not reasonable, for one Man to judge another, for every thing of this
nature; yet it will be fit for all, that do thus, to examine and charge it upon
themselves, and if they cannot perfectly clear themselves from that evil
Principle, or worse End, then to remember, that this is it, which they
Renounced in their Baptism.

The short is this, Decency Decency according to what is suitable to Age, Sex,
or Quality, the Rule in this Case.
is that, he says, which must give Limits to Attires: This Decency is to be
taken from that, which is Usual and Customary amongst those, with whom we Live,
and is often varied by Change of Times, and of the Condition of the Age, or
Dignity of each Person (that being Comely for one Age, and Sex, and Quality of
Persons, which is not for another:) And He, or She, that rests contented with
those ways of Adorning themselves, which are most usual among the more Sober
and Grave of their Age and Quality, are not to be judged guilty of the Breach
of this Vow; though there are perhaps some Things in their Attire, Gold, Jewels,
and the like, which might be thought to own this Title of Pomps and Vanities,
as those words signify Bravery and Superfluity.

Nevertheless the Truth is, (as he goes on) it were to be wished, that Men and
Women of the highest Quality, would choose to Distinguish themselves from
others, rather by that Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit (commended to the
weaker Sex, by St. Peter, as a far more amiable Ornament, than that of
Apparel;) and make show of their Wealth, by those more profitable, beneficial
Expenses, for the supply of the Wants of others. And no doubt, this would
contribute more to their own Ends, (if they be the Aims of Christians) and
would set them out more in the Opinion of all wise and good Persons. But this
being affirmed, will not conclude the Use of any of those Ornaments, which are
agreeable to Time, and Place, and Callings, to be Sinful, or of the Number of
those Vanities, that are to be Renounced in our Baptism.

THE XX. Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
IN the Explication of these Words, I have fully laid before you the Stratagems
and Wiles of Satan, and the various Temptations also wherewith the World does
assault us, to withdraw us from God, and to make us break our Covenant with
him. And it only remains to complete this Account of our Spiritual Warfare, to
consider the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to know in what sense, and how far
we are also to Renounce and Resist them.

And indeed this is a most Material and Important Part of Christian Knowledge.
To Know our selves, is next in Dignity and Usefulness to the Knowledge of God
himself. To know our selves, especially our natural Imperfection, a most useful
part of Knowledge.
And if we did but distinctly Know the Imperfection and Weaknesses of our
Corrupted Nature, and of all the Powers and Faculties within us; neither the
whole World with all its formidable Host of Temptations, nor Satan himself
Marshalling and managing of 'em against us, with all the Malice and Cunning he
is Master of, would be in much danger of doing us hurt. For though our case is
that of a Besieged Fort, to take which there are not only a numerous Army,
under the Conduct of a wary General, who narrowly views every part of us, and
orders the Attack where he finds us weakest; But what is worse, the whole
Fabric of our Corrupted Nature is extremely decayed; and all the Faculties and
Powers thereof, are but so many Traitors within us ready to deliver us up to
our Enemies. Yet however in Knowing the Weakness of our Nature, we may be able
to repair its Decays; and by Knowing also the Treachery of all its Faculties,
we shall successfully prevent their delivering of us up to our Adversaries: And
therefore, for the more full discovery of so Useful and Important a Subject to
you,

1. I will show you what is meant by the Flesh.

2. What by the sinful Lusts of the Flesh; and, together with each of these,
will also declare unto you in what sense, and how far we are to Renounce the
Flesh and its sinful Lusts. And,

^he Flesh va^ously ex^^est.
First, Let us enquire what is meant by the Flesh, and in what sense, and how
far we are to Renounce the Flesh. And in order to this, we are to consider,
that as the Knowledge of Things does much depend upon understanding those
Phrases whereby they are usually expressed; so there are very many Words in the
Holy Writings, of like Meaning and Importance with this of the Flesh. And
indeed there is not any one thing so variously expressed in the Holy Striptures
as this is. It is called the Old Man, as to denote the Antiquity of this
Corruption, and from whom it descended, even from Adam, the first Father of us
all; so to signify that it has universally infected the whole Race of Mankind.
It is called the Natural Man, both because this Corruption over-spreadeth the
whole Nature, and because it is become Natural to Man in this Corrupt State to
Sin. It is called the Flesh, because the very Soul in a Man, and all its
Faculties, are Carnal and Sensual. And, Lastly, it is termed Evil Concupiscence,
because this Fleshly Nature of ours Lusts after Evil Things. And so much for
the meaning of the Word Flesh, and its synonimous Phrases.

What is meant ^y the Flesh.
And now, by the help of what has been said, we may form this Account of the
Flesh, That it is the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, as spoiled as to its
Original Frame and Constitution, and despoiled of that Image of God, consisting
in the Perfection, Order, and Purity of all his Faculties, whereby he was
Originally making toward GOD, his Chief End and Happiness. And it is that
Corruption of this his Nature and Faculties, whereby he is inordinately
Converted in all the Tendencies of Soul and Body, and of all the Faculties and
Powers thereof toward the Creature.

1. I say by the Flesh, is meant the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man; not only
the Body, 1. The whole Vnregenate Nature of Man, Soul and Body.
but also the Soul; not only the Inferior Powers, as the Affections, Lusts and
Appetites; but also the Superior Faculties, as the Understanding, Conscience,
and the Will. For it is not only said, Tit. 1.15. That the Mind and Conscience
is defiled; but the Mind, as well as the Body, is said to be Fleshly, Col.
2.18. and Carnal, Romans 8.7. And, Gal. 5.20 we find Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Seditions, Heresies, reckoned amongst the Works of the
Flesh, though they are Sins that have their residence in the Mind only: So that
the whole Man, as he is by Nature, and all the Faculties of his Soul as well as
Body, as they are unregenerate, and till they are sanctified by the Spirit and
Grace of God, come under this one Title of the Flesh. But,

2. The Flesh is the whole Man; not as he was Created by God, but as he is now
in the State of Corrupted Nature. 2. The whole Man not as created by God, but
as he is now in the State of Corrupted Nature.
No, Humane Nature, as it came out of God's Hands, was of another Frame and
Constitution to what it appears to be now in its Natural State and Condition.
God made Man upright, but he sought out many Inventions, Eccl. 7.24. He has
found out many ways to crook and bend down toward the Earth that Upright
Nature which God once gave him.

3. Then the Flesh is the whole Vnregeaerate Nature of Man, as it is spoiled as
to its Original Frame and Constitution, and as it is inordinately converted in
all the Tendences of Soul and Body, and of all the Faculties and Powers
thereof, toward the Creature. 3. As spoiled in his Original Frame and
Constitution, as despoiled of the Image of God, and as inordinately tending
toward the Creature
In order to the more perfect Understanding of which Matter, we must in the
first place enquire what was the Original Frame and Constitution of Man: In
what the Image of God, wherein he was created at first, consisted; And how that
in all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body, his whole Bent and
Inclinations were originally Heavenward; for by thus comparing the upright
Nature of Man, as it was at first Created, with what it now is in this State of
Corruption, we shall be able clearly to apprehend what is meant by the Flesh,
the important Subject of our present Enquiry.

And now as to the Original Frame and Constitution of our Nature, The Original
Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature, what.
wherein God made us, it seems, to have been this. He gave Man a Faculty of
Understanding, whereby he could Contemplate upon, and Know in an Extraordinary
Measure, the wonderful Nature and Perfections of his Creator! his Amazing Works
of Creation! his Surprising Works of Providence! and thereby was able to
discover the Good and Evil in any Objects that were presented to him. Next, he
placed in his Bosom another wonderful Faculty, called Conscience; which is the
practical Judgment in every Man, whereby his own Mind, out of that vast
Treasure of useful Knowledge, did dictate to him what was Good, and to be
Chosen; what was Evil, and to be refused by him; and upon which Choice of Good,
and Rejecting of Evil, its Office was to give its Testimony of Well-done, to
the Good and Faithful Servant, to his unspeakable Comfort and Satisfaction.
Next, in the Upright Nature of Man, as it bore upon it the Image and Likeness
of God, there was placed a Will, which of it self is a blind Faculty, and
chooses and refuses, according to the Information of others. And in the State of
Innocence, it was entirely complying with the Dictates of Reason and
Conscience. And to descend from the Rational to the Inferior and Bodily Powers:
It was the Divine Goodness did implant in our Natures those, which we call the
Passions and Affections in a Man; which are principally these, Admiration,
Love, and Hatred. And it was to very Excellent Purposes that these were given
us. The Use of Admiration was, as to Things which should offer themselves to
our Approbation; if Good, that we might put a true value upon them according to
their Worth; if Bad, that we might despise 'em, according to the Vanity and
Evil we should find in 'em. And as to the two other principal Passions of Love
and Hatred, God's Design in implanting in our hearts the former, was to move
and stir us up with Vigor and Activity, to pursue whatever we should find good
and convenient to us. And the Passion of Hatred was put into our Natures, that
we might avoid on the contrary whatever might be found Hurtful and Offensive.
And it was no other than the Divine Goodness, which in the Nature of Man did
place certain Appetites and Lusts. Every particular Man had, even at his first
Creation, Appetites to Food and Sustenance, in order to preserve his own Being
in Life and Health. And Cupidity or the Inclinations of the Sex to each other,
was in order to the Multiplication of Mankind.

This now was the Original Frame and Constitution of Man. And in the
Perfection, Order, and Purity of all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body,
according to this Original Frame and Constitution, did the Image of God, in
which he was at first Created, The Image of God, wherein Man was at first
Created, what.
consist. So long as the whole Nature of Man was perfect in all parts, the
Understanding quick in discerning momentous and weighty Truths, the Conscience
faithful in Dictating Right ways, the Will entirely Obedient to the Directions
of Conscience and Reason, so long as the Affections were only placed upon
worthy Objects, and the Lusts and Appetites were always under the Power and
Government of Right Reason; so long as Man remained in this State, the Image of
God continued unsullied.

And so long as he continued thus, it is plain also, that the whole Bent and
Inclination of the Soul was toward God, The Bent and Inclination of the Soul
toward God, what.
that to him it did point in all its Motions, and did fix upon him as the End
of all its Actions; and did love him with the intensest degrees of Affection.
And that even the Bodily Part was perfectly compliant with the Soul in serving
it entirely and solely to that End. So that thus you see what was the Original
Frame and Constitution of Man: In what the Image of God, wherein he was created
at first, consisted: And that in all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and Body,
his whole Bent and Inclinations were Heavenward.

But now in the Unregenerate Nature all this Excellent Frame and Constitution
is broken: This Image of God is defaced; and all the Faculties and Powers of
Soul and Body, instead of Inclining toward, and Centring upon God and Heavenly
Things, tend downwards toward the Creature.

1. In the Unregenerate Nature, I say; That Excellent Frame and Constitution,
wherein Man was Originally Created, is now broken: 1. In the Unregenerate
Nature of the Original Frame and Constitution of Man, wherein he was Created,
is broken.
So that instead of that Harmonious Subordination of the Inferior Faculties to
the Superior; instead of the Wills being subject to the Dictates of the
Understanding, and the Affections being subject to the Commands and Sovereignty
of the Will, and the Lusts and Appetites being Obedient to Right Reason, and a
well-inform'd Conscience; instead of this, the whole Order and Frame of Humane
Nature is now turned upside down: The Affections, Lusts and Appetites do now
Reign, and Reason and Conscience are dragged after them in miserable Slavery.
And as to the Will of an Unregenerate Man, the most that it can do, is not
without Reluctance and Regret, to comply with the Temptations of the Senses;
like him in St. Paul, I know that in me, that is, in my Flesh, dwells no good
thing; for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good, I
find not; for the Good. that I would, I do not; but the Evil which I would not,
that I do, Romans 7.18, 19. The best that can be supposed of the Unregenerate Man
is this, that after the Preaching of the Laws of God to him, and a Divine Light
has been let thereby into his Understanding, he does approve in his own Mind of
the Ways of God as most excellent. Such was he, in St. Paul, Romans 7.22. I
delight in the Law of God after the inward Man; that is, according to the
Understanding or Superior Faculty, contrary to the carnal or bodily part of
him; such a one does approve of what the Laws of God do prescribe. But then
alas he must own, that he sees another Law in his Members warring against the
Law of his Mind, and bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in
his Members, v. 23. So that the State of an Unregenerate Man is a State of mere
Confusion, Disorder, and Rebellion, the Affections, Lusts, and Appetites,
rising up in Opposition to the Dictates of the Mind and Conscience: And it is a
State of mere Impotency and Weakness, the Mind and Conscience being so far
unable to govern the Affections, Lusts, and Appetites, that these latter get
the better of the day, carry the Mind and Reason captive, and force it
slavishly to do what the Flesh requires to have done by it, so exceedingly
spoiled, and broken in the Unregenerate Nature, is all that Excellent Frame and
Constitution wherein Man was at first Created.

2. And consequently then, the Image of God, wherein Man was at first Created,
must needs be miserably defaced 2. The Image of God, wherein he was first
Created, defaced.
in a State of Unregeneracy. For why? In that Excellent Perfection and Order,
which appeared in the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature it was, that
those lively Strokes of the Divine Power, Wisdom and Goodness, were plainly
visible. But as a misshapen and monstrous Picture, in which there is nothing of
Regularity and good Feature, cannot without Injury be said to Resemble some
Excellent and Goodly Personage; so neither can the defaced and deformed Nature
of an Unregenerate Man be said to be made after the Likeness of God. Some Faint
and Remote Resemblances, true it is, do still remain under all those
Defacements; even as in the Ruins of a Stately Palace, there may appear
something of Admirable Architecture. There is still remaining in the most
Corrupt Nature; True it is, that part of the Image of God which consisted in
those things which are Essential to Man, as Man, that is, the Soul, and all its
Faculties of Understanding, Will, and Affections, these do still remain the
same for Substance as they were before. But the Image of God as it consists in
our Moral Perfections; viz. in the Order and good Harmony of the several
Faculties of Humane Nature, with respect one to another, and in that Perfection
which did Originally belong to each single Faculty; The Image of God, I say in
this respect, is miserably defaced in the Natural Man.

As to the good Harmony of the several Faculties and Powers of Humane Nature,
you have already seen how that is spoiled. And as to the Perfection which
should be in every one of these several Faculties, that in an Unregenerate Man
is very little. Alas in his Understanding, what is there now but Blindness and
Darkness? What in his Will, but Stubborness and Perverseness? What in his
Affections, but Violence and Disorder? And what in his Lusts and Appetites, but
Sensuality and Irregularity? So sadly is the whole Nature of the Unregenerate
Man Corrupted, so that little or nothing of the Image of God does now remain in
him.

But, Lastly, Above all, Man in his Unregenerate Nature is now miserably
Altered from what he was; in that all the Faculties and Powers of Soul and
Body, instead of Inclining toward, and Centring upon God and Heavenly Things,
tend downwards toward the Creature. Lastly, the Tendency of all the Faculties,
both of Soul and Body, are toward the Creature.
As to the Appetites and Desires in the Unregenerate, they are in a manner
wholly sensual, and are hardly ever to be satisfied with what Gratifies the
Senses. The Affections also are wholly set upon Worldly Enjoyments, and the
Will does also prefer and choose such far before Spiritual Consolations. And
what is more, in the Unregenerate Man, the very Mind and Conscience is defiled,
Tit. 1.15. And they who are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh,
Romans 8.5. do mind Earthly Things, Phil. 3.14. Their whole Thoughts and
Contrivances, their Meditations and Purposes are wholly upon those poor and
paltry Vanities of this World, and are altogether taken up in making Provisions
for the Flesh, and their Hearts and Affections cling closely and solely to the
Earth. Hence it is said of such, that they live after the Flesh, Romans 8.13. and
that they walk after the Flesh, 2 Pet. 2.10. they are so wholly Addicted to
Fleshly and Worldly Things. And thus you see what is meant by the Flesh.

And now it is time to consider in what sense, and how far we must Renounce the
Flesh. And, 1. The Flesh must be Renounced by our being Renewed in the whole
Frame and Constitution of our Nature after the Image of God. To Renounce (...)
Flesh, is be renewed (...) the whole ^rame and ^^nstitution (...) our Nature,
^^ter the I^age of God.
Thus we are commanded, Ephesians. 4.22.23, 24. to put off, concerning the former
Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt, according to the deceitful Lusts,
and to be Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds; and to put on that New Man, which
after God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness. So that the whole
Corrupt Nature must be Restored, as near as it can, to its first Constitution,
and that Divine Likeness wherewith it was then stamped; That is, the Mind,
which is now covered with Darkness and Ignorance, must be Enlightened with true
and practical Knowledge: Ye have put on the New Man, which is Renewed in
Knowledge, after the Image of him that Created him, Col. 3.10. The Will, which
is now obstinately bent against the Ways of Righteousness, must be made
compliant with God's Will: The Affections, which are now set upon Worldly
Things, must be called off from these Earthly Vanities, and fixed upon
Spiritual and Heavenly Objects. And Lastly, the Lusts and Appetites, which in
the State of Nature are continually Rebelling against the Mind, must be Reduced
to their Original Subjection to Right Reason, which is called Crucifying of the
Flesh with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. and mortifying our Earthly
Members; Col. 3.5. Thus must the whole Corrupt Nature be Restored, as near as
it can, to its first Constitution, and that Divine Likeness wherewith it was at
first stamped.

The Image of God must be Restored as far as it can in ^his Corrupt State.
Thus, I say, it must be Restored, as near as it can; for as long as we are in
this Mortal State, some Relics of Sin and Corruption will still remain within
us; so that even in the Regenerate Nature, The Flesh lusts against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other; so that we cannot do the things that we would, Gal. 5.17. That is, we
cannot without the Resistance and Opposition of our Fleshly Nature, act in
Obedience to the Spiriritual and Renewed Nature, so long as we are here on this
side the Grave; but the most Holy Persons that are, have their Graces allayed
with a mixture of Sin and Corruption. The most Universal Knowledge is not free
from Ignorance and Error; the Will, which is most complying with the Commands
of God, has sometimes its contrary Velleities, or Wouldings; the Affections
which are most Refined are sometimes Inordinate and Earthly; so that every
Faculty of our Nature, and every Action we do, have some mixture of Sin and
Frailty. In a word we cannot attain whilst here on Earth, to these degrees of
Perfection wherein we were first Created.

But the Image of God, which is restored to us in our Regeneration, though it
have not the Perfection of Degrees, yet it must indispensably have the
Perfection of parts, It must be Renewed to a perfection of Parts, tho not
Degrees.
as Divines do distinguish; that is, we must have an Universal Inclination to
all that is Holy, Just and Good, and an Universal Aversion from all Sin. And we
must have our selves actually Adorned with all Divine Graces, and Holy
Dispositions; and we must actually forsake every known Sin: And then though
something of Humane Frailty will mix it self in the Exercise of all our
Virtues, yet through the Mercies of God the Father, in Christ his Son, it will
be graciously dispensed withal: So that thus you see, when the whole Nature of
Man in every part and faculty thereof is Changed, Repaired, and Renewed,
according to the Happy Constitution and Subordination of the several Faculties,
one to another, wherein Man was at first Created; and consequently when the
Divine Image which is now defaced, is in some good measure restored; when thus
we shall have put on the New Man, Ephesians. 4.24. partake of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. and be conformed to the Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. then can we be truly
said to Renounce the Flesh.

2. To Renounce the Flesh, is to be Converted in the whole Bent and Inclination
of the Soul toward God. 2. To Renounce the Flesh, is to be Converted in the
whole Bent and Inclination of the Soul toward God. Smith's Select Discourses,
p. 374. 430.
This is the true Property of the Regenerate Nature to be exalted above all
Worldly Things, and to be carried out in Love and Affection toward God. The
Soul, (says a Learned and Pious Author) is a more vigorous and puissant thing
when it is once Restored to the possession of its own Being, than to be bounded
within a narrow Prison of Sensual and Bodily Delights; but it will break forth
with the greatest Vehemence, and Ascend upwards toward Immortality. For it is
only true Religion that teaches and Enables Men to die to this World, and to
all Earthly Things, and to rise above the Sphere of Sensual and Earthly
Pleasures, which darken the Mind and blind it that it cannot enjoy the
brightness of Divine Light; so that whereas the Fleshly Mind never minds any
thing but Flesh, and never rises above the Outward Matter, but always creeps up
and down like Shadows upon the Surface of the Earth; and if it begin at any
time to make any faint Essays upwards, it presently finds it self laden with a
weight of Sensuality, which draws it down again; Holy and Religious Souls being
touched with an Inward Sense of the Divine Goodness and Beauty, are moved
swiftly after God, and as the Apostle expresses himself, forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before,
they press toward the Mark for the Prize of the high Calling of God in Christ
Jesus; that so they may attain to the Resurrection of the Dead.

In short therefore, whereas there is now a continual Conflict betwixt the
Flesh and the Spirit, the Flesh Lusting against the Spirit, and the Spirit
against the Flesh, we must never cease Mortifying and Subduing all the Motions
of Corrupt Nature tending downward toward the Creature, till they be brought
in Subjection to the Power and Influence of God's Holy Spirit, which alone can
lift up our Hearts and Affections to God and Heavenly Things.

THE XXI. Lecture. First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.
IN order to the full Explication of these Words, the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, The sinful Lusts of the Flesh, what.
Having already showed you, First, what is meant by the Flesh, and in what
sense, and how far we must Renounce the Flesh.

2. I am now to give you in like manner the full Meaning and Importance of the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to show you in what sense, and how far we are to
Renounce them.

And as by the Flesh is meant the whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, Soul as
well as Body in its State of Corruption, and as it Acts contrary to the Holy
Will and Spirit of God; so proportionably by the sinful Lusts of the Flesh,
must be understood all the Faculties and Powers of this Corrupted Nature as
they carry us out to commit Sin, as well the Faculties of the Soul, the
Understanding and Will, as the Bodily Powers; viz. the Affections, Lusts and
Appetites.

These are all of 'em in their own Nature, the Effects of God's Workmanship,
and were pure as they came forth of his hands: But ever since the Fall of Adam
they are woefully Corrupted, and there is none of these Faculties or Powers,
either of Soul or Body, but may be called a sinful Lust of the Flesh. Every
Faculty and Power of Soul and Body is properly enough termed a Lust, as it
Craves and Desires its Object. And they are all of 'em sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, just as the whole Unregenerate Nature was said to be Flesh; that is,
either First, as those several Faculties of the Soul do move downwards from God
and Heavenly Things, Immediately and Inordinately toward the Creatures: Or
Secondly, as the Inferior and Bodily Powers, the Affections, Lusts, and
Appetites, do disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculty of the
Understanding and Reason, and do carry the Will into Slavery to 'em. I will
take the whole Frame of this our depraved Nature in pieces, that so viewing
that Corruption, which residing in every of the Faculties and Powers thereof,
renders all of 'em so many sinful Lusts of the Flesh, we may be better able to
Renounce each of those sinful and fleshly Lusts.

And First, let us consider that Corruption which Resides in the Mind, and
renders it Fleshly, and consequently the Motions even of the Intellectual part
of our Nature, no better than sinful Lusts of the Flesh. The sinful Lusts of
the Fleshly Mind, what.
And our Understanding, alas, which should be full of Divine Knowledge, such as
may be a Lamp unto our Feet, and a Light unto our Paths, is in the Unregenerate
Man full of Vanity, Ignorance of, and Prejudice against Divine Truths. The
Unregenerate Man neither understands nor seeks after God, Romans 3.11. He likes
not to Retain God in his Knowledge, or to consider any thing concerning him,
but is vain in his Imaginations, having his foolish heart darkened, Romans 1.21,
28. Nay, the best Habits of the Mind in the Unregenerate Man are Corrupt,
having the Understanding darkn'd, being Alienated from the Life of God, through
the Ignorance that is in them, Ephesians. 4.18. And hence it comes to pass, that
whereas the great and proper Appetite of the Mind is after Knowledge, an
Appetite which God has put into the Soul of Man, and so a thing Beautiful and
Good: This very desire of Knowledge becomes a sinful Lust of the Fleshly Mind
in several Cases, particularly in these following; viz. when either we misplace
our Desires of Knowledge upon wrong Objects, or when we do immoderately study
to be exquisitely skilled in Humane, though Lawful Arts and Sciences, to the
Neglect and Contempt of Divine Knowledge. And Lastly, when out of Pride,
Prejudice, and contradiction to all sacred Truths, we set up our own Fleshly
Imaginations and Reasonings against the Spiritual Notions that are dictated to
us. And accordingly such our Appetites or Desires, even of Knowledge it self,
must be Renounced, as so many sinful Lusts of a Fleshly Mind.

And first we must Renounce the Desires of Knowing wrong Objects; that is, we
must not Gratify, but Mortify our Desires of Knowing such Things, which are
either Hurtful to be known, 1: When we are curious to know Things which are
either Hurtful to be Known,
or are not proper for Man to know. Now as to this we are to consider, that
there is a certain Distemper of Mind, called Curiosity, which as it is of like
Nature, so it is of full as hurtful and Mischievous Effects to the Mind, as
that Distemper is to the Body, which stirs up Persons to eat Chalk, or Coals,
or Trash, or whatever affords either none at all, or a very ill Nourishment:
Such is the Curiosity of Knowing Evil, which was the thing that ruined our
first Parents, and afterward Solomon, and since him, many other Persons: Such
are they who have a great Desire to taste those Pleasures which are in Sin, and
by Tasting of 'em their Minds are defiled, and their Morals Corrupted, and it
is seldom that they do ever after return to have a right Judgment of Good or
Evil. Thus hurtful is the Knowledge of some things, so that it is much better
to be Ignorant thereof, than to know 'em.

Again there are others, whose Curiosity gives 'em a strange Itch to know
Hidden Things, such as are not proper for Man to know, Or not proper for Man to
know.
as the Decrees of Predestination, and the Counsels of God's Will, which is the
Ark that no Mortal Eye ought to look into. And many are wonderfully Inquisitive
to learn the Future Events of Kingdoms and States, and of their own and others
private Fortunes. And therefore it is, that they are so apt to give heed to
every pretended Prophecy; and tho few are so very wicked, as to Consult Evil
Spirits themselves by Magical Arts, yet Multitudes will make no scruple to
Resort to Fortune Tellers and Conjurers; and those that do consult 'em, or are
reputed to do, tho it be an Impiety so severely threatened, Deuteronomy. 18.11, 12. But
all Curious Enquiries whatever into the Secrets of God's Providence are to be
Renounced by us Christians, as being the Gratifications only of a sinful
Curiosity. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things which
are Revealed, unto us and our Children for ever, that we may do all the words
of his Law, Deuteronomy. 29.29.

^. When we do ^mmoderately ^tudy to be Exquisitely Skilled in whatever Humane
Arts and Sciences, to the Neglect or Contempt of Divine Knowledge.
2. We must Renounce that as a sinful Lust of the Fleshly Mind, which
improportionably to the true worth of things, is more desirous to furnish it
self with the Knowledge of what concerns only this Mortal Life, than with the
Knowledge of those Divine Truths, which direct us to Life Everlasting. Now this
is Life Eternal, or that Knowledge which leads and directs us to Life
Eternal, That we know the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent,
Joh. 17.3. But alas, such is the Folly of the Carnally and Worldly wise, that
most Persons do neglect the Knowledge of God, and the Christian Religion, as if
it were little worth, when certainly in the end there is nothing will stand us
in that stead as this sort of Knowledge. Some there are whose whole search is
for the Causes and Cures of Bodily Distempers, and yet alas all is but Guess
and Conjecture, and an ordinary Malady, not very seldom, baffles the most
Learned Physician, and he sits down heavy in Disgrace and Disappointment. But
the Knowledge of God and Religion, if duly applied, never fails to Cure the
Soul of all its Infirmities, nor will it fail to fill the Mind with the
Sweetest Comforts and Satisfactions. Others you shall have who desire and care
for nothing more than good Skill in the Laws of their Country, whereby they
may raise themselves good Estates in this World; but alas, such Knowledge can
only serve a present Interest; but by the Knowledge of our Christianity we may
be able to provide our selves Bags that wax not old, Eternal in the Heavens.
Some are wholly bent upon Merchandise and Trade, but when the most Skilful
Pilot shall split upon the Rocks, or be foundred in the Sands, he who has
Heaven in his Eye may steer his Course without danger through the roughest
Billows of Adverse Fortune. And others there are who seem to aim at no higher
Knowledge, than how to Till their Land, and feed their Cattle, and when after
all the Crop fails the most painful Husbandman, he who knows the Laws of
Christianity need not fear a joyful and a plentiful Harvest; so excellent and
useful is Divine Knowledge above all other Arts and Sciences. Not that I would
cast a Disparagement upon them; they are the Gift of God, and useful in their
kind; but the Knowledge of our Christian Religion, as it serves to nobler and
better Purposes, so ought it to be preferred to any other, The Knowledge of our
Christian Religion, as it serves to nobler Purposes, so ought it to be preferred
to any other.
and most studied by every Christian. And hence therefore does St. Paul, when
he comes at any time to speak of Divine Knowledge, not only barely enjoin the
Attainment of it, as of other Virtues, but does moreover add Prayers and
Supplications to God to endow 'em therewith, and to increase 'em therein. We do
not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might be filled with the
Knowledge of his Will in all Wisdom and Spiritual Understanding, that ye might
walk worthy of the Lord in all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, and
increasing in the Knowledge of God, Col. 1.9, 10. And again, I cease not, says
he, making mention of you always in my Prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of Wisdom and
Revelation in the Knowledge of him, Ephesians. 1.16, 17. So that tho to be
excellently well skilled in any Art or Science whatsoever, which terminates
only in the Conveniences of this Life, be not only Lawful, but Commendable,
yet it is a Profaneness fit to be Renounced by every Christian, to prefer such
to Divine Knowledge, and to apply your Mind wholly to the attaining of such
Skill, to the Neglect of those Great and Important Truths, the Knowledge of
which is indispensably necessary to our Everlasting Happiness. And therefore
let your Profession and Calling be what it will, you must make it your first
Care and Study to know the Nature and Design of the Christian Religion, The
Necessary Points of Christian Knowledge.
how that it is a Body of the most Excellent Principles and Laws, all of 'em
tending wholly to render you Holy and Good Livers, and then to make you to
depend upon the Mediation of Christ with his Father, for his Acceptance thereof
to your Justification. You must also next make it more your Study to understand
thoroughly the Covenant of Grace, than the Nature and Obligation of any Humane
Covenants or Contracts, whatsoever. And since we must build our hopes upon the
performance of particular Articles, and as exactly as possible square our Lives
according to each single Condition of the Covenant of Grace, there can be
nothing of more concernment to every Christian, Lay as well as Clergy, than
thoroughly to understand, both the Meaning and Importance of every Doctrine of
Faith, and the Nature and Extent of every Christian Duty. And lastly, Since a
good End can never be obtained without the Knowledge and Use of due and proper
means, the Nature therefore and Use of Prayer, and the Nature and End of
Sacraments must be a most necessary part of Christian Knowledge. So much must
our Appetities after Knowledge in the most Excellent of Humane Arts and Science
be Renounced, in comparison of our Desires after a competent Measure of Divine
Knowledge.

But Lastly, above all we must Renounce that prevailing Appetite in such as are
of most Depraved and Corrupt Minds, viz. The setting up their own Imaginations
and Fleshly Reasonings against those Spiritual Notions, and those more
Mysterious Articles of Faith, which are delivered to us in the Scripture. 3.
When out of Pride, Prejudice, and Contradiction to all Sacred Truths, we set up
our own Carnal Imaginations, and Fleshly Reasonings against those Spiritual
Notions, and those Mysterious Articles of our Faith, which are delivered to us
in Scripture.
In the more depraved Nature of some Men, there is a great deal of Untowardness
and Difficulty to submit to the Sacred Truths Revealed to us by Christ in the
Gospel, as to Matters of Faith, or such Articles as are necessary to be
believed: One that is conceited of his own Wisdom, strength of Parts, or
Improvement in Knowledge, will not submit his Reason to entertain Notions which
he cannot Comprehend and Penetrate. The Carnal Mind which is Enmity against
God, Romans 8.7. will disdain to have his Understanding baffled or puzzled with
Sublime Mysteries of Faith, he will quarrel at any thing too high for his Wit
to reach, or too Knotty for him to unloose. How can these things be? What
Reason can there be for this? I cannot see how this can be true. This Point is
not intelligible; And perhaps he finds fault with the whole Body of the
Scriptures, either because some things are obscure to him, or the Phrase is not
queint and fine enough. Thus the Carnal Mind treats the Dictates of Faith,
and the Word of God.

But far be it from Christians thus to indulge their own Carnal Reasonings, and
Self-Conceits, in opposition to what God has Revealed to us, as necessary to be
Believed by us. For certainly the Infinite Wisdom both knows what is fittest to
be taught and revealed to us, and in what Manner and Method he had best to
express himself. Those that did thus proudly despise the Wisdom of God,
measuring it according to their own Talent of Wit and Understanding, did at
first, and do to this Day most fatally miscarry; for it is written, 1 Cor.
1.19. I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent. But our Duty is to submit our Understandings to
Almighty God to be Inlightn'd by his Infinite Wisdom, Casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2
Cor. 10.5. There is a great deal of Virtue and Grace in an Obedient
Understanding, and therefore to the Disciples who were so disposed, To them it
was given as our Savior tells us, Matthew. 13.11. To understand the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of Heaven; but to them who are not prepared with an humble Mind, it
is not given.

Nor is this an hard Imposition upon Mankind, to oblige 'em to believe what is
above our Reason to Comprehend. It is sufficient that the Holy Scriptures which
do deliver such Articles of Faith, as necessary to be Believed, are
sufficiently witnessed to be Divine Revelations; and that there is nothing
contained in the Articles or Mysteries themselves, which is contrary or
contradictory to that Reason which God has given to Man. But that there should
be any thing in an Article of Faith, which, though it be above our Reason to
Comprehend, (especially in this its State of weakness) must yet be Believed,
will not seem hard, if we consider, that there are many Appearances, even in
Nature it self, which no Man has been yet found who could give a tolerable
account for; and yet the truth of their being so and so, cannot be called in
question.

This Humor of opposing Reason to Revelation proceeds from mere Pride.
In short, this Humor of opposing our own Fleshly Reasonings against those
Divine Revelations which we cannot now in this State of Imperfection, so fully
Comprehend, proceeds merely from the Pride of those Men, who disdaining to own
the Decays of our Reason, as well as of other the Powers of the Soul, ever
since the Fall, (which every Modest Man's Experience does make him too sensible
of in a thousand Instances) do overvalue their Talent of Wit, far beyond what
they ought: And this therefore being such a proud Luciferian Temper, it ought
to be Renounced, as the most Impious of all the Sinful Lusts of the Fleshly
Mind. And let this suffice to be spoke concerning our Renouncing of the Sinful
Lusts of that sort.

The Corrupt Will, what and how to be Renounced.
2. Let us next consider the WILL, and the Innate Corruption which Residing in
that Faculty renders it Fleshly, and tending in all its Choices toward the
Creature, and so the proper Matter of the Christians Renuntiation. And as to
this Faculty we are to consider, how that God gave to Man a Righteous Law,
which was to be the Rule of his Will; and while it was conformable to this, it
was conformable to the Will of God, and consequently beautiful and regular; but
instead thereof, there is now a Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8.2. And this Law
subdues the Law of the Mind, and brings the Soul into Captivity to the Law of
Sin, Romans 7.23. And the Will being thus Captivated, is made Carnal, and filled
with Enmity against God, and that Law which he once planted in us to be the
Rule of our Will; so that it is not subject to the Law of God; neither indeed
can be, whilst we remain unregenerate, Romans 8.7. But in its corrupt State being
always Averse to the Directions of God's Laws and Right Reason, it perversely
chooses those things which please only the Senses, and so becomes, in the most
proper and immediate Sense of the Word, a Sinful and Fleshly Lust.

But as obstinately bent, as the Corrupt Will is found to be, against complying
with the Laws of God, which would guide our Souls upwards, we must bring our
selves to that Habit of Self-denial, so as readily to submit our Wills to God's
Laws, to be Governed by 'em; the reason is, we are not our own, and therefore
our own depraved Wills ought not to bear Rule in us, but we are God's
Creatures, and his Subjects and Servants, and therefore his All-wise Will and
Pleasure should be the Rule and Measure of, and preside over all our Actions.
And this it must do in the most difficult Cases, when his Laws seem most to
thwart our Reason, and his Dispensations seem most hard and severe. Thus did
Abraham the Father of the Faithful, when God commanded him even to slay his
only Son Isaac, he readily obeyed, he did not stand to dispute the case, Genesis
22.10. And thus did Job in reference to the Dispensations of God's Providence,
when he was stripped naked of his vast Possessions, and even of his dear
Children; he even then blessed God for it, (kissing as it were the Rod that
stroke him.) The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, Blessed be the Name
of the Lord, Job 1.21.

III. The Affections in the Carnal Man do sadly degenerate into what may too
properly be called the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. 3. The Affections, what, and
how to be Renounced.
Our Passions and Affections are indeed in themselves of singular use to the
perfecting of our Natures. They are the Wings of the Soul to carry it forth
with eagerness in the pursuit of that which is good, and with Aversation and
Flight from that which is Evil. They are variously numbered up, but the Master
Affections are Love and Hatred, which when they are rightly governed, all the
rest are so too; but when they are misplaced and out of order, so in the same
proportion are all the others. And accordingly, whereas then it is, that our
Love is rightly fixed; 1. When we place it upon a proper Object: And, 2. When
we steer toward the Thing we Love, with Desires proportionable to the Good
that is in the Object, that is, When the best and greatest Things are pursued
with our Chiefest Passions, middle Things with a less, and the lowest with the
least; So it is, that so long as a Person remains Unregenerate, he either first
places his Love upon that which he should Hate, which is the wrong Object, as
upon sinful Profits and Pleasures; or secondly he loves Things of an
Indifferent Nature, such as are Earthly Things, with an over Intense Affection,
beyond their true Worth and Value. And so on the contrary, as to Hatred, the
Carnal Mind hates that which he should love, Viz. God and Virtue, The Carnal
Mind is Enmity against God, nor is it Subject to the Law of God, Romans 8.7. Or
else he hates some Things as the chiefest of all Evils, viz. Sufferings and
Afflictions, when indeed they are of that Nature, that upon due Consideration a
Man shall be able to say, That it is good for him, that he has been Afflicted.
And accordingly when our Affections of either kind, are either misplaced upon
wrong Objects, or are disproportionate to the true worth and Evil that is in
those Objects, toward which it is lawful to be well or evilly Affected in
Moderate Degrees. In either of these cases, I say, our Affections shall become
Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and are necessary to be Renounced by us.

1. As they are Misplac't upon wrong Objects.
And 1. Those Affections of Love and Hatred must be utterly Renounced, which we
shall find our selves to have misplac't upon wrong Objects; that is, instead of
Loving, we must utterly Hate and Abhor all Sin and Sinful Pleasures: So the
Psalmist, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that Love the Lord, hate Evil. Now Sin is the
greatest Evil in the World, as being most directly contrary to the Holy Nature
and Will of God; and it is the Cause of all the Evils which befall us, and
therefore to take pleasure in Sin is so perverse a thing, that so long as any
Person remains thus wickedly Disposed, he is an Enemy of God, and no better
than a Child of the Devil, 1 John 3.10. Thus must we not misplace our Love upon
that greatest of all Evils, which is Sin.

And so 2. Instead of Hating God and Virtue, against whom the Carnal and
Unregenerate are at Enmity, we must Entirely and Affectionately Love both,
which is so plain and palpable a Truth, as needs neither proof nor Enlargement.
And thus we are to Renounce the Affections of Love and Hatred, whenever they
are misplaced upon undue Objects.

2. As they are Disproportionate to the Love, Worth, and Evil that is in those
Objects, toward which it is lawful to be well or evilly Affected in Moderate
Degrees.
2. And we must so far Renounce 'em, as they are Disproportionate to the true
Worth and Evil that is in those Objects, toward which it is lawful to be well
or Evilly Affected in Moderate Degrees. That is,

1st. We must not Love God with an Inferior Degree of Affection, and Worldly
Things with a Superior; but as God is the Supreme Good in himself, and the
Author of all the Good we Enjoy, we must therefore Love him accordingly with
the Intensest Degree of Affection that we shall be able; so Matthew. 22.37. Thou
shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with
all thy Mind. We must so Love him, as cheerfully to Renounce and Sacrifice all
our Profits and Pleasures when called thereto; that is, We must deny our
selves, take up our Cross and follow him in Afflictions, Distresses, and
Persecutions, whenever the Cross shall be laid upon us, Matthew. 18.24. Nay, and
we must so Love him, as even to Hate all others, the Nearest and Dearest
Relations in comparison of him, Luke 14.26. So far must we Renounce our
Affections of Love, as it is any wise disproportionate to the thing Beloved, as
it is too violently set upon perishing and worldly Goods, and too cold toward
God and Heavenly Things.

2. And on the contrary we must also Renounce that other Affection of Hatred,
as it is Disproportionate to the Evil, which is to be Hated. There may be just
occasion of Anger toward a Person, and of Hatred of his ways, but we must not
let those Passions so far exceed their due Bounds, as to Degenerate into Wrath
and Malice. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor be put away
from you with all Malice; And be ye Kind one to another, Tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians.
4.31, 32. 3. The Lusts and Appetites are such Sinful Lusts of the Flesh as are
to be Renounced


3, The Last of those Powers of our Corrupted Nature, which are here to be
Renounced, are our Lusts and Appetites, which in a State of Unregeneracy are
indeed most directly and immediately no other than so many Sinful Lusts of the
Flesh. These were designed by the God of Nature for our Preservation. Our
Appetites after Meat and Drink were Implanted in our Nature in order to
preserve our own selves in Being; and Cupidity or Lust for the Propagation and
Preservation of a Posterity to succeed us. But when either our Appetites or
Lusts do desire, 1. Undue Objects: Or, 2. That which in it self is Lawful and
Allowable, in Undue Measures, they do then degenerate into Sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, and must be Renounced by us.

And 1st. 1. As they do desire Undue Objects.
As to the Indulgence of a Fleshly Appetite with such Meats and Drinks, as are
Unlawful in respect of their Quality; It does infinitely become Christians
utterly to Renounce that Sinful Epicurism which seems to study nothing so much,
as by new invented Dishes to fair deliciously every Day. Christians should
relish better things than these, and are not therefore thus to make Provision
for the Flesh to fulfill the Lusts thereof, Romans 13.14.

Nor Secondly, 2. As they desire 'em in Immoderate Measures.
Must we Christians gratify the Cravings of our Appetites in Eating and
Drinking, but we must indeed take heed to our selves, least at any time our
Hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and Drunkenness, and so the Day come upon
us unawares, Luke 21.34. But above all,

Lastly, It behooves Christians to Renounce those which are peculiarly called
the Lusts of the Flesh, whether it be, 1. The Lusting after strange Women, the
Neighing after the Neighbor's Wife, as the Prophet expresses it: Or, 2. Even
that Immoderation practiced by many in the Married State, there being a
Chastity and Modesty which ought to be preserved, even in Wedlock it self,
which the Carnal part of Mankind may perhaps but little think of.

And indeed this Renouncing of these Fleshly Lusts of Concupiscence, is perhaps
what the Composers of our Catechism (as taking the Form of Renuntiation from
the Ancient Baptismal Vow) did particularly intend; for as the Gentiles did
scarcely make any account of Fornication, nor think it an Irregularity and
Vice, so the Scripture, and the first Christians, did particularly lay it upon
all that should take upon 'em the Christian Name and Profession, to Renounce
those kind of Sinful Lusts. But Fornication and all Uncleanness, let it not be
once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; for this know you, that no
Whoremonger, nor Unclean Person has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ,
and of God, Ephesians. 5.4, 5. And thus I have fully considered these several
Faculties and Powers both of Soul and Body, as they are so many Sinful Lusts of
the Flesh moving downwards from God and Heavenly Things, Immoderately toward
the Creature.

II. And now I come to consider some of 'em, viz. The Affections, Lastly, the
Inferior and Bodily Powers, viz. The Affections, Lusts, and Appetites to be
Renounced, as they Rebel against Right Reason.
Lusts, and Appetites, as so many Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, under another
Notion, and that is, as they do disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculty
of the Understanding and Reason, and do carry the Will into Slavery to 'em; and
to show how they must be Renounced upon that account also. What the Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature originally was, and how it is now broken, I have
already showed you, as also how that instead of the Harmonious Subordination of
the Inferior Faculties, to the Superior, that the Affections, Lust and
Appetites do absolutely Reign, and that Reason and Conscience are in the
Unregenerate dragged into miserable Slavery.

Business ^eligion is ^educe ^s, as near ^ossible, to (...) primitive ^e of
Inno^e and In^ity.
And now I am only to show you, that it is the proper Business and Employment of
Religion, to Reduce Man, as far as is possible, in this State of Weakness and
Infirmity, to his Primitive State of Innocence and Integrity, to rescue him out
of Slavery, to restore him to himself, to put Right Reason and Religion again
into the Throne, and to subject his Affections and Passions, his Lusts and
Appetites, and every Inordinate Inclination within him, to the Dictates and
Laws thereof, refusing to Gratify any of those in any thing that is Sinful and
Unlawful.

This is to wrestle against Flesh and Blood: And thus we must wrestle, till we
overcome, and bring it under, into an Entire Subjection to Right Reason, as
ever we expect to be Friends of God, or ever hope to be Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven. There is nothing more plain in Scripture, than the utter
Inconsistency of a Carnal Temper and Disposition to a State of Grace and
Reconciliation with God. The Carnal Mind is Enmity against God; for it is not
subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; so that to be carnally minded
is Death, but to be spiritually minded is Life and Peace, Romans 8.6, 7. and
therefore let me add with the same Apostle, Ver. 12, 13, 14. Brethren we are
Debtors, not to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the
Flesh, ye shall die; but if you through the Spirit do mortify the Deeds of the
Body, ye shall live; for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God, and so Heirs of Eternal Life; so necessary it is, as ever we
expect the Favor of God, and future Happiness, to subdue the Flesh, and all
its Lusts and Appetites, its Passions and Affections, all our fond and foolish
Imaginations, and false Prejudices, and whatever else within us which savours
of Carnality, to the Power and Conduct of Right Reason, enlightened by the Word
and Spirit of God.

To this pur^ose of keep^ng under our Fleshly Lusts, ^t was that our Reason was
given us.
And to this purpose it is, that our Reason was given us. That Excellent and
Divine Faculty was not certainly bestowed upon us, to such Vile and Base
Purposes, as to purveigh for a filthy Carcass, which shall consume ere long in
Stench and Rottenness; but to nobler and better Purposes you may be sure, viz.
to Govern and Manage the Animal part of us, our Flesh, and to render it
serviceable and useful to Reason and Religion. The best Philosophers amongst
the Heathens, the Platonists, do call the Mind, that Divine part of us, (...),
The Charioteer, and compare it to a Rider, and the Body, or Flesh, and all its
Troop of Affections or Passions, of Lusts and Appetites, they compare to so
many rude and wild Horses, that must be Managed and Tamed, and kept in goood
order, and rendered Serviceable and Useful to the Mind and Reason.

Now so it is, as a well-ordered and Managed Horse may sometimes stumble, and
start aside, tho his Rider keep a very strait Rein, and a weary hand upon him;
So in this corrupt and depraved State of our Natures, our Fleshly Lusts will
sometimes at leastwise, even in the most Regenerate, have some small
tendencies, some Imperfect Velleities, and Wouldings toward Evil Things. But
if we shall take due care to keep so watchful an Eye, and wary an Hand over
'em, as presently, so soon as we perceive any Evil Motion and Tendency, to curb
and restrain it, and not willingly, nor wilfully to indulge any Evil
Inclination, we shall by the Gracious Acceptance and Favor of God be accounted
good Managers of that hard Province, the Renouncing or Subduing of our Fleshly
Lusts. If in the general course of our Lives, we act like Men endowed with
Reason and Grace, we shall be pardoned all our Unwilling and Unavoidable
Infirmities.

III. And Lastly, 3. To Renounce ALL the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, what.
I shall have done this point when I have showed you, what is meant by
Renouncing ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and in what sense, and how far we
must Renounce 'em ALL. And by Renouncing ALL the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh, can
be understood no less, than that we must Indulge no part, nor Faculty of our
Corrupt Nature in the Transgression of any of God's Commandments. All Men are
not alike Addicted to Sin; but according as their Temper and Inclinations do
differ, accordingly are they more or less given, some to one Vice, some to
another. Thus some are Naturally High-minded, and these disdaining to Think in
the common Road, or to submit their Judgments to commonly received Opinions,
are always starting new Notions, and broaching New Heresies. Some again will be
Orthodox enough in their Opinions; but being Persons of warm Constitutions, and
Sanguine Complexions, they cannot help it they will say, their being overcome by
the Pleasures of Sense. The whole Herd of Unregenerate Sinners are not made up
of such as are all over wicked. But some are more particularly in their own
Nature addicted to be Covetous, some to Revenge, and others to Lust, and the
like. And then when these their Natural Dispositions are strengthened (as is
usual) by long Accustomed Habits of Indulgence to some such Complexional Vices;
it becomes a very difficult Work utterly to Renounce such Sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.

But however difficult it is, There must be no one Fleshly Lust suffered to
Reign in us.
there must be no Indulgence to any one Fleshly Lust, nor must there be any
Vicious Inclination suffered to Reign in us; for the Wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, Romans 1.18. And
whosoever shall keep the whole Law, says St. James, and yet offend in one
point, that is, shall allow himself in the Indulgence of any one Sinful Lust,
he is guilty of all, James 2.10. shall be as surely punished, as he who had
lived in a breach of all.

And indeed our Business is particularly to set our selves in opposition to
those Lusts, Our business is particularly to oppose Lusts of Temper and
Constitution.
which arise from our particular Temper and Constitution, and to subdue them;
And also to break off those Habits whereby these Natural Inclinations and
proneness to some particular Sins have grown strong upon us. And this is that
which is called, Matthew. 5.29, 30. A Cutting off the Right Hand, and a plucking
out of the Right Eye; which Divorcing of our selves from our beloved Lusts,
because it is so difficult to go about, and so few have the Courage to do it
effectually; it is therefore said, That the Gate of Heaven is strait, and that
many of those who shall seek to enter in, shall not be able, Luke 13.24.

Now this is hard Doctrine to the Carnal Man, This because it is a hard
Doctrine to the Carnal Man, is much Evaded.
who is wedded to his Lusts, and has no mind to part with 'em. Such therefore
are for finding out all the Evasions possible to shift off the necessity of
such a sorrowful Separation, as dreadful almost to 'em, as that of Soul and
Body. And because they find St. Paul himself, (a Regenerate Person no doubt)
owning that he found a Law, that when he would do good, evil was present with
him, and that he delighted in the Law of God after the Inward Man; but that he
saw another Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, and
bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin which was in his Members; so that
with the Mind he did serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh the Law of Sin,
Romans 7.21, 22, 23, 25. Because, I say, they find even St. Paul expressing
himself, as they think, as unable to Resist the Temptations of Fleshly Lusts;
and that all that he was able to do, was in his Mind and Conscience to
disapprove of that which the prevailing power of Lust within him, forced him to
commit; They do therefore conclude, that provided it be with Reluctance, and
some Counter-Strivings against their Lusts, that they do yield thereto; that
they are in a Regenerate State, however, tho in the Issue they do comply
therewith; and consequently that it is not of such necessity to Renounce ALL,
but that the Inferior Appetites may be Indulged, what the Mind and Reason do
squeamishly Refuse.

^he Objection from Romans 7. ^leared.
But that you may not make Shipwreck of a good Conscience, by falling into the
usual Mistakes about the sense of this place, you are to know, that St. Paul's
design in this 7th to the Romans being to Represent the Ill Condition of the
Jews, as under the Law of Moses, which only Enlightn'd their Minds so far as to
Convince 'em of many things to be Sins, which otherwise they could not have
known to be such; but gave no power to 'em to overcome those Lusts; because the
Jews could not bear such a Charge against themselves and their Law, he does
suppose himself in the case of a mere Jew, and personating such a one, does
accordingly argue as from experience, against the Converting power of the mere
Law of Moses, which was destitute of those Assistances afforded in the Gospel.
And this is a Scheme and Figure of Speech usual with this Apostle in many other
places. Thus for their sakes he did transfer in a Figure those things to
himself, which could not be personally spoken of him, 1 Cor. 4.6. And nothing
is more usual than the same way of speaking amongst Men, especially in Reproofs
and such cases, as would be ill Resented, to be downright charged withal; but
when we say, We do so, and so, under this disguise it is usual with more
Success, and less Offense, to Disparage and Correct very Ill Practices.

But that St. Paul should speak it of himself, when he tells 'em, That he saw
another Law in his Members, warring against the Law of his Mind, and bringing
him into Capiivity to the Law of Sin, which was in his Members; and that with
the Mind he did serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh, the Law of Sin, is
contrary both to what he affirms elsewhere of himself, and of those who are
truly Regenerate. For of himself he affirms, Romans 8.2. That the Law of the
Spirit of Li^e, had made him free from the Law of Sin and Death. And Ver. 1. he
says of those who are in Christ Jesus, and to whom Condemnation does not
belong, and who are consequently Regenerate, that they walk not after the
Flesh, We must Renounce the Flesh, and all ^ts Sinful Lusts, so as to have an
Aver^ion, an Anti^athy in our hearts thereunto.
but after the Spirit. And Gal. 5.24. it is said, that they who are Christ's,
have Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts.

In short therefore, and to draw toward a Conclusion, we must not content our
selves in this great Work of Renouncing ALL the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, that
we have our Minds enlightened, so as to know what we ought to do, whilst our
Affections and bodily Powers do remain Rebellious against the Dictates of our
Minds and Consciences. But we must have our whole Natures possessed with an
Aversion, an Antipathy from the very Heart, against all Sin; and we must have
both the Mind, Will and Affections, nay, the very Lusts and Appetites fully
bent against it. And we must have, on the contrary, a hearty Love and
Disposition to all Virtue, wrought in all the same Faculties both of Soul and
Body. We must be Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, and put on the New Man,
which after God is Created in Righteousness and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

And when a Person is thus inwardly Changed throughout, in all the Faculties
and Powers of Soul and Body, it is then only that he can be truly said to be a
New Creature, a New Man.

And this, indeed, This the hard Part.
to become thus Renewed in the Spirit of our Minds, so as to have the Heart and
Affections set against Sin and sinful Pleasures, as well as the Mind Convinced
of the Evil of 'em, is the hard Work. This is certain, that it is not possible
for any Man to work so great a Change in his Nature, of himself, but it is the
Spirit of God that must Assist wonderfully in the doing of it. And, indeed,

That we may be said sincerely and thoroughly to Renounce the Flesh, and ALL its
sinful Lusts; that Renovation of our Corrupted Nature, wherein this
Renuntiation does consist, must be such as is wrought in us by the Spirit and
Grace of God. This I say, because it is very possible for a Man to be Changed
from some sensual Courses to an utter hatred thereof, and yet remain in God's
Eyes a Carnal and Unregenerate Man; and the reason is, because his Change
proceeds not from any Inward Vital Principle of Virtue, but from some
prudential Methods in the management of his Pleasures, as some the most sensual
Epicures, that live, shall become at length temperate and sober, because their
Constitutions will not bear a Debauch; but as the Spirit of God had nothing to
do in the Change, so in their Hearts and Minds they remain still to be sensual.
And others again you shall meet, who have a full Conviction in their Minds and
Consciences, through the preaching of the Word, of the Evil of Sin, and yet in
their Affectiens they Love it, and their Lusts and Appetites Rebelling against
the Reason of their Mind, will have it, and their Wills do finally choose it; so
that these Persons with the Mind do serve the Law of God, but with the Flesh
the Law of Sin; as St. Paul, in that much mistaken Chapter, Romans 7.25. does
represent, (as was now showed you) the Case of the Carnal Jew, abiding only
under the Conviction of the Law. But where the Spirit of God works the Change,
that Person is Sanctified wholly, and the whole Spirit, and Soul, and Body will
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 These. 5.23.
So that such a Person shall effectually Renounce the Flesh, and All its sinful
Lusts, both of the Inward, and of the Outward Man.

And accordingly, as we will draw nigh to God, and have him draw nigh to us, we
must cleanse our hands, and purify our hearts, and not be double-minded, James
4.8. We must, through the help of his Grace, Cleanse our selves from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God, 2 Cor.
7.1. We must be always, I say, in the perfecting of (one degree after another)
our Holiness, and that Image of God which we lost by our Fall; for the subduing
of All our Lusts, must be the Work of Time; and it is not of a sudden, that we
can get an entire Conquest over 'em ALL. But if in our Strivings against 'em,
we find our selves still more and more to get ground upon 'em, we are in a
hopeful Condition. In a Word therefore, Brethren, we are Debtors, not to the
Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for if ye live after the Flesh, ye shall die;
but if through the Spirit ye do Mortify the Deeds of the Body, ye shall live;
for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans
12.13, 14.

The Reason of having enlarged so much upon this one Article of Renouncing the
Devil, etc.
And so I have at length done with this no less Important, than Copious Subject,
the Renouncing of the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. It may seem indeed, as
if I have been too long upon the Explication of one single Article of our
Covenant, viz. the Renouncing of the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and All the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh. But if it
be considered, that half the Business of our Christian Religion is performed in
Resisting the Enemies of our Salvation, it will not be a Matter of blame that I
have been so long upon this Point, especially in Instructing of Youth about it,
who ought to be very well fore-arm'd in order to their coming off Conquerors.
The truth of it is, this Renouncing of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
that is, the Resisting, and Overcoming of all their Numerous Host of
Temptations, is the Christian's Warfare and great Work. For as the Holy
Scriptures do in a multitude of Texts Represent our State as a State of
Warfare. ( Fight the good Fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal Life; for
hereunto ye have been called before many Witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. That is, we
Listed our selves in this Warfare at our Baptism, in the Presence of the Church
of Christ) As our State, I say, is a State of Warfare against all these
Spiritual Enemies; so it does infinitely concern all of us to know, as far as
is possible, All their Arts and Stratagems to deceive us; and this, I hope,
will be a sufficient Apology, that I have been so improportionably long, to
what I have, and shall be upon other Heads, in showing you what it is, and how
far you must Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this
wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

THE XXII. Lecture. Secondly, That I should Believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith.
HAving largely Explained the first Condition of Life and Happiness, and showed
you, what I conceive is meant by Renouncing the Devil and all his Works, the
Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh;
I come now to do the like, as to the Second Condition upon which we are to
expect to be Justified, to have our Sins Pardoned, and eternal Life and
Happiness conferred upon us; and which we have also Covenanted with God to do,
and that is, that we Believe all the Articles of our Christian Faith. In order
to the Explication of which Point,

1. I will declare to you the General Nature of those ARTICLES, or Christian
Truths, which are to be believed.

2. I will show you, What it is to BELIEVE those Articles, or Christian Truths,
so as to make us capable of Life and Happiness. And,

3. I will show you how we must Believe ALL the Articles of the Christian Faith.

And that I am to declare to you something in general, Articles of Christian
Faith, of what Nature.
concerning the Nature of those ARTICLES, or Christian Truths, which are to be
Believed.

The whole Bible, both Old and New Testament, is the proper Object of a
Christians Faith; The whole Bible the Object of a Christian's Faith, both
and whatever we find therein Recorded, or delivered down to us, we are to
believe, as a Divine, Certain, and Infallible Truth, because all things therein
contained, are the Word of him who will not, who cannot Lie, who neither can be
deceived himself, nor will he deceive others.

As to the Old Testament and the the Old Testament, and the
Writings of the Prophets, Jehosophat, in a Solemn Assembly of the whole
People, upon a Solemn Fast Day, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Proclaimed unto them, stood up
and said, Hear me O Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord
your God, so shall you be Established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye
Prosper. And let the Declarations of God Recorded therein be of what Nature
they will, the Truth of them is by no means to be called in doubt; If you will
not Believe, surely ye shall not be Established, Isa. 7.9.

And so likewise as to the New Testament; New.
Our Savior upon his entrance to preach the Gospel, did in the first place
require of all Men to Believe it. Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom of God, and saying, the time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand; Repent ye and Believe the Gospel, Mark 1.14, 15. And when he
was also leaving the World, and Commissioned his Disciples to go into all the
World, and to preach the Gospel to every Creature, He declared, that he that
Believes shall he Saved, but he that Believes not shall be Damned, Mark
16.15, 16. So that both the Old and New Testament, and every part and parcel of
Scripture therein contained, is firmly to be Believed, as the Divine, Certain,
and Infallible Truth of God.

And the reason thereof, as to the Old Testament, is because Prophecy came not
in Old time by the Will of Man; but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. And we are also firmly to Believe all the parts
both of Old and New indifferently, because all Scripture is given by
Inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16. All the parts of
it are the Dictates and Word of God himself, and are more or less Useful to our
Edification and Improvement in Divine Knowledge, Faith, and Practice. And
therefore all Ranks and Degrees of Men, and of every Age, Young as well as Old,
ought diligently to Study, and firmly to Believe the Holy Scriptures. The
Bereans did so, and they were accounted the more Honorable for so doing. The
Bereans were more Noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they Received, or
Believed the Word with all readiness of Mind, and searched the Scriptures
daily, Act. 17.11. And it is Recorded to the Immortal Honor of Timothy, 2 Ep.
3.15. that from a Child he had known the Scriptures, which were able to make
him wise unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus.

Well, but though all Scripture, as being the Infallible Word of him, who neither
can be deceived himself, nor will deceive others, does Challenge the Belief of
every Christian; yet among the great multitude of Truths of various Kinds
delivered in the Scriptures, some are of far greater Importance and Concernment
to us than others, Some Truths Revealed in Scripture of greater Importance and
Concernment to us, than others.
because they do more immediately and directly tend to give us due and worthy
Apprehensions of God, and to Instruct us in the only sure Method of Salvation
by Jesus Christ. There are some Principal Doctrines of Christianity which are
in their own Nature apt to have a greater Influence upon our Lives, and more
powerfully to restrain us from a course of Sin, and to unite us to the Practice
of Virtue and Holiness, than others; and when they have done this, to send us
to God the Father to seek for Acceptance merely through Christ his Son. And
upon these, and the like accounts, therefore such Truths as these are more
particularly necessary to be Believed by us, in order to our Justification
before God, and to our Salvation in the other World; and are therefore called
the Articles of our Christian Faith, being a Summary and Collection of such
Doctrines out of the Holy Scriptures, as are of a more Concerning Nature than
the rest.

And must therefore be distinctly Known, and explicitly Believed.
All those other Truths, of what Nature soever, contained in the Holy
Scriptures, are indeed necessary also to be Believed, at leastwise Implicitly;
that is, we are to be possessed with a General Persuasion that they are all
certainly true, because God has Revealed them as such. But these latter which
we call the Articles of our Christian Faith, must be positively and Explicitly
Believed, that is, we must thoroughly understand 'em, and be assuredly and
distinctly persuaded of each single Truth contained in 'em, as without which
understanding and persuasion, a Good and Christian Life will not be wrought in
us, nor a reliance on God's Merits in Christ for the acceptance thereof,
Created in our Souls.

Such, for instance, is the Belief that there is a God; Some Instances of such
Truths.
for this is the very first Principle of all Religion, and must necessarily
make us stand in awe, and fear of offending him, if we thoroughly believe and
consider it: Such is the Belief, that he is our Father who Created us and all
the World; for this will make us love him who gave us our Being. And such again
is the Belief, that he Exercises a just and a wise Providence in the Government
of the World; for this will make us submit our selves to all his Dispensations,
as being the Appointments of one who knows better than our selves what is best
for us.

And to instance also in some which are the Truths purely of Revealed Religion;
Such is the Belief, that the Son of God came down from Heaven to suffer Death
for us, to Redeem us from the Punishments of Hell; for this, as it shows us how
Odious a thing Sin is, when nothing less could satisfy God's Justice against
it, than the precious Blood of the Son of God; and consequently, does extremely
tend to create in our Hearts an utter hatred to all Sin; So hereby we are
taught, that Christ has made a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice and
Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. And such, lastly, is the Belief
(for I need not now stand to mention every Article) that all our Bodies shall
rise again at the General Resurrection; that then we must all appear before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, to Receive a Just Sentence for whatever we have done
in the Body, whether it be good or bad; for this will make us careful how to
lead our Lives so in this World, that we may not be Condemned in the next.

These now are some of those Articles of our Christian Faith, and are such
Divine Truths, as are more particularly necessary to be Believed by us, as
containing in them the greatest reason in the World to restrain us from all
manner of Sin, and to encourage us in the Practice of all Religious Duties. And
yet are Doctrines withal of extraordinary force to remove all conceit out of
our Minds concerning our own Merits, and to make us rely solely upon God's
Mercies in Christ, for the Acceptance of our most Holy Performances. And let
this suffice, as to the first thing proposed, which was to declare unto you
something in general, of the Nature of the Objects, or of those Truths to be
Believed the Articles of our Christian Faith. And now,

Secondly, I will also show you what it is to BELIEVE these Truths, so as to
make us capable of Life and Happiness.

And if it be asked how we must Believe these things, What it is to Believe
those Truths so as to make us capable of Life and Happiness.
why we must be so thoroughly and firmly persuaded of their undoubted Truth, as
to be accordingly Influenced (as I have now said) by the Belief thereof, to the
Practice of Good Works, and then to betake our selves to Jesus Christ to
Interceed with the Father, for their Gracious Acceptance.

Our Belief thereof must be Operative and Practical.
I say, our Faith must be such, as does Influence us to a Good Life; for such is
the Faith that St. Paul tells us is now required in the Christian Religion in
order to Salvation, Gal. 5.6. In Jesus Christ, says he, neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but Faith which works by Love: Some
render the words, and that more rightly, Faith that is perfected by Love; which
does more expressly signify the Apostles meaning, that that Faith which will
save us, must be such which is perfected by the addition of those Duties which
we owe to God and our Neighbor. And St. James does with great Industry show,
that the Christian Faith, which has the promise of Justification and Salvation,
is a Powerful, Practical Belief, and that none other has any Promise. What,
says St. James, 2.14. does it profit my Brethren, though a Man says, he has
Faith, and has not Works, can Faith save him? Faith, if it have not Works, is
dead being alone, v. 17. and is no more than what the Devils have; for the
Devils believe and tremble, v. 19.

Such was the Faith of Abraham, and of all the Saints.
And the Faith, indeed, for which the Holy Patriarchs and Saints were renowned
of Old, and are now so highly Rewarded in Heaven, was a Powerful, Practical,
and Working Faith indeed, which excited them to the highest and the hardest
Acts of Obedience, that it was possible for Men to perform. Thus, Heb. 11.17,
18. we read, that by Faith, Abraham, when he was tried, offered up Isaac; and
he that had received the Promises offered up his only begotten Son, and he a
Son too in whom God had promised him great Blessings; And yet, at God's
Command, he readily Obeyed, believing that God would be as good as his promise
to him, though it was by raising him again from the Dead. By Faith, Moses, when
he was come to Years, refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter,
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the
pleasures of Sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
than the treasures of Egypt; for he had respect to the recompense of reward, v.
24, 25, 26. It was a great temptation to Moses to be made a Prince, if he
pleased, in which Estate he might enjoy the highest Pleasures this World could
afford; but he Believing, that God would infinitely reward him for his
Self-denial, in refusing such Worldly Honors and Pleasures, chose rather to be
one of those mean Persecuted People, the Children of Israel. By Faith,
thousands of Blessed Saints before us, endured trials of cruel Mockings and
Scourgings, yea, moreover, of Bonds and Imprisonments; they were Stoned, they
were Sawn asunder, were Tempted, were Slain with the Sword, they wandered about
in Sheepskins, and in Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, (of
whom the world was not worthy) they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and
in Dens, and in Caves of the Earth, Heb. 11.35, 36, 37, 38. They were terrible
Sufferings which the Servants of God in former times have been put to undergo;
but as dreadful as they were, being supported with a firm belief, that they
should be infinitely recompensed for their Sufferings and Losses, they
thereupon cheerfully underwent the severest, that the Wit or Malice of Men or
Devils could invent or inflict upon 'em. Such a powerful, practical, working
Faith indeed, was that for which the Holy Patriarchs and Saints were of Old
renowned, and are now rewarded in Heaven: A Faith, I say, which excited them to
the highest and hardest Acts of Obedience, that it was possible for Men to
perform. And such a Powerful, Practical, Active and Working Principle is Faith,
whenever the things Believed are of great Importance or Concernment to us.
And such an Operative and Practical Principle is Faith, whenever the Things
believed are of great Importance or Concernment to us.
Some things indeed, as an Excellent Person does well observe, are of such a
Nature, that the Belief or Knowledge of 'em goes no farther, but rests in it
self, as the Knowledge or Belief of bare Speculative Truths, that do not at all
Concern us; but some things again are of such a Nature, as being once firmly
and truly believed, and known, carry a Man out to action. Thus, for Example; If
you should hear another threatened, that he should certainly be Killed if he
stir out of his House to morrow, it would not hinder you from going Abroad,
though you firmly believe the threatening, because it is a truth in which you are
not Concerned: But the Person so threatened, if he does thoroughly believe the
danger, will certainly not stir out of his House that day, because it is a
Truth that he is very much Concerned in. On the other side, If you should hear
of a Promise made to another Person of a Thousand Pound, if he will be at the
Pains to go but to such a place, it will not make you go there, because it is a
Promise that you are not Concerned in; but the other Person, if he be certainly
persuaded the Promise will be made good to him, will certainly go to the
appointed place, because it is a Promise that he is Concerned in.

And so likewise, as to the case in hand; That a sure Promise of the Pardon of
our Sins, and Eternal Happiness, is made over to us in the Second Covenant, on
condition we will forsake the Service of Satan and of Sin, that we will Repent
heartily, Believe practically, and Obey sincerely, is a Truth that the Devils
(to their great grief) are fully persuaded of; for they believe and tremble,
St. James tells us: But this Faith of theirs, does not put them upon Repentance
and Amendment, because those gracious Promises do not Concern them, and they
have no Promise of Salvation, though they should Repent and Amend. But as to us,
whom they do Concern, and to whom they are made, if we are really persuaded,
that if we amend, we shall be certainly Saved, we shall immediately, upon such
persuasion, seriously Repent of what has been done amiss heretofore, and take
care to Obey God for the future; for every Man that has this Hope in God,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3.3.

In short, the Articles of our Christian Faith are every one of 'em so many
Motives, and those the most powerful ones in the World, to stir us up to a
diligent Reformation of our Hearts and Lives. They are in themselves the most
obliging Arguments to it, and with respect to us, they are the most Concerning
and Important Truths that can be, containing in the meaning of 'em, either
Threatenings to scare us out of Sin, or Promises to allure us to Obedience:
Either such considerations as are apt to excite our fears when we are in a
course of Impiety, or are Grounds whereon we may build the vastest hopes in the
Performance of our Duty. And if any one does not live accordingly, a Godly,
Righteous, and a Sober Life, I dare be bold to say, it is owing to some spice
of Infidelity lurking in his heart, whereby he is not thoroughly persuaded of,
or does not actually consider these Truths; But he that does thoroughly Believe
and Consider them, can hardly fail of being a good Liver. Thus necessary, you
see it is, that our Belief of all the Articles of our Christian Faith be such,
as does Influence us to good Works; And then, after all,

2. It must be a Belief that causes us to betake our selves to Jesus Christ to
Interceed with God the Father for their Gracious Acceptance. 2. To Believe
savingly, we must apply our selves to Jesus Christ, to interceed with God the
Father for our Gracious Acceptance.
This I have formerly, in the beginning of my Exposition, insisted upon; yet
such is the growing Infidelity of the World with respect to this, which is the
most Essential part of Christian Faith, that it would not be unseasonable,
should I again show you that we must depend upon the Mediation of Christ with
the Father, for us, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted
to our Justification. This is that Act of Faith which is called in Scripture
Believing in Christ; and to such a Believing as this it is, that our
Justification is Attributed by St. Paul, Gal. 2.16. Know this, that a Man is
not Justified by the Works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ; even
we have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be Justified by the Faith of
Christ, and not by the Works of the Law, for by the Works of the Law shall no
flesh be Justified. And as this Act of Faith, the Relying upon God's Mercies in
Christ, does wonderfully exalt the Divine Justice and Mercy, so it leaves no
place to the Creature to Attribute any part of its Happiness to it self, but
does utterly exclude all occasions of Boasting. God has set forth Jesus Christ
his Son to be a Propitiation, through Faith in his blood, to declare his
Righteousness for the Remission of Sins, that are past, through the forbearance
of God. Where is Boasting then? it is excluded. By what Law, of Works? nay, but
by the Law of Faith, Romans 2.25, 27. So that it is not enough that we Believe
punctually, but it is moreover necessary that we rely also on God's Mercies in
Christ, that our imperfect Holiness may be accepted; or otherwise, even our
Assent to all the Articles of the Christian Faith will not avail us to our
Justification and Salvation; which brings me,

Lastly, To show you what it is to Believe ALL the Articles of our Christian
Faith. What to Believe All the Articles of the Christian Faith.
And,

1. To Believe ALL these Articles does Import, that we must Assent with a
through persuasion of their undoubted Truth, and of their Divine Authority, to
all and every one of those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in
the Apostles Creed. 1. To Believe them All does Import, that we must Assent to
all and every one of those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in
the Apostles Creed.
This Collection, or Summary of Christian Doctrine, is called by St. Paul, Romans
6.17. That Form of Doctrine which was delivered to the Christians; that is,
that Summary of Christian Doctrine, to the Belief and Practice of which they
were delivered up, and solemnly Consecrated in their Baptism. And the same is
called, 2 Timothy 1.13. The Form of sound words which was heard of the Apostle
himself; and we are commanded to hold it fast; that is, to take care not to
depart from it in any part thereof.

And as we must not shrink from the Confession and Belief of any one of those
Articles, which have been handed down to us from the Apostles, in that Summary,
or Form of sound words, which makes up the Body of our Christian Faith; so we
must content our selves with the Belief of All those saving Truths, and must
not think there is any thing more to be Believed by our selves, or others, as
necessary to Salvation.

But especially, we must take care of possessing our Minds with a Persuasion of
the Truth of such Articles, as do tend to destroy what the true Genuine
Doctrines of Christianity, viz. All the Articles of our Christian Faith, Such
as tend to destroy a good Life, and send us to other Mediators than Christ, to
interceed with the Father for its Acceptance, no Articles of Christian Faith.
do Build; as do all, or most at leastwise, of the New Articles imposed upon
the Belief of Christians in the Romish Church. Some of those Articles in the
Romish Creed, do plainly take away the necessity of a Good Life, as might be
easily made appear, were it proper here to enlarge on that Point. And other
Doctrines of that Church, do as apparently take Men off from depending solely
upon the Mediation of Christ with his Father, that he would graciously accept
and pass by the Imperfection of the good they do, teaching 'em to apply
themselves to the Blessed Virgin, and other Saints, as Mediators with God for
'em. Nay, and some of their Doctrines, as that of Merits, and of Works of
Super-errogation, do teach 'em proudly to overvalue their own Performances, and
to boast themselves in their Merit. And therefore so far must we be from
suffering our selves to be persuaded of the Truth of All these, and the like
Doctrines, as Articles of our Christian Faith, that we must utterly dissent
from them all, as Unjust and Unreasonable Impositions on the Belief of
Christians. In a word; as we must strengthen our selves in the Belief of All
those True and Genuine Articles of the Christian Faith, so to Believe All
these, as necessary to Salvation, is enough. But to Believe more, under the
Character of Articles of a Christian's Faith, especially if they be such
Doctrines as do take off the fears of Sinning, and send us to other Mediators
betwixt God and Man, besides the Man Christ Jesus; this is indeed a Belief, not
only superfluous, as being a Belief of more than All the necessary Articles of
a Christian's Faith, but is a very sinful, and criminal, and superstitious
Persuasion.

2. To Believe ALL the Articles of the Christian Faith, is not only to Assent
to All, and every of those Articles in the Gross, but to be fully persuaded of
all and every of those single Truths contained in each of those Articles. 2. To
Believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, is to be fully persuaded of
all, and of every of those single Truths contained in each of those Articles.
Every one of the Articles of our Christian Faith is full of a great deal of
Meaning, and many of them do contain Truths of various Kinds and Importance.
Thus, for instance, To believe that Jesus Christ was Crucified, Dead, and
Buried, does import this Comfortable, as well as Fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity, That the Only Son of God suffered Death upon the Cross for our
Redemption, and that he made there by that one Oblation of himself once
offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction,
for the Sins of the whole World. And accordingly it is said, 1 Pet. 3.18. That
Christ once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us
to God. And 21.24. it is said, That he himself did bear our sins in his own
body on the Tree.

But then this is not the whole that is meant in that Grand Article, but also
this other Doctrine, That he suffered to Redeem us from all Iniquity; that is,
he suffered on the Cross the punishment of our Sins, that we seeing how odious
a thing Sin is, which could not be Atoned for by a Sacrifice less valuable than
the Blood of the Son of God, might therefore abhor it, and forsake it. And this
is also taught us in the very place now cited from St. Peter, viz. 1 Ep. 2.24.
He his own self bear our sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being dead
to Sin should live unto Righteousness.

And now a Person may become Guilty of Heresy by believing only one of those
Truths contained in the Articles. A Heretic may be such by Believing only of
one of those Truths contained in the Article.
And accordingly there are two opposite Heresies, which do at this day most
grievously afflict the Church of Christ amongst us, and they do divide these
two great Doctrines, contained in this one Article, betwixt 'em. And they are
therefore Heresies, because they do so divide 'em, and do not each of 'em
Believe both these important Doctrines. The Antinomians do Believe indeed, that
Christ did satisfy the Divine Justice for our Sins, but so as to leave no
Conditions to be performed by them. And the Socinians, on the other side,
owning that he came to draw us off from Sin, deny that he made any Satisfaction
for us; So that both do fundamentally Err in the Faith, though they Believe the
Article in the gross, that Christ was Crucified, Dead and Buried, because
neither of them Believe the whole Truth contained in that Article. And
therefore, as you must Believe All the Articles, so All those Divine and
Necessary Truths which are contained in every Article of your Christian Faith,
according to the full Explication and Meaning thereof, given us in the Nicene
and Athanasian Creeds. These Creeds do not contain more, or different Articles
of Faith, than the Apostles Creed does; but in these Creeds, many Articles of
our Christian Faith are expressed in the full Sense and Importance of 'em, in
opposition to those Heresies which did, and do still pervert, or restrain the
Meaning of those Articles. And thus you also see, how you are to Believe All
the Articles of your Christian Faith; that you are not only to Believe every
one of 'em, but all that Divine Truth which is contained in each.

And so, as I have before laid before you, how you are to Renounce the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh, so now, what it is to Believe all the Articles of
your Christian Faith. And so it only remains (and then I shall have fully
Explained to you all the Conditions of the Covenant of Grace) that I show you
next, what it is to obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the
same all the days of our Life.

THE XXIII. Lecture. Thirdly, That I should Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and Walk in the same all the Days of my Life.
I Hope I have sufficiently explained unto you, the Two first Conditions bound
upon you in your Baptismal Covenant, as indispensibly necessary to your
obtaining the Benefits of it; which Conditions are, First, That you should
Renounce the Devil, etc. Secondly, That you should Believe, etc. And now I come
to the Third; which is, That you should Obey, etc.

And that I may fully, and to the purpose, explain this to you, I will,

First, Lay before you, what it is to Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments; or
how far you must be obedient to the Holy Will and Commandments of God, as ever
you will hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Secondly, I will show you, what it is to Walk in the same all the Days of your
Life; or how long you must persevere in such Obedience, which must be to the
end of your Lives. And,

Thirdly, I will clear the Doctrine of Evangelical Obedience, as so stated,
from those Doubts that may be raised against it.

And, First, Because nothing can be more necessary for you to be Instructed in,
than the Measures of that Obedience, now under the Gospel, or Covenant of
Grace; upon the performance of less than which, you cannot expect to be made
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; I will, with what clearness I can, show
you, How far we must be Obedient to God's Holy Will and Commandments, 1. What
it is to obey God's Holy Will and Commandments.
as ever we'll hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And that Evangelical or Gospel-Obedience, which now under the Covenant of
Grace, is the indispensible Condition of Man's Salvation, (to give it you
according as it is most exactly stated by the Learned Author of The Measures of
Christian Obedience; The Nature and Measures of Christian Obedience.
for it is impossible, I do think, for any one to do it more exactly; therefore
I shall give you an Abstract of that whole Work:) Is a sincere and entire
Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel: Sincere it must be, by being a true
and undissembled Service of God, (opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and
feigned Pretense of obeying Him, when in reality we only serve our own Selves,
or our own Lusts and Interests.) Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of
the whole Man, to the whole Will of God, and that at all times; with this
abatement of Rigor, That all our unwilling and involuntary Failings, which,
through Ignorance and Frailty, we commit, shall, upon our Prayers to God, and
Charity to our Neighbor, be forgiven us; and even our wilful Transgressions,
when we repent and forsake 'em, through the Mediation of Christ, and the Grace
of the Gospel, shall not be imputed to our Condemnation. Such is the Obedience
which every one of you must carefully pay to the Holy Will and Commandments of
God, as ever you hope to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. But for your
better understanding the Nature and Extent of your Christian Obedience, I will
a little farther unfold each Part of this Description of it. And,

I. Our Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel must be sincere, by being a
true and undissembled Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false
and feigned Pretense of obeying Him, when in reality we only serve our own
selves. 1st. Our Obedience must be sincere, by being a true and undissembled
Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and feigned Pretense of
obeying Him, when in truth we serve our own selves.
This is a certain Truth, That our Gracious God, for the most part, has made
such Things the Matter of His Laws, and of our Duty, as really make for our own
Interest, Reputation, or Profit to perform; for so it really is to be
Temperate, and Chaste, and Contented, and Humble; to be Upright, and
Charitable, and Peaceable, etc. But then our Obedience is sincere, and done as
unto God, when we observe His Laws for His sake, and because He commands it;
for otherwise we do not observe God's Will, but our own: His Commands had no
share in what we did, because it had been done although He had said nothing.
And thus sincere must our Obedience be unto God (as ever we expect that God
should Judge us at the last Day to have obeyed Him:) I say, it must be done as
unto God; and sincerely from our Hearts to please Him, and not only our selves.
And this is plainly expressed in the very Words of the Gospel, for it accepts
not an heartless Service, nor accounts it self obeyed by what was never
intended for it: The Lord thy God requires of thee to serve him with all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, Matthew. 22.36, 37. And therefore St. Paul does
pray, that the Philippians may be sincere in their Profession, being filled
with the Fruits of Righteousness, or Good Works, to the Praise and Glory of
God, not themselves, Phil. 1.10, 11.

God indeed has not forbidden us all intending and designing of our own
Advantage in the performance of his Commandments. God does not forbid us all
intending our Advantage in the performance of his Commandments.
When He requires us to obey Him, He does not forbid us all Love of our Selves,
and Regard to our own Self-interests: For why? He does propose to us in
Scripture the greatest Rewards possible, as Motives to us, to persuade us to
obey. And the Blessed Saints in the Scripture, so Eminent for their Service to
God, are said to have had an eye at the Recompense of Reward. But then our
Intention of our own Advantage in God's Service is forbidden, and renders our
obedient Performances corrupt and insincere, when together with our Intention
of serving God, we either join, first, another Intention of serving Sin: Or,
secondly, when we design some temporal Ends, as much, or more, than we design
God's Service.

First, I say, That Man's Obedience is insincere, who together with his
Intentions of serving God, joins another Intention of serving Sin; But, 1st.
that Man's Obedience is insincere, who together with his Intention of serving
God, joins another Intention of serving Sin.
as if a Man (as our Savior tells us the Pharisees did) make long Prayers, and
other Professions of Religion, to enable him the better, and without suspicion,
to devour Widows Houses, as well as serve God. Where his obedient Performances
slow from such a mixture of Design as this, they will in no wise be owned as an
obedient, but punished as a sinful Service.

Secondly, Again, Men's Obedience is insincere, when they design some temporal
Ends in the practice of Virtue, as much or more than the design God's Service;
2dly, When he designs some temporal Ends in the practice of Virtue, as much, or
more, than he intends God's Service.
as when a Man is temperate, and will not drink, which is his Duty indeed, but
yet only because he cannot without making himself sick. But when, in the
performance of any Virtue, a Man has a regard as much, if not more, to his
Profit or Ease, than to the Commands of God, in that case this Obedience is
also insincere, and will be far from entitling him to be an Inheritor of the
Kingdom of Heaven: For thus to have as much regard to our worldly Profit or
Pleasure, in the performance of any Duty, as to please God, is a degrading of
Him; it is a setting up the World for His Rival: And to bring other Things in
Competition with Him, is plainly to renounce Him. In respect of our Love to
God, we must even hate Father and Mother, Wife and Children, the dearest
Interests and Concerns we have in the World. He will be served and respected
above all; for He is jealous of the Pre-eminence of His Service above all
Things, as an Husband is of his Wife's Love to him above other Men: I the Lord,
says he, am a jealous God, Exodus 20.5. And so much for that Sincerity which is
required of us, as the first Qualification of an Acceptable Obedience.

II. That Evangelical or Gospel-Obedience, 2dly, Evangelical Obedience must be
entire, viz.
which now, under the Covenant of Grace, is the indispensible Condition of
every Man's Salvation, must be an entire Obedience to all the Laws of the
Gospel. Now this Integrity of our Obedience is such a Perfection and
Compleatness of it, as excludes all Maimedness and Defects; and this in another
Word is ordinarily expressed in Scripture by Vprightness, or walking uprightly.
And to be upright in God's Ways, is not to stumble and fall by Sin or
Disobedience; but to be perfect and entire, or wanting nothing in obedient
Performances.

And that our Obedience may be thus entire and upright, it must be, First, The
Obedience of the whole Man: Secondly, To the whole Law: And, Thirdly, performed
at all times.

First, That our Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel may be entire, and so
avail as to Life and Happiness, it must be the Obedience of the whole Man; that
is, 1st. The Obedience of the whole Man; that is,
we must take care to obey, with all the Powers and Faculties of our Nature: We
must have our Understandings, our Wills, our Affections, and our Bodily Powers,
obedient to God's Laws. And for this* the very Letter of the Law is express;
for when the Lawyer asked our Savior, What shall I do to inherit eternal Life,
Luke 10.25. our Savior asked, how it is written in the Law; who answering that
it is written, Thou shall love (that is, serve, as it is Deuteronomy. 11.13.) the Lord
thy God with all thine Heart, or Will, with all thy Soul, or Affections, with
all thy Strength, or Bodily Powers, and with all thy Mind, or Understanding,
verse. 26, 27. When the Lawyer answered him, That thus indeed it was written in
the Law (as it was Deuteronomy. 11.) our Savior told him, he answered right; and bid
him do this, and he should live. Obedience, with all the Powers, and with the
whole Nature, is the Means of Life, and the indispensible Condition of our
eternal Happiness. And,

In the first place of the Mind and Understanding.
First, We must keep all God's Commandments with our Mind, or Understanding;
that is, all the Thoughts and Imaginations, all the Contrivances and Counsels
of our Hearts, must be governed by, and kept in obedience to the Laws of the
Gospel; so that we must not indulge our selves, nor entertain in our Hearts
evil Thoughts, wanton and vain Thoughts; nor must we purpose and contrive
wicked and unjust Things, no more than we must outwardly act them. Thus the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 10.4 tells us, That the Weapons of a Christian's Warfare, must
be mighty through God, to the pulling down Strongholds, to the casting down
Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge
of God, and to the bringing into captivity every Thought to the Obedience of
Christ. This Text forbids all Thoughts and Contrivances of Sin.

Secondly, Secondly, of the Will.
As ever we hope to have our Obedience avail us to Life and Happiness; as we
must keep our Minds and Understandings, so likewise our Wills, in Obedience to
God's Commands. The Choice, as well as the Practice of our Duty, is plainly
necessary to render it available to our Salvation; but, on the other side, he
that would sin, if he could conveniently and opportunely; if he choose Sin,
although he miss of opportunity to act it; the bare Choice, without the
Practice, is sufficiently to his Condemnation. Thus our Lord Himself has
determined it, Whosoever looks on a Woman to lust after her, or so long 'till
his Heart consent to commit Lewdness with her, if he could, though he never
meet with an opportunity to act it, has committed Adultery with her already in
his Heart, Matthew. 5.28. This Text shows us, that we may disobey in Willing, as
well as Doing; and that we shall be condemned for a wicked Choice, as well as a
wicked Practice.

Thirdly, Thirdly, of the Affections.
As we will render to God the Obedience of the whole Man, an entire Obedience,
such as will avail us to Salvation; we must regulate our Souls and Affections,
conforming them wholly to what God commands: That is, we must love our Duty, as
well as do it; and not to do it merely out of Fear, but of out Love. To pretend
Obedience to God, and yet to love what he forbids; to make a show of his
Service, and yet in our very Hearts to hanker after his vilest Enemies, our
Sins, whom above all Things his Soul hates; this surely is not honestly to
Serve, but grossly to Collogue, and flatly to Dissemble with Him. And we must
not do our Duty merely out of Fear, I say, but out of Love; for thus to serve
God against our Wills, is to submit to Him, as a Slave does to a tyrannous
Lord; not through any Kindness for him, but through a hateful Fear of him. But
this is such a hateful way of performing Obedience, as God will never endure,
nor accept of; for He scorns to be served by a slavish Fear, and an unwilling
Mind. No Man (as our Savior says, Matthew. 6.24.) can serve two Masters; for if
he loves the one, he will hate the other: Ye cannot serve God and Mammon. By
this he lets us know, that our Love and Obedience must go together, and be paid
both to one God.

Lastly, As we will give God the Service and Obedience of the whole Man, an
Entire Obedience, such as he will Accept of to our Salvation, we must Obey him
with all our Strength and bodily Powers: That is, we must not only Inwardly
Approve of God's Commands as good in our Minds and Judgments, bear a Love to
'em with our Affections, and choose 'em with our Wills; but we must proceed
Outwardly to Act, and do the Will of God in the Outward and Constant Practice
of our Lives; we must put to our Strength and bodily Powers, and work the Will
of God in our Lives and Actions. Little Children, says St. John, 1 Epist. 3.7.
let no Man deceive you; he that does Righteousness, is righteous: That is, you
will be deceived, if you suffer others to persuade you, or vainly flatter your
selves, that there is any thing less than doing and acting virtuously and
righteously, for which you shall be rewarded as virtuous and religious Persons.
These Texts, besides many others, show you the necessity, that our Inward good
Motions, proceed to Outward good Operations; that you must go on to do good
Deeds, before you are fit for the Great Reward; that we must work, as well as
desire, and not only will and like, but do our Duty; because on nothing less
than that we shall at the last Day be accepted.

This indeed is the severe Service, This the distasteful part;
and the distastful Part of our Duty. A secret Wish, or a sudden Desire of
Obedience, may start up in our Souls unawares; and there is not much opposition
made to it, because our Lusts receive no great hurt from it: And therefore they
will allow us to think of Good, to spend a faint Relish, a sudden Inclination,
or fruitless Desire upon it; but if once we would go on to do our Duty, and to
begin Obedience, then begins the Conflict; our Lusts then bestirr themselves
with might and main, and set every Faculty on work to resist and defeat it; for
our Thoughts then begin to argue and to pick Quarrels with our Duty, our Wills
then begin to be averse, and our Affections to cool toward it.

And because in this Obedience of our Works and Actions, And therefore
endeavored to be shifted off.
there is so much of difficulty, therefore are most People so desirous to shift
it off, and so forward to take up with any thing which will save them the
labor of it: They persuade themselves, that God will admit of easier Terms;
and build their Hopes on cheaper Services; as particularly, that it will be
sufficient to Salvation, that they Believe the Gospel, and that Jesus Christ
died for them; that God will accept of the Will for the Deed; that God will
excuse their Disobedience, because when they fall, it is by reason of strong
and violent Temptations: And, lastly, that it is not without Reluctance and
great Unwillingness that they disobey. But all these are deceitful
Imaginations; for howsoever we are against Sin in our Thoughts, and Minds, and
Desires, the working Wickedness will make us, in God's account, Sons of Sin and
Disobedience, and will be sure to render such Children of Wrath and
Destruction. If you live after the Flesh, says St. Paul, you shall die, Romans
8.13. And whatever Men think in their Minds, or desire in their Hearts, or
profess in their Words to the contrary; if for all that they continue to commit
Sin in their Actions, Christ has told them plainly, That he will pronounce
(when he comes to sit as Judge) Depart from me, all ye that work Iniquity,
Matthew. 7.23.

And thus you see what is, in the first place, necessary to make up an Entire
Obedience; that our Obedience might be that of the whole Man; and that it may
be such, we must have our Minds, our Wills, our Affections, and, lastly, our
outward Actions, in Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel; that all these several
Powers must unite in God's Service, before it will be Upright and Complete,
such as at present his Law requires, and such as at the last Day he will accept
of, and reward us for.

2dly, It must be an Obedience to the whole Law.
Secondly, As it is necessary to the Integrity of our Obedience, that we Obey
his Holy Will and Commandments with our whole Man, with our Minds, our Souls,
our Wills, and our Strength; so that we Obey his whole Law, and Conform our
selves to every of his Commandments. We must not think to pick and choose in the
doing of our Duty; for if we do not Obey all, we Obey not right in any; because
all the Laws of God are bound upon us by the same Power, and enjoined by the
same Authority: So that if we fulfill any one upon this account of his having
required it; the same reason holds for the fulfilling of all the rest.

This indeed is very hardly believed, because it is so hard to practice; for
almost every Man has some Sin or other, which he can as well die as part with:
It has got his Heart, and is become the Master of his Affections; and since he
loves it so dearly, he hopes God will bear with it too.

And when Men are thus desirous to Obey God by halves, and would hope that this
might serve the turn, they take to themselves false Grounds and Confidences,
under which they shelter themselves, in the allowance or indulgence of such
Sins, as they are resolved to practice; and when they do wilfully continue in
the practice of any Sin, they usually plead one or more of these Things in
excuse:

This endeavored to be evaded by Excuses;
First, That they sinned for the preservation of their Religion and themselves,
in times of Danger and Persecution: Or, secondly, for the supply of their
Necessities by sinful Arts, Compliances, and Services, and in times of Want and
Indigency: Or, thirdly, for the satisfaction of their Flesh, in Sins of Temper,
Age, or Way of Life.

But in vain.
But whosoever would Obey God's Laws, to the Salvation of his Soul, must Obey in
every Instance, and continue wilfully to transgress in none; he must never hope
to please God in nothing, but what he lists himself: For the Obedience of the
Covenant, whereinto Christ commissioned his Apostles to Baptize Converts, is
nothing below an Entire Obedience: Go, says he, Baptize all Nations, teaching
them to observe all Things whatsoever I have commanded you, Matthew. 28.19, 20.
And threatens, Matthew. 5.19. That he who breaks the least of these Commandments,
shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven, or none at all, which is the
sense of the Hebrew Phrase. So that the Obedience upon which alone we must
expect to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, must be a Faithful and Entire
Obedience to all the Laws and Commands of the Gospel. Thus we must Obey all
God's Holy Will and Commandments; which brings me,

III. To my general Proposal; which was, to show you, What it is to Walk in the
same all the Days of our Lives; 3dly, What it is to Walk in the same all the
Days of our Lives.
we must continue in such a Sincere and Entire Obedience, even to the End of
our Lives. We must not think to please God by an Obedience, that comes and goes
by Fits; or by serving him only at such times as we are in Humor, and have no
Temptation to the contrary; but our Service of Him must be Constant and
Uniform; we must obey Him in all things, and wilfully transgress in none.

Some indeed there are, who parcel out their Time, and divide it betwixt God
and their Sins; they observe a constant course of Transgressing and Repenting,
of Sin and Sorrow; for they are always won when they are tempted, and they are
always sorrowful when they have done: And others there are, who wholly fall off
at last, and sin against God for altogether.

But now as for such a broken Service as this is, God will by no means accept
of it: For when Christ comes to Judgment, God will not endure a constant
Revolution of Sin and Repentance.
he will pass Sentence upon Men according to what they are then, and not
according to what they have been formerly. If the righteous Man turn away from
his Righteousness, and commit Iniquity, and do according to all that the wicked
Man does; Shall he live? No, by no means: For all his Righteousness that he
has done formerly, shall not be mentioned; but in his Trespass that he has
since trespassed, and in his Sin that he has since sinned, in them shall he
die, Ezekiel. 18.24. And it is they, which by patient continuing in Well-doing,
seek for Glory and Immortality, that shall inherit eternal Life, Romans 2.6, 7.

But as for all those who fall off from a good Course, and turn Apostates from
Obedience, their Case is desperate, and their Condition extremely damnable: For
if after Men have once escaped the Pollution of the World, through the
Knowledge of Christ's Gospel, they are again entangled therein, and overcome;
then is the latter End worse with them than the Beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20. So that
the Obedience which God will accept, and which will render us Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, must be, as of our whole Man, and to all the Laws of the
Gospel; so it must be performed to 'em at all times: We must persevere in it
through all Seasons, and take care both to live and die in it; for our Reward
will be dispensed unto us, according to the nature of our Service, at the time
of Payment, and he only, as our Savior says, that endures to the End, shall
be saved, Matthew. 10.22.

And thus I have showed you, first, What it is to Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments, or how far you must be Obedient to the Holy Will and Commandments
of God, as ever you will hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven: And, secondly, I have also showed you, What it is to Walk in
the same all the Days of your Life, or how long you must persevere in such
Obedience, even to the End of your Lives. In short, I have also showed you,
That the Obedience which is the Condition of our Salvation, even now under the
Gospel, must be a Sincere and Entire Observance of all the Laws of
Christianity. Sincere it must be, as I have showed you, by being a true and
undissembled Service, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and feigned
Pretense of Obeying him, when in reality we only serve our own selves, our own
Lusts and Interests. And Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of the whole
Man, to the whole Law; and not for some short, but for our whole Time, and to
the End of our Lives.

Covenant of Grace, is required, as the indispensible Condition of our being
made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; wherein lies the difference between
this, and the First Covenant, or Covenant of Works, which Christ came to
purchase our Freedom from, and to establish this in its room? The Condition of
the First (as I have told you) was no less than a Perfect, Exact, Unsinning
Obedience, the never offending in any one Point; and if our Obedience now must
be so Sincere and Entire an Obedience of the Whole Man, to all the Laws of the
Gospel, and this to be performed at all times (as has been now described)
wherein does this come short, you will say, of that Perfect Obedience, required
of us in our State of Innocence, or that Legal Obedience required under the
Covenant of Works?

And now therefore, to clear the Doctrine of Evangelical Obedience, Answ. The
difference between Evangelical and a Legal Obedience.
as thus stated from any such Doubt, as if there were no difference betwixt the
Covenants in matter of Rigor; I shall show that there is a very material
Difference, and such as makes this we are now under, deservedly be styled a
Covenant of Grace. And the difference is this, That whereas under the First,
the Obedience was to be so perfect, that there was no Mercy upon the least
Transgression; but the Offender became immediately liable to the threatened
Punishment. Now under the Second, as Sincere and Entire as our Obedience must
be; yet no more is required at our hands, than what by God's Grace, and our own
honest Endeavors, we shall be enabled to perform. And therefore since the
Weakness of our Nature is such, that we cannot continue in an unsinning
Obedience; though all our wilful and chosen Sins indeed, if persisted in, will
still put a Bar to our Salvation; yet all our Unavoidable Infirmities, and
Involuntary Transgressions, shall be constantly forgiven us; and even our
Wilful and more Heinous Sins, when by Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and
take better care to Avoid 'em for the future, they also, through the Mediation
of Christ, according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of
Grace, shall be forgiven us, and not prejudice our being Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven.

True it is, the difference betwixt the Covenant of Works, and the Covenant of
Grace, is not so great, but our Wilful Chosen Sins, if still persisted in, will
put a Bar to our Salvation. This difference not so great, but that our wilful
and chosen Sins will put a Bar to our Salvation.
A wilful Sin is when we see and consider of the Sinfulness of any Action,
which we are tempted to, and after that choose to Act and Perform it. Every Sin
against Knowledge and Conscience, is a wilful Sin, when our own Heart rebukes
and checks us at the time of Sinning, telling us, that God has forbidden that
which we are about to do; notwithstanding which, we presume to do it. And as
for them, they are all of an heinous Guilt, and of a crying Nature; such Sins
are a despising of God's Law, and therefore are called Presumptuous Sins, and
are said to be acted through a Rebellious Pride, and with an high Hand, Numb.
15.30.

And those who have committed such, are said, Heb. 10.29. to have done despite
to the Spirit of Grace, because as well the Spirit of God, as their own Reason
have resisted 'em in the committing of such Sins, which Resistance
notwithstanding they have violently broke through. And as to such Sins
therefore, they will make us the Children of Wrath, and subject us to
punishment, as well now, as under the Law, as is evident from that place, Heb.
10.28, 29. now mentioned: He that despised Moses's Law, died without Mercy; of
how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has
trodden underfoot the Son of God, and has counted the Blood of the Covenant an
unholy Thing, (which they do who do wholly apostatize) and has done despite to
the Spirit of Grace? which they do who do sin wilfully.

And this they will be accounted to do, whether such Sins be Directly and
Expressly Wilful and Chosen, or only Indirectly so, Some Sins are directly and
expressly wilful.
and by Interpretation. Sometimes Men eye and view the Sin they are about to
commit, before they choose or act; they pause and deliberate, doubt and demurr
about it; they have a Conflict and Dispute in their own Minds, whether they
should commit or keep off from it: And when notwithstanding this they commit
it, that Sin is then directly and expressly chosen and wilful, and done in
despite of the Spirit of Grace, and is therefore of a very heinous and damning
Nature.

But besides these, there are other sinful Actions which are not chosen
directly and expressly, but only indirectly, Some indirectly and
interpretatively.
and by interpretation; that is, when Men expressly choose such a state of
Things, as make some sinful Actions after that, to be no longer a matter of
free Choice, but almost necessary and unavoidable. Thus he that wilfully drinks
'till he is drunk, and then in his Drink commits Murder and Uncleanness, or any
other mad Frolicks, or sinful Extravagances, without any deliberation or
consideration at all, shall nevertheless be judged to have wilfully committed
those Sins, because he did deliberately and wilfully fall into that Sin of
Drunkenness, which when he was in (by depriving himself of his Reason) made
those, or any other Sins, unavoidable at that time. So again, he that watches
not over, but indulges and gives way to his Passions, and in his Anger kills a
Man; and he that accustoms himself to a Sin so often, that he knows not when he
commits it, as to swear, in either of these cases also, he shall be judged
wilfully in God's account to have committed Murder, and to have swore; because
any Man may choose to indulge and humor his Passions, or to accustom himself to
that Sin, which makes his falling into other Sins so unavoidable. And, lastly,
he that wilfully neglects the means of attaining to any Grace or Virtue, will
be judged wilfully to have omitted his Duty, which in the use of due means he
might have done acceptably. Thus in either of these cases, when Men fall into
any Sin, either by Drunkenness, or by indulging, and not watching over their
Passions; or by reason of having long accustomed themselves to such Sins; or,
lastly, by neglecting the Means of attaining to any Grace or Virtue: In any of
these cases, he that commits a Sin, his Sin will be accounted as indirectly,
and interpretatively chosen and voluntary, because he did willingly do those
things which brought and betray d him into such Sin; or wilfully neglected
those Means which would have preserved him from them. And so his Sin will be
condemned, as a chosen and wilful Sin, and a Transgression of God's Law, and he
punished as a wilfully disobedient Person. So that the difference between the
Law and the Gospel is not such, as that wilful Sins shall be now unpunished.
But the difference is, 1st. that those who sincerely and entirely obey, shall
not be called to an account for unchosen and involuntary sins.
But here the difference is very great and comfortable; and it is this, That,

First, Our unchosen and involuntary Sins, which, through the Weakness and
Frailty of our Nature, we cannot always avoid, through the Mediation of Christ,
now under the Covenant of Grace; those who sincerely and entirely Obey the Laws
of the Gospel, shall not be called to an account for such.

And such unchosen and involuntary Sins, are those which we commit either
through Ignorance, because we did not understand our Duty; or through
Inconsideration, because we did not think of it. And unless our Ignorance and
Inconsideration be themselves wilful, we shall not be condemned for the
Failings we have committed through either of 'em.

The first cause of an innocent and pardonable Involuntariness, is Ignorance of
our Duty, The first cause of an innocent Involuntariness, Ignorance of our Duty.
when we do what God forbids, because we do not know that He has forbid it; for
such Failings as we ignorantly commit, we shall not be condemned under the
Covenant of Grace; for Christ, who is our High Priest, as St. Paul assures us,
will have compassion on the Ignorant, and them that are out of the Way, Heb.
5.2.

Provided it be not wilful.
True it is, there are those that are wilfully ignorant; for either they shut
their Eyes, and will not see their Duty, or they are idle and careless, and
will not enquire after it: So that if they do not know their Duty, it is
because they do not desire the Knowledge of it, or will be at no pains for it;
they neither read the Word, nor come to hear it, nor to be Catechized; and if
they do come, neither think nor consider afterward upon what they have heard;
nor pray to God to make all those means of Knowledge effectual to their
Salvation. And in the neglect of these Means of Knowledge, they make themselves
wilfully ignorant; and so their Ignorance will not be their Excuse, but their
condemning Sin, because it was wilful and chosen. But if you have an honest
Heart, desirous to be taught, that you may know and do your Duty; and use an
honest Industry, by Reading, coming to be Catechized, by constantly Hearing of
the Word. If thus you do all that lies upon you to be informed what you ought
to do, and yet afterward, if through Misunderstanding, you fail, then through
the Grace of the Gospel, and the Mediation of our Savior, what you have been
wanting in, will not be imputed to your Condemnation. Nor,

Secondly, What you do unwillingly commit through Inconsideration. 2d.
Inconsideration.
We sometimes do things we do not think nor consider the Evil of 'em when we
commit 'em; and so their Sinfulness being unseen, is also unchosen; and these
Slips do so steal from us, without our Consideration and thinking of 'em,
Inconsideration excuses, 1. When through surprise.
several ways; either, first, by surprise, and a sudden Temptation. And thus
St. Paul, upon an unexpected occasion, was surprised into a sudden Anger, and
into an unadvised Irreverence toward the High Priest, Acts 23.1, 2, 3. And the
beginnings of a single Passion, whether of Anger or Envy, and the unadvised
Slips of the Tongue, generally enter this way. Or, secondly, we venture upon
several Actions without thinking of their sinfulness, through our natural
Weariness, and the length and constancy of a Temptation. Thus in times of
Affliction, or Sickness, 2. When through natural weariness, and the length and
strength of a Temptation.
by the uneasiness of the Flesh, and the hardness of Man's Condition, a Person
is sometimes tempted to fret and murmur, and to be peevish and repining: And so
we find it was with Job, who though a Man patient to a Proverb, and one to
whom, by the Testimony of God Himself, there was none Equal in the whole Earth,
a perfect and an upright Man, one who feared God, and eschewed Evil, Job 1.8.
Yet this Man, I say, of admirable Constancy and Patience, was wearied out of
his Watchfulness, by a tedious trial of Afflictions; and in that time of his
Unadvisedness, uttered many Things impatient with his Lips, as appear from his
whole History. And, lastly, we sometimes inconsiderately and unadvisedly do an
ill Thing, by reason of the violent Discomposure and Disturbance of our
thinking Powers, when our Mind is so disturbed, that on a sudden we cannot
think what we do; Lastly, When by the violent discomposure of our Thinking
Powers, our Minds are so disturbed, that we cannot think what we do.
as upon a sudden Grief, Anger, or Fear. And thus Samuel, who was a Person so
dear to God, that if he could be entreated by any Man, he tells us it would be
by him, or Moses, standing to intercede before him; did yet in an instance that
would have drawn him into the hazard of his Life, dispute God's Command, when
he should have performed it, and question where in Duty it became him to Obey;
for when God did bid him go and Anoint David King, which Service was sure to
draw upon him the implacable Hatred of Saul; through the sudden force of that
frightful Thought, instead of Obeying, he answers again, saying, How can I go?
for if Saul hear of it, he will kill me, 1 Samuel 16.1, 2. So that as for those
Slips, which we do unwillingly commit, through either of these Causes of
Inconsideration, they are a matter of God's Mercy, and will be graciously born
with, and forgiven now under the Gospel and Covenant of Grace; for all those
Persons now mentioned as guilty of the like, St. Paul, Job, and Samuel, were in
a state of Grace, and the dear Children of God; I say therefore, they will be
graciously born with, and forgiven.

Provided, first, we never be guilty of 'em, Ignorance and Inconsideration
excuse not these Sins, 1. Which we have time to understand and observe; nor, 2.
Crying Sins; nor, 3. Those we do not endeavor against; nor, lastly, Which we
are not sorry for.
when we have understanding of, and time to observe 'em, nor, secondly, in any
great and crying Sin, as Murder, Adultery, etc. for no Man can pretend he did
unwittingly commit such things, as a Man's Conscience will presently start at:
Provided, thirdly, we do endeavor and strive, and watch against 'em: And,
lastly, after we find that we have fallen into 'em, provided we be sorry, and
earnestly beg God's pardon for 'em. Provided thus, such Slips and Infirmities,
as we do commit unadvisedly and inconsiderately, shall not be laid to our
charge.

And thus you see, that our unavoidable Infirmities, and our unwilling
Transgressions, which through an unaffected Ignorance, and an involuntary
Inconsideration, we do commit, shall not be imputed to our Condemnation now
under the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace. And this is the first great Difference
between the First Covenant, wherein the least Sin was Unpardonable, and this
Second Covenant, or the Covenant of Grace, wherein, through the Mediation of
CHRIST, all our Unwilling, Involuntary Infirmities, shall be graciously passed
by.

The Second great Difference is, That even our wilful and more heinous Sins,
when by our Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take better care to avoid
'em for the future; they also, through the Mediation of Christ, according to
the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven
us, The 2d. Difference betwixt Legal and Evangelical Obedience, That our wilful
and more heinous nous Sins when Repented of through the Mediation of Christ,
according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall
be forgiven us.
and not prejudice our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Among the Jews, according to the strictness of Moses's Law, the Punishment
took place upon the first wilful breach: He that despised Moses 's Law, says
the Apostle, if it were in an instance where the Law threatened death, died
without Mercy, Heb. 10.28. A Man that had committed Adultery, or Murder, or any
other Crime, whereof Death was the established Punishment, was to the without
Remedy; for no Sacrifice would be accepted for him, nor would the Law admit of
any Favor or Dispensation.

But when Christ came into the World, his Business was to abrogate all the
Rigor of Moses's Law, as well as that of the First Covenant, and to preach an
Universal Pardon upon Repentance. Now under the Covenant of Grace, God does not
cast us off upon the commission of every Sin, but as he is heartily desirous
that we should repent of it, according to that of Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says
the Lord, I do not delight in the death of a Sinner, but rather that he return,
and live. So when we repent, he has obliged Himself, by his Truth and
Faithfulness, to forgive it, according to that of St. John, Epist. 1.9. If we
confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins.

This is the great Doctrine of the Gospel, which is a Covenant of Remission of
Sins upon our Repentance; Remission of Sins upon Repentance, the great Doctrine
of the Gospel.
and therefore our Savior, when he began himself to preach it, he said,
Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 4.17. And when he left the
World, he commanded his Disciples, that they should declare to the World the
Pardon of Sins upon their Repentance; for so St. Luke tells us, Chapter 24.47. that
he gave 'em in charge, That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be preached
in his Name to all Nations.

Thus has God provided us of means, which will most certainly restore us to his
Favor. He has not left us in a forsaken state, but has prescribed us this
Method of Repentance to recover us out of it, and to be the great Instrument of
our Pardon and Reconciliation. And our Repentance, through the Mediation of
Christ, will be accepted for our Pardon, whatever our Sins have been, whether
known or unknown; whether they have been wilful or involuntary Sins.

Repentance will be accepted to our pardon, for our known or secret Sins,
whether wilfully or unwilly committed, but now forgot, though generally
repented of. 2. For our most known and wilful Sins, if particularly repented of.
First, Our unknown, or secret Sins, which whether wilfully or unwillingly we
have committed, but now we have forgot, shall be forgiven us upon our hearty,
though general Prayer to God to forgive us; such as was that of David, O
cleanse me from my secret Faults, Psalm. 19.12. and upon our diligent care
hereafter, not knowingly and wilfully to transgress any of God's Laws. And,

Secondly, Our most unknown and wilful Sins, even they shall also be forgiven
us, if for every particular Sin we know our selves to have committed, we
particularly repent of it by confessing it to God, and by taking care to amend
and forsake it for the future.

'Till we are reclaimed indeed from our former Sins, and are become God's
dutiful Sons and faithful Servants for the present, and for the future; it is
not consistent with the Honor of his Justice and Holiness, with the Authority
of his Laws, and with the Wisdom of his Government, to receive us into his
Favor: But as soon as ever we are conscientiously reform from our Sins, he
will be reconciled to us if we are heartily sorry for what has been past, and
amended for the future; and in case of Injury and Wrong done to God or Man, we
undo, as much as in us lies, what has been done amiss, by making amends, and
reparation for what we have injured either.

We cannot be said to repent of a Sin, unless we undo, And in case of Injury to
Man, if Restitution be made.
as much as in us lies, what has been done amiss: Therefore if any one has
offended his Neighbor, and given him just cause of Anger against him; he that
will truly repent, and expect that God will hear his Prayers for his Pardon,
must go and acknowledge his Offense, endeavor to appease his Neighbor, and be
reconciled to him; for so our Savior has ordered, Matthew 5.23. before he offer
his Prayer to God. And he that has injured his Neighbor, either by taking away
his good Name by Slander, or his Goods by wrong Dealing, must take off the
Slander, and restore what he has unjustly got; and so did good Zacheus, upon
his Repentanee, we find, Luke 19.8. when he embraced the Gospel.

And so likewise toward the Reparation of God's Honor, I must needs add, as a
necessary part of Repentance, Of high Dishonor to God and Religion, if that be
not repaired by an eminent Repentance.
that he who has formerly lived a very notorious and scandalously ill Life, to
the great Dishonor of God and Religion, must now, toward the Reparation of
God's Honor, be as famous for his eminent and exemplary Piety, that his
Repentance may be accepted, a private Sorrow for public Scandals falling
vastly short of undoing what has been done amiss, in which consists the
restitutive part of Repentance. The necessity of this, we have exemplified in
the case of the Woman who washed our Savior's Feet with her Tears, and wiped
them with the Hair of her Head, Luke 7.44. She had formerly, it seems, been a
very vile Woman; but the reason why her Sins, which were many, were forgiven,
is said by our Savior to have been, because she loved much, verse. 47. And thus
if we do repent, our Sins shall not be imputed to us; but through the Merits of
Christ's Death, and the Grace of the Gospel, they shall be looked upon as if
they had never been.

And thus I have showed you that other great Difference betwixt that Obedience
required now under the Covenant of Grace, and the Obedience required by the
First Covenant; That whereas the Obedience required by the First, was a
Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning Obedience, the never Offending at all. Now not only
our involuntary Sins and Infirmities; but also our most voluntary and and
wilful Transgressions, when by Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take
better care to avoid 'em for the future; they also, through the Mediation of
Christ, according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace,
shall be forgiven us, and not prejudice our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

And upon the whole, I have now showed you, The sum of Evangelical Obedience.
as to all that Obedience required now under the Gospel, to make us Inheritors
of the Kingdom of Heaven; that there is not required indeed, a Perfect, Exact,
Unsinning Obedience, the never offending in any one part, which was the
indispensible Condition of the First Covenant; but there must be a Sincere and
Entire Obedience paid to all the Laws of the Gospel: Sincere it must be, by
being a true and undissembled Service, Obeying 'em not only because most for
our Health and Interest, as generally the Laws of Religion are; but even where
they are contrary to our Inclinations and Interest, because God commands us.
And entire it must be, by being the Obedience of the whole Man, of our
Understanding, our Wills, our Affections, and our Actions, to the whole Law of
God, and that at all times. And this if we endeavor the best we can to do,
that our unwilling and involuntary Failings, which through Ignorance and
Frailty we commit, shall, upon our Prayers to God, be forgiven us; and that our
wilful Transgressions, when we repent of, and forsake 'em, through the
Mediation of Christ, and the Grace of the Gospel, shall not be imputed to our
Condemnation.

In a word; That Obedience (to speak also in the Words of the Learned Dr.
Hammond) The sum also thereof, according to Dr. Hammond.
which is the Condition of the Second Covenant, and of our being made
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven: Negatively it is not a Perfect, Exact,
Unsinning Obedience, the never offending at all in any kind of Sin, (this is
the Condition of the First Covenant.) Nor, secondly, is it never to have
committed any deliberate Sin in the former course of our Lives. Nor, thirdly,
never to have gone on, or continued in any habitual or customary Sin for the
time past: But it is positively the New Creature, or Renewed, Sincere Honest,
Faithful Obedience to the whole Gospel, giving up the whole Heart unto Christ,
the performing of that which God enables us to perform, and bewailing our
Infirmities, and Frailties, and Sins, both of the past and present Life, and
beseeching God's Pardon in Christ for all such, and sincerely laboring to
mortify every Sin, and to perform an uniform Obedience to God, and from every
Fall rising again by Repentance. And thus, if we Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and Walk in the same all the Days of our Life, we shall not fail
to be Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.

And thus I have fully explained to you all the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, both on God's part and on ours; both what it is to be a Member, etc. and
which are the Mercies and Favors made over to us therein on God's part, and
what it is to Renounce the Devil, etc. which are the Conditions to be performed
on ours.

My next Task must be, and then I shall give you a full account of all that
pertains to the Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace) to show you,
what a happy state of Salvation this is, to be in such a gracious Covenant with
GOD; By whose Mediation we obtained it; By whom and how we are called into it:
And, lastly, what infinite Thanks we owe to God for Calling us into this state
of Salvation: All which Points we have taught us in these Words: And I thank
God our heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state of Salvation,
through Jesus Christ our Savior.

THE XXIV. Lecture. And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that He has
Called me to this State of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
I Have already, in order to a full Explication of all that pertains to the
nature of the Covenant of Grace, given you an account of the Terms and
Conditions of it, both on God's part, and on ours, as they are laid down and
taught you in your Church-Catechism.

The Invaluable Privileges on God's part, made over to you therein, as you are
taught in your Catechism, and I have explained 'em to you are, first, That you
are therein made Members of Christ; secondly, Children of God; and, thirdly,
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. And those Conditions to be performed by
us, our part of the Covenant, are, That we should, first, Renounce the Devil
and all his Works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That we should believe all the Articles of
the Christian Faith. And, Thirdly, That we should keep God's Holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our Life. And what each
several Article in this your gracious Covenant does mean and import, I have
hitherto (according to the best of my Skill) been explaining to you.

And now, if there be any thing farther necessary to a full and complete
Explication of the Nature of this Covenant, it must be this, in the second
place, to show you, How that thereby you are restored to a state of Salvation:
Thirdly, By whose Mediation you obtained so gracious a Covenant, and are put
thereby into a state of Salvation; It was through Jesus Christ our Savior.
Fourthly, By whom and how we have been Called to this state of Salvation; It
was our Heavenly Father, who has called us to this state of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. And, lastly, What infinite reason you have heartily
to thank Almighty God our Heavenly Father, that he has Called you to this
state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has Called me to this
State, etc.

And as all these Points are fairly taught you in these Words of your
Catechism; so in commenting upon these, I will, by God's Assistance, open and
explain these several Points to you. To proceed therefore, in order to a more
complete understanding of the whole Nature of the Covenant of Grace, let us see,

Secondly, How this Covenant, whose Terms and Conditions I have been explaining
to you, does restore us to a state of Salvation. That in the Covenant of Grace,
we are restored to a ^tate of Salvation.
Salvation does import a deliverance from Danger or Misery; and a State of
Salvation does import the being put into a Condition of Safety, where one may
be safe and secure from Danger and Misery, if he please. For our understanding
therefore, how this Covenant of Grace is a means of restoring us to a State of
Salvation, we must look back and consider, how we brought our selves into a
State of Danger and Misery before; and how by the Covenant of Grace we are put
again into a State of Safety and Security, if we pelase.

And to this purpose we must know, That God Almighty created Man at first in
such a state of Perfection, How we brought our selves into a state of Misery
before.
with such an enlightened Mind, such a regular Will to the Laws of right Reason,
and with such obedient Appetites and Affections, that he might, if he would,
have continued in perfect Innocence: And now making him thus upright, and
capable to perform such an Obedience, God did very reasonably make this
Covenant with Man, That he should perform a Perfect, Exact, Vnsinning
Obedience, and live for ever: But upon the least Sin, the eating of the Fruit
of one Forbidden Tree, he should surely die. The Event of which Proceeding was,
that Man harkening to the Suggestions of the Devil, did thereby rebel against
his Maker, take part with Satan, and so did forfeit all his Right and Hopes of
Happiness; which upon the faithful Performance of his Covenant he would have
had, was shut out of Paradise, and condemned to death, as you will see largely
described in the third Chapter of Genesis. Thus did Man, by the breach of his
Covenant with God, bring himself into a state of Danger and extreme Misery.

How by the Covenant of Grace we are put into a state of security, if we please.
And now here it comes in for us to consider the Second Covenant, as that which
restores us to a state of Salvation. Had the First remained uncancelled, and in
full force, we must have all perished without remedy, upon a double account: It
required an unsinning Obedience, and we had sinned: It allowed no place for
Repentance after Sin, and yet we had brought our selves into that State, that
except we should repent, and our Repentance be accepted, we must all
undoubtedly have perished. We were unavoidably therefore bound up by that First
Covenant, as the case then stood with us, to Death and Misery; and it was not
possible for the Wit of Man to contrive any way to escape it.

And now when we were in this irrepairable State, was God of his own Goodness
graciously pleased to cancel the First Covenant, blotting out the Handwriting
of Ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us, and took it out of
the way, nailing it to the Cross of Christ, Col. 2.14. By which place is more
immediately meant, I must confess, his concelling and making void, as to any
condemning Power in it, the Covenant of Works made with the Israelites by the
hand of Moses; but not so as to exclude his cancelling all former Covenants
that were too rigorous and impossible for Man in his fallen State to perform. I
conclude therefore, that God was graciously pleased to cancel and make void the
First Covenant, under which Man was created, and which he was incapable of
performing and receiving Benefit by, having forfeited that perfect Light, and
perfect Strength, which should enable him to perform it, and become very
defective and weak both in Knowledge and Ability of performing his Duty toward
his Creator. And he was pleased to grant unto us, and to establish with us a
Second, by way of Remedy against the Rigor and Extremity of the First; wherein
God, as it were, descending from his Majesty and Glory, does oblige himself to
make good to such, as shall enter into it, and continue faithful therein, those
inestimable Favors and Benefits which do vastly exceed those of the former.
For, in the first place, whereas the First Covenant did not (as far as I can
find in Scripture) any where Expressly promise Eternal Life in Heaven, to those
that were faithful in it: The Covenant of Grace, whereunto you are called,
does, in innumerable places, propose immortal Life and Happiness, to all those
that do Believe its Doctrines and Articles, and do sincerely Obey its Precepts,
as has been showed you; for it is Jesus Christ who has brought Life and
Immortality to light, through the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. And then, secondly,
whereas under the First, there was no place for Repentance; but nothing less
than an Exact and Unsinning Obedience, was the Condition of this Life and
Happiness: And upon the first and least Offense, all was become forfeit and
lost. Herein we have this relaxation of Rigor, and exceeding Favor, That even
the greatest Sinners, upon their Repentance and Return to God, should be saved;
and our Savior therefore left Commission with his Disciples, That Pardon and
Remission of Sins should be preached in his Name, amongst all Nations, Luke
24.47. Thus, in the Covenant of Grace, is Repentance, like a Plank thrown out,
which if Ship-wreck'd Sinners lay hold on, they may save themselves; and the
Covenant it self like a Ship, like Noah's Ark, whereinto those that enter, and
will continue in it, may be landed safe in the Kingdom of Heaven So that the
Covenant of Grace, in whose Terms and Conditions you have been lately
instructed, does restore us you see into a state of Salvation, whereby we are
put again into a state of Safety and Security, if we please.

And now, Thirdly, it will be infinitely worth our Enquiry, by whose Mediation
we obtained such a Covenant of Grace, and were restored thereby into a state of
Salvation. That by the Mediation of Jesus Christ it was, that we obtained such
a gracious Covenant, whereby we are restored to a state of Salvation.
And it was through Jesus Christ our Savior. You have seen how wretchedly Man
did break his Covenant with his Maker, and into what a miserable state he
plunged himself thereby.

And now behold the unspeakable Goodness of God the Father Almighty, declared
in Jesus Christ his Son! When God's Justice required, that Sin should be
punished; when his Holiness forbad, that a thing so contrary to his Nature, and
hateful unto him, as Sin is, should escape the severest Marks of his
Displeasure, and when his Wisdom would not suffer it to escape Punishment, lest
his Creatures should take occasion from thence to rebel the more against him;
when for these Reasons it was necessary that the Sin of Man should be most
severely punished; then did Jesus Christ the Son of God interpose Himself
betwixt Vengeance and us, and did mediate and intercede with his Father, to
pardon and forgive us the Breach of our Covenant, he laying down his own Life a
Ransom for our Sins, to redeem us from Misery, and paying his own Blood a
Satisfaction for our Offenses: This we have taught us, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom
for all. And, moreover, because having fallen from our Uprightness, and lost
that perfect Light and Strength, whereby in a state of Innocence we had been
able to perform a perfect, exact, and unsinning Obedience, the Conditions of
the First Covenant; because this we were no longer able to do; and therefore so
long as we remained bound to perform the First Covenant, we must have been
however lost; Jesus Christ did therefore, I say, moreover mediate and intercede
with his Father in our behalf, and purchasing the Grace and Favor with his
precious Blood, did obtain for us a better Covenant, a Second and more gracious
Covenant, instead of the First, which was more rigorous; a Covenant consisting
of such Conditions, as by his Grace we shall be enabled to perform, and of far
better Promises to encourage our Endeavors and Performances; for which reason
he is therefore styled the Mediator of a better Covenant, which was established
upon better Promises, Heb. 8.6.

In particular, He did obtain these infinitely happy Terms and Conditions for
us (as has been already shown you) that if we would renounce God's Enemies, the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, and return to our Obedience (which is in other
Words to repent) we should be accounted as his Children, and have all our
former Rebellions pardoned us: That if we will firmly and practically Believe
in God, and in Jesus Christ, who died and suffered for us, we should be Members
of his Body, the CHURCH, and partake of all those manifold Graces and
Privileges he has purchased for it. And, lastly, if instead of a perfect,
exact, unsinning Obedience, we would but perform a Sincere and Honest one, such
as, by the Grace he would afford us, we should be enabled to, we should finally
be made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. Thus did Jesus Christ mediate and
intercede with God the Father for our pardon, upon the Breach of the First
Covenant, paying down his own Life a Satisfaction for the Injustice done by us
to God, in violating of it, and did purchase and procure of God the Father, to
be reconciled to us upon easier Terms, such as those in the Covenant of Grace
now mentioned.

And now let us behold here, and admire the Infinite Wisdom also, as well as
Goodness, in this Method of our Redemption, through and by the Mediation of
Jesus Christ our Savior. Was it necessary, as a due Reparation of God's
Honor, that the Divine Justice must be satisfied for the Breach of the First
Covenant? Who then could be sufficient for so vast an Undertaking, except the
Son of God, who is God Himself! The Sufferings of such a Person, as a
Satisfaction to the Divine Justice, could alone fully proclaim the infinite
Guilt of Sin; and, How extremely God was incensed against it, and could alone
sufficiently pacify and atone the Divine Anger thereupon! Was it, again, on
the other side, requisite to Man's Restoration, that a Covenant should be
obtained of such Conditions, as we in our state of Weakness might be capable of
performing? Who then was so proper to propose to, and obtain of the Father such
gracious Terms for us, as one who was himself Man, and so could be sensible of
all the Weakness and Infirmities of Man, Sin excepted, and had experienced
himself what was in the Power of Man to perform?

Why, all this does of it self appear to have been considered in the Divine
Wisdom, and in the Contrivance of Man's Recovery to a state of Salvation,
through the Mediation of Jesus Christ our Savior; but for our better
assurance, the Author to the Hebrews does expressly declare it to have been so,
Heb. 2.17, 18. telling us, That since he had undertaking to mediate a Peace for
us with God, that therefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto
his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in Things
pertaining to God, to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the People: For in
that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. By being God, he was qualified to be a faithful High Priest in
Things pertaining to God, and to make Reconciliation for the Sins of the
People: That is, as God alone, he knew what Satisfaction was sufficient to be
offered to God, and was fit for him to accept, ere he would be reconciled to
Sinners; and by being Man, he was also qualified to be a merciful High Priest;
for in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted: That is, as Man, who is sensible what Temptations and
Infirmities we lie under, he was more proper to be entrusted with the
Appointment of such Terms and Conditions as Man was capable to perform; and
therefore did prescribe us a Covenant of Grace, consisting accordingly of such
reasonable and performable Conditions.

And thus you see also by whose Mediation we obtained such a Covenant of Grace,
such a state of Salvation; viz. that it was through Jesus Christ our Savior.

And now, Fourthly, let us consider, The infinite Care of God the Father to
call us into it.
as you are also taught in your Catechism, by whom, and how you are called to
this state of Salvation. And truly, the same Heavenly Father who granted us,
and the same Jesus Christ our Savior, who purchased this state of Salvation
for us, have also most mercifully called us to it.

And behold and consider, first, I beseech you, what infinite Care our Heavenly
Father has taken in this great Affair, to call us to this state of Salvation.
And we have seen, and do testify, says St. John, that the Father has sent the
Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 Epist. 4.14. And how has he sent him to
save it? Why (as was long before prophesied, Isai. 61.1.) He put the Spirit of
the Lord upon him to preach the Gospel to the Poor; he sent him to heal the
brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and recovering of Sight
to the Blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable
Tear of the Lord, Luke 4.18, 19. Such was the very earnest Care of the Father,
that he Commissioned, and sent his own Son to envite us, his rebellious
Creatures and Subjects, to lay down our rebellious Arms against him, and to
embrace those Overtures and Conditions of Mercy and Salvation, that he offered
to us by the Preaching of the Gospel.

Nor was the Ever-blessed Son of God less intent upon this Blessed Work, (...)
Ever-blessed Son of God no less intent upon this blessed Work.
than the Father: No sure; it was his Meat to do the Will of Him that sent him,
and to finish his Work, John 4.34. It was his Meat and Drink to save Men's
Souls; and therefore He went about doing good, Acts 10.38. Doing good; that is,
executing that Office to which the Father had authorized him, in order to the
Salvation of Men; that Office of Mercy, instructing and calling of the World to
Repentance; and, in order to that, winning 'em to it by other Works of bodily
Charity, with which carnal Men are most taken, as Curing their Diseases,
Casting out Devils by the Power of him who was present with him. He went about
doing good of all kinds, but all in order to the good of Men's Souls; and he
was zealous also, to the highest degree, in this blessed Work.

How mightily he importuned us to come into this state of Salvation.
For, good God! with what mighty Importunity, and winning Rhetoric, did he, the
Son of GOD, address himself to his own foolish Rebellious Subjects, to come
into this state, and to receive freely the Means of Salvation! Ho, every one
that thirsts, cries he, (as the Evangelical Prophet represents him bespeaking
the World, Isai. 55.1, 2, 3.) come ye to the Waters, and he that has no Money;
come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy Wine and Milk without Money, and without
Price. Wherefore do ye spend Money for that which is not Bread? and your Labor
for that which satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat ye that
which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your Ear,
and come unto me; hear, and your Soul shall live, and I will make an
everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of David. It is not to be
expressed nor imagined, with what mighty Zeal and Persuasion he did himself,
whilst on Earth, pursue this blessed Work of our Salvation.

Nor was he contented himself, whilst on Earth, thus to call us into this state
of Salvation; but, moreover, when he was to leave the World, he provided a
Succession of Ministers, which he has left behind him, He has left a succession
of Ministers behind him to do the like.
to continue to the end of the World, to do the same good Office under him, for
the Salvation of Mankind, empowering them with the Gifts of the Holy Ghost, to
enable 'em to do it effectually: As my Father has sent me, so send I you, John
20.21. And accordingly has he committed it to our care, as he made it his own,
to Preach the Gospel to Mankind, to make known the Love of God, as manifested
in Christ to the World, to receive those that believe into the Covenant of
Grace and Society of Christians by Baptism, and by this means to call you into
a state of Salvation.

And as he has committed to us the Word of Reconciliation, we therefore as the
Ambassadors for Christ, and as though God did beseech you by us, we do pray you
in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. We are perpetually
preaching and declaring this (...), this good Tidings to you; we instruct you
in the Nature of that Salvation which is wrought for you, we direct you to the
means of attaining it; and, with all the powerful Motives drawn from the Word
of GOD, we do all we can to move you to seek this Salvation in the way that
Infinite Wisdom has appointed for the attaining of it.

And what, I beseech you, can be done more? What can be done to call you into a
State of Salvation, if this will not? When God our Heavenly Father, when Jesus
Christ his Son, when his Holy Spirit by his good Inspirations, when his
Apostles, Evangelists, and a whole Succession of Pastors and Teachers since, do
spend so much Care upon this one Work; What can be done more to save you? Nay,
What could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Will
God most justly expostulate with us, as he did with the Jewish Church, Isai 5.4
which brings me to the

Last thing which was to be spoke to in the Explication of these Words I am now
upon; viz. what infinite reason we have Heartily to Thank Almighty God our
Heavenly Father, that He has Called us to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior.

And indeed it is a matter that infinitely deserves the deepest Sense, and
utmost Acknowledgements of the Divine Goodness to us, whether we consider
barely the Advantages of having GOD in Covenant with us, or our own singular
Happiness of being called into it.

And, First, This great matter of Thankfulness, whether we consider, 1. The
extraordinary Advantage of having God in Covenant with us.
As to the extraordinary Advantage it is to have GOD in Covenant with us (which
I have frequent occasion in this Argument to mind you off) and consequently
that it affords great matter of our Praise and Thanksgivings to Him upon that
account; it is worthy your notice, that in this case, GOD does condescend, even
to oblige Himself by Contract and Agreement with us, whom he might oblige to
Obedience by his mere Authority, without any Assurance of Reward, that, if we
will but do our part, Repent, Believe, and Obey, he will be even bound in
Justice, having given his solemn Word and Promise for it, to conferr upon us
the richest Blessings that Heaven and Earth can bestow, viz. Pardon of Sins,
and Eternal Life and Happiness.

Alas! if we were left to build our Hopes merely upon the Merit of our own
Righteousness and Virtue, we could none of us have the least Expectations of
obtaining, as the Reward thereof, such unspeakable Blessings as are now laid up
in Heaven for us: But GOD condescending by Covenant to engage himself to make
'em good to us, we have thereby the fullest Assurance given us, that we shall
obtain those Blessings: and upon that Assurance, the strongest Consolations and
Comforts also, to cheer us in going through the Difficulties we shall meet with
in performing those Conditions, whereby only we shall obtain such unspeakable
Blessings.

By having GOD in Covenant with us, I say, we have the greatest Assurance
possible, that we shall obtain his Favors: To which purpose, those Words of
St. Paul are very remarkable, Gal. 3.15, 16. Brethren, says he, I speak after
the manner of Men, though it be but a Man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no
Man disannulleth or adds thereto; now to Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises (that is, the Covenant) made: Which Words do import, that the
deceitful Man will scarcely fail to perform, what he has once obliged himself
by Covenant to do, it is impossible that the God of Truth should fail to make
good to the utmost, those Blessings he has ensured to Abraham and his Seed;
that is, to all whom he has vouchsafed to enter into Covenant withal.

And such Assurance given by GOD, does yield also the strongest Consolations
and Comfort. For why? If you will compare one Scripture with another, you will
find, that that which ( Genesis 17.2.) GOD does call his Covenant, ( Heb. 6.13.)
is called his Promise upon Oath. And what says the Apostle in that case? Why,
GOD, says he, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs of Promise, the Immutability of his Council, confirmed it by Oath, or by
Covenant, that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to
lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold
upon the Hope set before us; which Hope we have, as an Anchor of the Soul, sure
and steadfast, and which enters into that within the Veil, whither the
FORERVNNER is for us entered, even Jesus. That is, GOD having ascertained to us
his Blessings, by Promise upon Oath, or which is tantamount by Covenant, we
cannot upon such Assurance but have the greatest Comfort and Hopes of obtaining
those Blessings, and so of following, ere long, that Jesus which is gone before
us into Heaven, to prepare a Place for us; that where he is, there we may be
also, John 14.2, 3. So that it is an invaluable Privilege, this, of which the
World can never be sufficiently sensible, nor thankful to God for, that he
vouchsafed to ensure his Mercies to 'em by Covenant. But,

Secondly, The occasion of your Thankfulness is yet greater, if you consider
your own singular Happiness, Or, 2. Our singular Happiness therein, above the
fallen Angels, or the rest of Mankind.
in being called into this Covenant of Grace, and in having all God's Mercies
thereby secured to you, when so many millions of his Creatures do want this
Favor. The Words of your Catechism do teach every one of you to consider his
own particular Interest in this Covenant, as the proper matter of his
Thanksgiving to God: Every one of you is taught to answer for himself in
particular, I thank God our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this
state of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior. And indeed, if we are
naturally most affected with, and most sensible of those Benefits, which we see
so many besides our selves to want, here is occasion for the deepest Sense, and
utmost Acknowledgments of GOD's Goodness to you, that you have been called into
this State of Salvation, when so many millions besides, both Angels and Men, do
want the Benefit of it.

As to the fallen Angels, the Covenant of Graces wa a Favor never afforded by
God to them; for Christ, that he might deliver them who all their lifetime
were subject to Bondage, verily took not on him the Nature of Angels, but took
upon him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.15, 16

And as to Men's, alas! there are many Nations now in the World, who have not
yet enjoyed so infinite a Blessing, as this happy Call into a State of
Salvation; who have not yet heard of a Savior, nor the good Tidings of the
Gospel, or Covenant of Grace; who have had no Apostles, no Evangelists, no
Pastors nor Teachers amongst 'em, and who therefore still lie gropling in
Darkness, and the shadow of Death. And perhaps amongst those Nations that are
called, there are not any that enjoy the Means of Salvation, the Worship of
GOD, the Administration of Sacraments, and the Preaching of the Word, in that
purity and force, as we in this Church and Nation do. It is indeed an
unspeakable Blessing we enjoy above many other People: For now in Jesus Christ,
we who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ, who is
our Peace, Ephesians. 2.13, 14. And are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, verse. 19.

It is counted a great Privilege amongst Men but to enjoy the Freedom of a
City, or Corporation, as that which puts those who enjoy it, above the
Condition of Strangers, and gives 'em to partake of many singular Advantages
which Foreigners want: But by being taken as Fellow-Citizens of the Saints, and
of the Household of God, into Covenant with him, we are Enfranchised Citizens of
the New Jerusalem, whereby we are entitled to all those Privileges which
Christ has purchased for us, which are unspeakable and invaluable, and which
does place us, as has been often said, in so much a better State and Condition
than the rest of Mankind. Such infinite reason have we heartily to Thank
Almighty God our Heavenly Father, that he has Called us to this State of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

THE XXV. Lecture. In my Baptism, wherein I was made.
AS to what concerns the Nature and Substance of the Covenant of Grace, I have
already opened and declared to you: I have showed, First, What are its Terms:
Secondly, That it restores us to a State of Salvation: Thirdly, By whose
Mediation we obtained so gracious a Covenant, and were restored thereby into a
state of Salvation: Fourthly, By whom we have been Called into it: And, Lastly,
What mighty Thanks we do owe unto God, that we have been called into so
gracious a Covenant, and happy state of Salvation.

My next Business must be, to treat upon the Sacrament, or Solemnity, by which
you Entered therein: For the declaring whereof, and and the full Explication of
these Words, In my Baptism, wherein I was made, it will be requisite,

That I should, in some measure, (so far as relates to the Sealing of the
Covenant of Grace) open unto you the Nature and End of Baptism.

And not to give you now a full and particular account of the whole Nature, and
Meaning, and End of Baptism, which shall be more conveniently done, when we
come to the latter part of your Catechism, where the whole Doctrine of that,
and the other Sacrament, is taught you; it may suffice to our present purpose
to tell you, That

Baptism Baptism what.
is an outward Rite, or Ceremony, of our Savior's own Appointment, for the
solemn Admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace; Instituted by Christ
for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms; the Promises on GOD's
Part, and Conditions on ours, it being thus mutually Sealed to, betwixt GOD and
us.

First, Baptism, I say, is an Outward Rite, or Ceremony, of our Savior's own
Appointment, for the solemn Admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace. 1.
On outward Rite of our Savior's own Appointment, for the solemn Admission of
Persons into the Covenant of ^^ace.


Although the Service prescribed us in the New Covenant, be a spiritual
Service, according to that of St. John, chap. 4.23, 24. But the Hour comes,
and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth; although the Gospel, I say, be a spiritual Service, opposite to that
Outward and Ritual Service, that was Instituted in the Law; in respect of
which, it was called, Heb. 7.16. The Law of a carnal Commandment; yet however
it pleased Almighty God, to Institute some very few Outward Rites and
Ceremonies, by which Believers, as by certain Visible Signs, should be obliged
to that Service and Obedience due unto God on their part, and by which even God
Himself would Seal, as with his Royal Signet, the Favors and Promises to be
made good on his part; that so those Outward Solemnities might be express Marks
of that mutual Agreement betwixt God and Man.

And indeed since such is the Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature, To have
some outward Rites and Solemnities in Religion, agreeable to the Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature, as being most apt to receive Impressions from
sensible Things.
that nothing enters into our Minds, but through the Door of our Senses; and
that which does strike our bodily Senses, does make the deepest and most
lasting Impression upon us; since indeed it is so with us, it was very
agreeable with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, to have that Respect to our Make
and Nature in his Treatment with us, as at the same time he threw away the many
burdensome Ceremonies of the Law, to retain so many, and such at least, as
whereby we might be made more sensible of our Engagements to God, and be the
better assured of his gracious Promises unto us. And therefore since all Men,
in their Covenants one with another, ever used some Outward and Express
Solemnities of Signing and Sealing, for the better Assurance of the Performance
of Promises on both sides; it was no ways disagreeable to the Wisdom of our
Savior in so appointing it, nor with the spiritual Nature of the Covenant of
Grace, that we should transact it with God in such a way and manner, as might
make us more deeply sensible of our Obligations by it, and more full of Hopes
of Benefit and Advantages from it.

It was truly well observed by the Father, This especially requisite in the
admission into Religious Societies and Covenants.
That Men can be associated together in no Religion, whether true or false,
unless they he combined by the common Tie of some sensible Signs and Sacraments
of their Profession. For this reason, it is like, that a Visible Sign, or
Sacrament, might be a continual and apparent Remembrance to 'em, and put 'em in
Mind of that Profession they took upon 'em by that Rite; and that it might be a
Visible Testimony and Witness against 'em, if they should ever act contrary to
that Profession. Hence therefore all the Religions we hear of in the World,
have had their solemn Rites of Initiation or Admission into 'em.

The Israelites, The Israelites were initiated both by Circumcision and Baptism.
they were initiated into the Covenant God made with them, by the Ceremony of
Circumcision, which is therefore called by a Figure or Form of Speech, very
usual in the mention of Sacraments (where the Sign is often put for the Thing
signified) the Covenant in their Flesh, Genesis 17.13. it being the Sign in their
Flesh of their Covenant with God. The Jews also had their Baptisms, whereby
they admitted their Proselytes, or Gentile-Converts, into their Covenant; and
by Baptism they say, all their Women who never were Circumcised, and both Men
and Women, during their sojourning in the Wilderness (when Circumcision was
dispensed with, because it would make them sore for Traveling.) By Baptism
therefore they were entered into Covenant; and this seems also to be clear from
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.2. They were all Baptized into Moses, or
Initiated into the Religion of Moses, The Heathens were initiated into their
Mysteries by Purgations or Washings.
in the Cloud, and in the Sea. And indeed the very Heathens likewise, they were
initiated into their Mysteries and Worship, by some solemn Rites or other, and
that frequently by Purgations and Washings.

And now agreeably to both, the Rite, or Ceremony whereby our Savior appointed
that we should be Initiated into the Covenant of Grace, or the Christian
Religion, was Baptism, or Washing. As our Blessed Savior, out of his Infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, did ordain, That agreeably to our Humane Nature, which is
most sensibly touched with Outward Things, the Covenant betwixt him and us
should be transacted by Outward and Express Solemnities; Our Savior chose the
latter, as what would be acceptable to both Parties.
so he was not scrupulous of having it done by such Outward Rites, as were more
generally known and acceptable both to Jews and Gentiles.

Circumcision, the Rite of Initiation into the Legal Covenant, he would not
adopt into the Covenant of Grace, because it was detestable, and had in
abomination by the greatest part of the Heathen World; but Baptism, or Washing,
none could accept against it, either Jews or Gentiles. It was used by the Jews,
as well as Circumcision, to initiate their Proselytes into Covenant, as was
before said; and the Gentiles did as often use it in a Sacramental Manner, when
they were entered into any of the Heathen Mysteries of their Pagan Worship;
especially when on any extraordinary Occasion they professed their Innocence,
as appears from Pilate, the Roman Governor's so solemnly Washing his Hands,
when he would declare himself clear of shedding the Innocent Blood of the Holy
JESUS, Especially as more significative of Christian Purity.
Mat. 17.24. And indeed, as on the account of its agreeableness to all Parties;
so chiefly, no doubt, he chose it for the Sacrament of the Christian Religion,
on this last score, viz. its being so significative of the Cleanness from the
Pollution of Sin, of the Purity and Holiness that all Christians are to
practice. As Washing purges and cleanses the Body from Dirt and Filthiness; so
our Savior chose the Washing of Regeneration, as the Apostle calls Baptism,
Tit. 3.5. to be the Rite or Ceremony whereby all his Disciples should be
initiated or entered into his Covenant, or Religion, to signify that all his
Disciples must be Pure and Holy, not polluted with the Sins and Wickednesses of
the World.

And this he has enjoined, as indispensibly necessary to our initiation into
the Covenant of Grace.
And so indispensible a Rite of our Initiation or Entrance into the Covenant of
Grace did our Savior make it, that he did not only Command his Apostles, and
all the succeeding Ministers of his Church to the end of the World, to Baptize
those whom they did proselyte over to his Religion, Go, says he, Matthew. 28.19.
and teach, or disciple, by Baptizing 'em, all Nations, and lo I am with you
always to the end of the World: But he excludes all others from having any
Interest in his Covenant of Grace, which he vouchsafed unto us, and from having
any claim to the Promises of it, who are not Entered into it by the Outward Rite
and Solemnity, or Ceremony of Baptism. Thus he tells Nicodemus, with a Verily,
verily; that is, with a solemn Asseveration, which amounts almost to an Oath,
That Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. The Kingdom of God, is here meant the Church of Christ, which
is a Society of Men in Covenant with God, enjoying certain inestimable
Privileges under Christ their Supreme Head; and is often in the New Testament
called the Kingdom of God, as Matthew. 21.31. So that it is plain from hence,
that there is no admittance to the Privileges of the Gospel, or New Covenant,
which are Grace, Pardon, and Happiness; nor to the Enjoyment of those infinite
Rewards in Heaven, the chief of all the Mercies of the Covenant, without being
first entered into the Church by Baptism, which is the Oatward Seal and
Confirmation of those Mercies to us; Except a Man be born of Water, and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And agreeably to this
Doctrine of his Lord and Master, did the Great St. Peter hold Baptism so
indispensibly necessary, that he ordered even those Persons, upon whom at his
Preaching of the Word the Holy Ghost had fallen (which one would have thought
might render Baptism unnecessary) yet he ordered even those to be Baptized
withal, as you may see Acts 10.46, 47, 48. Then answered Peter, Can any Man
forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost as well as we? And he commanded them (Commanded whom? why, those on whom
the Holy Ghost had fallen, verse. 44. and) who had received the Holy Ghost as
well as he, verse. 47. he commanded even those to be Baptized in the Name of the
Lord. Thus is Baptism you see an Outward Rite or Ceremony of our Savior's own
Appointment, for the solemn admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace.

Secondly, And thus our Savior appointed us to be entered into the Covenant of
Grace, for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms, the Promises on
God's part, and the Conditions on ours; it being thus mutually and
interchangeably, as it were, Sealed to betwixt God and us. Baptism appointed
the Rite of Admission into the Covenant of Grace, for the better Confirmation
and Assurance of its Terms, the Promises on God's part, and the Conditions on
ours, it being thus mutually and interchangeably Sealed to betwixt God and us.


As in this sacred Rite of Baptism, there are two Parties concerned; God, who
by his Minister, or Ambassador and Agent, as he is called, 2 Cor. 5.20. does
admit the Person Baptized to Covenant, and does by him promise and engage to
conferr upon him, particular Blessings and Favors; and the Party Baptized, who
presents himself, or is presented by others; and does solemnly engage to
Renounce GOD's Enemies, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, to Believe in God,
and to Obey him: As there are Two Parties, I say, God and Man* thus transacting
a Covenant together; so the Minister, God's Agent, his Receiving the Party, and
Baptizing him in the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is the Sealing to
it on God's part, who has promised to confirm in Heaven, what they in his Name,
and by his Commission, shall bind on Earth, Matthew. 16.19. And the Party
presenting himself, or being presented to Baptism, and therein expressly vowing
to perform the forementioned Conditions, and in token of that, his being
washed or sprinkled with Water, is the putting to, as it were, his Seal to the
Counterpart of the Covenant.

And farther, as this mutual Covenanting and Sealing, does give unto God,
besides his Right of Creation, a farther Right by our own express Engagements,
to our Obedience and Service; so to us it gives (even that which we could
otherwise have, no, not the least Pretensions to) even a Legal Right and Title
to all the most inestimable Blessings and Favors of the Covenant.

It gives great Assurance of mutual Performances barely to be in Cavenant
together.
It has been already more than once hinted, and shall here be more fully
declared, how that it gives us mighty Assurance, that the Mercies of God shall
certainly be conferred on us; that he has vouchsafed to engage Himself in
Covenant to make 'em good unto us; and that because this way of proceeding
gives us even a Legal Right and Title to All the most inestimable Blessings and
Favors of the Covenant. For this we are to consider, that 'till such time as
God has condescended to engage so and so, the utmost Services that we can pay
him, cannot give us sure and certain grounds to hope for, or expect such
invaluable Benefits to be conferred upon us. Though we should never so heartily
repent us of our Sins, there is not that in Repentance alone, that it should be
sufficient of it self to satisfy the Justice of God, and to salve that
infinite Dishonor we have done him by our former Violations of his sacred
Laws: And though we should never so sincerely and faithfully Obey him for the
future, is it possible that such unprofitable Service as ours, should merit and
deserve of it self, the unspeakable and unconceivable Joys of Heaven, as a due
Reward for such Obedient Service? Pardon of our manifold Sins and Offenses, and
eternal Joy and Happiness, I say, can never be expected merely upon any Merit
there is in our Repentance and Obedience; nor at all, 'till such time as he has
graciously vouchsafed, and freely condescended by Covenant, to secure such
Benefits unto us, upon our serious Repentance and sincere Obedience.

But then when he has once condescended to ensure unto us by Covenant, these
unspeakable Benefits, and we, on the other side, have also engaged our selves
to the Performance of such Conditions; then, what our Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience, could not give us reason to expect or hope for, merely upon the
account of their own desert, shall however be ascertained to us by virtue of
God's Covenant-Obligations, which he has laid upon himself: And Pardon and
eternal Happiness shall be so far then the matter of our Hopes and
Expectations, that we shall have a Legal Claim and Title made over to us, upon
our Repentance, Faith, and Obedience to 'em; insomuch that God will reckon
himself (as has been before said) in Justice and Faithfulness bound, both upon
the account of Christ's Purchase, and his own Covenanted Promises, to forgive
us our Sins, as you may see, 1 John 1.9. and will then own us to have a Right
to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14. We shall then, I say, have a Right and Title
to the Blessings of the Covenant, not by virtue of any Outward Merit and Desert
in our Performances, but by virtue of the Divine Promises and Engagements to
those, who having solemnly entered into Covenant with him, do take care
faithfully to perform the Conditions of it. So that this alone gives us mighty
Assurance of the Divine Mercies, that we are entitled thereunto, by his having
Covenanted them unto us; as well as he is the more entitled to our Repentance,
Faith, and Obedience, because we have Covenanted to perform 'em.

But yet the more firmly to entitle, as God, to our Obedience; so us, to his
Mercies; because we never take our selves to be so well ensured of the
performance of Articles, as when we have 'em solemnly sealed to by both
Parties; God did therefore, in compliance with our own Ways and Methods,
graciously please to Seal to his part, the Promises; and required us to do the
like to our part, the Conditions, that he might be the better secured of our
Covenanted Performances, and we of his promised Mercies. And then since he has
condescended to ensure unto us, not only by mere Covenant, but moreover to seal
unto us these unspeakable Benefits; and we, on the other side, have also
sacramentally sealed to the Counter-part of the Covenant, the Conditions of it;
what can there be further thought of to entitle God to our Obedience, or us to
his Mercies?

And let this suffice, as to the Sacrament, or Solemnity, whereby we entered
into the Covenant of Grace, which was by Baptism. Baptism, as you have seen, is
an Outward Rite or Sacrament of our Savior's own Appointment, for the solemn
admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace, instituted by Christ for the
better Confirmation and Insurance of its Terms, the Promises on God's part, and
the Conditions on ours; it being thus mutually sealed to, betwixt God and us.
For, agreeably to our Frame and Nature, as I have told you, which consists of
Bodily Senses, as well as Spiritual Faculties, God has given us, besides those
most rational Terms and Conditions of the Covenant Recorded in the Gospel,
being such Promises as are becoming the Wisdom and Goodness of God to make, and
such Conditions as are highly befitting us to perform; besides these, he has
appointed to us those Outward and Express Solemnities we call the Sacraments,
to seal these Things betwixt us. And because that Baptism is a Rite most
significative in it self, and would be most acceptable to all sorts of People,
Jews and Gentiles, he was therefore pleased to Adopt that to be the Solemnity
of our Entrance into, and Sealing the Covenant with him. And this Covenant you
have seen he would have thus mutually Sealed to betwixt Him and us, that the
Obligations to Performance might be the stronger upon us both, to discharge
each his part of the Covenant.

And thus having spoke to the Sacrament, or Solemnity, whereby we enter into
Covenant, evpress'd in these Words, In my Baptism; the next thing to be showed
you is, the great Obligation which lies upon us to perform this our Covenant
with God.

THE XXVI. Lecture.
Quest. Do thou then think, that thou art bound to Believe and to Do as they
have Promised for thee?

Answ. Yes, verily.

IN my Exposition of the Preliminary Questions and Answers of your Catechism,
having already given you a general account, first, of the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace; and, secondly, of the Sacrament whereby you did solemnly
enter into it, I shall now think my self happy, if I can but convince you of
the mighty Obligations that lie upon you, accordingly to perform it. And this,
the Words that I have now read, do manifestly lead me to declare unto you; for
(taking the Question and Answer both together) they do plainly import this
Doctrine; (viz.)

The vast Obligations lying upon us, both from the Mercies of God, and our
Baptismal Vow, to perform the Covenant of Grace.
The vast Obligations upon us, from the Mercies of the Covenant, especially
from our Vow in Baptism, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge their
Covenant with God. And what those several Obligations are, which arise from
each of these Considerations, I will, with as much clearness and force of
Reason as I can, declare unto you.

And to begin with the Mercies of the Covenant, there is not one Article of
Grace or Favor on God's part contained therein, but if the Nature and
Importance of 'em be truly considered, they do each of 'em lay inviolable
Obligations upon us, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge that our
Covenant.

As, first, if we consider our selves as Members of Christ, or Members of the
Christian Church, The Obligations thereunto, first, as Members of Christ's
Church.
why there cannot be a greater Argument to keep us right in a regular, orderly
Conversation, than that one Consideration should be: For to be a Member of
Christ's Church, what else, I pray you, is it, but to be one of those Disciples
of our Savior, who by the Preaching of the Word, and under the Solemnity and
Bond of Sacraments, are Called and Chosen out of the rest of the World, to live
another sort of Life, than the World is accustomed to? To this purpose, it
would be exceedingly well worth your while, to consult, and thoroughly consider,
1 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. where you have such Characters given of the Church of
Christ, and the Members of it, as speak it to be a selected, separated Body of
Men, who are Consecrated, as it were, to God's Service. And such Inferences are
drawn from thence, concerning living at an excellent rate upon that very score,
as speak the strongest Obligations upon all the Members of Christ's Church to
approve themselves therefore, upon that very account, excellent Men. In the
8th. Verse immediately foregoing, the Apostle speaking of those who would not
come into the Bosom and Pale of the Church, he terms them a Disobedient People;
but coming, in the 9, 10, 11, 12. Verses, to speak of the Members of the
Church, But ye, says he, are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy
Nation, a Peculiar People, that ye should show forth the Praises of Him, who
has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light: Which in time past
were not a People, but are now the People of God; which had not obtained Mercy,
but now have obtained Mercy. 11, 12. Verses: Therefore, dearly Beloved, I
beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which war
against the Soul, having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles; that
whereas they speak against you as Evildoers, they may, by your good Works
which they shall behold, glorify God in the Day of Visitation. But ye are a
Chosen People, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People. These are
every one of 'em most distinguishing Characters, and do bespeak the Church of
Christ, and all its Members, to be a Dedicated, a Consecrated sort of People,
between whom and the rest of the World there is such a distinction made, on the
account of such their Dedication to God's Service, as there is in the Church it
self betwixt the Priesthood, who are separated to the more immediate Service of
God, and the People in it. The Expressions are all of 'em borrowed from the Old
Testament, and were the Characters then given to the Jewish Church: And if we
will be at the pains to look back into the Mosaic Law, and see what separation
and distinction they did import there, we shall the better discern to what
elevated degrees of Holiness, they do signify us of the Christian Church to
have been likewise separated; and consequently to what a singular Life and
Conversation we are upon that score obliged.

Ye are are a Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People: The Jews
chose from amongst the Nations of the Earth to serve God.
In all these three Expressions, he alludes to Deuteronomy. 7.6. where of the Church
of the Jews it is said, Thou art an Holy People unto the Lord thy God; the Lord
thy God has Chosen thee to be a special People unto himself, above all the
People that are upon the face of the Earth. All the People of the Earth
besides, were utterly estranged from God by their wicked Deeds; and to all
other Impieties had added this grand one, That they had fallen into the basest
Idolatry, the Worship of the very Devils, whereby they did own them to be their
Sovereign M^sters instead of God. But God did select those People of the Jews,
from amongst all the Families of the Earth, and gave 'em such excellent Laws,
and required such an exact Obedience to 'em, and such a regular Conversation
from 'em, that it should raise even the Admiration of all the Nations of the
Earth, who should see or hear it, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6, 7. You see here what
Peculiarity and Distinction these Words, A Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation, a
Peculiar People, did import in the Jewish Church; and the other of a Royal
Priesthood did no less.

A Royal Preisthood: This is an allusion to Exodus 19.5, 6. Now therefore, if ye
will obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a Peculiar
Treasure unto me above all People; and ye shall be a Kingdom of Priests, and an
Holy Nation. As the whole Nation of the Jews were separated from the rest of
the World, peculiarly to serve the True God; so were the Order of Priesthood
separated from amongst the rest of the Jews, to a greater degree of Holiness,
and nearer Service to him, than the rest of the Jews; and for that reason, viz.
to signify a greater Purity in them than the common Jews. Those very Outward
Blemishes, which were no Impediment to the other Jews, but that they might
approach God, as far as to Laymen was permitted, were a bar to the Priests,
that they could not thereupon Execute the Priestly Office: Speak unto Aaron,
saying, Whosoever he be of thy Seed in his Generations, that has any Blemish,
let him not appear to offer the Bread of his God; for whatsoever he be that
has a Blemish, he shall not approach; a blind Man, or a lame, or he that has
a flat Nose, or any thing superfluous, Levit. 21.17, 18. And the reason is
given before, verse. 6. They shall be Holy unto their God, and not profane the
Name of their God; for the Offerings of the Lord made by Fire, and the Bread of
their God they do offer, therefore they shall be Holy. So that as much as the
whole Body of the Jews were to be separated and distinguished from the rest of
the World; yet the Priesthood were to be farther distinguished by a Peculiar
Holiness.

Christians chose both from amongst Jews and Gentiles, to a more peculiar
Holiness.
And now to bring this to our present case: Does St. Peter here, in his
Character of the Church of Christ, call it a Chosen Generation, an Holy Nation,
a Peculiar People? Why, what does it import, but that the Members of Christ's
Church must study to distinguish themselves, as much now from the Infidel part
of the World, whether Jews or Gentiles, by Piety and Devotion toward God,
Justice and Charity toward their Neighbor, and a subjecting of their Lusts
and Appetites to right Reason, which is the great Duty to themselves? I say,
Christians must as much distinguish themselves from the profane Crew of
Idolatrous and Wicked Heathens, and Unbelieving Jews, by an exact and regular,
and a better Life; as the Jews were to distinguish themselves from the
Idolatrous and Wicked Heathens in those days, by a Ritual Holiness.

Nay, And does he call us a Royal Priesthood? Why, this he does here, and also
Rev. 1.6. where we are told, That Christ has made us Kings and Priests unto
God, and his Father. And what does this import, but that we are as much to
exceed both Jews and Gentiles in holy Living, as the Priests among the Jews
were to excel the rest of the People in a Legal Purity and Cleanness?
Christians are to show themselves to be Kings, by their Victories over the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, over Sin and Satan; and they are to be, as it
were, Priests, because they are to present their Bodies a living Sacrifice,
Holy, acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable Service, and are not to be
conformed to this World, but to be transformed by the renewing of their Minds,
Romans 12.1, 2. And are to offer up the Sacrifice of Praise continually, the
Praises of God, Heb. 13.15. They are to offer charitable Alms, which are called
an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice acceptable and well-pleasing unto God,
Phil 4.18. This is the Importance of those high Expressions of St. Peter; and
this indeed do the following Words declare: But ye are a Chosen Generation, a
Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that ye should show forth
the Praises of Him, who has called us out of Darkness into his mavelous
Light.

And indeed so much it concerns us who are Members of Christ's Church, to
distinguish our selves from the rest of the World by our excellent Lives, far
above other People; that our Blessed Savior came into the World, died, and
suffered all those stupendous Things recorded in the Gospel, all on this very
Design, To purchase such a Body of Men, that should more peculiarly and
zealously serve God, and to work and persuade us to it. Thus Tit. 2.14. it is
said, That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity,
and purify unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good Works.

And hence were all his Discourses and Preachings to us, (especially that most
divine Sermon upon the Mount,) to raise all his Disciples and Followers to the
highest pitch and perfection of moral Virtue and Goodness: He came not to
destroy the Law and the Prophets, but to fulfill them, Matthew. 5.27. That is, to
enlarge and increase our Duties to God and Man, and to our selves; to make the
Obedience of the Heart, as necessary as that of the outward Man; to make the
very Thoughts of Uncleanness criminal, as well as Adultery it self. And, in a
word, hence does he require of us his Members, that our Light should so shine
before Men, that they might see our good Works, and glorify our Father which
is in Heaven, verse. 16. That is, he requires that by the Eminence of all divine
Graces and Virtues shining in our Lives, we should be as a Candle set on an
Hill to enlighten the benighted and bewildred World, straying in the darkness
of Ignorance and Error, that they might find their way by the Brightness of
our Examples, to Heaven and Happiness. And by the savourliness, lastly, of our
good Conversation, he requires that we should be as Salt in the World, to
season the corrupted Manners of Men. Such strong Obligations lie upon us,, as
Members of Christ's Church, to be faithful in our Covenant, that is, to perform
all due Obedience unto God.

Secondly, Nor is the consideration of our being Children of God, 2. As
Children of God.
less fruitful of good Arguments, showing us those vast Obligations lying upon
us, faithfully and conscienciously to discharge our Covenant with him. There is
no relation that is, which does speak more of Duty, and Duty sounded upon
better Reasons, than that of a Child to his Father: A Wif^ owes some Duty and
Observance to her Husband, because the Husband is the Head of the Wife; a
Servant to his Master, because from him he has Provision; a Subject to his
Prince, Children are bound to the strictest Obedience to their Parents, as
owing to 'em their Being.
because of Protection: But a Child owes his very Life and Being; and all that
he has, is originally derived from his Parent. Especially this is so with the
Children of God, upon a double account, both that of Creation, and that of
Adoption. Consider us as the Children of God with respect to Creation, and not
only our Life and Being, but all Things necessary to the support and
maintenance of this Being of ours, that it falls not back into Annihilation and
Nothing, is wholly owing to that God, whose Offspring we are, according to that
of the Apostle, Acts 17.28. In him we live and move, and have our Being, for we
are his Offspring. But consider us who are Baptized Christians farther, as the
Children of God by Adoption, and then over and above our Being, and all that
belongs to it, our Well-being also both in this and a better Life, is wholly of
his Gift: For if Children of God, (as St. Paul does argue, Romans 8.17.) then
Heirs, Heirs with God, and joint Heirs with Christ; so that if we suffer with
him, we shall be also glorified together.

And now, if for Life and Being, and also for all that Well-being Children of
God, as owing both Being and Well being.
too which we have, or hope to enjoy in this, or the Life to come, we wholly
and entirely depend upon God our Father; Do we not then owe to him as his
Children, all the Duty, all the Observance, and all the Diligence possible, in
the discharge of such Duty and Observance? This the very Light of Nature
teaches us; but the Scripture does most expressly, upon that very score of being
his Children, require of us: A Son honors his Father, and a Servant his
Master, says God by his Prophet, Mal. 1.6. If I then be a Father, where is mine
Honor? And if I be a Master, where is my Fear? And upon the same score of our
being Children of God, does St. Peter most earnestly exhort us to a
Renunciation of the World, and our filthy Lusts, and to a faithful and careful
discharge of our Duty to God our Father: As Obedient Children, says he, 1
Epist. 1.14, 15. not fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts in
your Ignorance; but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of Conversation. And verse. 17. If ye call on the Father, (that is,
profess your selves the Sons of your Heavenly Father) who without respect of
Persons, judges every Man according to his Works, can see Blemishes, and will
punish Faults, as well in his Children as others; if you profess your selves
the Children of such a Father, pass the time of your sojourning here in fear,
is the Inference the same Apostle makes from this Relation, of being the
Children of God.

And indeed, except we do give up our selves sincerely and faithfully to obey
God, and in all Points to discharge our Covenant with him, we are in effect not
the Children of God, however Baptized, and so in Profession, but in reality are
the Children of the Devil, and from him must expect our Reward: So St. John
assures us, 1 Epist. 3.8, 9. He that commits Sin, is of the Devil; that is,
he that commits any act of known Sin, is in that, so far from being a Child
of God, that he is a Child of the Devil, of whom, and not of God, he is an
Imitator; For whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: That is, as the
Learned Hammond does Paraphrase upon the same place, whosoever is a true Child
of God, keeps himself strictly from every deliberate Act of Sin; and the reason
is, Because that contrary Principle of Regeneration, or Sonship (from which he
is said to be born of God) if that continue to have any Life or Energy in it,
is utterly contrary and incompatible with Sin. And then does follow that
Characteristical distinguishing Mark he does give of a Child of God, and a
Child of the Devil, showing the grand difference between one and the other. In
this the Children of God are manifested, and the Children of the Devil,
whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, v. 10.

In a word, to conclude this Argument also: As it is almost natural, and
therefore ever expected, that Children should imitate the Life and Manners of
their Parents; and if they prove dissolute, and of loose Behavior, it does
usually redound to the Parents disgrace, as generally supposed to proceed from
slackness of Government; so, should we who are Children of God, be
Covenant-Breakers, prove lawless and dissolute Livers, it will extremely tend
to the Dishonor of our Heavenly Father, whose Name is then hallowed amongst
Men, when we his professed Sons and Servants, do dutifully and sincerely
fulfill our Engagements to Him; but, on the contrary, is then blasphemed, when
we live ungodly Lives. So that this grand Favor and Privilege of being the
Sons of God, is another most powerful Argument to render us faithful in our
Covenant with Him. And so likewise it is,

Thirdly, To be an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. 3. As Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven.
What restraint will it put upon a young Heir, and how careful will it make him
to please his Parents, when a great Estate is like to descend upon him; but yet
so, that he shall certainly be disinherited of it, except he behave himself
soberly, and regularly, and dutifully to those his Parents! And if so, how
infinitely more circumspect, and wary, and diligent should we all of us be, to
please our Father which is in Heaven, by discharging our Covenant-Engagements
to him, inasmuch as the Heavenly Inheritance is of infinite more value than an
Earthly one can be.

I shall not stand now to give you a description of that Exceeding Weight of
Glory, and of those Vast and Immense Treasures of Happiness, which are laid up
in Heaven for those who shall faithfully perform their Covenant with God; I
shall only in short show you, that such is the Nature and Constitution of the
Covenant of Grace, that there is no Hopes nor Expectations of ever obtaining
it, without a faithful discharge of all our Covenant-Engagements to God; and if
so, then certainly there cannot be greater Obligations possible to the
performance of 'em. And as to the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, surely one
would think it were needless to prove, that the Conditions of it must be
performed, or we cannot expect to inherit the Promises. This is of the Nature
of all Covenants whatsoever, which consist of certain Promises and Benefits to
be made good on one part, not without certain Conditions to be performed on the
other. And why then should any so fondly expect Justification and Happiness to
be conferred upon 'em, except they do Repent heartily, Believe practically, and
Obey sincerely, the only Conditions of this Covenant, Kingdom of Heaven not to
be expected, but by those who are faithful in their Covenant.
as has been often showed? Why, sure none that look into the Gospel, and see
and consider, how that all along Happiness is only promised to the Obedient,
can ever expect it upon other Terms. But so it is, that a sort of Antinomian
Heretics do spread abroad their pestilent Doctrines, teaching that Christ by
his Sacrifice and Satisfaction for us, has purchased Justification and
Happiness, without any Conditions to be performed on our part; and, that what
he has done will wholly excuse us from Duty and Obedience. But this is one of
the most Antichristian Errors in the World, as undermining the whole design of
Christ's Coming, and his Preaching the Gospel amongst us; which was to tie us
up to higher Rules of Righteousness, than were before given to the Sons of Men.
It was infinitely far from the Design of him, who came to save and deliver us
from the Power and Dominion, as well as from the Guilt and Punishment of our
Sins, to do any thing that should encourage us in Sin, and render us secure
when at any time we commit it. But that which Christ has done for us, amounts
to this, that he has purchased, by his Bloodshedding, an Abrogation of the
First Covenant, wherein was no Happiness without an Unsinning Obedience; and
then has procured for us this most gracious Covenant, with these abatements of
rigor, That we shall have all that unspeakable Bliss, and the Inheritance of
Heaven conferred on us, on condition we shall repent of, and forsake our Sins,
and knowingly and willingly not offend him for the future.

And a most encouraging Argument this will be to all considering and serious
Persons, to make 'em faithful and diligent to perform their Covenant. No
People, either Jews or Gentiles, ever before us had the like. The Jews, by the
Law of Moses, or the mere Covenant of Works, had plainly and expressly the
Assurances only of a temporal Canaan, and the Promises of a peaceable and
prosperous Possession thereof, to encourage their Duty. And the poor Pagans had
little Inducements to virtuous living, more than the present Tranquillity of
Mind, which arises from the mere exercise of Virtue; neither of 'em
Considerations strong enough to bear us up against great Temptations to sin,
and the difficulties in the way of our Duty. But this one Consideration of an
eternal Weight of Glory, an Inheritance laid up in Heaven, a Crown of Life,
infallibly ensured to those who shall be faithful unto Death: This is enough to
encourage us in Well-doing, and ^o preserve us safe and innocent (as it has
done thousands before us) amidst all the Persecutions of evil Men on the one
hand, or the Allurements of the World on the other, withdrawing us, or
frighting us into Sin; so that in the strength of the Hopes of such an
Inheritance, we may be prevailed upon, faithfully and conscientiously to
discharge this our Covenant with God.

And thus you see what mighty Arguments the several Mercies of the Covenant
made over to us on God's part, do yield us; and what inviolable Obligations
they do all of 'em lay upon us ^aithfully and conscientiously to discharge this
our Covenant with God. But,

Fourthly and lastly, Another vast Obligation lying upon us to do the same, and
which ought especially to be here considered, is, That Promise and Vow made for
us in our Baptism, accordingly to discharge this our Covenant. 4. As having
promised and vowed in our Baptism accordingly, to discharge our Covenant with
God.
Do thou not think, that thou art bound to Believe and to Do as they have
promised for thee? That is the Question which is asked you; to which you are
taught to Answer, Yes, verily; and thereby to acknowledge the vast Obligations
lying upon you, on the account of that Promise and Vow, to perform that your
Covenant; and a mighty Obligation too it lays upon us, there being nothing more
sacred and inviolable than ^ ^^w made unto God, and more severely punished, if
it be ever viola^ed.

A Vow in general ^^d^fined to be a solemn Promise made unto God, whereby we do
in a peculiar manner engage our selves unto him to the performance of
something. The matter of a Vow sometimes not a Duty 'till ^^wed.
And there are two sorts of these Vows, which are to be distinguished according
to the matter of which the Vow is made: For sometimes the thing which we have
vowed to do, was not a Duty upon us, 'till such time as we made such a Vow; as
when a Person does solemnly promise to God, that he well set apart such a
Portion of his Time, such a Day of the Week, for the more immediate Service of
God, in Fasting and Prayer; or that he will devote such a part of his Estate or
Gains for pious or charitable Uses. Secondly, again, the matter of a Vow may be
what was incumbent upon us before, only the Vow is added to strengthen the
Obligation: And such is the Vow was made in our Baptism, Sometimes antecedently
incumbent upon us, and such is the matter of our Baptismal Vow.
whereby we were solemnly and in a peculiar manner Devoted and Consecrated to
God's Service, and to live to his Glory; which though it was a Duty upon us
before, yet now we have farther obliged our selves thereunto, having solemnly
vowed so to do. Generally the matter of a Vow is of the former sort, something
to which we were not obliged before; as when Jacob did vow to build an House to
God, Genesis 28.22. And of this nature are all those Lands and Possessions, over
and above the Tithe, or tenth Part, which have been devoted and given by the
Piety of well-disposed Persons, for the maintenance of the Ministers and the
Worship of God, for the Education of Children in Schools, and the Relief of the
Poor in Hospitals. Before they were devoted to pious and charitable Uses, they
were so far in the Power of the Party who owned 'em, as that he might dispose
of 'em how, and to what Uses he pleased. But after a Vow is once made by our
selves or Forefathers, whereby such a Part of an Estate is determinately set
aside for sacred Uses, it is then a devoted thing.

And I will be bold to add (and I will endeavor to prove it) that for that
very reason of its having been Vowed and Devoted to God, it is one of the most
provoking Sins in the World to rob God of it. It Is a provoking Sin to rob God
of what has been once Vowed and Devoted to him, though of the former Nature.
This is plainly seen, in the case of Ananias and Sapphira, Acts 5, 1, 2, 3, 4,
5. These two Persons, stirred up at first, as is probable, with a like pious
Zeal for the promotion of Religion, with many others of the first Converts to
Christianity, had sold a Possession, and given it to the Church (which
according to the Circumstances of those Times, was of more use than if settled
upon it) but Covetousness afterward prevailing upon their Hearts, they kept
back part of the Price, and laid a share of it only at the Apostles feet, v. 3.
But observe how severely Peter rebukes 'em for this Sacrilege: Before they had
devoted it, he tells 'em they might have done what they would with it; but
first to bestow it wholly on the Church, and then to keep back part of the
Price of the Land, he calls this a Lying to the Holy Ghost, and immediately
(for the terror of other sacrilegious Invaders of Things devoted) punishes it
with one of the most sudden and fearful Deaths that we find recorded, either in
the Scripture, or profane Story. This Sin of withholding or seizing of any
thing once Vowed and Devoted by our selves or others to sacred Uses, is called
the Sin of Sacrilege, and is spoke of, as seems by the manner of expression,
Romans 2.22. as a Sin equalling the Guilt even of Idolatry it self.

And nothing is more plain to be observed, than the Anger of God, God's An^^^
observab^^ (...) on such ^^^^^^ons.
even in this Life, toward those who have sacrilegiously invaded God's
Portion, which has been once Vowed unto him, either by our selves, or our
Forefathers, and have robbed him in his Tithes and Offerings, as he calls it a
robbing of Himself, Mal. 7.8. and threatens it with a heavy Curse, of the
Execution whereof, if I had time, I could give several instances. But let this
suffice to show how heinous a thing it is to violate a Vow to God, even where
the matter of the Vow has been something to which there was no Obligation
before such Vow.

And will it be less provoking then, think ye, to violate those Vows, wherein
by solemn Engagements, Men have promised to do that which before such Vows and
Promises they were obliged to from the Law of Nature, It Is much more provoking
to violate Vows; to perform which, were antecedently obliged by the Law of
Nature.
and as a Debt due for their very Creation and Being? In this case, there is a
double Obligation to perform such Vows: When that which was commanded to be
done, and is necessary upon other accounts, is with all solemnity engaged to be
performed, then the Vow does add to the Command, a new and farther Obligation,
which will make it more criminal, and a far more heinous Sin to break such
Vows. There are many of this kind recorded in the Scripture, particularly the
first part of that Vow of Jacob, Genesis 28.21. is of this kind; and so is our
Baptismal Vow to perform the Covenant of Grace: We were obliged to perform all
that Duty, which we therein engaged to perform, by the very Law of Nature, upon
the account of our Creation, and dependence upon God, from whom, as a Fountain,
we derive all the Good we already have, and hope to enjoy. But when, moreover,
we come solemnly and expressly to engage our selves to the performance of such
Conditions, we add strength to our former Obligations, tying 'em faster upon
our selves; and in the breach of the Laws of God, we thenceforward become not
only barely disobedient, but moreover faithless and Covenant-breakers, and
shall be therefore punished, not only as disobedient, but also as faithless and
perfidious Rebels.

Nor does it in the least lessen the Obligation, that this Vow was made by
others for you in your Infancy; for not to prove to you now, which shall be
done in its due place, that it is in the Power of Parents or Guardians, to
oblige their Minors to the Performance of Conditions, without their own express
Consent at that time, provided there shall considerable Advantages accrue to
'em thereby; it is moreover plain from Scripture, that Parents may devote their
Children to the Service of God in a very peculiar manner; and therefore they
had Power to devote us to the Worship of the True God, as prescribed us in the
Gospel, or New Covenant; to which Covenant we shall therefore stand obliged, as
much as if in our Persons we had Vowed and Engaged our selves to perform it. Of
this Power in Parents we see an instance in Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.11. Nor is the
thing contrary to Reason, and natural Equity, the Philosopher himself
affirming, that both the Parents may devote the Children whilst young, as they
please, since Children at that Age are to be accounted not so much at their
own, as at their Parents disposal.

The thing is just and reasonable, and therefore it is highly criminal in us to
break that Baptismal Vow. A Vow is much of the nature of an Oath, and therefore
to violate it is Perjury.
It is a sin much of the nature of Perjury, a Vow and an Oath being
promiscuously used in Scripture, as Numb. 30.13. one for another. And indeed as
to our Baptismal Vow, since therein God is made a Witness, a Judge, and a
Revenger, it is in its full importance no less than and Oath, and the violating
thereof would be Perjury. He is called to, as a Witness of our Sincerity, in
what we do promise, and oblige our selves thereby to do: He is appealed to, as
a Judge of our Performance, whether we are faithful or not. And as he is a God
that will not be mocked, he will certainly be a Revenger, and a severe one too,
if we shall falsely and perfidiously brake our Vows of Renouncing the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, of Believing in God, and Obeying Him; and shall, on the
contrary, give our selves up to the Service of Sin and Satan, live like those
that Believe not God, nor the Christian Religion, and in perfect contradiction
to the Apostle's Rule, deny not all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, as we are
commanded, and have promised; but deny to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly
in this present World. In such a case, I say, he will be a severe Revenger of
our Perjury, and of our Apostasy; I say of our Apostasy; for he will then
consider us not as ordinary Sinners, but as those who have in effect renounced
our Religion, and will allot to us therefore not the ordinary measures of
Punishment due to unbelieving Jews, Turks, and Infidels; but extraordinary
ones, such as are due to faithless and perfidious Renegado's. Oh, it had been
happy for us, if we had never been Baptized; if after those Vows we have
therein made, to do all we can to destroy Satan's Kingdom, and the Power of Sin
in the World, we shall fight against God by our impious and wicked Deeds,
Better it is that thou should not Vow, than that thou should Vow, and not
pay, Eccl. 5.5. It is a less fault not to Vow at all, than having Vowed, not to
perform; the one being but a Neglect, the other an Affront, nay, a Contempt of
his Majesty, who will not suffer a scorn to be put upon himself.

What shall I say? why take therefore the Advice of the Wise Man, v. 4. When
thou vowest a Vow unto God, deferr not to pay it: for he has no pleasure in
Fools; pay that which thou have Vowed: And say resolutely with Holy David,
Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy
righteous Judgments; I have solemnly resolved, and bound my self by the most
sacred Ties, which I will never break, but do now confirm; that I will
carefully perform my part of the Covenant, which I find to be most just and
good.

The End of the First Volume.
THE CONTENTS.
LECTURE the First.
THe Meaning of the word Catechize. The Definition of a Catechism. page 1
Christian Religion, What? First, A Moral good Life, an essential part of
Christianity. page 2 Secondly, To act Virtuously upon Christian Principles.
Thirdly, Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, that our imperfect
Righteousness may be accepted, also necessary. page 3 Such Dependence, the
distinguishing Character of a true Christian. Dependence upon Christ, necessary
to take down an arrogant Conceit of our own Righteousness, a Temper of Mind
most displeasing to God. page 4 The Nature of Fundamental Principles. An
Enumeration of Fundamental Principles. First, The general Doctrine of the
Covenant of Grace. Secondly, The Articles of our Christian Faith. page 5
Thirdly, The Laws of the Ten Commandments. Fourthly, The Doctrine of Prayer,
and of the Sacraments. A Catechism ought not to be crowded with any thing more,
than what is purely Fundamental to a good Life here, and Happiness hereafter.
page 6 A Catechism is a general Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of
Christianity. Such were the Ancient, and Apostolical Catechisms. And such is
our Church Catechism. The Persons, that are to be Catechized, are every Person.
page 7 The necessity of every Person's being well grounded in Religious
Principles by Catechetical Instruction. The Contempt hereof is the effect of
Pride, and the cause of Ignorance. page 8 The Seeds of Virtue, and Principles
of Religion, can never be too soon sown in Childrens Hearts. However a clear
Understanding of Catechetical Doctrines is attainable only by Persons grown up
to some Years of Discretion. It is not below Persons of any Age, or Quality, to
lay the Foundation of their Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction. The End of
Catechizing to prepare for Confirmation. Confirmation, What? page 9
Confirmation necessary. First, As a solemn Ratification of the Covenant with
God. Secondly, As it consists in the Episcopal Benediction, and laying on of
Hands. Confirmation Beneficial. First, As the solemn Profession therein made,
imprints serious Thoughts, and religious Resolutions. page 10 Secondly, As the
Episcopal Benediction, Prayers, and laying on of Hands have spiritual Blessings
attending them. page 11 Catechism necessary. First, To the solemn Ratifying of
our Covenant with God. page 12 Secondly, To the Receiving Benefit, by the
Episcopal Benediction, Prayers, and laying on of Hands. page 13
LECT. II.
Catechizing requisite to prepare Persons to be worthy Communicants. page 15
The want thereof the occasion of People's Ignorance concerning the Sacrament,
and consequently, First, of Receiving Unworthily. Secondly, of not Receiving at
all. page 16 Thirdly, Catechizing is requisite to Persons being Edified by
Preaching. page 17 Fourthly, Catechizing necessary to prevent being seduced
into dangerous Errors. page 18 Lastly, Catechizing is exceedingly necessary,
First, to preserve Youth from ever falling into an Ungodly way of living. page
19 Secondly, To recover out of it, when fallen therein. page 20
LECT. III.
The reason wherefore the Catechism begins with asking the Catechumen his
Christian Name, is to put him in mind of his Christian Profession. The Force
there is in a Christian Name, to make a Man lead a Christian Life, as under
that Name having Listed himself. First, a Disciple of a most holy and excellent
Religion. page 24 Secondly, a Servant of a most Holy and Just God. Thirdly, to
fight against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Fourthly, as under that Name
he professes to believe such Articles as are the most powerful Motives to deny
all Ungodliness. Fifthly, to obey the most Righteous Laws. Lastly, as having
under that Name received Promises of most powerful Assistances to do all this.
page 25 The bad Lives of Nominal Christians do an infinite Prejudice and
Dishonor to Christianity. It hinders the Conversion of Infidels. It puts
bitter Reproaches in the mouths of Atheists, especially when Wickedness is
committed under the guise of Religion. Few Men will endure their worldly
Calling to be put at naught, and Reproacht. page 26 An Exhortation therefore to
Christians, to stand upon the Dignity of their Christian Name and Profession.
First as that which is more considerable than Titles of Honor. Secondly,
because of that near Alliance there is between the Christian Name, and
Profession. Thirdly, Because the primitive Christians did in virtue of the
Christian Name resist the fiercest Temptations. page 27 Fourthly, because of
the Indecency of living unsuitable to the Christian Name and Profession.
Fifthly, That to quite other Purposes, we gave up our Names to be Christians.
Sixthly, most Christian Names afford some Examples of Virtue, which should
prompt Christians to an Imitation of those, who were Eminent under those Names.
page 28 And therefore Parents are advised to choose for their Children, the
Names of Persons Eminent for Virtue, not Infamous for Vice. page 29
LECT IV.
Our Catechism gives an entire Instruction in the Covenant of Grace, both
generally and particularly. First, Generally in the Three first Questions and
Answers. page 32 The Notion of a Covenant. It is a mutual Agreement. page 33 As
there are Conditions therein on our side, so express Promises on the other. A
View of the Covenant of Grace. God having made Man upright, and in a capacity
never to have violated his Covenant, did engage him to a perfect, exact, and
unsinning Obedience. Man did violate it. page 34 The Divine Justice, Wisdom,
and Holiness required Satisfaction. Man being himself incapable to make it, by
less than suffering an everlasting Punishment. The Son of God undertook. First,
to satisfy for the Breach of the First. Secondly, to Cancel it, and in its
stead to make a Covenant of Grace, consisting of Conditions performable in our
fallen State. Wherein Repentance, Faith, and a sincere Obedience is accepted,
instead of a perfect, exact, and unsinning Obedience. page 35 It resembles
Articles of Accommodation, made through the Intercession of a Prince's Eldest
Son, betwixt him and his Rebellious Subjects. page 36 Little more f universal
Concernment to be known, but the Articles of this Covenant. The Catechetical
Method most useful to that Purpose. page 37
LECT. V.
A Member of Christ, is a Member of Christ's Church. page 39 A Definition of
Christ's Church. The Church of Christ a well-ordered Society, wherein some are
Governors, some Governed. page 40 An Episcopal Clergy undoubtedly such. page
41 The Church is the universal Society of Christians, taking in Men of all
Nations, as well of the Gentiles, as of the Jews. It consists of such, who are
called out of the World, by the Preaching of the Gospel, to a holy Profession
and Calling. page 42 First, Repentance from Dead Works. Secondly, to the
Knowledge, Belief and Service of the One True God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
page 43 Thirdly, to enjoy the Privileges of the Gospel. The Church are such,
who to the End of being Incorporated into one Society, and of having God to be
their God, and they themselves his People, have Entered into Covenant with him.
page 44 First, in Baptism. Secondly, to renew it at the Lord's Supper. The
Church one Body. page 45 Subdivided into several particular Bodies and
Churches. First, for the convenience of Government, into Diocesan Churches.
Secondly, for the convenience of Worship, into particular Congregations. page
46 But however United by one Covenant, into one Body. As also by holding
Communion with each other, in hearing the Word, in Common Prayers, Sacraments,
and in affording to each other mutual Assistances. page 47 The Church united
into one Body, under Jesus Christ its supreme Head. Christ a Political Head of
the Church. Christ the Mystical Head of the Church. page 48 The Church of
Christ a Spiritual Kingdom. But yet notwithstanding a visible Society. page 49
What it is to be a Member of Christ's Church. page 50 Every Baptized Person is
a Member of the Visible Church. And shall continue such, till cut off by the
just Sentence of those, who have the power of the Keys, to Receive in, or shut
out. page 51 Or till he cuts himself off, by a causless Schism and Separation,
from any of its sound Parts. page 52
LECT. VI.
The Privileges of our being Members of Christ's Church. First, a most
excellent Body of Religion, Laws, and Ordinances. The Christian Religion, and
Laws, far exceed the Pagan, Mohammedan, or Jewish. The Pagan Superstition tended
to nothing, but to defile humane Nature. page 55 The Gods the Pagans worshipped,
were, at best, the most Infamous Men and Women. Many times they worshipped the
very Devils themselves. And that with lewd, barbarous, and cruel Rites. The
Mohammedan Religion is a vile Imposture. page 56 Its Principles tend to Lust,
and Cruelty. Judaism was an imperfect, and unfinished Draught of Religion.
Christianity a most excellent Religion. page 57 It gives a most excellent
Representation of God. It gives an honorable account of his proceedings with
Mankind, with reference both to his Creation and Redemption of us. page 58 Its
Laws are excellently contrived for the good Order and Happiness of Mankind. And
are Enforced by most powerful Principles and Motives. Another Branch of this
first Part of a Christian's Privilege, are most edifying and comfortable
Institutions and Ordinances. page 59 First, Public Ordinances, the Privilege
of every Member of Christ's Church. page 60 Scandalous Members to be suspended
from the Lord's Supper. First, Christian Ordinances are a singular Favor,
which Aliens and Unbelievers do not, nor have any Right to enjoy. Secondly,
they are excellent Advantages considered in themselves. page 61 First, as
conducing much toward our Edification. As most comfortable to the Souls of
those, who enjoy them. page 62 They are seldom sufficiently valued, till most
wanted. The Second general Privilege belonging to the Members of Christ's
Church, is a sufficient measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived from
him, the Head, and conveyed by his Ordinances, to enable us to conform our
selves to his Religion, and to obey his Laws. page 63 By the same means, that
Christ is united to his Members, is Grace conveyed down from him, as Head, to
those Members. The first Medium of Union betwixt Christ and his Members, must
be each Member's Union to the Catholic Church. Secondly, its Union to the
Lawful Governors and Teachers of the Church. page 64 Thirdly, the use of
Christ's Institutions and Ordinances. First, Divine Grace, a most singular
Privilege, if compared with what others enjoy of this Nature. page 65
Secondly, an exceeding Advantage considered in it self. All the Members of
Christ have Supplies proportionable to their Station in the Church. page 66 And
also in such Measures as according to different Times and Occasions in the
Church, are wanting. page 67
LECT. VII.
that is meant in the Catechism by a Child of God. First, Not the Son of God by
an Eternal Generation. Secondly, Not every Son by Temporal Creation, which is a
Sense too wide. page 68 ^hirdly, Nor such only who are Children of God, by
spiritual Regeneration, which is a Sense too narrow. page 69 ^uch indeed are in
a peculiar manner, and in the highest sense, the Children of God. But every
Child of God is not actually Regenerate, either in the sense of Scripture: Or
of your Catechism. But, Fourthly, a Child of God, as meant in the Catechism, is
every one, who is so by virtue of a Covenant Relation. This was the Notion of a
Child of God before the Law. Under the Law. page 70 Under the Gospel. Also a
Child of God, as meant in the Catechism, is every one, who is so by virtue of
Adoption. Adoption, what? The use of it amongst the Israelites, and the
Privileges it gave them. The use of it amongst the Gentiles, and the Rights it
conferred upon them. page 71 How we Christians, especially such who are
descended from the Gentiles, are according, as has been spoke, the Adopted
Children of God. To the Israelites did once pertain the Adoption. But that
Covenant, by entering into which they were his Children, was only Temporary. To
last only till the Publication of the Gospel. After which they, and all
Christians were to be Children of God, by faith in Christ. page 72 But the Jews
adhering to their Law, and refusing Christ, and his Gospel, in whom God had
predestined all to be his Sons, the Apostles turned unto Gentiles, preaching
Christ, and Salvation to them, and to as many as received him, to them gave he
power to be the Sons of God. What are the Privileges, which do belong to the
Children of God, as such. In general, such as an indulgent, but wise Father,
may be supposed to allow his Children beyond Aliens and Strangers.
Particularly: First, Pardon of all Sins, upon hearty Repentance. page 73
Secondly, by being his Children, he will not be so severe, as to mark what is
done amiss as to Sins of Infirmity. page 74 Thirdly, to the Children of God is
granted an easier access by Prayer, to the Throne of Grace, for pardon of Sins,
and other Mercies. Lastly, a Child of God is more surely instated in the
Inheritance of Heaven, than others. page 75 The infinite reason we have to
praise God for these Advantages. page 76
LECT. VIII.
By the Kingdom of Heaven, is meant in Scripture, either first, the Kingdom of
Grace in this Life, or secondly, the Kingdom of Glory, in the Life to come. The
Kingdom of Grace, the Gospel State. page 77 The reason why the Gospel State
should be dignifyed with the Title of the Kingdom of Heaven. viz. Because it so
directly tends to render Men so exactly like the Blessed Saints, the
Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Heaven. page 78 This is not the meaning of the
Kingdom of Heaven, here in the Catechism. Secondly, the Kingdom of Heaven
signifies the Kingdom of Glory. This, a most noble and glorious State as being
dignified with so honorable and glorious a Title, as the Kingdom of Heaven.
page 79 Hence all those in this World, wherein we conceive the highest Glory
and Happiness, are used, as Emblems, to set off our future Glory. All which
things come short of expressing it. An Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven,
What? An Heir is one, who has a legal Right and Title to a Possession made over
to him. Such who have entered into the Covenant of Grace, are in like manner
Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven, as Children are Heirs. page 80 It is through
Christ alone, not owing to the Merit of our Obedience, that we are Entitled to
the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven. The Vastness of a Christian's
Privilege in being made an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven. First, it is
in it self a very great Privilege to have the invaluable possessions of
Heaven, so settled and ensur'd, as to have a legal Claim and Title thereto, made
over to one. page 81 Secondly, if compared with what others enjoy, it is a
singular Privilege. The best amongst the moral Heathens could have but faint
Hopes, built upon uncertain Conjectures of a future Happiness. And their Hopes
being faint, they could not in the Strength thereof overcome great Temptations.
But the Christian's Hopes are sure and steadfast, being founded upon the express
Promises and Covenant of the God of Truth. And being such, there is no
Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so great, which he may not overcome. page
82 And whatever certainly an honest Pagan might have, that God would reward his
Virtue, yet depending only on the Uncovenanted Goodness of God, he could
promise himself no greater a measure of Happiness, than what his good Deeds did
of themselves deserve, which must fall vastly short of what is meant by the
Kingdom of Heaven. But a Christian, to whom God has Covenanted, to make sure a
Crown of Glory, may, without Presumption, rely upon him, to make good the same.
As Life and Immortality is brought to light through the Gospel; so by Embracing
it, and by coming into Covenant alone, Salvation can be expected. And to a
sincere Christian, who is faithful in the Covenant, the Heavenly Inheritance is
certain. page 83 A sum of those invaluable Privileges, made over to us, on
God's Part, in the Covenant of Grace. page 84
LECT. IX.
Whereof the First is, to Renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. page 85
The Devil, his Names, and their Importance. He was once one of the highest
Angels, and is now that Arch-Rebel against God. He, with many Legions of
Inferior Angels, whom he drew into the same Conspiracy, is Banished Heaven. page
86 Being acted with a Spirit of Revenge against God, he afterward withdrew
Mankind to join with him in his Rebellion. And prevailed so far, till God's
Authority was almost utterly Banished from amongst Men. Which occasioned the
Son of God's coming into the World, to recover Mankind. The Works of the Devil
in general are, First, Sin. By Sin God's Authority is thrown off, which is the
Devil's constant work. page 87 Whoever therefore does wilfully sin, does strike
at God's Authority. For which Reason no Sin ought to be the subject of any
Man's Mirth. Some Sins more particularly the works of the Devil. First, Such as
are directly levelled against God's Authority, viz. Idolatry, Sorcery, Charming,
Witchcraft, and Conjuring, as also Resorting to such as use those unlawful
Arts. page 88 Secondly, Such as express more of the Devil's Temper, than
others, viz. Pride. Envy. page 89 Malice. Thirdly, Such as are more the
Practice of Satan himself, than other Sins, viz. Murder. Apostasy. Lying, and
especially Calumniating, and Evil-speaking. page 90 To Renounce, a Word of
various Importance, according to the Renounced. page 91 To Renounce the Devil,
in the sense of the Ancient Church, was to disclaim his Usurped Dominion, and
Authority over Mankind. To Renounce his Works of Sin, was in their sense, to
abandon and forsake every Sin, as being the proper Service of the Devil. page
92 The Words are to be understood in much the same Sense at this day; Satan
having his Kingdom still in the World, and even amongst Christians, and the
Laws of Sin, which are the Laws of his Kingdom, being still obeyed by the
greatest Part of Mankind. This Renunciation, for the most part, the same with
Repentance. page 93 The Devil, and all his Works of Sin, must be absolutely and
entirely Renounced; because, There is nothing but Evil proceeds from Satan. And
Sin, whether we consider it in its original Cause and Nature; or in its sad
Effects and Consequents, is the utmost Evil. Therefore no one Sin, nor any
thing the least of Sin, must willingly be complied with. page 94 And indeed, if
the Nature of Satan, and of Sin, and the horrid Consequence of yielding to
either, be well considered, it is hardly possible, not absolutely and entirely
to Renounce both. However this if we do not do, we shall forfeit all Right and
Title to those infinite Blessings, held forth in the Covenant of Grace. page 95
LECT. X.
To Tempt is to make a trial of a Person. To Tempt, a thing morally Good, or
Evil, according to the End thereof. To Tempt a Person, in order to prove his
Virtue, or discover his Corruption, consistent with the Justice, Wisdom, and
Goodness of a Governor; and thus God does Tempt Men. page 97 First, Thus he
tempted Abraham, to try his Faith, and to reward him for it. Secondly,
Hezekiah, to discover his Hypocrisy, and to humble him in the sight thereof.
These Temptations of God are therefore in no sense to be Renounced, but to be
Rejoiced in, because for our Good. page 98 A Temptation to ensnare a Person
into some Sin, that so God's Anger may be kindled against him. And the Person
punished for this Transgression, is wicked and malicious; and so the Devil,
together with the World, and the Flesh, do tempt us. The vast Concernment it is
to us, to know his Temptations. The several Heads of Satan's Temptations. page
99 By what Methods he first tempted our first Parents, and still does continue
to tempt us. First, By insinuating into the Minds of Adam and Eve false Notions
of God, and an ill Opinion of their Maker and Governor, particularly with
respect to his Justice and Mercy. page 100 And by Entertaining false Notions of
God's Justice and Mercy, do Men generally Encourage themselves in Sin at this
Day. But all such Conceits of God are to be utterly renounced and cast out of
our Thoughts, as Diabolical Suggestions, most destructive to our Souls.
Secondly, By Corrupting the Understanding and Reason of Man, by putting him
upon curious Enquiries after useless Matters, and upon making a sinful
Experiment of the differences between Good and Evil. page 101 The Mind of Man
naturally desirous of increasing Knowledge. Experimental Knowledge of Sin
clouds the Reason, and stupifies the Sense of Spiritual things. And even mere
Curiosity after less Profitable things, takes off from the Knowledge of God,
and our Selves, and the Means of Happiness. page 102 By these Means he brings
that Ignorance in Divine Matters, which reigns in most Men's Minds. And being
spiritually Ignorant, Men are easily led into whatever Sin and Misery. This
therefore another Wile of Satan's, which must be carefully avoided. page 103
Thirdly, By Bribing the Affections with something nearest our Hearts, and
rather than disoblige and lose which, we will commit any thing that is Evil.
And by whatever we most place our Affections upon, does he still Inveigle us to
do what is Forbidden. And therefore our Savior would have us bear that
Indifferency of Affection toward our nearest Relations, as to be able to
Forsake them, and their Interests, rather than God. Lastly, By exciting their
Lusts and Appetites after the forbidden Fruit, by proposing the fairest
Objects, and most delicious Dainties to their Senses. page 104 And by the same
Methods does he prevail, to this day, upon the far greatest part of Mankind to
Rebel against God. For Man being made up very much of Sense, so that nothing
enters into the Soul, but through the Doors of our Senses; we are easily
prevailed upon by what gratifies our Senses. Especially the Senses of Seeing
and Tasting. page 105 But our being taken only with Outward things, is such an
high Ingratitude to God, who has provided so much better for us, and such an
Abuse to our Souls, which are capable of relishing higher Enjoyments, as is not
to be Endured. page 106
LECT. XI.
What Temptations Satan levels against the Church of Christ. God recovers out
of the fallen Race of Mankind a Body of Men, the Church, to his Service, Listed
'em under Jesus Christ to Fight against Satan. The Devil enraged, to have his
Prey snatched out of his Teeth, continually Attacks it. His first and chief
Endeavors are, utterly to destroy it from off the Face of the Earth. page 107
This he Endeavored to do in the Person of Abel. And when afterward Recruited
in the Family of Seth, yet he Reduced it again, by the Bloody Posterity of
Cain, to Eight Persons in the Days of Noah. When after the Flood, God chose
Abraham and his Posterity, to be a special People unto himself, Satan
endeavored utterly to have Extinguished that People, by his Servant Pharaoh.
And in all Periods, till our Savior's coming, he stirred up the Idolatrous
Nations, their Neighbors, especially the Four Monarchies, to Harrass them. But
soon after, that Christ appeared in the World, did he most vigourously Exert
his Malice against it. page 108 So that for the first 300 Years we hear of
nothing but of bloody Persecutions. The Emperors of Rome the Instruments, but
Satan the Instigator. And wheresoever any Attempt is made to Convert a Country
from Paganism, he does instigate the Princes and People thereof, to Persecute
and Destroy the Preachers of the Gospel. And he is no less Industrious to drive
Christianity out of those Countries, whereof it had once Possession. And he has
an Antichristian Party within the Bowels of Christendom, most sadly weakening
Christ's, and most effectually promoting the Interest of his own Kingdom. page
109 And now all Christians are so far to Renounce Satan, with respect to those
his persecuting Temptations, as to submit to the sorest Sufferings, which Satan
and his wicked Instruments can inflict, rather than deny Christ, or his Truths.
Secondly, When those bloody Methods fail, Satan then does endeavor so to
corrupt Men's Notions of God and Religion, that by their very Christianity they
may dishonor him. page 110 This Politic Methods of his, discovered to us
under the Parable of a malicious Enemy, coming privately in the Night, and
sowing Tares where the Husbandman had before sowed good Seed. Like a skilful
Husbandman he is choice about the Nature of the Seed, the Temper and
Preparedness of the Soil, the Fitness of the Season, and the Skilfulness of the
Seeds-man. First, As to the Nature of the Seed, he takes care his Heretical
Opinions and Practices should bear some Resemblance of Divine Truth, in order
to conceal their Discovery. Thus especially he Gilds his Errors, where the
Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine, as here, First, When under the
plausible Appearance of Advancing God's Honor, in some of his Attributes, he
renders him odious and despised in Others. page 111 Secondly, When under the
Color of Advancing Gospel Truths, he propagates Heresies, which do undermine
Religion, and the Necessity of a holy Life. Thirdly, When he teaches to prefer
some eminent Christian Duty, or some part of a Duty, or one Way of performing a
Duty, to the Disparagement of another. As to prefer Prayer, to the neglect of
Preaching, or Sermons to the contempt of Prayer. As also Praying in Spirit, to
the regard of Bodily Worship. And Extemporary Prayer, to the utter Contempt of
Forms of Prayer. page 112 By this latter Means, Satan has utterly Defeated
those excellent Helps we have in our Church, and brought in a great Neglect of
Public, Family, and private Devotion. page 113 Secondly, As to the Temper and
Preparation of the Soil, in Churches where the Scriptures are Locked up, and
Ignorance prevails, he imposes the grossest Heresies, as Articles of Faith.
Especially he introduces Idolatry and Superstition, whereby he is most
immediately and directly served. Thirdly, As to the fitness of the Season, he
is dexterous in Accommodating his Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of
Acting to such Seasons, as are most proper to his Purpose of seducing Mankind.
page 114 Hence in dark and ignorant Ages, nothing so common as the Apparitions
of Saints, as was Pretended to introduce the Belief of Purgatory,
Image Worship, and the like Superstitions. And in Learned and Philosophical
Ages, he is as shy in appearing, lest she should destroy the prevailing
Sadducism. Fourthly, As to the Skilfulness of the Seeds-man, Satan is
wonderfully Cunning, in making choice of fit and proper Instruments; and in
furnishing those with the proper Arts of Deceiving, and with suitable
Qualities, whom he employs to sow the Seed of corrupt Doctrine in the Souls of
Men. page 115 Such as place all Religion in Morality, shall be adorned with
Humanity. Such as turn it all into Mystery, shall be Gifted with Canting. page
116 And yet sometimes the Crooked Serpent by Men seeming Godly, will propagate
Principles extremely Immoral. The most difficult Part of a Christian's Warfare
is to preserve One self untainted with Heretical Pravity, colored over with
the Varnish of Gospel Truth. But yet by Trying it by proper Rules it may be
done, viz. First, By its Tendency to an ill Life. Secondly, By its taking off
from our Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, for the Acceptance of a good
One. page 117
LECT XII.
Thirdly, Satan's great Industry is to gain over to his Party, or to Tempt to
some scandalous Enormity such Persons as are more than ordinarily Eminent for
their Rank, their Order, or their Piety in the Church. First, Such as are most
Eminent for their Station or Quality. page 119 Such Men's Wickedness, not
altogether from the Temptingness of Riches, but the Industry of Satan, to get
over such leading Men to his Party. Such Men's Examples, if bad, of malignant
Influence, because Conspicuous. And will bring upon 'em the Guilt, not only of
their own, but of other Men's Sins, because Their Actions have the force of a
Precept, as well as of a Pattern, which Inferiors are afraid to show their
dislike of. page 120 Great Men therefore must of all others Renounce the
Temptations of Satan. Secondly, Such as are most Eminent on the account of
their Order, viz. the Ministers of Religion. He is doubly Enraged against such,
both because in the Nature and Design of their Office, they are to destroy his
Kingdom, and because the rest of the World do altogether Eye them for their
Pattern. Hence no Temptation left untried to withdraw such into some scandalous
Enormity. page 121 And hence the more Industrious a Minister is, the more
Industrious is Satan to overcome him And in the very way wherein he is most
serviceable to the Church of God, Satan does endeavor to make him most
Mischievous. As by turning his Zeal into Faction. His spiritual Mindedness into
Enthusiasm. If he cannot prevail over him by real Miscarriages, he will render
him useless by forged Calumnies. page 122 It wonderfully concerns the Interest
of Religion, that the Reputation of its Ministers be kept unsullied. Hence
Satan, and Satanical Men so Industrious to blast it. And slanderous Reports
lessen the Authority and Influence of the Clergy almost as much as real Sin.
page 123 It behooves the Clergy therefore so far to Renounce and Resist the
Devil's Temptations, as to take care not only to be really Blameless, but also
to abstain from all appearance of Evil. Thirdly, Such as are signal for their
extraordinary Piety and Virtue. Good Men the Devil knows, will be scandalized
at such a One's Fall. And the Atheistical will triumph therein. And withal the
lapst Person will be rendered almost incapable ever after of Converting others
by his Example, or Exhortations. page 124 Against this Bulwark of Religion,
therefore the Devil draws up all his Artillery. The Pride and Pains he takes in
overcoming such a One, represented in a Parable. page 125 The more Exemplarily
Pious therefore any Man is, the more it concerns him to beware of the Devil,
and all his Temptations. page 126
LECT. XIII.
Lastly, what Temptations Satan levels against all Persons indifferently
considered. The Devil's Temptations not easily known to be his, nor always
distinguishable from those of the World, and the Flesh, which are managed and
directed by him. page 127 Some of the most considerable of his Methods of
Tempting us discovered. First, He permits, if not furthers some in a partial
Obedience to God in some Particulars, the better to detain them perfect Slaves
to himself in others. This a most fatal Delusion, when some Sins only of a
scandalous Name, are exchanged for contrary Virtues, but with the Retention of
Impieties of a higher Nature. page 128 Such the most Irreclaimable of all
Sinners. Secondly, By putting plausible Names upon the worst of Sins, under
that disguise he does cheat Persons into a good Opinion of 'em, and then to
commit 'em. Sin in that disguise gets Reputation amongst Men. page 129 Thirdly,
By changing the Nature of several Divine Graces, so that they degenerate into
very great Sins. Sins thus mistaken are seldom Repented of. Fourthly, By
putting Novices upon undertaking Severities, greater than they can go through
with, on design that when they grow weary thereof, they may together with those
their voluntary Severities, throw all Religion aside, as too Burdensome, and not
at all Practicable. page 130 The difference between God's Ordering, and the
Devil's Management of Men in these Matters. Fifthly, By injecting of evil
Thoughts into our Minds at our Devotion, to unhallow those Services, whereby we
do really and most immediately glorify God, and benefit our own Souls. page 131
And thus he hinders the Efficacy of the Word. Sixthly, The Devil observing the
outward Wants and Necessities of Persons, he accordingly Tempts them, by the
use of unlawful Means, to remove those Evils. Seventhly, Knowing every
particular Person's inward Dispositions, he accordingly presents such Objects
to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to prevail over such a Man to commit some
grievous Sin. page 132 Eighthly, Above all, by Representing to the Fancies of
Men, the Convenience of Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the Sweetness of
Pleasures, he does thereby Bribe 'em to Rebel against God, and to Sin against
their own Souls. In his Representation of this World's Goods, he shows only the
fair Outside to allure into Sin, industriously concealing all that is Hurtful
therein, and would deter Men from it. page 133 Ninthly, Having prevailed
thereby upon Persons, to commit some grievous Sin to obtain them, he then lays
the shame and disgrace of their Sins before 'em, persuading 'em to commit
another horrid Wickedness, to hide from the Eyes of Men, the shame of the
former. page 134 Tenthly, Having once Engaged a Person into many Sins, he
either lulls him in Security, or drives him into Despair. Lastly, There are
those, whom God does in a great measure give up to the Delusions of Satan,
others whom he does wholly Abandon to the Power of the Devil. First, Such
ill-dispos'd Minds, as out of love to their Lusts, seek after such Principles
and Teachers, as will make Sin easy to their Consciences, are justly left to
the Delusions of Satan. Secondly, Such as by a long Course of many damning Sins
have laid wast the Conscience, and have baffled all the Methods of God's Grace
to Reclaim 'em, these are sometimes, even in this Life, abandoned by God, to be
acted by the Devil. page 135 And lastly so are Witches, Magicians, and
Conjurers, who have Covenanted away both Body and Soul to the Devil, on
Condition he will be for some time at their Beck, to execute their vile and
malicious Purposes. Upon the general View of the Works of the Devil, both of
Sin and Temptation, it does appear his Drift is no less than to usurp God's
Throne, and to draw the whole Race of Mankind into the same Cursed Rebellion
against the Majesty of Heaven with himself. page 136 What it is, and how we
must Renounce this great Work of the Devil, his Tempting of us to Sin. page 137
The Temptations of the Devil are then only properly Renounced, when they are
Resisted by us. That they may be successfully Resisted. First, We must keep our
selves always Sober. Sobriety, First, As opposite to Drunkenness, a necessary
Preservative against Satan's Temptations. page 138 Secondly, As opposite to
Passion. Secondly, Watchful over those our Weaknesses especially where Satan
will be likeliest to Attempt us. And Thirdly, we must be constant and fervent
in Prayer to God, to Protect us from them. page 139
LECT. XIV.
What is meant by the Pomps and Vanity of the wicked World, and in what sense,
and how far we must Renounce the wicked World, with its Pomps and Vanity. Three
things here to be Explained, and accordingly Renounced: 1. The World; 2. The
wicked World; and 3. The Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World. The World a
great Enemy to God's Glory, and our own Happiness. page 141 It is to be
considered both Generally and Particularly. First, By the World in general is
meant that whole Frame of Nature, which we behold, and all that variety of
Creatures which it contains, and is given us by the Bounty and Goodness of God,
for our Use and Benefit. The World in this sense is not in it self Evil, but
only accidentally, by Man's Abuse of himself, or it. page 142 Considered in it
self it is very Good, and convenient to us. And as it is not absolutely in it
self Evil, so neither is it entirely to be Renounced; but being Good in it
self, it may in some measure be desired and enjoyed by us. Nevertheless through
our own Corruption, whereby we abuse the good Things of the World, it becomes
accidentally the occasion of most of our Sins, and of our Estrangement from
God, our sovereign Good. How the World becomes so. page 143 In what manner it
does Captivate us, and draws us from God. So far therefore as it engages our
Affections too closely to it, so as to make us Inordinately, and Irregularly to
mind it, and to neglect our great Concern, the Business of Religion, it is to
be Renounced and Rejected by us. So long as we wear these Earthly Bodies about
us, we are permitted the Use and Enjoyment of worldly Things, provided in
Things lawful, and in Degrees allowable. But being our Souls, our principal
Part, are soon to remove to Heaven, we must chiefly set our Affections on
things Above, and mainly endeavor to attain 'em. page 144 Secondly, Concerning
the World, considered in its Particulars, and those Temptations result both
from the Good, and the Evils thereof. The good Things of this World, Riches,
Honors and Pleasures; the Evils, Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions. And
Things of a middle Nature are the different Callings, Conditions, and Cares of
this World. First, As to Riches, these are not in themselves Hurtful, but Good,
and are bestowed upon us to good Ends and Purposes. And those who enjoy 'em,
have great Advantages of doing Good therewith, to others Comfort, and the
Benefit of their own Souls. Nevertheless Riches are a mighty Temptation,
whether we consider Men as Getting, Possessing, or as Parting with, or Losing
of them. page 145 First, In the over-eager Pursuit of Riches Men do run
themselves into many grievous Sins. As also into many miserable Snares, so as
to be hardly ever able to disentangle themselves out of 'em. For as Restitution
is necessary to Peace with God, so it is extremely difficult to be willing, or
able afterward to make. page 146 Secondly, And no less Temptations are those
subject to, who do possess 'em. In the Possession of Riches, Men are Tempted to
the highest Offenses against God, their Neighbor, and Themselves. But lastly,
the great Sins of all are occasioned by a Lothness to part with, and a Fear of
losing 'em. page 147 From a lothness to part with Riches, arises Unmercifulness
to Men. From the Fear of losing 'em, Apostasy from God. In what sense, and how
far Riches are to be Renounced. page 148 In General, being they are not Evil in
themselves, they are in Cases only to be Renounced by us, wherein we cannot
without Sin Pursue, Possess, or Retain them. As First, Riches considered in the
Getting, no Man must so put his Heart upon 'em, as to Esteem 'em his chiefest
Good and Happiness. Nor must he labor after 'em with immoderate Care, so as to
neglect the great Duties of Religion and Devotion. Especially he must beware of
Enriching himself by unjust Means. page 149 Particularly not by Sacrilege.
Whoever has unjustly gained any thing, must renounce it, by making Restitution
thereof. Secondly, Riches considered in the Possession, are to be renounced, by
paring off those Superfluities, which tempt Idleness and Luxury, Pride and
Insolence, and an Idolatrous Trust in Riches; and by bestowing it to Pious and
Charitable Uses. page 150 And Lastly, By suffering the Loss thereof, rather
than Apostatize from the Faith. page 152
LECT XV.
What is meant by the Honors of this World, and in what Sense, and how far
they are to be Renounced. What is meant by Honor properly and strictly. What
in the general Meaning of the word. page 153 First, Nobility, or Gentility. The
original Nature of Nobility, or Gentility. The Abuses it is subject to, and in
what Instances to be renounced. First, A Gentleman, be he of what Rank or
Quality soever, must utterly renounce all that Honor, which pretends to Place
him above the Laws of God, or Man, and beyond Reproof or Punishment, when he
has Violated either. page 154 Such a One is bound above others to be a strict
and orderly Liver, and upon his Failure, is more open to Reproof, and more
liable to be severely Punished. Secondly, As also that which exalts Persons
above their Brethren, to that degree, as to despise and oppress the rest of
Mankind, as if they were but a lower Rank of Creatures, and had not the same
God to their Father, Bodies Formed out of the same Clay, and Souls as Excellent
in their Natures, and as capable of Improvements; as precious in God's sight,
and as much the Heirs of Heaven, as their own. page 155 Thirdly, Such ought
even to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor, who have degenerated from those
worthy Qualities, which Ennobled their Ancestors. page 156 This the
Determination of our Savior, and his Apostles, in their Case. Lastly, And such
ought to Renounce all Pretensions to Honor, amongst Christians at leastwise,
who despise Religion, and its chiefest Virtues, as Qualities beneath 'em. But
if such are accounted Honorable by vain Men, they are Despicable in the Eyes,
both of God, and of all Wise and Good Men. page 157 The Sum how far Paternal
Honor is to be Renounced. Secondly, In what Sense, and how far Civil Honor is
to be Renounced; whether the Favor of Princes, or the Effects of their Favor,
Posts of Honor. page 158 These kind of Honors and outward Glories, are
dazzling and bewitching Things. But First, A Prince's Favor, though extremely
Valuable, when it can be had without Sin, yet no Man must gain, possess, or
retain it by wicked Arts, or sinful Compliances. Nor Secondly, the Effects of
their Favors, high Places, and Titles of Honor. First, In the obtaining of
these, no Man must grasp at that, which is above his Capacities and Abilities
to manage to the Public Good. page 159 This Mischievous to the State. This
Mischievous to the Church. Nor Secondly, ought Persons of the best Capacities,
and greatest Abilities, be over-eager and importunate in their Suits and
Applications to those, who bestow them. page 160 Thirdly, How far, and in what
Sense that Honor, which consists in the high Esteem and Reputation of the wise
and virtuous part of Mankind, is to be Renounced. This is what the Wise Man
calls a Good Name, and is more Valuable than Riches, or precious Ointments.
page 161 It is a more peculiar Blessing than any the greatest Treasures, and
procures better Security to our Persons and Estates. It is a necessary
Qualification to the Episcopal Promotion. It is Comfortable to a Man's own
self. page 162 And smells Sweet in the World. It renders a Person capable of
doing Good in it. And active in Promoting it. A desire of Reputation and
Credit, is a thing Implanted in our Natures by God. And to preserve a
Reputation untainted and unsuspected of Evil, is a Duty enjoined us by his
Laws. page 163 Nevertheless, even a Good Name is in some measure to be
Renounced by us, and the Temptations it gives us. As First, we must so far
Renounce the Honor that shall accrue to us from our good Works, as not to make
our own Glory the End and Reason of any Good we do. page 164 Secondly, We must
not affect, but renounce those Praises, which are above our Deserts. Thirdly,
We must beware of taking the Honor and Respects given us for any worthy
Performances, wholly to our selves, and of not transferring it to God, to whom
the Glory of all that is Good in us, does properly belong. page 165 Fourthly,
We must abhor making a Reputation for Religion, an Instrument only to our own
Advancement. But must use the Authority our Credit gives us, to discountenance
Vice, and to encourage Virtue in the World. page 166 Fifthly, As valuable as is
a Good Name and Reputation amongst Men, we must renounce all undue Means of
preserving it. Such are Duelling upon the account of Slanders, amongst the
great Ones. Going to Law thereupon, usual amongst common People. Lastly, We
must utterly renounce and forfeit the Esteem of Men, rather than incur the
Dis-favour of God. page 167 Fourthly, How far that Honor is to be renounced,
which consists in the Applauses of the Vulgar, upon what they do account
Praiseworthy and Honorable. page 168 This sort of Honor must be utterly and
absolutely renounced. Lastly, In what Sense, and how far we must renounce those
outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word or Deed, which are usually given
upon the account of any of the forementioned Honors. page 169 First, No
Created Being, either Men, or Angels must suffer those Respects to be given
them, whether by word, or deed, which are proper and peculiar to signify our
sense of God's Majesty and Perfections. Women therefore must with Detestation
renounce those Blasphemous Complements, wherein Divine Perfections are usually
ascribed to them. Secondly, Every Man must renounce and refuse those Titles and
Respects, and Precedencies, which are not his due, but belong to Persons above
him. page 170 Lastly, And must in Modesty, Humility, and good Manners, decline
his due in this kind, and must renounce the Entitleing of himself, and permit
that to others. Objections against receiving Titles of Honor, Respect and
Precedence, Answered. page 171
LECT. XVI.
What is meant by the Pleasures of this World, in what Sense, and how far they
are to be Renounced. First, Rational Pleasure is very Excellent, and Allowable.
page 173 But first, no Man must make mere Pleasure the End of his Knowledge.
Nor secondly, must that Satisfaction and Delight, which arises from the Sense
and Conscience of good and worthy Deeds, be so much, because we are Admired and
Applauded for it, as because they are really in themselves Virtuous. Secondly,
Sensitive Pleasure, which results from the suitableness between the perceptive
Faculties, and the Objects that effect them, is lawful. page 174 These
Pleasures unlawful only when they become, Thirdly, Sensual. As first, when we
prefer them in our Judgments, or Desires, either before our spiritual Joys in
God, or the eternal Joys of his Kingdom. page 175 Secondly, When a Man relishes
no Enjoyments like those of Sense. Thirdly, When he gluts himself, so as to
surfeit on these Sweets. And lastly, when the Deliciousness of these Pleasures
causes him to load and burden his Nature therewith, so as to render him unfit
for the Duties of his Calling, and Religion. Recreative Pleasures of a middle
and indifferent Nature. page 176 The most Innocent thereof are to be sparingly
used. page 177 The Evils of the World are Poverty, Disgrace, and Afflictions.
Poverty and Afflictions, instead of Temptations to Sin, and Hindrances to
Virtue, do very often prove Mortifiers to Vice, and the great occasions of a
holy Life. page 178 Nevertheless, they are often great Temptations to many Sins
and Impieties. First, It behooves those, who labor under Poverty, or any kind
of Affliction, to beware of Impatience and Discontent. Secondly, Those, in the
worst of Circumstances, must not envy the outward Felicity of the Wicked.
Thirdly, A Person that is Poor, must be infinitely careful, least to Rescue
himself out of it, he be tempted to Fraud, especially to Stealing and
Purloyning. page 179 Nor, Lastly, must any think, that because they are Poor,
they are e're the more dis-engaged from the Service of God, and their
Attendance upon him in all the Parts of Divine Worship. In what sense, and how
far we must Renounce Disgrace, and the Temptations it gives us. page 180 First,
The Callings of the World, and how the Temptations they give, are to be
Renounced. Every Man is to betake himself to some Business. It must be such as
Providence has fitted him with Abilities for. And such he is preparatively
Called and Appointed to by God, with due Abilities. page 181 To whatsoever
Calling he is appointed, he must employ himself therein to God's Glory, and his
own, and the public Good. First, All Persons must renounce such Callings and
Professions, as are directly sinful and ^icked. Secondly, Such as tend to the
Hurt, not the Good of the Public. page 182 Thirdly, All sinful Arts in the
most useful Callings. page 183 Fourthly, All Levity and Desultery Skipping,
from one Calling to another. page 185 Fifthly, Any Calling whatsoever is to be
declined, for which a Person is not Qualified, both by Education, Abilities,
and Inclinations. Especially Callings of great Importance, such as the
Ministry. page 186 Sixthly, Idleness in any Calling is to be renounced.
Idleness not allowable, no not in Gentlemen. page 187 It is one of the greatest
Temptations in the World to Sin. And is it self a very great Sin. Lastly, No
Man must Live above his Calling. page 188 Secondly, Amongst those Things of the
World of a middle Nature, the different Conditions and States of Men therein,
are to be considered. First, A Master has great Advantages of doing Good. But
all that Dominion is to be utterly Renounced amongst Christians, which treats
Servants no better than Slaves and Brutes. The State of Servants not in it self
Unhappy. First, It concerns every Person, who is to live by a Service, to avoid
such, where there is neither the Means of Religion, nor Restraints upon Sin.
page 189 Secondly, In the most Irreligious Families a Servant shall happen
into, he must put on a steadfast Resolution to preserve his Innocence. Thirdly,
The State of Celibacy advantageous to Devotion, and in Times of Distress. This
must be renounced, when Persons cannot Contain. Lastly, The Married State has
its Advantages. First, All Solicitations from either of the Married Couple must
be renounced, which would persuade to sinful Compliances in times of Distress.
page 190 Secondly, And Engage too much in Worldly Cares. Lastly, The Cares of
this World, the last of those things pertaining to it, in some measure
necessary. First, It becomes Christians to renounce a Multiplicity of Cares.
Secondly, Every Worldly Care, so far as it does alienate our Affections from
God and Heavenly Things. page 191 Lastly, All manner of Worldly Care, when
advanced in Years. page 192
LECT. XVII.
Secondly, What Is meant by the wicked World, and how far, and in what sense we
are to renounce it. Thereby is meant such as make it their Business, like that
wicked One, the Devil, to tempt others to Sin. page 193 First, We must renounce
that Diabolical Wickedness of becoming Tempters our selves of other Persons. It
is a terrible thing, to have been an Instrument of another's Damnation. page
194 It is an Injury to Men's Souls, in some Cases hardly ever, in others
impossible to be repaired. Secondly, We must renounce to Conform our selves to
wicked Men, when they shall Tempt us, viz. First, By their evil Examples.
Examples have the greatest Influence upon us; especially, page 195 First, If
Examples of Sin. Secondly, If common, and many. Thirdly, If of such, for whom
we have a great Esteem. Fourthly, If of those of whom we stand in awe. page 196
We must by all Means renounce, and refuse Conformity to such bad Examples: For
First, A Christian is called out to Combat against the wicked Examples of the
World, as much as against any one sort of Enemy in his Christian Warfare. page
197 Nay, secondly, to Confront their bad Examples with an excellent One of his
own. II. When they shall Tempt and Entice us by their evil Company. The Company
of the Wicked extremely infectious. page 198 Most of the Miscarriages of Men
owing thereunto. This makes Men Atheists, Libertines, Thieves, and Robbers.
Drunkards. Withdraws from the Worship of God. Evil Company therefore of all
things to be abhorred. I. Young Women must shun the corrupt Conversation of
young Men. page 199, 200 II. All Persons of either Sex, both Young and Old, as
they will prevent the Infection of evil Company, must take all possible Care to
avoid it. page 201 But, Thirdly, when Employment and necessary Occasions draw
Men forth into the World, they must refuse to Conform themselves to the Manners
of ill Company. First, By discountenancing their Profaneness and Riot.
Secondly, By diverting 'em by useful Discourse from both. Thirdly, If all
Methods fail, by openly Reproving them. To do this Service to God we are
particularly Listed in our Baptism. We shall be much discouraged from this by
Men. But have infinite Encouragements to such Fidelity from God. page 202
LECT. XVIII.
Thirdly, Flattery a great Temptation to Sin. The Ground thereof our own
immoderate Self-love. page 204 This Flattery keeping Men ignorant of the good
or ill Qualities in 'em; thereupon the Good never come to Perfection. And the
Ill that is in Men does thereby grow Incorrigible. page 205 First, In order to
Renounce Flattery we must Cashier every vain Opinion of our own selves.
Secondly, We must so far Renounce the Flatteries of Men, as to take it kindly
to be Reproved. page 206 Especially the Reproofs of God's Ministers are to be
kindly received and regarded. Fourthly, Wicked Men Tempt others to Sin by their
false and fallacious Arguings against the Necessity of a Holy Life. page 207
All which wicked Reasonings we must fortify our selves against; as when they
Plead, First, That it is inconsistent with God's Mercy for the Sins of a short
Life, to Condemn the Guilty to an Eternity of Woe and Misery. page 208
Secondly, That the Duties of Religion are hard Sayings which no Man can bear.
Thirdly, That they are made of Flesh and Blood, and that therefore sure God
will not require Men upon the Forfeiture of Salvation, if they do not, to
mortify the Flesh. Lastly, That God has set us in a World full of Temptations,
and abounding with sensual Delights and Pleasures; and that he therefore who
has placed us in it, will not command us, upon Pain of Damnation, to overcome
those strong Temptations, and to deny these Pleasures of the World. Fifthly,
Wicked Men will add Kindnesses and Promises to Oblige us to do ill Things, and
on the contrary will much discourage us, nay sometimes Threaten us to forbear
our Duty. page 210, 211 First, Kindnesses must not corrupt us to Sin. Secondly,
Promises must not bribe us. Thirdly, Discouragements must not hinder us from
discharging our Duty. Nor, Fourthly, must Threatenings, or Frowns fright us from
it. page 212 Lastly, The evil Customs, which have prevailed in the World, are a
powerful Temptation to Sin. Custom takes off the Sense and Fear of Hurt in the
most Unchristian Practices. page 213 A Christian must courageously and
vigorously renounce, and withstand the Force of all sinful Customs whatsoever.
Such only as are Immoral are to be Renounced. page 214 The greatest Courage
required to this Part of a Christian's Warfare. Cowardice the Cause of
Complying with the Custom of Duelling, or any other Custom of Sinning. page 215
LECT XIX.
First, Thereby were anciently meant those pompous Spectacles, Plays and
Scenical Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters. page 217 Our Modern
Plays no less Inferior to 'em in Impiety, than in Pompousness. And having such
a malignant Influence upon Faith, and Manners, ought never to be frequented by
Christians. page 218 Secondly, By Pomps, in the sense of the Ancients, were
meant the solemn Processions of the Heathens in Honor of their Gods. The
Idolatrous Processions of the Papists, in the honor of the Saints, answerable
to these; And must not therefore be joined in. Thirdly, By Pomps Redu^ely, may
be meant the Revels and Drunken Riots of our Youth, at Wakes and Festivals.
page 219 ^o be Abstained from. Vanity of the World, What? First, When Perrous
outgo their Ability, (...) Building and Furniture. page 220 ^dly, It appears in
striving for Precedence. Thirdly, In affecting Titles above ones Qua^ and to be
esteemed Virtuous above ones Desert. IV. In the vain Affectation of costly
Ap^el and Ornaments: As, First, When Persons exceed what becomes their Rank and
Degree, (...) that they wear. Secondly, When they are proud of their Ornaments.
Thirdly, When they ^orn themselves to undue Ends and Purposes. page 221, 222
(...), When they spend too much Time, and at unfitting Seasons therein. Decency
according to ^t is suitable to Age, Sex, or Quality, the Rule in this Case.
page 223
LECT. XX.
^ow our selves, especially our natural Imperfection, a most useful part of
Knowledge. page 225 ^lesh variously expressed. What is meant by the Flesh. 1. The
whole Unregenerate Nature of Man, (...) and Body. 2. The whole Man not as
created by God, but as he is now in the State of Cor^ted Nature. 3. As spoiled
in his Original Frame and Constitution, as despoiled of the Image (...) God,
and as inordinately tending toward the Creature. page 226 ^riginal Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature, what. The Image of God, wherein Man (...) at
first created, what. page 227 ^ent and Inclination of the Soul toward God,
what. 1. In the Unregenerate Nature the Ori^al Frame and Constitution of Man,
wherein he was created, is broken. page 228 ^e Image of God, wherein he was
first created, defaced. Lastly, the Tendency of all the Facul^, both of Soul
and Body, are toward the Creature. page 229 (...) renounce the Flesh, is to be
renewed in the whole Frame and Constitution of our Nature, after (...) Image of
God. The Image of God must be restored as far as it can in this Corrupt State.
(...) must be renewed to a perfection of Parts, tho not of Degrees. page 230
(...) renounce the Flesh, is to be converted in the whole Bent and Inclination
of the Soul toward God. page 231
LECT. XXI.
^inful Lusts of the Flesh, what. page 232 ^inful Lusts of the Fleshly Mind,
what. 1. When we are curious to know Things which are either ^rtful to be
known, Or not proper for Man to know. page 253 ^hen we do immoderately study to
be exquisitely skilled in whatever Humane Arts and Sciences, the neglect or
contempt of Divine Knowledge. The Knowledge of our Christian Religion, as it
^ves to nobler purposes, so ought it to be preferred to any other. page 234
Necessary Points of Christian Knowledge. 3. When out of Pride, Prejudice, and
Contradiction (...) all sacred Truths, we set up our own carnal Imaginations,
and fleshly Reasonings against those ^iritual Notions, and those Mysterious
Articles of our Faith, which are delivered to us in Scripture. page 235 (...)
Humor of opposing Reason to Revelation proceeds from mere Pride. This corrupt
Will, what ^d how to be renounced. page 236 ^he Affections, what, and how to be
renounced. page 437 As they are misplaced upon wrong Objects. 2. As they are
disproportionate to the Love, Worth, and Evil that is in those Objects, toward
which it is lawful to be well or evilly affected in moderate ^egrees. 3. The
Lusts and Appetites are such sinful Lusts of the Flesh as are to be renounced.
page 238 As they do desire undue Objects, 2. As they desire them in immoderate
Measures. Lastly, the ^feriour and bodily Powers, viz. The Affections, Lusts,
and Appeitites to be renounced, as they ^ebel against right Reason. page 239
Business of Religion us to reduce Man, as near as possible, to his primitive
State of Innocence and Integrity. To this purpose of keeping under our Fleshly
Lusts, it was that our Reason was ^ven us. page 240 To renounce ALL the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh, what. There must be no one Fleshly Lust suffered ^o reign
in us. Our business is particularly to oppose Lusts of Temper and Constitution.
This because it is a hard Doctrine to the Carnal Man, is much evaded. page 241
Objection from Romans 7. cleared. We must renounce the Flesh, and all its sinful
Lusts, so as to have an Aversion, an Antipathy in our hearts thereunto. This
the hard Part. page 242, 243 The reason of having enlarged so much upon this
one Article of renouncing the Devil, etc. page 244
LECT. XXII.
Articles of Christian Faith of what Nature. The whole Bible the Object of a
Christian's Faith, both the Old Testament and the New. page 259 Some Instances
of such Truths. What it is to believe those Truths, so as to make us capable of
Life and Happiness. page 261 Our Belief thereof must be operative and
practical. Such was the Faith of Abraham, and of all the Saints. And such an
operative and practical Principle is Faith, whenever the Things believed are of
great Importance or Concernment to us. page 262, 263 2. To believe savingly, we
must apply our selves to Jesus Christ, to interceed with God the Father for our
gracious Acceptance. What to believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
1. To believe them All does import, that we must assent to all and every one of
those great Articles of Christian Doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed.
page 264 Such as tend to destroy a good Life, and send us to other Mediators
than Christ, to interceed with the Father for its Acceptance, no Articles of
Christian Faith. 2. To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, is to
be fully persuaded of all, and of every of those single Truths contained in
each of those Articles. page 265 A Heretic may be such by believing only of
one of those Truths contained in the Article. page 266
LECT. XXIII.
1. What it is to obey God's Holy Will and Commandments. The Nature and
Measures of Christian Obedience. page 267 1. Our Obedience must be sincere, by
being a true and undissembled Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a
false and feigned pretense of obeying Him, when in truth we serve our own
selves, does not forbid us all intending our own Advantage in the performance
of his Commandments. page 268 But, 1st. that Man's Obedience is insincere, who
together with his Intention of serving God, joins another Intention of serving
Sin. 2dly, When he designs some temporal Ends in the practice of Virtue, as
much, or more, than he intends God's Service. 2. Evangelical Obedience must be
entire, viz. 1st. The Obedience of the whole Man; that is, In the first place,
of the Mind and Understanding. Secondly, of the Will. Thirdly, of the
Affections. page 269, 270 This the distasteful part; And therefore endeavored
to be shifted off. page 271 2dly, It must be an Obedience to the whole Law.
This endeavored to be evaded by Excuses; But in vain. 3dly, What it is to walk
in the same all the Days of our Lives. page 272 God will not endure a constant
Revolution of Sin and Repentance. page 273 The difference between Evangelical
and a Legal Obedience. This difference not so great, but that our wilful and
chosen Sins will put a Bar to our Salvation. page 274 Some Sins are directly
and expressly wilful. Some indirectly and interpretatively. page 275 But the
difference is, 1st. that those who sincerely and entirely obey, shall not be
called to an account for unchosen and involuntary Sins. The first cause of an
innocent Involuntariness, Ignorance of our Duty. Provided it be not wilful. 2d.
Inconsideration. Inconsideration excuses, 1. When through surprise. page 276 2.
When through natural weariness, and the length and strength of a Temptation.
Lastly, When by the violent discomposure of our Thinking Powers, our Minds are
so disturbed, that we cannot think what we do. Ignorance and Inconsideration
excuse not those Sins, 1. Which we have time to understand and observe; nor, 2.
Crying Sins; nor, 3. Those we do not endeavor against; nor, lastly, Which we
are not sorry for. page 277 The 2d. Difference between Legal and Evangelical
Obedience, That our wilful and more heinous Sins when repented of, through the
Mediation of Christ, according to the Terms he has obtained for us in the
Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven us. Remission of Sins upon Repentance, the
great Doctrine of the Gospel. Repentance will be accepted to our pardon, for
our unknown or secret Sins, whether wilfully, or unwillingly committed, but now
forgot, though generally repented of. 2. For our most known and wilful Sins, if
particularly repented of. page 278 And in case of Injury to Man, if Restitution
be made. Of high Dishonor to God and Religion, if that be repaired by an
eminent Repentance. The sum of Evangelical Obedience. page 277 The sum also
thereof, according to Dr. Hammond. page 278
LECT. XXIV.
^t in the Covenant of Grace, we are restored to a state of Salvation. How we
brought our selves unto a state of Misery before. How by the Covenant of Grace
we are put into a state of security, ^f we please. page 280 ^t by the Mediation
of Jesus Christ it was, that we obtained such a gracious Covenant, whereby ^e
are restored to a state of Salvation. page 281 (...) infinite Care of God the
Father to call us into it. page 283 (...) Ever-blessed Son of God no less
intent upon this blessed Work. How mightily he importuned us ^o come into this
state of Salvation. He has left a succession of Ministers behind him to do the
^ike. This matter of Thankfulness, whether we consider, 1. The extraordinary
Advantage of ^aving God in Covenant with us. page 284, 285 (...) 2. Our
singular Happiness therein, above the fallen Angels, or the rest of Mankind.
page 286
LECT. XXV.
^ptism what. 1. An outward Rite of our Savior's own Appointment, for the
solemn Admission of Persons into the Covenant of Grace. page 288 (...) have
some outward Rites and Solemnities in Religion, agreeable to the Frame and
Constitution of Humane Nature, as being most apt to receive Impressions from
sensible Things. This especially requisite in the admission into Religious
Societies and Covenants. The Israelites were initiated both by Circumcision and
Baptism. page 289 ^e Heathens were initiated into their Mysteries by Purgations
or Washings. Our Savior chose the latter, as what would be acceptable to both
Parties. Especially as more significative of Christian Purity. And this he has
enjoined, as indispensibly necessary to our initiation into the Covenant of
Grace. page 290 ^ptism appointed the Rite of Admission into the Covenant of
Grace, for the better Confirmation and Assurance of its Terms, the Promises on
God's part, and the Conditions on ours, it being thus mutually and
interchangeably Sealed to betwixt God and us. page 291 (...) gives great
Assurance of mutual Performances barely to be in Covenant together. page 292
LECT. XXVI.
^he vast Obligations lying upon us, both from the Mercies of God, and our
Baptismal Vow, to perform the Covenant of Grace. The Obligations thereunto,
first, as Members of Christ's Church. page 294 ^he Jews chose from amongst the
Nations of the Earth to serve God. page 295 ^hristians chose both from amongst
Jews and Gentiles, to a more peculiar Holiness. page 296 (...) As Children of
God. Children are bound to the strictest Obedience to their Parents, as owing
to 'em their Being. page 297 ^hildren of God, as owing both Being and
Well-being. page 298 (...) As Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. Kingdom of
Heaven not to be expected, but by those who are faithful in their Covenant.
page 299 (...) As having promised and vowed in our Baptism accordingly, to
discharge our Covenant with God. The matter of a Vow sometimes not a Duty 'till
vowed. page 300 ^ometimes antecedently incumbent upon us, and such is the
matter of our Baptismal Vow. It Is a provoking Sin to rob God of what has been
once Vowed and Devoted to him, tho of the former Nature. Gods Anger observable
upon such occasions. page 301 ^Tis much more provoking to violate Vows; to
perform which, we are antecedently obliged by the Law of Nature. A Vow is much
of the nature of an Oath, and therefore to violate it is Perjury. page 302
FINIS.

