A Circular Letter To the Clergy of Maryland, Subsequent to the late
Visitation.
Reverend Brethren,
I cannot reflect upon the good Order of your Conferences, and the Unanimity in
your Resolves at your late Visitation, without the greatest esteem of, and
Affection toward you. And so happy a beginning gives me good Grounds to hope
the best things from you. The truth of it is, when I sit down and consider the
several particular Methods of Ministerial Instruction, which you did then so
cheerfully come into, I am not able, upon the most mature Deliberation, to
conceive, what can be farther wanting on your Parts, to render the People
committed to your Charge, fully edified in all things necessary to Salvation,
but the putting the measures then Resolved upon, vigorously into Execution,
both as to Catechizing, Preaching, and Private Exhortation and Admonition.

Now the first of your Resolutions refer to Catechizing; a part of your
Ministry so exceedingly necessary in the Church of Christ, especially in an Age
so loose in its Principles, as ours is, that enough can never be said to
inculcate that matter upon you. But I forbear here, having so largely spoken to
it in my Visitation Charge. However there is one consideration of such peculiar
force to your selves in Maryland, that I must needs remind you thereof, to
invigorate you in that Work, though I know the words themselves were so
emphatical, and the occasion of them, must be so fresh in your Minds, that it
will not be easy for you to forget them.

And was it so, that but few Months ago, the whole Province were in that
Consternation, on the account of their Religion, as did far exceed our
Expectation; And did the Patriots of your Country under such Difficulties, and
Discouragements, as I forbear to name, renew its Establishment, and that too
with such an Unanimity, and general Consent, as shows that it is no indifferent
thing to them? And wherefore was it, that notwithstanding all, they would
re-establish our Church, and provide for its Clergy amongst them; Why? For this
end they declare they did this glorious Work! THAT THEIR CHILDREN AND POSTERITY
BEING PRESERVED IN THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH, FROM FACTION AND SCHISM, IN HONESTY
AND CHARITY, MIGHT BECOME GOOD AND SOBER MEN, LOVING VIRTUE, HATING VICE, THE
RATIONAL CONSEQVENCE OF TRUE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. Words surely that deserve to
be written (both for the perpetual Honor of the Province, and for a Memorandum
to you of the Clergy, to what purpose you are continued) IN LETTERS OF GOLD on
PILLARS OF MARBLE. It evidently appears hence, That the Christian Education of
their Youth, is what those Patriots do chiefly expect from you. And surely
then, if for this Reason principally, a Clergy have been there re-established,
so far as lies in their Power: To this work therefore it is, That in a more
especial manner, you are called to exert your Labors, as a most important part
of your Ministry among them. And you are to conclude hence, That you, of all
the Clergy in the King's Dominions, have a more than ordinary Call to apply
your selves particularly thereunto.

And indeed the Catechetical part is Digested by you, so much to my
Satisfaction, that if you shall marshall all the Youth within your respective
Cures into those Three Classes, and shall Catechize them accordingly, I should
then hope very soon to see those in America, as far exceed many amongst us
here, as the Children of the poor Vaudois, which Thuanus speaks of, Lib. 27. do
those in the wealthier parts of the Christian World. And the Religious
Education of Youth, being a part of your Duty of such infinite Consequence, as
well to the planting of Christanity with you, as the Restoration of it here,
now almost expiring amongst us, I conjure you, by all that Love which the Son
of God bore to the Sons of Men, when he descended from Heaven, to teach and
enlighten the ignorant and benighted World; and which Love he particularly
expressed to such tender ones: I conjure you by all this, to ^e^^ those Lambs.
And that there may be no impossibility, incapacity, or any want of means urged
in excuse for any one's omission in that part, I have provided you with such a
quantity of Books, Adapted to those several Degrees of Catechumens, as will
supply all the poorer Children, at leastwise, in your respective Cures; and
will also take care of even those of better Condition, should their Parents be
so Barbarous toward them, as to deny to provide them with necessary Books,
rather than they shall want Catechetical Instruction.

For the First Class, you have. The Church Catechism, together with some of the
most Apposite Texts pertaining to the several Doctrines, and Duties contained
therein, with a Form of Morning and Evening Prayer for Children. Also, a Grace
before and after Meat. And of these I would have you give one to all the poorer
Families, and to Servants Quarters within your respective Cures, where there
are Children, and to recommend it to the welthier Parents to buy for theirs.
And after this, let it be your Care to have the Children frequently called upon
to repeat their Catechism, and to recite their Scriptures, and Prayers. Let
this, I say, be done, either by your selves, when you shall visit those
Families, or by others whom you shall entrust to call them thus to account in
your stead. And as you cannot think of such proper Persons for this purpose, as
the Members of the Religious Society, or superior Class of Catechumens within
your Parishes, whom you will find very servicable to you in this, and many
other good Offices within your Cures: So indeed this part must be done chiefly
by some trusty Deputy, it being equally impossible, either that such small
Children should be brought many Miles to Church to be Catechized, or that you
should be continually visiting them at their Houses for that purpose, for which
more than your whole time would be insufficient in such dilated Cures. And it
may suffice that you do this in Person only, when either a Baptism, or the
Visitation of the Sick, or a Funeral, or any other occasion shall draw you out
into any quarter of your Parish. Where a Competition between the several Duties
of your Pastoral Office is such, that your time will be devoured by any one of
them, to the omission of others equally necessary, if you should give your
selves up wholly to that; there is a necessity, so far to dispense with the
Personal Execution thereof, as to reserve a share for other parts of your
Function, And this I know is too much your Case.

The Second Class of Catechumens you have judiciously appointed to consist of
Children, between Nine and Thirteen: not that you are to tie up your selves so
nicely between such Periods, that a Child either under the one, or beyond the
other is always to be excluded that institution which you judge most proper for
such as are within that Compass: But because it is to be expected, that as well
Christian Children, as those of the Jews, should by that time be able to give
some Account, or Reason of the Faith that is in them. And it is of the greatest
use to fix designs to certain Periods, which will cause such expectations,
that, generally speaking, things will answer within those terms. And as you
have Resolved, with respect to this rank of Catech(...) to have them learn by
Heart Some Exposition with Scripture Proofs; so I have accordingly sent you a
sufficient number of that Kind.

This Book is divided into four parts, and subdivided into Fifty Two Lessons;
one for every Sunday in the Year; in which are explained the peculiar Terms in
Divinity; and in which are given the Elements of Christian Knowledge; both in
the general Doctrine, and particular Articles of the Covenant of Grace. And it
is in this manner, I think, that your Catechism ought to be Expounded to Young
Children. For first, as to the terms in Divinity; Theology, as well as all
other Sciences, has some peculiar Expressions, which till understood, render
any Discourse on Subjects of that Nature utterly unintelligible to either
Hearers or Readers: And therefore the peculiar acceptations of such words, so
often occurring in our Discourses of Religion, must be first explained to the
Youth, as we would have them be ever Edified from the Desk, or from the Pulpit.
And such Expositions ought also to be so contrived, as to give the Catech(...)
a view of the Nature, Terms and Conditions of his Covenant with God. For
Christianity is no other than such a Covenant. And the whole Texture of our
Church Catechism is, according to the Analytical and best Method, both a
general, and particular Instruction in that matter.

The Third Class of Catechumens, you would have to consist of Youth grown up to
some Years. And these you are for treating with in a manner something more
Manly than the very Children of Thirteen. You would not oblige them to get an
Exposition by Heart, but would recommend to them some proper Book to Read, but
yet to Read so attentively, and with such Application of Mind, as to be so much
Masters of its Sense, as in Conference and Discourse with you upon those
Subjects, to be able to give you Reason to conclude they understood what they
have Read. And indeed hereby you will both lead them to exercise their own
Judgments, a thing or singular use to them, and will also treat them in such a
manner (though it be in effect still but Catechizing) as none will think
themselves above.

And it is moreover very judiciously Resolved by you, to advise them more
particularly to Read such a Book, or Books, as shall more fully instruct them
in the Nature, Terms and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace. To understand and
comprehend which thoroughly, is to know the whole Tenor of Christianity, and
which, except it be conceived under such a Scheme, cannot, in my Opinion, be so
rightly and clearly apprehended. Besides, these your Catechetical Conferences
with them are primarily designed to prepare them with proper Knowledge, that if
Adult, and not yet Baptized (of which there are so many in the Plantations)
they may be listed to God in Baptism; or if they have been already Baptized,
that they may ratify their Baptismal Covenant with God in the Lord's Supper.
And therefore some more enlarged Discourse upon the Nature, Terms and
Conditions of their Covenant with God; such as shall farther explain, what
through shortness might be left obscure in the former, must, I humbly conceive,
be the most proper Book, which at first you can recommend to them: And then
other Discourses on Faith, or a good Life, such as you will find in the
Layman's Library, when that former is fully imbibed, may be with greater
advantage proposed afterward. Well, I think it my Duty to furnish here also,
such of your Disciples, at least, as cannot provide themselves; and therefore
give you Commission to take of Mr. Jones at Annopolis, as many of the Short
Discourses upon the Baptismal Covenant, as you shall want for the poorer Youth,
both Children and Servants.

And because that Youth when once they advance toward the State of Manhood,
will soon out grow your Tuition, begin with them first: And, I beseech you,
with all expedition, to form out of such amongst them, as are grown up to years
of Discretion, a Class or Society of Catechumens, whom I would have you to
Instruct and Direct according to the Methods, which you will find I have laid
down at large in the Preface to my Discourse on the Baptismal Covenant, to
which I refer you. I call these your Young Disciples, indifferently a Religious
Society, or a Class of Catechumens. But since too many have such ridiculous
Prejudices (and it is indeed an amazing thing to consider, how far some pitiful
Prejudices do, in many Cases, pervert the Minds of many wise and good Men from
approving, or pursuing the best Designs) I say, since many are prejudiced
against the word Societies, call them, if you please, Catechumens, being the
ancient Term of the Church of Christ, for these your Disciples, and I defy any
then to except against them; for I am sure no good Man can gainsay, or oppose
the Thing. For,

FIRST, It is most indispensibly your Duty to call Young People together, and
to give them proper and suitable Instructions, their Youthful Years being the
very Critical time of engaging them firmly to God; for if left to themselves at
that Age, it is very great odds, but their natural Propensity to Evil, which is
then in the Highth, and the Allurements of bad Company, which are then most
busy, will Enter them, and bind them close in the Service of the Devil, the
World, and the Flesh. And let any of you, as you are the Ministers of Christ,
and will answer it at the dreadful Tribunal, take heed how you let them alone
then to themselves to be the Slaves of Satan.

SECONDLY, It is highly expedient, that you should, for their better Conduct,
put them under some prudential Rules. And I do recommend to you, for that
purpose, those which you will find in the Short View of the Religious Societies
in and about London, herewith sent you, wherein you will see, that those here
in England have formed to themselves such Rules as deserve our highest
Approbation: And, with some little Alterations, agreeable to the Circumstances
of your parts, you may regulate the matter with reference to the Catechetical
Societies (for such the Religious Societies ought all to be) with you in the
Plantations.

THIRDLY, I do assert, That every Parochial Minister ought to be present with
them at their Meetings, to Instruct, and to direct them what they are to Read;
to examine them, in order to know their Improvements, to take care they do not
warp toward Error or Schism, and to prevent Seducers from coming amongst them.

The danger of the two latter, I know is all that those who are the most
prejudiced, have to suggest against them. But whose fault is it, if their
Clergy come not near them, tho it should be so, that they either warp of
themselves, or are seduced by others? (as the contrary is most evident) Nay,
why then, with greater Reason, should not every Parochial Minister be always
present with, and preside at their Religious Conferences. This, My Reverend
Brethren, I do conjure you to do; and as I lay my Heart upon no one thing so
much, as your forming these Catechetical Societies within your respective
Cures, as the only means to train up a better Generation, than the wretched
one, now in being; so having found the extent of your Parishes to be vastly too
large to have all such Youth meet you at one place, whether at the Church, or
elsewhere, I desire you to quarter out your larger Parishes into as many
Districts as you shall find necessary for their convenient Meeting together,
and to appoint so many several Days and Places for em to meet you (every Sunday
in the Afternoon at Church, being always one of your Days and Places;) and
this, if you shall do, though I have seemed in the following Catalogue to provide
only Books for one, or two of those Classes in each of your Parishes, yet you
shall not want the like number of Books for as many Catechetical Societies as
you shall be able to raise. And the Good God, to the terror of Satan, and all
his Adherents, succeed you in these your Labors, and Endeavors.

To Second you in which, I have sent you a Pastoral Letter, persuading Youth
both to an early Entertainment of Religion; and, in order to that, to put
themselves under the Conduct of their respective Ministers. And as I would have
you to give these Letters into the Hands of the most serious Youth in your
Parishes, and such as are likeliest to be influenced by them, in order to form
them into such a Class or Society of Catechumens; so I beseech you to apply to
them to this purpose by these Letters, with all possible Expedition, least that
one of these poor Souls, for want of our securing him to God betimes, be
pre-engaged to the Powers of Darkness.

And because I am absolutely of your Opinion, that could you procure some
skilful Person in the Country, to teach your Catechumens to sing the Psalms
Artificially, as set to the most approved Tunes (and Mr. N. -- S. and Mr. T. --
P. being both skilful in Church-Musick, will soon train you up one, or two
Masters for the purpose) the Entertainments of Psalmody, especially according
to the New Version, would wonderfully invite the Young People both to enter
into a Catechetical Society, and would charm them into a constant attendance on
it. I would therefore have you make it part of your Business at those Meetings
of the Youth, to have them first taught to Sing by Note, and then afterward, I
would have you both open, and close up your Catechetical Conferences with a
Psalm. This is, with St. Paul, to Catch them by Guile; and I am sure will be an
innocent and unsinful pious Fraud. And as for the Psalms themselves, you have a
sufficient Delectus for your purpose to begin with, at the end of the Baptismal
Covenant. And I will take care to send you a more complete Collection
afterward.

And when, upon the whole, you shall hereby have trained up a considerable
number of the Youth of your Parishes, to a very good pitch of Knowledge, and
shall have seasoned them by your Religious Discourses with them, and Pious
Directions given them; so that they become both Knowing and Devoat Christians;
immediately upon that, I beseech you, according to your last Resolution upon
this Head, to appoint your Monthly Sacraments, and to make it your special Care
to have all the Catechumens of the Superior Class, constant Communicants.
Hereby your Youth will be happily pre-engaged in the Service of God. And from
them, you will be always sure to have Guests at the Lords Table. And if you can
instruct and prepare some of the poorer Negroes so far, as that they may join
in Communion with you at the Supper of the Lord (as our Brother Mr. Colbatch
has so worthily done) methinks the Diversity of Complections will add a Beauty
to the Spiritual Entertainment: And it may rejoice our very Hearts to behold
Minds so enlightened, in Bodies so Dark.

The remaining part of your Visitation Acts relate to Preaching, to private
Application, and to such Methods of Discipline, as are most necessary to be
maintained among your selves.

And I shall, at my first Leisure, reflect likewise upon those Parts
successively, in the same manner as here. I say, in the same manner as here;
for I shall not offer to lay heavy Burdens upon you, and not touch them with
one of My Fingers, but as with Relation to the Catechizing of all the degrees
of Youth, Care shall be taken to furnish you with Catechisms and Expositions
for them; so with reference to the two remaining Parts, I shall industriously
endeavor to provide you with such necessary helps, as I can possibly contrive,
that so there may be no want of means to any of you to Execute the most
difficult of all your Resolutions, and nothing to urge in Excuse as to the
impracticableness of any one of those Particulars, you have so well, so much
becoming your Function Resolved upon; For this you may assure your selves,
that I am, as,

Reverend Sirs, Your most Affectionate Brother, so your Faithful
Fellow Laborer, Thomas Bray.

Cursus Catecheticus AMERICANUS.
Consisting of Books more particularly fitted for the Use of the Three several
Classes of Catechumens, in order to season the growing Generation with the
Principles of Piety and Virtue: Pursuant to the Resolutions made to that
purpose the Second Day of the Visitation in Maryland, May the 4th. 1700.
I. For the First Class of Catech(...) consisting of Children under the Age of
Nine.

THE Church Catechism: Together with some of the most Apposite Texts pertaining
to the several Doctrines and Duties contained therein; with a Form of Morning
and Evening Prayer for Children. As also, a Grace before and after Meat. -- 20

These to be given to so many as will make a Class.

II. For the Second Class of Catech(...)

An Exposition of the Church Catechism, with Scripture-Proofs fitted for the
second Class of Catechumens in the Plantations: Divided into four Parts; and
subdivided into 52 Lessons, one for every Sunday in the Year, in which are
explained the peculiar Terms in Divinity: And in which are given the Elements
of Christian Knowledge, both in the General Doctrine, and Particular Articles
of the Covenant of Grace. -- 20

These to be lent to so many as will make a Class.

III. For the Third Class, or the Society of Catechumens to be fitted for the
Blessed Sacrament, either of Baptism, if Adult, or the Lord's Supper, if
formerly Baptized.

Preparative to the forming, and engaging of which Catechetical Society,

A Pastoral Letter from a Minister, addressed to the Young Persons of his
Parish, showing them the Necessity and Advantage of an early Religion; in order
to persuade the Youth of each Parish in the Plantations to enter themselves
into a Religious Society of Catechumens, under the Conduct of their respective
Ministers. -- 20.

These to be put into the hands of the most serious Youth in a Parish, in order
to form them into such a Class, or Society of Catechumens.

And to which is added the better to engage them to meet at such Catechetical
Conferences,

An Introduction of the New Version of Psalms into General Use both in
Families, and Churches; being a sufficient Collection of such, as are proper to
be sung in either. Set to the most approved Tunes which are in use. -- 20

These to be sung both at the beginning and end of the Conference.

And then for the proper Instruction of these Persons,

A Short Discourse in the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, proper to be read
by all Young Persons, in order to their understanding the whole Frame and
Tenor of the Christian Religion; and to their being duly prepared for
Confirmation, with Devotions preparatory to that Apostolic and Useful
Ordinance. -- 20 Common Prayers. -- 20

These to be lent to the superior Class of Catechumens, during the time they
shall attend upon their Catechetical Conferences, That they may be then
thoroughly directed by the Ministers respectively, in the Use of the Common
Prayer, pursuant so what has been proposed in that Matter, in the Preface to
the Discourse en the Baptismal Covenant.

FINIS.

