PROPOSALS For the Encouragement and Promoting of Religion and Learning in the
Foreign Plantations; and to induce such of the Clergy of this Kingdom, as are
Persons of Sobriety and Abilities, to accept of a Mission into those Parts.
WHEREAS the Propagation of the Christian Faith, and the Increase of Divine
Knowledge, amongst all sorts of Persons in His Majesty's Foreign Plantations,
are the Wishes, Desires, and Prayers, of all Pious and Serious Christians, and
such as are zealous of God's Glory, and the Salvation of Men's Souls. AND
WHEREAS that Blessed Work, next under God, does principally depend upon the
Abilities of the Clergy of those Parts, the Exemplariness of their Lives, and
their Industry in Teaching others; WHEREAS ALSO the Clergy, that are already in
the Plantations, as well as those who are to be sent thither, cannot (Humanly
speaking) be so capable of Informing themselves, and of Instructing others in
the Design of Christianity, in the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, in the
Meaning and Importance of the Articles of Our most Holy Faith, and in the
Nature and Extent of all Christian Duties, without the Assistance of some good
Commentators upon the Holy Scriptures; and one, at least, or more of those
Authors, who have best treated upon each, and every of those Points; WHEREAS
ALSO for the Supply of that Want, Men of Parts, and addicted to Study, will
hardly be induced to leave the Expectations they may have of better
Encouragement and Improvement in their Native Country, to go to remote Parts
and Climates less agreeable, without such Advantages, as will over-balance all
Considerations inclining them to stay at home; and, especially, not without a
competent Provision of such Books as are necessary for their Studies in those
Places where they are to serve (few of them that go over from hence being able
to furnish themselves with so many Books as they shall need) AND, LASTLY,
WHEREAS Insufficiency and Scandal in the Clergy of those Places, in all
probability, would be most successfully prevented, both in this and future
Ages, should every Parochial Minister in the Plantations have a sufficient
Library of well-chosen Books, of all those kinds beforementioned, in which he
might spend his Time to his own Satisfaction, and with Improvement and Profit
to himself and others.

TO PROMOTE THEREFORE so Blessed and Noble an End, as the Propagation of
Christian Knowledge in those Parts; and as well to encourage those who are
there already employed in the Ministry, as also to envite other able Ministers
over, and to furnish both with proper Means for accomplishing so good a Work;
IT IS HUMBLY offered to all that are hearty Well-wishers to the Souls of Men,
and the Honor of their Savior, to consider, and, as they shall see cause, to
favor these Proposals following:

1. THAT a Catalogue being made of what particular Books shall be judged most
immediately and necessarily Useful for a Parochial Minister, wherewith he may
be sufficiently enabled both to Inform himself, and to Instruct others, in all
the Necessary and Essential Parts of Christianity; So many of such Libraries be
sent by the Lord Bishop of London, by the hands of such as his Lordship shall
Commission for that purpose, to be Appropriated and Affixed, one to each Parish
in the Foreign Plantations, particularly those of Maryland and Virginia, and
farther as the Fund to be raised shall enable. 2. THAT every Parochial Library
shall be affixed in a decent and large Room of the Parsonage-House of
such-Parish, there to remain to the sole Use of the Minister thereof for the
time being, unto all future Generations, and to be as UNALIENABLE as any other
the Rights add Dues of the Church, which are Ascertained by Law. 3. THAT in
order to the Preservation of every such Library to succeeding Ages without
Loss, as far as can be Humanly provided in any thing of that kind, there be
made an exact Catalogue of the Books belonging to the Library of each Parish;
and that every such Catalogue be fairly written in Four Books of Vellum
provided for that purpose: The First whereof to be left with the Lord Bishop of
London for the time being; a Second with his Commissary, or some Chief
Clergyman in every of those Plantations where such Libraries are provided; and
a Third to remain in the respective Libraries themselves; and a Fourth to be
deposited in the Vestry of each of the said Parishes. 4. THAT the COMMISSARY be
obliged, at least once in Three Years, Personally to make a Parochial
Visitation; And then, besides the Charge of his Duty in other respects, that it
be incumbent also upon him, particularly to Inspect the Parochial Libraries,
and to see that none of the Books be Imbezell'd or Lost: And that the
Churchwardens of each Parish be also obliged, every Year, before the
Visitation, to inform themselves in what Condition the said Books are, and to
Present accordingly at the Visitation. 5. THAT for farther Security to preserve
them from Loss and Imbezelment, and that they may be known wherever they are
found, in every Book, on the one side of the Cover, shall be Lettered these
Words: SUB. AUSPICIIS WILLIELMI III.: on the other side the Name of the Parish
to which these Books do belong: EX. GR. E. BIBLIOTHECA DE MARYTOWN: E.
BIBLIOTHECA DE JAMES-TOWN, etc. 6. THAT the Minister of each Parish, his Heirs
and Administrators, may be obliged, by Virtue of an Act of Assembly provided
and made for that purpose, to make good what Books shall be Imbezelled or Lost
by his Fault.
MEANS of Obtaining such Parochial Libraries.
1. THat Application be made to the Nobility, Clergy, and Gentry, for their
Charitable Contributions to so Pious a Work; and especially that the Merchants
and Traders to the Foreign Plantations be earnestly called upon, as Persons
principally concerned, to encourage this Design: It being most reasonable to
expect, that in Gratitude to God, and the Inhabitants of those Plantations, the
more plentifully they have reaped of their Temporal Things, the more liberally
they should sow to them in Spiritual Things.

2. That Application be also made to such Learned Authors as are now living,
that they would bestow some of their own Books, which shall be judged useful to
the Purposes aforesaid.

3. That, for the General Satisfaction of those who have advanced either in
Books or Money to so Pious a Design, a full Account shall be published what
Books have been given, what Sums have been obtained, and how the same have
been laid out to the designed Ends.

Lastly, In Gratitude to the Benefactors toward this Pious Design, all those,
whether they be Public Societies, Companies, or Private Persons, who shall
Contribute any thing thereunto, shall have their Names and respective Sums;
And the Authors shall have the Number of Books given by 'em, transmitted to
Posterity, by being Registered in a Book kept for that purpose in each of the
Libraries.

We look upon this Design, as what will very much tend to Propagate Christian
Knowledge in the Indies, being it will, in all likelihood, invite some of the
more Studious and Virtuous Persons out of the Universities, to undertake the
Ministry in those Parts, and will be a means of rendering 'em useful when they
are there: And therefore as we shall contribute cheerfully toward Promoting of
these Parochial Libraries, so we hope that many Pious Persons will be found,
who, out of Love to Religion and Learning, will also contribute thereunto.

Tho. Cantuar. Jo. Ebor. H. Land. W. Cov. and Litch. Ed. Worcester. J. Norwich.


THE PRESENT STATE OF THE The Protestant Religion IN MARYLAND.
IN the Year 1691. His Majesty having graciously thought fit to take the
Government of MARYLAND into his own hands, and the Province into his Immediate
Care; in May, 1692. an Act of Assembly passed for the Establishment of the
Protestant Religion there, and for dividing of the TEN COUNTIES thereof into
Five and twenty Parishes, each of which, are endowed with a competent
Maintenance for a Minister. But the Execution of that Act has been in a manner
wholly neglected, 'till it pleased His MAJESTY to confer the Government on the
most Worthy and Excellent Person, FRANCIS NICHOLSON Esquire who since his Arrival
in Aug. 1694. with an indefatigable Industry and Zeal to promote His MAJESTY's
Honor, the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and the Good of the whole
Province, has Revived and Reinforced the said Act, by another Additional one,
for the Increase and Maintenance of Religion; has Collected the Arrears, and
is now Building several Churches, besides one Fine Church at ANNOPOLIS in
ARVNDEL County, with a Parsonage House to every Church: Toward all which, His
EXCELLENCY, the Council, and other inhabitants of the Province, have generously
and largely Contributed.

And that a perpetual Succession of Protestant Divines of the CHURCH OF
ENGLAND, may be provided for the Propagation of the True Christian Religion in
the said Colony, His EXCELLENCY has, by the Consent of the Council and
Burgesses in Assembly, promoted a Law, vesting a Power in certain Trustees for
Erecting one Free School in each County; one of which is already begun at
ANNOPOLIS, and is to be Endowed with 100 l. Sterling per Annum, for the
Maintenance of one Master and two Ushers, for Instructing the Youth of the said
Province in ARITHMETIC, NAVIGATION, and all USEFUL LEARNING; but chiefly for
the Fitting such as are disposed to Study DIVINITY, to be further Educated at
His MAJESTY's COLLEGE ROYAL in VIRGINIA, in order, upon their Return, to be
Ordained by the Lord Bishop of LONDON's SUFFRAGAN Residing in the Province,
both for that purpose, and to supervise the Lives of the Clergy thereof; for
whose Support also, at the Request and Recommendation of the Assembly, His
EXCELLENCY has settled a fair and competent Maintenance.

The Person now Deputed by the Lord Bishop of LONDON, to be his COMMISSARY in
MARYLAND, for the Propagation of Our most Holy Religion amongst the Infidels,
for the Inducement of Sober and Serious Young Divines to go to the Foreign
Plantations, and for the better Qualifying them for so Noble and Christian an
Employment, is now wholly busied in Collecting of PAROCHIAL LIBRARIES of Choice
and Useful Books, for the perpetual Use of such of the Clergy, who shall now
undertake that Voyage, and for all those who shall succeed them. AND certainly
a more suitable Encouragement to Men of good Parts, and Inclinations to go upon
so Blessed a Mission, could not be thought of: For as it is Books alone which
will encourage the most Studious, Virtuous, and consequently the most Useful
Persons to go over; so it is an Encouragement that is in a manner necessary to
be provided in the Foreign Plantations; since few or none at their first going
over, are in a Condition to provide themselves therewith; and when they are
there, Books are hardly to be met with, by those who shall be able to buy them.
And yet without a competent Provision of several Useful and Necessary Books, it
is morally impossible that any should be enabled to instruct their People.

And now that such Excellent Works are jointly begun, and carrying on, What a
happy Conjuncture is this (which perhaps may not again recur) for Persons who
are Piously disposed, to give their helping hand toward such Blessed and
Glorious Designs, as the Propagating of True Christian Knowledge and Practice,
in Places formerly so much Uncultivated therewith. Surely if he who Converteth
a single Sinner from the Error of his Ways, shall hide a multitude of Sins,
what abundant Matter for comfortable Reflections upon a Deathbed, shall that
Person lay up, who shall contribute toward providing of the most proper and
genuine Means, next to the Divinely Inspired Writings, of Converting many poor
Souls, not only in this, but in all future Generations, even so long as the Sun
and Moon endures.

Benedicat Deus Operi and Faventibus.
FINIS.

