AN ESSAY Toward Promoting all Necessary and Useful Knowledge, BOTH Divine and
Human. In all the PARTS of His MAJESTY 's Dominions, Both at Home and Abroad.

By THOMAS BRAY, D.D.

(...).
(...)
(...).
Clemens Alex. Admonit. ad Gentes. LONDON, Printed by E. Holt for Robert
Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCVII.

TO THE READER.
KNowledge is the fairest Ornament of the Soul of Man; and whosoever is Endowed
therewith, let it be of any kind, which is not mischievous, fails not of Esteem
amongst all sorts of Persons. This is certain, that Knowledge does more
distinguish the Possessors of it, than Titles, Riches, or great Places: For tho
'these Men may command the Cap and the Knee, and extort some outward kind of
Reverence from Inferiors; yet the Man of Understanding is he, who is inwardly
and truly respected, whilst the Gaudy, but Empty Beau, is no other than the
Scorn and Derision of all who Converse with him. But especially a Man is then
Esteemed for his Knowledge, if his Understanding is Eminent in things laudable,
and of great Weight and Moment, for whatever is greatly useful is highly
valuable.

And such is the Knowledge, which I am endeavoring to provide for, by the
following Proposals.

For why? as to the Theological part; In the first place, this is a Knowledge
Conversant about the greatest Objects, God, and our selves; Secondly, and that
about the Grandest and most Concerning Truths relating to those Objects.
Thirdly, It is a Knowledge to which the most considerable of other Sciences are
some way or other appendant and subservient. Fourthly, It is a Knowledge
founded upon more certain Principles than all other Sciences whatsoever (scarce
the Mathematics excepted) All which speak the Noble Nature of Divine
Knowledge. And Lastly, It is the only Knowledge which can conduct us safe
through the Mazes and Labyrinths of this World, to our Rest and Happiness in
the other; which does eminently show the Usefulness of it.

Nor will the other parts of Knowledge I propose to promote by the following
kind of Libraries, be Vnusesul. From History we can take a noble view of all
Mankind; and by our Observations from thence of the different Fates of Men, and
their Causes, we may form to our selves most excellent Rules for the Conduct of
Humane Life. Travels discover the Commodities of Foreign Countries, to the
great Enriching of our own; and not only Merchants, but all other Persons
besides, by reading the Accounts of so many Nations of Men in the World, sunk
down to the lowness of Brutes for want of Knowledge, may see Infinite Reason to
bless that God, who by an admirable Religion enlightening our Minds, has raised
us above the Animal Life; and so vastly distinguishes us from the Barbarous
part of Mankind. What shall I say? By Knowledge in Humanity or Morality, men
become, as it were, (...), disposed for the Reception of that Faith which will
save 'em, and those Divine Graces, which will render 'em capable of Eternal
Life. By an Insight into Nature, Gardening, Agriculture, etc. All sorts of
Persons will learn how to meliorate their Condition and manner of Living whilst
here on Earth. And if there may be added hereafter to our Libraries, the Best
Authors in Mathematics, Physic and Law, there will be no means wanting even
in the most Vncultivated parts of this Kingdom, to render the Thinking,
Reading, and the best part of the Inhabitants thereof both Intellectually,
Morally and Civilly, as well as Divinely Happy: For which Reasons I hope,
though this Design seems more immediately directed to the Service of the
Clergy, yet Gentlemen, Physicians and Lawyers will perceive they are not
neglected in it, and will see themselves concerned to promote it.

And indeed those Persons of Quality, whose Eldest Sons being commonly brought
up to no Employment, have a great deal of Time lying upon their Hands, seem to
me to be as nearly concerned as any, to favor it. For many of these young
Gentlemen, when removed from the Universities, those Fountains of useful and
substantial Knowledge, and residing all their Lifetime in Countries, where
they can meet with no Books to employ themselves in reading, and whereby they
may be able to improve the Talent they have there gained; they do thereupon too
commonly become not so conspicuous for their Excellent Knowledge, and Morals,
as will be ever expected from Men of Rank and Station in their Country. And
when they happen into one another's Company, for want of Good Sense, are forced
too often to fill up their Discourse, and maintain a Conversation, in the
Porterly Language of Swearing, and Obscenity.

In short, I think all Persons of a liberal and ingenuous Education, are so
much concerned in a Design of this Nature, that I cannot but flatter my self
with the Expectations of some sort of Success in the Undertaking. But however I
hope I have offered at nothing which all candid Persons will not own to be
honestly designed, and which Scholars of all Professions will not at leastwise
wish well to, though for want of men of a public and active Spirit to manage
it in their respective Towns or Deanaries, little or nothing should be
accomplished in it.

PROPOSALS TO THE Gentry and Clergy of this Kingdom, For Purchasing Lending
Libraries in all the Deanaries of England, and Parochial Libraries for
Maryland, Virginia, and other of the Foreign Plantations, pursuant to what is
spoke of Both, in the Prefatory Epistle to the Bibliotheca Parochialis.
Honored SIRS,
AMongst the many Laudable Contrivances for promoting Religion and Learning in
the World, in which several Persons of a Public Spirit have labored more or
less in all Ages, there-seem none to me would be of greater Advantages to
either, would tend more to cultivate the Minds of our young Gentry, and can be
more adapted to the present Circumstances of our Parochial Clergy (one third of
whom I am afraid are not enabled by their Preferments to purchase a fourth part
of those Books, which it is absolutely necessary every Pastor should peruse;
and yet from whom great measures of Knowledge are expected in this inquisitive
Age) than if we could have Lending Libraries disposed, one in every Deanary
throughout the Kingdom, for the Service of those who have occasion to borrow. I
shall not here repeat what I have already spoken of the Benefit thereof, both
to Clergy and Laity, in the Prefatory Epistle to my Bibliotheca Parochialis:
But having,

First, Computed the Charge of each Library;

Secondly, I will show by what means they may be purchased:

Thirdly, How they may be preserved: And,

First, As to the Charge, I presume, if the Foundation of a Library were once
laid in each Deanary, the Stock by one means or other would soon increase to a
complete Set of all necessary Books: And that well-chosen Books to the value
of 30 l. would lay a good Foundation.

Secondly, I am next to show by what Methods they may be purchased; and the
most easy and likely Method I can propose, will be by Subscriptions raised
amongst both Clergy and Gentry; each Clergyman subscribing at the Visitation
some small matter proportionuble to the Value of his Living, or Circumstances
in the World; the Gentry, what in their Generosity they shall think fit. And
the Subscriptions of both to be taken, and returned to London; and the
Libraries transmitted into the Country in the Method following.

1. That one Third of the Subscription-Mony, viz. 10 l. be subscribed, and paid
at the next Easter-Visitation, to the Rural Dean, or whom the Clergy of the
Deanary shall agree upon, and returned up to the Treasurers of the
Subscriptions, Mr. Francis Evans, Secretary to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, or Mr. Thomas Tailor at the Lord Almoner's Lodgings in White Hall.

2. That within a Month after, the following Books to the value of Thirty
Pound, be sent down into the subscribing Deanaries to such Places as from the
Visitation shall be directed. And that they be made up in such Boxes, or
Book-Presses, with Shelves in them, and Locks and Doors to 'em, as will serve
both to preserve 'em in the Carriage down, and in the Place where they shall be
deposited for the Public Benefit. And being kept in such moveable
Repositories, they can at any time be removed to any other part of the Deanary,
as by the Vote of the Clergy at a Visitation shall be judged most convenient to
have 'em lodged in; and that without the Charge of building any Room wherein to
lay 'em up.

3. That to make up the remaining two Thirds for the Purchase of the Books,
each of the Clergy do in their respective Parishes' and amongst the Gentry of
their Acquaintance, solicit some small Subscription toward this Public
Design, by which such Subscribers, whether Gentlemen, or Ladies, will be
entitled to the Privilege of borrowing at any time a Book for their own
Reading; and that there may be proper and acceptable Books for them, there are
some of the most valuable pieces of History, Geography, and Travels, provided
in the following Set.

4. That what is Subscribed by the Gentry, be brought in to to the next
Michaelmas Visitation, and entered down in a Book, together with the
Subscriptions of the Clergy, to be kept in every Library: And if there be
something wanting to make up the remaining Twenty Pounds, it be made up by the
Clergy, if there be any over, it be applied toward paying for the Book-Presses
and Carriage down, and the Surplusage be laid up in Bank against next Eoster
Visitation after this, toward purchasing another like quantity of Books, in
order to complete a useful and sufficient Library in the respective Deanary.

5. That the Books shall be afforded to the Subscribers, something below the
Prices at which the Clergy, or Gentry usually buy 'em by Retail in the
Booksellers Shops.

6. That what Gratis-Books will be obtained of the Bookseller, in consideration
of so many bought of 'em toward these Lending Libraries; that these be set
apart toward making up Parochial Libraries for for the Foreign Plantations.
And it is found, that one Library in ten at least, will be obtained by this
means toward the Public Design; to which all Christians, methinks, should
readily contribute; such as are most able, by immediate Benefactions; and every
one that is not unable in such a way as this, in which they have a valuable
consideration to themselves for what they do toward carrying on that necessary
Work; for so I shall be bold to call it, if it were but to ward off the
Reproach under which we justly lie, even to this day; that whilst our
Adversaries the Papists, are at vast Charges every Year, in promoting their
false Superstition in the remotest parts of the World, there are but too few
amongst us, pudet haec Opprobria dici, and dici potuisse, who have yet showed
that Value for their Religion, and the Honor of God, as to contribute in any
considerable way to advance the Glory of their Savior, by propagating the best
Religion in the whole World, either here at home, or amongst their Countrymen
abroad.

There is but one Objection I can foresee against this Method of procuring
these Lending Libraries, and that is the excessive scarcity of Money,
especially amongst the Clergy at this time, when they are exhausted more than
others by Public Payments.

But indeed, the very Objection it self seems to me to be the most forcible
Reason for putting a Design of this Nature on foot, and that especially at this
time. For is it so, that one third of the English Clergy, are not now in a
Condition to buy a sufficient quantity of Books? Well, but on the other side, I
hope it will be granted, that Books must be had, or else Religion must even
fall to the ground. And if so, putting both together, I think it will follow,
that since very few are capable to furnish their Studies at their own proper
Cost, it is therefore necessary that all should join their Forces; and what is
impossible for 'em singly, would be easy for 'em jointly; for Multorum manibus
grande Levatur Onus; so that indeed this is really the most proper Season to
set such a Design on foot.

But then if we consider to what a high Perfection, most, if not all parts of
useful Learning have advanced in this last Age, so that we may rather fear a
declension thereof (as is usual with every thing when it comes to its full
growth) than hope for much farther Improvements therein: But above all, if we
consider the impious Principles which have begun to advance against us, and
have gained so much ground upon us by the Industry of some, who at great Charge
and Expense, do labor to poison both Town and Country with their Atheistical
and Socinian Notions; These things, I say, if duly considered, will convince
us, that this seems to be the very time pointed out by the Divine Providence
for us to provide ourselves of Magazines, out of which we may be sufficiently
furnished with that Panoply of excellent Learning and Knowledge, whereby we
shall secure our selves and others, against the fiery Darts of the Devil; and
may be enabled at leastwise to stand our ground, whilst Atheists, Deists and
Socinians, do so earnestly contend against the Faith. So much, upon many great
Accounts, it seems to me to be a most proper Season now to begin the Foundation
of Lending Libraries throughout the Kingdom.

And whereas many of our Reverend Clergy have Noble Libraries of their own, so
as not to need themselves a Supply of this Nature, I am not to doubt their
Subscribing notwithstanding, since the Design of these Libraries is not to
serve a Man's private, but the public Interest of Religion and Learning; which
such Reverend and Learned Persons do well know (none better) that every one is
bound to provide for, more than his own, especially those whose Condition and
Circumstances in the World shall best enable 'em for good Works.

I am not indeed so sanguine as to hope or expect, that notwithstanding the
Charge in the foregoing Method is made so easy, that a Clergyman of Two
hundred Pounds per Annum, need not subscribe at a Visitation above Ten or
Fifteen Shillings, of One hundred Pound above Five or Ten Shillings, and of
Fifty Pounds above half a Crown or Five Shillings; notwithstanding this, I am
not, I say, so unacquainted with the Temper of the World, as to expect that an
Affair of this Nature should not meet with Exceptions from some. And I also
know the Prince of Darkness (the strength of whose Kingdom does lie in the
Ignorance of Mankind) has too much Interest at stake, to let a Design, which
does so directly tend to the Ruin of his Dominion over the Souls of Men, go on
without Obstruction. But however the Management of this Affair falling into the
hands of such as do so well understand the Use and Benefit of Books, and who
are withal so sensible of the peculiar need of 'em at this time, I hope there
will be a sufficient number found in most Deanaries of well-disposed and
publick-spirited Persons, both amongst the Clergy and Gentry, who will carry it
on in their respective Districts: And even those, who may be backward at first,
may come in afterward, when they shall better consider the Tendency which
these Libraries will have to the Glory of God, and to increase the Usefulness
and Esteem of the Clergy: So that though some should happen at first to refuse
subscribing, it will not I hope discourage others from promoting the Design, so
far as to make up at next Visitation the first Ten Pounds amongst themselves
toward laying the Foundation.

Thirdly, And now I am to show how the Lending Libraries particularly, may be
preserved.

How the Parochial may be secured from Loss or Imbezelment, is, I hope
satisfactorily showed in the Prefatory Epistle to the Bibliotheca Parochialis:
But it being designed that these Lending Libraries should travel abroad, it may
seem that the Books will be in danger to be soon lost by passing through so
many hands: However, in order to their being fully secured, it may be provided
by these following Methods; 1. That they be marked upon the Covers to what
Deanary they belong. 2. That they be locked up in Book-Presses made on purpose
to keep them in. 3. That they be deposited with the Rural Dean, or with the
Minister or Schoolmaster in some Market Town, if near the Center of the
Deanary, that so they may with very little trouble be sent for any Market Day,
and as easily returned within a limited time: And it may be presumed, that any
Minister or Schoolmaster, for the use of such a Library under his Key, will be
willing to undertake the trouble to lend out the Books, and receive them in
upon occasion. 4. That the Limitation of Time for keeping a borrowed Book be
determined by the Reverend Subscribers at the Visitation, as a Month for a
Folio, a Fortnight for a 4 o. and a Week for an 8 o which will have this good
Effect, that a Book will be read over with speed and care; which if one's own,
might lie in a Study without being quickly or very carefully perused, upon
presumption that being one's own it may at any time be read; and therefore this
by the way may be considered as one Advantage of Lending Libraries. 5. That the
Borrower having sent a Note desiring any Book, his Note be filed up, and his
Name entered in a Book kept in the Library for that purpose, what Year, Month
and Day he borrowed such a Book; and upon the Return of the Book, the Note be
also returned, and the Name of the Borrower crossed out. 6. That a Register of
the Books belonging to every Deanary, be given to the respective Bishops, and
Archdeacons. 7. That each Library may be visited once a Year by the
Archdeacon in Person, or by three of his Clergy deputed by him to see that the
Books be not imbezeled or lost. And by these means I believe they will be very
well preserved; for why? Their being Lettered to what Deanary they belong, will
prevent their being transferred into any Man's private keeping; or if they are,
they will be as readily discovered and owned, as any living Creature by its
Ear-Mark; and the Arch-Deacon's Visitation will call 'em all in once a year:
And indeed so far am I from fearing that these Libraries will suffer any
Diminution by loss of Books, that I believe they will daily increase; for the
thing being once put on foot, the Clergy at every Visitation will be apt to
continue some small Subscriptions to buy in the new pieces as they shall come
forth; especially such as shall tend considerably to the improvement of any
part of Christian Knowledge. And moreover, the Foundation being once laid, many
Learned Persons amongst the Clergy, and others who have a Zeal for the Churches
Good, will be likely to leave at their Death, their own Libraries, as additions
to these Lending Libraries proposed, and perhaps Legacies to buy Books: Not to
say that the thing being once begun, I could easily propose, how the whole
Course of History and Humanity may be added; and that farther means may be
found out in time, to provide all the Smaller Livings throughout the Kingdom,
with such Lesser Parochial Libraries as are designed for the Plantations.

But to proceed, if now and then a Book should be lost, this ought no more to
discourage our Design, than it should have hindered our Forefathers from
building of Parsonage-Houses for us, because sometimes they fall to decay; or
from giving Tithes and Glebe for the Maintenance of the Clergy, because these
do suffer daily diminutions by Modus's growing upon us through the importunity
of some, and the more Violent Sacrilegious Invasions of the Churches Rights by
others. Not to say, That there may be Provision made by Law to secure these
Libraries, and to repair their Loss, as well as the other Dilapidations of the
Church.

And indeed, if it could be brought about by any means, that we might have 400
Lending Libraries fixed throuhout the Kingdom, and the Clergy, by a small
Subscription in every Deanary, should continue to add the valuable new Books
that shall come out hereafter; Here would be a sufficient Encouragement
provided for the Learned Men of our Universities, to undertake the giving us
some more such Editions of the Fathers, and other Ancient Writers, as that of
St. Cyprian, Thucydides, etc. A certain Sale of 400 Books, being enough to
discharge an Impression; which one thing, as it has in this Age so much
contributed to the Learning and Honor of a Neighboring Nation, where, upon
the Encouragement of the Monasteries taking off each of 'em, one of every New
Editition of a Father, or other Book of Value, the Learned of that Kingdom have
been thereby encouraged, and enabled to give the World such Editions as they
may justy glory in; so it would make exceedingly for the Honor of our
Universities, and not a little for the Interest of our Nation: For as to the
former. it would raise a Noble Spirit of Emulation in those Learned Societies,
and would excite more of the Members thereof, to Exert themselves in being
serviceable to the World in this kind; who now for want of Encouagement, cannot
spend their time so much to their own, and the Public Good in this way, as
otherwise they might. And as to the latter, whereas some Thousand Pounds worth
of Valuable Books, Printed in Foreign parts, have been Imported Yearly, we by
reason of the better Editions of the Ancient Writers, which our more Learned
Men are able to give the World, might be able to employ our own Paper-Makers,
Stationers, Printers, Book-Binders, Booksellers here at home, to the
maintaining many Thousand Persons amongst us, and might export so much of our
own, and Foreign Paper Manufactured by our selves, as would turn the Balance of
that part of Trade considerably on our own side.

And now I am to entreat the Candor of my Reverend Brethren, that, however I
may be mistaken in the Practicableness of this Design, they would believe I
sincerely intend the Good of Souls, and the Honor of my Function, and of my
Nation too, in all that is here proposed. That I am so pressing for both
Parochial Libraries in the Plantations, and Lending Libraries in England, is,
because in the former, I know no good a Clergy, who are not able to furnish
themselves with Books in going over, can do in a Country where none are to be
bought when they are there, nor to be had from the Merchants, but at excessive
Rates. And in the latter, I am certain that Good cannot be done, which is
expected from every Minister here in England, when the Third Part of our
Parochial Clergy are not enabled by their Preferments, to buy the fourth part
of those Books, which are necessary to enable 'em fully to instruct the People
in the mere Necessaries to Salvation. And as for our younger Gentry, I cannot
think but it would tend extremely to furnish their Minds also with that useful
Knowledge in History, Travels, Humanity, Agriculture, and all such Noble Arts
and Sciences, as will render 'em serviceable to their Families and Countries,
and will make 'em considerable both at home and abroad: And that it will very
much keep 'em from idle Conversation, and the Debaucheries attending it, to
have choice Collections of such Books dispersed through all the Kingdom, and
waiting upon 'em in their own Parlors, as will ennoble their Minds with
Principles of Virtue and true Honor, and will file off that Roughness, Ferity
and Barbarity, which are the never failing Fruits of Ignorance and
Illiterature. Standing Libraries will signify little in the Country, where
Persons must ride some miles to look into a Book; such Journeys being too
expensive of Time and Money: But Lending Libraries, which come home to 'em
without Charge, may tolerably well supply the Vacancies in their own Studies,
till such time as these Lending may be improved into Parochial Libraries.

And whereas it may be objected, that the Books will be so often Borrowed, that
it will be hard for any one to have the Book he wants. I am so far from being
much concerned to answer it, that I heartily wish the great Use and frequent
Borrowing of Books out of these Libraries, may make it a real Objection. But to
reply as far as necessary; the Limitations mentioned above, will fetch home any
Book a Person shall want, within a Month at farthest; and indeed there being
several Authors specified in such a Library, as I design, upon most of the
Subjects, if one be not to be had, Satisfaction may be fought in the mean time
from another. And, in the whole, I am the more forward to hope for great
Advantages from these Lending Libraries especially, having had some Experience
of the Benefit thereof in a Country, where one such Library left by a Pious and
Learned Divine at his Death, has done much to improve many of the Parochial
Clergy within some Miles, (who constantly borrow out of it,) to that degree, as
to make 'em as useful Men in their Station, as any I have had the Happiness to
be acquainted with.

In short, as mere Zeal for Public Service has excited me to leave no Stone
unturned, to procure Parochial Libraries for the Plantations, in which I thank
God I have had hitherto no mean Success; so if with the same Labor I can be
serviceable in the like Design to my dearest Mother the Church, and my Reverend
Brethren at home, I shall think my self sufficiently happy in such an
Employment: And indeed, as I know not that thing in the World, wherein I could
take that Satisfaction, as in this piece of Service to our Church at home; so
provided this Design of Lending Libraries in England should universally take,
whereby, without any Man's Charge, properly speaking, so great an Advance will
be made toward Parochial Libraries in the Plantations: Instead of Libraries
for Maryland, the bounds of my first Design, I shall not only extend my
Endeavors for the Supply of all the English Colonies in America therewith; but
can most willing be a Missionary into every one of those Provinces, to fix and
settle them therein when they are obtained, being so fully persuaded of the
great Benefit of these kind of Libraries, that I should not think 'em too dear
a Purchase, even at the hazard of my Life, being to both Church and Clergy

A most Devoted, and Humble Servant, THO. BRAY.

Note, 1. In those Large and Populous Cities, where there will be Subscribers
enough to raise a Library, there the Library may be appropriated solely to the
Use of the Clergy and Gentry of that Place; only it may be expected from the
Clergyespecially, that their Quota of Subscriptions be made also toward the
Deanary-Libraries for the Use of the Rural Clergy, it being the First and
Principal Design to supply them, especially those in smaller Vicarages and
Curacies. 2. If in the same Deanary there are several Market Towns, it would be
happy if the Foundation of a Library could be laid in each of 'em, Libraries
being more peculiarly useful in Market Towns, where, though it be requisite the
Abilities of the Clergy should he the greatest, yet the Provision and
Maintenance for that Purpose is commonly the least. 3. If the Foundation of a
Library can be laid in every Market Town, then the adjacent Clergy and Gentry
may entitle themselver by their Subscriptions, to the Library of such
Neighboring Towns, from whence they shall be able with most ease and
convenience to send for a Book at any time. 4. If these Deanary-Subscribtions
shall so multiply, that any one of the Books proposed in the following Set
shall become so scarce, as not to be had at all, or at an unreasonable rate,
then another Book equivalent in its intrinsic Worth and Price shall be sent in
its stead.
THE CATALOGUE of BOOKS Designed to lay the Foundation of Lending-Libraries To
be fixed in all the Market Towns in England, FOR The Use of the Clergy,
Schoolmasters, and Gentlemen of such Towns, and Parishes adjoining, as shall
subscribe toward the Purchase of the said Books.
History,
Eccelesiastical, General. DVpin's Ecclesiastical History, 3 Vol. Fol.
Platina's Lives of the Pope's; continued by Sir Paul Ricaut. Fol.
Particular, Sleidan's History of the Reformation of the Church, from the
Errors and Corruptions of the Church of Rome, Fol. Bishop Burnet's History of
the Reformation of the Church of England, 2 Vol. Fol.

Civil, General, Vsserii Annals V. and N. Testamenti, Fol.
Particular, Puffendorf's Introduction to the History of Europe, 8o, Mazaray's
History of France, Fol. Sir R. Baker's Chronicle of the Kings of England,
continued to the latter End of King Charles the Second, Fol.


Geography and Travels,
General, Varenius's Geography, with Sanson's Maps, and the County-Maps of
England, Fol. Thesaurus Geographicus, Fol.
Particular, Camden's Britannia, Fol. Dr. Brown's Travels through the greatest
part of Europe, Fol. Misson's Travels to Italy, 2 Vol. 8o. Sir George Wheeler's
Travels into Greece, Fol. Sir John Chardin's Travels through the Black Sea, and
the Country of Colchis into Persia, and the East Indies. Knox's History of the
Island of Ceylon, Fol. Gage's Description of the West Indies, 8o. Dampier's
Voyage round the World, 8o.

Theology,
I. Apologetical, Grotius de Veritate Christianae Religionis, 1o. Parker's
Demonstration of the Law of Nature, and of the Divine Authority of the
Christian Religion, 4o. Bishop William's Sermons at Mr. Boyle's Lectures, 4o.
Bishop Wilkin's Natural Religion, 8o.
II. General Bodies of Divinity, Ellis 39 Articuli, 12o. Dr. Scot's Works, 4
Vol. 8o. Phillippia Limborch Theologia Christiana, Fol. Turretini Compendium,
4o.
III. Particular upon some of the more important Subjects. First, Upon the
Whole Body of Christian Faith, or on some of its Great Articles. Bishop Pearson
on the Creed, Fol. Dr. Pelling's Divine Existence, 8o. Bishop Stillingfleet's
Vindication of the Holy Trinity, 8o. -- Upon the Satisfaction of Christ, 8o.
Dr. Hody upon the Resurrection, 8o. Dr. Sherlock on Death, 8o. -- On Judgment,
8o.
Secondly, Upon what relates to the Duties of Christianity, and upon the Duties
themselves. Suarez de Legibus, Fol. Bishop Taylor's Ductor Dubitantium, Fol.
Sanderson de Obligatione Conscientiae, 8o. -- 9 Casus, 8o. Whole Duty of Man's
Works. Kettlewel's Measures of Christian Obedience, 8o. Goodman's Penitent
pardoned, 8o. Bishop Patrick on Repentance, and the Lent-Fast. Dr. Hooper on
the Lent-Fast, 8o. Kettlewel on the Sacrament, 8o. Dr. Lucas of Happiness, 3
Parts, 8o.

IV. Sermons. Tillotson's Sermons, Fol. Sir Matthew. Hales's Contemplations,
Moral and Divin, 3 Parts, 8o.
V. Controversy. Dr. Comber's Roman Forgeries, with the Church History, 4
Parts, 4o. Mr. Allen's Works, 4 Parts, 8o. Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica,
8o. Bishop King's Invention's of Men in the Worship of God, with the Defenses,
8o. Snake in the Grass, 8o.
VI. Humanity, Virgil, In Vsum Delphini. Horace, In Vsum Delphini. Juvenal, and
Persius, In Vsum Delphini.
VII. Toward the promoting of Natural Knowledge. Dr. Gibson's Anatomy, 8o.
Complete Gardener, by Monsieur Quintinie, Fol.

AN ADDITION of BOOKS To the Value of Ten Pounds, to be sent into such
Deanaries, where the Clergy are in a Condition, and the Gentry are forward to
lay a larger Foundation for these Lending-Libraries; the Money to be returned,
one half at present, the other at the next Michaelmas-Visitation.
DR. Howell's Universal History, 3 Vol. Fol. History of the Council of Trent,
Fol. Archbishop Laud's Lise, Published by Mr. Wharton, Fol. Thevenot's Travels
into Persia and the East Indies, Fol. Dr. Barrow's Sermon's, 3 Vol. Fol. not
now to be had, but will be reprinted if this Design takes, as will many other
valuable Books now out of Print, particularly the next, viz. The London Divines
Cases against the Dissenters, Fol.
N. Commentators upon the Scriptures, such as Dr. Hammond 's Annotations, and
Bishop Patrick 's Paraphrases, are not inserted in this Catalogue, because such
ought to be always at hand to be consulted upon occasion; whereas the Books
falling under this Design are to be read through, and then speedily returned.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
BIBLIOTHECA PAROCHIALIS: Or, A Scheme of such Theological Heads, both General
and Particular, as are more peculiarly Requisite to be well Studied by every
Pastor of a Parish: Together with a Catalogue of Books which may be Read upon
each of those Points. By THOMAS BRAY, D. D.

London, Printed by E. H. for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.


