17. June 1661.
ORdered, That the undernamed persons, or any three or more of them, do repair
unto His Grace the Lord Primate of all Ireland, and in the Name of this House,
return thanks unto His Grace for his great pains taken yesterday in Preaching
and Administering the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto the Members of
this House, and to desire His Grace that he would cause the same to be Printed.

Sir Henry Tichburne. Sir Theophilus Jones. Mr. of the Wards. Sir Francis
Hamilton. Sir Robert Forth. Sir Richard Kirle.

Copia Vera.

Ex. per Philip Ferneley Cler. Parl.



THE RIGHT Way to Safety AFTER SHIPWRECK: IN A SERMON Preached to the
Honorable House of Commons, in St. Patrick's Church, Dublin. Jun. 16. 1661. At
their Solemn Receiving of the Blessed SACRAMENT. By the most Reverend Father in
God, JOHN Lord Archbishop of Armagh, Primate and Metropolitan of all Ireland.

DUBLIN, Printed by John Crook, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And are to be sold by John North, Bookseller in Castle-street. 1661.

PROVE. 28. 13. He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.
IN these Words, two different Ways, which Sinners take to attain to Happiness,
are represented to us; The one short and broad, but impassable, by reason of
Thieves and Precipices; He that covers his sins shall not prosper: the other
long and strait, but certain and secure, Who so confesses and forsakes them,
shall have mercy. Or if you will, a common Shipwreck, wherein two Planks are
presented to us, to save us from drowning; The one painted, but rotten, which
will undoubtedly deceive us, that is, the Plank of Dissimulation: He that
covers his sins shall not prosper: The other rugged, but sound, which will
infallibly bring us safe to Land, that is, the Plank of Repentance; He that
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy.

Or lastly, We may consider herein the Sore, the Chyrurgery, and the Success:
The Store is Sin, the Course of Chyrurgery is double and different, the one by
healing over, or binding up, the other by incision, or cleansing out; the one
with supple Oil, the other with sharp Vinegar; the one by bathing, the other by
lancing; the one by covering, the other by confessing. The Success is likewise
double, and different, proportionable to the two ways of cure; the one
unprosperous, shall not prosper; the other prosperous, shall have mercy. He
that covers his sins shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses and forsakes
them, shall have mercy.

The Sore is spiritual and epidemical, that is Sin, 2. Chron. 6. When every one
shall know his own sore. And more emphatically Isa. 1. 6. it is styled a
putrefying sore. So long as our first Parents continued in the state of
Innocence, Roses grew without Thorns, as St. Ambrose observed. As there was no
Sin, so there was no Sickness; no Sores in the World, either of Soul or Body.
Indeed it was not impossible for them to sin, so they should have been Gods,
not Men; but it was possible for them not to have sinned, which is as much as
the Angels in Heaven can challenge to themselves: for many of them fell
irrecoverably, because they found not a Redeemer, and those, which stood, owe
their Conservation, as we do our Redemption, to the Cross of Christ, Col. 1.
20. But by the fall of Adam the Image of God became defaced in Man, the Rays of
heavenly Light eclipsed, the Sparkles of divine Grace cooled, the Understanding
infatuated, the Will confounded, the Affections disordered, and in place of
these Perfections, Sin entered into the world as an Hereditary Contagion, a
spiritual Leprosy, with the Consequents of it, all manner of Sores and
Diseases, both of Soul and Body, which cannot be cured with all the Balm in
Gilead, nor cleans'd with all the Water in the Ocean; but only by the Blood of
Christ, and in order to that, by Repentance; which is the Cure commended in my
Text.

Hence all those swarms of Fevers, Catarrhs, Gouts, Palsies, Apoplexies, and
the like, which do infest the Body of Man more than any other living Creatures:
We may be burned up with Choleric Distempers, drowned with Hydropick Humors,
choked with the Fumes of a vicious Stomach, and buried quick in the Grave of
Melancholic Imaginations. But the chiefest Defects are those of the Soul, as
1. Ignorance, that in so thick a mist of Errors and Sects, we know not how to
find out the Truth; and that, which tops up our Folly, is, That we are grown
too wise in our own conceits. 2. Concupiscence, that Pestilence of the Soul,
whose cankered Blossoms are still sprouting up in the most Regenerate Hearts;
this weakened the Power of Sampson, infatuated the Wisdom of Solomon, defiled
the Holiness of David. 3. Self-love, an hidden Poison, the Rust of the Mind,
the Moth of Holiness, the Parent of Envy, the Original of all Vices. 4.
Discontent, which makes up prize what we want, slight what we enjoy, more
sensible of Sufferings than of Blessings; like little Children, which for want
of some Toy which they affect, throw away all they have, and fall a crying: we
follow Contentment hard, but as Fools do an Ignis Fatuus, always at a distance.
5. Preposterous fear; If we do ill, we fear Magistrates; if we do well, we fear
Detractors: if we be rich, we fear Thieves; if poor, Creditors; if we hate, we
fear Enemies; if we love, Corrivals. 6. Distrust; We all say, We trust God, but
for the most part sooner with our Souls, than with our Estates, and hardly
without a Pawn, as Usurers would trust a Bankrupt. Lastly Hypocrisy: If there
be a Mote in the Eye, there is a Beam in the Heart; if there be a Beam in the
Eye, there is a Stack of Mischief in the Heart: We look one way, and row
another way; blow hot and cold with the same Mouth, and have our Hearts more
double than our breath: We flatter for advantage, and we slander for advantage;
we serve God for advantage, and if need be, we serve the Devil for advantage.
Then since we have all made shipwreck of Baptismal Grace by sin, since all
without exception do stand in need of a second Plank to save them from
drowning, it remains that we make choice of one of the two presented to us in
my Text, Dissimulation, or Conversion; Covering, or Confessing: That Is the next
part: He that covers his sins shall not prosper: but whosoever confesses and
forsakes them shall have mercy.

There are three good covers of sin in holy Scripture, 1. Charity, 2.
Conversion, 3. Pardon: The two first are men's covers, the third is Gods cover.

1. Charity, Prove. 10. 12. Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers all
sins, and 1. Pet. 4. 8. Charity shall cover the multitude of sins; Charity
thinks no evil, Charity suspecteth no hurt, Charity interprets all things in
the best sense; Charity does not aggravate or exaggerate the faults of men, but
seeks to extenuate them, imputing them to a good Intention, or to Ignorance, or
to Surprise, or to the violence of Temptation: Charity delights not in carrying
about fardles of Tales and Calumnies, as Pedlars do their Packs, from House to
House, nor to divulge the Faults of Men, as cursed Cham did the Nakedness of
his Father; but to conceal them, and to suppress them, as Joseph was not
willing to make Mary a public example: Charity is not vindictive, to write
Injuries in Marble, but buries them in oblivion. He that wants this cover, is
an unclean Vessel; He that has not this wedding Garment, is sure to be cast
into outer darkness; but he that has it is blessed; he shall prosper: Judge
not, and you shall not be judged.

The second good Cover is Conversion, Jam. 5. 20. He that converteth a sinner,
shall save a soul, and hide a multitude of sins. Just as he converts a Sinner,
and saves a Soul, so he hides sins; not primitively, but derivatively; not
principally, but subordinately; not sovereignly, but ministerially. He converts
morally, but Grace, Physically; he by persuading, but Grace by renewing. Now
Conversion being an infallible way to Remission, he that helps to convert,
helps to cover sin; that is one way. 2. He that converts a man helps to amend
him, and after amendment the shame of former sins is covered; the memory of
them is rather a Badge of Honor, than a note of Ignominy; like the scar of a
Soldiers wound, after it is healed. Thus he hides the sins of his Convert. But
he hides his own sin likewise, that is, dispositively he renders himself more
capable of Gods pardon. Blessed are the merciful, for they shall find mercy:
But those busy Bodies, whose Affections are stronger than their Judgments,
who labor with tooth and nail to spread abroad their erroneous Dreams, must
expect no share in this Blessing: VVo be to you Scribes and Pharisees,
hypocrites: for you compass sea and and land to make a Proselyte, and make him
twofold more a child of Hell, than your selves.

The third kind of covering of sin is the forgiving of it. Psalm. 85. 2. Thou
have forgiven their iniquity, and covered all their sins: that is, covered them
from the eye of thy Justice; as a Wound is covered with a Plaster, to cure it;
as a dead Body is covered in the Grave, to avoid the stench of it; as the Doors
of the Israelites were covered with the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, to cause the
destroying Angel to pass by them. In the same regard elsewhere the Remission of
sins is called a forgetting of them, a casting of them behind the back, a
burying them in the bottom of the sea: of all Covers, this is the best, Psalm.
32. 1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered.

But these are not the Covers intended in my Text, the first of which is
downright Denial, as Gehezi thought to have out-faced his Master, and Ananias
and Sapphira, St. Peter. Prove. 30. The harlot eats and wipeth her mouth, and
says, What have I done? Men are too apt to forget the all-seeing Eye of GOD;
like Woodcocks, which thrust their Heads in a Bush, and think no man sees them,
because they see no man. Let the leprosy of Gehezi, let the sudden death of
Ananias and Sapphira warn us to take heed how we seek to cover our faults with
lies; well may it advantage a man a little for the present, as a lie got St.
Peter his admission into the high Priests hall, but it has ever a foul ending,
and within a while forfeits the whole stock of a man's credit and reputation:
Therefore the Scripture says, That a lying Tongue is but for a moment; and to
God it is a very abomination, Prove. 12. 22. Then tell the Truth, and shame the
Devil: When a Fault is ingenuously discovered, the Amends is half made.

The second Cover is mincing or extenuating of our sins, as the Sluggard, Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, and Jonathan did but taste a little Honey upon
his Rods end: But a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, a few dead flies
cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to stink, Eccl. 11. He that clippeth a
little of the Kings Coin, is guilty of Treason; every little Sand has his
weight; and it is all one whether a man be pressed to death with an heap of
Sand, or a Mass of Lead, whether a Ship be overwhelmed with one great wave, or
drowned with many small Leaks. More perish by the daily habitual presumptuous
practice of lesser sins, than by one foul act of some greater sin. We detest
that horrid Paradox, That all sins are equal; That he is as great a
Transgressor that kills a Cock-Chicken without a cause, as he that murders a
Prince. But he that makes light of any sin, when he comes to make up his
account with God, destroys himself; yet this is often our Condition: A mote in
our neighbors eye, shows greater than a beam in our own.

The third Cover is that of Excuses. Saul pleads for a Sacrifice to the Lord,
to excuse his own Disobedience. Gehezi pleads the necessity of the Sons of the
Prophets for his Bribery, Judas alleges the poor to palliate his
Covetousness. When the King of heaven invites Men to his great Supper, one has
married a Wife, another purchased a Farm, the third must go to prove some Oxen;
many frame Excuses to themselves with as much ease as the Spider weaves her
Webs. Every Sin has its Cloak, Malice and Revenge pretends zeal of Justice;
Willful Murder, I mean in our Duellists, which cries to Heaven for Revenge,
muffles it self up in the Cloak of Honor and Reputation. These Fig Tree Leaves
may serve to cover our Sins well enough, whilst it is Vacation; but take heed
of the Term-time when it comes: When Conscience begins to spit Fire and
Brimstone in our Face, when the Devil pulls off the Hood wherewith he has
blinded us; then all these painted Excuses vanish away, we hear nothing but
Hues and Cries, we see nothing but evident Destruction.

The fourth Cover is, Transferring of our sins upon others; as Adam upon the
Woman, the Israelites upon their Fathers. The Fathers have eaten sour grapes,
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge; as if the multitude of Delinquents did
lessen the Offense; nay rather, the more the Transgressors, the nearer are the
Judgments of God. Others accuse the Times, and evil Company of their Faults.
How should one stick say it remained unscorch'd in the midst of a flaming
Bundle? It Is true, As fire begets fire, so does sin; evil manners corrupt good,
though the operation be not always present: Poison must have a time of working:
The more our familiarity grows with sin, the less the deformity thereof
appears: After the Music is ended, the Tune still remains in our Ears. He that
makes Conscience of his Ways, must avoid evil Company as he would do Poison, or
an house infected with the Plague; and write, Lord have mercy upon us on the
one Door, as well as on the other. Others make Satan their Cover, and cast
their Sins upon his Score. The Devil may solicit us, but he cannot necessitate
us: He could not thrust the Apple by force down Eves Throat, nor push Christ by
violence down from the Pinnacle: He has a sleight of persuading, not a power
of compelling: He blows the Coals, but the Fire is our own: He bites, but it is
those which thrust themselves into his Jaws: Resist the Devil, and he will fly
from you. Lastly, Some make GOD himself the Cover for their Sins; of all Covers
this is the worst: So Adam, The Woman which THOU gave me. Such are they which
make all things in the World, even Sin it self, to come to pass fatally,
inevitably, by virtue of a necessitating Decree of GOD. Such are they which
make their Redeemer their Pack-Horse (be it spoken with Reverence) to bear
their presumptuous Sins: as if he had shed his precious Blood to purchase our
Liberty, that we might turn Libertines: Deceive not your selves; to whom Christ
is made Redemption; to them he is made Righteousness and Sanctification. This
is the fourth Cover, the Transferring of our Sins upon Others.

The fifth Cover is Hypocrisy. This was Absalom's Cloak for his Rebellion:
Such Covers were Cain's Sacrifice, Esau's Tears, Jezebel's Fast, the Pharisees
Alms, the Harlots Vow, the Traitors Kiss. The World is full of such Juglers and
Mountebanks in Religion, of all Sects, who cry, Great is Diana; and magnify
the Image that fell down from Jupiter; meaning nothing but their Profit: Who
cry aloud, Lord, Lord; and mutter to themselves, Da mihi fallere, da jus^um
sanctumque videri: Give me grace to cheat and to delude the Eyes of the World:
painted Sepulchers, very Glowworms, which have a counterte it Light, without
any Heat; Pictures with double Prospectives, that to the Light, presents an
Angel, the other from the Light, a Devil: We have pulled down other Pictures to
set these up in our Churches. Nothing is more odious unto God, than to make a
stalking-Horse of Religion: Christ throws out seve^ woes against Hypocrites:
Other Sinners may be converted, the Hypocrite hardly, because he has converted
Conversion it self into sin. Such as devour Widows houses under a color of
long prayers, shall receive the greater damnation.

The sixth and last Cover is Impudence to defend our Sins, and glory in them,
which is used by none but those who have already gotten one Foot within the
Gates of Hell. Periisse puto cui pudor periit: Past Shame, past Grace. St.
Austin bewails his Youth, led in the Streets of Babylon, where when he heard
his Companions boasting of their lewdness, he was forced to feign those things
he never did, least he should appear so much more vile, by how much he was more
innocent. That which was his Detestation, is now the only Garb for a Gallant:
Such a Gallant was Cham, that gloried in the Nakedness of his own Father,
whilst his more modest Brethren covered it with their Faces backward: Such
another Gallant was Caligula, who said, He liked nothing better in his own
Disposition than his Impudence: A Voice fitter for a Hangman than an Emperor.
It was the height of Israel's sin, That she had a Whores Forehead, and refused
to be ashamed: Shamefastness is the praise of Nature, the Harbinger of Grace,
the Ensign of Honesty, the Seat of Virtue, the Witness of Innocence. But
glorying in sin is the next Link to Damnation. They that use such vain Covers
as these, shall one day wish for another cover, even the Mountains to fall upon
them, and the Hills to cover them from the presence of the Lamb. So
unprosperous is this course of concealing: That Is the next part, Shall not
prosper.

First, He shall not prosper in his sin; he shall not find that Happiness and
Content in it which he expects. Amon was sick of love until he enjoyed Thamar,
that moment passed, his Love was dogged with Hatred and Repentance. What a deal
of conveniencie and hearts ease did Ahab promise to himself in Naboth's
Vineyard; and the very first time he goes to take possession of it, he meets
there with the Tidings of the utter ruin of Himself and Family. Herod violated
all Laws of God and Man, burdened his Conscience, waded through a Sea of
Blood, all to settle the Kingdom upon his Son; and he proves an Unthrift;
offers half of it to a wanton Minion for a Dance. So Goods ill gotten, are like
a Coal of Fire in a thatched House. Remember Herod. Before Judas had fingered
that beggarly sum of thirty pieces of Silver, his Desires were upon the Rack;
he forgot his Duty to God, his Fidelity to his Master, his care of his own
soul. But when he once had it, he could not endure to look upon it, as being
the cause of his bane; he casts it away as an infectious Rag; he disgorgeth it
in the very Temple: his detestation of that poisonous Morsel, was greater than
his reverence to that Holy Place. When Pharaoh's lean Kine had devoured the
fat, they were still no better favored themselves. Let us all but look back to
our former Excesses, and unlawful Pleasures, and see if we may not sighing say
with the Apostle, What profit had we of those things whereof we are now
ashamed? So he shall not prosper in his sin.

Secondly, He shall not prosper in his Affairs; not in his temporal
Undertakings, Jer. 22. 30. Write this man childless, a man that shall not
prosper in his days. Israel could not prosper so long as the accursed thing
remained hidden in Achan's Tent. The eleven Tribes prospered not against
Benjamin, until they had humbled themselves by fasting. Jonas prospered not in
a Ship until he had reconcile himself to God; then he found safety in the Belly
of a Whale. Neither shall he thrive or prosper in spiritual Graces: No Man can
serve both GOD and Belial: These hidden Sins do choke the Seed of the Word;
they hinder the Efficacy of our Prayers, they make the blessed Sacrament to
become poison, and our Fasts and Humiliations, to be mere Mockeries. The Grace
of God will not suffer Mates, to be chamber-fellows, and fellow-commoners with
her in the same Heart. To ask for which of our sins things have succeeded
unprosperously with us, were to seek a man in Athens at noon day, with a Candle
and a Lanthorn. The Lord sanctify our sufferings to us; until then, we cannot
prosper in our Affai^s.

Thirdly, He shall not prosper in his concealment. God will bring it to light,
2 Samuel 12. 2. Thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all
Israel, and before the S^n: -- For nothing is covered, which shall not be
revealed, Luke 12. 2. Almost incredible are the ways which God uses for the
Discovery of crying Sins; especially of Murder. Whilst the Earth is covered
with Snow, the Ditches, and Dunghills, and Deformities thereof are hid; but by
the melting of the Snow they are discovered: So the vi^lanous Projects of
Dissemblers are so covered over with a show of Snow-white Innocence and Candor,
that they are able like Zeuxis his Counterfeit Grapes to deceive a piercing
Eye: But when time shall bring Truth to light, their horrid ugliness will
appear to the Eye of the World: we may this day observe the footsteps of God's
justice, how he brings the same Troubles home to their Doors who have been
underhand the Contrivers and Fomenters of them among their Neighbors: And now
Bellona begins to shake her bloody Whip among them, as if God should say, Thou
did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Europe, and before the
Sun. Just art thou, O Lord, and right are thy judgments. So he shall not
prosper in his concealment.

Fourthly, He shall not prosper in obtaining pardon for his sin; and then all
his other Advantages are too much to his cost: What shall it profit a man to
gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul. A damned spirit in Hell may as
soon hope for forgiveness at the Hands of God, as that person who hides and
cherishes his sins privately in his Heart; this is to make God Confederate
with us in our wickedness and dissimulation: It Is in vain to skin over a sore,
whilst dead flesh remains within; the Weapon must first be pulled out, before
the Wound can be cured: The Medicines of salvation profit not a wounded Soul,
until the fiery darts of Satan be drawn out by Repentance. So he shall not
prosper in his Recovery.

Lastly, These Words, He Shall not prosper, are a (...), and signify as much
as he shall suffer, he shall smart for it.

1. He shall suffer in his Conscience, those Coeca vulnera, those blind blows
which no man knows but he, which feels worse than all the Plagues of Egypt, and
Botches of Job. This made Cain a Runnagate upon the face of the Earth.

2. The Judgments of God shall pursue him both in this Life, and the Life to
come. Herod did not only not prosper in his aim, to entail the Crown to his
Posterity, but the day came that paid for all, such a conglomeration of
unmeasurable Torments, as they are described by Josephus, did hardly ever meet
together in one man, and which is worse, these were but the forerunners of
greater: Judas did not only miss his contentment in the thirty pieces of
Silver, but he got thirty Curses; you may find them Psalm. 109. The Money
perished, but the Curses stuck by him until they brought him to an halter.
Envy not a Murderer that braves it upon the stage for the first or second Act
of a Tragedy, nor an Ox, that is fatting for the slaughter, nor a Thief that
is riding in state to his Execution: Have patience and expect the Catastrophe,
Eccles. 8. Though a sinner does evil an hundred times, and the Lord still
prolongeth his days, yet I know it will be well with them that fear the Lord;
but it shall not be well with the wicked. Thus every way he shall not prosper.

And so I leave him lurking under a Net, treasuring up to himself wrath against
the day of wrath, to come to the true Convert in the next Words.

But he that confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Confession, with
its Requisites, Contrition and Amendment of Life, which is here called
forsaking, do make up a complete Repentance. Which some Fathers style a second
Table after shipwreck, others a Baptism of pains and tears: yea, some of them
doubted not to say, That Confession did loose the bands of sin, and extinguish
the Fire of Hell; that is, not by way of Merit, but by way of Impetration; not
by paying, but by pacifying the wrath of God, and so averting his Judgments.
No, those blessed Saints did never dream that the Covenant of Grace, whereunto
we are admitted by Baptism, was evacuated by a Lapse into sin; or that any new
and different Covenant was established by Repentance, grounded partly upon the
Merits of Christ, and partly upon our selves. Let Confession and Repentance
have their due, but let them not thrust Christ out of the Chair, from whose
Grace they flow, from whose Acceptance they have their Efficacy. Thrice happy
are they which use this Plank aright, to bring them through the raging Billows
of this sinful world, to the Haven of eternal Bliss.

Confession is as ancient as our first Parents, whom God himself did call to
the performance of this duty. It was practiced among the Israelites, by Divine
Precept, Number. 5. 7. By those Jews that repaired to the Baptism of John, Matthew.
3. By those Ephesian Converts, Acts 19. prescribed by St. James, Jam. 5.
Confess one to another, and pray one for another. Endowed with such ample
privileges, as in the first Epistle of St. John, If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all
unrighteousness. And here in my Text, He that covers his sins shall not
prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy. There is
no better physic for a full stomach than a vomit; nor for a soul replete with
sin, than Confession. Bodily sores do oftentimes compel a man to put off
natural shamefacedness, and to expose his less honorable parts to the view of
the Surgeon. Ought not every one to be as solicitous for his soul? We offend
God three ways; by the imaginations of our hearts; by the words of our mouths;
by the actions of our lives. If we intend to please God, we must take a clean
contrary course; for evil thoughts of the heart, bring contrition of the heart;
for corrupt speeches of the mouth, bring Confession of the mouth; for wicked
actions of our life, bring fruits worthy amendment of life. Buy this means we
bring glory to God, and shame to our selves; and prevent that great confusion
of face, which otherwise must fall upon us at the day of Judgment, before God
and Angels and Men. A contrite sinner stands not upon terms of reputation with
God, or with his Church. Why should we be more afraid to confess, than we were
to offend? to make those the Witnesses of o^^ Tears, who have been the
Witnesses of our Faults to take away the Scandal that we our selves have g^ven?
Let the World take notice of our Sin, so may likewise take notice of our
Repentance. (...) great Sickness often ushers in Health, and a bet^^^ Habitude
of the Body; a broken Bone, when it is w^^^ knit, grows the stronger: So the
first shall be l^^^ and the last shall be first. Indeed Innocence (if t^^ Herb
of Grace were to be found) is better than C^^fession: but there is more joy in
heaven over one sin^^^ that repents, than ninety nine just Persons that
need^^ repentance, among the Holy Angels: Da Pater (...) per eis gaudere de
nobis, etc. Grant, O Father, t^^^ they may always rejoice over us, that Thou
ma^^ always be glorified by them for us, that we and th^^ together may praise
thy Holy Name, O Thou t^^^ art the Creator of Men and Angels.

No man can doubt but the Romanists have gro^^ abused Confession, by tricking
it up in the Robes ^^ a Sacrament; by obtruding a particular and plen^^
enumeration of all sins, to Man, as absolutely ne^^^sary to Salvation by Divine
Institution, by mak^^^ it with their commutations, a Remedy rather for
Confessors Purse, than the Confitents Soul, by in^^^sing ludibrious Penances:
As Chaucer observed, knew how to impose an easy Panance, where he l^^ed for a
good Pittance, by making it a Pick-Loc^ know the secrets of States and
Families, Scire (...) secreta domus atque unde timeri, by absolving b^^ ^hey
enjoin Ecclesiastical Satisfaction, by reducing to a customary Formality; as if
it were but the ^oncluding of an Old Score to begin a New. So on ^he other side
it cannot be denied that our Protestant Confessions are for the most part too
General; We ^onfess we are Sinners, and that is all, which signifies nothing:
And a little too presumptuous: They that dare not trust their own Judgment
about their Estates, without the opinion of a Lawyer, nor about their Bodies,
without the advice of a Physician, are wise enough for their Souls, without any
other Dire^tion: And a little too careless, as if we were telling Story of a
third Person that concerned not us: We ^onfess light Errors willingly, which
neither entrench upon our Credit, nor threaten us with punishment; ^ut greater
Crimes, where the discovery brings with fear of ignominy and disgrace, or
suffering for them, ^e conceal and cover with as much art as may be. ^astly,
Even whilst we are confessing, we have too ^ften a mind to return with the dog
to his vomit, and ^ith the sow to her wallowing in the mire; What (...) this
but a plain mocking of GOD? Far from ^^y Hopes of Mercy: For though Covering
alone be ^sufficient Cause of Punishment, He that covers ^^s sins shall not
prosper: yet Confession alone, with^^t Forsaking, is not a sufficient Cause of
Mercy; But (...) that confesses and forsakes, shall have mercy. Not ^^rbears
them in natural, or only by an outward ab^^inence, but forsakes them as a man
would cast a ^nake out of his Bosom, with detestation. An outward abstinence
is not the true change of a Christian: like a Dog that is muzzel'd, or a Thief
that is manacled, which still retain their former dispositions: When the
unclean spirit returns to his old habitation, and finds it swept and garnished,
not thoroughly, but superficially cleansed by an outward Reformation, without an
inward Renovation, he brings with him seven other spirits, and the latter end
of that man is worse than the beginning. He that absteins from an old sin not
for Conscience toward God, but for fear of shame or punishment, is like that
Wolf whereof the Father speaks, which came unto the Sheepfold, to kill and to
devour, the Shepherd waking, the Dogs barking scared him away indeed, but
altered not his wolvish nature: Lupus venit fremens, Lupus redit tremens; Lupus
est and fremens and tremens. So forsakes them, not forbears them.

Again, Forsakes them, not conceals them: Penetration of Bodies, is a Monster
in Philosophy: an Heart inwardly replete with secret sins, has no room for
Grace: A good Lesson, or a good Motion to it, is like a Spark of Fire falling
into a Vessel of Water, presently extinguished; or like good Seed falling among
Thorns, soon choked. What fellowship has Light with Darkness, or CHRIST with
Belial?

In natural Transelementation, there must be some affinity between the Bodies,
as Fire and Air, not Fire and Water; for the too great contrariety: but in
spiritual Conversion, no disparity can hinder the change: The greatest sins do
often produce the most signal conversions, as it was in Saul, changed in the
height of his fury from a Persecutor to an Apostle, from a Wolf to a Shepherd,
from a Pyrat to a Governor.

We cannot live as Amphibians in two such contrary Elements, as a resolved
course of sin and of Godliness; such half Converts, who have nothing but a few
idle yawning desires, can expect nothing at the hands of God, but to be spewed
out of his mouth for their luke-warmness; the mouth of Hell is full of such
vain Wishes and Wishers, which use no serious means to gain them liberty, but
only thrust their heads out of the Grate, to look about them. A man may break
all the Commandments of God, and be guilty of none, if it be against his
resolution, if he be heartily sorry for it: It is not so much Sin, as
Impenitence, for which men are damned: And on the other side, he that breaks
but one Commandment habitually, and resolvedly, is guilty of all. I fear this
is many of our Conditions, we rather cover our sins, or forbear them, than
forsake them; we desire rather to make a Truce with God, than a Peace; We do
with our sins, as Servants do with their fires when they go to Bed, put them
not out, but rake them up; so when we come to reckon with Conscience, and to
make up our Accounts with God, we do not desire to take an everlasting farewell
of our sins, ab hoc momento in Aeternum, as St. Austin says, but only a
Coverfen, to hide them in an heap of Devotions, for the present, whilst we are
doing some superficial Duties to God, or whilst the blessed Sacrament does
strike a kind of Reverence into our hearts, with a purpose to reassume them
upon the first opportunity; as the Serpent does her poison, which she had left
behind her in her Den. Can any man think that such a fained show of forsaking
our sins, can be acceptable to God? O no! it is too hollow-hearted. That
conversion which finds mercy, must be serious and sincere: Gods forgiveness
and our forsaking, go still hand in hand together: Forgive us our trespasses,
there is the one; And lead us not into temptation, there is the other: Turn thy
face from my sins, O Lord, there is the former; And make me a clean heart,
there is the latter: Lord have mercy upon us, there is forgiveness; And incline
our hearts to keep thy Law, there is forsaking: That brings me to the last Part,
Shall have mercy.

One might ask, Which of all gods Mercies? The Air we breathe, the Light we
behold, the Ground we tread upon, the Meat we eat, whatsoever we are, or have,
or hope for, it is his mercy: By it we live, and move, and have our being:
Thou have crowned me with thy mercy, says David: it is a Metaphor taken from
a Garland, which is composed of many and different Flowers. Gods mercy was the
only motive to our Redemption; his merciful Grace preventing us and assisting
us, is the only means to apply this Redemption; the consideration of this
mercy is that which incourageth us to Repentance: As Christ prayed Father
forgive them; the poor Thief grew bold, Lord remember me. Mercy is the end of
our Repentance, that we may find forgiveness: Mercy is our supporter in all
our sorrows for sin, that we roar not out with Cain, My sin is greater than
that it can be forgiven; nor betake our selves desperately, with Judas, to an
halter. Mercy is our only plea, when we do repent; we cannot say we have done
such and such good offices for the time past, we are too unprofitable Servants,
we dare not promise of our selves, to be more serviceable for the time to come,
we are too desultory creatures: Lord forsake not us, least we forsake Thee.
Mercy is the object of our hopes, the total sum of our desires; both Grace and
Glory do depend upon Mercy. So mercy is the beginning, the middle, the end of
our happiness.

But St. John will tell us what mercy this is; If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our sins: This Mercy then is forgiveness of
sin. That which is called Mercy here, is called Justice there: It is Mercy to
make a gracious Promise, bus it is Justice to keep it. Without this Mercy of
Forgiveness, all the other Mercies of God are no Mercies, but Judgments: In
this Mercy true blessedness does consist, Blessed is the man whose iniquities
are forgiven: what confort can a person sure to be condemned have, without hope
of a pardon? The best music in the world, is, Son, thy sins are forgiven thee,
when GOD shall stretch forth the Golden Scepter of Mercy, that is, to all those
who for his love do mortisie their earthly members, and forsake their own
Lusts: For he that hides his sins shall not prosper, but he that confesses
and for saketh them, shall have mercy.

Now among all the means ordained by God for the obtaining this saving mercy
mentioned in my Text, after Baptismal Grace, there is none more efficacious
than the blessed Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, the very
conduit-Pipe of Grace to all worthy Communicants, the Manna of Life and
immortality, the precious Antidote against the sting and infection of the
infernal Serpent, that inestimable Love-token which Christ at his departure
left to his Church, to keep in remembrance of him; the true pool of Bethesda,
wherein we may be cured of all our infirmities. Preparation of our selves is
necessary before the performance of all holy Duties, but especially before the
holy Sacrament. We ought to repair to the participation of this with as great
care and anxiety, as if we were immediately to depart out of the world. It was
death for an uncircumcised person to eat of the Paschal Lamb; we must
circumcise our eyes, our ears, our hands and our hearts; and take heed how we
come to this Wedding Feast, without the Wedding Garment.

O Lord, Be merciful to all those who prepare their whole hearts to seek Thee,
though they be not purged according to the Purification of the Sanctuary.

FINIS.

