Bishop Bramhall's VINDICATION OF Himself and the Episcopal Clergy, FROM THE
Presbyterian Charge OF POPERY, As it is managed by Mr. Baxter in his Treatise
of the Grotian Religion.

Together with a PREFACE SHOWING What Grounds there are of Fears and Jealousies
of POPERY.

LONDON, Printed by A. C. for James Collins, at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street. 1672.

A PREFACE To the READER.
READER,
THis ensuing Treatise being somewhat superannuated, the Bookseller was very
solicitous to have it set off with some Preface, that might recommend it to the
present Genius of the Age, and reconcile it to the present Iuncture of Affairs.
And though I am none of the most Zealous Patrons of the Press, and am at this
time as busy and as much concerned as De-Wit, or any of the High and Mighty
Burgomasters, in Matters of a closer and more comfortable importance to my self
and my own Affairs: Yet I could not but yield so far to his importunity, as to
improve (...) ^^y fragment of time that I could get into my own disposal,
toward the Gratification of his Request. And that has brought forth this
Preface, such an one as it is; for how it will prove, I my self neither am, nor
(till it is too late) ever shall be a competent Judge, in that it must be
ravished out of my hands before my thoughts can possibly be cool enough to
review or correct the Indecencies either of its style or contrivance. But which
way my mind will work it self and its thoughts, I am neither Prophet nor
Astrologer enough certainly to foretell; though the Heads I at this moment, and
under the present Schemes and Aspects of the Heavens, intend to treat of, are
only these two: First, To say something of the Treatise it self; and then,
Secondly, Something of the seasonableness of its Publication; and this (unless
my humor chance to jade me) is likely enough to enter me upon a farther
prosecution of the Argument it self, as far as it has a more particular
reference to the present state of things: And from this it is odds but I shall
take occasion to bestow some Animadversions upon one J. O. the great
Bell-weather of Disturbance and Sedition.

As to the first, I suppose it is not at all material to give an account either
by what misfortunes it came to be so long hidden from public view, or by what
lucky accidents it came to be so long preserved in private hands: It is enough
to let thee know, that at length it happened to fall to the possession of one
that had always had a very high esteem of the Authors very great Worth and
Abilities, and that therefore was very unwilling that any thing should perish
that was written by so great and so accomplished a man: A man so great and so
accomplished, that the meanest character we can give of him, is, that he was one
of the greatest of the Age he lived in. For in the first place, He was by
Nature furnished with an unusual mixture of wit, sagacity, and judgment;
Perfections that rarely meet in one person, but were all eminent and of equal
strength in the Genius of his mind. And in the next place, his Natural Parts
were admirably improved by study and industry in all the choicest and most
useful parts of Learning. He was an excellent Divine, an accurate Lawyer, and
an exact Historian, and (as far as the Prejudices of the Age would permit him)
an acute Philosopher. And then, Lastly, All these mighty Advantages both of
Nature and Education, were improved to their utmost usefulness and perfection
by experience and public. Employment. His Book and his Retirement did not make
him lazy and unwcildy for Business; but being of a brave and enterprizing
temper, of an active and spritely mind, he was always busied either in
contriving or performing great Designs. He was indefatigable in his
Undertakings, and undaunted under his Sufferings; and he had not only the Art,
but the Opportunity of bringing forth his Learning into use and practice. And
as he was able to accomplish the most gallant attempts, so was he always ready
not only to justify their Innocence, but to make good their Bravery, in spite
of all the Accusations of Envy, and all the Arts of Detraction. He neither did
nor thought any thing, but what was great and extraordinary. In short, his
Actions were equal to his Abilities, and his Writings equal to both.

It is true, the Church of Ireland was the largest Scene of his Actions; but
yet there in a little time he wrought out such wonderful Alterations, and so
exceeding all belief, as may convince us that he had a Mind large and active
enough to have managed the Roman Empire, at its greatest extent. For as he
finished all the glorious Designs that he undertook, so he managed all his
Affairs with that prudence and caution, that the malice and cunning of all his
Enemies, though they were invited and encouraged by those that were to be his
Judges, could not find out matter enough to make out so much as the appearance
of a plausible Aceusation: so that the infinite pains they were at to ensnare
and to blast his innocence, became an irrefragable testimony both of his Wisdom
and his Integrity. No Injustice was bold and hardy enough to offer violence to
such an exact and unblemisht Virtue; and in all his Troubles from wild and
unreasonable men, his Reputation was still preserved as clear and as spotless
as his Conscience: They were both Armor of Proof against Tories and against
Presbyterians. Though at length that could not exempt him from being involved
in the common ruin, and he was then forced even to put himself into
Banishment, when nothing was so criminal or so unsafe at home as Loyalty. His
righteous Soul could not endure to behold the Insolence and Hypocrisy of those
Goodly and Rebel Saints, whose very best pretenses were a more desperate
affront both to Government and Religion, than perhaps any Age or Historian can
parallel; but whose worst practices were villainous not only beyond example, but
belief.

And thus Christendom became the place of his Habitation, or rather of his
Pilgrimage; and that was some considerable advantage to the largeness of his
thoughts: for as he was rarely adorned in all kinds of true and useful
Knowledge, and as the main Argument of his Pains and Consultations, was the
Peace and Interest of Christendom; so he was confirmed in the reasonableness of
his Projects, or rather Opinions concerning it by his Travels and Observations.
He was before excellently skilled in the Customs and Constitutions of the
Primitive and Apostolical Church; but now he had more opportunity, or at least
more leisure to observe all the miscarriages of the present Churches, and
particular Combinations of the Christian World, by their several deviations
from their original Practice and Institution. And that was the Method he
prescribed to all dissenting Parties, in order to a Catholic Agreement, and a
sober Reformation to forego all their upstart and unwarrantable Innovations,
and return to the ancient and Apostolical simplicity; a thing very easy and
very practicable, were not Interest and Ignorance engaged against it. Not that
he was so vain or so presuming as to hope to see it effected in his own days:
He too well understood with how many invincible Prejudices it was obstructed;
he therefore only designed to declare his Judgment to the Wise and the
Unprejudicate, and so to leave it to Posterity, and some happy Iuncture of
Affairs to accomplish what he could only advise and wish for.

But by this plain dealing with all Parties, it is not to be doubted (because
it always so happens in the like cases) but that he must displease and
disoblige all; but more especially he raised the Choler, and enraged the Zeal
of the Geneva Faction; that Waspish Sect being according to the humor and
spirit of their Founder, never able to bear the least Affron or Contradiction.
And then immediately there was no gainsaying but that he must be as arrant a
Papist as Antichrist himself. This (cry they) smells of a
Spanish-Popish-Iesuitical-Arminian Plot. It is a plain Prosecution of the
Cardinal of Lorrains design, that allowed annual Pensions, even to the Lutheran
Ministers themselves to revile and preach down Mr. Calvin, thereby to reduce
the People to Popery. That crafty Statesman knew well enough, that he was the
only (...) to their Mystery of Iniquity; and were he but once removed out of
the way, the Apostolical Chair would quickly be restored to its ancient Empire
and Sovereignty over the Christian World. And hence the Alarm is given to the
People both from the Pulpit and the Press, to stand upon their Guard against
such dangerous and Babylonish Attempts. These moderate and lukewarm men are but
the Forerunners of the man of Sin, and do but prepare the ways for his Entrance
by removing the strongest, and most stubborn Opposition against him.

And what though he deal as roundly, and much more severely with the Church of
Rome, that is but a mere disguise for his present turn; those hard Conditions
are easily shaken off, when once the Protestant cause and interest is utterly
expired.

And therefore he and his Partisans may publish as many Books as they please
against their present abuses and corruptions; but the most charitable design
they can be supposed to aim at, is to bring in a more refined and a more
cunning Popery. And when this surmise is once voted and noised abroad, and
vouched by public fame or their own vulgar Tales, it is in vain to remonstrate
to their rudeness and disingenuity. It is not, no, it cannot be doubted of by
any but such as are either privy, or, at least, well-wishers to the design;
such indeed may pretend or counterfeit a Disbelief, to cover their intentions,
and to escape suspicion. And by this Artifice they begin first to seize upon
all men in their Wits, either for madmen or for parties in the Plot. And then
the common people dare not but believe it in their own defense, lest they
should be suspected to have lost their Understanding as well as their Religion.
And by this rude and boiterous Confidence are they able, as often as they please,
to raise any disingenuous and spiteful surmise into popular Reputation, and by
strength of face and forehead to bear out the credit of the largest and most
abusive Lies. And it is well known what strange and monstrous stories they
obtruded upon the Multitude against the King, the Bishops, and the Church of
England, in defyance even to common sense and the most undeniable Experience.

But no man was more vehemently charged and more confidently condemned of this
Attempt than this Reverend Prelate; partly because he was a zealous and
resolute Assertour of the public Rites and Solemnities of the Church against
all their wild and fanatic Pranks; partly because he expunged some of their
dear and darling Articles, not only from the Christian Faith, but from the
Protestant Cause, in that they were so far from being or pretending to be of
Apostolical Antiquity, that they were much younger than the Reformation it
self, or, at best, were but the Opinions of some private Doctors; and were
never established into Articles, by any public Laws or Councils: or if they
were voted for Orthodox Doctrines in any meeting in Germany or Geneva, they
were never received for such in the Church of England; and therefore ought not
to be charged upon the Protestant Cause as such, much less upon the English
Reformation, when it was never any part of its design to model new Bodies of
Orthodoxy, nor to exchange the old School-Doctors for Calvinian Systems and
Syntagms, but merely to clear the Christian Faith of all Corruptions and
innovations, and reform it into its primitive and uncorrupted simplicity. And
if any Errors or fond Opinions should have escaped her first Observation, she
reserves a power in herself, to review her own Decrees; and either to ratify,
or abolish them, as they shall, upon mature deliberation, appear consonant to
this Rule, and agreeable to this design. This was ever the Doctrine of the
sober and intelligent men of the Church of England, as well as her own declared
sense. They would never submit to any Authority of a later date, than the four
first general Councils, and as for all foreign Churches of the modern stamp,
they were so far from being determined by them, that they censured all their
proceedings, and rejected all their Doctrines, that fell short of, or went
beyond their own standard of Prudence and Moderation.

But this was not to be endured by the fierce and fiery Calvinists, to have all
their Orthodox stuff. cut off at one blow; had they spent so much pains, and
gained so much reputation, by their skill in Polemick Theology, and must they
now throw away all their Problems, Subtilties, and Distinctions, and must all
their deep and solid Learning be at last despised as a silly and impertinent
piece of Duncery? This certainly must needs be very grievous, and somewhat
provoking to great Clerks. Men care not to be convinced, that they have wasted
so much Oil and Sweat to no purpose. And though they are not able to justify
the Follies and Errors of their Education; yet being flushed with the Glory
that they have gained among their own party, by their skill and ability in
contending for their Opinion, it is easy to imagine how stubbornly they will
struggle in its defense, rather than quit the support of their pride and
self-conceitedness. This Itch is so incident and delightful to humane Nature,
that where it is not overruled by an habitual Integrity and Discretion, it is
the most powerful (not to say the only) motive of all our Actions; and has such
a strict and undiscernable Influence upon our most serious thoughts, that if
well-meaning men are not very careful, or very curious in observing, and
preventing its inward motions, it will quickly prevail over their
Understandings, insinuate into all their designs, and poison their best
Intentions and Resolutions. So that they may easily believe themselves
passionately concerned for the love of Truth and the Glory of God; whilst all
their mighty zeal and passion may be nothing else than Eruptions of pride and
vanity. And wherever this Delusion rules, it is the most impetuous and most
importunate Principle in the world. No sort of men so boisterous and
irresistible as those, whose imaginations are overcome with the vehemence of
its delight. And this is the case of our peevish and Grubstreet Divines; they
have, when time was, been looked upon as Authors of esteem and credit in the
world, and were once admired, and applauded, for the deep and the solid men of
the Age; and as they have walked the Streets, have sometimes had the pleasure
of a this is that Demosthenes, from the more knowing and judicious
Tankard-bearers: And in all Assaults and Challenges from the Enemies of the
precisest, and most refined sort of Orthodoxy, they have been called forth to
defend the Cause, and in all Trials of controversial Skill have ever come off
with success and victory. Truth has always hung upon their Pens, and they have
been courted, and consulted as the Oracles of their Age; Learned men have
submitted themselves to their Judgment, and their Writings have stood or fell
at their Tribunal, and in all the nice and more difficult Controversies their
Decree has determined what is Orthodox, and what Heretical. Now these men must
needs lie under vehement temptations of being very troublesome and pragmatical,
and upon every trifling occasion of annoying the public with perpetual
Pamphlets and Scribles.

And I cannot divine what other provocation Mr. B. had to meddle with Grotius
or Bishop Bramhall, then that they were learned enough to despise the Ignorance
of the highest knowledge that he or any of his Brethren coul'd pretend to. And
certainly he must have been bravely flusht and perch't in his own conceit, that
could prevail with himself to venture, upon three or four days study, to bolt
forth such bold and rash censures against two such great Wits and great
Scholars. Had he then been furnished with Learning enough to understand the
vast disproportion between his own and their abilities, he would rather have
trembled at their Names, than have attempted their Reputations. Mr. B. must not
think himself undervalued by being placed so many degrees below them; for alas!
it is not every Rabbi that is sufficiently qualified to sit at their Feet. And
I doubt not but the opportunities he has since had to improve and raise himself
to an higher form of Learning, have convinced him of the confidence and
unadvisedness of that undertaking; as the rudeness and extravagance of his own
Party has taught him more candor and civility toward the Church of England.
And therefore this Treatise was not published to impair his E steem, in the
least, but for a Correction of his scribbling humor, and a warning to their
Rat-Divines, that are so perpetually nibling and gnawing other men's Writings;
that by this example they may learn how easy a thing it is to blast such hasty
Conceptions, and be a little frighted from being so very pert and forward at
such uncivil Attempts. For upon Perusal of it, I cannot imagine any man either
so partial or so ignorant, as not to grant that our Author has with Smartness
enough, and (considering all Circumstances) Modesty too much, not only answered
but baffled all such Accusations of his Adversary as are at all material in
themselves or pertinent to the Cause, and that without condescending to play
with him at his Systematical and Push-pin Divinity.

But the main Reason that put me upon the Publication of it, was thereby to
give some check to their present disingenuit^; for though Mr. B. have learnt
more modesty then to be so prodigal as formerly in sending abroad his hard ^
ensures and positive Decrees against every Body and upon every Occasion; yet
others that pretend to as great an Interest and Authority with the holy
Brotherhood still persevere in the same rudeness and incivility toward the
Church of England, and upon every flight accident are beating up the Drums
against the Pope and Popish Plots; they desery Popery in every common and usual
chance, and a Chimney cannot take Fire in the City or the Suburbs, but they are
immediately crying Jesuits and Fireballs. And as for all those that wear
Canonical habits, and walk in Cassocks and Girdles, they are a^ least
Pensioners to his Holiness; and let them protest or pretend what they please,
they are Popelings in their Hearts, and Worshippers of the Beast in secret, and
own him too shamefully in their open and avowed Practices. In so much that the
great Scribler of the Party, (J. O.) blushes not to charge them with a total
Apostasy from the Reformation, and to plead this in justification of their
Nonconformity. We fear not (says Shamefacedness) to own that we Discourse
concerning Evangelical Love, etc. page 18.
cannot Conform to Arminianism, Socinianism on the one hand, (he might as well
have added all the Isms in the Old Testament, Perizzitism, Hivitism,
Jebusitism, Hittitism, etc.) or Popery on the other, (and why not Sorcery and
Extortion too?) with what new or specious Pretenses soever they may be blended.

This is his old Modesty, and brawny-faced Confidence: who, beside this humble,
melting, broken hearted Secret One, could have vented such lofty strains of
Candor and Ingenuity? But the Viper is so swelled with Venom, that it must
either burst or spit its Poison. The Dunghill is his only Magazine? and Calumny
his only Weapon; and he has no other Apology to justify the Rudeness and
Incivility of his Scriblings, but by such loud and thundering Falsifications.
And though he has been so often and so shamefully corrected for these base and
unworthy Arts, yet it is not in his power to forbear them, when they are the
result of his Humor and Genius. For had his Complexion been capable of a Blush
or a modest Thought, I dare say he has not wanted for Means and Opportunities
of learning better Manners. But he is so far from being reformed by the
sharpest Rebukes and Corrections, that they only provoke him to greater
Sullenness, and more enraged Abuses; and in stead of being brought to Tears and
Repentance, he improves in the Boldness and Insolence of his Aspersions. It is
not sufficient now adays to represent us Papists, Socinians, and Heretics;
that is an easy and an ordinary Slander; he was able to face that out when he
was but a Novice, and unexperienced in the Arts of Malice and Confidence: These
were his common Performances twenty or thirty years ago. But now his Mightiness
scorns to stoop his Prowess to such low and creeping Achievements; they become
not the Courage and the Confidence of so Renowned a Wight; he disdains to vent
a Slander that is not too big for any Man's Throat or Conscience but his own.
And now things are come to that desperate pass in the Church of England, that
they are not contented to be Jesuits and Socinians themselves, but (O Tempora!
O Mores!) they will force all others that desire to be admitted into her
Communion, to submit to Popish and Heretical Subscriptions; and there is no
other cause of the Independent Separation, than that they dare not in
Conscience conform to Popery and Socinianism. Dear Heart! How could I hug and
kiss thee for all this love and sweetness? Well fare poor Macedo for a modest
Fool! He could never have rubbed his Forehead to such a burnisht Confidence, as
to venture upon such notorious and palpable Forgeries, so contradictory both in
themselves, and to every Man's own Knowledge and Experience. For in the Name of
Truth, what new Doctrines have we made necessary to Conformity, over and above
the old Articles, which yet he is so far from bringing under this Indictment,
that he makes our departure from them the very Charge of our Apostasy? So that
how wild and wanton soever we may be in our own Sentiments, there is nothing to
be found in Nature of so daring and desperate a Confidence, beside the great
and renowned J. O. as to belch in the face of the Sun such foul and uncleanly
Railings. But he is a Man of that inveterate and incurable Pride, that there is
no rancour spiteful or disingenuous enough to be admired at in him.

But now that I have seized him, I cannot let him pass without taking notice to
the World of another eminent instance of his Ravishing Candor and Ingenuity:
That when he had without any Provocation, (though that he never needs) in a
public and solemn way undertaken the Defense of the Fanatic Cause, and when
he had reason done him in a particular Rejoinder to all his Pretenses and
Exceptions, such as they were, he could think of satisfying his People, and
salving his Reputation by Scribbling over the very same stuff again, and
presenting it to the World in a new Pamphlet, and under another Title, without
regarding how comfortably it had been exposed and baffled by a loving Friend,
even for his own dear sake. For whoever will be at the idle pains to peruse his
late Discourse of Evangelical Love, Church Peace and Unity, will never be able
to find one syllable to the purpose, beside a perpetual Repetition of the old
worn-out Story of Unscriptural Ceremonies, and some frequent Whinings, and
sometimes Ravings about his hard usage in being so severely chastised, and
innumerable Suggestions that all that are or pretend to be Loyal to the present
Setlement of the Church of England, are not so upon any Principles of Integrity
or Conscience, but purely for their own seoular and carnal Ends: i. e. in plain
English, they are all downright Knaves. These are the most pertinent passages I
can meet with in the Book, but they are not very new; some others indeed I meet
with somewhat newer, but then they are not very pertinent. It is a very new
discovery to demonstrate that the Church of England is desperately
Schismatical, because the Independents are resolved one and all to continue
separate from her Communion; and though it is not as new, yet it is as odd an
Observation, that all Parties in Christendom (except only the little Flock of
their own Secret Ones) are professed Rebels to the most necessary and
indispensable Institutions of the Lord Christ, that none of them ought to be
suffered to live in an open and habitual contempt of his Laws; particularly
that the Church of England is as little to be endured as the Church of Rome,
because they persecute those that are better than themselves; and St. John
tells us, (Revel. 21. 8.) Murder is as bad as Idolatry. If it will do him or
his cause any kindness, we will let these pass for New Lights, and wonderful
pat to the business of Toleration. Did ever Man write or speak with such a
fluent Vein of looseness and impertinency? Is it credible that any Creatures
that pretend to common sense, and the shapes of Men, could ever accept, much
less admire such dull and intolerable Bungling? And yet it is rare and
admirable to the Wits of the Congregation; and the Doctor is a wonderfully
precious and convincing Man. But the truth is, he has an Advantage above most
of his Neighbors for Writing Nonsense in that his common Readers despair
beforehand to understand the Categoricalness of his Logic: Otherwise he
abounds so plentifully with Absurdities and Incoherences in every Page, that
there is nothing to keep him from being despicable even to the Apron-men of his
own Dispensation, but a peculiar Uncouthness and Obscurity of style; whereby as
they cannot hope to carry along with them the Thread and Connection of the
Discourse, so neither dare they presume to observe its Flaws and Weaknesses;
but (if their Prejudices so incline them) they suppose at all adventure some
extraordinary depth of Reason and Metaphysics, that Men of their Education are
neither able to fathom, nor obliged to understand.

And he may take his Liberty, as much and as long as he pleases, to amuse his
own gazing and admiring Drove with this profound and wonderful Nonsense,
provided he will be advised not to lay out his Talent to the disturbance of his
Neighbors: But if he will be venting his Gall and his Ignorance against the
established Laws and Constitutions of the Commonwealth, he must not take it ill,
if his shameful folly (not to name something worse) be discovered and laid open
to the World. And therefore in my Opinion it would be very good advice, if he
would be persuaded to give over this threadbare Controversy of
Church Government, and spend the remainder of his Days in embellishing and
illustrating that great and important Discovery, with which he has so lately
obliged the World, viz. That the Determination of a Septimary Portion in the
Hebdomadal Revolution, is, or is not, (I care not whether) an addition of the
Law Decalogical to the Law Natural. Ah! What Edifying Doctrine is this to the
White-Aprons? It could be no less to them than a Demonstrative Evidence of the
Morality and Divine Institution of the Lords Day; and doubtless they would,
with the Jews, sooner Roast themselves than a small Joint of Mutton upon the Day
of Sacred Rest. He may (I say) trifle with his own Proselytes after this rate
as much and as long as he pleases, and no body will be much concerned to
disabuse People so resolved to abuse themselves. But if he will not be
satisfied with the Privilege of being learnedly impertinent, unless he may
make use of his Liberty to discompose the Public Peace, he may thank himself
for what will follow: For he will be sure to encounter to his cost too many
Persons that love their Country too well, to suffer it to be overrun and
debaucht by such shallow Mountebanks and Impostors.

But my just Indignation against this Man's insolent and insufferable Behavior,
transports me into too vehement and smart Resentments of his vile and dirty
Practices; yet because he is so forward upon all occasions, and without them
too, to appear in the Head of the Party, and is at present not only the chief
Ringleader, but the only Champion of the Cause* I cannot prevail with my self
to let him go yet, without remarking for the prevention of all their
Subterfuges and Tricks of escape, one little Artifice whereby his Followers
would salve and redeem his Reputation, viz. That his Adversary was not so
ingenu^us as to engage him upon equal terms, but took advantage of his old
Miscarriages and Engagements in the late Rebellion, and prevailed more by
personal Reflections than strength of Argument; so that though he could with
case have Replied to all his pertinent Objections, yet he could not in
discretion revive so many old and forgotten Stories.

1. Be it so. And if he stand indicted of such Enormities against his Prince
and Country, as are neither to be exoused nor defended, yet however it is not
modest for him to defy his Accusation as he has done in public by charging it
with slander and scurrility. If he be not guilty, he ought to plead his
Innocence; if he be, he might have some reason to complain of want of Candor,
but none at all of want of Truth. And it only becomes his Confidence, to defeat
the Credibility of a plain and undeniable matter of fact, by hussing and giving
the lie in plain English, and that in defiance to the Convictions of his own
Conscience, to the Testimony of his own Writings, and to the Notoreity of his
own Practices. This is pretty well for Modesty. But if he ever were guilty, he
is so still; for nothing can recover his Innocence, but a sincere and an hearty
Repentance; and till he has cut off all his Ancient Crimes, by some public
acknowledgment and satisfaction, he cannot be supposed to have forsaken his old
Dispensation, but still to continue as very a secret one as ever. And now had
he been proceeded with, as they pretend, it would not have been, in the least,
impertinent to his Adversary's Cause or Argument, whilst he was persuading the
Government to beware of that sort of men, to represent how those that are most
forward to appear in their Defense, were never considerable for any thing but
Sedition and Disloyalty: And that is a very strong Accession to the direct
force of his Argument, when we find none (...) (...) enervate or disparage its
Ev^ (...) (...) such as are known to design nothin^ (...) ^hief or disturbance.
And there can scarce be a more effectual Proof of the Dangers, and
Ill-consequences of Toleration, than that J. O. and some others of his Kidney,
so much bestir themselves to obtain it: all Governments have certainly reason
enough to be jealous of all such designs as are carried on by professed Enemies
of the State. The only unanswerable Objection that the Nature of the Argument
it self affords, is, the natural Tendency of fanatic and enthusiastic
Principles, to wild and seditious Practices; but when such right peaceable men
as these are observed to come forth in its defiance, that farther proves the
Event, that was but probable in the Nature of things, to be really laid, and
intended in the minds of men; and the Result of all is, that public Broils and
Tumults is not only the natural Effect, but the serious end of all their
Pretenses. And this I presume is competently material to the scope of the
Discourse.

And as this way of Procedure could not have been justly charged with any
Impertinence, so much less with any Disingenuity; for in sober sense, what
milder Correction could a Person so obnoxious deserve, or modestly expect,
though it were only to take down his malepert Confidence and Presumption; but
when, beside that, it was so direct a Consideration to the matter in Debate, no
Laws of Ingenuity could oblige, no nor scarce excuse any man, that should baulk
such weighty advantages to so honest a cause, only out of regard and tenderness
to a malefactors Reputation. Especially when he shall so often (as he has
publicly done) proclaim open Defiance to all Accusations, boast of his own
meekness and innocence, and with such an intolerable Confidence, pish at the
vanity, and silliness of all such ungrounded reflections. What other course can
be taken with such a boisterous Huff, than to dash back his bold Affronts and
Challenges into his own Teeth, and beat down such a daring Impudence with the
weight of its own Guilt. And thereby let the world see how little Conscience or
Modesty is to be expected from these demure precious ones, that can bare up so
bravely under such a sinking load of horror and vilany. And though the
Government has been pleased to forgive and forget all their Godly pranks, yet
it is not to be endured, to see them look so big, and talk so loud upon
Presumption of their own Innocence; and who could believe it, that People so
guilty upon all accounts, both before God and Man, (and so they are and must
be, till they have disowned their former Practices, and renounced their former
Principles by some public Protestations of Repentance) should be so
irrecoverably fallen from all shame and modesty, as to spit at the most modest
suspicions of their Honesty, to stand on tip-toe upon their own Justification,
and in stead of being brought to any Remorse or Contrition for all their horrid
and public Crimes, to cast off all Reflections upon their Guilt, with all the
stateliness of Pride, and all the assurance of a good Conscience? And therefore
until they have given us some more satisfactory Symptoms and Indications of
their Repentance, they have nor can have no reason to complain of our want of
Charity for supposing them constant to their good old Principles, and their
good old Cause. If these Men complain of their hard usage, till they have given
us some hopes of their Reformation, so may Wolves and Padders.

2. Supposing he had been bespattered with uncivil and unhandsom Reflections,
yet certainly a Person of his abstracting and Metaphysical Head, is able to
separate the Argument from the Abuse; and though possibly he could not wipe
them off to the satisfaction of all Readers, yet he might fairly neglect them,
as of no Concernment to the matter of his Enquiry. And he is not so shamefaced
as not to Huff and Out-swagger all Affronts. Nay, he has quit himself like
himself of them already; not only by holding forth that it is more
Christian-like to forbear all such Provocations, because they tend to mutual
Exasperations of Spirit, (for that signifies little more, than that he, Good
Man! is very angry, and I think he has no very great reason to be very well
pleased) but also by retorting them with all the Keenness of Revenge, whilst,
poor Nothing! he protests his unfeigned Resolutions of Meekness and
Forgiveness; as he has done a thousand times over in his late goodly Discourse
of Evangelical Love and Unity, particularly page 8. he defies all the Revilings
of his Adversaries, because they are such Persons that have no regard to Truth,
or Modesty, or Sobriety toward God or Man, and shall be sure to be accounted
with at the Day of Judgment, (to the great Relief of his tender Heart;) That
are animated by their secular Interest or desire of Revenge; that are
unacquainted with the Spirit of the Gospel, and the Christian Religion; that
are incompassionate toward the Infirmities of others, whereof yet none in the
World give greater Instances than themselves; that have no thoughts but of Rage
and Destruction; and that, had they Power, would render all Christians like the
Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites, that is, are for nothing less than
Massacres, and cutting of Throats, etc.

Sweet Sir! Enough, enough of these healing Words; we are vanquished for ever
with these generous strains of Meekness and Civility: Did ever Man pass by such
unparalled Injuries and Provocations, with so much Gallantry and Greatness of
Mind? What execrable Miscreants must they be, that could treat so brave an
Adversary with Rudeness and Incivility, or assault such an Heroic Ingenuity
with ignoble and unhandsom Arts? He is too hard for us at all Weapons, there is
no contending with a Person of such an Adamantine Honor; he rebukes us with
his Endearments, and strikes us dead with his sweet and kissing Looks. We
yield, we yield; we cannot resist all this kind and melting Goodness. He has
requited our Malice with so fair and ^ivil a Character, that it were a
notorious Calumny to paint any thing but the Devil himself in blacker Colors.
And if but one half of this Enamouring Description that he has bestowed upon
his Adversaries in the very Pangs of Love and Compassion, were true or
credible, no Man that is yet unhang'd (unless he had been marked thrice at
least with the Honorable Brand of Authority) would ever be so mad as to change
condition with such cast and irreclaimable Wretches. However, we accept his
kind Offer, and his Good Meaning; and seeing he is willing to respite his
Revenge to the Day of Judgment, (Ah, sweet Day! when these People of God shall
once for all, to their unspeakable comfort and support, wreak their Eternal
Revenge upon their reprobate Enemies) it is agreed upon: for we are not so
fierce and fiery, but we can wait with as much patience as he for satisfaction.
And therefore let us by mutual consent forbear all this unnecessary Courtship
and Complement for the future, and fall on bluntly upon the Argument without
hugging and kissing, before we draw Sword: It is a pretty point of Honor for
young Gentlemen; but we that are a more sullen sort of Combatants, may without
any great inconvenience spare the Ceremony. And now upon this Proposal, it will
be found that these intemperate Reflections (as he calls them) are so far from
making the Book unanswerable, that they are the only thing to which he has
ventured to make any Reply: so that it is plain this is not the Reason, but
purely the Pretense of his Reluctance. For, alas! the Evidence of the Cause is
so bright and convictive, as prevents all tolerable Mistakes or Exceptions; and
as for his bold and barefaced Falsifications, they ar^ all spent in the former
Engagement, and all his juggling shifts have been so sufficiently laid open to
the World, that they can never do him or his Cause any service for the future.
And setting these aside, the Argument of the Controversy is so plain and
easy, that it is not capable of any farther Doubt or Disputation.

For all their Exceptions (especially as they concern the Church of England)
relate either to the Power it self, or to the Matters of the Command: the first
are directly levelled against the very Being of Authority; and Magistrates of
what kind soever, according to their general Pretenses, must not dare to put
any Restraints upon their Subjects Consciences, lest they invade the Divine
Prerogative, overthrow the Fundamental Liberties of Humane Nature, and undo
honest Men only for their Loyalty to God and their Religion. Now if this Right
be claimed without Restraint or Limitation, then the Consequence is
unavoidable, That Subjects may, whenever they please, cross with the Authority
of their Governors, upon any pretense that can wear the Name, or make a show
of Religion. But this is so grossly absurd, that J. O. (nor any Man else in his
Wits) never had the Courage to assert it. And then the Necessity of a Sovereign
Power in Matters of Religion is granted, and all Arguments that prove it in
general necessary to Peace and Government, are allowed, or at least not
contradicted: for whoever admits an Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, howsoever
bounded and limited, admits it; and that is enough to the first Assertion of a
Supreme Authority over the Conscience in Matters of Religion. But then (say
they) there are some particular things exempted from all Humane Cognizance,
which if the Civil Magistrate presume to impose upon the Consciences of his
Subjects, as he ventures beyond the Warrant of his Commission, so he can tie no
Obligation of Obedience upon them, seeing they can be under no Subjection in
those things where they are under no Authority. Now this pretense resolves it
self thus; that they do not quarrel his Majesty's Ecclesiastical Supremacy, but
they acknowledge it to be the undoubted Right of all Sovereign Princes, as long
as its Exercise is kept within due bounds of Modesty and Moderati^n. Which
being granted, all their general Exceptions against the Sufficiency of the
Authority it self, are quitted, and they have now nothing to except against but
the excess of its Jurisdiction. So that having gained this ground, the next
thing to be assigned and determined, is the just and lawful bounds of this
Power, and that has been already distinctly enough described as to all the
Defense of Eccles. Pol. from p. 232. to p. 264.
most material Cases that can probably occur in Humane Life; all which may be
summed up in this one general Rule, viz. That Governors take care not to
impose things apparently evil, and that Subjects be not allowed to plead
Conscience in any other case, this is the safest and most easy Rule to secure
the Quiet of all that are upright and peaceable; and all that refuse Subjection
to such a gentle and moderate Government, make themselves incapable of all the
Benefits of Society; in that if we stop not their Liberty of Remonstrating to
the Commands of Authority at this Principle, we shall for ever be at an utter
loss for making any certain Provisions for the Peace and Security of
Commonwealths. So that if they will attempt any thing here to any purpose, they
must again either cancel all Ecclesiastical Power, or confine it within
narrower bounds of Jurisdiction, both which are equally absurd and dangerous;
the former we have already cashiered as flat Anarchy; and the latter is no
less, because there is no end of the Follies and Impostures, or at least the
Pretenses of Religion: so that if they may be suffered to overruled the Power
of Princes, then can Princes claim no Power over any that have no mind to obey
them, i. e. they have none at all, because all that are or would be disobedient
may plead dissatisfaction for their Privilege, and that supersedes all the
proceedings of Authority. And here too before they can do any good, they must
justify the reasonableness of the Pretenses of Scandal, or an unsatisfied
Conscience in Opposition to the Public Laws: i. e. they must prostitute all
the Wisdom and Power of Government to the Humor and Ignorance of the common
People, and that is plainly to destroy it. Nay, though we should grant them all
this, and any thing else that they can with or without modesty demand; yet when
all is done, the Puritan Controversy will prove the most desperate and
indefensible Cause in the World. For that relates to the Lawfulness or
Unlawfulness of the Matters of the particular Laws and Constitutions
themselves; and now when the Question is cast upon this Issue, attend Heavens
and Stars! Here are Wonders and Mysteries to be discovered, that would make an
Archangel stare! A flourishing Nation has been embroiled in a bloody War: As
Virtuous a Prince as ever sat upon a Throne, has been Murdered and Martyred:
An Established Church has been Plundered and Dissolved, and Fellow Subjects have
been enraged against each other with implacable Zeal and Cruelty, and we are
still shattered into numberless Schisms and Factions, and People are seared
from returning to their Obedience upon peril of their Eternal Salvation; though
for what reason all this is done, Elias must tell us when he comes, for as yet
it is above the reach of our Inquisition, and the comprehension of our
Understandings.

As for my own part, I have wasted not a little time (I fear more than I shall
be able to give a good account of) to search and enquire what mighty Prize it
is that they contend for in good earnest; and yet after all my pains, I must
protest that I understand their meaning no more, than I do the Great Secret, or
the Philosophers Stone. For the result of all their endless talk, is plainly
reducible to these two Heads, Either what they plead in their own behalf, that
they may have Liberty to Worship God according to that Rule that is instituted
and prescribed to them in the Gospel: or what they object against us, which is
in the last Issue of things nothing else than the horrible Unwarrantableness of
Symbolical Ceremonies. As for the first, they still persist to urge it with
their old Zeal, Clamor and Confidence, though it is apparently no more
concerned in the matter of our Controversy than the possibility of squaring
the Circle. For when we descend to particulars, and proceed by Induction, there
is not any thing by which they divide and distinguish themselves from the
Church of England, that can so much as pretend to the least footsteps in the
Word of God. And though they have been so often challenged, upbraided and
taunted, to show one Divine or Apostolical Injunction that expressly requires
their way of Worship, as far as it is opposed to our established Rites and
Constitutions; yet you may sooner beat out their brains (if they have any) than
make them so much as attend to your motion; or at least prevail with them to
specify this general Rule in any one particular case. If they would but once
undertake this, it would bring all our Differences to a very speedy and a very
easy issue. For if the Scripture have determined any certain and standing
Rules of outward Worship, what ean be more reasonably demanded, or easily
performed than to assign them? It is full as obvious as to find out the Rules
of the Liturgy by the Rubricks and Canons of the Church: If it have not, what
can be more disingenuous or seditious than for men to stand upon such
conditions of their Obedience, as they know to be impossible? They have had
time enough to search the Sacred Records for particular Forms and Rituals of
outward Worship; and when with all their pains they have not been able to
discover so much as one express Institution, is it not prodigious beyond all
Precedent that they should persevere in their old Confidence, and that in
defiance to their own knowledge and experience? And they may with all their
searching as soon find out the Institution of all the Laws and Ceremonies of
the Order of the Garter in holy Writ, as any one Form of Worship enjoined to
all Ages of the Church under a perpetual and unalterable Obligation, beside
barely the two Sacraments. What can be imagined more peevish or humoursom, than
for Men under so much demureness and seeming Sanctity, to persist so
seditiously in such a baffled and precarious pretense? It is rank and
self-convicted waywardness.

But then, Secondly, When they come to object against us, the last result of
all their outory there, is, the sad unwarrantableness of Symbolical Ceremonies;
though had they made it Syncategorematical Ceremonies, the Objection had been
more terrible than it is by at least three or four Syllables. It is both an
hard and a big word, and for any thing the People know, may signify one of the
bloodiest things in Popery. They will endure any Ceremonies, provided they be
well purged of all their Symbolicalness; that is the very Essence of Paganism,
Superstition and Idolatry. They will, and ought sooner to broil in Smithfield,
than submit to such Abominations of the Strumpet and the Beast. It is less
dangerous to Worship the Host, and more easy to believe Transubstantiation,
than to defile our selves with this lewd and Antichristian Trangam. The
Jesuits Powder was first extracted out of it, it is worse than Witcheraft and
Sorcery, the least Infusion of it immediately transforms a Man into a Papist or
a Jew, or any thing else as the Enchantment is laid. It Is the very Potion
wherewith the Scarlet Whore made Drunk the Kings of the Earth. Heliogabalus and
Bishop Bonner loved it like Clary and Eggs, and always made it their
Mornings-Draught upon Burning Days; and it is not to be doubted but that the
seven Vials of Wrath, that were to be poured upon the Nations of the Earth
under the Reign of Antichrist, were filled with Symbolical Extracts and Spirits.

And were all this dismal Story a sad and serious Truth, Men could scarce be
more affrighted than they are at two or three very innocent Ceremonies, only
because they are called Symbolical: and yet after all this hideous noise and
outery, (1.) It is very unhappy that there are no Ceremonies to be found out in
the World, but what are Symbolical, in that it is the very Nature, and the only
warrantable Use of Ceremonies to be Symbolical. But, (2.) Suppose there were
any that are pure and Unsymbolical, yet it will be a cruel task to find out any
certain Prohibition, either in the Law of Nature, or the Word of God, against
all those that are Symbolical; and if it cannot be done, they will not prove so
deadly dangerous as has been hitherto imagined. And, (3.) It is still somewhat
more difficult to find out the several sorts and species of Symbolical
Ceremonies, and which are allowable and which not, by what marks we may know
which are natural and which are only customary, which owe their beginning to
Chance, and which to Institution, where the Scripture has allowed one to be
used in the Worship of God, and where it has disavowed the other; and why the
Sovereign Power may not bestow this Privilege upon a Ceremony by virtue of its
Prerogative, as well as Use and Custom; what greater Immorality there is in
them when they are determined by the Command and Institution of the Prince,
than when by the Consent and Institution of the People; with so many more
curious and profound Enquiries, that they must spend whole Waggon-Loads of
Metaphysics, to prepare their way, and make their Approaches to the subtilty
of the Argument. Are not these Men (think you) pretty well resolved upon it, to
be for ever peevish and troublesome, that can raise so much dust and disorder
out of such slender and beggarly Pretenses? Pretenses so apparently vain and
frivolous, that their persisting in them so long and so stubbornly, can prove
nothing but their being utterly forsaken either of all Modesty or
Understanding. Had they any thing in the World material to object, they would
never make so very much of such very Nonsense, that has nothing else to defend
it even from the scorn of the common People, than that it is sheltered under a
word that they understand not. But (say some) if their scruples are so very
Childish, why do not you that are, or pretend to be wiser, condescend a little
to their folly, rather than give them opportunity of creating so much
disturbance to so little purpose? In Answer to these Men, though there were no
other Reason of our firm adherence to our old Constitutions, yet this is a very
sufficient one, That we can never satisfy their Demands, nor remove their
Grounds of dislike, by all the Alterations and Condescentions in the World. For
let us order our external Worship with as much caution and simplicity as
themselves pretend to, yet we can never prevent their Objection, unless we
quite abolish it; and it dashes as much against their own way of Worship as
against ours: for therein consists the very Use and Nature of all outward
Worship, to express and represent the inward sense of our Minds by some outward
Indication: so that if there be any outward Worship in the World, there is no
avoiding it, but it must be significant and Symbolical.

And now, I hope, I may safely appeal to the Reader, to search the Records of
all Ages and Nations in the World; and though he will meet with numberless
Stories of strange and unaccountable Schisms, yet he will never find any People
so ridiculously peevish, as to separate from the Church they lived under upon
such woeful Scruples and Exceptions as are pleaded and insisted upon by our
present Dissenters. They are as new as they are impertinent, peculiar to
themselves, unheard and unthought of to all the World beside.

3. But, Thirdly, What if his Adversary has not made any unkind Reflections
upon his Person, nor taken any Advantages against himself or his Cause, from
any of his former Exorbitances? I will assure thee (Reader) if he have, they
are very slily and hintingly couched: I have searched for them with all
possible diligence and attention; and after all my Industry, am not able to
furnish my Common-Place-Book with any one of these Rhetorical Embellishments. I
must confess I meet with some Passages produced against himself out of his own
Writings; but then I must acknowledge too, (to do right to all Parties) that
they are all such as were extorted by his own rash and hot headed Defiances,
and such as his Adversary was forced to appeal to, (sorely against his own
will) in defense of his own Honesty. And thus when J. O. so daringly boasts of
his Constancy to his own Principles, and of his unalterable Zeal for Toleration
under all Dispensations, and Providential Revolutions; and yet confesses at the
very entrance of his Discourse, That in all Pleas for Liberty of Conscience, he
and all others are forced to juggle and dissemble with the World, and to admit
of such a Supposition as flatly contradicts their own first and Fundamental
Principle, viz. That there is no Form of Worship Lawful and Allowable but what
is prescribed in the Word of God; and that is their own: Now what could be more
pertinent than to show how their Language alters, when they speak out their
full meaning? and then they breathe nothing but Death and Destruction to all
Dissenters; and this is largely enough evidenced out of the inspired Writings
of J. O. who in all his Pamphlets and Preachments for Indulgence, is ever
careful to except all Parties from the Benefit of that favor, but only the
Army-Saints, that were necessary to support the Tyranny, and secure the Plunder
of the Lords Anointed Ones. And this (I suppose) is farther evidenced past all
contradiction, not only from numberless Passages of his own Books, but from the
very Pretense upon which he founds all his Demands, in that the things they
desire to be indulged in, are upon their own Supposition for ever incapable of
any such Liberty, because (as they pretend) they are no less than Matters of
indispensable Duty.

The second occasion that I observed of raking into his Scribles, was this,
That when his Adversary had charged the Nonconformists with the Modesty of
appropriating to themselves the Titles and Characters of Godliness, yet this
charitable Man cries, Tush, to the Calumny, and defies it in the name of all
the Secret Ones; and especially as far as it concerns his own worthy individual
Self: though as great and considerable a Man as he is, I have some reason to be
confident be was never so much as intended or thought of in the Accusation: And
therefore I appeal to all the World, whether any thing could be more
pertinently Replied to rebuke the boldness of this Challenge, than by checking
the career of his Confidence, even out of his own spiritual and selfabasing
Writings? And if it could possibly be proved that never any Man was more
malapert and forward to pass Reprobating Censures upon all Parties, than J. O.
that alone might pass for a sufficient Correction of such rude and unadvised
Challenges. Nay, had he been content barely to deny this rough Impeachment, and
not upbraided his Adversary to Traverse it, as he would not forfeit his
Ingenuity, he might (I verily believe) have escaped all that disgrace, that did
and must unavoidably follow upon his Public Trial.

The third main occasion that necessitated his Adversary to make use of this
Weapon, was this; That when he had only charged some Men (that yet were
nameless) with owning this poor innocent Principle; that to pursue Success,
though in Villainy and Rebellion, is to follow Providence; this Man had the face
and the fully too to defy it for a monstrous Fiction, and a huge yelling Lie.
Now it becomes not a Gentleman, and much less a Divine, to put up the Lie,
especially when it is dashed in his Teeth with all the Circumstances of Public
Scorn and Disdain; and therefore though probably he were provided of a thousand
other Instances to justify the Truth of his Accusation against some other Men,
yet it was most proper to vindicate his own Integrity, by laying the whole Load
upon this Man's unparalled and intolerable Confidence. And for this reason it
is (I presume) that he has given such a right godly Account of Providence out
of the Writings of J. O. as only defeats all the Obligations of Religion and
common Honesty, and (if there be occasion for it) will at any time justify all
the Wickedness in the World. When I first perused it, I must confess I could
not but tremble to see any man so desperately debauched as to disgorge such a
Load of rank Blasphemy and Disloyalty, and that with the Warrant and Confidence
of a Divine Authority. The Discourse is made up of such lewd and unaccountable
Principles, that should all the Impostors in the World, nay all the Powers of
Darkness club together to contrive a compleater Doctrine of Religious Falsehood
and Immorality, they could never outdo its Horror and Wickedness. And now if
such unavoidable Arguments as these may be called Personal Reflections, or if
such Personal Reflections may be thought disingenuous, there is then no remedy
but it must be granted that J. O. has had somewhat harder measure than was
necessary: if not, I hope it is no Offense against the Rules of Candor or Good
Manners for an Honest Man to impeach a Malefactor, especially when he is
forced to it in defense of his own Honor and Reputation.

If there be any other sharp words in any other Paragraphs of his Adversaries
Discourse, of which he complains under his old common place of Railing; to that
I can say no more, than to inform them, that there is some little difference
between Railing and just Reproofs, and to challenge them to specify on tart
and severe Expression, that the Argument will not only bear, but require;
otherwise I am apt to believe, by the example of all the most Classical of
Ancient and Modern Professors of Controversy, it is no very foul play nor
Language to discover palpable Forgeries, affected Mistakes, thick
Contradictions, and shameless Impertinencies. If it is, then I must be so
ingenuous as to confess, that his Adversary is one of the most unmerciful and
uncleanly Writers that ever pretended to Good Nature or Good Manners. But when
a bold Scribler shall dare to impose upon the World with the most enormous and
ungrounded Falsifications, I think it is altogether as eloquent, and as civil
too, plainly to tell him, (as that Author has done) in blunt and downright
English, that they are impudent and inexcusable Falsehoods, as tamely to say,
Verily, verily, forsooth you not say Troth. And there lies the vebemence and
cruelty of his Style, in insulting over such notorious and unpalliable Tricks
of Dishonesty. No Invectives can be sharp enough to reprove mere and affected
Calumny; and had he had any appearance of pretense either to excuse or to
alleviate his Mistakes, be might have called for Quarter, and challenged some
Mercy: but when he shall load an Honest Man that never provoked, no, nor
rivaled him, with such black and horrid Slanders, be Outlaws himself to all the
Claims and Privileges of Civility. A wilful and convicted Forger, is every
where looked upon as an open and declared Enemy to the common Rights of
Humanity. And yet this Man's Malice is sadly aggravated by his Boldness for had
he accused his Adversary of treasonable Words, or suborned a Professor of
Villainy, to impeach him of Popish Plots against the State, (provided he were
not so unhappy as to swear he saw him take the Sacrament upon it in the
Conclave at Rome, at the very same instant of time, when five hundred Persons
of an unblemisht and unsuspected Reputation are able and ready to depose that
he was engaged in public Employment at London:) I say, had he revenged himself
of his Adversary thus, it would have abated of the Impudence, though not of the
Malice of his Forgery. For Words once spoken, vanish into the empty Air, and
are never after to be produced in Court to clear a Man's Reputation: but when he
shall charge him (as he has often done) with nothing less or more than only
Blasphemy, and then think to make good his Charge by forging Words that may be
so easily confuted by legible Black and White; that, I say again, is Confidence
beyond all Example, and above all Imitation.

And then as for any other Passages that they complain of under the Title of
Arrogance and Contempt; I can and will say no more to them, than that it is a
sad Unhappiness to have to do with such an unreasonable sort of People, when it
is impossible to make a just Representation of the folly of their Pretenses,
without upbraiding it: No Argument in so palpable a Cause can be duly urged to
its proper Head, without some Satyr and Invective; so far is it from being any
excess of temper, that it is downright Dullness and want of Wit, not to expose
their Persons whilst we confute their Principles: for how is it to be avoided,
but that such Men must appear contemptible to all Mankind, that have so little
Wit to believe, or so much Confidence to maintain such monstrous and thick
Absurdities? So that they plainly owe all the Disdain they complain of, to
themselves, and the Nature of their Cause; and if their Talkings be so
wretchedly trifling as they are proved to be, they can never be scorned too
much for disturbing a settled Church to so little, so no purpose. So that all
the severity of that Discourse, how stern soever it may appear, results purely
from the Nature of the Argument, and not from any peculiar fierceness of
Expression: And if that Authors Style may to any seem more unmerciful than that
of some of his Neighbors, I think he need only desire those Persons to
consider, whether they can find any other Ground for their so thinking, than
that he may possibly have pursued their Pretenses a little more closely and
severely to the last and most lamentable Issue of their Folly.

And yet after all this needless Apology, beside what that Author himself has
made in his own behalf, more than became him; bad J. O. been treated as rudely
and unmercifully as it is pretended, yet it can never be pretended that he was
treated any worse than he deserved: for he is a Person of such a pernicious
Temper, of such a swollen Insolence, of such a restless and implacable Spirit, of
such a sworn and inveterate Hatred to the present Government of Church and
State, that he ought, without Ceremony or fear of Incivility, to be pursued as
the greatest Pest and most dangerous Enemy of the Commonwealth; and whoever
wishes well to his Country, can never do it greater service, than by beating
down the Interest and Reputation of such Sons of Belial. Had he ever given us
any Symptoms of Modesty or Remorse for his old Impostures; would he have been
true to his own Doctrine of wheeling about with Providence; would he but deign
to give any Engagements of Loyalty and Allegiance, only whilst it is in fashion
and reputation, and acknowledge his good old Principles to have become wicked
and abominable, because they are now, and so long have been disowned by
Providential Revolutions: Nay, did he not give us manifest Tokens of Rage and
Indignation at the disappointment of his former Designs; did he not employ all
his Industry to discompose our present Setlement; did he not make it his
business in private and (as far as he dares) in public to keep up the old
Schism, and to keep back the People from returning to Peace and Sobriety; did
he not train up Nurslings of the Cause in Principles of Enthusiasm and
Sedition; did he not always thrust forward to appear in the Head of the Mutiny;
did he not set up his Flag of Defiance against the Church of England, and
bestir himself with all his Zeal and Power against all Endeavors of Peace and
Reconciliation; did he not inflame and exasperate the Minds of his Disciples,
against the Established way of Worship and Discipline, and choose rather than see
it perfectly settled, to let loose Antichrist, and call in the Turk: in a word,
did he not show himself past all hopes of Reformation, by his incorrigible
Boldness and Confidence, he might be allowed some Grains of Mercy and
Tenderness. But if he be a Person of such a gangrened Temper and malignant
Spirit, no body that is not concerned and involved in the same guilt himself,
can ever be concerned to have such a Caitiff spared. Especially when by his
Zeal and Pragmaticalness he has advanced himself to some considerable Power and
Reputation with his Party; in so much that great Numbers of silly People run
greedily into Schismatical courses for no other reason than because J. O.
steers and drives them. He is (to his great content) become the Head of the
Faction, and the Oracle of the separate Churches; and is consulted in all Cases
of Conscience, and in all Projects of Anarchy; and his bare Authority and Nod,
is to the Disciples a satisfactory Determination of all Enquiries. And if it be
so, it is not only fit, but necessary to take down such an aspiring Mind from
its height and loftiness, to take off all his demure and hypocritical
Disguises, and to show him to the deluded People in his own Colors; and if it
be possible to disabuse them, by letting them see that the only thing that lies
at the bottom of all his Tumultuatingness of Spirit, is Pride and Ambition. I
ever had so good an Opinion of the well-meaning of the Vulgar sort, that I am
confident great Multitudes would quickly return to themselves and to their
Duty, did they but see into the Dishonesty of their Leaders, and into the
Designs of their Practices: and I can scarce judge so severely of any Member of
his own Rendevouz, as to believe he would ever have entrusted his Soul and its
Eternal Interest to his Conduct, had he but understood the Rankness of his
Blasphemies against the Divine Providence. And that is one of the chiefest Arts
they make use of to keep their People fast to their Communion, viz. To bar up
their Minds against all ways of being undeceived; if they do but light upon a
Book that reflects upon their Reputation, it is immediately wrested out of
their hands; and they are frighted from perusing it, because (as they inform
them) it is stuff't with nothing but Railing, and Wicked, and Ungodly Opinions.
But were they so hardy as, notwithstanding their frightful Tales, to examine
and judge impartially, it is not to be doubted but that their Conventicles
would quickly moulder away, if they did not suddenly vanish and disappear: so
that at last nothing will be found more serviceable toward the cure of our
Schisms and Divisions, than to deal plainly and sincerely with the People, in
acquainting them with the Blasphemous Doctrines and Seditious Practices of
these Achitophels.

And therefore I would advise J. O. for the future, to forbear all Public
Attempts against the Church; and if he will not, he will find all the Rebuke he
has hitherto suffered, to be but the beginnings of his sorrows, and will be
brought to the Sledge oftener than he is aware of: for if he be not taken down
with open and continual Disgraces, his Pride will quickly grow raging and
insupportable. I know he will complain of this as the most intemperate Language
that was ever poured upon him by any Adversary; but it is no matter for that, as
long as I know them, and have proved them to be Words of Truth and Sobriety:
they proceed not from Passion or Revenge, but from an upright and composed
Mind, that upon mature Judgment chooses this way of procedure as most proper and
rational against such an enormous and irreclaimable Offender. I have not skill
enough in the Tricks of Hypocrisy, to protest my Friendship and Charity to my
Enemies in the coarsest Expressions of Rancour and Bitterness; as this
meek-spirited Man always does, with heaping up all the Recriminations that (he
tells us) he might, but will not retort; and so in one breath vents his Malice,
and boasts his Charity: and were it not for this demure way of darting his
Revenge, it is manifest from the Genius of his Mind and Writings, that Death it
self would scarce be more disgustful, than an hearty forgiveness; otherwise he
would not always issue out his Pardons with such spiteful and stabbing
Intimations. But for my own part, I love nothing more than a frank and an open
Integrity, and endeavor nothing more than to deal clearly and undisguisedly
with all Men; and therefore having plainly enough told him his own, and nothing
but his own as to his Principles, I need not to protest my unfeigned Love and
Charity toward his Person; I am too well ass^red of the Uprightness of my
Purposes, to condescend to such faint and mis-giving Expressions; for it is
nothing else but a diffidence of their own Sincerity, that puts Men upon such
needless Appeals and Protestations. And therefore in stead of that, I shall
only add, That I do not in the least tax his private Conversation; and (for any
thing I ever will know, for I scorn ever to enquire) he may live as becomes a
good and an honest Man among his Neighbors and Acquaintance: the only thing I
lay to his Charge, is his insolent and unpardonable Behavior toward the
Public; and it is purely for the sake, and in the behalf of that, that I
account with him so severely for his old Arrears. Which yet I should willingly
have spared, (so tender am I of the Laws of Good Nature and Civility, even
toward all that have forfeited their Right in them) could I ever have
discovered the least appearance of Integrity either in his Writings or Actions,
or the least tokens of Repentance for his former Crimes, or the least ground of
hope for his future Reformation: but when nothing appears but reprobate
Hardness and Impenitence, and an obstinate persisting in his old Rancour, his
case is desperate; and when Men are past Grace, they are past Mercy too.

And thus having done him Right, and his Pamphlet Reason, and prevented the
Design of escaping the Disgrace of his Overthrow, by sending abroad new
Challenges before he had discharged himself of his old Engagements; it is high
time to return to the Argument, upon which I was entering, when he came in my
way to divert me, viz.

To consider what likelihood, or how much Danger there is of the Return of
Popery into this Nation.

For my own part, I know none, but the Nonconformists boisterous and
unreasonable Opposition to the Church of England; for if ever that be
Re-erected, it must be upon the Ruins of this; as long as this stands in Power
and Reputation, it will easily beat back and baffle all the Attempts of Rome,
and all its Adherents. Our Reformation is Established upon such unblameable
Grounds and Principles, that all the Learning and Wit of our Adversaries was
never able to fasten any Reproach or Dishonor upon the Constitution it self;
and next to the Puritan Cause, there was never any so unequally managed as the
Controversy between us and the Romanists; their most plausible Reasonings are
evidently no better than little Tricks and Sophisms, and seem intended by
themselves rather to abuse the Simple, than to satisfy the Wise: in so much
that it is very hardly credible that those Persons who have lately appeared in
the Cause, can notwithstanding all their seeming Zeal and Earnestness, be
really in good earnest in their Pretenses; but it is somewhat more wonderful,
that they should have the Confidence to suppose the World should be so simple
as to think them so, when they can boast such idle talk for Demonstration, as
themselves (unless their Skulls are stufft with Mud and Saw-Dust) cannot but
know to be mere Trifling, and arrant Sophistry. And no wonder, for every Cause
must be defended as it can; their Innovations are so undeniable, and the Design
of our Reformation so apparently Apostolical, that those People must needs
argue at a strangely wild rate, that will be Demonstrating against Experience
and Ocular Inspection; and nothing could preserve them from being hissed out of
the Pit, but that they are extremely confident, and most Readers sufficiently
ignorant: so that the Church of England may safely defy all their Opposition,
she does not stand upon such trembling Foundations as to be thrust down with
Bullrush-spears, with sure Footings, and Oral Traditions, with Labyrinths and
Castles in the Air. If there be any danger from them, it lies more remote and
out of view; and if ever they get any Ground or Advantage of us, they will be
bound to make their Acknowledgments to the Puritans and the strength of their
Assistance. Not that these are a whit more considerable and dead-doing Enemy
than the other; they are Triflers beyond contempt; and when they have in their
mighty Zeal done their poor utmost, and spent all their Ammunition, a Man must
be very splenetick that can refrain from laughing at the folly and the
childishness of their Attempts. No, their strength lies in other Weapons, and
their danger arises from other Interests; their Faction may be made use of as
Instruments to dissolve and unravel the established frame of things, but they
can never be able to set up any of their own Models, and crazy Fancies in lieu
of it; they are too humorous and extravagant, ever to be reduced to practice; a
little Experience quickly brought them all into the scorn and contempt of the
common People; and it would be a pleasant speciacle to see either the Classical
or the Congregational Discipline Established by Authothority. But, alas! they
are only excellent at their old Destruction-Work; and beside that, their
Conceits are too freakish to be ever settled upon any lasting bottom; they will
always be supplanting each other by their mutual Squabbles and Animosities; so
that though they can never compass their own giddy Designs, yet by their
perpetual and restless Opposition to the Church, they may possibly be the
occasion of its utter Ruin and Dissolution; and by that Change may probably
make way for the Introduction of Popery: And this is most likely to be effected
by these Means, and upon these Accounts.

I. By creating Disorders and Disturbances in the State: For the present
Fanatics are so little Friends to the present Government, that their Enmity to
that is one of the main Grounds of their Quarrel to the Church. They are
generally fermented with a Republican Leven, and are fallen out with Monarchy it
self, as one of the greatest Instruments and Supports of Antichrist; and no
Liberty with them either of the Subject o^ of Conscience, but in a
Commonwealth; and that is a mighty piece of their Zeal and their Project to
reform the Government of Church and State to the Platform of the Low Countries.
It Is the Good Old Cause that is the strongest Band and Endearment of the present
Schism; and the greatest Agents in and for Conventicles, are Officers and
Chaplains of the old Army. And the warmest and most zealous of them, such as
have given the World no great ground to suspect, either from their professed
Principles or open Practices, that they have the least Concern or Tenderness
for Religion. But this is the only plausible Device that is left them, to rally
and randevouz the People of God into a Body by themselves, and distinct from
the rest of the Nation; and so keep up a Party always ready and prepared for
their Purposes; that if ever they may gain any hopes or advantages of
recovering the Kings Power, or the Bishops Lands, (for confident Men despair of
nothing) they may play the holy Brotherhood upon Demands and Attempts either of
the old or some other new thorough-godly Reformation, and enrage their Fiery
Spirits against the Abominations and Idolatries of the Whore and Antichrist.
Though the danger here is not very formidable, because Fanaticism it self is so
much worn into Contempt, (unless among the mere Rabble) that it is never likely
to gather strength enough to grapple with the Royal Power; but yet whatsoever
Power it has, (if it have any) lies in the Old Army and the Old Cause. And if
we observe the true Patriots of the Godly Party in every County, we shall find
them generally such Persons as were never much concerned to give his Majesty
any great assurance of their Loyalty and Allegiance; and there are very few (if
any) of any considerable Interest or Estate among them, that was not raised by
Plunder and Sequestration: so that the Chiefs of the Party are only the
Remainders of the old Rebellion, and the Republican Faction, and such as
profess no great kindness to Monarchy or Sovereign Princes. These that are so
stein'd with Guilt and Disloyalty, are they that are every where so zealous to
make their Cabals of Zeal, and their Musters of Reformation, or at least to
keep up the Cause and themselves above despair, by keeping up a factious and
discontented Party, that, if ever opportunity should favor them, may have
Strength and Interest enough to act over their old Designs of Zeal and
Reformation. Now at present it is the Way and the Wisdom of these Men to bend
all their Forces against the Ecclesiastic State, not only to disguise their
Intentions, but to remove the main hindrance of their Designs.

For it is the Church that is the best part of every Commonwealth; and when all
Projects are tried, Religion is the best Security of Peace and Obedience: The
Power of Princes would be but a very precarious thing, without the Assistance
of Ecclesiastics, and all Government does and must owe its quiet and
continuance to the Churches Patronage; it is the Authority that has over the
Consciences of Subjects, that chiefly keeps the Crown upon the Princes Head,
and were it not for the Restraints of Conscience, that are tied on by the Hands
of the Priest, and the Laws of Religion, Man would be a monstrously wild and
ungovernable Creature. For though the World be kept in some tolerable Order,
notwithstanding there are too many Persons in it of Atheistical and Irreligious
Principles, yet of all Subjects these are the most dangerous and disloyal,
because it is impossible to bring them under any effectual Engagements of Duty
and Allegiance; and hence it is that all Seditions and Treasons are headed and
managed by such Leaders: At least, though they are not able to do so very much
mischief, because their Party is not very considerable; yet were all Mankind of
their Humor and Persuasion, nothing could be more insecure and destitute of
help than the Condition of Princes, because no Man according to their
Principles could be so foolish as to think himself any way obliged to venture
Life and Fortune for the sake of their Interest; and whenever they are
attempted, Subjects would be determined as to their Loyalty by the chance of
Success, and not by any antecedent Obligations; and whenever the Princes
Affairs were brought into any straight or danger, they must leave him to shift
for himself, and revolt to an Usurper for their own Safety and Interest. But
those only are Loyal Subjects, and true Friends and Servants to the Established
Government, that think it their Duty to adhere to their Prince in all Fortunes,
and to assist and serve him against all Enemies; and it is their Numbers every
where that keep the World in that little order and security that it enjoys: for
beside the useful and advantageous Offices that they do to the Crown by their
own immediate Service, it is their known and sworn Fidelity that in a great
measure keeps back wicked and seditious Men from attempting it too lightly.
Every aspiring Mind, or neglected Grandee, would be presently venturing at the
Throne, if it stood naked and unguarded of the Assistances of Loyalty: but when
they are assured, that howsoever their Designs may succeed, that there is so
strong a Party unalterably resolved to make Head against them and all their
Attempts, it is that that chiefly makes such Projects and Practices not so very
frequent or easy. Now it is nothing but Conscience and Religion that can awe
the Minds of Men to any sense of this Duty; and they ever are, and ever must be
Governed by Ecclesiastics; other Persons may tamper with them, and inveigle
some straggling People, but still the main Body of a Nation, and especially the
sober part of it, will choose to submit themselves to their Conduct, whose
Public Profession it is to guide Souls, and instruct Consciences: so that to
them, and the discharge of their Duty, do all Princes plainly owe the main
Strength and Seourity of their Government. This Obligation of kindness to the
Ecclesiastical State, is common to all Civil States; and so much as they
discountenance the Power and Reputation of the Church, so much do they
disadvantage the Interest of their own Authority. But this reason of State is
of greater force and more peculiar usefulness in reference to the present
Constitution of the Kingdom of England.

The Nation is manifestly divided into two opposite Parties, the Church of
England, and the Body of the Nonconformists: The former whereof is the greatest
Example of Loyalty, that perhaps ever appeared in the Christian World. Its
Clergy are the most Zealous Assertours of the Rights of Princes; they have all
along undauntedly maintained their Supremacy against all Assaults and
Invasions, they have possessed the Peoples Conscienecs with a religious Awe and
Reverence of Government; they have restrained them from all Attempts of
Rebellion, or of taking up Arms upon any Pretense whatsoever, under the
greatest and most dreadful Penalties, they have secured them from being abused
with the Impostures of Zeal and Superstition, and have carefully prevented all
the Shifts and Excuses of Disobedience; and after they have made Subjection a
prime and indispensable Duty, they do not evacuate the Efficacy of their
Doctrine by juggling Reserves and Limitations. And thus are the People trained
up in a Conscience of their Loyalty, and take it in together with their
Religion, and are as strongly principled against the hateful sin of Rebellion,
as against Witchcraft or Idolatry. And of this our Princes have had sufficient
proof and experience ever since the Reformation. They have ever found all their
Subjects of the Communion of the Church of England modest and peaceable, and
were never troubled with Disputes and Remonstrances, Plots and Disturbances
from any of her Friends. And when Rebellion broke forth, and the Royal Power
was invaded and oppressed, with what Zeal and Devotion did they appear in its
Defense, and for its Recovery? and what Numbers sacrificed Lives and Fortunes
out of mere sense of Duty and Allegiance? For though it is not to be doubted,
but that some might engage themselves in the Royal Cause for other ends, yet
it is manifest from too many sad Circumstances, that the true and hearty Sons of
the Church were acted by Principles of Conscience and Religion; and whilst
others might be bought over by the Rebels and Usurpers, no Temptation could
prevail upon their Minds: but they were constant and impregnable in all
Conditions. They forsake their Prince! You must first force them to renounce
their Faith; their Loyalty stands upon their Religion, and they were Martyrs as
well as Soldiers for his Cause, and in his Service. This is the peculiar
Genius, and these the distinguishing Principles of the Church of England; and
as far as they are admitted into the Minds of Men, so far do they work in them
this religious and awful Regard toward Sovereign Princes. And though sometimes
it may so fall out, that they may have other Reasons and Motives to determine
them to their Loyalty, yet there are no Enforcements so powerful and
irresistible as Convictions of Conscience: All others may and often do fail,
but this never can.

But now as for the dissenting Party, their Religion spends it self another
way; their Preachers fill the Peoples Heads with Wind and Phrases, possess
their Fancies with Dreams and Visions, and spend most of their Pulpitsweat in
making a noise about Faith, Communion with God, Attendance upon Ordinances,
that (as they manage them) with some other fluttering and Romantic Stories,
serve only to appease their natural sense of Religion, and to stroke them into
a very civil and kind Opinion of themselves. But as for the Duty of Respect and
Obedience to Superiors, (being a Paultry Moral Virtue) it is a Topic that has
very little or no place among their Cases of Conscience; and though the
Scripture be so very plain and pregnant in this Article, and abounds with so
many clear and express Determinations of the indispensableness of the Duty, yet
they can rarely find either a Text or an Occasion (as many as there are of
both) to discourse it in their Pulpits, and recommend it to their People: And
if at any time it so falls out that they cannot avoid it, they will make hard
shift but before they have done they will be too cunning for their Text; for be
that never so plain and positive, they will so overreach and draw it in with
Tricks and Distinctions, that before they part, it shall be perfectly wheeled
about to the Long Parliament side. They still Preach Obedience with so much
Caution, and under so many Reserves, as utterly abates its Obligation; for they
make the People so tender and timorous of their own Compliance, and so jealous
of the Commands of their Superiors, that they are scarce more afraid of doing
what God has expressly forbidden, than they are of what the Magistrate expressly
requires; and they are taught to dispense with their Duty and Obedience toward
their Governors, upon no greater or wiser Pretense, than that they only fear
and suspect lest possibly their Commands should cross with the Divino Laws: And
they are exhorted above all things to keep their Consciences (i. e. themselves)
free from the Usurpation of all Humane Powers; that is in effect, they are
forbidden to make any Conscience of Subjection to Princes; for it is only
Conscience that is capable of the Obligation of Laws, so that if that be
exempt, the whole Man is at Liberty. And how little sense they have of this
Duty, or concern to discharge it, is very observable from their own most
public and solemn Devotions, where though they strain and wink hard for the
largest and foulest Confessions of sins, and arreign themselves of all the
Crimes they can think of, and rake together, whether they ever did or did not
commit them: And withal, though most of them be pretty well concerned in the
Guilt of this Wickedness, (if a Wickedness at all) yet it has no place in their
Catalogues of Vice, and they never deign so much as to take notice of it to
Almighty God, or to beg his pardon for it, and could never yet be prevailed
upon so much as to acknowledge it, but among the Infirmities of his People; and
that is a shrewd ground of suspicion, when People that are, or would seem to
be, so tender in all other Cases, are so sullen and insensible in this. Nay,
(what is worse than all this) they instruct the People in all the Doctrines and
Pretenses of Disloyalty; for Rebellion never appears barefaced, but always
comes forth masked with popular and plausible Demands; now they furnish them
with such Principles and Maxims, as will easily excuse all Disorders and
Disobedience, such as the Preservation o^ the true Religion, and the
Maintenance of their Fundamental Laws and Liberties, not against the Prince (by
no means!) but against his evil Council. And whenever they have a Mind to make
Trial of their Princes Patience or Courage, they are provided with Aphorisms of
all sorts to warrant all the Pranks and Frolicks of the Experiment. This has
been often enough, and from time to time represented to the Public: but if we
will not attend to other Men's Information, yet it is mad and wilful
sottishness, if we will wink against our own smarting and dear-bought
Experience; and yet that we must shamefully do, if we can put any Confidence in
the Loyalty of these holy Men. For their Practices have never shamed their
Principles; and though some of them are so modest as to excuse and deny their
own Virtues, yet it must be confessed that they have never failed to behave
themselves as becomes the holy Brotherhood. They have (like the great Hercules)
from their very Cradle laid hold upon all occasions to affront and grapple with
the Royal Authority, they have always been forward to dispute and to abate the
Sovereign Prerogative, and industrious to raise Iealousies against the
Government and the Integrity of their Prince. And our Princes have all along
complained of those Disrespects and Abuses that have been put upon them by the
Puritan Party and its Abettors, and have at length to some purpose felt the
Kindness and Civility of these Right-godly and Religious Rebels.

This is the true and undeniable Character of the Leading Faction; and as for
all the other Clans and Sub-divisions, they were merely spawned out of the
Presbyterian Disorders, and bred out of the very Dregs of their Rebellion, and
were never distinguished from any other Parties of Men, but by their
Confederated Zeal and Fierceness for the Republican Usurpation against Monarchy
and C. S. and yet since his Majesty's Restoration would never be provoked to
make the least Acknowledgments of their former Disloyalty, or to offer any
Engagements of their future Allegiance. Now let us lay all this together, (and
ten times as much more that I am forced to omit in haste) and then consider how
peaceable such People are likely to prove that are first poisoned with such
Principles of Anarchy and Sedition, and then managed by Leaders of such bloody
and ambitious Designs. The People themselves are of such a peevish and envious
Humor, both from their Temper and their Principles, that no Government can
ever please or oblige them; they are a sort of Creatures that love to lie at
catch for Opportunities of discontent, and it is a satisfaction to their proud
and peevish Minds if they can but affront their Superiors. This is the natural
Genius of the Party, and the several Brotherhoods are made up of People of this
Complexion, and Men List themselves into the separated and discontented
Churches only to gratify this snarling and waspish Humor.

Pride and Ill Nature are the Fundamental Principles of all their Zeal; and
they are rude and restive to Authority, not always out of disaffection, but out
of a wanton and sullen Humor. It Is a mighty Ease to their Spleens to vent
their Censures and Contempts upon their Superiors; nothing so much inclines
them to Good-fellowship as had News, it makes them gay and frolic, and is the
only season of their Mirth and Iollity; and if it chance to prove a Story, they
grow moody again, and return to their old precise and surly Humor. It is the
Masterpiece of their Wit to make Satirical Remarks upon the Gazets and public
Narratives; and it is the greatest concern of their Zeal and Passion, to
confute and discredit all Reports allowed of by Authority. This is so notorious
in common Conversation, that his Majesty has been forced to check this saucy
and undutiful Demeanor by his Royal Proclamation, though they have been so
long accustomed to it, that it is to be feared they are grown too headstrong
and incorrigible to be awed into a more modest behavior by threatenings of
severity; and it will at last be found necessary to bridle their ungoverned
Tongues and Spirits with Pillories and Whipping-posts. For what can be more
irksom and insufferable than to hear the Wisdom and Discretion of the State so
lavishly and familiarly censured by every pert and conceited Mechanic? and yet
that is their daily and perpetual Employment, to be ^olting or hinting their
Iealousies and irreverent Refl^ctions upon the King and his Council, and their
management of Affairs, in all Places and in all Companies. And I appeal to
every Man's Experience, whether he ever heard one kind word from the mouth of
one zealous Brother, except in one case since his Majesty's Return; and am sure
that the Observation of all sober Men will agree with my own, that nothing
comes from them with so costive a difficulty as a poor seeming approbation of
any public Proceedings. And they are now almost as free to bestow their good
Words upon the Pope or the Prelates as upon the Civil Government. To this
peevishness of their Hu^^urs, I might add the restlesness of their Minds, that
is always displeased with the settled frame of things, and that no Alterations
can satisfy. If you cond^scend to their first Demands, you only encourage them
to be making new Remonstrances; appease all their old Complaints, and they are
immediately picking new Faults to be redressed. Their Reformation knows no
limits, but their Projects grow and improve with their Success. They that at
first only request Indulgence, will, when strong enough, demand it; and if they
succeed, they will then dispute Equality with the present frame of Government,
and then in a while Superiority, and then at last they will refuse to grant the
same Indulgence that themselves at first requested. Thus to mention no body
else, Knox and his Confederates first Petitioned the Queen of Scots, then
Threatened Her, then Affronted Her, then Rebelled against Her, and then formally
Deposed Her. And as Reformation always begins at the Bishops and Clergy, so it
rarely ends but with the Civil Magistrate. Innovation never stops at its first
Proposals, but new Thoughts, and Projects, and Interests, perpetually arise out
of new Events and Occurrences of Affairs; and as the work succeeds, it
naturally improves into new Parties and Principles, till at length it out-grows
it self. And it was scarce ever known, that Fanatic Zeal began to alter the
present Setlement of the Church, that it ever ceased till it had involved State
and all in Ruin and Confusion.

And now it is easy to imagine into what Freaks and Disorders People of such a
factious and hotheaded temper may be transported by the crafty Insinuations of
proud or factious Malcontents: it is but whispering some confident Jealousy
against the Government, and then upon any unlucky Conjuncture of Affairs they
naturally break out into Tumult and Rebellion; their Minds are always prepared
for Disturbance, and easily take Fire upon every Opportunity, and every
Invitation. So that now the state of the Question is altered; the Controversy
between us is not about Ecclesiastical Laws and Forms of Discipline, (they have
the least share in our Differences, and are rather mere Pretenses than any
serious Causes of Discontent;) but the Contest now, as it relates to the real
Concernments of the Nation, is, Which shall prevail, Loyalty or Faction?
Whether it be the Interest of the Prince that Subjects should be Educated in a
religious sense of their Duty to all Superiors, or whether in a dislike and
disaffection to all Royal Dignity? or, Lastly, Whether such Preachers should be
permitted the Liberty of making Proselytes, when all that are seduced into
their Communion, are at the same time alienated from the Government, and Listed
into a Combination against it? And yet these Men are so very foolish and
presumptuous, as to flatter themselves and their Followers with hopes of his
Majesty's Conversion to their Party; and to suggest in their common and
Coffee-House Discourses, his secret Contempt of Loyalty and the Church of
England; as if he laughed at the Folly and Pedantry of all those that ventured
Lives and Fortunes in his Service and for their Allegiance, and looked upon
them as shallow and empty People that understand neither themselves nor their
Interest; but that those are the only shrewd and notable Men, and fit for the
management of his Affairs, that had so much Wisdom and Dexterity, or (as it is
in another Reading) so much Knavery and Hypocrisy as by right or wrong to work
their own Advantage out of all Changes, to secure their Preferments in spite of
all contradictory Oaths, and always to light so luckily as to improve their
fortunes by all turns, and grow great either by Rebellion or by Loyalty, (it is
all one to them) as either of them luck'd to prosper, and scrupled not to
flatter an impudent Usurper, nor to betray or murder their Lawful Sovereign,
as Times, and Iunctures of Affairs advised them. Bold Men! that can so cheaply
and so daringly undervalue their Princes Honor and Ingenuity, and think him so
void not only of all Principles of Virtue, but of common Sense, as to despise
his best (his only) Friends for being honest Men and good Subjects. But this it
is to show the least Mercy or Tenderness to such proud and incorrigible
Offenders, when they have so much Vanity and Self-conceit to overpresume all
things to their own favor. Let the Government but think it seasonable at any
time to Reprieve them from the Severity of the Laws, and they immediately start
up into that Confidence, as to imagine themselves the only Darlings and
Favorites of the State: Let but the Public Rods be a little removed from
their Backs, and they are presently full of Expectations to have them put into
their hands: If they are not always scourged and chastised, they will grow
sawey, and must by all means become Cronies to Kings and Princes. And yet this
I must say in their behalf, they serve his Majesty no worse than they served
God Almighty; for neither could he a little suspend the Execution of his
Justice upon them, (though they were such scandalous and refractory Delinquents
against his Laws) but that must, past all doubt and controversy, declare him
of their Side, and for their Cause, and the Lord must needs walk sweetly with
his own People in ways of Plunder and Sequestration. But if that were enough to
make them presume his Favor and Approbation, be has (we may presume too) done
enough since to clear his own Providence, and dash their Confidence; and they
may assure themselves that his Majesty understands both himself and them too
well to be over-fond of their Friendship, or trust too confidently to their
Good Will. But if they will be making such ill use of his Mercy as to insult
over, or to disrespect his Loyal Subjects, they will find to their own cost and
shame, that he too can call them to their Songs upon Sigionoth, as well as
Divine Providence: so that (unless we will be guilty of a Jealousy as
ungrounded and as unmannerly as their Presumption) we may rest satisfied in the
present Security of the Church of England, under the Protection of a Wise and a
Gracious Prince; especially when beside the impregnable Confidence that we have
from his own Inclinations, it is so manifest that he can never forsake it
either in Honor or Interest. But should it ever so happen hereafter that any
King of England should be prevailed with to deliver up the Church, he had at
the same time as good resign up his Crown; and the reason is already very
plain, because there are none heartily Loyal to this, but those that are so to
that; when it is so notorious from Experience, that the Crown of England never
had any Cordial Friends but the Lovers of, and Adherents to the
Church-Interest; and so evident from Men's Principles, that it never shall have.
And then what must become of that unhappy Prince, that should deliver it up to
the Rage and Rapine of its and his implacable Enemies? He is in the very same
forlorn condition, as if, be were forced to flee from all his Friends to a
Kirk-Army for Sanctuary and Protection: i. e. be is certainly Sold and
Sacrificed.

II. The second way whereby the Fanatic Party may at last work the Ruin of
the Church, is by the Assistance of Atheism and Irreligion; Profaneness is in
our days become as zealous and implacable a thing as Enthusiasin, and Men are
not content barely to neglect all acknowledgment of Duty to their Creator,
unless they may have the Liberty to affront and defy him too: They scorn to be
abused themselves with the Tales and Legends of Knavish Priests, nor will they
(great Heroes!) suffer the World to be imposed upon by their bold and insolent
Impostures. It is not by any means to be endured to see such despicable Fellows
insult over the freeborn Minds and well-bred Understandings of Gentlemen, away
with all their Superstitious Cheats and Fopperies; they will undertake to
instruct Mankind in wiser and more Gentleman-like Principles. And thus are
these Caitiffs become as fierce and malicious Enemies to all Setlement of the
Church, as the most distempered and fiery sort of Fanatics; and they will
piece Interest with any Party to pluck down any Church-faction that is
uppermost, and are as brisk and forward at hammering Reformation-work, as the
giddy and rascal Multitude; and rather than the Cause should miscarry for want
of Zeal, they themselves will not stick to turn Preachers of Sedition, nor
(when the People are enraged) to lead them on to act it. The Atheists of former
times, because they expected nothing in the Life to come, resolved without any
farther trouble to enjoy all the Comforts of this; and therefore they never
thrust themselves into Public Cares and Concerns, but studied all the Arts of
an idle, a jolly, and a pleasant Life; and minded nothing but Wine, and Love,
and Poetry: But those of our Age are a sort of Devilish and Malicious
Wretches, whose proud and arrogant Minds make them love Mischief for Mischiefs
sake; they have so mean an opinion of other Men in comparison to themselves,
that they treat them just after the same rate as we do Insects and Vermin; and
will for the ostentation of their own Power and Greatness, sport themselves in
those Miseries and Ruins they are able to draw upon the World, and will not
stick to destroy Kingdoms, if it lie in their Power, only to gratify their
Insolence: And no wonder, when all the rankest Principles of Injustice and
Ill Nature lie at the bottom of their Irreligion. They are, taught in the first
place, that they may and ought to use all the ways of Fraud and Violence for
the Advancement of their own Power and Safety; that the greater and more
enormous Injuries they do to Mankind, the more are they feared, and that fear
is their only security; and the result of all their Principles is, That every
Wise Man will by any means consult his own Interest and Security, and that his
Interest and Security consists chiefly in the prebeminence of his Strength
above other Men; so that the more he oppresses them, the more he acts up to the
Laws of Nature, and Principles of Wisdom. And then being insolent as well as
ill-natured, they care not what Mischiefs they do out of mere Humor and
Wantonness; and the more extravagant they are in their Injuries and
Oppressions, their Power is so much the more considerable, they scorn an
ordinary Vice almost as much as to say their Prayers; but if they can invent
any new and unheardof Wickedness, that Vulgar Sinners have not the Wit to light
upon, nor the Courage to venture at, that is an height of Bravery, and only
fit to be attempted by Men of their Parts and Breeding: so that they love
Mischief, if not altogether as the Devils do, for its own sake, yet at least
(and that is almost as bad) out of Pride and Singularity; they cannot brook it
to be inferior to any Man in any thing that they are pleased to pretend to,
and yet are they pleased to pretend to every thing. And from hence it is that
they can be no real Friends to any Government, only because the Supremacy of
Power did not happen to fall to their share; and they can never have any hearty
kindness for their Prince, though for no other reason than because he is their
Superior; a little affront or neglect from him, shall disoblige them for ever:
they are implacable in their revenge, and every slight displeasure immediately
puts them upon nothing less than thoughts of Treason and Rebellion.

But the great Object of their Hatred and Indignation, is the Priestly Office;
their proud Spirits cannot bear it to see such mean and contemptible Fellows
brave it with so much Awe and Authority over the Minds of the Peoples but they
are past all patience that they should dare to pretend to vie Wisdom with
themselves, and undertake publicly to convict such mighty Wits of Folly and
Ignorance, and prevail so far as to be able to expose them to popular Scorn and
Infamy: for it is manifest that their Principles will never much take in the
World, in that the generality of Men are not to be work't off from their
natural sense of Religion; that ever did, and ever will keep the strongest
Party in spite of all Opposition; and whoever attempts against it, must of
necessity be run down with Reproach and Disgrace; and that transports them
beyond all bounds, to be thus contemptuously kept under by ignorant and
ill-bred Fops; and it becomes the great exercise of their Wit and their Drink
to entertain the Company with pleasant Stories of Priests and Black-coats. This
humor has prevailed so far in our Age, beyond what it could ever arrive to in
former times, that it is become in some degree Gentile and fashionable; every
Man now has Wit and Pride enough to despise a Parson, and he is no Vertuoso,
that does not in his common and Table-talk call and prove them Cheats and
Impostors; and some Persons that one would think should have more Breeding or
more Sobriety, affect the extravagance out of mere wantonness; and others that
are no declared Enemies to the Cause of Religion, are yet well enough content
for other reasons to have its Officers kept low and despicable; but for some
reason or other they meet with disrespect enough on all hands. And now, though
this ill usage signifies very little to those against whom it is intended,
because it falls upon an Order of Men that are above its regard and resentment;
in that the Clergy of the Church of England know themselves far enough from
being obnoxious to any contempt but what Sacrilege has made unavoidable; and
though we take them under all the Disadvantages that Plunder, and Robbery, and
Reformation (as some Men have managed it) has brought upon them; they are at
this very time vastly the farthest off from being justly contemptible (to
mention no other Order or Profession of Men) of any Clergy in the World; the
pre-eminence is so evident, that it clears the comparison from all possible
suspicion of its being either proud or odious: But though this unkindness be
able to do them so little harm, yet it falls very heavy in its mischievous
Consequences upon the Public. For all wise States have hitherto always given
the deepest respect to the Presidents of the sacred Rites, and settled the
greatest Privileges and Immunities upon the Church, as well for Reasons of
State, as for the Ends of Devotion. In that no Government can support it self
without the Assistance of Religion, and the Assistance of Religion is ever
proportioned to the Power and Interest of the Clergy; its Esteem (as it is in
all other Arts, Sciences, and Professions) depends upon the Reputation of
those, whose Office it is to dispense its Mysteries and Public Solemnities;
they have always and every where found the same Fate, and the same
Entertainment; so that to make the Priestly Order any way contemptible, is to
enervate the force of Religion upon the Consciences of Subjects, and thereby to
destroy the greatest Strength and most lasting Security of the Civil
Government. So interwoven are the Cause of God and the Prince and the Priest,
that no Man can be an Enemy to one, without proclaiming Hostility to all. Is
not this wise work then, and fit to be endured in a Christian-Commonwealth, for
the witty People to be so much concerned to make the Profession of the Clergy
vile and despicable? especially when this whole Design is at last founded upon
no milder Supposition, than that Jesus Christ himself is the great and leading
Impostor: for if he were seriously vested with any Authority from Heaven, their
Commission from him is too evident to be called into question: so that if the
Power they claim by virtue of his Grant be forged and insignificant Usurpation,
it is only because be abused the World with Tales and false Pretenses to a
Divine Authority, i. e. only because he was the lewdest and most prostigate
Impostor that ever appeared amongst Mankind. And this no doubt is a notable
piece both of Policy and Good-manners, to be owned, yes, or endured in a
Christian-Commonwealth. But yet however passing by this horrid Blaspemy against
our Blessed Savior, and if our Religion were nothing else but (as all Religion
is lately defined) the Belief of Tales publicly allowed, and the Priesthood
only a Succession of Cheats and Iuglers; yet after all this, they are and must
be allowed necessary Instruments in the State to awe the common People into
fear and Obedience, because nothing else can so effectually enslave them as the
dread of invisible Powers, and the dismal Apprehensions of the World to come;
and for this very reason, though there were no other, it is fit they should be
allowed the same Honor and Respect as would be acknowledged their due if they
were sincere and honest Men; because unless that be supposed, they can never
bring that assistance that is absolutely necessary to the support of
Government, and the preservation of Society. But so far are they from being
allowed that Respect and Reputation that is necessary to the usefulness of
their Function, that they are even Outlawed from the common Rights of Justice
and Humanity. One would wonder how People should so combine in such an inhumane
and imprudent baseness, but that the reason is so very plain and obvious. The
old Probity and Integrity of our Nation is fled and gone, and what remains of
it, has taken Sanctuary in the Church and its Friends, that are assaulted by a
Fanatic Rage on one hand, and a base-natured Atheism on the other, and then no
wonder if they are treated accordingly, when they are fallen into the hands of
such Salvages and Cannibals. And in truth when I consider the temper of both
these sorts of Men, that the one hates Peace, and the other hates Mankind, and
withal some present and some probable Circumstances of things, it were easy to
represent to view a black and gloomy prospect of things: but it is to no
purpose to affright our selves with distant Miseries, and it is better to leave
the care of future Events to the Wisdom of Providence, sufficient to the day is
the evil thereof; only let me desire thee, Reader, to consider whether that
Nation be according to Humane Accounts likely to continue long in a firm and
settled Condition of Peace, a great part of whose Inhabitants are tainted with
such malignant Principles, as make them to delight in Mischief and Confusion.
Atheism and Enthusiasm are apart and by themselves the most desperate and
dangerous causes of Misery and Calamity to Mankind; but when they combine
Interests and join Forces against a common Enemy, what Government can withstand
their Fury, in that there is no Wickedness that is necessary to the carrying on
the Cause, that one of them will not undertake, and be able to go through with?
They are provided with all sorts of Pretenses, and prepared for all kinds of
Villainies; and if there should happen in their way any attempt so very horrid,
than the Saints were for very shame obliged to boggle at it, there the bold and
professed Sinners may advance and lead on the Party; and if on the contrary there
be need of any Hypocritical Declarations or Remonstrances too demure for these
barefaced People to patronize, they must be subscribed and carried on by the
zealous and sanctified Ones: And thus when they combine together, there is no
kind of hindrance that they may not easily overcome, nor of advantage that they
may not as easily command. Their Union is like the mixture of Nitre and
Charcoal, it carries all before it without Mercy or Resistance.

III. Especially if in the third place, it should ever so fall out, that crafty
and sacrilegious Statesmen should join themselves into the Confederacy. There
are several sorts of these devouring Vermin, but the most dangerous (because
the least honest) are the cowardly and self-designing Men, that in Public
Employments mind nothing but purely their own private Interest, and so that
thrive, care not how much the Affairs of the Commonwealth run backward. All
their Counsel is nothing but Flattery, and they will not stick to exhort a
Prince to undo himself, if it be in such ways as are agreeable to his Vice or
Humor. They will encourage and authorize the lawfulness of all his Practices;
and if he have any ill Inclinations, they will recommend them for great and
Princely Qualities, and assist them too by the meanest and most dishonorable
Services. They will debauch his Mind with such Principles as will allow him to
do the most dishonest and unworthy things without shame or remorse of
Conscience; they will set him at liberty from all the Restraints of Religion,
and prepossess his Mind against all the Counsels of Priests, and not suffer him
to be imposed upon with their Impostures and juggling Pretenses; neither is it
fit for a Sovereign Prince to think himself obliged by the Laws of good or
evil; Truth, and Justice, and Honesty, and every thing must give place to the
Public Weal; and when the Safety or the Interest of the Crown requires it,
then breach of Faith is not Falsehood, nor to slay the Innocent Murder. It is
not for Kings to submit themselves to the Pedantry of the Laws, nor are States
to be Governed by scruples of Credit or Conscience; Convenience is, and ever
was the only Rule of Policy; and you may violate your Word or your Oath for
Reasons of State, all the wisest and all the greatest Princes in the World have
ever done it before you. None but ignorant and unexperienced Book-men would
ever go about to tie the Management of State Affairs to the strict Rules of
Morality. Alas! they understand not the nature and the difficulty of
Government, they never observed the rise and decays of Empires, nor ever
weighed all the Circumstances and Possibilities of things, and from hence it is
that they prescribe such impracticable M^thods of Policy, and are so
desperately silly as in many cases to require Princes rather to hazard their
Crowns, than to lose their Reputations. No, it is for Subjects to do as they
ought, but for Sovereigns as they please, Nay, (what is more unhappy than all
this) these false Pretenders to Policy are forced in their own defense to
whisper in their Princes Ear such Maxims and Propositions, as directly
undermine, or at least undervalue all Principles of Government. They instruct
him to despise his own Authority, and to resolve all Sovereign Power rather
into Chance and Fortune, than any Institution of the Divine Providence. And
hereby they roundly cancel all Duties and Obligations of Allegiance, and allow
no other Ties of Fidelity upon Subjects than present Interest and Preferment;
that are always as effectual under a prosperous Usurper, as they are or can be
under a Lawful Prince; and then if there either does, or ever has happened any
Competition of that kind, they only are to be looked upon as the Men of
Shrewdness and Understanding, that know how to temporize, and tack about neatly
with all Turns of Affairs: whilst all others that make Conscience of their
Loyalty, and have or are ready to venture Lives and Fortunes in defense of the
Rightful and Hereditary Claim, shall be marked out as shallow People, that
understand not the true Wisdom and Interest of Humane Nature. They Govern a
Nation! Poor Souls! they have not Wit enough to Govern themselves, and to
manage their own little Concerns. They are likely to give their Prince
wonderful Advice for the Advancement of his Prerogative, that have so little
reach to consult or consider the improvement of their own private Estates. Take
them to your Council, and they will be perpetually troubling your Head, and
entangling your Affairs with Cases of Conscience; they shall endanger your
Safety to preserve your Honor, and hazard your Crown for a pedantick Word; and
when you might easily disengage your self from any Streights or Difficulties,
only by making bold with your Word, or perhaps forgetting an Oath or so, you
must rather choose by their Maxims of State to perish under them, than make (as
they call it) a dishonest or dishonorable escape: and all the reward you shall
have to compensate your Misfortune, shall be perchance that a few Churchmen
and such like People shall cry you up for a Saint or a Martyr, whilst all Men
that have any Brains or Breeding shall pity your Softness and Simplicity. It
becomes not Men of Wit to be overawed with these old Grandame Stories of
Honesty and Conscience: they are fit Tales to abuse the Rabble into Servitude,
but Interest of State is the only Rule of Princes, and they are to know no
other Cases of Conscience, but Maxims of Italian Policy, nor to employ any
other Persons in State Affairs, but such as are able to go through with all
Undertakings, and such as will never scruple the Lawfulness of any Action so it
be but expedient. And the last result of all their Wisdom is, that they would
persuade their Prince that none are fit to be employed but only such as are not
fit to be trusted, such as have set themselves at Liberty from all Principles
and Pretenses of Honesty, and are as ready to betray their Prince for their own
Interest, as they are to oppress and abuse his Subjects for his. And by these
and the like Suggestions, if they chance to take, they quickly run the
Commonwealth into woeful Streights and Distresses, and then there is no way to
maintain their former Practices, but by proceeding on to farther Enormities,
till at last they are forced to support their Government by Rapine and
Sacrilege. There have been sufficient numbers of these People at all times in
all Princes Courts; so that though their Doctrine does not always reign, yet it
is always contending for Superiority with the Rules of Honor and Virtue.

Now it is none of my business, and but little to my purpose to upbraid the
folly of these shuffling and half-witted Principles, and to show that (when all
tricks are tried) there is no lasting Wisdom or Policy beside true and generous
Honesty: for though Falsehood and Cunning may make shift to subsist awhile, yet
it is soon discovered, and then it is never after trusted: Reputation is one of
the greatest Strengths and best Securities of Interest; and when that is gone,
suspected Power is but a lamentable weak and tottering thing, it has no support
beside it self, and all its pretended Allies are its real Enemies, and first or
last it is entangled in such Streights and Embroilments, from which it can
never be able to disengage it self but in violent and illegal ways. And then
the easiest and first Attempt of Oppression, is by Sacrilege and
Church-Plunder. The Ecclesiastic Order are a tame and helpless sort of Men;
and if you think good to invade their Propriety, they have no remedy to relieve
themselves but Patience and a contented Poverty; and whenever Exigences of
State require it, you may easily stop one Gap with their Endowments. This is so
common and so natural, that it is always the first Effect of ill Government,
unless only in such places where Churchmen have scrued up themselves to a
Superiority or Equality of Interest with the secular Power, and are by that
means able to hold their own. It is true, the small Remainders of our
Church-Revenues are pretty well secured, not only by the slender Account they
would amount to, (for Sacrilege has already devoured the whole Harvest, and
has only scattered a few Gleanings to the Church and Churchmen;) nor only by
their dependence upon the Crown, whereby his Majesty keeps the most
considerable Order of Men in the Commonwealth at his Service, and that at no
Charge; nor only because the Tribute that returns back to his Exchequer in
First Fruits, Tenths, etc. is so considerable a Proportion of the Revenue, that
their Sale and Alienation would amount but to very little more; for if ever
they should be brought to Market, they would go off at a very low Rate, and at
a very few years Purchase. It is possible they may pretty well enrich the
Buyer, or rather Adventurer, but all the advantage the Seller can ever gain by
it, will be to alienate his perpetual Inheritance, only to receive three or
four years Rent at one Payment, which is the very same with the Providence of
Fools, and the Policy of Prodigals. But beside this security which the Church
has, as well as all other Beggars, that it is not worth the robbing; it has at
present an impregnable Affiance in the Wisdom, the Honor, and the Piety of a
Gracious Prince, that is not capable of attending to such Counsels, should they
be suggested to him; though certainly no Man, that is worthy to be admitted to
His Majesty favor or privacy, can be supposed so foolhardy or presumptuous as
to offer such weak and dishonorable Advice to so wise and able a Prince: so
that it is secure of Protection during his Life and Reign. But yet Princes are
mortal, and we are sure (though we had no Text to vouch it) that they must die
like Men; and then, if ever hereafter (and some time or other it must happen)
the Crown should chance to settle upon a young and unexperienced Head, this is
usually the first thing in which such Princes are abused by their Keepers and
Guardians, and then the Church must by all means be reformed and new modelled,
i. e. in Court-stile plundered or demolished only to build great Houses for two
or three Favorites or Flatterers. And now when this is done, there is nothing
can bid so fair for the next turn as Popery, because (beside many other
Reasons) there is nothing left to stand in Competition with it: for some
public and established Religion the Kingdom must and will have; but when the
Church of England is destroyed, it must either have that or none. For
Fanaticism, howsoever useful it may be to the Designs of Rebels and Usurpers,
is too untoward and intractable to be ever much doated upon by any settled
Authority. And thus these extravagant People by the Assistance and under the
Patronage of Rebellion, Atheism and Sacrilege, may possibly endanger a Change
of Religion; and by being employed as Iourney-men, or rather Tools to destroy
the Church of England, may sooner than we are aware of, make a free and
unobstructed passage for the return of Popery in Glory and Triumph. I know no
other grounds of fear or danger from them, beside these already mentioned,
unless this may prove one at last, that by their wanton and unreasonable
peevishness to the ingenuous and moderate Discipline of the Church of England,
they give their Governors too much reason to suspect that they are never to be
kept in order by a milder and more gentle Government than that of the Church of
Rome, and force them at last to scourge them into better manners with the
Briers and Thorns of their Discipline.

And thus (Reader) having sufficiently tired both thee and my self too, it is
high time to request thy pardon for presenting thee with such a Rhapsody of
hasty and hudled Thoughts: I have nothing to say in my own excuse, but that I
never intended to have been so tedious; but so many warm and glowing
Meditutions started up in my way, as without much musing made my Heart burn,
and the fire kindle; and that has heated me into all this wild and rambling
Talk, (as some will be forward enough to call it) though I hope it is not
altogether idle; and whether it be or be not, I have now neither leisure nor
patience to examine; and therefore if thou meet with any passages that would
have confessed this for me, though I had kept my own Counsel, I can only cast my
self upon thy Candor, and offer Security never to offend again in the like
kind. And now after this, I have no other Favor to request, than what concerns
thee as much as my self, viz. To beg thy hearty Prayers and Endeavors for the
Peace and Prosperity of the Church of England; for when that is gone, it will
be very hard to find out another, with which, if thou art either honest or
wise, thou will be over-forward to join Communion.

ERRATA.
In the Preface.
Page 13. line 4. for strict, read secret. Page 1^. lin. 26. for his, read
this. Page 5^. lin. 8. for beyond, read below. Page ^6. l. 13. before the, read
are.

In the Book.
Page 1. line (...). for it, read he. Page 10. lin. 8. read annum. Page 18. lin.
18. read Erastian. Page 30. lin. 21. for deserve, read desert. Page 34. lin.
25. before cry, read to. Page 38. lin. 2. for Cane, read Cave. Page 40. lin.
12. for too, read to.

Bishop Bramhalls Vindication of himself and the Episcopal Clergy, from the
Presbyterian Charge of Popery, as it is managed by Mr. Baxter in his Treatise
of the Grotian Religion.
CHAP. I.
Of Mr. Baxter and his Books, and Sequestrations.

BEfore I saw Mr. Baxters late Treatise called, The Grotian Religion, it was to
me, nec beneficio nec injuria, neither known for good nor hurt. I acknowledge
the very Title of his Book did not please me. Different Opinions do not make
different Religions. It is the Golden Rule of Justice, not to do thus to
another, which a man would not have done to himself. He would take it unkindly
himself to have his own Religion contradistinguished into the Prelatical
Religion, from which he does not much dissent, so he might have the naming of
the Prelates; and the Presbyterian Religion, which he does profess for the
present; and the Independent Religion, which he shakes kindly by the hand; and
the Anabaptistical Religion, which challenges Seniority of all Modern Sects.
And then to have his Presbyterian Religion subdivided either according to the
number of the Churches, into the English Religion, and the Scottish Religion,
and the Gallician Religion, and the Belgian Religion, and the Helvetian
Religion, and the Allobrogian Religion; of all the names of the Reformers, into
the Calvinistical Religion, and Brownistical Religion, Zuinglian Religion, and
Erastian Religion, etc. For all these have their differences. And so himself in
his Preface to this very Treatise, admits those things for pious Truths, for
which we have been branded with the names of Papists and Arminians, and have
been plundered and spoiled of all that we had.

Let himself be judge whether this be not to have the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ with respect of persons. Iam. 2. 1. The Church of Christ is but one, one
Fold and one Shepherd; Christian Religion is but one, one Lord, one Faith, one
Hope. Then why does he multiply Religions, and cut the Christian Faith into
shreds, as if every Opinion were a fundamental Article of Religion? Let him
remember that of St. Hierome; If you shall hear those who are said to be
Christians any where, to be denominated not from the Lord Jesus Christ, but
from some other person, know that this is not the Church of Christ, but the
Synagogue of Antichrist.

So much for the Title of Mr. Baxters Book, now for his design. His main scope
is to show that Grotius under a pretense of reconciling the Protestant Churches
with the Roman Church, has acted the part of a Coy-duck, willingly or
unwillingly to lead Protestants into Popery. And therefore he held himself
obliged in duty to give warning to Protestants to beware of Grotius his
followers in England, who under the name of Episcopal Divines, do prosecute the
design of Cassander and Grotius, to reconcile us to the Pope, Page 2. And being
pressed by his adversary to name those Episcopal Divines (vir dolosus versatur
in generalibus) he gives no instance of any one man throughout his Book, but of
my self. I shall borrow a word with him of himself, a word of Grotius, and a
word or two concerning my self.

First for himself, he does but wound himself through Grotius his sides, and in
his censuring Grotius, teach his own Fellows to serve him with the same sauce.
Grotius and Mr. Baxter both prosecute the same design of reconciliation, but
Mr. Baxters object is the British World, and Grotius his Object is the
Christian World. Mr. Baxter as well as Grotius in prosecuting his design, does
admit many things which the greater part of his own Fellows do reject. As that
Praeterition is an act of justice in God, Praef. Sect. 7. That God gives
sufficient grace (in the Jesuits sense) to those that perish, Sect. 8. That
Redemption is universal, They (the Synod of Dort) give more to Christ's Death
for the Elect than we, but no less that he knows of to his Death for all than
we, Sect. 10. He is as much for Free Will as we, They all profess that Man has
the natural faculty of Free Will, Sect. 11. He who had all his other Treatises
which I did never see, in probability might find much more of the same kind. I
do not dislike him for this, but rather commend him for unwrapping himself as
warily as he could without any noise, out of the endless train of Error. And
for other points wherein he is still at a default, I hope a little time and
better information, may set him right in those as well as these. But others of
his own Party do believe all these points which he admits to be as downright
Popery as any is within the Walls of Rome. And with the same freedom and reason
that he censures Grotius, they may censure him for the Popes stalking Horse or
Coy-duck to reconcile us to Rome. Neither can he plead any thing for himself,
which may not be pleaded as strongly, or more strongly for Grotius.

He may object that those things which he admits, are all evident Truths;
but sundry of those things which are admitted by Grotius, are Popish Errors.
This is confidently said, but how is he able to make it good to other men.
Grotius took himself to have as much reason as Mr. Baxter, and much more
learning and reading than Mr. Baxter. But still if his Fellows do no more
approve of what he says, than he approves of that which Grotius says, they
have as good ground to censure him, as he has to censure Grotius. Those very
points which are admitted by Mr. Baxter, are esteemed by his Fellows to be as
gross and fundamental Errors, as any of those other supernumerary points which
are maintained by Grotius. But to come up closer to him, What if those other
points disputed between Grotius and him be mere logomachies, or contentions
about words, or mistaken Truths? He himself confesses as much now of all the
Arminian tenets, Pref. Sect. 15. I am grown to a very great confidence that
most of our contentions about those [Arminian] points are more about words than
matter. Again, in the same Section; The doctrine of the divine decrees is
resolved into that of the divine operations. Let us agree of the last, and we
agree of the former. And almost all the doctrine of the divine operations about
which we differ, depends on the point of Free Will, and will be determined
with that. And how far we differ (if at all) in the point of Free will, etc. I
see Truth is the daughter of Time. Now our Arminian Controversies are avowed to
have been but contentions about words. Now it is become a doubtful case, and
deserving an if. whether we have any difference at all about Free Will or no.
The wind is gotten into the other door, since we were prosecuted and decried as
Pelagians, and enemies of Grace, because we maintained some old innocent Truths
which the Church of England and the Catholic Church even taught her Sons,
before Arminius was born. Some of their greatest Sticklers do owe a great
account to God, and a great reparation to us, for those groundless calumnies,
which they cast upon us at that time. For the present I only lay down this
disjunctive Conclusion; Either Mr. Baxter and his Fellows have changed their
judgment from what it was then, which makes the distance seem less now, or they
did us abominable wrong then; or both these Propositions without any
disjunction, are undoubtedly true. Mr. Baxter, who was so much mistaken in his
Arminian points then, may be as much mistaken in his Grotian points now.

He notes the time when he began his Book, April 9. 1658. and when he ended
it, April 14. 1658. by which account it cost him but six days inclusively,
comprehending both the day when he began, and the day when he ended. In my
judgment this circumstance might better have been omitted. Among those who seem
to approve his Work, some will ascribe it to the fortune of Augustus in
Suetonius in the life of Claudius, (...), happy men may have children at 3
months. Some others will take it as a symptom of vainglory, other men must dig
deep to lay a good foundation; but Mr. Baxters happiness is only by turning the
Cock to spout out whole Pages in an instant, as if he had found them set to his
hands, and his part had been only to imprint them. Here was neither multa dies,
nor multa litura, neither much time lost, nor much pains taken in correcting.
Thirdly, All men will say that he undervalues his Adversary, and makes his
Victory too cheap, without either blood or sweat.

And on the other side, among those who dislike his Work, some will make bold
to tell him, that he presumes too much upon his Readers courtesy to publish
such raw undigested fancies upon fewer days deliberation than the Poet requires
years, nonumque prematur in armum. Others will not stick to say that they knew
by the Treatise it self, though he had held his peace, that it cost him no
great labor. And lastly, His saddest and most judicious Readers will suspect
that he has not weighed his Citations as he ought. Certainly all those
testimonies which he produces out of Grotius in this Book, if he had examined
them as exactly as he ought, with their coherence with the Antecedents and
Consequents; and compared them with those Authors whom Grotius does allege for
confirming of his own judgment, would have taken up thrice as many days as he
assigns to this Work, yea though he had made use of Aristotle's Ball and his
Basin to keep him waking.

Before I leave his own part, I cannot choose but tell him that I do not, I
cannot approve of his defense of Sequestrations. And what he believes of idle
ignorant unworthy Pastors that they are obliged to make restitution, the same
do I firmly believe of his Sequestrators, that without restitution according to
the extent of their power, they can have small hope of salvation. But first I
must crave leave to tell him, that he does utterly mistake the question. First
he does disown the casting out of able and godly Ministers, because they are
Prelatical, or supposed Arminians, or interested in the late civil differences.
But we know that the greatest part of sequestered persons were such; and ejected
for those very reasons. So he disowns the question.

And as he disowns the question, so he diverts it from sequestered Ministers, to
ignorant unsufficient reading Ministers. There was no need why he should have
put reading Ministers into his Apology: and yet he cannot choose but know that
good use may be made of reading Ministers in a constituted Church; and that
there is much less danger of them than of ignorant or seditious Preachers. Our
reading Ministers of all the Clergy were in least danger of their
Sequestrators, who looked more at the value of the Benefice, than at the
qualifications of those persons who were turned out. He who doubts of this
general Truth, upon inquiry into particular Cases, may quickly satisfy himself.

And as he disowns the question, and diverts the question, so he begs the
question; that those Ministers whom they put in, were incomparably better than
those they turned out. No, nor yet worthy to be named the same day with them.
Compare those Provosts, and Presidents, and Professors, and Fellows, and
Scholars, who were turned out of our Universities, with those Bulrushes in
comparison, whom for the most part they introduced, or read but the Martyrology
of the City of London alone with an impartial eye, and consider sadly how many
eminent persons for Learning, Piety, and Industry, have been turned out of
their livelihoods, merely for those reasons which he disowneth, and dares not
justify. He who shall do this thing seriously, and compare them with their
crawling Successors, will find cause enough to write upon the doors of their
habitations, O domus antiqua quam dispari dominaris Domino? From this Foot a
man may easily conjecture the proportion of the whole Body, and what have been
the sufferings of our Orthodox Clergy throughout the whole Kingdom, contrary to
the Laws of God and Man; how many of them have been beggered and necessitated
to turn Mechanics or Day-Labourers; how many imprisoned, or forced to forsake
their Native Country and seek their bread among strangers; how many have had
their hearts broken, some starved, some murdered, and the spoil of their
houses given for a Reward to the Murderer. But this is a sad Subject to dwell
upon. God Almighty pardon them who have had any hand in these cruel courses,
and give them true repentance. In the mean time their Sequestrators,
notwithstanding their former censures against all Pluralists, and their present
pretended self-denial, were well contented to hold Pluralities themselves with
confidence enough.

But now I will suppose all that which he desires, and which he is never able
to prove; yea which his own conscience tells him to be much otherwise, that all
persons who have been sequestered or turned out of their Benefices by them, had
been such undeserving persons as he feigneth: and all those who were put in
their places had been such learned, honest, and Orthodox Divines; such as out
of conscience and a desire to do good, did seek as much after the stipendiary
Cures of Reading Ministers, as after the larger Benefices of more eminent
Scholars; yet these sequestered persons had a just title to their Benefices by
the Laws of England.

That which was theirs by Law, cannot be taken from them without Law, or
against Law. Dominion is founded in Nature, not in Grace. Nothing is more
hidden than true Grace: we understand it not certainly in another, hardly in
our selves. Therefore if Grace should give every one that pretends to it,
interest in that which is another man's lawful Possession, no man's title could
be certain to another, scarcely to himself; from whence must necessarily follow
an incredible confusion, and an inevitable perturbation of all estates.

By the Laws of England they were possessed of their Benefices, and by the Laws
of England they ought to be outed of their Benefices. They who decried
Arbitrary Government, should not be the only men to introduce Arbitrary
Government into England. The Law of England knows no way to out a man of his
Benefice but death, cession, or deprivation. It knows no deprivation but for
crimes committed against Law, and that Law more ancient than those Crimes,
where there is no Law, there is no transgression, and where there is no
transgression, there can be no deprivation. The Law of England knows no
deprivation but by persons to whom the ancient Law of England has committed
the power of depriving. So every way their Sequestrations are unlawful, and
they who hold them are like Moths which inhabit in other men's Garments. Of all
the Commandments the eighth is most dangerous; other Commandments oblige to
Repentance, but that obliges both to Repentance and Restitution. His instances
of a Physician, and a Commander, and a Pilot, who hold their Offices ad
voluntatem Domini, so long as their Masters think fit, are not appliable to a
Benefice, which is the inheritance of the present Incumbent and his Successors.
Sequestration may have place during the vacancie of a Benefice, or until the
decision of some Process depending, or for the discharge of some Duty which by
Law is incumbent upon the Benefice; but such lawless Arbitrary Sequestrations
as these were, are plain Robbery by all Laws of God and Man.

CHAP. II.
Of Grotius, and what Communion he was of.

NExt for Grotius and others of his charitable way, I acknowledge freely, that
I prefer one page of Wicelius, or Cassander, or Grotius, for true judgment
before all the Works of Taulerus, and ten more such Authors. Yet I have read
sundry of them, and sometimes have approved more of their piety than of their
judgment; and at other times repented of the loss of my time. Yea, I do prefer
these three before an hundred yawning wishers for Peace; whilst they do
nothing that tends to the procuring of Peace. Particularly, I do admire the
two former for this reason, because their clearer judgments did pierce so deep
into the Controversies of Religion, before they were rightly stated. And their
free spirits dared to tell the World impartially what was amiss, according to
the dictates of their Consciences, though with the hazard of their life's,
without any other motive than the discharge of their duties. And if any of them
be reviled for their Charity, the greater is their Reward in Heaven.

Yet I cannot pin my Religion to any of their Sleeves. Plato is my friend, and
Socrates is my friend, but Truth is my best friend. Perhaps I may disapprove
some things in Grotius his Works, or some parts of them, more than Mr. Baxter
himself. He extolleth his Book of the right of the Sovereign Magistrates in
sacred things: But when I did read it, he seemed to me to come too near an
Evastian, and to lessen the power of the Keys too much, which Christ left as a
Legacy to his Church. It may be he did write that before he was come to full
maturity of judgment; and some other things, I do not say after he was
superannuated, but without that due deliberation which he uses at other times,
wherein a man may desire Grotius in Grotius. Or it may be that some things have
been changed in some of his Works, as I have been told by one of his nearest
friends, and that we shall shortly see a more authentic Edition of them all.
This is certain, that some of those things which I dislike, were not his own
judgment after he was come to maturity in Theological matters.

But whereas Mr. Baxter does accuse him as a Papist, I think he does him wrong:
Nay I am confident he does him wrong, and that he owes a reparation to his
memory. I have read all that he alleges to prove him a Papist, but without
any conviction or alteration in my judgment. And I believe that one who
delights in such kind of contentions, would find it no difficult task to
clear all his Objections, and demonstrate the contrary out of the Writings of
Grotius himself, and others of the most learned and judicious Protestants.
Sometimes he accuses him of that which is not true at all, sub modo, as it is
alleged, Nothing can be so truly said, but that it may be depraved by
misrelation or misinterpretation, or inconsequent inferences.

At other times he accuses him of that for Popery which is no Popery, the
greater, and better, and sounder part of Protestants being Judges. Yet if
Grotius his Genius had been somewhat less critical, and so much more
Scholastical, he had not laid so open to Mr. Baxters accusations, Unum hoc
maceror and doleo sibi deesse.
It shall suffice me to say, that he was a person of rare parts, of excellent
Learning, of great Charity, and of so Exemplary a Life, that his fiercest
Adversaries had nothing to object against him of moment: but were forced to
rake into the faults of his Family, which whether true or false, was not so
ingeniously done.

But lest any man might chance unawares to hit his own spiritual Mother out of
a mistake, I will endeavor to give some further light, what was the Religion
of Grotius. He was in affection a friend, and in desire a true Son of the
Church of England. And upon his Deathbed recommended that Church, as it was
legally established, to his Wife, and such other of his Family as were then
about him, obliging them by his Authority to adhere firmly to it, so far as
they had opportunity. And both my self, and many others have seen his Wife in
obedience to her Husbands commands, which she declared publicly to the World,
to repair often to our Prayers and Sacraments, and to bring at least one of his
Grandchildren to Sir Richard Browns house then Resident for the King in Paris
to be baptized into the Faith and Communion of the Church of England, and be
made a Member thereof, as it was accordingly. If any man think that he knows
Grotius his mind better by conjectural consequences, than he did himself; or
that he would dissemble with his Wife and Children upon his Deathbed, he may
enjoy his own opini^n to himself, but he will find few to join with him.

CHAP. III.
No Grotian Design in England.

ANother branch of his Discourse is, concerning the Grotian Design in England.
He pretends that there was a Party of Grotius his followers in England, who
prosecuted his design of reconciling us to the Pope, under the name of
Episcopal Divines, Page 2. That Grotius had a Pacificatory design, all men
acknowledge; and he himself extolleth it as much as any of us, Pr. S. 3. For
his Pacificatory design in general, I take it to be one of the most Christian
noble blessed works that any man can be employed in. That Grotius was a
Stalking-Horse for the Pope, or had any design but in order to Peace and Truth;
or that he had any Party in England, who followed him further than he followed
the Truth, after all Mr. Baxters pretenses, we have no reason to believe. This
is his own absurd and groundless presumption. For certainly Grotius could have
no thoughts of introducing any Popish errors into England, who looked upon the
Church of England, as the right medium of reconciliation. Neither were there
any genuine Sons of the Church of England who thought upon any change either in
Doctrine or Discipline. We may fafely take our Oaths of the truth thereof. It
was his own Party, only his own Party, who were plotting and contriving a
change underhand, and cried out against other men's feigned innovations, to
conceal their own real innovations. But how does he make it appear that Grotius
had such a Party of followers in England, who sought to reconcile us to the
Pope? If it be sufficient to accuse, no man can be innocent. Let him speak out
distinctly, we fear not his charge; would they reconcile us to the Pope and
Papacy as it is now established? Let him not say it for shame, they abhor it.
Or would they reduce the Pope to what he was from the beginning, and so
reconcile us? All good Christians join with them in so pious an Act. If his own
meaning do agree with his words, he himself does not quarrel the Pope for his
just rights, but for his Innovations. If he mean it not, it is a double shame.

His first Reason to prove that there was such a Party of Grotians in England,
who nourished such a Design, is taken from Grotius his own words, P. 96. Paris
knows, and many throughout France, many in Poland and Germany, not a few in
England, quiet persons and lovers of Peace, that Grotius his labors for Peace,
have not displeased many moderate persons. He adds, that Rivet agreed better
with the Brownists, than with the Bishops of England. For pity sake let him
show us wherein the strength of his Argument does lie. He may as well persuade
us that we see a Dragon flying in the air, as that there is any design of
introducing the Pope couched in these words. Does the strength of his Argument
perhaps lie in this, that there were lovers of Peace in England? So there were
all over Christendom before Grotius was born. France, Germany, Poland, all
Christendom shake hands with us in this. He himself professes that he is
resolved to speak for Peace whilst he has a tongue to speak; and to write for
Peace whilst he has an hand to write, p. 6. Or does the strength of his
Argument lie in this, that Rivet agreed better with the Brownists than with the
Bishops of England? Whether he did or did not, whether it be true or false,
what does this concern Episcopal Divines? Such are his proofs against Grotius
always halting on one side, most commonly on both sides. I am afraid this great
mountain-design will prove but a ridiculous Mouse in the conclusion.

He asks, What if he had named Bishop Goodman, and all the rabble described
in the Legenda lignea, which are more than Doctor Vane, and Doctor Goffe, and
Doctor Baily, and H. P. de Cressie, etc. p. 99. I answer, First, If he had
named these for Episcopal Divines of the Church of England, of whom he held it
necessary to admonish his Readers, that they might beware of them as Promoters
of the Grotian design, he had made himself guilty of one of the grossest and
silliest calumnies that ever was. For some of these were dead, and all of them
apostated to the Church of Rome before he gave his warning. And Bishop Goodman
in particular, was branded by the Church of England for his inclination to
Roman Errors.

Secondly, I answer, that if he had named these, he had wounded his own Party
more than Episcopal Divines. Abate only Bishop Goodman, whom I did never know,
and of the rest whom he names, not one was thoroughly a genuine Episc pal
Divine. Excuse me for telling the truth plainly, many who have had their
education among Sectaries, or Non-Conformists, have apostated to Rome, but few
or no right Episcopal Divines. Hot water freezeth the soonest.

He adds, That Grotius himself assures him (whom he has reason to believe)
that there were not a few such among the Prelatical men. How! not a few such as
these, who have apostated from the Church of England. For ingenuities sake, let
him tell us where Grotius says any such thing. Grotius has not one word to
his purpose, when it is duly examined. But this it is to confute Books in less
time than wise or modest men would require to read them.

Hitherto he is not able to show us any tolerable reason of his warning. But he
shows us the occasion, p. 82. Those that unchurch either all or most of the
Protestant Churches, and maintain the Roman Church and not theirs to be true,
do call us to a moderate jealousy of them. This is far enough from proving
his bold suggestion that they have a design to introduce the Pope into England.
So though all he say were true: yet he can conclude nothing from thence to make
good his accusation or insinuation. I wish he would forbear these imperfect
Enthymematical forms of arguing, which serve only to cover Deceit, and set down
both his Propositions expressly. His assumption is wanting, which should be
this: But a considerable Party of Episcopal Divines in England, do Unchurch all
or most of the Protestant Churches, and maintain the Roman Church to be a true
Church, and them to be no true Churches. I can assent to neither of his
Propositions, nor to any part of them, as true, sub modo, as they are alleged
by him.

First, I cannot assent to his major Proposition, That all those who make an
ordinary personal uninterrupted succession of Pastors to be of the integrity of
a true Church (which is the ground of of his exception) have therefore an
intention, or can be justly suspected thereupon to have any intention to
introduce the Pope. The Eastern, Southern, and Northern Churches are all of
them for such a personal succession, and yet all of them utter enemies to the
Pope. Secondly, I cannot assent to his minor Proposition, that either all or
any considerable part of the Epispal Divines in England do Unchurch either all,
or the most part of the Protestant Churches. No man is hurt but by himself.
They Unchurch none at all, but leave them to stand or fall to their own Master.
They do not Unchurch the Swedish, Danish, Bohemian Churches, and many other
Churches in Poloma, Hungaria and those parts of the World, which have an
ordinary uninterrupted succession of Pastors, some by the names of Bishops,
others under the name of Seniors unto this day. (I meddle not with the
Socinians) They unchurch not the Lutheran Churches in Germany, who both assert
Episcopacie in their Confessions, and have actual Superintendents in their
practice, and would have Bishops name and thing if it were in their power. Let
him not mistake himself, those Churches which he is so tender of, though they
be better known to us by reason of their Vicinity, are so far from being all,
or the most part of the Protestant Churches, that being all put together, they
amount not to so great a proportion as the Britannick Churches alone. And if
one secluded out of them, all those who want an ordinary succession without
their own faults, out of invincible ignorance or necessity, and all those who
desire to have an ordinary succession either explicitly or implicitly, they
will be reduced to a little slock indeed.

But let him set his heart at rest, I will remove this scruple out of his mind,
that he may sleep securely upon both ears. Episcopal Divines do not deny those
Churches to be true Churches wherein salvation may be had. We advise them, as
it is our duty, to be circumspect for themselves, and not to put it to more
question, whether they have Ordination or not or deserve the general practice
of the universal Church for nothing, when they may clear it if they please.
Their case is not the same with those who labor under invincible necessity.
What mine own sense is of it, I have declared many years since to the World in
print; and in the same way received thanks, and a public acknowledgment of my
moderation from a French Divine. And yet more particularly in my Reply to the
Bishop of Chalcedon, Pref. p. 4. and cap. 1. p. 71. Episcopal Divines will
readily subscribe to the determination of the learned Bishop of Winchester, in
his Answer to the second Epistle of Molineus. Nevertheless, if our form (of
Episcopacie) be of Divine Right, it does not follow from thence that there is
no salvation without it, or that a Church cannot consist without it. He is
blind who does not see Churches consisting without it; he is hard hearted who
denies them salvation. We are none of those hard-hearted persons, we put
agreat difference between these things. There may be something absent in the
exterior Regiment, which is of Divine Right, and yet salvation be to be had.
This mistake proceeds from not distinguishing between the true nature and
essence of a Church, which we do readily grant them, and the integrity or
perfection of a Church, which we cannot grant them, without swerving from the
judgment of the Catholic Church.

The other part of his assumption is no truer than the former. We do
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be Metaphysically a true Church, as a Thief
is a true Man, consisting of soul and body; so did Bishop Morton, Bishop Hall,
Bishop Davenant, old Episcopal Divines; so did Mr. Primrose, and other
Presbyterian Divines; so does he himself in this very Treatise. What a weakness
is it to accuse Episcopal Divines of that which he himself maintains. But we
all deny that the Church of Rome is morally a true Church, because it is
corrupted and erroneous: we make it to be a living Body, but sick and full of
ulcers. So we neither destroy the body out of hatred to the ulcers, nor yet
cherish the ulcers out of a doting affection to the body. And therefore he had
no reason in the world to suspect Episcopal Divines of a plot or design to
introduce Popery into England, which they look upon as the very Gangrene of the
Church.

He pleads a reason why he does not name those Episcopal Divines who had this
design for fear of doing them hurt. Sect. 70. As if it were not less hurtful to
discover the nocent, if he knew any such, than to subject the innocent both to
suspicion and censure, by his general descriptions. I cannot excuse his first
intimation of such a design, because he had no ground at all for it: but I can
easily excuse his silence now, upon another reason, because I am confident
there neither are, nor ever were any such designers among the Episcopal Party.

Whereas he ought to prove his intention that there was such a design, in the
place thereof he gives us some symptoms or signs whereby to know the
designers. This is one great fault in his Discourse. But the worst is, they are
all accidental notes, which may either hit or miss; there is not one essential
mark among them. His first mark is, They are those that actually were the
Agents in the English illegal Innovations, which kindled all our troubles in
this Land, and were conformable to the Grotian design. Those last words [and
were conformable to the Grotian design] were well added, though they be a
shameful begging of the question, and signify the same thing by it self. A
strange kind of proof: for without these words all the World will take him and
his Party to be the illegal Innovators, and no body but them. The Episcopal
Divines hold their old Canons, their old Articles, their old Liturgy their old
Ordinal still without any change: They took the Protestation against
Innovations without any difficulty, and are ready to take it over and over
again. Their fault was that they could not swallow down New Covenants to
innovate. His Party have changed Canons, Articles, Liturgy, all things, and yet
have the confidence cry Innovators first.

His second mark is, They bend the course of their Writings to make the Roman
Church honorable, and to vindicate them from Antichristianism, and to make the
reformed Churches odious. This is a poor note indeed, as if men were obliged
out of hatred to the Church of Rome, to deny it that honor which is justly due
unto it, or out of affection to the Protestant Churches to justify their
defects. What reward did ever any English Protestant get from Rome for doing
them this honor? I know no man who honors the Church of Rome more than
himself. He calls Cassander, Thaulerus, Ferus, Blessed souls with Christ: He
esteems the French Nation to be not only an erroneous, but an honorable part
of the Church of Christ, p. 10. Episcopal Divines have learned to distinguish
between that great Antichrist and lesser Antichrists, between the Court of Rome
and the Church of Rome, which he confounds. I dare not swear that the Pope is
that great Antichrist, but I dare swear that I never had any design to bring
Popery into England, I hope I never shall have, and that all genuine Episcopal
Divines may take the same Oath.

His third note of distinction, whereby to know an English Grotian is this,
They labor to prove the Church of Rome a true Church, because of their
succession, and the Reformed Churches to be none, for want of that succession,
Sect. 71. This note is already answered. Elsewhere he presses this point
further thus; that he would gladly know what Church has power to make a new
Canon, the observation whereof shall be essential to a Church or Pastor. I
answer, that he does doubly mistake the question, which is not whether the
Catholic Church can make new Essentials, but whether it can declare old
Essentials. Not whether the Canons of the Universal Church of this Age have
divine Authority, but whether they do oblige Christians in conscience, and
whether it be not timerarious presumption for a particular person or Church to
slight the Belief or Practice of the Universal Church of all succeeding Ages.

His fourth note of Grotians is, that they are for a visible head of the
Universal Church, whether Pope or General Council. They who are for the
Headship of a General Council are no fit instruments for the introduction of
the Popes tyrannical power. It seems he rejects the Authority of General
Councils, either past or to come, as well as Popes: so dare not we. If under
the name of the Universal Church he include the Triumphant Church, we know no
head of the Universal Church but Christ. If he limit it to the Militant Church,
we are as much against one single Monarch as he, we dislike all tyrannical
power in the Church, as well as he: yet we quarrel with no man about the name
of Head, or a Metaphorical expression. But if he think that Christ left the
Catholic Church as the Ostrich does her Eggs, in the Sand, without any care or
provision for the governing thereof in future Ages, he erreth grossly. So the
Catholic Church should be in a worse condition than any particular Church,
yea, than any Society in the World, like the Cyclops Cane where no man heard or
heeded what another said. Particular Churches have Sovereign Princes and Synods
to order them, but there never was an universal Monarch. And if he take away
the Authority of General Councils, he leaves no humane helps to preserve the
Unity of the Universal Church: what is this but to leap over the backs of all
second Causes? The first Council was of another mind, It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15. 28. And so have all the Churches of the World
from Christ's time until this Age.

His fifth note of Grotians, To dery the sufficiency of Scripture in all
things necessary to salvation, might well have been spared, for we all maintain
it as well as he; but he shuffles into the question such impertinent and
confused generalities about the Peace of the Chur^^, and Traditions, as deserve
no answer. The sufficiency of Scripture is not inconsistent either with
prudential Government, or the necessary means of finding out the right sense of
Scripture. When he expresses himself more distinctly, he may expect a
Categorical answer.

His last mark is, that they will not be persuaded to join on any reasonable
terms for the healing of our present divisions. This depends upon his own
interpretation, what he judges to be reasonable terms. We have seen his
dexterity in making wounds, and would be glad to have experience of his skill
in healing them. He complains only of illegal Innovations. Dare he stand to the
ancient Laws? If he dare, the Controversy is ended. If he like not this, for
we know their exceptions were against the Laws themselves, not against illegal
Innovations; let them name those Laws which they except against, and put it to
a fair trial, whether there be any thing in any of them, which is repugnant to
the Laws of God, or of right reason. If they will but do this seriously without
prejudice, the business is ended. I will make bold to go yet one step higher,
though our Laws be unblamable, yet if the things commanded be but of a middle
or indifferent nature, we are ready to admit any terms of peace, which we can
accept with a good conscience, so as we may neither swerve from the analogy of
Faith, nor renounce the necessary principles of Government, nor desert the
communion, and ancient and undoubted customs of the Universal Church. Such an
accord would be too much loss both to you and us.

He would persuade us that there are two sorts of Episcopal Divines in England,
the old and the new. And that there is much more difference between the old and
the new, than between the old and the Presbyterians, Sect. 67. O confidence
whither will thou? what is the power of prejudice, and pride? The contrary is
as clear as the light; we maintain their old Liturgy, their old Ordinal, their
old Articles, their old Canons, their old Laws, Practices, and praescriptions,
their old Doctrine and Discipline against them. Then tell us no more of old
Episcopal Divines, and new Episcopal Divines; we are old Episcopal Divines, one
and all: out of his own words I condemn him; The old sort of Episcopal Divines
that received the public Doctrine of the Nation, contained in the 39.
Articles, Homilies, etc. I wholly acquitted from my jealousies of this
compliance, Sect. 12. If they be old Episcopal Divines, who maintain the
Doctrine of the 39. Articles and Homilies, then we are all old Episcopal
Divines. In acquitting all them he acquitteth all us. If he can show any thing
that I have written contrary to these, I retract it: if he cannot, let him
retract his words. He might have taken notice of my submission of whatsoever I
writ to the Ecumenical essential Church, and to its Representative, a free
general Council; and to the Church of England, or a National English Synod, to
the determinations of all which, and each of them respectively, according to
the distinct degrees of their Authority, I yield a conformity and compliance,
or to the least and lowest of them an acquiescence. Pref. to the Reply to Bish.
Chalc. So far am I, and always have been from opposing the Church of England
wittingly.

He makes a show as though he could make it appear that the Grotian design was
the cause of all our Wars and changes in England: but it is but a copy of his
countenance. How should the Grotian design be the cause of all our Wars, when
our War began before Grotius himself began his design, or to write of the
reconciliation of Protestants and Papists, which was in the years 1641, and
1642. But without all controversy, either the Grotian design was the cause of
our Wars; or the design, and more than the bare design of his own Party. The
World knows well enough, and I leave it to his own conscience to tell him
whether of the two was the right Mother of the Child.

Though he fail in his proofs against Episcopal Divines: yet he produces
sundry other reasons to prove that there was such a Plot on foot to introduce
Popery into England, but they do not weigh so much as a Feather; nor signify
any thing more than this, how easily men believe those things which they wish.
He says, Franciscus a Sancta Claras design and Grotius his design seem the
very same, and their Religion and Church the same, Sect. 73. Nay certainly,
(that is more than seemingly) their Religion and Church was not the same;
unless he mean the same Christian Religion, and in that sense his own Religion
is the same with theirs, but in his sense they were not the same. This is
begging of the question which he ought to prove, Grotius was not of the French
Communion. And for their designs, the World is so full of feigned Plots and
designs, that I do not believe that either of them had any design, except that
general and pacificatory design, which he himself professes and extolleth
every where. I wish every man's Books had as much learning and ingenuity in them
as A Sancta Clara's have. Yet if he conclude from hence, that I and he are of
the same Communion, he does me wrong. Judge Reader, how partial men are, to
deny that liberty to another which they assume to themselves.

He proceeds, This A Sancta Clara is still the Queens Chaplain, etc. And we
have reason to believe the Queen to be so moderate as to be of the same
Religion. Whether he be the Queens Chaplain or not, is more than I know. The
Queen has had many Servants of Mr. Baxters own Communion, who have had more
influence upon her Counsels than ever A Sancta Clara had. He has reason to
believe that the Queen and he were of the same Religion: but no reason to prove
that so seriously and so weakly, which all men acknowledge, that either the
Queen or he had any hand in the pretended design of Grotius and his Followers,
no man can believe.

From the Queen he passes over to the King; what to do? to accuse him of
Popery. He cannot prove it, nor all the World to help him. Yea, he professes
openly that he believes no such thing. Not only his Conference with the
Marquess of Worcester, but his Life and Death, and that Golden Legacy which he
left to his Son, do proclaim the contrary to all the World. What is his aim
then? To show how far he was inclined to a reconciliation. That is the duty of
every good Christian. But did he prefer peace before truth? Had he any design
to introduce Papal Tyranny into England? That is the crime whereof he accuses
those whom he nick-nameth Grotians. The Devil himself cannot justly object any
such thing against him.

He cites the Articles of the Spanish and French matches; but is not able to
cite one word out of them which makes for his purpose. And this alone, that
there is nothing in them for his purpose, is a convincing proof against him,
that all his pretended design is but a dream. I may well call it his design,
for it is the phantasm of his own brain, and never had any existence in the
nature of things.

He mentions the Kings Letter to the Pope, written in Spain. If he himself had
been there at that time, upon the same condition the King was at that time, he
would have redeemed his liberty with writing three Letters to the Pope, such as
that was, or else he had been much to be blamed. But what is there in the
Letter? Is there any thing of the Grotian design? No I warrant you. Observe how
all his conjectural reasons make directly against himself. Perhaps the King
calls the Pope Most Holy Father; a great crime indeed, to make such a civil
address, which the common use of the World has made necessary. He who will
converse with a Friar in a Roman Catholic Country, must do little less; and he
that will write to the Great Turk must do more. Such compellations do not show
always what men are, but what they ought to be, or what they are, or would be
esteemed.

Next he tells us of the choice of Agents for Church and State. Very trifles.
Kings must choose their Agents according to the exigence of their affairs. But
if the qualifications of Agents did always demonstrate the resolutions of
Princes, I could more easily prove King Charles a Presbyterian, than he a
Grotian, and bring more instances for my self. I am confident he cannot
instance in any one Agent for Church or State, that ever had his Grotian
design; but I can instance in many who have had contrary and worse designs. I
shall not stick to tell him with grief, that which has been in a great part
the cause of all our woes. In some Courts it has been esteemed a singular
policy to nourish two Parties, upon pretense that the one might balance the
other, and the one watch over the other. But it proves too often true that the
one Party is disgusted, and ordinarily the weaker and worser Party does
countenance heterodox and seditious persons, to augment the number of their
dependents, which evermore tends to manifest sedition. By this means the
rents of the Church have been perpetuated and enlarged, and Subjects have been
debauched with destructive and seditious Principles, the evil influence
whereof, we have felt to our cost.

He proceeds to the Residence of the Popes Nuncios in England. It may be
during all the Kings reign there were one Nuncio and his Proctor or Deputy, or
two Nuncios at the most. And if we had never had them, it had been the better,
not so much for any great hurt they did, but for that opportunity which his own
peevish Party got from thence, to raise jealousies and Panick fears among the
Rabble. Unless he could have told something that the Popes Nuncio did in
England tending to that end which he pretends, he might as well have instanced
in the King of Morocco's Ambassador, and said that he came over to convert us
to be Turks. I thought he would have produced the Popes Bull to his Nuncio to
reconcile us to Rome; or at least have discovered some secret Cabal, or
Conferences between him and those Episcopal Divines whom he accuses. He
knows well there was no such thing, and therefore it were much better to be
silent, than to urge so many things, and to fail in every one of them.

His next instance is in the Jesuits College, which had been much better
omitted for his credit. Did the King found the College? No such thing. Was he
a Benefactor to it? Nor that. Did he give the Jesuits a license of Mortmain, to
purchase Lands for themselves to that use? Not so much. What did he then, did
he know of the Jesuits and the College, and connive at them and it? O no. So
soon as ever it was discovered, it was suppressed. By the same equity he might
accuse an innocent Prince of all the crimes that are committed in hugger mugger
throughout his Kingdom, and make him Head even of the Presbyterian Rebellion.

The last of his odious instances has less show of truth in it than any of the
rest, how vain or empty soever they have been; that is, the illegal innovations
in worship so resolvedly gradatim introduced. Perhaps he calls the execution of
old Laws, Innovations, because they themselves had taken the boldness to disuse
them. It were better to spare this charge, lest they get a round peal of their
own Innovations rung out in their ears. Theirs are Innovations indeed.

To conclude, Does he think that such disloyal and uncharitable insinuations as
these, are salved by pretending that he has not the least desire to persuade
men that he was a Papist; or that he would not have other men to believe it: As
if he should say, Here are violent presumptions indeed, that the King had
Popish inclinations: yet my charity will not give me leave to believe it, other
men may judge as they find cause; when all he says does not weigh one grain in
the Scale of Reason. Our Case-Divinity will hardly excuse this from downright
Calumny. But that is their only weapon, and their only strength, and Skill has
ever laid in idle and malicious suggestions.

CHAP. IV.
This Plot weakly Fathered upon Episcopal Divines.

I Mused some while why he should rather father his imaginary design of
reducing the Pope into England upon Episcopal Divines, than upon any other
Divines. For in the first place this is certain, that both Presbyterian
Divines, and Independent Divines, and Millenary Divines, and Anabaptistical
Divines, and each sort of their Divines, (if any of them may be allowed that
Title) have all of them, and every one of them contributed more to the reducing
of the Pope into England, than Episcopal Divines ever did, or were likely ever
to do. Men do naturally prefer Antiquity in Religion before Novelty, Order and
Uniformity before Confusion, Comeliness and Decency before sordid
Uncleanliness; Reverence and Devotion before Profaneness and overmuch
Sawciness and familiarity with God; Christian Charity before Unchristian
Censures; Constancy before Fickleness and frequent Changes, they love Monuments
of Piety, and delight not in seeing them defaced and demolished; they are for
Memorials of ancient Truth, for an outward splendour of Religion, for helps of
Mortification, for adjuments of Devotion; all which our late Innovators have
quite taken away. Nature it self does teach us that God is to be adored with
our Bodies as well as with our Spirits. What comfort can men have to go to the
Church, where they shall scarcely see one act of corporeal devotion done to God
in their whole life's? These are the true Reasons why the Roman Emissaries do
gain ground daily upon them, why so many apostate from them. If the Pope have a
fairer game in England, he is beholden to them for it, not to the Magistrates
Sword, much less to Episcopal Divines.

Some may perhaps urge that this advantage is accidental to Episcopal Divines,
therefore I propose a second consideration; That Episcopal Divines cannot be
the Popes Stalking Horses, nor promoters of the Papacy, without deserting their
principles about Episcopacy. Episcopal rights and Papal claims are
inconsistent. This appeared evidently in the Council of Trent, in the debating
of that great Controversy about Episcopal Right, whether it be divine or
humane. Thus much the Spanish, Polonian, and Hungarian Divines saw well enough
And consulting seriously about the Reformation of the Church, they could find
no better ground to build so noble a Fabric upon than the Divine Right of
Bishops, as the Archbishop of Granato well observed. Hist. Conc. Trid. l. 7. p.
588.

Father Lainer the General of the Jesuits saw this well enough, and concluded,
that it is a mere contradiction to say the Pope is head of the Church, and the
Government Monarchical; and then say, that there is a power or jurisdiction in
the Church not derived from him, but received from others, that is, from
Christ. Hist. Conc. Trid. ibid.

The Popes Legates themselves found this out at last, when it was almost too
late, l. 7. p. 609. October. 19. When the question was set on foot in the
beginning, the Legates thought that the aim was only to make great the Authority
of Bishops, and to give them more reputation. But before the second
Congregation was ended they perceived very late by the voices given and reasons
used, of what importance and consequence it was. For it did imply, that the
Keys were not given to St. Peter only, that the Council was above the Pope, and
the Bishop equal to him, who had nothing left but a pre-eminence above others,
etc. the dignity of Cardinals was quite taken away, and the Papal Court reduced
to nothing

But before the Papalins discovered this, the Party bent for a serious
Reformation, was grown numerous and potent in the Council. The Divine Right of
Bishops was inserted into the Anathematisms. Fifty nine of the prime Fathers
voted for it, besides all those whom either an Epidemical or a Politic Catarrh
detained at home; notwithstanding all the disswasions and persuasions,
threatenings and promises, and other Artifices used by the Papalins, whereof the
chiefest, and that which saved the Court of Rome from utter ruin at that time,
was to represent to the Italian Bishops, whose number was double to all the
rest of the Christian World in that Council, (a very unequal composition) how
much they were concerned in the preservation of the Papacy, as being the only
honor which the Italian Nation had above all other Nations. This I urge to
show that Episcopal Divines cannot be Papalins without betraying their own
Principles. The very name of Episcopal Divines renders this dedesign less
probable.

Thirdly, In stiling them Episcopal Divines he does tacitly accuse himself to
be an Anti-Episcopal, or at least no Episcopal Divine. What odious consequences
do flow from thence, and how contrary it is to the title of Catholic, which he
gives himself in the Frontispiece of this Treatise, I had much rather he should
observe himself, than I collect. Catholic and Anti-Episcopal are contradictory
terms.

From Christ's time till this day there was never any one Catholic in the
Eastern, Southern, or Northern Churches, who professed himself to be
Anti-Episcopal, but only such as were cast out for Heretics or Schismatics.
The same I say of the Western Church for the first 1500. years. Let him show me
but one formed Church without a Bishop, or the name of one Lay Presbyter in all
that time, who exercised or challenged Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or the
power of the Keys in the Church before Calvin's return to Geneva in the year
1538. after he had subscribed the Augustine Confession and Apology for Bishops,
and I will give him leave to be as Anti-Episcopal as he will. I will show him
the proper and particular names of Apostles, Evangelists, Bishops, Presbyters,
Deacons, in Scriptures, in Councils, in Fathers, in Histories; if he cannot
name one particular Lay-Elder, it is because there never was any such thing in
rerum natura, for 1500 years after Christ.

I will add one thing more for the honor of Episcopal Government, that all the
first Reformers did approve it, and desired it, if they could have had it.
Second Reformations are commonly like Metal upon Metal, which is false
Heraldry. After the Waldenses, the first Reformers, were the Bohemian Brethren:
and both these were careful to retain Episcopacy. Take their own Testimony in
the Preface of their Book called, Ratio, Disciplinae, Ordinisque Ecclesiastici
in unitate fratrum Bohemorum, lately translated out of Bohemian into Latin,
and published by themselves. And whereas the said Waldenses did affirm that
they had lawful Bishops, and a lawful uninterrupted succession from the
Apostles unto this day, they created three of our Ministers Bishops solemnly,
and conferred upon them power to Ordain Ministers. From that time this Order is
continued in all their Churches until this day.

The next Reformers were the Lutherans. These retained Bishops name and thing,
in the Kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark, and the thing under another name of
Superintendents in Germany. The Confession of Saxony is subscribed by seventeen
Superintendents. Harm. Conf. Sect. 19. p. 290. The Snevick Confession
complains of great wrong done to their Churches, as if they did seek to
reduce the power of Ecclesiastical Prelates to nothing. Sect. 11. p. 65. And in
Chap. 33. Of the Rights of the Civil Magistrate, they declare most plainly for
the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Bishops. There cannot be a more luculent
Testimony for the Lutherans approbation of Bishops, than the Augustine
Confession it self, cap. 7. de Potest. Eccles. It is not now sought that the
Government be taken away from Bishops: but this one thing is desired, that they
will suffer the Gospel to be purely taught, and release some few observances
which cannot be kept without sin. And the Apology for the same Confession,
Cap. de numero and usu Sacrament. This our will shall excuse us both before God
and all the World, that it may not be imputed to us that the Authority of
Bishops was taken away by our means.

I need not say any thing of the Britannick Churches. He knows well they
never wanted Bishops from their first Conversion until these late Tumults,
wherein our Native Country was purpled with the Blood of English Subjects, to
take them away by force and Rebellion.

The next Reformation was the Zuinglian or Helvetian in Switzerland, wherein as
they erected no new Bishoprics, so they pulled down no old ones. There was a
kind of necessity laid upon them to want Bishops in their own Territories:
because the Bishop of Constance, under whose Jurisdiction they were, was of
another communion, and lived out of their Territories. But they would gladly
have had him to have continued their Bishop still. They made their addresses to
him, they courted him, they besought him to join with them, or but to tolerate
them. For proof of this, I produce that famous Letter written by Zuinglius
himself, and ten others of their principal Reformers, to the same Bishop of
Constance, recorded in the Works of Zuinglius, in all humility and observance
beseeching him to favor and help forward their beginnings, as an excellent
work, and worthy of a Bishop. They call him Father, Renowned Prelate, Bishop.
They implore his clemency, wisdom, learning, that he would be the first fruits
of the German Bishops, to favor true Christianity springing up again. They
beseech him by the common Christ, by one Christian Liberty, by that Fatherly
affection which he did owe unto them, by whatsoever was divine and humane, to
look graciously upon them; or if he would not grant their desires, to connive
at them; so he should make his Family yet more illustrious, and have the
perpetual tribute of their praises; so he would but show himself a Father, and
grant the requests of his obedient sons. They conclude, God Almighty long
preserve your Excellency.

The last Reformation of those which he approves, was that of Calvin. How far
Calvin and his Party were Episcopal or Anti-Episcopal in their desires, let
their own testimonies bear witness. First Calvin himself acknowledges that he
subscribed the Augustine Confession formerly mentioned, or the Apology for it,
both which are for Bishops. And in his 190. Epistle to the King of Polonia, he
represents Episcopal Government as fittest for Monarchies; where having
showed the regiment of the Primitive Church by Patriarchs; Primats, Bishops, in
these words: Indeed the ancient Church instituted Patriarchs, and gave certain
Primacies to particular Provinces, that Bishops might remain bound one to
another by this bond of Concord. He proceeds thus, As if at this day one
Archbishop should be over the illustrious Kingdom of ^olonia, etc. And
farther, there should be a Bishop in each City or Province, to attend
peculiarly to the preservation of Order, as nature itself does dictate to us,
that in every College one ought to be chosen, upon whom the principal care of
the College should rest. And in his Institutions having described at large the
Regiment of the Primitive Church, and showed the end of Archbishops, and the
constitution of Patriarchs, he concludes, that some called this kind of
Government an Hierarchy, by a name improper, or at least not used in the
Scripture. But if we pass by the name and look upon the thing itself, we shall
find that the ancient Bishops did go about to devise no other form of governing
the Church, than that which God has prescribed in his Word, lib. 4. Inst. c.
4. Sect. 4.

And in his Answer to Cardinal Sadolet, on the behalf of the City of Geneva, as
it is cited by Archbishop Bancroft, for I cannot procure the first Edition at
present, and in the later Editions they have made a shift to purge it out.
Talem nobis Hierarchiam, etc. If they make tender of such an Hierarchy to us,
wherein Bishops may retain their eminence, so as they refuse not to be under
Christ, and have their dependence upon him as their only Head, and refer
themselves to him, and observe such a brotherly society among themselves, and
be bound together with no other bond but the truth, then I confess that they
deserve all sorts of curses or anathemas, if there be any who do not observe it
with reverence and the highest obedience.

Lay all these together, If the Law of Nature, which is divine Law, written in
our hearts by God himself, and needing no other promulgation, do dictate that
in every Society there ought to be one upon whom the principal care of the
Society should rest. If the ancient Bishops devised no other form of governing
the Church by Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, than that which God had
prescribed in his Word; If they deserve the severest curses and anathemas, who
shall not regard such an Hierarchy with reverence and obedience, where Christ
is acknowledged to be the only Head of his Church, where the Pastors are freed
from all Oaths and Obligations to the Bishop of Rome, let him be his own Judge
what they deserve, who have destroyed the Church of England.

Before Calvin, Farellus offered the Bishop of Geneva terms to retain his
Bishopric, if he would give way to the Reformation. Beza his Successor was not
for the divine Right of Bishops in express terms by the Evangelical Law: But he
was for the precedencie of one Clergy man above the rest by the Law of Nature.

From Geneva let us pass over into France, where we find Monsieur Mouline as
high or higher than any of them, in his third Epistle to the Bishop of
Winchester. I am not so brazen-faced as to give sentence against those lights
of the ancient Church, Ignatius, Polycarpus, Cyprian, Augustine, Chrysostom,
Basil, the two Gregory's Nissene Nazianzene Bishops, as against men wrongfully
created, or as usurpers of an unlawful Office. The venerable antiquity of those
Primitive Ages shall always weigh more with me than any man's newfangled
Institution. And a little after, in the same Epistle, I spoke with honor of
the Bishops of England, I derived the Episcopal dignity from the very cradle of
the Church, I condemned Aerius, I affirmed that St. James was Bishop of
Jerusalem, from whom the succession of the Bishops of that City was derived by
a long row of Bishops.

Mr. Blondel in his needless Apology for St. Hierome made a very necessary
Apology for himself, and sent it; to Mr. Rivet to be added as an Appendix to
his Book in the Impression of it, by whose neglect it was omitted. And now
having mentioned Doctor Rivet, I shall make bold to add, that he himself did
entreat a Noble Earl, yet living, to procure him a dignity or Prebend in
England, as his Brother Mouline and Vossius had. The Earl answered, that he
could not hold any such place in England without subscribing to Episcopacy, and
the Doctrine and Discipline of the English Church. And he replied, that he was
most ready to subscribe to them both with his hand and heart.

I conclude that all Divines throughout the Christian World, who maintain a
necessity of Holy Orders, ever were and still are Episcopal Divines: except
some weaker and wilful Brethren, who for their Antiquity are but of Yesterday,
and for their Universality come much short of the very Donatists in Africa,
condemned by all moderate and rational persons of their own Communion. And
therefore Mr. Baxter might have done better to have given his pretended
Designers, a lower and more distinctive name than that of Episcopal Divines.

It will not help him at all which he says, page 21. It is not all Episcopal
Divines which I suspected of a compliance with Grotius and Cassander, no not
all of the later strein, etc. I extended it to none of the new Episcopal Party,
but such as I there described. His distinction of Episcopal Divines into Old
and New, is but a Chimera of his own brain, without any ground; neither does he
bring one grain of reason to make it good. And by his plain Confession here, it
appears that this great design is but his own suspicion. To accuse men of a
design to introduce the Pope into England, merely upon suspicion, is a liberty,
or rather license, to be abhorred of all conscionable Christians.

Yet of the old Episcopal Divines he names many, Bishop Jewel, Pilkinson,
Hall, Carlton, Davenant, Morton, Abbot, Usher, Potter, Downham, Grindal,
Parker, Hooper, Farrar, Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, and forty more Bishops here.
p. 103. as if so many names blended together confusedly in an heap as an
hotchpotch, were able like a Medusas head to transform reasonable men into
stocks and stones. If he had made his forty up an hundred, he might have found
instances enough to have made it good, and sundry of them no way inferior to
any whom he names, and superior to many. In commemorating some, and
pretermitting others, he shows sometimes want of judgment, always respect of
persons. What his description was of New Episcopal Divines, I do not know,
(having never seen any Treatise of his, but this of the Grotian Religion;
neither should I have meddled with that, if he had not brought me publicly
upon the Stage,) neither do I much regard. But howsoever he describes them he
instanceth in no man but my self, either because he is not able to name any, or
because he thinks it easiest to leap over the hedge where it is lowest. Have I
not great reason to thank him for being so mindful of me in my absence.

As for my part I profess ingeniously before God and Man, I never knew of any
such design, I am confident there never was any such design, and I am certain
that I neither had nor could have an hand in any such design, either for
Italian Popery, or French Popery. or any Popery, unless he call the Doctrine
and Discipline of the Primitive Church Popery, unless our Holy Orders and
Liturgy and Articles be Popery. Other Popery he shall never be able to prove
against me, nor I hope against any true Episcopal Divines. His design, like the
Phoenix, is much talked of by himself, but never was seen.

I know as little of any such distinction between Old and New Episcopal
Divines. All the World sees evidently, that all the material differences which
we have with them, are about those Holy Orders, and that Liturgy, and those
Articles, and those Rites, which we received from those Old Episcopal Divines.
Non tellus cimbam, tellurem cim^a reliquit.



We have not left our Predecessors, but They have left both us and our
Predecessors, and the Church of England. And it fares with Mr. Baxter as it
does with new Sailers, who by the deception of their sight, suppose that the
Land leaves them, terraeque, urbesque recedunt, when in truth it is they
themselves that leave the Land. In a word, his supposed design and his
pretended distinction, are mere fancies, which never had any being in the
nature of things. Where did these designers ever meet together to contrive
their Plot? They are never likely to do any great actions, who want sinews to
knit them together. When or where had ever any of them any intercourse or
correspondence with Rome, or any that belonged to Rome, by word or writing? It
was a senseless silly Plot to design the Introduction of the Pope into England
without his own knowledge or consent, upon terms never accorded, never so much
as treated upon. Thus have we seen melancholic persons out of a strong
fantasy, imagine that they see Ships and Minotaures in the Clouds. The proofs
of such accusations as this is, ought to have been clearer than the Noonday
light, not ungrounded or ill grounded jealousies and suspicions of credulous
and partial persons.

CHAP. V.
This Plot was as weakly fathered upon the Bishop of Derry.

ANd as he erred in fathering his imaginary Plot upon Episcopal Divines in
general, so he made an ill choice of me the meanest of those Episcopal Divines
for his only instance, who have only read so much of Grotius, as to enable me
to judge that Mr. Baxter does him wrong, I hope unwittingly. If ever I should
attempt the reconciling of Controversies among Christians, it must be in
another way then Grotius takes, I mean more Scholastical.

I will confess that freely which Mr. Baxter neither does know, nor ever could
know but by me, that about thirty years since, when my body was stronger, and
my wits fresher, when I had some Books and Notes of mine own, and could have
had what supply soever I desired, and opportunity to confer with whomsoever I
pleased, I had then a design indeed to do my weak endeavor to disabuse the
Christian World, by the right stating and distinguishing of Controversies
between the Church of Rome and us. And to show:

First, How many of them are mere Logomachies, or contentions about words
without any just ground.

Secondly, How many of them are Scholastical subtleties, whereof ordinary
Christians are not capable, and consequently no points of Faith.

Thirdly, How many of them are not the Controversies of the Churches, but of
particular Persons or Parties in those Churches, as well Protestants against
Protestants, and Roman Catholics against Roman Catholics, as Protestants
against Roman Catholics. Those Controversies which each Church does tolerate
within it self, ought not to be any cause of Schism between the Churches.

Fourthly, How many of our Controversies are about Rites and Ceremonies, and
things indifferent in their own nature, in the use of which every particular
Church under the Universal Church has free liberty in it self, and dominion
over its own Sons.

When all these empty Names and Titles of Controversies are wiped out of the
Roll, the true Controversies between us may be quickly mustered, and will not
be found, upon a serious enquiry, to be either so exclusive of salvation to
those who err invincibly, and hold the truth implicitly in the preparation of
their minds, nor altogether so irreconcilable as some persons have imagined.
The two dangerous extremes are to clip away something from saving Truth,
whereof I do not find the Church of Rome to have been guilty; and to obtrude
erroneous or (at the best) probable opinions for Articles of Faith, whereof I
find many in the Church of Rome to have been most guilty.

Next to these are the practical abuses of the Court of Rome. These were my
thoughts in my younger days, which age and experience has rather confirmed and
radicated in me, than altered; which if they had been known, I deserved rather
to have been cherished and encouraged, than to be branded by any man as a
Factor for the Pope.

Truly Mr. Baxter could hardly have fixed upon a Subject more improper for such
a charge. When I was commanded to preach to our Northern Synod, where every one
designed to discharge that duty, chooses some controversy between the Church
of Rome and us, my Subject was the Popes unlawful Usurpation of Jurisdiction
over the Britannick Churches. When I disputed in Cambridge for the Degree of
Doctor, my Thesis was taken out of Nilus, that the Papacy (as it was challenged
and usurped in many places, and as it had been sometimes usurped in our Native
Country,) was either the procreant or conservant cause, or both procreant and
conservant cause of all the greater Ecclesiastical Controversies in the
Christian World. When our late King Charles (of blessed memory) was in Spain,
and Religion in England seemed to our Country people (though without any
ground) to be placed in aequilibrio, or reduced to a measuring cast; I
adventured with more zeal than discretion, to give two of their Roman Champions
in our Northern parts, Mr. Hungate a Jesuit, and Mr. Houghton a secular
Priest, one after another, two meetings at North-Allerton, and came off without
any dishonor to the Church of England, and stopped the Carrier of the Romish
Emislaries at that time in those parts.

When I was last in Ireland and the Romanists had wrested some part of the
power of the Sword into their hands, they prosecuted no English Protestant more
than my self, and never left until they had thrust me out of the Kingdom, as
conceiving me to be a great impediment to them in their making of Proselytes.
It was but an ill requital, if I had been one of their Factors. Since I came
into exile these sixteen years, where have my weak endeavors ever been wanting
to the Church of England? who has had more Disputes with their Seculars and
Regulars of all sorts, French, Italian, Dutch, English, in Word, in Writing, to
maintain the honor of the English Church? And after all this am I traduced as
a Factor for Popery, because I am not a Protestant out of my wits; or because
my assertions of known Truth are not agreeable to the gust of Innovators?
Blessed are we when men revile us and persecute us, and say all manner of evil
against us falsely for Christ's sake, for great is our reward in heaven.

But does he think in earnest, that my way of reconciliation is the ready way
to introduce the Papal tyranny into England? Nay, directly on the contrary, it
is the ready way to exclude the Papal tyranny out of England for ever; and to
acquit us for evermore from all the Extortions and Usurpations of the Roman
Court, and to free us from all their Emissaries who now make a prey of such as
are unsettled among us; by the means of doubtful, and (give me leave to speak my
mind freely) impertinent Disputations. And this I am ready to make good against
any Innovator of either side who shall oppose it.

This is hard measure to be offered to me, from him who professes himself to
be so great a lover of the Unity of the Church, p. 6. which is but his duty if
it be true, as I hope it is. But let him take heed that his love of Unity prove
not to be self-love, which insinuates it self strangely into the most holy
actions and designs. All men could be contented to have others united to
themselves, and to chop off or stretch out the Religion of their Brethren, as
Procrustes did his Guests, according to the measure of his own Bed. I doubt not
but he would be well pleased to have Independency stretched up to an ordained
Ministry, (as he calls it,) and Episcopacy let down to a Presbyterian
parity, or rather to an empty show of equality. For I never yet observed but
one or two single popular Presbyters ruled the whole Consistory; and had more
absolute Arbitrary power than ever any Bishop pretended unto. If this be all
his love and desire of Unity, to have Antiquity, Universality, and the
perpetual Regiment of the Church to be levelled and moduled according to
private fantasies, it is mere self-love, no love of Unity. But I hope better,
though I sear worse.

If he dare refer all differences between us to be tried by the public
Standard, we shall quickly see whether he or I follow Peace and Unity with
swifter paces. I offer him two Standards to be tried by.

First, the Doctrine of the Church of England, set down by those old Episcopal
Divines whom he pretends to be more propitious to him than to me. If he
submit to this Standard, all differences between him and me are at an end. And
then to what purpose has so much plundering, and so much effusion of Christian
blood been? unless it be to shake the dregs to the top of the Urinal.

But if he like not this Standard (as I much fear he will not) I offer him
another; that is, the Pattern of the Primitive Church, both for Doctrine and
Discipline. But it may be he will dislike this more, and when all is done admit
no Standard but the Scripture. I am ready to join with him in this also. But if
he and I differ about the sense of the Scripture, (all men acknowledge that the
Scripture consists not in the words but in the sense,) how shall we be tried
what is the sense, by the judgment of the Church of England, that is the
Standard of the place, or by the pattern of the primitive Church, that is the
original Standard according to which the local Standard was made? If he refuse
both these, let him not say that he will be tried by the Scripture, but he will
be tried by himself, that is to say, he himself will and can judge better what
is the true sense of the Scripture, than either his national Church, or the
primitive and universal Church. This is just as if a man who brings his
commodities to a market to be sold, should refuse to have them weighed or
measured by any Standard local or original, and desire to be tried by the Law
of the Land, according to the judgment of the bystanders. Not that the Law of
the Land is any thing more favorable to him than the Standard, but only to
decline a present sentence, and out of hope to advantage himself by the
simplicity of his Judges.

Yet Mr. Baxter acquits me, that I am no Papist in his judgment, though he
dare not follow me, page 22. What soever I am, this is sure enough he has no
authority to be my Judge, or to publish his ill grounded jealousies and
suspicions to the world in Print to my prejudice. Although he did condemn me:
yet I praise God my conscience does acquit me, and I am able to vindicate my
self. But if he take me to be no Papist, why does he make me to be one of the
Popes Factors or stalking horses, and to have an express design to introduce
him into England. He himself and an hundred more of his confraternity, are more
likely to turn the Popes Factors than I am. I have given good proof that I am
no reed shaken with the wind. My conscience would not give me leave to serve
the times as many others did. They have had their reward.

He brings four reasons in favor of me why he takes me to be no Papist. I
could add fourscore reasons more if it were needful. First, because I disown
the fellowship of that party more than Grotius did. page 23.

It is well that he will give me leave to know mine own heart better than
himself. Secondly, because I give them no more than some reconcilable members
of the Greek Church would give them. And why some members? I know no members of
the Greek Church that give them either more or less than I do. But my ground is
not the authority of the Greek Church, but the Authority of the Primitive
Fathers and general Councils, which are the representative Body of the
Universal Church. Thirdly, because I disown their Council of Trent, and their
last 400. years determinations. Is not this enough in his judgment to acquit
me from all suspicion of Popery? Erroneous opinions whilst they are not
publicly determined, nor a necessity of compliance imposed upon other men, are
no necessary causes of Schism. To wane their last 400. years determinations is
implicitly to renounce all the necessary causes of this great Schism. And to
rest satisfied with their old Patriarchal power and dignity and Primacy of
order, (which is another part of my proposition,) is to quit the Modern Papacy
both name and thing. And when that is done I do not make these the terms of
Peace and Unity, as he does tax me injuriously enough, (It is not for private
Persons to prescribe terms of public accommodations,) but only an introduction
and way to an accommodation. My words are expressly these in the conclusion of
my answer to Monsieur Militiere, If you could be contented to wave your last
4^0. years determinations, or if you liked them for your selves, yet not to
obtrude them upon other Churches; If you could rest satisfied with your old
Patriarchal power and your Principium unitatis, a primacy of order, much good
might be expected from free Councils and conferences of moderate Persons. What
is here more than is confessed by himself, that if the Papists will reform what
the Bishop requires them to reform, it will undoubtely make way for nearer
Concord. p. 28. I would know where my Papistry lies in these words more than
his. They may be guilty of other errors which I disown as well as their last
400. years determinations; and yet those errors before they were obtruded upon
other Churches, be no sufficient cause of a separation. But what I own or
disown, he must learn from my self, not suppose it, or suspect it upon his own
head.

His last reason why he forbeareth to censure me as a Papist is my two knocking
arguments as he styles them against the Papal Church. But if he had weighed
those two arguments as he ought, he should have forborne to censure me as he
does, for one that had a design to reconcile the Church of England to the Pope.
But I will help Mr. Baxter to understand my meaning better. I meddle not with
the reconciliation of opinions in any place by him cited, but only with the
reconciliation of Persons, that Christians might join together in the same
public devotions and service of Christ. And the terms which I proposed were
not these, nor positively defined or determined, but only represented by way of
query to all moderate Christians, in the conclusion of my just Vindication, in
these words, I determine nothing but only crave leave to propose a question to
all moderate Christians who love the peace of the Church, and long for the
reunion thereof. In the first place if the Bishop of Rome were reduced from his
universality of Sovereign Jurisdiction jure Divino, to his principium unitatis,
and his Court regulated by the Canons of the Fathers, which was the sense of
the Councils of Constance and Basile, and is desired by many Roman Catholics
as well as we. Secondly if the Creed or necessary points of faith were reduced
to what they were in the time of the four first Ecumenical Councils, according
to the decree of the third general Council. (Who dare say that the faith of the
primitive Fathers was insufficient?) Admitting no additional Articles, but only
necessary explications; And those to be made by the Authority of a general
Council or one so general as can be convocated. And lastly supposing that some
things from whence offenses have either been given or taken, which whether
right or wrong do not weigh half so much as the unity of Christians, were put
out of the Divine offices, which would not be refused if animosities were taken
away and charity restored; I say in case these three things were accorded,
which seem very reasonable demands, whether Christians might not live in an
holy Communion, and come in the same public worship of God, free from all
Schismatical separation of themselves one from another, notwithstanding
diversities of opinions, which prevail even among the members of the same
particular Churches, both with them and us.

Yet now though I cannot grant it, yet I am willing to suppose that I intended
not only a reconciliation of men's minds, but of their opinions also; and that
those conditions which he mentioned had been my only terms of peace and
concord, let us see what exceptions Mr. Baxter is able to bring against them.

CHAP. VI.
Mr. Baxters exceptions answered.

HE says, he cannot consent that these which I grant should be made the terms
of union. page 25. What then? Suppose I did name improper terms of
pacification, not only in Mr. Baxters judgment, which I ought not altogether
to depend upon, but in very deed. Is there no remedy but I must needs be the
Popes Stalking Horse presently, and have a design to reconcile England to him.
This is over severe. My design is rather to reconcile the Pope and his party to
the Church of England, than the Church of England to the Pope. He may make use
of my way if it like him. Much good may it do him. If not he ought to thank me
for my good will, and propose a better expedient himself if he can. But I must
tell him before hand that if it be a general one, like those which he has
hitherto proposed, it will signify nothing. Observe Reader how he is every way
mistaken; I make demands and he calls them grants or concessions; I propose
some terms as preparatory to a treaty and he calls them terms of peace. He
says he cannot consent to these terms, and yet he has consented to them
already, that if they would reform what the Bishop requires them to reform, it
will undoubtely make way for nearer concord. To make them adaequate terms, or
conclusive Articles of Peace was never any part of my meaning.

All the exceptions which he brings against my way, are taken out of my
answer to Monsieur Militier. I have seen some silly exceptions against it from
a Jesuit, and have answered them, but he is the first Protestant that I have
met with, who does disapprove it. If the efficacy or influence of it upon him
be different from what it is upon others, I cannot help it. Books have their
success according to the prejudice or qualifications of their Readers. On this
side the seas it has been more happy, to confirm many, to convert some, (and
particularly the Transcriber of the Copy which was brought to the Press, who
was then one of their Proselytes,) to irritate no Man but the common
Adversaries, who vented their spleen against it weekly in their Pulpits, as
thinking that the easiest way of confutation. Thus one sucks honey, and another
poison out of the same flower. He pretends that the old Episcopal Divines are
of his party, some of them have approved it, and thanked me for it. If they be
not of his party, I hope he will not suspect them at Geneva as Factors for
Popery. They have allowed it, and translated it into French, and Printed it,
without any fear of introducing Popery into their City by it. God forbid that
we should esteem the practice of the Primitive times to be Popish. They who
admit that for a conclusion need not wonder if the more rational persons turn
Apostates. But it has ever been the trade of this proud and envious race of men
to fasten an hated name upon every thing they understand not. And it is to be
feared this great Divine may in time write a Book to prove Greek the Language
of the Beast; and he may as reasonably do it, as charge me with Popery only
because I pretend to more knowledge in Antiquity than he knows himself to be
guilty of. His first particular Exception is this, If when he excludes
Universality of Jurisdiction by Christ's institution he intend to grant them
(which yet I know not) an Universality of Jurisdiction by humane institution as
agreement, then it would be but to set up an humane Popery instead of a
pretended Divine. But this I charge not on him as his judgment, though some
will think it intimated. p. 25. If he do not charge it on me, then why does he
publish his own or other men's thoughts in Print to my disadvantage. I know not
how to acquit the Printing of groundless jealousies and suspicions of innocent
Persons from downright calumny. Especially suspicions of such things which the
Persons suspected had publicly disclaimed in Print, long before any such
suspicion was broached. These are my very words in my replication to the Bishop
of Chalcedon, p. 249. It were a hard condition to put me to prove against my
conscience, that the Universal Regency of the Pope is of humane right, who do
absolutely deny both his Divine right and humane right; And in my Schism
guarded, p. 15 I have made it evident that the Popes Authority which he did
sometime exercise in England before the Reformation, when they permitted him,
and which he would have exercised always de futuro, if he could have had his
own will, was a mere usurpation and innovation. If I deny both the Popes divine
right and humane right to Sovereign Jurisdiction, and regulate his powers by
the Canons of the Church; If I make the Papacy a mere usurpation and
innovation, he has no need to fear my setting up of an humane Popery: But I
have just cause to require reparation of him. So his first exception is a false
groundless suspicion.

But does he make no difference indeed between a Divine Papacy and an Humane
Papacy? So it seems by his words. If the Pope do hold a Sovereign power in
the Church by divine institution, then whatsoever he does though he draw
millions of Souls to Hell after him, yet it is not in the power of a general
council to call him to an account, or to depose him, or to reform him. But if
his right be only humane all this may justly be done and has been done. If he
have a Sovereignty by divine right he may give his non obstantes to the Canons
of the Fathers at his pleasure; then all power in the Church is derived from
him: But if he hold the Papacy not from Heaven but from men, then other Bishops
do not derive their power from him singlely, but he from them jointly, then he
is stinted and limited by their Canons, and cannot dispense with them, further
than the Church is pleased to confer a dispensative power upon him, within the
bounds of his own Patriarchate. Against divine right there is no prescription,
but against humane right men may lawfully challenge their ancient liberties,
and immunities by prescription. A Papacy by divine right is unchangeable, but a
Papacy by humane right is alterable, both for person and place and power. So an
humane Papacy if it grow burthensom is remediable; But a pretended divine
Papacy when and where and whilst it is acknowledged, is irremediable. So much a
pretended divine Papacy is worse than an humane.

His second exception follows, But that St. Peter has a certain fixed Chair,
to which a primacy of order is annexed, and an headship of unity, is not a
truth, and therefore not a principle necessary to heal the Church. Whether it
be a truth or no, is not much material. We have no Controversy with the Church
of Rome about a Primacy of order, but about a Supremacy of Power. I shall
declare my sense in four conclusions. First that St. Peter had a fixed Chair at
Antioch, and after that at Rome, is a truth which no man, who gives any credit
to the ancient Fathers and councils and Historiographers of the Church, can
either deny or well doubt of.

Secondly, that St. Peter had a Primacy of order among the Apostles, is the
unanimous voice of the primitive Church, not to be contradicted by me, which
the Church of England and those old Episcopal Divines, whom he pretends to
honor so much, did never oppose. -- The learned Bishop of Winchester
acknowledges as much, not only in his own name, but in the name of the Church
and King of England, both King and Church knowing it, and approving it. Resp.
ad Apol. Bellar. cap. 1. Neither is it questioned among us whether St. Peter
had a Primacy, but what that Primacy was, and and whether it were such an one
as the Pope does now challenge to himself, and you challenge to the Pope. But
the King does not deny Peter to have been the prime and Prince of the Apostles.
He who should trouble himself and others to oppugn such a received innocent
truth, seems to me to have more leisure than judgment. But on the other side
it is as undoubtedly true, and confessed by the prime Romanists themselves,
that St. Peter had no supremacy or superiority of power and single Jurisdiction
over any other Apostle. To this purpose I have laid down these four grounds in
my Book of Schism Guarded, page 27. First, that each Apostle had the same power
by virtue of Christ's Commission. Secondly, that St. Peter never exercised a
single Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles. Thirdly, that St. Peter had
not his Commission granted to him and his Successors as any ordinary Pastor,
and the rest of the Apostles as Delegates for term of life. Fourthly, that
during the History of the Acts of the Apostles, the Sovereignty of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction rested not in any single Apostle, but in the
Apostolical College. Hitherto there is no cause of controversy between him
and me, or between any persons of judgment and ingenuity.

My third assertion is that some Fathers and Schoolmen, who were no sworn
vassals to the Roman Bishop do affirm, that this Primacy of order is fixed to
the Chair of St. Peter, and his Successors for ever. As for instance Gerson
for a Schoolman that learned Chancellor of Paris, who sided with the council
against the Pope, and left his enmity to the innovations of the Court of Rome
as an hereditary legacy to the School of Sorbone. Auferibilis non est usque ad
consummationem saeculi vicarius sponsus Ecclesiae. The vicarial Spouse of the
Church (this was the language of that Age, whereby he means not the person of
any particular Pope, but the Office of the Papacy,) ought not to be taken away
until the end of the World. And among the Fathers I instance in St. Cyprian,
whose public opposition to Pope Stephen is well known, who seems not to
dissent from it; In his Epistle to Antonianus he calls the Sea of Rome the
place and Chair of Peter. Ep. 52. And in his 55. Epistle to Cornelius, They
dare sail and carry Letters from Schismatical and profane persons to the Chair
of Peter, and the principal Church from whence Sacerdotal unity did spring. And
in his De unitate Ecclesiae, Although he give equal power to all his Apostles
after his Resurrection, etc. Yet to manifest an unity he eonstituted one Chair,
and by his own authority disposed the original of that unity beginning from
one. And a little after, The Primacy is given to Peter, to demonstrate one
Church of Christ and one Chair.

Every one is free for me to take what exceptions he pleases, to the various
lections of any of these places, or to interpret the words as he pleases.
Always there seems to be enough to me in St. Cyprian to declare his own mind,
without taking any advantage from any suppositious passages. Whether it be a
truth or an error, it concerns not me, I am sure it is none of mine error, if
it be one, who neither maintain nor grant such a Primacy of order to be due to
the Chair of St. Peter and his Successors, by the institution of Christ. But
only dispute upon suppositions, that although there were such a beginning of
unity, (which Calvin and Beza require in all Societies by the Law of Nature,)
And although the Bishop of Rome had such a Primacy of order either by divine
right, or humane right, yet it would not prejudice us, nor advantage them at
all. Neither in truth is it worth contending about, or to be balanced with the
peace of the Church, and of the Christian World. They who undervalue the
Fathers, may style their sayings untruths when they please. I have weighed my
grounds over seriously to stumble at a Straw.

My fourth and last conclusion, is, that supposing still but not granting that
any such Primacy of order or beginning of unity, (about which, we have no
Controversy) was due to the Chair of St. Peter by divine right, or much rather
by humane right, yet this supposed Chair of St. Peter is not fixed to Rome. As
for divine right we have the plain consession of Bellarmine, it is not to be
sound either in Scripture or Tradition, that the Apostolic See is so fixed to
Rome, that it cannot be removed, Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 4. And for humane
right there needs no proof. For whatsoever is constituted by humane right.
may be repealed by humane right. This is my constant way everywhere. I do
altogether deny a supremacy of Power and Jurisdiction over us in the exterior
Court, which only is in controversy between us and the Pope. And whatsoever
Jurisdiction he has elsewhere, I regulate by the Canons of the Fathers. I
suppose a Primacy of order, but grant it not farther than it has been granted
by the Canons of the Catholic Church. And as it was acquired by humane right,
so it may be taken away by humane right. To confound a Primacy of order with a
Supremacy of Power, divine right with humane right, a legislative Power with an
executive Power, is proper to blunderers. So in his two first Exceptions I
suffer two palpable injuries. In the first Exception he charge me upon
suspicion, directly contrary to my assertion. In the second Exception he
confounds a Primacy and a Supremacy, order and power, and makes me to fix
that to the Sea of Rome, which I maintain to be unfixed.

His third Exception is this, That the Pope should hold to himself and his
Church his last 400. years determinations, and so continue, as the Bishop here
concludes, to be no Apostolical, Orthodox, Catholic Church, nor to have true
Faith, is an unlikely thing to stand with the unity and concord which he
mentions. We shall cement but sorrily with such a body as this. It is no
wonder if Grotius suffer wrong by him, when my words are (at the best) so
grossly mistaken, who live to interpret my self. First I give no leave to the
Pope and Church of Rome to hold to themselves their last 400. years
determinations. But if they will hold them I have no power to help it, or
hinder it. My words are these, If you could be contented to wave your last 400.
years determinations, or if you liked them for your selves, yet not to obtrude
them upon other Churches. As if one should say, If Jeroboam will forbear to
commit Idolatry himself, or if he will not, yet if he will forbear to compel
others to commit Idolatry, I may come to live in Israel, no moderate man will
say, that he gives leave to Jeroboam to commit Idolatry. Secondly, he pretends
most untruly that I make these to be the terms or conditions of a peace which I
mention only as preparatives. My words are not then, we may unite and cement
our selves together, but then much good might be expected from free Councils
and conferences of moderate persons. He himself says as much as I say.
Thirdly, if they do not obtrude their last 400. years determinations upon other
Churches, then they wave their ligislative power, and take away from their
Canons the nature of Laws, then they make them no longer points of Faith, but
probable opinions. It was not the erroneous opinions of the Church of Rome, but
the obtruding them by Laws upon other Churches which warranted a separation. He
who will have no communion with a Church which has different or erroneous
opinions in it, so long as they are not obtruded must provide a ladder to climb
up to Heaven by himself. And this is that which I said expressly in that very
place cited by him, We might yet live in hope to see an union, if not in all
opinions, yet in Charity and all necessary points of saving truth. Let the
Church of Rome do that which I require, that is the Apostolical Discipline, and
Apostolical Creed without addition, and it shall become an Apostolical, and
Catholic Church, and have true Faith.

His fourth Exception is this, That the Pope should hold his Patriarchal power,
is a mere innovation, and humane institution, as is his Primacy of order and
such privileges. The Council of Chalcedon avers it. And therefore it is no
necessary thing to be conceded for the Churches peace. That the Patriarchal
dignity is an humane institution, all men who understand themselves do
acknowledge. That it is a mere innovation, all men who understand themselves do
deny. How should that be a mere innovation which was not first constituted, but
confirmed as an ancient Ecclesiastical custom in the first general Council of
Nice, and approved by all the general succeeding Councils of the Church, and
particularly by the Council of Chalcedon which he mentions, which equalled
the Patriarch of Constantinople, to the Patriarch of Rome? This form of
Government is allowed by the Canons of the Apostles, as I have showed
elsewhere. This Patriarchal Government Calvin himself did not only allow, but
assert it to be such a Form as God has prescribed in his Word. Call. Just. l.
4. c. 4. S. 4. What wonder is it if they lose ground daily to the Romanists,
who have the confidence to affirm that Patriarchal power is an innovation, and
cite the great Council of Chalcedon for it.

He proceeds to his fifth exception, Multitudes that live in the western
Nations of the World will still dissent both from the Popes Patriarchal power,
and more from his way of exercising it. And so will be forced to fall under the
reproach of Schismatics by these t^rms, and that for obeying the Laws of
Christ. If the Pope as Patriarch of the West should impose on us only and not
on the East, the Doctrines and worship, and Ceremonies which he now imposes on
the Papists, (except the excepted before,) does any man of reason think that
the Reformed Churches would ever yield to them, or ought to do it? We will
unite on Christ's terms, and that will be a more sure and general Union, and not
on such humane devises as these. Let those that made the Pope our Patriarch
maintain his power, for Christ did not. Still weaker and weaker. Multitudes
that live in the Western parts of the World will not only dislike the Popes
Patriarchal power, but his Presbyterian Discipline, and his holy orders, the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, the Sacraments, etc. must a man therefore quit his
just right because some dislike it? Their dislike is but scandal taken, but the
quitting of that which is right for their satisfaction should be scandal given.
Whether is the worse?

By the way I desire him to consider two things; First, how they are forced to
fall under the reproach of Schismatics? If they be forced any way, it is by
their own wilful humors or erroneous conscience. Other force here is none. If
there be any force it is they which force themselves. Secondly, I would have
him to consider, whether is the worse and more dangerous condition, for
Christians to fall under the reproach of Schismatics, which has no sin in it,
but is a means many times to reduce men into the fold of the Catholic Church,
or for Christians to fall into Schism it self. Whosoever shall oppose the just
power of a Lawful Patriarch, lawfully proceeding, is a material Schismatic at
least, and if his error be vincible, such as he might conquer and come unto
the knowledge of the truth if he did his endeavor, he is a formal Schismatic.

His reasons of their falling under the reproach of Schismatics for obeying
the Laws of Christ, I confess I do not understand. Does he think that
Patriachal power is contrary to the Laws of Christ, and that all the Primitive
Churches and Councils and Christians did transgress the Laws of Christ in this
particular? Surely he cannot think it. Or is it his Zeal to admit nothing in
the Church grounded upon prudence and experience and the Law of nature, but
only that which in commanded by Christ in Holy Scripture? If that be it I refer
him to Doctor Sanderson in his Preface before his 20. Sermons, to whom he
professes very great reverence. I had rather suspect that I understand him
not, than Imagine him to be guilty of such an absurd conclusion.

To his question if the Pope as Patriarch of the West should impose upon us
which he imposes upon the Papists, should the reformed Churches yield to them?
I answer God forbid, but his whole discourse is grounded upon a Cluster of
mistakes. First the Pope has no right to the Patriarchate of all the West.
Particularly he is not our Patriarch. Other Churches in the West might find out
Primates or Patriarchs of their own as well as we, if they sought diligently
for them. Secondly a single Patriarch has not legislative power to impose Laws
in his own Partriarchate, nor power to innovate any thing without the consent
of his Bishops. Thirdly my former exceptions as he styles them, or rather my
preparatory conditions, do virtually comprehend all the gross errors of the
Roman Church, both in Discipline and Doctrine, leaving no difference in
necessary points of faith, but only in opinions. So if my conditions be
observed, there is no place left for any such supposition. Lastly, I observe
what an unsound kind of arguing this is, to deny a man his just right, as
Patriarchal power was the Bishop of Romes just right, for fear lest he may
abuse it. All factions use to miscal their own terms, Christ's terms; to cancel
all humane right under the notion of humane devises, is both inconsistent with
the Law of Christ, and the welfare of all Societies. They who made the Bishop
of Rome a Patriarch were the Primitive Fathers, not excluding the Apostles, and
Christian Emperors, and Ecumenical Councils. What Laws they made in this
case, we are bound to obey for conscience sake, (until they be repealed
Lawfully,) by virtue of the Law of Christ. A fairer plea than I know any for
their own Consistory, where Laymen usurp the power of the keys contrary to the
Law of Christ.

His sixth exception is the same with the fifth, only there it is proposed
hypothetically [If the Pope as Patriarch of the West should impose,] And here
it is repealed categorically, many things in Doctrine and worship which on
these terms would be imposed both on East and West, and prevail in most of the
Churches at this day, are sins against God, and therefore how small so ever
they may be, are not to be consented unto for unity. If there be any grain of
truth in this proof, it is so indefinite, so conjectural, and so accidental,
that it requires no answer. How should a man either affirm or deny or
distinguish of many things, without specifying any one thing in particular? I
assent thus far in general that no man can be obliged to do a sin against God,
and that whatsoever humane Ordinance does necessarily and essentially produce
sin, is unlawful. But until he tell us in particular what these many things
are, or at least some one of them, and prove evidently that it is a sin against
God, indeed, and not in his opinion only; and that it is infallibly true that
it would be imposed, which would be an hard task to undertake without the gift
of Prophesy; and lastly that the imposition of some such sinful thing or
things, is not an arbitrary or accidental abuse of that Lawful power which I
admit, but flows naturally or essentially from it; I say until he do all
this, all that he does say signifies nothing; and so I leave his many things
as just nothing,

And come unto his seventh exception, The Ethiopian and other Churches that
were still without the verge of the Roman Empire, will never alknowledge thus
much to the Pope, seeing that even those humane Constitutions which gave him
his Primacy of Order, determined of no more than the Roman World, and had
nothing to do beyond Euphrates. How did the Popes lay any claim or meddle any
further. And abundance among the Eastern Churches will deny this Primay. This
exception was made in the dark, and therefore the errors that abound in it may
more easily be pardoned, as proceeding from the not knowing of the true State
of the Aethiopick and other Eastern Churches. Both the Aethiopick and all other
Eastern Churches do unanimously admit this form of Government by Patriarchs,
which I acknowledge. The Aethiopians have a Patriarch of their own, and so have
all the other Eastern Churches. And particularly the Albuna or Patriarch of
Aethiopia is under the Partriarch of Alexandria, named by him, and ordained by
him from time to time. So untrue it is that the Ecumenical Constitutions of
general Councils extended not beyond Euphrates. The Aethiopick and all other
Eastern Churches do submit to the Council of Nice, and other Ecumenical
Councils, by which Patriarchal Government was confirmed. They all acknowledge
the Patriarch of Rome to be the chief Patriarch, whilst he behaveth himself
well, and to have a Primacy of order among the Patriarchs. They know no points
of faith but those which are contained in the ancient Creed, as we find at
large in the Historical Description of Aethiopia by Francis Alvares. They all
deny the Popes Supremacy of power, as we do. And when the Pope songht to
introduce it into Aethiopia, by the mediation of the King of Portugal, Claudius
then Emperor of Aethiopia returned this answer, Se quidem fraterna in
Lusitanum Regem voluntate esse ac fore, caeterum nihil sibi minus in mentem
venisse, quam ut ideirco a Majorum institutis ac tot saeculorum spatio
corroborata religione deficeret, That he ought all good will to the King of
Portugal as his Brother, but it was the least part of his thought therefore to
Apostate, from the orders and Religion of his Ancestors, received and radicated
in Aethiopia throughout so many ages. Pet. Maffei Hist. Jud. l. 16. p. 749.

His eighth Exception is, There is no hope of uniting the Churches on any terms
but what are necessary and divine; for its vain to think that things humane and
unnecessary, should be consented to by all. Much less things sinful. In the
name of God, why is it not possible that the Churches should be united upon
some humane or prudential terms? Are there not common principles of natural
equity, which reason dictateth to all mankind? That is one mistake. Secondly,
the Law of Nature is a divine Law. And though Patriarchal Regiment be no
express principle of the Law of Nature, yet it is very agreeable to it, and
grounded upon it. Thirdly, though no humane ordinances be absolutely necessary
to salvation, as those supernatural truths which are revealed in holy Scripture
are, yet they may be respectively necessary to the well-being of Religion.
Lastly, in his conclusion much less things sinful, he disputes upon that which
is not granted, nay more which is absolutely denied. Mr. Baxter will never be
able to prove that any thing which is sinful, is contemned in my reconciliatory
Propositions.

His ninth Exception signifies as little as the rest, There is no union to be
had but upon the terms on which the Churches have sometimes been united. For a
new way of union is not to be expected attempted. But never was the Church
united on such concessions as these, and therefore never will be. I Deny his
assumpsion altogether. And if I were to choose a reason, or medium whereby to
demonstrate my way of reconciliation to be good, I could not fix upon a better
than this. The Catholic Church has been united on these same principles which
I suppose, the same Faith without any addition, the same Ecclesiastical
Discipline without any variation, the same Form of serving God publicly; And
since the dispersion of the Church, all over the World, it never was united
upon any other principles but these, nor can be united upon any other
principles but these.

I am come to his tenth and last Exception, It would be an exceeding dishonor
to God, and injury to the Souls of many millions of men, if but under the Popes
Patriarchal Jurisdiction in the West, the Papists way of Worship were set up,
and their Government exercised as now. The good will of Rome, or the name of
peace would not recompense the loss of so many thousand Souls, as some one of
the Papal abuses might procure; for instance their driving the people from the
Scriptures, and other means of knowledge. All along he builds upon a wrong
Foundation. It is one thing to set up, or to approve the setting up of a false
way of Worship, which I do not justif^e, And another thing to tolerate it when
and where it is not in our power to hinder it, as both he and I must do whether
we will or no. I do not only give no consent to the setting up of any unlawful
Form of Worship where it is not, but I wish it taken away where it is set up
already. But if it be without the sphere of my activity I must let it alone
perforce. If a Shepherd when it is past his skill to cure his rotten Sheep,
shall do his uttermost to preserve that part of his Flock which is sound from
infection, he deserves to be commended for those he saved, not to be accused
as the cause why so many perished, that were past his skill and power to cure.
In a great Scathfire it is wisdom not only to suffer those Houses to burn down
which are past quenching, but sometimes to pull down some few Houses wherein
the fire is not yet kindled, to free all the rest of the City from danger. If
the Pope within his own territories, or other Christian Princes by his means
within their territories, will maintain a way of Worship which I do not
approve, must I therefore, nay may I therefore, make War upon them to compel
them to be of my Religion? So we shall never have any peace in the World whilst
there are different Religions in the world, for every one takes his own
Religion to be best.

But what certainty has he that so many thousands, yea millions of Souls are
lost, because they live in such places as are subject to the Pope. God is a
merciful God, and looks upon his poor Creatures, with all their prejudices. Or
how does this agree with what he says elsewhere, that the French moderation is
acceptable to all good men, And that Nation is an honorable part of the Church
of Christ in his esteem. It is no very honorable part of the Church of Christ,
if so many millions of Souls run such extreme hazard in it, p. 10. His marginal
note of their streams of blood and Massacres might have been spared, for fear
of putting some of them upon a parallel between theirs and ours. And for his
instance of driving the people from the Scriptures, he escapes fairly if none
of them cast it in his teeth, that the promiscu^us license which they give to
all sorts of people, qualified or unqualified, not only to read, but to
interpret the Scriptures according to their private spirits or particular
fancies, without any regard either to the analogy of Faith, which they
understand not, or to the interpretation of the Doctors of former Ages, is more
prejudicial, I might better say pernicious, both to particular Christians, and
to whole Socities than the over rigorous restraint of the Romanists. Whereof a
man need require no farther proof but only to behold the present face of the
English Church. Truth commonly remains in the modest. And so I have showed
him how little weight there is in his ten Exceptions.

At the conclusion of his Exceptions he has this clause, Besides most of the
evils that I charged before on the Grotian way (as censures, persecutions etc.)
would follow upon this way. It may follow in his erroneous opinion, but in
truth and really no inconveniency at all does follow upon what I say. The third
cause of his dislike of the Grotian way was, Because it is uncharitable and
censorious; cutting off from the Catholic united Society, the reformed
Churches that yield not to his terms, and will not be reconciled to the Pope of
Rome. Let them take heed that they cut not off themselves, for I neither cut
them off, nor declare them to be cut off. If they will not be reconciled to the
Pope of Rome, upon warrantable and just terms, such as were approved by the
Primitive Church, such as those are which I propose, for any thing he does say,
or can say to the contrary, it is his own uncha^itableness not mine. Some men
would call it Schismatical obstinacy. But this reason has been fully answered
before.

The fourth reason of his dislike of this design is, Because it is a trap to
tempt and engage the Souls of millions into the same uncharitable, censorious,
and reproachful way. When a false Center of the Churches unity is set up, and
impossible, or unlawful terms of concord are pretended thus to be the only
terms, they that believe this will uncharitably censure all those for
Schismatics, or Heretics that close not with them on these terms. His first
office should have been to have proved that my way is uncharitable, censorious,
or reproachful, and that my terms are impossible and unlawful, which he neither
does, nor attempteth to do, nor ever will be able to do. And until he do it, or
go about it, all his reasons are a pure begging of the question, and no better,
and consequently deserve no answer.

The fifth reason of his dislike is, because it tends to engage the Princes
of Christendom in a persecution of their Subjects, that cannot comply with
these unwarrantable terms. And that is likely to be no small number, nor the
worser part, but the soundest, and wisest, and holiest men. For if Princes be
once persuaded that these be the only terms, and so that the dissenters are
factious, Schismatical and unpeaceable men, no wonder if they silence the
Ministers, and persecute the people. It is an easier thing to call them
unlawful, and unwarrantable terms twenty times, than to make it good once. It
is a fault in Rhetoric, and in Logic also to use common reasons, such as may
be retorted against our selves by an Adversary. Such a reason is this, and may
be urged with as much show of reason against all Writers of Controversies
whatsoever, and against Mr. Baxter himself in particular, with as much color
of truth as he urges it against Grotius or me. That if Princes be once
persuaded that those terms which he proposes be true, and the contrary
errors, no wonder if they silence the Ministers, and persecute the People. Or
if they be once persuaded by him, that his new Discipline is the Scepter of
Christ prescribed in the Gospel, then the Episcopal Divines, and the
Independents are sure to suffer. This srivolous pretense will fit all causes
whatsoever, though they be never so Diametrally opposite one to another.

Secondly, I answer that there is not one grain of clear distinct necessary
truth in this whole Discourse, but uncertain suspicions, groundless
persuasions, confused generalities, and beggings of the question. That the
terms are unlawful and unwarrantable, that he and his party are the soundest,
and wisest, and holiest of Christians, is groundless presumption and begging of
the question. That the Princes of Christendom will be persuaded themselves, and
thereupon condemn the dissenters, and silence the Ministers, and persecute the
People, are all uncertain conjectures, and accidental events. What Princes of
Christendom he does intend or can intend, who are those dissenters whom he
calls the soundest, and wisest, and holiest of men; what Ministers he means
ordained or unordained, or both; And what Flocks such as they had a legal title
to, or such as they have usurped, are all confused indefinite generalities, and
ought to have been set forth more distinctly.

In a word mutato nomine de se Fabula narratur. Whatsoever he faineth of
imaginary Grotians, is really true of his own Party. They have prevailed with
persons of power and Authority, and persuaded them to silence and persecute,
and to chase away from their Flocks the right Pastors, and have usurped their
Benefices and Charges themselves. And all this while pretended (shameless men,)
that they are doing God good service. He is not able to charge any of his
imaginary Grotians with any such thing. This is to bite and whine, as the
Proverb has it, to do wrong and to complain of suffering wrong. Popular
Persecutions of all others are ever most groundless, and most violent.

The more moderate that men's judgments are, as Grotius his judgment was, and
mine is, the farther off they are from engaging Princes to persecute their
Subjects. Cowards ordinarily are most cruel. So weak and willful persons are
most apt to promote Persecutions, knowing that to be their only defense against
those whom they are unable to answer with reason. There are seditious
principles and practices enough in the World to irritate Princes, without any
other bad offices, which have been introduced into the Church under a pretext
of Religion, such as no man living can justify, such as are inconsistent with
all humane Societies. Such as if God be pleased once to restore men perfectly
to their right Wits, they must be sure in the first place to cast out of the
World, if they do ever mean to preserve Peace and Tranquillity among themselves.
It were much more politickly done of him to leave this subject, which the more
it is stirred in, the worse it will smell to some body.

In the conclusion of this Objection he complains thus, This is the unhappy
issue of the attempts of Pride. When men have such high thoughts of their own
imaginations, and devices, etc. Which is most true in general if he can let it
rest there. But if he proceed any farther to examine on what side this Pride
does lie, whether among the Grotian Party, as Cassander, and Wicelius, and
Grotius, or among his own Party, if it were fit to name them, he will quickly
find who they are that do calcare fastum majore fastu, tread down Pride with
greater Pride, through the holes of whose coats vain glory does discover it
self. That ever Presbyterians should complain of Pride!

CHAP. VII.
Of Mr. Baxters one was of reconciliation.

THus having in his own Imagination battered down that frame of an Union, which
he thought I had proposed, though in truth all his reasons have scarcely force
to shake an Aspin leaf. Yet for our comfort he tells us that he will not
leave the business thus, lest whilst he pulls down all and offers nothing
instead thereof, he might he thought an Enemy to peace. It is all the reason in
the World that if peace be so desirable as he makes it, and he show his
dislike of our ways to procure it, he should propose a better expedient of his
own, that other men may have the liberty to try if they can say more against
his way, than he has hitherto been able to say against theirs: but I have my
jealousies and fears as well as he, and better founded, that he will never
prove a good Architect in this kind, because I never found any man yet who was
given to innovation, but his genius was ten times apter for pulling down than
for building up.

But let us view his own way or terms of peace without prejudice. In general
therefore I say, that the terms of an Universal concord or peace must be purely
Divine and not humane, necessary and not things unnecessary, ancient according
to the Primitive simplicity; and neither new nor yet too numerous, curious, or
abstruse. These are Generals indeed, and if they were all consented unto, the
peace would not be much nearer than it is. I think such general terms or
Articles of peace were never seen before in our days. From what hopes am I
fallen? I expected that having rejected our ways of reconciliatioxn, he would
have chalked us a new ready way of his own, free from all exceptions. And he
only tells us that a way must be short and straight beaten and smooth, and so
leaves us to find out such a way for our selves where we can. This is just
take nothing and hold it fast. Such general ways are commonly the ways of
Bunglers or Deceivers. One of Mercuries Statues though it were dumb could have
given better directions for a way than this. But he who will be a Reconciler of
Controversies must be more particular.

Yet let us take a particular view of his general directions. The terms of an
Universal peace must be purely Divine not humane. How purely divine not humane?
That is impossible. That which is purely divine has no mixture of humane in
it; but these terms of peace must be made and contrived by men, between man and
man, for the use of men, and after an humane manner; not by immediate
inspiration. So these terms cannot be purely divine. But perhaps his meaning is
no more than this, that in an accommodation no humane Constitutions ought to be
imposed upon the Churches. Then down goes his Presbyterian Discipline, for that
is both humane and new. When Calvin first proposed it to the Helvetian Divines
for their approbation, he desired no more of them but to testify that it was
not disagreeable to the word of God, or came near to the word of God. It is
meet and just that no humane Constitutions should be imposed as Divine
ordinances, but it does not follow thence that all humane right and law must be
thrust out for rotten.

Humane right is grounded upon Divine right, that is the Law of nature, and the
positive Laws of God, and cannot be violated without the violation of the
Divine Law, and ought to be observed for Conscience sake, out of a respect to
the Divine Law, which commands every soul to be subject to the higher Powers.
Is not this like to prove a fair accommodation? wherein the first Article must
be to renounce the light of natural reason, and the experience of so many ages
since Christ's time, and the prudential Constitutions of all our primitive
Guides. These are such terms of peace as can please no body but Sequestrators,
and such as live like Moths in other men's garments. Neither would his pretented
Divine terms be more favorable to innovations than humane terms, but only that
this way affords wranglers a longer time to prevaricate, before Controversies
can be maturely determined. If ever there were an Universal reconciliation of
all Christians, the first act which they ought to do after their Union, is to
cast out all such pernicious principles as this form among them, before they
thrust out all reason and humane right out of the World.

His second rule is the terms of peace must be things necessary not
unnecessary. We are beholden to King James not to him for this prudent
direction. But by setting it down so imperfectly he makes it his own. There are
two sorts of necessary things. Somethings are absolutely necessary to the being
of the Church. Some other things are respectively necessary to the well-being
of the Church. The terms of peace ought to extend to both these, to the former
ever more, to the later as far as it may be. Or yet more distinctly. Some
things are necessary necessitate medii, as necessary means of salvation,
without which no Church can consist. Concerning these there is little or no
need of reconciliation, where there is no difference. Secondly, Some other
things are necessary necessitate precepti, as commanded by God or by the Church
of God. Both these are necessary in their several degrees, and both of them
ought to be taken in consideration in a reconciliation, but especially the
former, yet not excluding the later. Every thing ought to be loosed by the same
Authority by which it was bound. Thirdly, There are other things which though
they be neither necessary means of salvation, nor necessarily Commanded by God
or man, yet they are necessary by a necessity of convenience, out of pious and
prudential considerations, Huic, hic, nunc, to this or that Church, at this or
that time, in this or that place. The greatest consideration that ought to be
had of these things, is to leave every Church free to determine their own
necessities or conveniences, yet with a regard to unity and uniformity.

His Third rule is, the terms of peace must be ancient according to the
primitive simplicity, and neither new nor yet too numerous, curious, or
abstruse. His first rule does virtually comprehend both his later rules, and
renders them superfluous. For if nothing be admitted into the terms of peace
but Divine truths, they can neither be unnecessary, nor new, nor too numerous,
curious, or abstruse. And this way of his rightly expressed and understood is
the same in effect with my way which he pretends to impugn. He admits no
truths but Divine, and excludes all humane rights which is more than he ought
to do. I distinguish divine right from humane right, and give unto the Law of
God both written and unwritten, and to the Laws of the Church, and to the Laws
of Caesar, their respective dues. He admits none but necessary truths; I
admit no truths in point of Faith, but these which the blessed Apostles judged
to be necessary and comprehended in the Creed. I reject all new coined Articles
of says, all usurpations in point of Discipline, all innorations in point of
worship. He proposes for a Pattern of union the simplicity of the ancient and
primitive Church; So do I, before the faith was adulterated by the addition of
new Articles, or the Discipline translated into a new Monarchical way, or the
public worship of God was corrupted by the injunction of sinful or
supernumerary rites

I wish he had expressed himself more clearly what he means by the primitive
simplicity. I hope it is not his intention that either the house of God or the
public service of God should be fordid and contemptible. He cannot be
ignorant, that so far as the persent condition of times, and places, and
Persons and affairs will bear it there ought to be some porportion between that
great God whom we serve, and that service which we perform unto him. God was
acceptably served by the Primitive Christians both in their Cells, and Vaults,
and homely Oratories in times of persecution, and likewise in stately and
magnificent Temples and Cathedrals when God had given peace and plenty to his
Church. Wisdom is justified of her Children. Yet even in those times of
persecutions a man would wonder at that external splendor wherewith those
devouter souls served God, where they had means and opportunity.

Neither do I perfectly understand what his aim is, where he would not have the
terms of peace to be curious or abstruse. I conjecture it reflecteth upon the
Schoolmen. And if his meaning only be, that he would not have our Catechisms
or accommodations to be pestered and perplexed with the obscure terms and
endless disputations of the Schools, I do readily assent. But if he think that
in the work of reconciliation there is no need of a Scholastic Plain to take
away the crabbed knots, and to smooth the present Controversies of the
Christian World, I must dissent from him. We find by daily experience that the
greatest differences and such as made the most Noise, and the deepest breach in
the Christian World, being rightly and Scholastically stated do both become
easy and intelligible, and now appear to have been mere mistakes one of
another. And when many other questions are rightly handled after the same
manner, I presume they will find the like end. When I was a young Student in
Theology Doctor Ward declared his mind to me, to this purpose, that it was
impossible that the present Controversies of the Church should be rightly
determined or reconciled without a deep insight into the Doctrine of the
Primitive Fathers, and a competent skill in School Theology. The former
affords us a right pattern, and the second smootheth it over and plaineth
away the knots.

Though he himself do deal only in Generals: yet he tells us that Mr.
Chillingworth has already particularly told the World a way of unity. It is
well if he have, but if it prove as general as his own way, it will not conduce
much to the Peace of Christendom. What has Mr. Chillingworth told us, or where
has he told it? Had it not been worthy of his labor to have repeated the
words, or cited the place? What a deal of vanity is it to write whole Treatises
in confutation of others, to no purpose, and when he comes to the main
business, or to the only necessary and satisfactory point to be mute. It is
long since I read over Mr. Chillingworth, but I remember no such particular
reconciliatory way told by him to all the World, but only some general
intimations or directions. All that I do remember or meet with I shall produce.

The first place is in the Frontispiece of his Book. Neither is that his own
judgment, but the judgment of King James, related by Mr. Casaubon in his
Epistle to Cardinal Peron, in these words, The King judges that the number of
things absolutely necessary to salvation is not great. Wherefore his Majesty
thinks there is no more compendious way to Peace, than to distinguish
diligently, things necessary, from things not necessary, and to endeavor to
procure an agreement about necessary things, and that place may be given to
Christian liberty in things not necessary. The King calls those things simply
necessary, which either the Word of God commmandeth expressly to be beloved or
done, or which the ancient Church did draw out of the Word of God by necessary
consequence. If this distinction were used to decide the present Controversies,
and divine right were ingeniously distinguished from positive or Ecclesiastical
right, it seems not that the contention would be long, or sharp between pious
and moderate men, about things absolutely necessary. For they are both f^^ as
we said even now, and are for the most part approved by all, who desire to be
called Christians. And his most renowned Majesty thinks this distinction to
be of so great moment, to diminish the Controversies which trouble the Church
so much at this day, that he judges it the duty of all who are studious of
Peace, to explain it diligently, and teach it, and urge it. This is an
excellent way indeed, but it is a general way, not a particular way; It was
King James his way, not Mr. Chillingworths. What King James pointed at in
general, I pursue in particular. But that prudent Prince was far enough from
dreaming, that there could be no reconciliation of Christendom, except all
humane right were destroyed or taken away. This is Mr. Baxters own unbeaten way.

I find a second passage to this purpose in Mr. Chillingworths answer to the
Preface nu. 23. Notwithstanding all your errors, we do not renounce your
communion totally, and absolutely, but only leave communicating with you in the
practice and profession of your errors. The trial whereof will be to propose
some Form of Worshipping God, taken wholly out of Scripture. And herein if we
refuse to join with you, then and not till then, may you justly say we have
utterly and absolutely abandoned your communion. This might serve for a
coverfew to hide the flame of our contentions from breaking out whilst we are
at out devotions. But it has nothing of reconciliation in it, and has as
little probability of a pacification. We desire not half so much as this of
them to change their whole Liturgy, but only to leave out some of their own
latter additions, which never were in any of the Primitive Liturgies. By being
taken wholly out of the Scripture, either it is intended that it shall be all
in the words and phrase of Scripture, That will weigh little. I have never
observed any thing more repugnant to the true sense of Scripture, than some
things which have been expressed altogether in the phrase of Scripture. Or it
is intended that the matter of the Liturgy shall be taken wholly out of the
Scripture. But this has so little of an expedient in it, that it will leave
the Controversy where it is. Both Parties do already contend that their
respective Forms are taken out of the Scriptures.

He has another passage much to the same purpose in his answer to the third
Chapter, part 1. n. 11. If you would at this time propose a Form of Liturgy,
which both sides hold Lawful, and then they [Protestants] would not join with
you in this Liturgy, you might have some color to say that they renounced your
communion absolutely. First, remedy regards only a communion in Public
Worship, without any respect to an union in Faith and Discipline. Secondly,
even in the point of Public Worship it leaves the difference where it was,
what is a Lawful Form. Those things which the Romanists hold to be necessary
the Protestants shun as superstitious excesses. And that Form which the
Protestants would allow, the Romanists cry out on as defective in necessary
dutys, and particularly wanting five of their Sacraments. Nay certainly to call
the whole frame of the Liturgy into dispute, offers too large a field for
contention. And is nothing so likely a way of Peace as either for us to accept
of their Form, abating some such parts of it as are confessed, to have been
added since the Primitive times, and are acknowledged not to be simply
necessary, but such as charitable Christians ought to give up and Sacrifice to
an Universal Peace, and would do it readily enough, if it were not for mutual
animosities of both Parties, and the particular Interests of some persons. Or
if they should say to us as Father Paul Harvis (a Romanist violent enough) has
often said to me, that if we had retained the Liturgy used in Edward the sixths
time, he would not have forborne to come to our communion. To procure peace,
there must be condescension on both sides.

I find a third place, part 1. cap. 4. n. ^9. To reduce Christians to unity of
Communion, there are but two ways that may be conceived probable. The one by
taking away diversity of opinions touching matters of Religion. The other by
showing that the diversity of opinions, which is among the several Sects of
Christians, ought to be no hinderance to their unity in communion. The former
of these is not to be hoped for without a Miracle. Then what remains but that
Christians be taught that their agreement in the high points of Faith and
obedience, ought to be more effectual to win them in one communion, than their
difference in things of less moment to divide them. I must crave leave to
dissent from Mr. Chillingworth in his former conclusion, That diversity of
opinions among Christians touching matters of Religion cannot be taken away
without a Miracle. A great many of those Controversies which raised the highest
animosities among Christians at the first Reformation, are laid aside already
by moderate and judicious persons of both Partys, without any Miracle, and are
only kept on foot by some blunderers, who follow the old Mode when the Fashion
is grown out of date, either out of prejudice, or pride, or want of judgment,
or altogether.

And as many Controversies of the greatest magnitude are already as good as
reconciled, So more may be. There is no opposition to be made against evident
truth. I hope Mr. Baxter will be of my mind, who confesses that He is grown to
a great deal of confidence, that most of our contentions about [Arminian]
Points, are more about Words than Matter. And doubts whether there be any
difference at all in the point of Free Will. praef. sect. 5. And affirms that
the difference between Protestants and many Papists about certainty of
Salvation, (except the point of perseverance) is next to none. And with some
Papists in the point of perseverance also, Sect. 64.

The second conclusion was borrowed by Mr. Chillingworth from my Lord Primate.
That our agreement in the high and necessary Points of Faith and obedience,
ought to be more effectual to unite us than one difference in opinions to
divide us. Concerning which there is no need of my suffrage, for it is just
mine own way. My second demand in my proposition of Peace was this. That the
Creed or necessary points of Faith might be reduced to what they were in the
time of the four first Ecumenical Concils, according to the decree of the
third General Council. (Who dare say that the faith of the Primitive Fathers
was insufficient, etc.) I do profess to all the World that the transforming of
indifferent opinions into necessary Articles of Faith, has been that insana
laurus, or cursed Bay Tree, the cause of all our brawling and contention.
Judge, Reader, indifferently, what reason Mr. Baxter had to disallow my terms
of Peace, (as he is pleased to call them) and allow Mr. Chillingworths, when my
terms are the very same which Mr. Chillingworth proposes, and my Lord Primate
before him, and King James before them both.

CHAP. VIII.
The true reasons of the Bishops abatement of the last 400. years
Determinations.

IN his one and fortieth Section; he has these words, He will not with Bishop
Bramhall abate us the determinations of the last 400. years, though if he did,
it would prove but a pitiful patch for the torn condition of the Church. When I
made that proposition that the Papists would wave their last 400. years
determinations, I did it with more serious deliberation, than he bestowed upon
his whole Grotian Religion. Begun April 9. 1658. And finished April 14. 1658.
My reason was to control a common error received by many, that those errors
and usurpations of the Church of Rome, which made the breach between them and
us, were much more ancient than in truth they were. What those errors and
usurpations were cannot be judged better than by our Laws and Statutes, which
were made and provided as remedies for them. I know they had begun some of
their gross errors and usurpations long before that time, and some others not
long before, but the most of them, and especially those which necessitated a
separation, after that time.

Those errors and usurpations which were begun before that time, if they be
rightly considered, were but the sinful and unjust actions of particular Popes
and Persons, and could not warrant a public separation from the Church of
Rome. I deny not but that erroneous opinions in inferior points, rather
concerning faith than of faith, and some sinful and unwarrantable practices,
both in point of Discipline and devotion, had crept into the Church of Rome
before that time. But erroneous opinions may be, and must be tolerated among
Christians, so they be not opposite to the ancient Creed of the Church, nor
obtruded upon others as necessary points of saving faith.

Neither is any man bound or necessitated to join with other men in sinful and
unwarrantable opinions or practices, until they be established and imposed
necessarily upon all others by Law. Whilst it was free for any man to give a
fair interpretation of an harsh expression or action without incurring any
danger, there was no necessity of separation. But when these tyrannical
usurpations were justified by the decrees of Councils, and imposed upon
Christians under pain of Excommunication, when these erroneous opinions were
made necessary Articles of saving faith, extra quam non est salus, without
which there is no salvation, when these sinful and unwarrantable practices were
injoined to all Christians, and when all these unjust usurpations, erroneous
opinions, and sinful and unwarrantable practices, were made necessary
conditions of Communion with the Church of Rome, so that no man could
Communicate with the Roman Church but he that would submit to all these
usurpations, believe all these erroneous opinions, and obey all their sinful
injunctions, then there was an absolute necessity of separation.

Then if any man inquire when and how this necessity was imposed upon
Christians, I answer, all this was ratified and done altogether, or in a manner
altogether, by these last 400. years Determinations, beginning with the Council
of Lateran in the days of Innocent the third, after the twelve hundredth year of
Christ, when Transubstantiation was first defined, and ending with the Council
of Trent. So though these were not my terms of peace, but preparatory demands,
yet if these demands be granted our concord would not only be nearer, (which he
acknowledges) but the peace almost as good as made, and Christians were freed
from their unjust Canons, and left to their former liberty. When they had
granted so much, it were a shame for them to stick at a small remainder.

CHAP. IX.
An Answer to sundry aspersions east by Mr. Baxter upon the Church of England.

I Have done with all that concerns my self in Mr. Baxters Grotian Religion.
But I find a bitter and groundless invective in him toward the conclusion of
his treatise, wherein he labors to cast dirt upon his spiritual Mother the
Church of England, which out of my just and common duty I cannot pass over in
silence. He says, p. 75. That this Grotian design in England was destructive
to Godliness and the prosperity of the Churches. What Churches does he mean? By
the Laws of England Civil and Ecclesiastical we ought to have but one Church.
It was never well with England since we had so many Churches and so many
Faiths. I am afraid those which he calls Churches were Conventicles.

He proceeds, that it animated the impious haters of piety and common
civility. First he ought to have proved that there was such a design in England
which he neither has done nor ever will be able to do. That which never had
any being but in his Imagination, never had any efficacy but in his
Imagination. He adds that men were hated for Godliness sake. That is (to
expressed his sense truly) were restrained in their seditious and Schismatical
courses, which he styles Godliness. Fallit enim vitium specie virtutis and
umbra.



And troubled and suspended and driven out of the Land, though most of them
twenty for one were conformists. How, Conformist and yet persecuted? If this be
not a contradiction yet it is incredible, that so many men should be silenced
and suspended every where without Law. Certainly there was a Law pretended.
Certainly there was a Law indeed, and that Law made before they were either
punished or ordained. I will put the right case fairly to Mr. Baxter, if he
have any mind to determine it. Let him tell us who is to be blamed, he that
undertaketh an office of his own accord, which he cannot or will not discharge
as the Law injoineth, or he that executes the Law upon such as had voluntarily
confirmed it by their own oaths or subscriptions, or both.

He proceeds, that it was safer in all places that ever he knew, for men to
live in swearing, cursing, drunkenness, than to have instructed a Man's family,
and restrained Children and Servants from dancing on the Lord's Day, and to have
gone to the next Parish to hear a Sermon, when there was none at home. Quicquid
ostendat mihi sic incredulus odi.



I am sorry to find so much gall where so much piety is professed. Who did ever
forbid a man to instruct his own family? Let him bu^ name one instance for his
credits sake, or command any Person to dance ^p^n the Lords day, or restrain a
man fr om going to the next Parish to hear a Sermon, if there was no more in it
then he pretends? Here are I know not how many fallacies heaped together. No
cause is put for a cause, and that which is respectively true for that which is
absolutely true. No man was ever punished for instructing his own family, but
it may be for holding unlawful Conventicles, or for instructing them in
seditious schismatical or heretical principles. Nor for going to the next
Parish to hear a Sermon. Thousands did it daily and never suffered for it. But
it may be for neglecting or deserting his own Parish Church, and gadding up and
down after non-conformists, or after Persons justly suspended or deprived for
heterodox Doctrine, or laboring to introduce foraign Discipline, without Law
against Law, and strange unknown forms of serving God, and administering his
holy Sacraments according to their own private fantasies. Nor for restraining
their Children or Servants from dancing on the Lords day, but it may be for
taking upon them as busy Bodies, and pragmatically controlling the Acts of
their Sovereign Prince and lawful superiors; which the Laws of God and Man,
nature and nations, Church and Kingdom did allow, and for restraining the
liberty of their fellow subjects, and seeking to introduce new Law without a
calling or beyond their calling, which the Church of God, and Kingdom of
England never knew. If Mr. Baxter think that no recreations of the body at all
are lawful or may be permitted upon the Lords day, he may call himself a
Catholic if he please, but he will find very few Churches of any Communion
whatsoever, old or new, reformed or unreformed to bear him company.

No no, even among the Churches of his own Communion which he calls the
holiest Parts of the Church upon Earth, he will find none at all to join with
him, except the Churches of New England, and Old England, and Scotland,
whereinto this opinion has been creeping by degrees, this last half Century of
years or somewhat more. Before that time even our greatest Disciplinarians in
England abhorred not private recreations, so they could practice them without
scandal. And Calvin himself disdained not to countenance and encourage the
Burgers of Geneva, by his own presence and example at their public
recreations, as Bowling and Shooting upon the Lords Day, after their devotions
at Church were ended. In Germany, Switzerland, France, and the Low Countries,
all the Churches of his own Communion, do enjoy their recreations. And in
sundry of them their Prayers and Sermons on the afternoon of the Lords Day, are
but lately introduced, whereas formerly not the vulgar only, but the most
eminent persons did use to bestow the whole afternoon upon their recreations.

But it may be his pick is not against recreations in general, but against
dancing in particular. Indeed dancing was disliked at Geneva, not only upon the
Lords Days, but upon the other days of the week. And if their manner of Dancing
there, or any where else was so obscene, as has been in use in former Ages, in
some places, not undeservedly. No man can be so absurd as to affirm all sorts
of Dancing to be unlawful, as Miriams Dance, and that of the Virgins of Shilo,
and Iephtha's Daughter, and David. There is no time for any thing that is
absolutely unlawful; But there is a time to Dance, Eccles. 3. 4. On the other
side it is as great an extreme to affirm that all sorts of Dances are unlawful.
Not only conscientious Christians, but even modest Heathens have disliked some
sorts of Dances. And as there are some sorts of Dances unlawful, so there may
be great danger of abuse in the use of Lawful Dances. But where there is no
lawful, or direct prohibition there of God or man, we may advise a Brother or a
Friend to beware of danger, but we have no Authority to restrain him except he
will of his own accord. As for the public Dances of our Youth on Country
Greens, upon Sundays after the Dutys of the Day were done, I see nothing in
them but innocent, and agreeable to that under sort of people. But if any man
out of prudence, or conscience, or scrupulosity, do disaffect them, either
because they were sometimes used promiscuously, or for any other reasons, I
think it easier to regulate those recreations which should be allowed, than to
brawl about them perpetually until the end of the World.

Among all the imputations and aspersions, which were cast upon the Governmentt
of our late dread Sovereign King James, and King Charles, there was none that
had more color of truth, or found more applause among some sorts of persons,
whose Zeal exceeded their discretion, than their Proclamations to tolerate
public recreations upon the Lords Day, though there was no Law of God or man
to prohibit them. The very truth is this, King James making his Progress
through Lancashire, about forty years since or more, (a Country at that time
abounding with Papists, and Non-Conformists,) the Country People preferred a
Petition to his Majesty, that whereas after their hard weekly labors ended,
they had evermore for time immemorial enjoyed the liberty to recreat themselves
upon Sundays, of late some scrupulous Ministers upon their own heads, without
any Law or Lawful Authority did restrain them; Therefore they humbly besought
his Majesty to restore them to their ancient Liberty. His Majesty prudently
weighing what advantage might be raised to the Protestant Religion in those
superstitious parts, by his favorable condescension, Granted their request
upon two conditions. First, That no such recreations should be used in time of
Divine Service or Sermon, either forenoon or afternoon,. Secondly, That none
should enjoy that liberty but those that had been actually twice at the Church
that Day, both at morning and evening Prayers. And by this prudent
condescension he gained the People from Popery, to the Protestant Religion. The
very making this Objection the principal accusation against those two pious
Princes, is an evident proof of the innocence of their Reigns

He proceeds, In some places it was much more dangerous for a Minister to
Preach a Lecture once or twice on the Lords Day, or to expound the Catechism,
than never to Preach at all. He must excuse us if we can not give credit to
what he says. Never any man suffered any where in the Church of England simply
for Preaching, but it may be for Preaching seditious Sermons, or Schismatical
Sermons, or Heretical Sermons, or for intruding himself into the Sacred Office
of a Preacher without Lawful calling, or for some Abuse of his function. Even
so the Buyers and Sellers might have pleaded that they (innocent People) were
whipped by Christ, for furnishing Gods People with Sacrifices. And Uzza might
have pleaded much better, that he lost his life for seeking to support the Ark
of God from falling. Does he think that we are such silly Birds to be catched
with such empty chaff as this is? Or not to be able to distinguish between an
action, and the the obliquity of it? The Pharisees Prayer,, the Harlots Vow,
the Traitors Kiss, were commendable actions in general as well as his Preaching
of Lectures. But either the incapacity of the person, or a sinister intention,
or a defective manner, or a contempt of lawful authority, might render, and did
render all these actions sinful and punishable. Apollos watering is necessary,
as well as Paul's planting, especially until the plants have taken good root.
But after whole Nations have been long radicated in Christianity, and have
framed to themselves Liturgies, and other Books of devotion for the public and
private Worship of God, And Catechisms which comprehend all necessary and
essential points of Faith, and all the parts of new obedience, to fantasy
that without weekly Sermons all Religion is extinct, is as much as to persuade
us that no man can possibly write, except he have his Master perpetually by him
to hold his hand, or that a Field cannot yield a good crop, except it be sown
over and over again every month: of the two, a private guide seems to be more
necessary to a grounded Christian, than a public Preacher.

But if Preachers shall not content themselves to sow the Wheat over again, but
shall sow Tares above the Wheat, If they shall seek to introduce new Doctrines,
new Disciplines, and new Forms of Worship, by popular Sermons, different from
and destructive to those which are established by Law, who can blame the
Magistrates Political, and Ecclesiastical if they begin to look about them. A
seditious Orator is dangerous every where, but no where more than in the
Pulpit. Then blame not Magistrates if they punish seditious or Schismatical
Preachers, more than one who is no Preacher. All Laws, and all prudent
Magistrates regard public dangers, more than particular defects. Yet farther,
supposing them to be both faulty, the fault of a Reader is purae negationis, a
mere omission of duty, extenuated many times by invincible necessity, but the
fault of a seditious Preacher is purae dispositionis, a fault of a perverse
disposition. Then he may cease to wonder why Preachers are sometimes punished
more for Preaching ill, than for being silent, and recall to his mind the
practice of that prudent Schoolmaster, who exacted but a single salary from
such of his Scholars as had never been taught, but a double salary from those
who had been mistaught, because he must use double diligence with them, first
to unteach them what they had learned amiss, and then to teach them.

I have much more respect for those poor Readers whom he mentions every where
with contempt. I hope they may do, and many of them do God good and acceptable
service in his Church, and cooperate to the Salvation of many Christian Souls,
by reading the Holy Scriptures, and the Liturgy and Homilies of the Church, and
administering the Holy Sacraments. And I have heard wise men acknowledge, that
if it had not been for these very Readers, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when Preaching was very rare, England had hardly been preserved, as it
was, both from Popery, and from Atheism. Their very Reading is a kind of
Preaching, Act. 15. 21. Moses of old time has in every City them that Preach
him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. And their reading of
Homilies does yet approach nearer to formal Preaching. Or if it come short of
Preaching in point of efficacy, it has the advantage of Preaching in point of
security. The private conceits of new fangled Preachers, by being vented
publicly as the Word of God, have done much hurt, which the reading of public
Homiles never did. Let not this Apology for Readers occasion him or any other
man presently to condemn me for a Loiterer in my calling; Those who have known
me will acquit me. Let this be considered and acknowledged that as Readers
Talents are mean, so are their Benefices. And this is the great comfort that
they have, that they are below a Sequestration. The fire of Zeal which drives
able Scholars out of their great Churches, never lights upon their little
Chapels. So the great Flies are catched in their public Nets, whilst the
lesser pass through and through them without any danger or fear of being
entangled.

Nondum sinitus orestes. His invective is not yet done. Hundreds of
Congregations had Ministers that never Preached, and such as were common
Drunkards, and openly ungodly, etc. I know not how it comes to pass that in
this last Age the Pastors of Churches have got the name of Ministers, that is
Servants or Deacons, and they that are Ministers or Deacons indeed have got the
name of ruling Elders. Those whom he accounts for no Freachers, were
Preachers in an inferior degree. And our Canons provideth that the meanest
Churches or Chapels throughout England, which had cure of Souls should have
formal Sermons at least four times in every year. If some common Drunkards or
ungodly persons were crept into the English Church it is no wonder. Among the
twelve Apostles there was one Judas. What may be expected among twelve
thousand? This is just the manner of Flies to leave the whole Body which is
sound, and dwell continually upon one little sore. I have seldom observed that
ever any man who had a good cause, which would bear out it self, did make such
impertinent objections as this, or sling dirt in the face of an Adversary in
the stead of weapons. He says no more of the English Church, than God by his
holy Prophets has said of his own Church, no more than may be justly retorted
and said of any Church in the world, even upon his Presbyterian Churches in
particular, with as much and much more truth as it could ever be objected
against the Church of England.

He adds, when yet the most learned, Godly, powerful, painful, peaceable men,
that durst not use the old Ceremonies or the new, must be cast aside or driven
way, etc. Comparisons are odious. But such superlatives are incredible, and
argue nothing but the Writers pride and partiality, and little regard to what
he writes. Let Mr. Baxter sum up into one Catalogue all the non-conformists
throughout the Kingdom of England, ever since the beginning of the resormation,
who have been cast aside or driven away at any time, because they durst not use
the old Ceremonies or the new, or rather because they found it advantageous to
them to disuse them, (I dare abate him all the rest of the Kingdom,) and only
exhibit the martyrologies of London and the two Universities, or a list of
those who in these late intestine Wars have been haled away to prisons, or
chased away into banishment by his own party, in these three places alone, or
left to the merciless world to beg their bread, for no other crime then
loyalty, and because they stood affected to the ancient rites and ceremonies of
the Church of England, and they shall double them for number, and for learning,
piety, industry, and the love of peace, exceed them incomparably. So as his
party which he glories so much in will scarcely deserve to be named the same
day. And if he compare their persecutions, the sufferings of his supposed
Confessors will appear to be but flea bitings in comparison of theirs.

But after all this the greatest disparity remains yet untouched, that is in
the cause of their sufferings. The one suffered for says and the other for
faction. If he had contented himself to have rested in positive expressions, of
learned and pious and peaceable, etc. he had had no answer to this particular
from me but silence. It is the duty of a Controvertist to examine the merits of
the cause, not of the persons. But his superlative expressions did draw me
unwillingly to do this right to the Orthodox and Genuine Sons of the Church of
England. I will add but one word more, that we have seen but little fruits of
their peaceable dispositions hitherto, but the contrary that they have made all
places to become shambles of Christians. God grant that we may find them more
peaceable for the future.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for and sold by James Collins, at the Kings-Arms in
Ludgatestreet, 1672.
OBservations upon Military and Political Affairs, by the most Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle: Folio. Price 6. s.

A Sermon preached by Seth Lord Bishop of Sarum at the Funeral of the Most
Honorable George Duke of Albemarle: Quarto. Price 6. d.

Philosophia Pia, or, A Discourse of the Religious tendences of the
Experimental Philosophy, to which is added a Recommendation and Defense of
Reason in the affairs of Religion, by Joseph Glanvil, Rector of Bath: Octavo.
Price 2. s.

The Way to Happiness represented in its Difficulties and Encouragements; and
cleared from many popular and dangerous mistakes, by J. Glanvil.

A Praefatory Answer to Mr. Henry Stubbe the Doctor of Warwick, by Jos.
Glanvil: Octavo. Price 1. s. 6. d.

The Life and Death of Mr. George Herbert the excellent Author of the Divine
Poems. Written by Iz. Walton: Octavo. Price 1. s.

A Discourse of the forbearance or penalties, which a due Reformation requires
by Herbert Thorndike one of the Prebendaries of Westminister. Octavo.

A Private Conference between a rich Alderman, and a poor Country Vicar made
Public, wherein is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths, which have been imposed
on the Subjects of England: Octavo 2. s.

The Episcopacy of the Church of England justified to be Apostolical from the
Authority of the Primitive Church: and from the confessions of the most famous
Divines beyond the Seas, by the Right Reverend the late Lord Bishop of Duresm,
with a Preface written by Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet: Octavo.

A Collection of Sermons preached before the King at White Hall by the Right
Reverend Father in God, Seth L. Bishop of Sarum, now in the Press.

FINIS.

