THE PILGRIM. A pleasant piece of GALLANTRY: Written in French By M. S. BREMOND.

Translated into English By P. BELON. Gent.



LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza's. 1680.

The PILGRIM a Novel


London, Printed for R: Bentley and M: Magnes in Couent-Garden.

To her GRACE the Duchess of ALBERMARLE, etc.
May it please Your Grace.
When dejected Spirits lie groaning under the heavy pressure of Affliction,
they address their Vows unto a Supreme Being; likewise in every small Reverse
of Fortune, Self-preservation has instructed man to fly unto those Powers on
Earth, as are endowed by the Celestial Influences with requisite Qualities for
the protection of the afflicted.

Your Grace having been ordained and fitted by Heaven for that Employ on Earth,
in so vast a measure as has spread your Fame over the whole Universe; it is no
wonder, Madam, If Camille ha been diligent in attaining to such a proportion of
the English Idiom, as would fit him to appear in your Princely Presence, with
more Reverence, and to shroud himself with greater Respect, under the Wings of
Your Graces generous Protection.

This Roman Gentleman, Madam, though concealed under the formal Weeds of a
Modern Knight-Errants seeming Sanctity, is a Libertine by Profession, and of
the very first rank in Licentiousness, who approaches full of confidence, that
the bare reflection of Your Graces Perfections is more than sufficient to work
a thorough reformation in him.

The whole World is of Opinion that it is with the greatest force of reason
imaginable, that this gallant Pilgrim builds on this bottom. For what greater
motives to Virtue can there be derived from Humane Nature, Madam, than that
examplary life which Your Grace does steer with such exactness through the
tempestuous Seas of this World, without touching on the two dangerous Rocks of
Superstition, or of Religious Contempt.

Here, Madam, I should attempt to numerate Your Graces Virtues, If I would have
this Dedication a-la-mode, but besides that I know they are not to be
comprehended within the inconsiderate limits of an Epistle; I cannot be guilty
of such an Error, Madam, so long as I know with what disgust Your Grace
receives vulgar Applause while with Justice you expect your Reward from above,
where Angels only celebrate your Praises, and write your Fame on the vast
Tables of Eternity. I shall rest contented in giving Your Grace an hours
Divertisement in the lively portrait of a Spanish-Jacobin Friar, and Father
Confessor, of a considerable standing; persons whose Principal Employes are so
worldly, that their Religious Habit and Profession, are but the specious
pretenses, under which those Ghostly Fathers, with singular industry, and
admirable Experience do exercise a most gainful Traffic in Humane Flesh.

If I am ever so happy, Madam, as to have given Your Grace some moments of
Recreation, I have my ends. In those hopes I take the boldness to subscribe my
self,

May it please Your Grace, Your Grace's most Humble and most Obedient Servant,
P. BELON.

A Word of Advice to the READER.
THis Word of Advice would not be necessary, if I had to do only with rational
and indulgent Readers, but when once a man has delivered himself up to the
Public in this manner, he is apt to fall into the hands of such persons as
will give no quarter. For my part I have feared, lest some persons should
scandalize themselves with the Reverend Father Andrew's Character. I could send
those Censors to Boccace, to Ariosto, and to diverse other famous Authors, who
in their Railleries have treated those good Fathers somewhat worse than I have,
if speaking truth of them is treating of them ill. But peradventure those
examples will not be sufficient to justify me; and Baronius, who spares them
not, no more than Plautus, in some certain Affairs somewhat of a more
scandalous nature than those of being serviceable to ones Neighbor on the
account of Amorous Intrigues, would appear more excusable to them than I; only
because that these rebuke them for their Crimes, while that I do but laugh at
them. But with the good leave of those Gentlemen, that are so apt to be
scandalized, I will say, that there is sometime made a greater impression of
the horror of Vice in dexterously scoffing at it, than in down right railing
after it. However I am very certain that by what I say of Father Andrew, no
Monk will have a mind to imitate him. But these are not yet the best Reasons
that I prepare for my defense, It is upon the Custom of the Country which I
mention, that I retrench my self, where the right of serving Amorous Intrigues
is so common to those pious Confraters, that who says a Monk, speaks a
confident; and there is no person that has been in Spain but is convinced of
this truth. I could say the same of Italy, and, it may be, of France also, but
it is dangerous to draw so many persons all at once upon ones back; I am
satisfied with speaking of those of Spain, who counting it a particular honor
to be skilful in that point, I am persuaded, will not take it ill at my hands;
at the worst the business is not so great; and let me tell you; that if
Posterity had nothing in this age but that disorder to pardon, it would not
pass for one of the most corrupt. Humane Nature, with growing old, becomes so
weak, that of necessity many of her small Crimes, which the Spaniards call
Peccadillo's, must be winked at. It would be too great a task to reform all;
and such a Censurer may here find fault with me, who will have more need of
indulgency for himself, than I now crave from him. Thus I beg their favor for
my Father Andrew, and in my turn, I shall afford them the same Courtesy; when
all comes to all, let them be scandalized that will, for my part I will not
undertake to redress those persons, whose Brains are like their Necks. It
suffices me to believe that there will be found some modest persons that will
laugh with me at what I have done merely to cause laughter; I fear not that
Venom which is only shed upon Books, and I am certain that there will be none
strong enough to spoil that jovial humor, that my mirth may infuse into those
that know what it is to rally.

It is not given to all the world to know how to relish Salt and Pepper, no
more than how to use them aright. What would a Melancholic Brain say, if he
should read this place of Ariosto, where a certain Hermit, Chavea longa labarba
a Mezzo il petto
Devoto e venerabile d'aspetto
Dagli anni e dalgiuno attennuato, etc.
After he has conducted the beauteous Angelica into a desolate place, where he
had her at his will, he set himself, says the Author, to consolate her with
some devout Orisons. Epon Laudaci man mentre che parla
Orper loseno Orper l'umide got
Poi piu sicuro vaper abbraciarla, etc.


I will not pursue the Adventure any further; But what will the scrupulous
Reader say, when he will know that it makes a part of a Book which has been
dedicated to one of the first Cardinals of Rome. I will leave him with that
Reflection, to come to my Pilgrim.

THE Pilgrim. A NOVEL,
SInce that the Spirit of Devotion has Seized on the Knights-Errants of this
Age, there is scarce any thing else seen in the World. Of truth their Equipage
is somewhat different from that which their predecessors formerly had; for in
lieu of a Lance and a Helmet, which they did wear in those days, now they have
a Palmers-Staff, a Hat trimmed with Cockel-shells, and I know not what kind of
Rocket, instead of a back and breast, which indeed are not Iron and Lead proof;
but then they do not fatigate so much their bearer, as those Enchanted Armours
formerly did. That which they have retained of their ancient Custom, which
devotion it self could not persuade them to alter, is a little Miss, which
still sticks close to them, and for whose sake sometime the Palmer's staff does
Wagg, as the Lance did formerly. In short, what difference soever there is
betwixt that kind of life, which they lead now adays in their Foot-Travels,
and that formerly when they were continually bestriding their Palfreys, all
things well considered, it may be said that each condition has its agreements
and its Troubles, its sweets as well as its labors. For when all is said, it
was no small Toil to have so many Lances to break, and so many Enchantments to
put to an end. You doubtless may have read, how that when they were to pass
over a Bridge, or to get into a Castle, there still was some Giant or other to
Combat, or some Monster to overcome; but in these times, as things are now
ordered, all this is done with a Song. No Maid though, near so stout, these
latter years,
But becomes tame, when Palmer-staff appears:
Nor Buxom Hostess, but will wish and long,
When once she hears a Jolly Pilgrim's Song.


Adventure for adventure, it is certain that these new Knights condition is
well worth that of the Knights in former times. At leastwise it was made
Choice of, by a person of a very good gusto, whom the leaness of the Purse, or
the excess of Devotion did not oblige to ramble up and down the World under
that Figure. This poor Pilgrim had but Fifty or Sixty Thousand Livers yearly
Revenue; but here is the real cause of his vocation.

Rome, formerly so renowned, has not degenerated of late so much in persons of
Wit, as in many other respects. It cannot be denied, but that the ways they now
have taken unto tend somewhat more toward evil than formerly, and that though
it still is the place in which the Sanctity of the earth does reside, it is no
less a source of debauchery.

There has always been found in it diverse Accademies of great Wits, but in our
time none has made so much noise as that which was called, of the Libertines;
not only by reason of those bold discourses which were held in it; but for
those terrible Satyrs which it sent forth against all persons without
exception. The Holy Father, to whose feet the first complaints against it were
humbly laid down, by those persons that were concerned in those Truths which
those Accademicks did publish, was obliged to send forth diverse Thundering
Excommunications against this Society. But they being but little daunted at the
Vaticans Arms, did but laugh and scoff at the Pope's just indignation;
bringing him and the Cardinals also into play, which is the only Crime, that is
not to be forgiven in Rome. Therefore it was no longer Saint Peter that Armed
himself with Thunderbolts for their destruction, but Saint Paul, who with the
Sword in hand, made a pursuit after those impious persons. There never was seen
so many sorts of persons combined together, as there was then, to destroy those
Libertines: Sergeants, Watchmen, Guards, Soldiers, Monks, Prelates, both on
foot and on Horseback, all were under Arms, and one would really have taken
it for a Crusado.

There were but few persons in Rome that had not some share in their Satyrs,
and half the City was already providing Faggots for them, so that it was High
time to sound the retreat: Every one got away as well as he could, some
disguised after one manner, and some after another. Our Hero, who was one of
the most eminent amongst them, hid himself under the Habit of a Pilgrim; with
which having got, without any Retinue, to Civita Vecchia, he took a Felouqua,
that carried him to Genova.

His design was for France; but the opportunity of a Gally, which was going to
put off for Barcelona, where it was carrying a Spanish Lord, General Master de
Camp, of the Cavalry of the state of Millan, having made him Change his
resolution, he enbarqued to make the same voyage upon it.

There was a great number of Passengers on that Gally; and our Pilgrim, who
besides the trouble of the Crowd, was not willing to be known, being yet so
near Italy, did accost the Captain, and with a Complement of few words he slid
into his hand a Role of Pistols, to make him understand by his liberality, and
his good mien, that he was no common Pilgrim. The Captain therefore treated him
according as his Complement, and his good mien did deserve: for he gave him his
own Cabin, which was joining to that of the Spanish Don, and caused him to be
served by two Slaves during the whole voyage

The Wind was as favorable as could be, and they had not so soon Hoised Sails,
but they lost the sight of Genoua. Prudence would not yet allow our Pilgrim to
be much seen, though they were already well off at Sea. He therefore resolved,
not to stir forth out of his Chamber, till he were arrived at Barcelona, and to
divert himself in the mean time in reading of books. This was an agreeable
employment to him, but it lasted not long; for the very next day, his reading
was interrupted by the Charming voice of a Woman that was in the General's
Chamber. He lent an Ear, and understood that she sung some Italian Aires. His
Curiosity did each moment increase, and being Charmed with the sweetness of the
voice, he would willingly have seen that person. He visited and searched the
partition of the Cabin from one end to the other, to find out some Chink, but
the boards were so well Joynted, that it was labor in vain. In fine, at night
when the Captain, who used to eat with him, was come to see him, and to sup; he
set him on a discourse concerning the Spanish Don, and having particularly made
inquiry concerning his Retinue and Family, he learned that it was the Marquess
of L. lately married at Milan, where he had espoused the Daughter of the Count
N. one of the most Charming Persons in all Italy, of whom he was so jealous,
that there was but two old women that served her, that had the liberty of
entering her Chamber; neither would he have her to be seen by any of his own
servants. Camille, so was the Pilgrim named, did on a sudden fall into a
profound silence, seriously reflecting on what the Captain did tell him, not
doubting but that the voice that had Charmed him did belong to the beautiful
Marchioness. This made him more earnest than ever to see her, and he was
already almost fallen in Love; he did eat little or nothing, during that meal,
and dyed with impatiency to have the Captain gone, that he might, when alone,
make a new search after some means to pry into that Chamber. The very Idea
which he did frame to himself of that beautiful Lady, upon the Captain's words,
did inflame him with love, and the Jealousy of the Husband, which did detain
her in that Captivity, did already inspire him with such designs, as did
flatter him with some hopes of a good fortune. The Captain being at last gone,
he shuts the Cabin door, and with the Candle in his hand, searches and examines
every board one after another, above, beneath, on the right, on the left, all
over, but no hopes. He Torments himself, sweats, sighs, and almost in despair,
he would endeavor to make some hole, with an Iron he had found, when fortune
guided his eyes upon a knot in a board, which did answer just upon the Ladies
bed, and that could be got out without much difficulty. Never was joy
comparable to his, he presently peeps through the hole, and sees the most
beautiful woman that ever was in the World, in a most Magnificent undress, who
was at her Toylet undressing her self for bed. He could not see her but of one
side, and the hole being but small, he could but imperfectly discern such
Features, as were of power to have enchanted a man much less prepossest than he
was: but he did see enough to accomplish his bondage, and yet think himself the
happiest man in all the World. Nothing on earth could have drawn him from
thence; and he used no other Caution than the putting out of his Candle, for
fear of being discovered, and was preparing himself, for a most Charming
pleasure at her going in bed, when fickle fortune, who had been so favorable
to him, did presently fill his heart with darkness; for the Marquess being
entered the Chamber, to go to bed, went and hung his Cloak (an Ornament which
the Spanish Gravity will not allow to be quitted but rarely) upon that very
place, where was the little peep-hole; a most sorrowful vail unto the Amorous
Camille which caused a sad Eclipse betwixt his heart, and that most Charming
object. His sorrow is easy to be imagined, yet he left not his post, but making
use of his Ears, where his eyes could not reach, he heard certain discourses,
which did not please him less, than what he had seen; They were little Jarrs
between the Husband and the wife, which did speak the ill understanding, that
there was between them; The Ladies complaints against the rigorous proceedings
of her Lord; and his reproaches on her Humor of Courtship. Our Pilgrim
building on this bottom greater and fairer hopes than ever, he did pass the
best part of the night, in framing to himself such Ideas, as afforded him as
much content as would to others, every Charming reality: at last he must go to
bed, for there had not been any noise heard in the Chamber of two hours: but
how can a person sleep, that has his mind filled with what he had beheld that
day? and what he did hope to see the next morning, if fortune would have it,
that the Jealous Husband should rise before the Lady, and take the envious
Cloak along with him? That which troubled him most was the wind, which still
continuing favorable, would not let him long enjoy this Happiness: For it was
probable that with such a wind they would arrive the next day at Barcelona;
which would put an end to his adventure, except love, who is pleased with
extraordinary things, should favor him with some turn of fortune, of which he
durst not much flatter himself. The best part of the night he spent in
thoughts, and yet in his opinion passed it well, though he had had no sleep. So
soon as he did see day appear, he arose, but it was somewhat too early yet for
persons that had no such disquiet as he had in his mind. He fitted the knot to
its hole, and had the patience to wait a great while, incessantly harkening
with a strange anguish of mind, whether the Marquess was not stirring, which
unfortunately to him did not rise so soon that day, as he used to do; and when
up, he walked in his Chamber till he was advertised, that they were in sight of
Palamos. Then out he went in his Spanish decorum to behold that City. His Lady
who was yet in bed, and who had the same Curiosity, got out of it in a pretty
kind of disorder, to run to the window. Then it was that our good Pilgrim had
that happy sight which he had so much desired, for in that haste in which the
Lady had risen, she showed him such things as were able to inchant the Gods. He
was not contented with this, but Transported with ardor and love, he also went
to his Chamber window, which was very near unto that in which the Marchioness
was; and but half showing himself, lest any one else should see him, he made
her a Reverence much more amorous than profound, looking on her with Eyes that
did speak some part of those things which he felt in his Soul. The beautiful
Marchioness (who according to the genius of the Italian Ladies, was very expert
in that Language) was at first surpised to see so near her a man with so good
a mien; but after she had looked about, to see if any body did observe her, she
did very obligingly answer his Salute. Our amorous Pilgrim would gladly have
had this Language of the eyes changed, into an entertainment of the mouth, but
it was too much to be feared, that they would have been heard. And the Lady who
did fear to be surpised by her Guardians, or Husband, durst not make any
longer stay at the window. Camille who did follow her every where with his eyes
and heart, did retire presently also to his former port, where he did behold
the Marchioness, who was got to bed again, who not imagining, to be observed,
lay in such a posture, by reason of the great heat of the season, as was
capable to kill a man with love. Neck, Breast, Arms, Feet Legs; in fine, all
the most beautiful and Charming things in the World, were exposed at the mercy
of our Pilgrim's eyes, who at this sight did quickly lose the rest of his
liberty.

Presently after, her women came in to dress her, and Camille, who had received
as much as he wanted, retired, for fear that amongst so many eyes there might
be some, that might light accidentally upon his peep-hole, which would spoil
all. Imagining also, that in so great a bustle of Women he should have but an
imperfect view of the Lady.

Never any man so pleased as he, if his good fortune had lasted but some time
longer; but they still approached nearer Barcelona, and consequently of that
moment, which was to part them, and that would peradventure, make him lose for
ever the sight of what he so passionately loved: Good Gods! would he frequently
cry out sighing, some blasts of a contrary Wind! His prayers were not heard;
time pressed upon them, and finally there must be a resolution taken to speak out
some way, whereby he might be understood; he found some paper, pen and ink, and
without further delay, he wrote some Italian Verses to this purpose. When by a
too Rigorous Fate,
Most beauteous Lady, your cursed mate
Shall force you, through his jealous Rage,
To free your self; I dare engage,
By a certain amorous Art,
When just you are ready to depart,
To have a Pilgrim wait at hand,
In Obedience to your command.


Having finished his Verses, he waited till he saw no body in the Ladies
Chamber, and having rolled up the paper, he put it through the hole, which
being just in the Ladies sight, could not fail of drawing her eyes upon it. She
was at first surpised at the Novelty thereof, which caused her to blush
extremely, not doubting but it was exposed there by that Cavalier which she had
seen at the window, and whose good mien had raised in her a great Curiosity to
know what he was: but when she reflected on those advantages, which he might
have made use of by the means of that hole, during the freedom which she had
taken all the time that she had been in that Cabin, it wanted but little, that
an Anger mixed with bashfulness, did not produce some kind of hatred against a
man, of whom she had so little knowledge. She was strangly busied in her
thoughts, and knew not what to resolve; mean time the paper which she saw to
wag continually, giving her an extreme desire to see what it might be, and
fearing on the other hand that some body would come into the Cabin, her anger
and scruples were forced to give place to her Curiosity; she approached, took
the Note, looked through the hole, and did see a Pilgrim, whose good mien did
somewhat appease her; she presently withdrew, and having seated her self again
upon her bed, she unfolded the paper with a mind strangely taken up with this
adventure. In such a condition as she was at that time, evil-treated by an
Husband, which she had never loved, and who prepared himself to make her suffer
new afflictions in a Country, where women are yet greater slaves than in that,
from whence she came, nothing could be offered, that could bring her more
content, than that which the Pilgrim did write. Till then she had not been a
moment without wishing, that the Vessel might split upon the Coast, or that it
might fall into the hands of the Turk, rather than arrive in Spain; and never
ceased her Tears, since she had seen Land. And yet when the heavens grant her
her desires in a more favorable manner than she had required, and when she
dispar'd of making shipwreck, or falling into the Pirates hands, being almost
at the Gates of Barcelona, she tremblingly looks upon the succor which is
offered her, she staggers in her resolution, she loses her Courage, and fears
to employ a man, that has nothing in his person, but what assures, and gives
her to understand, that he is a gallant person. Of truth she was not long in
those irresolutions, having cast her sight upon Spain, and made some
reflections upon the unhappy life, which she was going to lead there, she
presently resolved to give her self up to the Conduct of a person, that seemed
to be sent to her by the heavens to that purpose. She would willingly have
signified so much to him; but it was long since all that belonged to writing
was forbid her, and one of her women being come into her Cabin, neither could
she come near unto the little hole, in which seeing the generous Pilgrim's eye
to glitter; she contented her self in giving him to understand, with such signs
as the Italians are very expert in, that she did very much like and approve of
the tender of his services, and that he should not be unhappy, if he could take
her out of that deplorable condition to which she was reduced. At last Camille,
who stood most attentively examining even the very least twinkling of an eye,
did interpret it after this manner; and it may be imagined, that the Pilgrim's
apprehension might very well reach as far, as the Ladies dumb discourse. Never
was lover so pleased with himself as he. He would not have Changed his fortune
for a Monarch's Diadem, no, not for the Pope's Triple Crown. The least look, a
kind gesture, or some favorable sign, did afford him more content, than the
whole Empire of the World would give unto the most Ambitious of Kings.

This pretty sport lasted till they were ready to enter into the Port of
Barcelona, when the Lady, being left a moment alone, drew near unto him, and
told him in a low voice, that she had apprehended what he had writ, that she
believed him a man of Honorable Principles, and even something more than what
he appeared to be under that Pilgrim's Habit; and that if he could deliver her
from the Tyranny of a Jealous Husband, and were a person that would receive
some recompense for so great a service, she did assure him, that he should have
cause to be satisfied, for having performed so generous an Action. And not
giving him time to reply, fearing incessantly to be surpised, she desired him
to find out some means, by which she might write or speak to him, when arrived
at Barcelona, and ending with these words, she put through the hole one of her
fingers, on which she had a very fair Diamond, with which she would have
presented him; but Camille having kissed a thousand times that delicate finger,
did not think of taking the Ring: so that she let it fall expressly. But the
Pilgrim was so transported with love and pleasure, that he took no notice of
it: And the Marquess being just come in to tell his wife, that it was time to
prepare her self to Land, she withdrew, to Camille's great sorrow, who some
moments after went out of his Chamber, to behold the beautiful Marchioness, and
to be seen by her.

Our Pilgrim who had not appeared during all the Voyage, and had embarked
himself in the night time, did surprise every body at his appearance upon the
deck; every one guessing by his air, his gate, and those Acoutrements which he
had under his Pilgrim's weeds, that he was nothing less than what he appeared
to be. The Marquess and his Lady, who came forth of their Cabin a moment
after, found him upon the Deck leaning on his staff, holding his Hat with
shells, under his Arm, in a certain Posture as did presently draw their eyes
upon him, though with different thoughts. The Marchioness had a Man to upon her
head after the Spanish fashion; which did cover her whole face: so that Camille
had but the pleasure of admiring her fine shape, and the Charming Air of her
whole composure; and that too by stealth, for fear of creating new Jealousies
in the Husband, who had his eyes incessantly fixed upon him, beholding him, as
a bird of evil presage; for he was of opinion, that the whole world had a mind
to his Wife. At last he came near unto him, and made him some questions, to
find if he were not deceived in his distrust. As they were discoursing
together, and that the Spanish Don's fears did still increase more and more, to
hear a Pilgrim reason with so much wit, as this did appear to have; the Captain
of the Vessel came up to Camille, and with a Reverence that did out-pass what
was due to an ordinary Pilgrim, he asked him if he had not lost a Ring, showing
him at the same time, that which the Marchioness had let fall from her finger,
and told him that he had just then found it in his Chamber; Camille, who had
not the least thought of the favor, which the Marchioness had intended him,
answered him, no, and that it did not belong unto him: but the Marquess having
presently known it, did most terribly blush; and God knows with what fury his
Soul was instantly possessed! yet he dissembled all, and chose rather to lose
the Ring, than to divulge his shame, in owning it to be his Wives. He left the
unfortunate Pilgrim, for presently his first suspicions had fallen on him
again, and retiring into his Chamber, caused the Marchioness to be called, with
such a cold Air, as did disguise the rage and violence of diverse passions,
which then possessed him: he enquired of her, what she had done with her
Diamond. The poor distressed Lady, more pale than death, fearing that she had
been betrayed by the Pilgrim, answered him in a stammering voice, that she
believed she had lost it. Then did the Jealous Husband, giving a full vent unto
his fury, let himself be carried away to such violent actions as were very
unworthy a person of his quality. Camille who knew not the reason, why the
Marquess and his Lady were retired, strange surpised at the noise he heard,
run to his Cabin to learn what might be the occasion: there he beheld the
lovely Marchioness leaning upon her bed, and her unworthy Husband, in a great
fury, walking in the room, and giving her all manner of ill Language. Nothing
could more grieve his Soul, than that sad Spectacle: he was a thousand times in
a resolution to go in to them, to Revenge such Tears as did rend his heart in
pieces, the which to prevent he would have given his life. Nothing but the
consideration of the loss of the Marchioness, which he foresaw would be
infallible, if he should proceed so far in his resentments, did prevent him. He
would gladly have known the cause of this quarrel, not believing that he had
given any such occasion to the Marquess, who being somewhat more cool, was
going to inform him of all things, by those reproaches that he had begun to
make to his wife: when he had notice given him, that the Governor of
Barcelona, who was his near Kinsman, was coming in person to receive him, and
that his Skiff was already got near to the vessel; upon which, laying aside the
rest of his anger against some other time, he left his wife in the Cabin, that
she might have some time to recollect her self, and went forth to meet the
Governor. The desolate Marchioness in this affliction greater than can be
expressed, for having been thus villainously betrayed by a person, for whom she
had at first sight conceived a great esteem, was framing within her self most
strong resolutions, never more to conside so lightly in persons that she did
not know, and as she was going forth she espied the Pilgrim locking through the
hole. Ah! Traitor, said she to him, did I present you with that Diamond, but to
ruin me by it? go, I shall be revenged if I can; and without staying for an
answer, she followed her Husband. Camille, who was afflicted even to death, to
be called Traitor, by that person that he would have least betrayed of all the
world, was a while like a man possessed with sorrow, despair, and amazement.
Traitor! Traitor! did he repeat twice or thrice over, what Treason can I have
committed against her? I that have not known her but one day, and that would
sacrifice a thousand lives to do her service. With this he let himself drop
upon a Bench, and reflecting on that which the Matchioness had reproached him
concerning a Diamond, and then on the Ring which the Captain would have given
him before the Marquess, believing that it was his; it came in his mind, that
he had seen such a one on the Marchioness finger, and thus little by little
unravelling this cruel Mystery, he easily did perceive that he was the only
cause of all that evil. In what despair did he fall on the sudden? but not to
lose time in superfluous exclamations, he went to the Captain, and did engage
him to return him that Ring; then presently running to the other end of the
ship, he found that the Governor was newly arrived, and that he was embracing
with the Marquess. He takes the opportunity of those Ceremonies, to restore to
the Marchioness her Ring, but as he approaches her she flies, and thus they
both went round the deck. Camille, who perceived this her disdain, was forced
at last to show her the Diamond, to let her know it was to restore it that he
would approach her. But the Marchioness did understand it otherwise, and
believing that this Pilgrim was of intelligence with her Husband, who doubtless
had given him that Ring as a reward of his Treachery, she imagined that he
sought how to bring her into further trouble: She was also cruelly vexed, that
he had the confidence to show it her, as glorying in it; and raising her Manto
a little, she looked upon him with the eyes of a woman that was infinitely
angry at his insolency. At which our unhappy lover, apprehending that she would
not receive it, stood still looking upon her, with a sad and afflicted
countenance, which was the only thing capable of justifying him, at that
present. But when the heart is prepossessed with any thing, the impression of
it is not so soon wiped off. The Marchioness could not see any thing in this
business: but what did accuse the Pilgrim of a most palpable Treason, or at
least of an indiscretion, of which a person as he seemed to be in her eyes, was
not capable of: yet she could not but feel something within her self, which
seemed to speak him less guilty than he appeared; and yet knew not why, and she
was troubled, that so accomplished a person, and who did appear to her so
worthy, could submit to do so base an action.

Those Civilities at last being ended, which on such occasions are commonly
somewhat long amongst Spaniards, the Marquess and his Lady entered into the
Governors Boat, to go to shore. And Camille in that of the Captains, which he
gave him, and which he made to follow close that of the Governors. They
arrived almost at the same time upon the Mole, where they met with the
Governors Lady, accompanied with diverse Ladies and Gentlemen of the Country,
who waited for the Marchioness to Complement her; Camille would gladly have
found out some means to speak a word to her in the crowd, before he should be
wholly deprived of the sight of her; but there was no likelihood of approaching
her in the dress he was in, especially in such a Concourse. He did see her take
Coach, with the other Ladies, and having followed them to the Palace, where the
Marquess was to reside with the Governor, he went to seek out some Lodgings
for himself.

He passed the whole night in sighs and regrets, the ordinanary comfort of
desolate Lovers, seeking within his mind after something that might make his
innocence appear to the Object of his love, and justify himself of a Crime
which he would not have committed against the last of Women. He durst not hope
for so much Happiness as to speak to her, imagining that in the opinion she had
of him, she would not make one step toward it? but he did not believe it
wholly impossible, that by contriving intreagues upon intreagues, he might get
a Letter safely delivered to her. He knew that in those kind of things, the
surest way was to act Personally; and not trust to others. Therefore he tried
whether, with a little good management of his own, and without any other
assistance, he could compass this business. In Spain, as in Italy, the Churches
are the chiefest places where lovers repair to seek their Mistresses: and thus
abusing of those things, which are most holy, they go to commit great Crimes,
in places that are appointed where to ask pardon for committing them. Camille,
who was not ignorant of the Spanish Bigotry, did imagine that the Marquess
would not fail to go with his Wife that morning to hear Mass, to give God
thanks for their happy Voyage, and that it would be a fit place to deliver her
a Note, if fortune or love would never so little favor his design. This
resolution being taken, he entreated his Host, who was an Italian, to get him
conducted by some Person to the Chapel of the Palace, if there was any, or to
that Church, which the Governor was used to frequent, he was served as he
desired, and brought to the Palace, where he did see a most sumptuous Chapel,
and in it the Governor's Wife, who was hearing Mass, and who seeing him enter,
was much surpised with his good mien, such as was not very ordinarily found in
Pilgrims: But the Marquess and his Lady had passed the night too ill to rise so
early: There had been nothing but reproaches, complaints, menaces, and quarrels
between them, which having lasted almost till day, were followed on both sides
with hatred, and heart-burnings, which had kept them long from sleep. The
Marquess, and reason good, would be satisfied how his Wife had conveyed that
Diamond into that Chamber where the Captain had found it, and what she intended
by it: Whether it was not for that Pilgrim, who she doubtless did know, and who
did follow her under that disguise. The Lady finding that he was no better
informed of the business, took Courage, stood upon her defense, cried out,
spoke, and threatened, as loud as her Husband. The only regret she had was for
having treated so severely that Pilgrim, whom she believed was not so guilty as
she had thought him, and who had expressed a design to serve her in a handsome
manner; not that she did wholly excuse his imprudence in letting that Ring be
seen by her Husband, but she did believe that there might be some ill fortune
in it, but no ill design; and thereupon did chide her self for having so soon
condemned a person who had so generously offered himself to free her from that
miserable condition she lived in, not thinking ever to find again so fair an
occasion, for she hardly had any hopes of ever seeing him more, after such a
piece of Injustice as she had done him.

The Night being passed in this manner, they did not rise, but just to sit at
Table; where the Governor and his Lady did wait for them to dine: The Company
had scarce begun to eat, when Donna Barbara d' Ayamonte, so was named the
Governor's Wife, did begin a Discourse of a young Pilgrim which she had seen
at Mass, there being no quality in his Person that she had not taken special
notice of, and did not praise extremely; further saying, being of a more free
humor than the Custom of the Country did commonly allow, that she had very
much wished he had approached nearer her, that she might have asked him of what
Country he was, not doubting but that there were some considerable Adventure in
that kind of life, that a man so well made as he was did lead about the World,
under the notion of a Pilgrim. The Viceroy, who was very gallant, and who
having not the Disease incident to Spanish Husbands, had always given a modest
liberty unto his Wife, who began not to be altogether so young, and had never
been over handsome, did play upon her very much about the Pilgrim, and set all
the Company in a good humor, except the Marquess, who at the very name of
Pilgrim had taken upon him a Melancholy Mien* not doubting but it was the very
Blade who had been to seek after his Wife in that Chapel. He was almost stark
mad to see his Wife well-pleased with what the Governor did say, and he looked
upon her as if he would devour her with his Eyes: The Marchioness, who did
observe all those Grimaces, did not much concern her self with them, on the
contrary she did laugh at them more and more, being certain that what Donna
Barbara said, to that Pilgrim's advantage, did give the Marquess as much of
trouble as it afforded her of pleasure.

Camille was at the Chapel the next morning again, but as unsuccessful as the
first time, not finding there what he sought after. Donna Barbara, who had
extremely desired to see him once more, did no sooner cast her Eyes upon him,
but she showed him unto the Governor, who had so much complaisance for his
Wife, as to have him called so soon as Mass was ended. The Governor made him
diverse Questions, to which he answered with so good a grace, and so much wit,
that he was much taken with him as well as his Wife. He bid him come and see
him, and that in the condition he was, if he wanted any thing he might have
recourse unto him. After the Pilgrim had given him to understand that he was
above want, he thanked him for the favor he did him in giving him leave to
wait upon him, of which he would make use; after this he retired, giving them
sufficiently to understand by all that he had said, as well as by his carriage,
and the fine air of his Person, that he understood Courtship, even after the
best manner. The Governor was much pleased at it, and did no sooner see the
Marquess and his Lady, but he mentioned his Wives Pilgrim unto them, for so he
called him, and promised likewise that they should see him. The Marquess, who
had not yet taken any notice that he knew him, did imagine that it would be
needless to conceal his knowledge of him any longer, and almost dead for fear
this Traitor should come to the Palace, if he used not some Stratagems to put
it off; he drew aside the Governor, and told him, that he knew not of what
Pilgrim he did speak, but that if it was a certain Rascal who was come in the
same Vessel with him from Genoua, and concealed himself all the time that he
had been at Sea, he did declare to him, that he was the most dangerous and most
wicked person in all Italy; that he had known him upon the Vessel, and had
spoken to him; that he was a Bandite of Genoua, who had been above a year
Prisoner in the Castle of Milan, whence at last he had made his escape, after
he had been convinced of having been employed as a Spy by the Enemies of that
State: That doubtless he came into Spain upon some such like designs, and that
for his part, if he were in a place where he had any Authority, he would
certainly secure him, and detain him in a Dungeon, till he had confessed what
he came for into Spain under that disguise, or that at the least he would send
him back to Italy. All this he spoke to him as an Advise of great consequence
which he ought not to despise. The Governor did hearken to him with a great
amazement, not being able to quit very easily the good Opinion which he had
conceived for the Pilgrim, who appeared to him nothing less than what the
Marquess would make him to be. Might you not, my Lord, said he twice unto him,
mistake your self? and do you know him well? for he qualifies himself a Roman,
and I can assure you that he has not the accent of Genoua, and that a man who
had so much wit as this seems to have, had not need to take upon him the Employ
of a Spy. If he is so as you represent him, said the Marquess, it cannot be
the same person; and I advise you once more, continued he, raising of his
Voice, that you take good notice of him; for I know what he has done in more
than one place; and upon that, to make good what he had said before, he
invented two or three stories, such as his jealous humor did suggest unto
him; unto which the Governor had much to do to give credit. Mean time, as he
could not give a guess at the Interest which did make the Marquess speak this;
he did believe it part of the duty of his Office, not wholly to neglect his
advice; and after he had expressed how much he was obliged to him for it, he
told him, that he believed that this Pilgrim would come to see him that day,
that he would examine him, and then he should know what he had to do.

Camille who knew nothing of those good Services which were rendered him at
the Palace, was transported with joy to have advanced his business so far
with the Governor, as to be invited by him to give him a Visit, which would
give him the most favorable access in the World at his Palace, whereby he
might have the opportunity to see, perhaps to speak, or at least to write unto
the beauteous Marchioness. He already dies with Impatiency that the fit hour to
render that Visit in is not come yet. At last he goes to the Palace, where the
Governor made him a no less gracious reception than he had done in the morning
at the Chapel. He examines, he questions, and entertains him on diverse things,
and finds not the least sign in him of what he was accused; on the contrary a
great Fond of Honor, the judgment of a person of Quality, and his Conversation
so charming, that he was amazed how the Marquess could entertain such a
thought of him, if this was that person which he had seen, and had
entertained in discourse on the Ship. Mean time, the duty of his Charge,
requiring that he should proceed further; after he had spoken during sometime
of things in general, he came to particulars, and asked him by way of
raillery, if it were a spirit of Devotion, or some secret Design which he
might have in Spain, that had made him undertake to travel thither under that
Pilgrims Habit: Camille answered him smileingly, That there was more of a
Caprichio than of a design in his disguise; but that knowing the charity that
the Spaniards had for all those that did vow themselves to S. Jaques, he had
taken in hand a Palmers staff to serve him as a Pass. The Governor replied,
That he knew well he had no occasion of any such aid, and then, putting on a
more serious countenance, he added, that there had been very ill Reports made
of him, which he could not attribute but to his disguise; that therefore he did
advise him to take an Apparel more suitable to a person of Quality, as he did
believe he was, and that if he had no business in Barcelona, that he should
quit that City so soon as he could: That he would allow him three days to end
his business in, during which time he would do well not to let himself be seen,
and less about the Palace than in any other place: That he would have him
believe it was with an extreme regret that he acted thus; and that if he could
have given credit but to part of those things which had been spoken against
him, he had been obliged to treat him with much more severity than he did: That
if he wanted money or any thing else to retire himself from thence, he should
but name it and he should be furnished with all things necessary, but that
absolutely he could not dispense from giving him that order. Camille, amazed
and confounded at once with the Governor's Bounties, and with so cruel and
unexpected a blow, after he had told the Governor that he was the most unhappy
of all men to have given an occasion for such evil impressions, which he could
attribute but to his ill fortune; he did return him thanks for all those
favors which he had received from him, assuring him that since he was pleased
to give him three days time longer before his departure from Barcelona, he
would employ them to such a use as should not give to any person the least
cause of complaint, or of any suspicion as to his conduct; and in this manner
he took leave of the Governor.

No man more disconsolate than Camille, to find himself on such a sudden fallen
from all those amorous hopes which he had too soon conceived, and what was
worst of all to be obliged to quit the City within three days, a short time for
a Lover; at least if he could but once have spoken or writ to the Marchioness,
and taken her off of those so disadvantagious resentments which she had for
him, and that he might but hope to take his leave of her; but he is banished
from the Palace without daring to approach it: That was too severe: a Lover may
promise such things, but it is to be feared that he will not observe them. It
is rare to betray ones self; and it was not to be expected that Camille, who
loved more than all the men in the World, should be in this point more exact
than others; so that after he had a long time afflicted himself on this unhappy
condition of the affairs of his heart, a despair seized him; he resolves to dye
rather than depart after that manner. An Adventure so happily begun, was not to
be concluded after such a manner, and it came in his head that peradventure he
should not be so unhappy as he did imagine.

He did not know what reason the Governor might have to use him thus, at the
very time that he did overcome him with such honor and bounty as out-passed
what such a figure as he represented might expect: There was great likelihood
that all this came from the Marquess, who upon the jealousy which he had
conceived of him on the account of the Ring, would not be wanting in employing
all his Interest with the Governor to make him quit the City. But he did not
know whether the Governor himself was not tainted with that disease, by reason
that his Wife had showed him so much kindness before him that morning in the
Chapel; so that he had been concerned at it himself, and the Governor had
looked upon her twice or thrice earnestly, so as to let her understand that so
much eagerness did not very well please him. That which did the more confirm
him in that Opinion, was the forbidding of him to approach near the Palace; so
that he held it already for certain, that the Reasons of State and Policy which
that Lord had made use of to be rid of him, were but the mere Effects of a
jealous temper: He was fully resolved to give him satisfaction in that point
without any trouble to himself; for besides that he was already prepossest with
a too beautiful Object, to have the least thought on any other Woman, Donna
Barbara was not the most charming of the World in his Eyes, and the Governor
had not hazarded much in trusting her with him.

Part of the night having been employed in making all those Reflections,
without being able to decide positively, if his unhappiness did proceed from
the Governor's or the Marquesses jealousy; he did pass the remnant of it on
the means to write to the Marchioness, because that the time pressed if he were
obliged to obey the Governor's Orders. He knew that in Spain the Friars are
the ordinary Confidents of the gallant Intrigues, by reason of their free
access into all houses, as a privilege annexed unto all persons of their
Character. He thought that if he could make an acquaintance with him that
officiated in the Governor's Chapel, he could not doubt of a good success in
his design; for, as to the gaining of him, that was a thing that did not much
trouble him. He had learned in Italy, that those Friars who resist the Devil
would be tempted with Money; he mentioned this in the Morning to his Host, who
told him, That he did very well know that worthy Chaplain, and that he would
bring him to dine with him, if he desired it. To begin that way with a Monk is
to hold the right course; the Match is concluded, the Dinner's ready, and the
Reverend Father comes with a fresh-coloured face, like a good Jacobin as he
was. In Spain those persons do not set forth the poverty of the Country,
abundance of Beads, but little Penitence serves their turn: They sit at Table,
they eat and drink a little better than in the Refectory: Monsieur, the
Pilgrim, plays his part, and the Reverend Father much better his. Friendship
from the one to the other, Healths and Complements, assurances of Services, and
the finest tenderness in the World flew about; drink but once with those
Reverend Fathers, and and it is an established Acquaintance even to the next
World; and if you have no need of their Service, at least you shall have a
share in their Prayers whether you will or not. Camille did not yet much
trouble himself to have Prayers said for his Soul; he having occasion to make
use of Father Andrew, thus was he named, more as to this World then for the
next; at the end of the dinner they fell into a discourse concerning the
Governor's Court. He found that the Father was perfectly well-instructed in
all things; that he lodged in the Palace; that he had as great a Power there as
any Chaplain could have, and that finally he could better than any person in
the World, render him that piece of Service which he desired; he gave a true
bias to the business, takes the good Father aside, and tells him, that having
taken that Habit which he did see him wear through a Vow which he had made to
S. Jago; he knew that he was obliged to make some charitable deeds, to cause
Prayers to be said in his behalf, and that he did not believe that he could put
his charity into better hands than his; whereupon he drew out of his pocket a
purse of Pistols, of which he gave fifty unto the Reverend Father, who returned
him Courtesy upon Courtesy, mumbling a quantity of words one upon another by
way of Thanksgiving and Prayers, of which he scarce did understand the sense,
so much did the Rapture that he was in by this magnificent charity transport
him beyond himself.

This step being made, which was the most essential in the whole business. Now,
Father, said Camille, might I obtain a favor of you? Alas, Sir, replied Father
Andrew with much earnestness, what would not any one do for you. I do believe
you, continued the Pilgrim, to be an honest and a good man, and therefore I
hope, that in declaring this to you in way of Confession, I run no hazard, and
that you will serve me therein if it lies in your power. You know, continued
he, that with in these two or three days there is come into the Palace a
certain Lady from Italy, who is called the Marchioness of C. I have some
business with her, and cannot get to speak to her, because of her Husband who
is very jealous. Jealous! replied Father Andrew, yea more than any man in the
World. So that I would willingly have a Letter delivered unto her, continued
Camille, and I believe that there is no hurt in that. Alas, not in the least,
replied the scrupulous Father, and you need do no more than to give it me. I do
promise you, upon the faith of a good-Religious, as I am, that you shall have
an Answer before you go to Bed. If it prove so, said Camille, there are fifty
Pistols more for Charities. I tell you, replied the zealous Father Andrew, that
you shall have it, for you are too charitable, and too honest a man not to have
your Prayers and Vows granted in Heaven. This Agreement being made, and there
being no further occasion of Requests or Promises between them, they altered
their discourse; and Father Andrew, who was as earnest to go earn the other
fifty Pistols as Camille was to see the Answer which the Marchioness would make
him, ended here his Visit, and having the Letter he went to labor to bring
about so pious a design.

The business was not so easy as he imagined, for the Marquess, who understood
such things better than any Friar of them all, and who had no great Faith in
their Girdle, was continually present during the Visit that this came to give
to his Wife; so that the good Father Andrew did begin to despair of getting the
other fifty Pistols that Night, when by good fortune the Governor came in,
toward whom the Marquess advancing to receive him, he gave an occasion to this
new Mercury to accomplish his Message, in sliding very dexterously the Letter
into the Marchioness's hand, who looking upon him did understand by some signs
he made that it was something of great moment to her, and which it was not
requisite that her Husband should see. She withdrew her self into another
Chamber, as if she would give a free liberty to these Gentlemen's
Entertainments, and having opened the Letter she found it thus. IN that
despair, Madam, in which those unjust distrusts which you have had of me, has
plunged me, I defer not to seek all the means in the World to write to you,
to offer you once again my Services. You tax of Treachery a man which would
rather perish a thousand times than have so much as the least thought of
displeasing you. When you will know me better, you will learn that I am not of
so mean a Rank as to commit any unworthyness. I know what is due to Ladies; but
more than that I know what I feel for you within my Bosom, and there is no fear
of falling in that Duty which is supported by Love. If your Ring has caused
some disorders, at the worst you may attribute it to some misfortune, but not
to any fault of mine. It fell from your fair hand without my knowledge, and the
Captain of the Galley who did find it, thinking that it was mine, did bring it
to me before the Marquess. This is the truth, Madam, of that Adventure: If you
are satisfied with this justifying of my self, as it appears to me you should,
and that you continue still in the same Resolutions you once had, make use of a
person who offers you not his Life and Fortunes only, but who dies with Love
for you. It is time to think on it, for I have but three days to stay in this
City, the Governor having given me orders, I know not for what reasons, to be
gone after that time. I could however find out some means to continue longer
here, if you did desire it. What will not a Lover do for the object of his
Love, I wait your orders on this. The Religious, who shall deliver you this
Letter, is a person that I have wholly engaged in my Concerns, and in whom you
may confide: Be confident, Madam, that nothing shall be forgotten to render me
worthy of your Esteem, and that there is no person that is with more Respect
and Passion, than I am wholly yours.

Camille of V.




The Marchioness, who when opening the Letter had had some thoughts that it
might come from her Pilgrim, was ravished with joy at the reading of it, and
finding that she had not deceived her self, and in learning the whole story of
the Ring. But that which charmed her most, were those tender and passionate
Sentiments which he expressed for her, judging well by the manner of his
writing, as also by the air of his person that he must be some person of
Quality. All that esteem which she had had for him at first sight, did now
redouble; he had offered himself unto her with so good a Grace; he had given
her to understand in so ingenious a manner the design which he had to serve
her, that that alone was capable to seize the heart of a beautiful young Woman,
that sought after that which was offered to her in so gallant a manner. It is
true, that her first distrusts had somewhat coold her desires; but besides that
she could never condemn him wholly in her thoughts; she had at last in some
measure better informed her self, by what she had heard from her Husband, and
the wrong which she conceived she had done the Pilgrim on that account, had
served but to render him the more worthy of her esteem: In fine all things
else, besides the Governor and his Lady, having contributed in making her a
thousand times regret the not having made better use of the good intentions of
so worthy a person. This Letter in bringing her the joy that she received by
hearing from him, did wholly dispose her to entertain such thoughts of him as
he was worthy of. She would gladly have made him an Answer, but as it has been
said before, the use of writing was not only forbid her as a Capital Crime, but
wholly out of her Power. Mean time as Love is extreme ingenious, and that it
appears more in such occasions than in any others, she bethought her self to
write with a Bodkin, upon an Orange which she had, these words, Be this night
at eleven of the Clock under my Window, and you shall have my Answer; after
which she returned into the Chamber, where was the Governor with the Marquess,
and Father Andrew, who would not be gone from thence without some Answer to his
Letter, after he had performed the most difficult part, which was the delivery
of it. The Marchioness did look upon him, and showing him the Orange which she
set upon the Window, she made him signs to take it, and that it was all that
she had to give him. Father Andrew, who was a most intelligent Friar, gently
takes it up, and lifting up his Cowl he made a most humble Reverence unto those
Gentlemen, and so retired, to the Marquess his great satisfaction, who was not
contented in mind till he did see him out of his Apartment.

Our devout Postilion, but half pleased with his Message, for receiving an
Orange for his Answer, was returning musing to the Pilgrim who staid for him at
his Lodgings in great perplexity; he did believe that the good Father had
failed of his design, seeing him coming with a somewhat mortifyed Countenance.
Well, Father, said he, the Marchioness is no more visible to you, than she is
to others, and doubtless that you have not spoken to her. I not speak to her!
replied Father Andrew, as if angry at the wrong was offered him, and who dares
refuse that to a Director of twenty years standing, Confessor to the Lady
Governess, and Chaplain to my Lord Governor, and a worthy Son of St. Dominick.
Good God! added he, raising his voice, and where would you have us to be, in
Barbary? No, no, Sir Pilgrim, continued he, while Camille was endeavoring to
make his Excuses with Postures and Grimaces, I have seen, I have spoken, I have
delivered your Letter, it has been read, but for an Answer, I have but this
Orange to deliver to you, which he drew out of his Slieve, and truly you must
needs be very unhappy to have no better success in this business, for I always
go through withal that I undertake, to the great satisfaction of those that
employ me. After that Camille had let him know that he was extremely satisfied
with what he had done, he took the Orange, examined it a little better than
Father Andrew had done, whose concern was not so great, and presently he
discovered the whole Mystery, after which taking no further notice, he put it
in his Pocket in the room of fifty Pistols which he took from thence, which the
good Father was scrupulous to take, saying, that in Conscience he could not,
and that at the most he would have but half, because he had done but half what
he had promised. Yet at last, to oblige so generous a Pilgrim he was persuaded
to take the whole, desiring him not to spare him in any thing that he should
have occasion for him, and upon that he went his way.

Camille, more full of joy than would be a Lover that had received an effectual
rendezvous, did wait with strange impatiency the hour of that Assignation which
was appointed him: Prudence would not let him approach the Palace in his
Pilgrims Habit after what the Governor had said to him, but the fear that he
had least the Marchioness should not know him from her Window in another dress,
or that she durst not trust to another, he being by that better distinguished
from all other persons, he resolved not to change his Apparel; so that being
gone out at a fit hour, he found himself just at eleven before the Palace.
Father Andrew had pretty well informed him on which side was the Marchionesses
Apartment, and that her Windows did answer upon the Sea; so that he could not
mistake. He gets under them, and perceiving some light in them, he goes behind
a Pillar till the Marchioness should appear and make him some sign. In such
businesses time seems long, every moment lengthens; and it seemed to Camille,
who had his Eyes fastened to those Windows, that he had already waited a long
time, when at last he did see a Lady appear, and as he imagined it could be
none but the Marchioness: He immediately steps out of his lurking-place and
showed himself. He was presently known by the Shells and other gaudy things
which Pilgrims usually wear on their Hats which glittered in those bright
nights that are common in those Countries in the Summer Season; and soon after
the Window was shut again. He thought that it was not yet time, but a quarter
of an hour after he saw a little door opened whence there came forth an ancient
Duenna, who called him, and made him go in, saying, in a low Voice, that all
that day they had been concerned for him, that he had been sought for all over
the Town, and that they had but just spied him from the Window; he was advised
to be discreet and wise, and that he should be the happyest of all men. And
hereupon, taking him by the hand, she led him without light through an obscure
way till they were come into a low room very like that of some old waiting
Woman, in a corner of which there was a Lamp burning, there being nothing else
in it but a Bed, and that none of the best, two Flag-Chairs, and a Trunk, which
it is probable did serve for a Wardrobe. She busily told him that he should
stay a little, and that when all things should be ready to receive him, she
would fetch him. Happy Camille, not daring to make the least noise, all
transported with joy and acknowledgments, did only kiss twice or thrice her
hand, making her signs that she might be gone, and that he would stay there
till she came again: upon this the Duenna who knew with what impatiency she was
expected back, that the result of her Commission might be known, did get up a
Ladder which was in the room, and went into the Chamber over it through a
Trapdoor to give an account of what she had done.

To conceive well the condition that the amorous Camille was in at that time,
one should love as much as he did. He was sensible that the Marchioness did
show him more favor than ever he could have hoped for, and that when he
thought his business desperate, on the sudden he did find himself upon the very
moment of being the happyest of all men. These Reflections raised his Thoughts
and Idea's, representing to himself the beauteous Marchioness, some time after
one manner, sometime after another, who told him this, to which he answered;
that thus relishing beforehand such charming pleasures, that nothing but the
reallity of what he did imagine could afford him greater; so long as the heat
of his amorous ravings could afford him any matter of entertainment, time did
not seem long to him; and setting aside some little Impatiences which from time
to time did seize on him, he did spend passably well some moments in that dull
Chamber; but when it began to be long before the old Woman did return, and that
he had begun to fear some back-stroak of Fortune or of Love, his fancy
representing to him every moment some misfortune or other, he felt no longer
any thing of the former sweets. He had almost been two hours dancing
Attendance, and had already gone above a thousand times about the Chamber,
which he had visited to divert himself from one end to the other, there not
being a Rag, or Clowt, Shell of red, Pot of Pomatum, with which that Trunck was
filled, which had not passed through his hands, and wherein he had not thrust
his Nose. He already did no longer hope for any thing of what he had promised
to himself, and was very fearful of passing the Night upon that Trunck; for as
to the Bed, he feared too much the smell and Society of it, when at last he did
see the Trap-door lifted up, and the Duenna to appear, who made him signs to
come up; Presently he re-assumes his joy, and in two or three steps flies up to
the Trap-door; he beholds a magnificent Chamber, enlightened but with one
single Flambeau, which was placed upon the Table. The Duenna made him sign that
he should go to the Wall-side of the Bed, he advances with redoubling joys of
Love which he could hardly contain in his heart, and drawing near to the Bed
where lay the Lady with the Curtins drawn, he cast himself upon his Knees
before her, who received him with no less passion. At the first onset there
was nothing but Transports and Tendernesses on both parts, sighs on this part,
sighs on the other. Ah, Madam, cried out Camille twice or thrice in a
languishing accent, what Graces, what Favors do I receive at present from you?
he was not able to say any more in the joy he had. Mean time the old Duenna,
who had no more business there, went out of the Chamber to keep Centry for fear
of a surprisal. The Lady, who had seen sufficiently this languishing Lover
kneeling, being impatient that he should rise to an higher degree of Fortune,
having no time to loose, desired him with a sigh to arise and sit down by her;
that the Governor was playing with the Marquess, and that it would not belong
before he would be coming. Camille surprised with this discourse, and to hear
so good Spanish spoken by a Lady of his Country who was not likely to
understand it so well, opens his Eyes, discerns through the Curtins some other
Features than those of the Marchioness, and in lieu of her he finds the
Governors Wife, whose Cornets, Ribbons, Curls, and all the other Adjustments
with which she had bedecked her self as a new Bride, had at first sight
deceived him through the aid of the small light that came into the Bed; what a
change did this mistake produce in him? his Joy and Transports are presently
changed into a dull silence, he looks up toward Heaven as if it had been the
Author of his mishap, and at the same time turning his Head another way, in
lieu of rising, as the Lady did bid him, he lets himself drop upon the Bed,
with his Head leaning on his Arms, as if he would hide the Confusion that he
was in through that piece of Treachery which Love had lately played him. The
Lady much troubled to see him in this posture, after such a tender and
passionate beginning, enquires what he aileth, and whether he finds himself
ill. He makes no Answer, she takes him by the Arm, draws him toward her, and
finds him to be grown cold and indifferent, which surprises and frets her.
Never were persons more pusled; she repeats her Caresses, and entreats him to
tell her what he has found in her that should on the sudden disgust him. She
sees that he sighs, but it is for sorrow, and not out of love. At last he rises
and entreats of her that he may retire. Retire! replied she, with a trembling
Voice, and can you leave me in this manner? Ah! how unhappy am I? continued
she, holding an Handkerchief before her eyes to hide the confusion that she was
in, and to receive some Tears which she could not retain. What, added she, must
I see my self thus slighted by a person to whom I have abandoned my Life and
Honor. And finding that neither her Tears nor any thing else that she could
say to him of most tender, did move him, and that he still did persist in the
design of retiring, ungrateful man, said she to him with a sorrow mixed with
fury, carry not thy cruelty so far, for thou would abandon me to all that
rage can make a person of my Quality and Courage do, when she finds her self
treated as thou usest me. Speak, draw near, and at least tell me something that
may allay the effects of thy contempt. The Governor is not far from hence, and
if thou obligest me to make some noise thou art lost. Whoever else had been in
Camille's room, had had peradventure more Complaisance for a Lady, who, though
none of the handsomest, might well deserve somewhat less of rigor to be shown
to her, that does never become a young man; but yet again when one is
prepossessed with such a strong passion as he was, and that in lieu of a
charming beauty which has been long expected and thought to be in possession,
an Object is met with which was not sought after, it becomes the more hateful,
and the Heart being grieved at such a deceit, it takes up quite contrary
thoughts to the former, and it is very difficult to reclaim it. Howbeit
Camille, who looked upon himself as a Prisoner in the Power of a transported
Woman who could really ruin him, did at last make use of his prudence; he did
not drive her to the extremity, and thinking on some more handsome put off than
that of a disgust, he was preparing himself to make her some Excuses upon a
faintness of Heart, which had seized on him, when the Duenna came in great have
to tell them, that the Game was at an end, and the Governor coming; so that
all that Donna Barbara could do, was to embrace once more that insensible
Lover, which in that very moment did force some expressions of kindness to
comfort her a little, seeing himself upon the point of being rid of her. If you
will not, said she, put into despair a person that has so much passion as I
have for you, render your self to morrow at the same hour where I did see you
this night. She had no time to say more to him, because that she heard the
Governor coming; so that the Duenna had but just time sufficient to open the
Trap door, and go out with Camille, and that with such precipitation, that her
Coats being between as she let it down again, and the Ladder, which was not
very fast, having slid from under them by their hasty motion in getting off,
the Pilgrim fell with his Breech to the ground, and the old Woman remained hung
in the Air by her Coats, which was the pleasantest sight that could be. She
durst not make any noise for fear of being heard by the Governor; and she was
making sign to the Pilgrim to help her to get loose; but notwithstanding the
cross Adventure which he had so lately had, and that in which he had shear'd
with the Duenna, he did break out into such a laughter at the dangling of her
Legs, that he was a long time not being able to rise. He would gladly have left
her in that posture to be revenged of the cruel message which she had lately
delivered to him, by which he had lost* the Rendezvous which he had from the
Marchioness, and perhaps the opportunity of ever having another; but having
occasion for this old Woman to convey him from thence, he was obliged much
against his will to assist her; yet it was not without considering of her very
exactly, before and behind, and laughing heartily at her, which made the Duenna
storm at him, and promise him to revenge her self if ever he came again.
Camille did not trouble himself at her Threats; being very sorry to have been
catched once there. Being led out he passed once again before the Windows of
the Marchionesses Chamber, but he could see no more light there, and small
hopes of having any till day; yet he walked under them for some time, sighing,
thinking and complaining of Love, and of that hard fate which had so untowardly
thrown him into the Arms of an homely Woman; yet in the midst of all these
regrets, the pleasant Reflections which he did make upon his mistake on the
transports of the Governess, and on the Duenna's Adventure did somewhat divert
him. But it was time to go to Bed, not to sleep; for that is not for Lovers; but
to think what he should do to repair that nights miscarriage.

So soon as it was day he sent to seek after the most dear Father Andrew, from
whom he kept secret what had befallen him with the Governor's Wife; it not
becoming a well-bred man to divulge such things; he only told him, That he was
the most unfortunate of all men, and that if he did not take pity of him, his
despair would not let him live 24 hours. The obliging Father Andrew, impatient
to learn in what he could serve him, imagining that it would not be unrewarded,
did conjure him not to despair, but to be persuaded, that if his happiness did
depend on him only, he would make him the most happy person in the World. After
this sincere and true protestation, Camille told him, that if he would have him
obliged to him of his life, which was much more than of his good fortune, he
must that day deliver a Letter to the Marchioness, and endeavor by all means
possible to bring him an Answer: That he would acknowledge his kindness so as
that he should have cause to be contented, and not repine at the little pains
he should take for him. Alas, fie, Sir, pray have no such thought, said the
Father, smilingly interrupting him. You know that we are in this World but to
serve one another, and I do not believe there is any one that takes more
delight in obliging persons than I do. Give me that Letter, added he, and only
pray to God that I may find the Marchioness alone, and I promise to return you
such an Answer as you would desire; but be the Marquess there or not, I will
not return without bringing you news from the Marchioness, and deliver your
Letter unto her; and without more words, he takes leave of him, and goes to set
the Irons in the Fire.

The Marchioness had been all night in no less trouble than Camille; she had in
the Evening feigned her self somewhat ill, that she might stay in her Chamber,
and not lose the opportunity of the appointment which she had made to the
Pilgrim, but that pretended indisposition had not had the effect which she
expected; for the Governor and his Lady, being come to keep her company, did
pass the greatest part of the night with her, the Governor at play with the
Marquess and Donna Barbara in discourse with her; so that she never durst draw
near to the Window, for fear of giving them any distrust in case the Pilgrim
should appear and be seen; as indeed it had happened unto the Governor's Wife,
which had presently known him and made use of the occasion as has been related.
And the Marchioness was no sooner quit of the Lady, but she went also to the
Window, but there was no more Pilgrim there, she looked every way, and waited
for him with the greatest impatiency and trouble imaginable, fearing that he
might have been weary with waiting so long. The Game being ended at last, and
the jealous Marquess, who had twice or thrice observed with what assiduity his
sick Wife did stay at the VVindow, had played with a very distracted mind,
every moment turning his Head toward her, as if he feared some Gallant should
get up that way; so that the Governor was no sooner got out of the Chamber,
but that he went himself to see what was the matter, he looked out, and after
he had been some time there, not seeing any thing, he shut the VVindow with a
great deal of caution.

The beautiful Marchioness was in such a melancholy for having failed the
Pilgrim, that she could have no rest all that night. Her Husband who did not
always sleep, when he seemed so to do, and who had fancied that certainly his
Wife had had some evil design that Evening, was more than ever confirmed in
that Opinion, when he heard her from time to time to vent most violent sighs.
There needed no great matter to puzzle his brains; and this wicked Pilgrim did
so run in his mind since the Adventure of the Diamond, that he had no other
dreams every night but of Palmer staves, Cockle-shell-Hats, and the like, which
made him be in continual fear; he would come every day at Mass in the
Palace-Chappel where he had no business; he did insinuate himself into the
Governor's Favor, to render him a Visit; wherefore all this, thought he, if
it were not on my Wife's account? who as indisposed as she was, did watch two
or three hours at the VVindow to see him pass by. Thus did he reason within
himself; if by laying his hand on her left side he could have made her declare
in her sleep all that she had in her Heart; Oh, what a triumph that had been
for him! but he had already a thousand times made trial of that secret without
advantage. After this he lay reproaching of himself for having continued so
long at play while he should have been minding his business; for, said he to
himself, with a Sex so perfidious as that is, let a poor man forget himself but
one moment, and he is liable to receive during that time the greatest Affront
that can ever happen to him. Having passed the best part of the Night in
tormenting himself after this manner, he got up in the Morning, his Head so
filled with the thoughts of this Pilgrim, that he fancyed to see him in every
person that came into the Chamber. Father Andrew, who was one of the first that
came to visit him, though he dissembled never so much, approaching him in a
Saint-like posture, with a wry Neck, his Hands in his great Sleeves, and a down
look, he was received by the Marquess rather worse than the day before. For
after he had showed him a mien cold enough to freeze the fiery heat of the most
Zelot of all Intreaguers, he heard him speak during more than an hour that they
walked together in the Hall, without affording him any other Answer than yea or
nay, with which Father Andrew grew at last weary, and finding that he could not
get him by any means to enter into a Conversation, he took the liberty to ask
him how the Lady Marchioness did, and whether he should not have the honor to
give her the good morrow. No, Father, replied the Marquess, very coldly, she is
not very well, and you will excuse her for this time. Heaven! how sorry am I at
it? replied the good Father, it is at such times, as when we are visited, that
we stand in most need of a wise Directors Consolations; and with your liking,
my Lord, added he, seeing that Heaven has sent me as it were on purpose, I
will have her asked, if without disturbing I could not speak some words of
Consolation unto her. You will certainly disquiet her, Father, did he reply.
But if she had occasion to confess her self? continued the ghostly Director.
She is not yet so ill, answered the Marquess, and it is not eight days since
she was at Confession. It is no matter, went on the Father, going toward the
Marquionesses Chamber, one knows not what may happen. She sleeps, said the
other, detaining him, and this is no fit time. How? does she so? sa^d the
zealous Father, then I will wait till she awakens, and you -- Father, without
any more ado, said the jealous Lord, interrupting of him somewhat roughly, his
patience being at an end, I tell you, that here is no need of you, and that you
will oblige me, not to come here again till you are sent for. Sir, it is not
usual to treat a man of my Orders in such a manner, replied Father Andrew,
without being daunted, In speaking to me so roughly, you offend a whole Order,
that might -- I should offend the Pope, and the whole Church, said the angry
Marquess interrupting him, with a longing desire to break the Friars bald Pate,
if the Pope and the Church would see my Wife against my Will: and saying this
he left his Reverence, and withdrew himself into his Wifes Chamber, and shut
the Door after him.

The poor Father Andrew extremely confused and vexed at the Marquess his
brutishness, retired very pensive, but fully resolved to find out some way of
revenge, thinking himself unworthy of his Monkish Character, if he did not make
him wear a pair of fair ones. He returned to the Pilgrim with a most sorrowful
countenance, and in giving him an account of the manner that that Brute had
used him (for so he qualified the Marquis) he did sufficiently express his
resentments protesting that were it not for the Habit he wore, he would have
made him that which he feared so much to be. That excess of cholar made Camille
to laugh, maugre all the discontent he was in at his Embassies ill success. He
entreated the Father to rely on him as to the point revenge, only desiring his
assistance to bring it about. That I fully resolve, answered Father Andrew, and
though it should cost me the hundred Pistols that I have received from you, I
must and will speak to the Marquioness this very day, and give you an account
of this Letter. Camille who was not ignorant of those Confraters subtilties,
very much rejoicing to see him take such a resolution, told him, to animate him
the more, that in case those hundred Pistols were employed in his service, he
should meet with another hundred at his return, and more too, if he had
occasion for them. Liberality is one the most advantageous, and surest
qualities of a Lover. Most commonly it stands in the place of Merit, and
persuades much better. That which Love cannot do in a long time, Money will
perform some time in a moment. Father Andrew in whom a covetous humor did
predominate above all other things, did find himself engaged by so powerful an
interest to serve so brave a Pilgrim, as not to omit setting on work all that
he knew of subtilty and intreague. Vengeance and hope of a new present were too
strongly joined together to fail; upon such good security he would have
undertaken the most difficult things in the World. He goes to Donna Barbara
whose Confessor he was, as we have already said, so that he knew the very Soul
of her; he counterfeits a troubled mind, that he might be asked what it was
that disquieted him. The Lady falls in his Trap, she entreats and presses him
diverse times to tell her what was the matter; and at last he informs her that
the Marquess is jealous of the Governor; and that having been in his
appartment to visit the Marquioness, who he had heard was fallen ill, he had
used him not as a Confessor, or his Excellencies Chaplain; but as a Messenger
concerned in the Governors Amors, not giving him the liberty to see her.
Signora Donna Barbara, according to the usual custom of women who will be
themselves jealous of their Husbands, but will not suffer others to be so; did
take in great disdain, the Marquis his distrusts, not thinking her self less
worthy than his Wife. Thus being carried away with those first transports, she
did speak with so much scorn of the Husbands extravagancy, and the Wifes want
of Merit, that she gave occasion to Father Andrew to descant upon that Theme
also, and say to her, all that could incense her and make her of his party,
Nay, since it so, said Donna Barbara, and that this Lord is so apt to see
Visions, only because my Husband is more civil, and better understands what is
due to Ladies than he. He shall be made jealous in good earnest, and we will
make our selves some sport with him. If you will serve me in it, Father Andrew,
added she, smiling, we shall both revenge our selves most pleasantly. Father
Andrew who desired nothing more, made answer, that he was ready to obey her, in
all that she would be pleased to command him; and upon that she told him that
she would think on it, and did bid him come again to her toward the evening a
little before Supper, of which he failed not, and Donna Barbara found him in
her Chamber waiting for her; she laughed so soon as she saw him, and asked him,
if he could act very well a Gallants part; for he should see that night the
Marquioness in such a Garb: at this, Father Andrew, taking upon him to assume a
good Mien, was willing to let the Lady see, that he had not quite forgot what
he had formerly been, and what he yet could be upon occasion: at which postures
Donna Barbara laughing outright, she sent him to one of her husbands Valets de
Chamber, to whom she had before given order to fit him Cap-a-pe, like a
gentleman, and she told Father Andrew that when he should be ready, he should
go into the Garden, and keep himself hid in the Grotto of the Nayades, where
she would meet him with the Marquioness. Father Andrew over joy'd with a design
so favorable to his desires, did shout with joy at so pretty a design, and did
much applaud the Ladies ingenuity. Go and prepare your self to act your part
well, said the Marquioness; for now that the Governor is not here, doubtless
the Marquess will accompany us into the Garden, which will furnish us no doubt
with some further divertisment, and you with a fit occasion of revenge. But
Madam, replied Father Andrew, who had no mind that the conclusion of the Play
should light on him, I would not have this Lord to mistake himself; for I know
how furious he is, and you can testify, Madam, that I have no hand in this,
further than to obey your commands; go, replied she, and fear not any thing
where I shall be.

Upon this Father Andrew goes to the Valet de Chamber, who did take care to
accomodate him; and Donna Barbara having supped, she went, as she used to do
every evening, to walk in the Garden with the Marquioness, where the Marquess
did not fail to accompany them. But because the Governor was not there, the
Spanish Custom not permitting him to entertain the Ladies, for fear of giving
Jealousy, he went to walk in an other place of the Garden, however still
having his Eyes on them, for fear of some surprise. Madam, said Donna Barbarae
to the Marquioness, so soon as they were by themselves, to show you that I am a
Woman of the most franck nature in the World, I must tell you that it is twenty
years since I first knew a man, for whom I have a very great esteem, and whom I
cannot forbear seeing once a day, and in a word, from whom I reserve no
secrets, so that I entrust him with my greatest as well as smallest Concerns;
yet this man does not so soon desire to see you, but that without weighing my
own interests, I offer to be his assistant. I must confess, replied the
Marquioness, that the example is not common, and that such an action from any
one but you, Madam, would very much surprise me, but one endowed with such
charming qualities as you have, may hazard something more than ordinary,
especially being near such a mean beauty as mine is. Madam, I do not tell you
this, replied the Governors Lady, to invite you to flatter me, or to contend
of beauty with you; on the contrary you see the sacrifice which I make you, of
a Man whose heart you deserve to possess much more than I do, and unto whose
vows I humbly entreat you to hearken: And I, Madam, replied the Marquioness,
who shall ever yield unto you in all things, except in complaisance and
generosity of heart, I conjure you not to speak to me in the least of that
Person, and to dispense with me from seeing him: That cannot be, replied Donna
Barbara, for I have engaged it should be otherwise, and we are too near him to
get off again: As she ended these words, and not above two or three steps from
the Grotto of the Nayades, they saw come forth a Cavalier in a magnificent
dress, which did as much surprise the Marquioness, as all that Donna Barbara
had newly said unto her. She would presently have retired, fearing* it was some
trick put upon her; but the Governors Lady stopped her. Good Madam, said the
Marquioness, permit me to retire I beseech you, or I shall have cause to
complain of you. But Donna Barbara had no sooner seen Father Andrew's Figure,
but she burst out into such a laughter as would not give her leave to answer
her. At which the Marquioness strangely confounded, believing that she was
certainly played upon, would by all means be gone, not intending to be an
object to the divertisement of the Governors Lady. On the other hand, Father
Andrew did make most ridiculous postures in imitation of a Gallant Air; and did
speak such pleasant things to the Marquioness to undeceive her, and oblige her
to stay, that Donna Barbara was even spent with laughing, and the Marquioness
began to be angry in good earnest, not deigning to answer, or so much as turn
her Eyes toward the Cavalier; who seeing that Donna Barbara could detain her
no longer, was at last constrained to ask her if she knew no longer, Father
Andrew. Never was a confusion equal to that of the Marquioness, who at the name
of Father Andrew, having cast her Eyes upon him, did presently know him, and
was for sometime so disordered within her self, that she knew not what to say,
not knowing to what purpose Donna Barbara had brought her that Friar, without
he had entrusted her with what had passed between her and the Pilgrim: but she
was presently undeceived as to that; for the Governors Lady, who thought that
she had sufficiently laughed at the Marchionesse's cost, not willing to let her
remain any longer in the disorder that she seemed to be in, did relate unto her
how that all this Comedy had been invented merely to revenge her self of her
husbands jealousy, who would not allow that any one should see her: and as she
was thus speaking, Father Andrew, who was upon the watch, and who not without
cause was more in fear than any body else, did afar off espy the Marquis, who
was advancing toward them with a round pace: upon which he was alarmed; and
would fain a been going; but Donna Barbara did imbolden him again, and advised
them both to go into the Grotto, while she would go meet the Marquess, to
undeceive him; but that the opportunity was too fair not to thoroughly revenge
her self by it. The Marchioness, who would willingly have given half her life
to speak with Father Andrew, was so surprised with joy, at the opportunity
which Donna Barbara gave her of it, that she thought of nothing but to make
good use of that happy moment.

The Marquess had all along kept the Avenue, having walked before the
Garden-gate to observe those that should go in or out; when having cast his
eyes on that side that the Ladies were, he had seen certain feathers appear,
which had most terribly affrighted him; and quite out of breath at the sight of
that Vision, he was running as fast as he could that way, to see what it was,
and know whether his eyes deceived him or not: But Donna Barbara meeting him,
did detain him, and enquired whether he went so fast: Leave me, Madam, said he,
with so great a perplexity that he could scarce speak, for Heavens sake let me
go, for I have seen all, and your company is too dangerous for my Wife. Why?
replied she, what is it you fear? She is with my Husband, who we have found hid
in the Grotto of the Nayades. How? She is with your Husband, replied the
Marquess more astonished than ever, and you can have the patience, Madam, to
leave them alone thus? What, replied she, you would have me be there as a Property?
That is not my humor; and if Monsieur the Governor, who as you know has ever
been wanton enough, will play me foul play, I shall sooner forgive him for
making choice of so pretty a Lady as is the Marchioness, than if he should make
use of some other less deserving: And I find, replied the Marquess in a fury,
that what you now say, is the most terrible thing in the world, and that an
honest Woman ought to give Poison to a Husband that should have the least
thought of such a thing. In speaking thus, he was so distracted, that he knew
not what to do: He would go two or three steps forwards, and then as many back,
dragging Donna Barbara after him, who still had hold of him, and had much to do
to follow him: Will you not then, said she to him, go and see what they do,
seeing you are so restless? No, Madam, answered he roughly, retiring back, for
I have seen but too much already; and since that the Rights of Hospitality are
violated here, and that under the pretense of Parentage a Man of my Quality is
dishonored, I must have a recourse to those that can do me Justice in this
case, and I will perish rather than not be righted. He did speak those words
with such a transport, and so loud, that Father Andrew, who was not far from
thence, having heard him, thought that he was just upon him, which made him
gallop away as fast as he could to the backdoor, of which Donna Barbara had
given him the Key.

The Marquess was going back to the Palace wholly transported with fury,
revolving a thousand designs of vengeance in his mind against this treacherous
Kinsman the Governor: When he was scarce got to the first Gallery which
answered into the Garden, where he met him with some Officers. How great his
surprise was, is easy to be imagined; and seeing him come up to him with a
cheerful smiling countenance, he stood looking on him without saying one word.
The Governor more surprised, than he himself, at his behavior, and to see him
so pale and wan, did ask him what he ailed: What, my Lord, said the Marquess,
did I not see you but even now in the Garden speaking to my Wife, near the
Grotto of the Nayades? No assuredly, replied the Governor, for I have been
ever since morning in the Arcenal, to hasten the fitting out of some Vessels
for Sicily, and I am but just come in. The jealous Marquess had no sooner heard
this, but that the fumes of this passion confounding his senses more than ever,
he returned into the Garden almost distracted, where the Governor, who did see
him so transported, did follow him, pressing him several times to declare what
he ailed, and where he was going, without being able to get one word from him,
till they had found the Ladies that were walking and laughing still at the
Adventure, against whom he vented part of his rage, running down his Wife with
such ill language, in which Donna Barbara's Honor was not a little concerned.
The Governor did hear all that without one word speaking, being in an extreme
impatiency to learn the cause of all those transports: But the Ladies, who
continued laughing at the Marquesses fury, did increase it much at the
Governors amazement, unto whom, when the jealous man was retired, they gave an
account of all that had passed.

Mean time the furious Marquess was extremely perplexed, to guess who that
Cavalier should be that he had seen with his Wife in the Garden, there being no
likelihood that it should be the Governor: so that after he had sufficiently
tormented himself on that Theme, he having always his imagination filled with
the Pilgrim, and that he could think of no other person on whom ^^ might more
certainly lay his C^^jectures, he concluded that it w^^ he, and that Sennora
Donna Barbara, who had always taken that Traitors part, had had him secretly
conveyed into the Garden, there to entertain his Wife. There was but little
ground for all that, and it was very unlikely that a Lady, as was the
Governors Wife, should stoop so low: But of what strange Idea's is not a
jealous man's fancy capable? He did confirm himself so well in that Opinion,
through a thousand false reasonings which he made upon it, that he no longer
doubted it; so that he took the resolution to rid himself of a man so fatal to
his quiet as was that person: Yet some checks of Conscience, (for Spaniards
have it very tender,) making him to reflect with some scruples on an act in
which a Christian soul was concerned, he did conclude to examine the business a
little better first: And thereupon he was framing a design most infallible, to
inform himself of the whole truth; which was, to disguise himself like a
Pilgrim, as he might easily do in a Country where there are Shops full of such
Garments to sell, and then to walk under his own Chamber-window, where his Wife
would not fail to appear, as she had done the night before, and so be trepan'd:
This being resolved upon, as has been said, and perceiving the night to draw
near, so that he had no time to lose, if he would get all things ready before
the Marchioness should be returned from her walk, he sent one of his Servants
to fetch him a Pilgrims habit; and having placed two other of his Servants over
against his Chamber to keep Centry, if occasion were, and to give him an
account of all things, he withdrew himself, expecting the return of his Servant.

Father Andrew, who through the impatiency he was in to carry those good news
to the Pilgrim, which he had to tell him, together with the fear that the
Marquess had put him in, had not had time to go and shift himself, but was
running as fast as he could toward his most Dear's Lodgings with that Hat
laden with Feathers, which sometimes flapt of one side of his head, and
sometimes hung on the other: besides the Peruque which did infinitely annoy
him, and made him sweat more than ever had done two Cowls made of Serge; but
above all the Belt, which was so long, that the Sword dragged on the ground,
being forced to carry it in one hand, and to hold his Hat with the other. He
did cross in this dress the best part of the City, not without frequently
looking behind him, to see if somebody did follow him, still fearing the
Marquess his anger, though he was far enough: At last he came to the Pilgrims
Lodgings, who unfortunately was not at home. This makes him mad, he must find
him out; that which he has to say to him is of too great a consequence to be
omitted; it cannot be deferred, and there is not a moment to be lost: He runs
to and fro, here and there, knowing that his steps would be very well rewarded,
and that thereby his zeal would the more appear, but no Pilgrim to be found. He
had been seeking of him two hours, and was ready to return the second time to
his Lodgings, but first he would go round the Palace, not being far from
thence, to see if he might not be staid there; when passing under the Windows
of the Marquess his Apartment, he saw a Pilgrim walking, and that seemed to
come toward him. It was somewhat dark, and he believed that he should hardly
know him; therefore running toward him to embrace him, You have given me, said
he, a great deal of trouble this day; you see in what an Equipage I am still,
but you shall never know in what dangers I have hazarded my life for your sake.
In a word, continued he in a low voice, the beauteous Marchioness is yours, and
this very night, if you can get a Ladder of Ropes, she will follow you
wheresoever you shall please to lead her: I have a Letter of hers to give you,
in which you will see more; but let us from hence. As Father Andrew was talking
after this manner, he perceived a certain piece of Iron to glitter, with which
the Pilgrim was going to reward him after an ill manner for his good services,
if he had not happily escaped the blow, by suddenly recollecting himself,
seeing his error, and running away; yet not so quickly, but that he left the
Hat, Feathers, and Peruque in the others hands, who thought to hold him fast by
them: Ah! thou Villain, cried he, is it thus that thou performest thy Religious
Vows? Thou infamous Hypocrite, have thou taken upon thee a Religious Habit, but
for the more secure debauching another man's Wife? Father Andrew, who had not
been so surprised at the shining of the Dagger, as he was at the hearing of the
Marquess his voice, did set all his strength in his heels, and little minding
the Sermon which was preached to him, he left not running till he was come to
the Pilgrims house. The Marquess, who was not so good a Footman, Ieft running
after him, being well satisfied with having found out the bottom of the Plot,
especially the Marchionesses good intentions. He was only vexed that he had
been too hasty, else he might have had the Letter also, which had been the way
to have convinced her so home, that she should have had nothing to say for her
self: Yet he did not wholly despair of performing it, in continuing to act the
Pilgrims part, and walking under the Windows of her Apartment: He was scarce
returned thither, but the Duenna of Donna Barbara, who had ever since morning
prepared as severe a revenge for Camille as could be imagined, failed not to
let fall upon the Marquess his head, from a third story, a whole deluge of
filth, with which he was covered all over. Oh Heavens! must I receive this
affront too, said he, lifting up his head, to see from whence that Present
came, to fill up my measure of misfortunes? And without staying to make
needless complaints, and not being able to endure the horrible stink with which
he was perfumed, he went back to the Palace to shift himself, and in the same
time give such orders, so that the Conspiracy should not take effect; but as he
was going into that Chamber in which he was to leave all his Equipage, the
Governor, who with his Wife was accompanying the Marchioness, did espy him;
and having judged by his countenance that it was somebody that would hide
himself, he did ask of him who carried the Flambeau, who it was; who made him
answer, that he thought it was the Marquess: At which they all fell to laugh;
and Donna Barbara, who sought by all means to make him stark mad, did oblige
his Lady, who was very indifferent, and the Governor, who out of complaisance
did follow them, to go with her into that Chamber where they found him, having
still the Hat and Peruque of that most wicked Father Andrew in one hand, and
the Palmers Staff in the other; but their presence was to him the most grievous
of all afflictions, not thinking that they had seen him. They all gazed upon
him with such an amazement, as at first hindered them from speaking, not only
by reason of his disguise, which was sufficient to surprise them, but to see in
what a pickle he had been laid, from head to foot, which did oblige them all to
hold their Noses, no body daring to ask him the reason of all that, seeing him
to be in no humor of satisfying their curiosity. But at last great shouts of
laughter having succeeded all on a sudden, to their surprisal and silence, the
Governor, who was a very civil Gentleman, did desire his Wife and the
Marchioness to retire, that they might not augment the confusion, or rather the
rage that the Marquess was in, and give their people occasion to laugh at him.
So he only remained with him; and looking on him with compassion, My Lord, said
he, what would you have the World to think of you? Let it think what it will;
but still it is my opinion, that it is permitted every body to mind their own
business; and, if possible, to prevent being betrayed: Betrayed, replied the
Governor, and where then are these Traitors? Where they are! replied the
Marquess in his turn, over all the Earth, and with you, more than in any place
of the World. In a word, your Wife, and your Apostate Chaplain, who is the most
wicked of all Traitors: But do you not see, replied the Governor, that all is
but in jest, to make mirth; and that my Wife, and that good Father -- How? a
sport to laugh at, said the Marquess in a fury, interrupting him, when my
Honor and Life are concerned in it? Yes, my Life, I say, for one cannot take
the one from me without the other; when Letters are carried, and that my Wife
is to be stolen away: But who, replied the Governor, who is to take her away?
Who? replied the other, your honest Pilgrim, with that precious Father Andrew,
through the assistance, I will not say of whom, for I my self am ashamed of it.
Heavens! is it possible, said the Governor, that you should abuse your self in
this manner? Yea, yea, I do abuse my self, replied he in a scornful tone, and
this Hat and Peruque were not part of Father Andrew 's Equipage, who has been
this night to speak with my Wife through the assistance of yours: That which
you now say, is true, replied the Governor, Father Andrew has been so idle as
to please my Wife, in disguising himself like a Cavalier, and she made him go
into the Garden to laugh at him, with the Marchioness; you should have laughed
also, and not fumed at it as you have done: Yea, I must confess I am mightily
in the wrong, replied the Marquess in the same tone still, and I was to have
laughed at it; or rather, if you please, I should have been my Wifes Confident
to have carried the Letters which she writ to the Pilgrim, and have saved the
good Father Andrew that labor. These are your counsels, Monsieur the
Governor, and I thank you most kindly for them. But -- the Governor would
have answered him; But, said he presently again, interrupting of him, I beseech
you to leave me in quiet, and let every one govern himself according to his own
Maxims; it suffices that I am obliged to you, and to my Lady Governess, for all
that could happen to me in this world of most cruel.

While they were thus entertaining one another, the Marquess had rid himself of
the Pilgrims Weeds, he immediately did run to his Apartment, confiding no more
in Donna Barbara, than in Father Andrew, and presently he set his head to the
Window, to see if the Ladder was not yet ready. The Governor who would not
leave him till he had informed him better, was endeavoring with the best
reasons that he could find, to reclaim him: Believe me, said he to him, my dear
Cousin, that Pilgrim, of whom you speak, has no share in this Evenings Rallery;
and I am very certain, that F. Andr. does not so much as know him. Good God!
replied the Marquess, crying out as if possessed, Father Andrew, that Villain,
from whom I have just now learned all, who is carrying of a Letter from my Wife
to that Pilgrim, and who is to give him notice that he need but bring a Ladder
this night to get her out at the Window, and that she will follow him
wheresoever he pleases, does not know that Traitor? All this did seem so
ridiculous unto the Governor, and to Donna Barbara, that in lieu of adding
faith unto it, they did believe that he was crack-brain'd; and they were
consulting between them, what they should do to prevent this distemper from
growing worse. As for the Marchioness, she was retired into a Closet, so soon
as she had seen the Marquess come, under pretense of not exposing her self unto
the rage of a jealous Madman; but the truth was, because she was so strangely
perplexed, not knowing what had happened unto Father Andrew, whose Hat and
Peruque she had seen in her Husbands hands; above all things, fearing that some
mishap was come to her Letter. The Governor did think, that if he should cause
the Pilgrim to be secured, so that the Marquess should have nothing further to
fear from him, that that might compose his Brains. Donna Barbara did highly
approve of this Proposition; and her advice was, as every body thinks most on
their own interest, that it would not be amiss to detain him Prisoner in one of
the Towers of the Palace, that the Marquess might rest the more secure; and
that on the other hand, this poor Pilgrim, whom they thought not guilty, should
be the better treated. This being so concluded, it was proposed to the
Marquess, who was already gathering his people together to be on the defense,
in case of an Escallade, and who protested that there should be night and day a
Guard in his Chamber, and that his Wife should not stir forth of it till this
cursed Pilgrim were seized, and that he had seen him have Irons at his feet.
They promised him, that things should be performed according to his desires:
And the Governor sent immediately to fetch a Lieutenant of the Guard, to whom
he gave Orders before the Marquess, to instantly go with twelve Musketeers,
and seek all about the City after an Italian Pilgrim, which he described unto
him; that he should not return without him, but should confine him in the Red
Tower of the Palace. Mean time Father Andrew was come to Camille so out of
breath, that he was a considerable time before he could say any thing to him,
more than by Signs and Grimaces, which did as much amaze the Pilgrim, as the
Equipage that he was in did make him laugh; Good God! Sir, said Father Andrew
to him, with his eyes staring, what hazards have I run through this day for
your sake? I have seen my self at the last moment of living, and it was well
for me that I had a quick eye, and a nimble foot, I had been a dead man else,
and killed, past all redemption, by the enraged Marquess his hand. Camille
having enquired how, after he had taken a little breath, he related all that
had happened to him that Evening, in such passionate terms, and such pleasant
gestures, especially at the Adven^ure of the Dagger, which was doubtless the
most pleasant passage of all the Relation, that Camille, as vexed as he was at
his giddy mistake, whose evil consequences he did very well foresee, could not
forbear laughing, seeing him imitate at once both the Marquesses and his own
part, how he had lifted the Dagger up against him, and how he had shunned the
blow, still concluding that his business had been done, if he had not made
quick use both of his eyes and legs. Camille who was much more impatient to see
the Marchionesses Letter, than to hear every particular of that story, having
asked for it, he opened it, and read these words. APpearances have deceived me,
Sir, and you must blame them for my overhasty condemning of you. I can further
say, that in despite of them, I have rendered you more Justice than I could
reasonably have done; and that at the very instant that I called you Traitor,
there was something which whispered unto me, it could not be possible, that a
person who appeared so worthy, and so generous, could be capable of committing
so base an action. I was beginning to renounce that injustice which I thought I
did you, when I received your Letter; and I am not more obliged to you for
those generous offers, which you continue to make me, than in having wholly
confirmed me in the opinion that I had of you: for proof whereof, I declare to
you, that besides the manner that you seem to be concerned at my ill fortune,
which would ever oblige me to have a great esteem for you, I have found such
qualities in you, as usually make the tenders of some persons services more
acceptably received, than those of some others; and that it will not be
difficult for me to wholly confide in you. Let us make good use of time and
opportunity, for I know not whether I shall ever have it so fair again; and if
you can provide this very night a Ladder to get me down with from the Window, I
shall be ready to follow you. Farewell, do you act so, as to get Fortune of your
side, and I Will engage to you on the account of Love.

The March, of L. C.




While Camille was reading this Letter with transports of joy and love, he did
tremble on the other side, when he did think on the hazards that it had run of
falling into the Marquess his hands, which would have been the absolute ruin
of the Marchioness: He did shrewdly guess, though Father Andrew had not told
him, that his imprudence had made him discover any thing of the secret, that
after such a fatal Encounter there was nothing to be hoped for in their late
design; and that the jealous Lord would certainly be upon his guard: He was
distracted at it, which yet he durst not wholly express to the Father, for fear
of putting him out of humor, perceiving very well, that which way soever the
business should go, he should still have occasion for him. As they were
reasoning together on the ways they should take, to know if there were any
hopes of executing their Enterprise, without danger of being discovered or
known, they saw an Officer come into the Chamber, who followed by six
Musketeers, gave the Pilgrim to understand, that he had an Order from the
Governor to secure him, and did in a civil way desire him to surrender
himself, because that besides his having of six Musketeers more at hand, it
had been expressly commanded him, to use him civilly; and that he should be very
sorry to be obliged to use violent hands. All those kind expressions did not
hinder our Hero, who believed himself lost, and who was not a person to be
tamely taken, to set himself in a posture of defense, with a Dagger in his
hand, the only Weapon that he had then near him; so that maugre their great
number, he sold them his liberty at a dear rate, having wounded three or four
of the Soldiers; who having spared him at first, were at last so netled at the
sight of their blood, that they were making at him, without any further regard
unto the Governors Orders of favoring him. Father Andrew, who had never been
in such a Fray, whether being animated thereunto by the example of the Pilgrims
generous resistance, or that the Cavaliers dress he was in, of which he had
lost nothing but the Hat and Peruque, did infuse courage in him; he played the
Devil amongst them; and did so well second the Valiant Camille, that the
Lieutenant had occasion for the other six Soldiers, which he called to his
assistance. They were forced at last to yield to the greater number: Father
Andrew was the first taken, and the most ill treated, having not been spared,
as had been the Pilgrim, there had rained upon his back and head, which was
naked, a whole deluge of blows of Garabines, and flats of Swords; he crying out
as one that was sufficiently beaten; Ah! you Villains, is it thus that you
treat poor Father Andrew, the Governors Chaplain, and Religious Priest of the
Order of S. Dominick? Ye are all Excommunicated, and I Excommunicate you for
ever if you do not hold. At the name of Father Andrew, rather than at the noise
of the Excommunication, there was a Truce of blows; and at the same time the
Pilgrim having been seized, they were both had to the Palace, though there was
Order but for Camille, because of the resistance that Father Andrew had made,
upon whom the Soldiers had been more severe, as it did very well appear, they
having discharged the greatest part of their anger upon him, so that he could
but difficultly move. He was thus very well rewarded for all his Messages:
Fortune does not always favor us in all places; and her ordinary vicissitudes
are in making cross Events to succeed the fairest beginnings.

The Pilgrim was lodged in the Red Tower, and his Companion was had before the
Governor, to know what should be done with him. Father Andrew would have
willingly redeemed himself from so shameful a Scene, with the hundred Pistols
which he had received: And for certain, how great soever the Governors
surprise was to see him in so strange a dress, and to learn that he was found
with the Pilgrim, he could not forbear laughing, in spite of the serious
countenance which he had took upon him, to see him in so sad a pickle with that
new garment, which had been extremely disordered in the Battle. Donna Barbara,
who was gone to bed, and could not persuade her self that it was her Ghostly
Father, did rise to see him, and was yet more surprised than had been the
Governor, but did not laugh, having a greater interest in it than her Husband,
not doubting after this, but that all which the Marquess had said concerning
the Intrigues between the Marchioness and the Pilgrim were real truths. All her
anger was presently turned against Father Andrew, not only for his serving her
Rival, but because he had made her a party, having caused her to act a part
very unworthy of her, and most cruel to her heart. She took no notice of it
before her Husband, but was resolved to treat him the next morning as he
deserved. The Governor, who thought the Friar had been sufficiently punished
for all his follies, caused him to be released, and presently sent word to the
Marquess, that the Pilgrim was secured: This was a great satisfaction to him;
yet he did not sleep the better for it, but had all night long Visions of
Palmer Staves, Hats with Shells, and such like things, against which his mind
could not yet be well settled, though the cause of all those terrors of his was
in Prison.

The unfortunate Camille, overwhelmed with vexations and despair in that
Prison, was much troubled about the cause that should move the Governor to
have him thus apprehended in the nightime, and after such kindnesses which he
had showed him: the time which he had allowed him to remain in Barcelona was
not yet expired, and on the Marquess his account he did not believe that there
was any reason to use that extremity toward him; and it was much more
probable, as he could not doubt it, that the Governor had dived into his Wifes
folly; and that the same reasons which had obliged him to forbid him the Court,
and not to remain above three days in the City, had incited him also to cast
him into Prison. These considerations made him exclaim against his too rigorous
fate, that thus did load him with troubles, through the love of a Woman, whom
he could not fancy, when he was just upon the point of being the most happy of
all men with her that he adored. This thought, with the little inclination that
he had for the Governors Wife, did not a little contribute to make him
absolutely hate her.

Donna Barbara had not that night her mind less filled with sorrow and care for
her Lover: She had scarce seen him, but she had loved him with so violent a
passion, which did every moment increase, and the sole Idea of that Pilgrim did
so transport her, that there was not any thing which she would not perform to
gain his affections. Mean time she learns that he loves another, and concludes
that the repulses, or at least the indifferency that he had shown to her the
night before, did all proceed from thence, and that when he came to her, it was
with an intention to have met with the Marchioness, as it had afterward
appeared by his surprise. These were cruel reflections for a Woman that loves
with such a passion as she did the Pilgrim, and yet they were not powerful
enough to cure her; and in the midst of all the sorrow she had, to find her
affections run so far in favor of an ungrateful person, which would triumph
over them before her Rival, she did sigh and earnestly wish that day were come,
that she might find out some way of seeing him. Father Andrew was now the only
Object of her anger, as if he had been the cause of all her misfortunes: she
wished that he would guess the concerns which she had for the Pilgrim; and that
in lieu of serving him toward the Marchioness, he would discover to her all
that which had passed between those two Lovers, that she might break all their
measures; that is, she desired that which was impossible. This is commonly the
odd composure of mind of such persons as are possessed with so violent a
passion: mean time she was preparing very severe Mortifications for the good
Father, the least of which was to send him back to his Monastery.

The morning, which affords counsel on the things which have been concluded in
the night, and frequently with advantage, did cause the Governess to go quite
another way to work than what she had designed: She sent to seek after Father
Andrew so soon as she was up; but the good Father, who had not rested well that
night, though not tormented with Love as she had been, was yet in Bed, and
caused his excuses to be made to Madam the Governess, that through some
defluxions which had that night troubled him, and from which he was not yet
quite free, he could not come so soon to wait upon her. Donna Barbara, to whom
Love would afford no rest, being impatient to see and speak with the Father,
went her self unto his Chamber, under the Veil of an act of Charity, and to
learn what was her Father Confessors distemper: Father Andrew, who expected not
this Honor, was much surprised at the sight of her; and after some questions
which she made him on the condition of his distemper, the true cause of which
he would never tell her, the Lady taking upon her a more serious Air, began to
make him a Fraternal Remonstrancy, that with so little regard to his Religious
Decorum, he was become the Confident of a mean Pilgrim, and had made her also
instrumental in the Intrigue, and the Fop of a Woman, that would take no small
advantage of it; adding, that the Governor had resented it very much, and
would have sent him back to his Convent, had she not opposed it, and
endeavored to excuse him. Father Andrew, most humble and contrite, at those
Lessons which Donna Barbara made him, did return her thanks for all the good
Offices which she had rendered him toward the Governor, protesting that he
had not acted any thing in all that, but what was in pure zeal of serving his
Neighbor, not imagining that there was any evil in it, that otherwise for
certain he had not done it; and that for his part, he had rather die, than
entertain the least thought of displeasing her. The passionate Lady, who
designed to make her advantage from the Fathers faults, would not be satisfied
with his excuses, seeming very unwilling to pardon him, without he endeavored
to gain her favor by some other means: She would first learn from him all that
had passed between those two Lovers; the Father, who had not entered very far
into Camille's concerns, did endeavor to satisfy her as well as he could, in
giving her a sincere and faithful account of that little which he knew of their
Amors. But she was not satisfied with that neither; and she made him diverse
other questions, to which he answered according to his Memoirs, which did not
extend very far. You do not believe then, said the Governess to him, after she
had been some time silent, that it is long since this Pilgrim has been
acquainted with the Marchioness, nor that he is much in love with her? As to
Love, Madam, answered he, not knowing what interest the Lady had in all these
enquiries, I cannot say but that he does very much love her, but I know that
their acquaintance is but new; that they have scarce had one opportunity to
discourse one another; and finally, that all their intelligence has yet gone no
further, than to a design of delivering the Marchioness out of her Husbands
tyrannical jealousy. Donna Barbara took a little courage at Father Andrew's
Relation, and as an unresolved person, who had a thousand designs in her head
that perplexed her, frequently beginning diverse discourses, and suddenly
breaking them off, without finishing of any, she at last told him, that she was
concerned for that young man, whom the Marquess was resolved to ruin; and that
the Governor would hardly have power to save him. Father Andrew, who had a
real affection for the Pilgrim, was much concerned at the news, and began to
intercede for him to Donna Barbara, telling her, that he was the most honest,
civil, and generous Pilgrim in the whole World; that it were a thousand pities
to take away his life, and that his death would draw some mischief upon her
Family, because it had never been heard that any man that had once vowed
himself to S. Jago, had ever been hanged. Donna Barbara being somewhat
persuaded with the good Fathers reasons, did promise to concern her self
further for him, but yet that she would have the Pilgrim to entreat her to it
himself, that he might know to whom he were obliged; so that she would have him
go to the Pilgrim, and give him an account of his affairs. That he should be
sure to represent the danger he was in yet greater than it was; and that he
should insensibly give him to understand, that there was no person, but she,
that could save him.

Father Andrew having been further instructed in all things, and yet not able
to dive into the business, was very well pleased however to see her so well
disposed to serve his dear Pilgrim, knowing well what power she had over the
Governors spirit, he returned her thanks beforehand for the kindness that she
showed in the behalf of a Stranger, who she would find when, she should know
him, worthy of her care. Donna Barbara, who valued not his Complement, did
press him to make haste, telling him, that she would stay for his Answer in her
Chamber; and he promised her to be within a moment at the Prison: There he
found the Pilgrim much dejected and cast down, and embracing him with a great
tenderness, Courage, Sir, said he, I hope that you shall not die: That I shall
not die, said Camille, am I then so near being condemned? No, but I fear,
replied Father Andrew, that you may be so, if you have not somebody to
solicit for you; for the Marquess does not only accuse you of having
endeavored forcibly to take away his Wife from him, but that you would have
murdered him also: And what proof is there of all this? replied Camille. I know
not, said the Father, but I believe that you will be condemned, whatever the
proofs may be, if you do not apply your self to the protection of some person
of sufficient power to save you. Camille, who pitied him to hear him reason so
simply, did only tell him, that if he had no body but the Marquess to fear, he
did not believe that he stood in want of any persons protection. Father Andrew
having once again endeavored to represent the danger greater to him than he
did imagine it, the Pilgrim asked him, Where he had learned all that: To which
he answered, from a Lady that had a great power at Court, and good intentions
toward him: In a word, that he had it from the Governors Lady. From the
Governors Lady! replied Camille, well Father, I have so little inclination to
be her Debtor, that I had rather die than be obliged to her for my life: And
carry her back that answer, continued he, if it is she that has sent you here
on that Errand; tell her beside, that death will never come so soon as I desire
it. Father Andrew astonished at this high spirit, did endeavor to reclaim him
a little, and inquired of him, what reason he had to refuse, in the sad
condition he was, such marks of affection, as would have filled with honor and
joy any other person than he? I have nothing further to say to you on that
account, said he, and peradventure I have more cause of complaint of the
Governors Wife, than of returning her thanks; But that is not the business, Go
back to her, Father, and tell her, that if I must die, I am resolved, but no
lowness on my part. Father Andrew, who had not comprehended any thing of the
Governesses design, could yet less unravel what reasons the Pilgrim had to
slight so much her obliging offers, as to choose to die, rather than so much as
entreat her. He could not conceive that there was any particular acquaintance
between them; and yet he did believe, that the odd way, after which they both
acted, was not without some kind of mystery, which did speak something more,
than from such persons as did not know one another. His Brains not diving
further into this mystery, he left to time to unravel all that Intrigue, and
returned unto Donna Barbara, to whom he gave an account of the Commission which
she had given him; and if he did not relate to her wholly with what
indifferency, or rather with what scorn the Pilgrim had received the offers of
her protection, he however told her enough to make her understand the small
esteem he had of her: What! he will die then, said she, with an Emotion which
she had much to do to conceal: Yes, Madam, replied the Father, rather than be
obliged to any one for his life: Perhaps, Madam, because he does not believe
that he deserves death: Ah! cruel! she then cried out, not being able to
suppress her sighs any longer, it is not that which makes him answer after this
manner, but the extreme passion which he has for the Marchioness, and the
aversion which he feels for all other Women: It is not with you, Father, that I
must constrain my self any longer, continued she blushing; and seeing that you
already know all the weaknesses of my Soul, therefore it would be useless to
conceal this from you: This Pilgrim has some secret Art to Charm Women with:
Since the first day that I saw him, and that he cast his eyes on me, I have
felt for him such things as are not naturally felt for ordinary persons; and
whatsoever I have opposed against it, to remove him from my mind, I have been
daily more and more possessed with it; I know that I do ill, but I have no
power to resist him, and find that the more my passion should be opposed, the
more it would break forth: I will try what time can do; mean time, Father, if
you have any consideration for me, you will have pity of the condition I am in,
and will endeavor to qualify in some measure the torment that I endure, for
none can do it better than you. Father Andrew overjoyed at this her confiding
in him, which gave him so fair a return upon Donna Barbara, did make her also a
gentle and short Remonstrancy, as in duty bound, and did represent to her the
consequences of those kind of Engagements, the sorrow that they are commonly
accompanied with, and the public shame when once they broke forth: All this
was delivered very mildly, and still with store of howevers, which did sweeten
the bitterness of the Remonstrancy, which was none of the severest. And at last
finding that there was no hopes of dissuading her that way, (neither had he
much mind to do it) he shifted into another discourse, as an Indulgent Director
should do, and told her in a languishing and devout tone, That seeing the
Spiritual Remedies had no power over her, she was to make use of those that
were Natural, and of two evils shun the worst, which was the scandal, in which
she must of necessity have fallen, if the Heavens had not inspired her to
address her self to a person so discreet as he was, she knowing what zeal he
had for her service. Do but repose your self on my cares, Madam, continued he,
and since that the chiefest business is to make you to be beloved, know that I
have some secrets as powerful in that point as are the Pilgrims; and that
before he sleeps, he shall sigh for you. That last word made Donna Barbara
sigh, who languishingly looking upon the Father Consolator; How much you
promise me in a short time, Father, said she to him, to do this, he must first
forget an Object with which he is too much possessed, and for which he has
doubtless left his Country, and be moved with the like thoughts for me: So
great a change, continued she, is not done in one day: No, no! do but make him
lose all hopes of ever seeing the Marchioness, and in the pressing danger of
his life, as you may represent it to him, make him see how much better it would
be for him to turn his affections toward me; for he already knows that I love
him, and that it is his own fault if he is not happy. Father Andrew having been
sufficiently instructed in all things, to acquit himself of that Employ, as a
zealous and expert Trustee, he promised Donna Barbara not to forget any thing:
And so parting each with his particular Idea's, they both went to labor to
bring about their design.

The Marquess and the Marchioness had passed the night as a Husband and Wife
could do, when they are of so bad intelligence as those two were. The Governor
had engaged the jealous Marquess, before they had parted, to sacrifice to his
request all the resentments that he might have against his Wife; and had had a
promise from the Marchioness, never to have any design against her Husbands
Honor and Interests. Thus a certain kind of Reconciliation having been made
upon this, he had left them both in a passable good resolution of living
friendly together. All this was good in the outward appearance, but the inward
parts are not so soon cured; and as the Marquess could but very hardly forgive
his Wife the treasonable trick that she would have played him, his Wife did not
despair of finding out some other Pilgrims, if this should fail her. Here were
two persons very strangely intention'd, and that might lie long enough
together, and yet have no true peace between them. Neither was there any thing
else all night, but maundrings on the Husband's side, and sighs on that of the
Wife, which lasted till morning. A pitiful Society! a sad alliance, which is
but too often met withal in this wicked age! it is not without cause therefore,
that the mode of unmarrying has been found out of late.

The Governor's Wife, who was impatient to speak with the Marquess, had
ordered a Page to wait all the Morning at his Chamberdoor to tell him, when he
were up, that she had something to impart to him. It was very late before he
came to her, with a sad and melancholy Countenance, partly through the ill
Night which he had passed, and the little reason that he had to be satisfied
with Donna Barbara's proceedings; as for her part, expecting no better, she was
not surprised at it, and without further minding of it, she told him, that she
knew the cause, which he thought he had to be angry with her, but th^^ she
protested to him, that she did not know any thing of Father Andrew's late
design, in which her Honor had not been as much concerned as his, she not
being of Quality nor Humor to serve any one in such amorous Intrigues; that
she did not only intend to have that insolent Monk punished for it, but that
she expected that the Marchioness should also make her some acknowledgment
thereupon; and driving her resentments further yet, she added, that it was a
thing very unworthy a person of Quality, that had married a Marquess, who had
been honored with so many brave Employes, and descended of one of the prime
Families of that Kingdom, to abandon her self in that manner to the love of a
Pilgrim, of a Beggar, which she had rather follow than her own Husband.
Finally, she set her self up in so fine a mode of Invectives, that the
Marquess, who did believe her to be angry in earnest, had much to do to appease
her. He did ask her a 1000 times pardon for his Wife, acknowledging that she
did not deserve to be allied to a person of such Honor and Quality as she was;
that it was his misfortune, and he the more to be pityed: The Conclusion of all
this was, that Donna Barbara did advise the Marquess to convey his Wife to some
solitary place, and learn her to be wise. But the Marquess, who was tainted
with that weakness incident to all jealous Husbands, that cannot part with
their Wives, though never so many Reasons to incite them to it, was not at
first of her Opinion, and thought it more reasonable to remove the principal
Cause of all those Disorders, that Pilgrim, which the Governor could do no
less than banish out of the Kingdom, if he would not condemn him to dye; as
such Attempts, as that wicked persons were, did deserve. Donna Barbara, who was
concerned in all this, did as little approve of the Marquess his Designs,
showing him that besides those forms that were to be observed in doing Justice,
which would not permit the Governor to banish a man without being first
examined, it were more proper to leave him for some time in Prison, to punish
him for his insolency, and that there were besides certain reasons as to the
decency and policy of the business, which required some other kind of usage,
because that this Banishment would seem less punishment, than a pretense,
whereby to be rid of a person which he feared, and of whom he were jealous; and
that however it would be an easy matter for this Pilgrim to go into the Kindom
of Valencia, or in that of Aragon, and there cause him the same troubles, as he
had done in Catalonia.

The Marquess, who was not one of the best head-pieces in the World, was
yielding to Donna Barbara's reasons; who added this besides, that when the
Marchioness should be informed of the Pilgrim's Liberty, she would not despair
to see him again, and that the surest way, to cure her of that fancy, was to
take from her all possible hopes of ever-seeing him more, by removing her from
him so soon as possible he could, so that she might never-more hear him
mentioned. The Marquess being now wholly convinced, did resolve to be gone the
very next day, and in order to it, he went to seek the Governor, to inform him
of his resolution, who did endeavor to dissuade him from it, but all in vain,
for he did not confide much in him neither, by reason of his Indulgency toward
the Pilgrim.

Donna Barbara was of Opinion, that she had very much advanced her business, in
having persuaded this jealous man to leave Barcelona, flattering her self with
the thoughts that the Marchioness, whom she did look upon as the sole Obstacle
to her desires, being once distanced from her Lover, she would find it no
longer so difficult to be beloved by him. To wholly deceive her in that
Opinion, there needed no more but Father Andrew, who after he had but very
fruitlesly discoursed the Pilgrim on these Instructions that the Lady had given
him, would not quite put her into despair, in informing her of the little
esteem that this Lover had for her; for then he would himself have lost those
advantages which he did hope to gain by his cares, as also the honor of
continuing longer in the Office of the Governesses Confident. He therefore gave
her hopes that the Pilgrim would not always prove insensible toward her, that
he had found him much altered since those fine things which he had told him
concerning her, and that if she would be patient but a little, she should find
him, if not quite so passionate as she deserved, yet at the least very penitent
for having slighted her favors, and sufficiently softened to give her
satisfaction.

As there is nothing that more easily makes impressions in our minds than those
things which please us, and which we desire, Father Andrew did not say one word
to that passionate Lady which did not give her infinite content, though under
doubtful appearances; the good Father, who did discern it in her Eyes, did
continually add some new thing unto the amorous Narrative. So that Donna
Barbara, being impatient to see the effects of Father Andrew's rare secrets,
did resolve to go in a Disguise to the Prison, to be a Witness unto their
Discourses, and to relish the whole pleasure of them.

This proposition did startle the Reverend Father, well knowing that she should
hear nothing there, but what would be contrary to those hopes which he had
given her. He opposed himself as much as he could to that Design, setting
before her the evident danger unto which she should expose her self; which
besides would not have a good effect on the Pilgrim's mind, of which she was to
manage well the value, if she would be beloved of him in good earnest; but all
those Reasons, and many more which he told her to draw himself out of the
Briars, were not of force to remove her from that design. They were of no value
with a Woman, whose Soul was filled with fiery transports. Father, I know, said
she, not giving ear to half what he said, all that you can say to me, and I
should know what I had to do in this Case, if, in the condition I am, I were
capable of some Reflections or Reasons. But when one loves, as I do, nothing
but the desires of the heart are hearkened unto; and it would be fruitless to
endeavor the dissuading me from it; for I can follow no other Counsel; and
without any further reasoning on the case, since it is my business, and that
you are willing to serve me in it, I desire you to get me in readiness against
Night, one of your Novices Garments, and not to trouble your self any further
in the business, for though I should but see this Pilgrim, I shall be extremely
recompensed for the pains I shall have taken, and the hazard I shall have run.
Father Andrew seeing that there was no hopes of making her change her
resolution, did promise to perform whatsoever she should desire, though he
foresaw the danger that there was for them both in it. But Friars in all
businesses have always a back door open to get out at. He went to his Convent,
where he soon fitted himself with a Novices Habit, about the Ladies stature,
which he had conveyed into the Palace. When the hour was come, Donna Barbara
failed not to go to his Chamber, to prepare her self for the Masquerade, with
as much earnestness as Father Andrew was backwards; but he was forced to
resolve upon it, and for that time to officiate to the Lady, who was not very
well acquainted with that Jacobin-Equipage in the place of a Valet de Chamber;
during his Employ he had here and there some little pleasures, and his new
Office giving him somewhat more of Liberty than that of a spiritual Director
would afford him, he made good use of it; for it is customary with Monks to
make an advantage of all things, and this, who was a most perfect one, did make
pretty good use of his Rights, in putting that Gown and Frock on the Sennora
Barbara, of whom he made the prittyest little Friar that ever was in the
Novitiat; if all this was without Temptation I shall not tell. Finally, all
being ready, they went out of the Chamber, and marched on without noise or
light toward the red Tower, and with so good fortune as to meet with no person
in the Palace that did speak to them. Camille's restraint being not so
extraordinary strict, Father Andrew had leave, through Donna Barbara's Order,
to see him at what hour he pleased; so that it was not difficult for them to
get in; they found the Pilgrim lying on his Bed, reading in a Book, a kind of
Consolation in his Afflictions. Well, Father, said he to the Confessor, so soon
as he saw him appear, have you no better News for me, than those which you have
brought me hitherto? and shall I have Justice done me, or must I dye in this
Prison? I have already told you, Sir, replied he, making him sign that there
was a Novice after him, of whom they should be wary, it lies in you to go out
of it, and to be the happyest of all men. Happy! after what manner? (replied
Camille, who thought there was no great danger in speaking before a young
Brother) in imploring the assistance of a Person that is peradventure the sole
cause of all my Evil? Of a Woman -- Yea! but of such a Woman, interrupted the
Father, still making sign, that has a great esteem and affection for you, that
knows your worth, and that doubtless deserves that you should consider her not
as your Enemy, or the cause of your misfortune, toward which she has never
contributed, but as a Lady that concerns her self in your Affairs, and that
would inform you what an interest she has in them. I know more on that subject,
Father, replied the Pilgrim, who did not comprehend to what purpose those signs
were made, than you can tell me; and in a word, if you would oblige me, never
speak more of her to me. To which Father Andrew, who was in a violent sweat to
hear him speak in that manner, replied, but this morning, Sir, you were not in
this mind, and I found you in my Opinion, more full of acknowledgments toward
a person, that you cannot hate without ingratitude. You deceive your self,
Father, replied Camille, who was wondering at the Father's Discourse, as much as
at his signs, I am no Changling, and what I tell you now, I did both think and
say in the Morning; you know that I love, and though my heart should be capable
of perfidiousness, it -- there he made a stop, perceiving that the little
Novice, that was drawn nearer them, did look steadfastly in his face, with a
Countenance that did amaze him. Go on, thou cruel one, said the little Brother
to him, and declare that I should deserve nothing, though I should act all that
can be imagined for thee. Camille, who would never have known Donna Barbara
under such a Dress, did fall into the greatest amazement in the World, when he
heard her voice. He could scarce believe his own Eyes, examining her from head
to foot. Yes, look, said she, and see what Love makes me do for thee, maugre
all thy scorns? What I have done hitherto is very inconsiderable, but I come
now to conclude my ruin for the most ungrateful of all men. Alas, Madam,
replied Camille, it is me that you ruin, and that you render miserable. How
miserable? speak, replied she, can thou complain but of being too much
beloved? is there any person of worth in the World that would say so much of
the meanest of Women? thoublest thy self about my cares, thou think that it
would be a shame to thee to be obliged to me for thy life, and preferrest thy
Prison to Liberty, only because that it is offered thee by me. The passionate
and winning manner that the amorous Donna Barbara did use in her reproaches to
her Pilgrim, certainly there was no heart but what would be somewhat moved at
it, and Camille, whose heart was not wholly insensible, was touched with
compassion, and did endeavor to excuse himself, on the respect which he owed
to the Governor, to whom he would not for the world, have given so great a
cause of complaint, after the great a Civilities which he had received from
him. The Governor? (replied Donna Barbara,) pitiful considerations, and seeing
that I pass them by, thou should not scruple to do the same: But rather say,
and never seek after specious pretenses, that to my grief thou came into
these parts, with a heart filled with an other Object: That it is the
Marchioness that renders useless, and even odious to thee, all my Cares, my
Kindnesses, and all things else, that I would do for thee. When thou do own
it to me, I shall do thy Heart justice; but then add to it, that I might have
been agreeable to thee, if thou had seen me first; and that when ever thou
shall lose all hopes of possessing her, thou will remember with what a Passion
I love thee, and give thy self wholly to me. Other Women would not be contented
with this small request; there are but few that would love thee at that rate:
But I will make thee sensible, how far the excess of a real Passion will
extend. Camille, had never found himself in so great a confusion: He could not
refuse some complaisances, at least, to a Lady so transported with Love, as she
was for him; and he had need to qualify his disdain, to give her some answer
suitable to her passionate discourses; yet, nothing did more contribute to those
kindnesses which he expressed to her, as the desire which he had to be rid of
her, incessantly fearing that she should be surpised with him, in that
disguise and that this visit should come to the Governor's knowledge, which
would make an end of ruining him, he could not forbear expressing his sense of
it to the Lady, entreating her to have patience, till he had recovered his
liberty, and that then there would be less danger for either of them, and they
might have the satisfaction of seeing one another the longer. But she being
incapable of any reason, did reproach him all his fears; which she, being
wholly taken up which her passion, could not entertain. Yet at last to let him
see that she did love him to that excess, as to deprive her self of what was
most pleasing to her; which was to see him: She left him, and at her going, she
did force from him some kindnesses, which either real, or fictitious, did
however extremely consolate her.

Father Andrew, who had seen this visit concluded for better than he expected;
did receive by it, almost as much of satisfaction as Donna Barbara had, and did
much glory in it, and did congratulate her of her happy success; to which he
thought he had not a little contributed. They both went out of the Tower
entertaining themselves with the merits and fine qualities of this Pilgrim,
which were thought to be such extraordinary ones, that she would needs have him
to be some Prince in a disguise; seeing nothing but what was great and
extraordinary in all his actions. The good Father, who knew how much it would
please her to extend himself upon the Pilgrime's praises; did ever out do her
at that sport, and the earnestness they both were in, did so transport them,
that without considering they were in the Enemies Territories, they did speak
so loud, that any body might hear them. So that being come near to some steps,
which were to be ascended: Donna Barbara, who knew not so well the way in the
dark, as Father Andrew did, did bid him lend her his hand to help her up the
steps. The Father, who went first, turned back; but when he would have taken
her by the hand, he found it already seized on, and that some body else did do
her that Office. Upon this, such a fear did seize on him, as it would have done
on many others; that without speaking one word, he stole away into his Chamber,
as fast, and with as little noise, as he could: Where I believe he Barricadoed
himself up, and, I believe, had but an ill night of it. Donna Barbara hearing
somebody walk so near them, did softly ask of the Father, who she thought she
had by the hand, what that was. But this Father would make no answer, it being
the Marquess, who returning from giving the last orders for his depart, was
waiting there for his Flambeau, that was blown out, and which was gone to be
lighted again. Donna Barbara, presaging no good from that silence, did inquire
of the pretended Father the reason of it; and was thinking to retire, fearing
some surprisal, just as the Flambeau appeared; by whose light having perceived,
that it was not Father Andrew that did hold her by the hand, she made a great
outcry, and presently got away, leaving one of her Gloves behind her, not
having had time to discern who it was. But she was perfectly known by the
Marquess, who had had leisure to hear her discourse with Father Andrew, which
gave no small cause of reflection to our jealous, who since the Morning had
thought her the most virtuous Wife in all Spain: And the Governor the happiest
of all men, because he could take his rest in quiet. The dress she was in did
surprise him more than all the rest, he who was a professed Biggot, and who did
perceive to what use were put such holy things. He concluded, that Father
Andrew must of necessity be made one in all those sports, on whom he did
already look as on one of Lucifer's black Instruments, sent into the World to
corrupt all Womankind. He could easily guess, by what he had heard them say
that they were newly come from visiting the Pilgrim; and that thought did
somewhat comfort him; for in this world there is nothing like having Companions
in our afflictions, which makes them not seem so weighty unto us. He had a
great itching immediately to give the Governor an account of this adventure;
but because he knew him to be extremely prepossest with a good opinion of his
Wife, and that he should have to do with a bold and high spirited Lady; he
feared that a Glove might not be sufficient proof, wherewith to persuade the
husband, that he was in his predicament, or to convince the Lady of being
concerned in a gallant Intrigue. And that consequently he should but cause some
disorder, and draw upon himself all the evil of that intrigue. So that he took
the resolution of being silent and returned to his own Apartment, reflecting
often within himself, how little Women were to be trusted, and that some did
make Horns to others, who had his own House full of them. Upon this he caressed
his Wife with a better heart, than he had done in a long time; and as he knew
that nothing could work a greater effect on the minds of Female kind, than
Jealousy would, he could not forbear giving her an account of the pleasant
Rencounter which he had had. The Marchioness would have had much to do to have
believed it, thinking it some effect of his jealous mind, to make her hate the
Pilgrim, if he had not assured her, that he had seen them both come out of the
Tower; if he had not repeated to her the same Discourses, which had passed
between Father Andrew and the Lady, and finally if he had not shown her the
Ladies own Glove, which had been left in his hands. Of truth, after that last
proof she had no more to say, and the sincerity with which she see him speak to
her, knowing him perfectly well, did make as great an impression in her mind as
all the rest did, so that she began to feel within her self more Hatred for
that perfidious man, and more jealousy against her Rival, than she could have
thought to have had upon so slender a subject. The Marquess, who, though his
Wife was silent, did easily see in her eyes, and perceive by her very silence,
that he had compassed his ends, and animated her with almost as much Hatred
against Donna Barbara, as he had been against his Wife, he further did inform
her, how excellently that fair Lady had acted the Virtuous Woman's part with him
that morning, having flown very high against her Conduct, even to the giving
him such Counsels as he would not follow; which confirmed the Marchionesses
rage against them both, though he would not let her know what those advises
were. So that what with Jealousy, and what with Resentments, she was all night
in little kind of rages, which would let her take but very little rest, wishing
with great impatiency for day, that she might be gone, having no other desires
left, than to remove from a place, where she could be of no other use than a
property to her Rival, to whom that Traitor the Pilgrim had doubtless
discovered all their secret Intrigue.

The Marquess, who had not changed his design, though he had found out, that
another had as well as his Wife a months mind to the Pilgrim, knowing well,
that in all those kind of things, others Examples do rather authorize than
deter, was the first rising in the Palace, to have all his Retinue in a
readines^ to march, and continue his Voyage toward Madrid, where he was going.
The Governor and his Lady did rise also to wait upon them out of Town; but the
first thing that Donna Barbara did so soon as her Husband went out of the
Chamber, was to send after Father Andrew, to enquire of him who that man was
that affrighted the Father, who was possessed with the same curiosity, having
spent all the Night in a strange restlesness, lest it should be the Governor,
was very glad to hear the contrary by Donna Barbara's Message. He had no more
to say to this point than she had, only that he was certain he had not been
seen. Donna Barbara, who was not a Woman to be frighted with so small a matter,
did trouble her self no further as to what might happen from this business,
knowing well how to get out of it, and that she would make that person pass for
ridicule, that would accuse her of any such thing; she sent back Father Andrew
to his Chamber, and took the way that led her to the Marchioness, to acquit her
self of those Ceremonies used in such cases, not knowing how to dispense her
self from them, though she had no great inclination to go. She entered her
Chamber with a cold and indifferent Countenance, and found the Marchioness
making an end of preparing her self for the Journey, and who afforded her as
indifferent a reception; they were both for some time in that humor, not
speaking a word to one another, till that Donna Barbara, who thought that she
had the only cause of Complaint, did break that silence, and told her, that she
was much amazed at the reception which she did afford her that morning. The
Marchioness did answer her coldly, that there were certain days of Vexation,
when a person was very unfit for any thing, and that she would have her to be
Judge of it, who appeared not to be in a better humor her self. I might have
hoped however, Madam, replied the Governess, who was not satisfied with that
excuse, that after so much Complaisance as I had for you in the Garden this
Evening, which was so favorable to your Designs, you might have afforded me a
better reception: But I perceive the business; you would have them that concern
themselves for you to be responsable of the ill success that your desires have
had. You being the Person, Madam, replied the Marchioness, who did give the
first motion to that Masquerade, which you had not invented but for your own
diversion; I wonder, that after you had made me the Property in it, you should
yet demand of me some acknowledgment. Yes, Madam, replied Donna Barbara, with a
forced smile, if there had been no more in the case, but you know that if you
have been my Property, I have been your Gull. The worse for you, Madam, replied
the Marchioness. Yes, the worse indeed, replied the other, but do you know,
added she, with a little transport, not being able to contain her passion any
longer, that I am very unfit to be employed in such kind of Commerce. I am
willing to believe it, Madam, replied the Marchioness, still with the same
coldness, but it is my Opinion, that no person should be vexed for rendering
such Services to others, of which they themselves stand in need. I need such
Services! replied she. Who knows, Madam, replied the Marchioness, you are a
Woman as I am, and one cannot -- Ah! one can be assured, said she, still
fretting more and more, that if I am a Wife, it is without such weaknesses as
dishonor an Husband. It is true, replied the Marchioness, who could forbear no
longer from revenging her self of that Reproach, that it is very honorable for
a Woman to go at midnight to visit Prisoners, such a one too, as upon whose
account you would have me disgraced, though I had never spoken to him.
Prisoners! replied Donna Barbara, in an accent very different from the former.
Yes, Madam, continued the Rival, Prisoners, but I must confess that is an act
of Charity, which performed at such an hour and under a Religious Habit, is of
so great a merit before God and Man, that it gives a person a due right of
slandring all others. Donna Barbara, whose quick and nimble wit had never
wanted a repartee to all that was said to her, did remain now strangely
confounded, so that she only said that she understood her not. How! do you not
understand me, replied the Marchioness, who was resolved to give it her home,
stay a moment, and I will fetch you a certain thing that shall expound to you
more clearly what I say to you, and shall let you see, that it is from good
hands that I have it. She meant the Glove, which she went to seek for in a
Closet that was in her Chamber. The Marquess, who had heard all that fine
Dialogue, without-meddling with the Dispute, employing himself about something
else, was very much pleased that his Wife had given her such a severe repulse,
and she had never done any thing in the world that had pleased him so much as
to have humbled that Lady, who was the proudest Woman in the World. He could
have wished, to complete his joy, that the Governor had been present, who came
just in the time that the Marchioness was returning with Donna Barbara's Glove.
Here, Madam, said she, giving it her, judge by that Token whether I am well
informed of the Adventure. The poor Lady was so cast down with different
thoughts, both at the sight of that Glove, and at her Husband's unlucky arrival
to make an end of ruining her, that she retired, not being able to speak one
word more. The Governor, who did see her go so out of Countenance, and with a
great flushing all over her Face, which did sufficiently express the
disturbance that was in her Soul, did inquire of the Marquess, what was the
matter with her; he told him that he must enquire of the Marchioness, and the
Marchioness said that he must ask the Marquess, thus shifting him from the one
to the other, without any other satisfaction. The Governor was not very well
contented with this, and he would have gone to seek after his Wife, to know of
her what occasion she had to separate her self after that manner from the
Marchioness, had they not been on the point of going, he therefore deferred his
Information till his return, believing that at the most it could be but some
Woman's Quarrel, and knowing the humor of his, he did suppose that she might
have undertaken to make some Remonstrances to the Marchioness about the
Pilgrim, which the other had not taken kindly; and therefore he did not trouble
himself any further about it. They all got into the Coaches, and drove on
toward Saragossa, through which the Marquess would pass going for Madrid. The
Governor had had a design to accompany them a Journeys way from Barcelonna,
but that certain words which the Marchioness had let fall by the way concerning
Donna Barbara and the Pilgrim, which did bear double sense, did give him more
cause to think than was expected, and were the occasion that he returned home
that night. No great store of Discretion can be expected from Women in such
cases, and there never was one yet that did spare her Rival, when she could
ruin her. Donna Barbara, was passing away some very scurvy particles of time,
as may be imagined after the late Encounter that she had had with the
Marchioness, who doubtless would not forbear, as she imagined, informing the
Governor thoroughly of it: So that she was in strange disquiets, till she did
see him go along with them, guessing by that that he was not over angry with
her; seeing he did not desist accompanying them, as he had designed it. After
this she began to breath and rejoice that she had driven away the Marchioness
from Barcelonna, and remained in sole possession of her Lover, she presently
sent to seek after her most dear Confident, to whom she did relate what had
passed between her and the Marchioness. Not conceiving from whom she could have
had all that Information, except it were the Marquess that had surpised them
at the going out of the Tower. Father Andrew did fear very much for himself, in
case this business should be known, not doubting but the share he had in it,
would make him fall heavily under the Governor's Anger, and made to bear the
whole Burden. Donna Barbara did endeavor to encourage him, telling him that
she knew a way how to prevent all the harms which might befall them; that they
had two days to think of it, seeing that the Governor was not to return till
the next day, but that the Pilgrim was to be disposed to assent to it, in
representing to him the danger that their lives would be in, if they should
stay till the Governor returned; and that of necessity they must make their
escape that night, and get into France, where they should not fear to want for
any thing, because she would carry along with her a sufficient quantity of
Jewels, to shelter them all from it. Father Andrew, who would willingly be
always the farthest from blows, did highly approve of this Advice, and he did
not believe that the Pilgrim would make any difficulty of following them,
seeing that besides his liberty which by that means he did recover, he could
not but imagine, that there was much more for him to fear than for them. They
therefore did conclude, that without a further delay they would go to him, and
inform him in what a condition things were, and see whether the proposition
would please him. Donna Barbara had put up her Friars Habit in one of her
Closets, whence they took it out, and the Father was again employed in the same
Office as the night before. After which they went to the Pilgrim, who was not a
little surpised to see Donna Barbara return in the same Disguise at that time
of the day. He could not forbear from expressing his trouble at it, and she
without hearkening unto him, said that she came to inform him of two things,
the first of them she doubted not but would very much afflict him, which was
that the Marchioness was gone to remain in some uninhabited place, where she
was led by her Husband, that she might never more be seen by any body but him.
The other was, that before the Ladies departure, she had told the Governor of
her going to see him the last night, in a Friars Habit, as she had learned it
of the Marquess, which had met her and Father Andrew as they were going out of
the Tower, from whose hands she had much to do to escape, with leaving one of
her Gloves with him, which the Marchioness had shown to the Governor for
Confirmation of what she had said; so that he might easily see what was to be
done: That, as for her part, she was fully resolved to do whatsoever he
pleased, provided that he would take care of his own life, which was that which
she held most dear. Though Camille had prepared himself in order to his
separation from the Marchioness, imagining that they would be gone before he
was got out of Prison; yet the news of it gave him a mortal wound: as to what
the Governess said besides, he did not add much Faith to it, and if he could
have believed it, it had only aflicted him a little for the fear he would have
had that the beauteous Marchioness had believed he had contributed something
toward that Visit, but apprehended nothing at all on the Marquess's account,
in reference to his life, of which he was very careless at that time. Donna
Barbara, who perceived that he continued silent, which made her think that he
was thinking of what he should resolve concerning what she had proposed to him,
did press him to give his answer; it was time to fix upon something, and to
prepare for a flight, if he thought fit to save himself from the evil effects
of the Governor's Fury, who being a person very sensible of things of that
nature, he would be highly exasperated. Camille, who did presently perceive
which way the Ladies designs did tend, and who had chosen to dye rather than to
be troubled with her, did answer her very coldly, that he had acted nothing
against the Governor, which might draw his Anger so severely upon him, and
that if he had been so unhappy as so to do, however he would not involve her in
his Misery, and so render her more guilty than she really was. Donna Barbara
struck to the heart with so cold an answer, as much as a passionate Woman as
she was could be, concealing her cruel rage, did tell him all that the wit of a
Woman could invent of most persuading, to engage him to yield to the
proposition which she did make him, even in mere pity to her self whom she had
lost through the violent passion which she had for him; adding to those tender
expressions such Tears and Sighs as did tear some also from Father Andrew's
Bosom, who did declare of her side, with his eyes full of Tears, to persuade
this insensible man to seek after his own liberty, which they did offer him,
and to shun that Death which would be inevitable, if he should stay the
Governor's return; but the hard-hearted, or rather prudent Camille, who was
not of so easy a nature as was the Reverend Father, and that perceived better
than he did, on which side lay the greatest danger, did easily defend himself
against all those Attempts; of which Donna Barbara being sensible, did then
endeavor to make him apprehend all that a passionate and despised Woman could
imagine of most cruel and wicked, to ruin him with, and finding that all those
threatenings did not move him neither, in that height of passion she drew from
under her Friars Gown a Stilleto, with a design to plunge it into her own
Bosom, if the Pilgrim had not been nimble in staying of her Arm, and after that
he had much to do to force that Weapon out of her hands. Father Andrew, who had
been strangely affrighted at the Attempt, was on his Knees, entreating the
transported Lady not to kill her self, and the Pilgrim to have Compassion of
her, who at last was moved, not at his Request, nor at her furious Rage, which
had rather exasperated him, seeing that all this did tend to make him
miserable, but unto those Considerations which he had, that to shun one evil he
should create to himself diverse others, if he should drive that Woman into a
despair: Therefore to reclaim her a little, he entreated her to deliver up that
Dagger to him, and that he would do all that she should desire. She did not
part with it but on that condition, and breathing a little, Ungrateful, said
she, that stays till I cause my own death, before thou would grant me my
life. I know not, Madam, whether the way that we are going to take, will not
bring you sooner to your end, than the abiding here. No certainly, answered
she, for the Governor being not in Town, I have the means to draw you from
hence without the least danger; at the Port there are some Felouca's in
readiness to carry us to France, and I take with me that which shall secure you
from want and misery, except you reckon it a misery to have in your Company a
Woman that loves you with such a passion as I do. Camille did make her no
Answer, to give her leave to think all that she pleased, his design being to
get out of Prison, since it was to be so, whether he would or no, to shun
greater evils, and not to humor the Amorous Capricios of a Woman, for whom he
had never had the least inclination. However, things were ordered as if he had
resolved to content her; and the Lady was so transported with joy at it, that
she already thought her self out of Barcelonna with her dear Gallant. The
Governess and the good Father Andrew took leave of the Pilgrim to go order
their businesses, and prepare for their departure, which was to be at eleven at
Night. The Father had all the outward Commissions in his charge, which were to
hire the Felouca, to buy in Provisions, and all other things necessary for a
Voyage. And the Lady took upon her the care of the inward business, and to
prevent all obstruction of their flight: Finally, all things having been well
regulated on her part, and Father Andrew having taken such care as nothing
should be wanting on his side, when the hour was come they went to the Tower,
where the Lady entered, being wholly transported with joy, and running
immediately into her dear Pilgrim's Chamber, Come, you must rise, said she,
seeing him lie upon the Bed with the Curtains drawn, for it is time to be
going, and we are Masters as well of the Prison as of the Palace; and finding
that he neither answered nor moved, she believed that he was asleep, therefore
she drew open the Curtains to pull and awaken him, but when she perceived the
Governor, who arose, it did set her on a sudden into such an amazement as may
be imagined; which did so surprise her, that after she had made an extreme
outcry, which affrighted Father Andrew, who thought as little as she did, to
find the Governor there, she fell down backwards in a Swoun. This Lord, more
careful of his Honor than of his Wife, whose humor he had known long, and
fearing more the divulging of the business, than the effects thereof, having
well conceived by all that the Marchioness had told him, that some things were
acted within his doors, which did not go well, he had thought that it would not
be prudence in him to lie from home: He had been witness of the good will which
his Wife had expressed for the Pilgrim, and making good use of the
Marchionesses advice, had in a handsome manner taken leave of the Marquess, not
showing them the least sign of disturbance, and was returned to Barcelonna on a
full gallop, where he came in the dark, judging that if there was any business
in hand, his Wife would take the opportunity of his absence. Wisemen have
always some fore-sights of the mischief that may befall them, and there are
many in the World that would not have such weights upon their Foreheads, if
they were as well inspired as he was. Our Governor therefore being come into
the City, had quitted his Horse at the Arcenal, where having left his people
also, he took one of his Servant's Cloaks, went into the Palace, and from
thence into the Tower, without being known by any body. There he spoke with him
that had the Pilgrim in charge, who being none of Donna Barbara's Intelligence,
did confess that he had let Father Andrew come to the Prisoner by the Lady
Governesses Orders, who the first time had come to see him singly, but
afterward accompanied with a little Friar of the same Order, and that the last
night they had been long together. There needed no more for a man of
understanding, as was the Governor, to unravel this Mystery, and to guess who
had been Father Andrew's Companion in that Visit, who was not not used to go
accompanied in the Palace, and who had less occasion to do so in going to visit
that Prisoner. He needed no further insight in the business. He sent the Jailer
to the Port to hire a Felouca, who a moment after returned to tell him, that
there was but one, who had been retained by a Friar of S. Dominick's Order, who
was to be gone that Night at eleven. This news did almost distract him, not
doubting any longer but that his Wife was resolved to be gone with this
Pilgrim, or at least to help him to escape. The Spanish Flemne, who did abound
in him, did at last gain the upper hand over diverse desperate resolutions which
he had taken, and which he had been upon the very point of executing upon his
own Lady, rather than against an unfortunate stranger, who was not to be
responsable of his Wifes follies, he took the resolutions therefore to break
their measures without noise, and to oblige Donna Barbara to become wise by
reason. He sent the Jailer to the Pilgrim to get him out of Prison, and conduct
him to that Felouca, which Father Andrew had hired, with express Orders from
himself unto the Watermen to be gone immediately, on pain of Imprisonment; and
a Charge to the Pilgrim, of never returning to Barcelonna, on pain of Death.
This was accordingly executed, with the greater satisfaction to Camille, who
had no business in that City, and who was happily going out of Prison, and
quitted of that cruel torment, in which he should have been with the Governess.

The Jailer having acquitted himself of all his Commissions, the Governor had
laid himself in the Pilgrim's place, charging the Jailer, not to tell of his
being out of Prison, and to let any one in, that came to see him; thus had the
Governor carried on the business; his Wifes accident did somewhat mitigate his
wrath, and made him lose the opportunity of seizing Father Andrew, who he had
resolved should have been kept in Prison for sometime, in recompense of all the
good and pious Offices which he had rendered to his Wife, none deserving it
better than he had done. But in a Retreat, Father Andrew was always one of the
first, setting all his safety in his heels; so that he was already gone far,
when the Governor was thinking to detain him. There was no more to do, but to
take care of the Lady, who he was forced to lead himself into her Appartment,
after she was a little recovered of her Swoun. How that breach was made up, I
know not; for my Memoires fail me there, but it is probable that the
Governor's Resentments lasted no longer than did his Ladies Passion, who was
not long before she was engaged in a new Gallantry with a Cavalier, less cruel
than our Pilgrim.

FINIS.
Books Printed for R. Bentley and M. Magnes, in Russel Street in Covent Garden.
THe History of the Passions, in Octavo. Plato's Apology for Socrates, in
Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Idolatry, in Octavo. Dr. Whitby of Host-Worship, in
Octavo. Dr. Whitby's Answer to Mr. Cressey. Mr. Chamberlain's Poems, in Octavo.
Moral Essays, in 2 Vol. in Twelves. A Prospect of Humane Misery, in Twelves.
Vanity of Honor, in Twelves. Bishop Andrews Devotions, in Twelves. The
Princess of Cleve, the most famed Romance, in Octavo. Memoirs of Madam Maria
Manchini, in Octavo. The Heroine Musqueteer, in 4 parts, in Twelves. -- The
Happy Slave, in 3 parts, in Twelves. -- The Disorders of Love, in Twelves. --
The Triumphs of Love, in Twelves. -- Zelinda, A Romance, in Twelves. -- Count
Brion; or, the Cheating Gallant, in Twelves. -- The Obliging Mistress, in
Twelves. -- Fatal Prudence, in Twelves. -- Count Cabalis, in Twelves. -- Double
Cuckold, in Twelves. -- Almanzor and Almanzaida, in Twelves. -- The Pilgrim, A
Novel, in Twelves.
Plays Written by John Dryden Esquire
Mr. Limberham, or the Kind-Keeper. Oedipus, in part. Mistaken Husband, in
part. Notes on Morocco, in part.
Plays Written by Mr. Lee.
Nero, A Tragedy. Glorian, A Tragedy. The Rival Queens a Tragedy. ^ithridates,
a Tragedy. ^^sar Borgia, A Tragedy.
Plays Written by Mr. Crown.
Andromache, A Tragedy. Calisto, A Masque at Court. Country-Wit, A Comedy.
Destruction of Jerusalem, in 2 parts. The Miseries of Civil-War.
Plays Written by Mrs Bhen.
Forced Marriage, A Tragi-Comedy. Town-Fop, A Comedy. Abdellazar, A Tragedy.
Madam Fickle, Comedies. Fond-Husband, Comedies. Virtuous Wife, Comedies.
Plain-Dealer, A Comedy, By Mr. Wicherly. All Mistaken, By Mr. Howard. Enlish
Monsieur, By Mr. Howard. Generous Enemies, A Comedy, By Mr. Corey Tartuff, A
Comedy; By Mr. Medburn.
French Books.
LA vie and les faicts memorables de l' Evesque de Munster. Le Pelerin:
Nouvelle Curieuse. Histoire du Grand Tamerlan. Les Satyrs de Boileau.
Tamerlan: ou la mort de Bajazet. Tragedy. Bellorophon: Tragedy. Instruction
moralle d' une Pere a son fills. Silvii Opera Medica. Les Commentaires de
Caesar, par Albancourt. La Noble Venitienne: Histoire gallante. Memoires de
Pontis. 2 Vol. Memoires sur l'origine des guerres. 2 Vol. Lacedemone antienne
and nouvelle. 2 Vol. Merovee fills de France; Nouvelle historique. Memoires de
Madam de Ravezan, en 4 part. Mademoiselle de Tournon.
Now in the Press.
The third Volume of the Moral Essays, in Twelve A Tragedy in Heroic Verse:
Written by two Ladi The Rival-Mother a Novel: A perfect School for the Officers
of the mouth.

