A LETTER From Dr. BRAY, to such as have Contributed toward the Propagating
Christian Knowledge in the Plantations.
BEing apprehensive that my so sudden Return for England, may occasion some
Misconstructions, till the true Reasons thereof shall be understood, to the
prejudice of those Designs, which you do so nobly support, for the Destruction
of the Powers of Darkness, and the Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom in His
Majesty's Plantations; I thought my self in Duty, Gratitude, and in Prudence
bound, to represent hereby a General View of those Reasons, which have induced
me to make it so soon, and unexpectedly. And they are as follows.

FIRST, It is pursuant to the Desire of the General Assembly of Maryland; who
having most unanimously passed a Bill of the Highest Consequence for the
Establishment of our Church, voted that I should be desired to request my
Lord's Grace of Canterbury, and my Lord Bishop of London, to favor that good
Law, by obtaining His Majesty's Royal Assent to the same, with all convenient
Expedition. And the Members, who gave me an Account of passing such a Vote,
told me withal, that it was the General Opinion, that I could be most
serviceable herein, by waiting personally upon Their Lordships, rather than by
Letters: In which I could not crowd all that may be necessary to be represented
concerning the present State of the Church, and the Necessity, at this time, of
their utmost Patronage. And it was in Debate, whether I should not be desired
by the Assembly so to do: But that it was thought this would be to unreasonable
a Request, they being sensible of the great Charges and Fatigues I had been
already at, in the Service of that Province; as they had a few days before
acknowledged by a Message from the House, with their Thanks for the same.

SECONDLY, It is at the joint Request of the Clergy of Maryland, who at the
Close of my Visitation, amongst other pressing Reasons, urged me with this,
that they found it to be the earnest Desire of the most sensible, and
well-affected to our Religion, throughout the Province, that I should go over
with the Law for England; Now that the Quakers are openly, and the Papists more
covertly, making their utmost Efforts against the Establishment of our Church,
by false Representations at home, of the Numbers and Riches of their Party; and
by insinuating, That to impose upon them an Established Maintenance for the
Clergy, would be prejudicial to the Interest of the Province, by obliging so
many wealthy Traders to remove from thence. The Falsity of which they thought
me best able to make appear, by means of my late Parochial Visitations,
throughout the greatest Part of the Province; more especially, by the Returns
given in upon my Tabula prima Parochialium Inquirendorum; by which, when they
shall be all sent in, I shall be enabled to give an Account of the Names of all
Heads of Families, and not only of the Religion, but in a good measure of the
Morals of every Man, Woman and Child, Freeman and Slave, White and Black,
throughout Maryland.

THIRDLY, Having answered the Clergy, that I could easily be persuaded, either
to go or stay, by the same Motives that urged my coming so many Thousand Miles
to visit them; viz. as it should appear to me wherein I could be most
serviceable to the Church, by the one, or the other: Yet being resolved to pay
the greatest Deference to those in Authority, I should determine my self in so
nice a Point by the Judgment of the Governor. Upon which the Clergy having
addressed his Excellency with their Reasons, he was pleased to prevent my
waiting upon him, by coming to me immediately as soon as the Visitation was
finished, and declared himself to be very much of the same Opinion with the
Clergy, as to the Importance of my going over.

FOURTHLY, It is to represent to my Superiors the State of Religion in
Maryland, Pensylvania, the East and West Jerseys, which requires some speedy
Consideration; and with reference to which, I have several things to propose to
my Superiors, wherein I shall want their Instructions.

FIFTHLY, It is in order to make the better Choice of proper Ministers for the
Service of those Churches, agreeable to what I have observed of the State, the
Temper, and Constitution of the Country and People: Of which Ministers, as
there are still wanting at least Thirty; so they must have some peculiar
Qualifications, if they would do good there. To supply which want, and to get
such qualified Persons, it is necessary to confer with my Lord of London: As
also to write to such of my Lords the Bishops, and the Reverend Archdeacons,
as I have the Honor to be known to, to recommend to me proper Persons, such as
they know to be, not only of an exact Conduct, both as to Prudence, and all
other good Morals, and have been for some time Curates, well experienced in the
Pastoral Care; but also of a true public, disinterested; in one word, of a
Missionary Spirit, having a Zeal for God's Glory, and the Salvation of Men's
Souls; and such as are by no means grown into Years, who cannot endure Fatigue;
(the Parishes as yet being very large) nor yet on the other side, raw young
Men, who can never preserve themselves above Contempt amongst a People of such
quick Parts, and good Intellectuals, as the Plantation-People are generally
observed to be.

SIXTHLY, It may perhaps appear of less we^^^t than it really is, should I give
it as one of my Reasons, that I may procure, and carry back with me a
considerable ^^^^er of Carpenters, Bricklayers, and Joyners, to finish some
Churches, an^ to build Parsonage-Houses upon the Glebes; which I have alre^^y
procured, and hope in a short time to have settled throughout the Province. The
want of Workmen makes Building there excessively chargeable; so that I find
upon auditing the Accounts of the several Vestries in my Parochial Visitations,
that the large Sums laid out in building their Churches, is by no means
answe^^d in the Fabrics: And therefore to husband the Charity of the Country,
that shall be given toward building of the Parsonage Houses, so as it shall be
more extensive, I have brought the Clergy into a Subscription, to maintain
every one his Workman, and to allow him much better than the Custom of the
Country is to do, and yet to be no Losers thereby themselves. By which means I
am enabled to make such Proposals, as will give sufficient Encouragement to
good Workmen, and sober Persons, to go over with me. But though this may be too
mean a Consideration; yet,

LASTLY, I hope this may appear of some weight; that it is, Because I find
there comes under my Cognizance several very important Cases to be speedily
tried, with relation to the Clergy and Laity. To determine several of which,
being of so high a Nature, as Forgery of Holy Orders, Polygamy and Incest, I
want Instructions as to the Manner and Forms of Proceedings: And as it appears
to me, have no Power, by my Commission, to give such Sentences as the Nature of
the Crimes will require. And in the due Execution of which, as I perceive that
I have many Eyes upon me; so the Country expects that something should be done
effectually in that Matter; and should I fail therein, my being there would be
to no manner of purpose of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and the necessary
Regulation of the Clergy and Laity.

I hope these Reasons may appear sufficient to Persons of that singular
Candor, and Goodness, which I have found in you. But because it is fit you
should be in some measure satisfied at present (though I intend to do it
hereafter in an ample and public manner) of the good that has been wrought by
your means; I do assure you, that besides the very useful Libraries, which are
provided through your Benefactions, and are settled in Pensilvania, New York,
New England, Carolina, Bermudas, are begun in several of the Leward Islands,
and are far advanced in Maryland; I have received in the latter the
Acknowledgments of the most public Persons, that the Face of Things, as to
Religion, Humanity, and good Morals, is very much altered for the better within
these few Years, that a Clergy have been sent amongst them: And have, I hope in
my Visitation, set the Clergy in such Methods, as, with the Divine Benediction
upon their Endeavors, will render them a continued Blessing to those Parts.

And it may not be amiss to add, that as I have personally found the whole Body
of the Maryland Clergy (excepting two, who have in part met already, and will
sufficiently feel the Effects of Discipline,) to give me an unusual
Demonstration of their Pastoral Care: And some of them to have so signalized
themselves, by their Industry, in the Instruction of the Negro's within their
respective Parishes, (of which they have baptized great Numbers) that these
poor Barbarians are not now the most ignorant, and least Solemn, Part of their
Assemblies; So at Philadelphia in Pensilvania, the Congregation of
Church-People, which amounted but to 60, at the most, not two Years ago,
through the Blessing of God upon the Endeavors of a late Missionary, is now
increased, chiefly from Quaker-Converts, to upwards of 700. And the People of
that Province do earnestly desire to be supplied with several Ministers more;
as indeed I think the Field is there, and the Neighboring Parts, so happily
sown by the excellent Mr. Keith, that it is become now as ripe for Harvest, as
in any part of the Christian World. And it being a main part of my Design in
coming over at this time, to procure, and take back very speedily with me,
right worthy Men, such as are capable to do the greatest good, I do earnestly
desire, that if you know any Clergyman so qualified, and alike Spirited as
Characterized above in the Fifth Article, you would lay before him what Service
he may do to the Church of God in those Parts, now that there is so happy a
Disposition therein to receive the Truth. I am sorry that, in the present State
I find that Church, which is but in its Infancy, I cannot promise that their
Places will be very considerable, the Glebes which I have, and am about to get,
being as yet uncultivated. But I can assure them, they may at this juncture be
very Extraordinarily instrumental to the Glory of God, the best Argument I can
use to such Persons as I want; and that which has been the great Motive, and
sole Support, during a five Years Service to those Churches, to him that uses
it: Also that their Livings will be improvable, and that they shall find all
possible Encouragement that may be contrived, and procured by their most
Affectionate Brother, and

Your most Faithful Servant, THO. BRAY.


