Edwin Mayor
Martis xii. die Aprilis School Anno Regn. Regis Willielmi Tertii Angliae, etc.
Decimo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Bagshaw to Print his Sermon, preached at the
Cathedral Church of St. Paul's, on Sunday the 3d. of this Instant April; before
the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of this City.

GOODFELLOW.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor AND ALDERMEN Of
this CITY. AT THE Cathedral Church of St. PAVLS on Sunday 3d. of April

By H. BAGSHAW, A. M.

LONDON Printed for Sam. Keble at the Turks Head over against Fetter-Lane, in
Fleet Street, School.

TO Sir JOHN JOHNSON, Knight. AND One of the Court of ALDERMEN.
Sir,
YOur having made choice of this particular Discourse, and being your self in
all respects a most eminent example of the Duties it recommends; As it gives
you a double title to the performance, so, I hope, it will in some measure
excuse the freedom I take in honoring it with your name, and in publishing my
thoughts on this Subject as your own by Approbation; I heartily wish they may
be in the least instrumental toward promoting the true interest of Religion
among us, but if the success be not answerable, there is yet a certain secret
satisfaction which is the necessary result of a well grounded Intention.

I am not ignorant with what profound Learning and persuasive eloquence this
Subject has been already treated, insomuch that it may seem a great piece of
vanity to trouble the World with another Discourse of of this nature,
(especially when it is almost as difficult to write any thing new upon it, as it
is to form any thing material against it) but since this is purely calculated
for the better guidance and direction of Christian practice; I hope the
plainness and simplicity of it is dress will admit of a better natured
construction; and that your wonted goodness (a quality well known to all those
who are so happy as to be of your acquaintance) will incline you to Patronize
this Discourse, and to accept the Dedication as atestimony of gratitude and
respect, from

Your most Obliged Most faithful Humble Servant, H. BAGSHAW.

St. Matt. XXI. part of the 13th. ver. My House shall be called the House of
Prayer.


THese words were spoken by our Blessed Savior by way of reproof to those
persons, whom he found buying and selling in the Temple at Jerusalem; and to
let them know how much they profaned that Sacred Pile, which had been
dedicated to the worship and Service of God, by turning it to an Exchange, or
Marketplace, where their whole business was cunningly to undermine their
Brethren, and to make the greatest advantages they could of each other in their
way of Dealing and Traffic. This infamous abuse of his Fathers House
exasperated our Blessed Lord, and made him express his resentments of such an
Indignity and Affront by overthrowing the Tables of the Mony-Changers, and the
Seats of them that sold Doves, as we read in the Verse immediately foregoing:
As if he had said, though your practice hitherto has been by no means answerable
to that awful reverence you ought to pay a Place of that Nature; yet
notwithstanding it shall be restored to it is Primitive use, set apart, and
appropriated to the work of Devotion, employed in these words, My House shall be
called the House of Prayer.

The design of this Discourse is to recommend the duty of frequenting those
Places, which it has pleased Almighty God to set apart for the performance of
Religious Duties, which I shall endeavor to enforce by showing, I. That such
places do justly challenge an extraordinary respect and reverence from us. II.
By showing what influence the distinguishing respect, which we owe to them,
ought to have on our lives and Actions, as also what qualifications are
necessary to accompany us in our attendance on them.


First then, I am to prove that we ought to have an extraordinary respect and
reverence for those Places, which it has pleased God to set apart for the
performance of Divine Worship.

In speaking to which head, I would not be so understood, as though these Holy
Places were to be esteemed or reverenced upon the account of any internal
sanctity inherent in them, or that the regard we ought to bear to them should
be terminated in the Places themselves; but only that we ought to esteem and
respect them in a relative sense, as being appointed by God as the proper Seats
and Instruments of His Worship and adoration, and which He has promised to
sancttifie with His Divine Presence, When but two or three are gathered
together in his Name.

It Is true indeed, God cannot properly be said to be absent from any place, who
fills the Universe with his Omnipresence, but with respect to His special
acceptance and readiness to assist the Prayers and Suplications of such, who
call upon him in his Holy Temples, we may affirm according to the Scripture
Phrase, Surely this place is no other than the House of God; and by consequence
to be esteemd and respected by us with that profound submission and awful
Reverence, which is due to the Sanctuary of the Lord.

And that more especially for these following reasons.

1. Because of that different respect, which God Himself bears to things set
apart to his own Worship, from what he does to all other things of common and
ordinary use, of which we cannot have a stronger Argument than the many and
remarkable Judgments poured down by God upon such profligate Offenders, who
have presumed to violate by Sacrilegious means, things consecrated to the more
immediate and peculiar use and service of Himself. And though History, both
Sacred and profane, abounds with many Instances of this kind, yet I shall
content my self at present with only marking out two of them, which whether
they are more exemplary for their punishment, or to be abhorred for their Crime
is a Question not easily determined. The first I shall mention is Antiochus,
who, when all his projects were frustrated, his Commanders fallen, and his
hopes out off, with the flower of his Army, whilst he was reflecting with
himself upon the happiness he had lost, and the misery he sustained; his
Conscience immediately flies in his face, and represents to him those wicked
practices which had occasioned his fall, and he repenting too late, recites the
black Catalogue after this manner, Now I remember the evils I did at Jerusalem,
how I took the vessels of Gold and Silver, I perceive therefore that for this
cause these evils are come upon me, and behold I perish for grief in a strange
Land.

The other Instance is, that Monster of iniquity and profaneness the great
Belshazzar, who having made a great Feast to entertain the Nobles of his Court,
commanded (as the Prophet Daniel informs us) the Golden and Silver vessels,
which his Father Nebuchadnezzar had taken out of the Temple, to be brought unto
him, that himself and his Princes, his Wives and his Concubines might drink
therein: One would have thought the heavy Judgments, inflicted on his Fathers
Head for the like Crimes, might have been a sufficient warning to him not to
break through the bounds which God had set between things Sacred and Profane,
and, by such a daring instance of impiety, bid defiance to the Almighty. The
most high God (says the Prophet speaking to Belshazzar on this occasion) gave
Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a Kingdom, and Majesty, and Glory, and Honor; but,
when his heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride he was deposed from
his Kingly Throne, and they took his Glory from him: he was driven from the
Sons of Men, and his heart was made like the Beasts, and his dwelling was with
wild Asses, they fed him with Grass like Oxen, and his Body was wet with the
dew of Heaven, till he knew that the most High God ruled in the Kingdom of men,
and that He appoints over it whomsoever He will. One would have thought, I
say, that this Vial of Gods wrath, which was poured out on the Father for his
Sacriledg, might have had some influence upon the Son, who knew all this; but
he, as if he had been desirous of getting a renown by that Crime, or one, that
thought the wickedness of the deposed Prince was intailed upon his Successor
together with the Scepter, could not forbear making the Sacred Vessels of the
Temple the unhappy Instruments of his Luxury; but alas how soon did the Scene
change, and the very same night, that he was entertaining himself in this
manner, his Sentence was written in lively Characters upon the wall by the
Finger of the Almighty: His knees smote one against another, the joints of his
loins were loosed, and the tragedy concluded in the loss of his Kingdom
together with his life. Neither are we to wonder why God should show such a
shining instance of his wrath and fiery indignation against such an audacious
Precedent of Impiety, since his profaning the Vessels of the Temple was in
effect, and by interpretation, to declare, that either he did not believe what
God said, or that he did not fear what he could do. And that we might not form
a false Judgment, and apprehend, that these signal punishments were the reward
of any other crimes, which in his life time he had committed, the same Prophet
positively assures us. For thou, O Belshazzar, says he, have lifted up thy self
against the Lord of Heaven, and they have brought the Vessels of his house
before thee, and thou and thy Lords, thy Wives and thy Concubines have drunk
Wine in them; and the God, in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy
ways, have thou not glorified; And then he proceeds to interpret the Judgment
pronounced against him; that God has numbered his Kingdom and finished it, that
he is weighed in the Balance and found wanting, that his Kingdom is divided
and given to the Medes and Persians: After which it follows, in that night was
Belshazzar the King of the Chaldeans slain.

It is not from hence to be concluded, that God does always show such remarkable
instances of his displeasure on the heads of all Sacrilegious Intruders, or
such, as violate either things or places consecrated to the more immediate use
and service of himself; it is sufficient, that his Justice does by some eminent
examples of this kind assert it self, though at other times it may suffer for a
while Persons and Families raised upon the ruins of Churches and enriched with
the spoils of Sacriledg to flourish and thrive like a green Bay Tree: It does
not become us to inquire or examine what is the reason of so a wise a
dispensation.

It is sufficient to my present purpose, that he does by some convincing
instance of his vengeance, very often proclaim to all the World, that he will
execute Judgments on those, who will not reverence his Sanctuary. Should the
Justice of God always interpose, and observe the same measures in other Crimes
of the like nature the frequency of his Judgments would probably be objected
against that Miraculous Power, by which they were effected: and Profane and
Irrilegious men would be apt to conclude, they were no more than the ordinary
effects of Chance or Providence; but, be that as it will: Thus much, I think, I
may venture to affirm, that there is no person, who has either known or read of
many notorious instances of Families enriched by such impious practices, but
may have likewise observed, that Providence has, sooner or later, blasted their
Prosperity, by some severe and unexpected visitation. Nay so Jealous does God
declare himself of the honor of his Sanctuary, and the place of his Holy
Presence, that he smote Uzzah for but endeavoring to support the tottering
Ark: Nor could the sincerity of his intentions alter the nature of the fact: It
is true indeed, many have been too apt of late, in instances of the like
nature, to depend too much upon the force of a sincere meaning, as though, that
were alon^ able to bear the guilt of all theit Sacrilegious impieties; but we
may learn from this Judgment, which befell him, that the pretended sincerity of
our intentions is no such preservative, as totally to secure us, and if the
errors of our judgments and consciences carry us on to the commission of
wicked practices we may be answerable for the one, if not for the other. And
this I the rather mention, because it is a frequent Artifice among some men, to
excuse their Rapine and Sacrilege with the blessed name of Reformation; but by
them most unjustly applied.

A seccond Reason why we ought to pay a distinguishing respect to Places of
this nature, is grounded upon the example and command of God himself, who is
pleased to appoint this difference. In the most early times of the World, we
find God giving his express injunctions to his Servant Jacob to build him an
Altar, which, when the holy Patriarch had performed in obedience to a special
and extraordinary Command, what reverence does he express to to it? and what a
profound esteem does he show toward it? How dreadful, says he, is this place;
for surely it is no other than the House of God. Is was not any internal worth or
sanctity inherent in the place it self, that either did, or could, procure it
this esteem from the holy Patriarch, for by nature there is no distinction in
places; but because it pleased God to appoint and set apart this place, as
peculiar to himself and his own use. If it be asked, for what reason God may be
supposed to bear a different respect to Places consecrated to his own Worship,
from what he bears to others designed for the common and ordinary uses of life,
it might be answered, that the Divine Will and Pleasure, when once revealed and
attested carry with them sufficient reason and conviction from the authority of
the Revealer to any sober and disinteressed Enquirers. We are not at liberty to
dispute and contest the grounds upon which the Will of God proceeds, or by
which it is determined: It is sufficient for us, that it has pleased him to
make known his Will to us by Revelation: Our duty is obedience and submission;
but so far as we may be allowed to reason upon Divine Subjects, we may probably
presume that God Almighty, by fixing upon and instituting of some places to
this peculiar end, was pleased to excite and promote the Devotion and Piety of
his people by that awful reverence, with which they are naturally apt to affect
our thoughts.

A third Reason, why we ought to bear a distinguishing respect to Places set
apart for the Worship of God is, that reverence and esteem which is due to all
things of what nature or qualities soever, whether persons or places, that are
appropriated more immediately to His holy Service and Worship. He that
despises you despises me, says our Savior to His disciples, and he that
despises Me despises him, that sent Me; which Sentence, though applied by our
Blessed Savior to such as should abuse, or vilify the Sacred Office of his
Disciples, may with equal verity, be pronounced, though in a subordinate degree,
of those, who Sacrilegiously invade the Temples and Patrimony of the Church,
and serve all their mean and sordid ends upon her. Have ye not houses to eat
and to drink in, says St. Paul in this first Epistle to the Corinthians, or
despise ye the Church of God? The Apostle would have no feasting, or,
otherwise, lawful freedoms practiced at the Altar, which had been set apart and
consecrated to a more Divine and spiritual entertainment. It had been no excuse
for the Corinthians to have pleaded, that they practiced only the inoccent
freedoms of Conversation, and used the Church of God as a means to promote
mutual freindship and society among themselves; these ends, however exellent in
themselves; were to be attained in their proper and ordinary places: And they
were not under any pretense, or color, or for any design or end whatsoever, to
abuse things, that had been dedicated to the immediate Service of God, to any
other ends than those, for which they were designed.

If it be demanded, whether the Consecration of Places does communicate any
special sanctity or holiness to them, beyond that of other things and places of
ordinary and common use: I answer, that though it does not, yet it will not from
hence follow, that therefore they are no more to be regarded by us than other
things and places are: For the places are already sacred by the donation and
appointment of them to the Service and Worship of God: And upon this account it
is, that we affirm they are to be respected, not as absolutely, but relatively
Holy because of that relation they have to him, who is the Fountain of all
holiness. If it be further asked, to what purpose then is the Consecration of
Things or Places, which are already Sacred by their donation and appointment to
this question I make answer, that by their Consecration they are solemnly
declared to be so: And unless this manner of pronouncing, or declaring places
holy were admitted, it is not easy to imagine how the common people should
know what places they were to respect as holy, and what not; besides thus much
at least we cannot deny but that such places, as are peculiarly and solemnly
appointed for Divine Service, are more apt to quicken us with a greater spirit
of Devotion than others of ordinary and common use. A reflection of this nature
cannot but correct our wandering thoughts, and will more forcibly engage our
affections than all the most pressing arguments, though pointed with the
clearest reason, and dressed up under all the beauties of Rhetoric and
elocution. And therefore, though these external things are neither essential
parts of our devotion, nor, by any virtue of their own, direct occasions of it;
yet because it has pleased God after this manner, by sanctifying these
inferior means to our spiritual improvement, to help us forward in the
exercise of our duty; it will better become us to adore his Wisdom, in thus
expressing his Compassion to our Infirmities, than by fondly relying upon our
own, to put a slight upon such assistances, and unthankfully frustrate the
gracious methods contrived for our Salvation. And thus have I finished my first
general Head proposed to be spoken to from these words; namely, that such
places as are set apart for the performance of Religious Duties, do justly
challenge an extraordinary respect and reverence from us. I proceed now to the
second Branch of my Text, wherein I promised to show, what influence the
distinguishing respect, we owe to those solemn Places of divine worship, ought
to have on our lives and Actions, as also what qualifications are necessary to
accompany us in our attendance on them.

In speaking to which head I shall not undertake any such exact ennumeration,
as may conclude all the general branches of our duty, but shall confine my
self, in the remaining part of this Discourse, to these three following;
Sincerity, Reverence, and Attention.

By Sincerity I mean an upright intention, by which we direct our devotion to
that proper end, for which these Holy Places were designed viz. the knowledge of
Gods Will in order to the due performance of it. This honest simplicity of
heart is that which our Blessed Savior represonts by the good ground, where
a^e it was the Seed sprung up and bore fruit; and he that brings not this along
with him, howsoever he may fondly flatter himself, retains only the shadow not
the substance of Christianity. And to this we may probably impute that small
influence; which the Word of God has on the minds of some among us, who come
to the places of Divine Service for the same end, that they frequent the
Exchange or the Court, not out of any sense of Devotion or Piety toward God,
but in compliance with their own interest which amounts to no more than a
State-conformity taken up in favor of their secular ease and profit to avoid
the punishments, or to grasp the Dignities presented to them. It Is with
difficulty that they prevail upon themselves to come, and with great impatience
that they sit out the Service. The Custom and Manners of the Country where they
live, oblige them to feign a decent Hypocrisy to avoid the Censure of the
public, or the imputation of Singularity; nay, even when they are in Gods
presence, as though it were a place of Penance, or confinement; they contrive,
by all the little Arts they can, how they may render their stay the mote
tolerable, and divert that time, which they look on as the Parenthesis of
their lives.

Others likewise there are, who are more constant attendants on Divine Worship,
who bring only their speculative faculties along with them, and leave their
wills and affections behind them: They covet to know Gods Will for any purpose,
but to practice it, and are Hearers of the Word, only to become more knowing,
without ever suffering it to reach any further than their understandings, which
is so fatal a defect as blasts our pursuits, though of things in themselves never
so excellent. This we find exemplifi'd in Simon-Magus, who, though he coveted a
thing in it self very desirable, the power of conferring the Holy Ghost, yet
desiring it upon undue conditions, and for sinister ends, he was immersed in
the gall of bitterness, and at last advanced to that height of Blasphemy, as to
set up himself for God thereby becoming a Lasting Monument how unsafe it is to
prevaricate in Holy Things. But there are a set of men who deal yet more
unsincerely in their attendance on the Service of God, and hear the Word
insidiously, on purpose to collect matter of objection and cavil against the
Preacher, that listen attentively, but to no other en^ t^n to remark
incoherencies and defects in the ^tter of it; which when they think the (...)
started they have gained their design, and he (...) use in any measure the same
proportion of diligence how they may improve the doctrine delivered to the
benefit of their Souls, and their everlasting happiness in a life to come: The
Precepts and Threatenings declared against their darling Lusts are continually
fretting and perplexing them, whereupon they are resolved to discharge their
malice against the Preacher. But I shall not insist upon this reflection in
this place, because I will not suppose any, who compose this Auditory so very
disingenuous as to be concerned in any part of it.

A second Qualification, which is necessary to accompany us in our attendanee
on Divine Service at the House of God, is Reverence. If we look back upon the
past Ages of the World we shall find that even among the Pagan Princes a
Reverend deportment was always used in the Worship of their Deities, and their
Devotions performed in the most expressive postures of Reverence according to
the different modes of the Countries they lived in; insomuch that Numa made a
Law that no man should meddle with divine things, or worship their Gods in
passing, or by accident, but make it a set and s^emn business: And every one
knows, that has the least acquaintance with ancient History, with how great
ceremony and solemnity their Oracles were consulted. How great a shame then is
it for Christians to abate of that reverence to the True God, which the very
Heathens allowed their False Ones.

Now this proceeds sometimes for want of that habitual reverence we should
always have to the Place of Gods Presence, and sometimes for want of actual
exciting it: For if the habit lie only dormant in us, and be not awakened by a
lively and vigorous consideration, it avails us as little for edification, as
the habitual strength of a man does for labor, when he will not exert it to
that end. When we enter into the gates of Sion we should do it with other
sentiments and apprehensions than when we enter into any other place of common
and civil use, considering that it is the Temple of the God of Heaven, the Seat
of His more Immediate Presence, the Instrument of our Salvation, or upon abuse,
of our Ruin: for the greater opportunities and advantages we have to improve
our selves in the knowledge of God and Religion, the more in proportion will b^
^pected from us. And sure this, if duly app^hended cannot but awaken our
endeav^ control all trifling fancies, and make us frequent these Holy Places
with a suitable reverence and becoming affection; to this purpose we find the
Royal Psalmist pathetically crying out; O how amiable, are thy Tabernacles O
Lord of Hosts? my Soul longs, yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord,
for a day in thy Courts is better then a thousand, etc. and in another place,
says he, one thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will require, even that
I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
fair beauty of the Lord, and to visit his Temple. And as we ought to make it
our deliberate choice to frequent the Place of Gods Worship, so, when we do it,
it is our duty to stir up our selves with such solemn apprehensions, as may
render us apt to receive due impressions from the Word of God, which is there
delivered to us; for, where there is no reverence, it is not to be expected
there should by any genuin or lasting obedience: Set places and set times for
Divine Worship have been made use of in all Ages of the Christian Church,
having been continued down to us more especially since Constantine's time: And
as they were at first instituted for this purpose that we might be more at
leisure to retire (...) our selves, and seriously reflect upon the solemn
Business we are going about, so we shall all of us be highly wanting to our
selves, if we do not endeavor, by a strict and daily observance of them, to
improve these assistances to that Blessed End, for which they were appointed we
must take care that our Services be as free from irreverence or indecency of
behavior, as the Sacrifices of the Law were required to be from infirmity and
blemish, assuring our selves that the God whom we serve, is Jealous of his
Honor as well as Holy in his Nature, neither will he suffer Himself to be
contemned or invaded within His Own Walls.

The third and last Qualification, which I shall insist on, as a necessary
ingredient of our public Devotion, is Attention. This is a duty so
indispensably necessary, that without it all places are alike and equally
insignificant, for he that attends not to the Duties and Offices of the Church,
the warmest and most persuasive devotion in the Priest shall affect him no
more, than the most artful and charming strains of Music can move a person who
has lost his Hearing. We must therefore keep our minds fixed in our attendance
on God in His (...) Temples. Inadvertency is a folly and ^ness i^ Civil and
Temporal affairs; but 'ti^ (...) in Divine, for a man to be in the presence
(...) one, especially his superior, and not at all to mind what he says, the
rules of conversation interpret no small instance of Contempt; yet this vile
affront do all those put upon God who in their attendance on his Service give
it no attention: And much more they, who come to the Church only to gratify
their curiosity, or what is yet worse to pursue some ill inclination, or
vicious design. Notwithstanding which I am afraid the practice is not more
impious than it is common, for there are many, who frequent the Gates of Sion,
who if at each time they should be called to an account, I doubt could show but
little fruits of their edification thereby; and this may be one reason why, so
many persons grow old in their ignorance, understanding their Baptismal Vow as
little when they should perform it, as they did when they made it, and are
ready to leave this World before they know any thing of the other which is to
succeed it. This want of Attention forestals all possibility of good; how shall
the preaching the Word of God convince the understanding, or persuade the
affections, which (...) much as enter the imagination? so that in thi^ ^e Seed
seems more cast away than in any of those ^es the Parable gives: In those it
still (...) the Soil? but in this it never reaches that, but ^tered and
dissipated as with a ^y wind, by those wandering and vicious thoughts, which
have prepossessed the mind.

Let none therefore presume to approach such Sacred Places, till they have
turned out all distracted fancies and have their faculties free and vacant for
those nobler objects which will there present themselves; and when they have so
disposed themselves for Attention, then let them contrive to improve that
attention to the best advantage. This will render what they hear opperative and
effective, and unless we employ our selves in this manner in these places, and
attentivly apply what is said to practice and experience; the Word or God may
fill our heads with high notions, nay with many speculative truths, which
amounts to no more than the Theology of the Apos ^ Angels, and will as little
advantage us. To conclude all, let our Attention, I say, be reduced to
practice, that so others seeing our good works may glorify our Father, which is
in Heaven. And if we fail here, the most assiduous diligence in all the former
will be but lost labor; let us mean never so well attend never so close, if
after all we do not practis, all the rest will serve but to inhance our guilt.
Let us all therefore keep a steady eye upon that mark and press toward it; as
the Apostle did, faithfully, and diligently frequent the places of Gods Holy
Service, that we may learn His Divine Will and pleasure and finally partake his
promises; which God of his infinite Mercy grant to us all, etc.

To whom with the Son and Holy spirit Three Persons, but one God, be ascribed
as is most due, etc.

FINIS.

