A PLEA FOR THE Peoples Fundamental Liberties and Parliaments.

Or, Eighteen QUESTIONS Questioned and Answered, Which QUESTIONS were lately
propounded by Mr. Jeremy Jves, pretending thereby to put the great Question
between the Army and their dissenting Brethren in the PARLIAMENT of the
Commonwealth of England out of question.

By Capt. WILLIAM BRAY.

Luke 3.14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall
we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse any falsely,
but be content with your wages.

1 Cor. 11.16. But if ANY MAN seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom,
neither the Churches of God.

Entered according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by John Clowes for the Author 1659.

To the Reader.
I Have given my thoughts in answer to these ensuing 18 Questions, that so I
might give some satisfaction to those doubts that may arise in the minds of
diverse good men, affected to their Countries Rights, and safeties, in these
times of great anxiety, dangers, and animosities, one toward another, and that
truth may take place, and all may endeavor to understand one the other, by a
faithful approaching to, and asserting, their Native Rights, and may not be
withdrawn from them upon any pretenses whatsoever; without which standing for
their Rights, there can be no true ground to expect Justice, Love, and Unity.
It is true, Calamities in Nations do oftentimes fall out to be best discerned,
when they are desperate and most incurable; But however, though the difficulty
be great, to amend a distracted Nation, yet it is all our duties to extend our
endeavors to save our Country, and leave the success to the Almighty; and in
so doing, the discharge of a good Conscience will offord great Comfort,
whatsoever may fall out in this uncertain and transitory Life.

W. B.

Eighteen Questions propounded by Mr. Jeremy Ives. Questioned and Answered, by
Capt. William Bray.
Question. I.
WHether a Free Parliament ought not by the Laws and Customs of this Nation,
to be chosen by the General Consent of the People?

Answer I.
It is one of the ancient and known general descriptions of a free PARLIAMENT,
according to the Laws, and Customs of this Nation to be elected by the general
and free consent of the People (who are not legally made incapable) and when it
comes to begin its Session by the Ancient Law and Right of the Parliament a
PROCLAMATION ought to be made in Westminster, That no man upon pain to loose
all that he has, shall during the PARLIAMENT in London, Westminster, or the
Suburbs wear any privy Coat of Plate, or go armed, or that Games, or other
Plays of men, women, or children, or any other Pastimes or strange news should
be used during the Parliament, and the Reason thereof was, that the High Court
of Parliament should not be thereby disturbed, nor the Members thereof (which
are to attend the arduous and urgent business of the Commonwealth) withdrawn;
And it is generally known by those whom it has pleased God to save alive in
our sad intestine wars, That the Parliament often declared themselves to be
highly affected, and displeased with the nature and manner of the late KING
CHARLES his demanding of the Lord Kimbolton, and the five Members, Mr. Pim,
John Hampden, Denzil Hollis, Esqrs. Sir Arthur Haslerig and Mr. Strood 5
January 1641, It was then Voted and Declared a high breach of the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and inconsistent to the Liberty and Freedom
thereof, and by a Declaration they did declare that the Kings Warlike manner
therein was against the Fundamental LIBERTIES of the People, and the RIGHTS of
PARLIAMENT; And another part of Freedom in the Election of Parliaments is,
That there ought to be no corrupt dealing to give money, etc: to be elected,
because it was to poison the Fountain it self (from whom should proceed no Law
contrary, but suitable to the Fundamentalls) Another principle Maxim and end
why Parliaments are to be assembled, and sit freely by the Fundamental, and
righteous, Constitution of England, is to redress grievances against corrupt
and unjust Judges, and great or potent oppressors who have subverted the course
of Law and Government, and destroyed the Peoples ordinary Legal remedies. And
no Parliament ought to be ended whilst any Petition remains undiscussed, or
at least to which a determinate answer is not made, as may be seen in the
fourth part of the Lord Cooks Institutes, treating of the high Court of
PARLIAMENT.

Question. II.
Whether a Parliament so chosen ought not to do what they think best for the
weal of the Nation that so chooses them without the interruption of any party
upon any pretense whatsoever?

Answer. II.
It is the Right of the People for their Parliament to be chosen in full
Freedom, and have also a free Session (after a free Election) without
interruption of any party, yet they are bound (as most Incomparable Example of
Law, Justice and Right to the whole Nation, and Executive Ministers whatsoever)
by the Right unalterable Rule, the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the
People to do impartial Justice and Right to every party, and not to consider
parties but the cause which wholly excludes an Arbitrary Power. And therefore
upon full debate in full and free Parliament of the 42 Ed. 3. cap. 3. If any
Statute shall be made against the Charter of our Liberties, it shall be void,
as may be seen by the Lord Cooks Institutes, the first part, his Commentary
upon Littleton, Lib. 2. cap. 4. Sest. 108. concerning which I have more fully
treated in my late Plea for the Peoples good Old Cause, or the Fundamental
Laws and Libertyes of England asserted, proved and acknowledged to be our
Right, before the Conquest, and by above thirty Parliaments, and by the
Declarations and Convictions of Conscience or public acknowledgements of the
late King Charles, and by the Parliament and their Army in their several and
particular streights and differences, and in answer to Mr. James Harrington his
CXX Political Aphorisms sold by Francis Smith at the Elephant and Castle near
Temple-Barr, wherein you will (as I conceive) upon your taking into
consideration the Authors which I cite for my judgment) clearly see; that Acts
or Statutes of Parliament that have been against the common Laws, (though upon
glorious and specious pretenses) are called illegal and mischievous Acts of
Parliament, shaking the Fundamental Law. And at a Grand Committee of the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England for the Government, Sept. 14. 1659.
It was resolved that the Supreme delegated Power residing in the Peoples
Trustees, is and ought to be limited in the exercise thereof by some
Fundamentalls not to be dispensed with or subjected to alteration.

Question, III.
If any shall say a free Parliament ought not to be so elected, and so
empowered; I demand then how they are a free Parliament in the sense that the
People of this Nation according to Law and Custom, do understand a free
Parliament?

Answer, III.
I conceive I have answered this in the first and second answers; And I do
further averr that a Parliament may be free in its election or original being,
and operations or exercise, and to and in the end of its Session, yet they are
bounded by the Fundamental Laws and Liberties of the Nation, and this does
not make them ever the more unfree, because the Fundamental Laws does limit
the delegated power, and hinder them from doing that which is ipso jure and
ipso facto Illegal in it self, viz: To destroy the Fundamental Laws, which
is the salus populi, suprema lex, and according to all which any Statute is to
be made. And therefore Parliaments I conceive will hardly give you thanks in
making their Authority and power to be greater then is desirable, whereby to
induce them to think they have no bounds, by which Cogitation they may do Acts
that may prove a snare unto them; And the people have no reason to thank you,
for if there be no Fundamentalls, and a limited Delegation in the Supreme
Legislative power, they might fear some danger to themselves in their
Eelection of their Parliamentary Conservators. But there being such Righteous
Fundamentalls, and the peoples Right to have Parliaments every year, or oftener,
(if need be) the people need not fear Parliaments; but have much reason to love
their CONSTITUTION.

Question, IV.
If it shall be answered in the Affirmative that a free Parliament ought to be
so chosen, and so empowered as aforesaid, I demand as the Nation is now
influenced by Priests, Lawyers, and Cavaliers, how the end of the good People
can be answered by a Parliament so elected and empowered?

Answer, IV.
Although there may be danger in the having a free Parliament, considering our
late intestine, civil Wars, and animosities, and so it does behove those that
have been faithful in the Cause of their Country, to seek, to save and defend
themselves from destruction and Violence, and our Enemies might tax us, as well
as our own hearts condemn us, with carelessness, and want of common ingenuity,
if we should not have respect to our just preservation, yet consider this has
been the pretense for very many years to avoyde our Rights, and it is the only
way to continue perpetual animosities, and to manifest that we trust not in
the Lord our God at all. And besides, consider danger is no argument against
Right. Upon this and the like suitable suggestions of yours, the people may be
for ever deprived of their Fundamental and ancient Laws and Birthrights, as
they were for a time by that Illegal mischievous Acts of Parliament, with a
flattering Preamble of 11 H. 7. cap. 3. as that famous Lawyer the Lord Cook
calls it in the fourth part of his Institutes. The colors (to make an Act
good, or seem good if colors only can make an Act to be so) were as specious
as these which you have given, or can be made to extend unto, to justify a
force, or deny, or question Right. The said Illegal mischievous Act was
pretended to be made to avoyde diverse mischiefs.

1. To the displeasure of Almighty God. 2. To the great let of the Common Law.
3. The great let of the Wealth of the Land.
Which were (I averr) as great, (or far greater) pretenses as to tell us of
influenced Lawyers, Priests and Cavaliers; For our Fundamental established
Laws, are so excellent and good in themselves, that no artificial Rhetorique
of influenced Lawyers, Priests, or Cavaliers, (your names of distinction) or
indeed any other Faction as well as they you name, could yet ever subvert them,
or raze them; and there may or can be given you a very great Catalogue (in
convenient season) of the force of the Law, and the visible displeasure of God
and good people, in very many Generations past, against such influenced
persons, when by their acquired wit and interest they have done the Nation
injury, in willful acts and endeavors to subvert the public Fundamental
Laws; And I have read Cassiodor says, Jura publica, certissima sunt vitae
humanae solatia; infirmorum auxilia, impiorum fraena. The Public Laws are the
most certain Comforts of humane life, they are the helps of the weak, and the
Bridles of the Impious: Our Public Fundamental Laws are the Bulwarks of our
Nation in general, and of Families, and persons in particular; and if we can
enjoy them, we have earthly happiness therein.

Question V.
If ever any Parliament could have answered the ends of the good people, I
demand whether the last long Parliament were not once the most likely of any
that went before them, or of any that can be expected to succeed them?

Answer V.
You need not publish a questioning or doubt of the ability of Parliaments to
answer the ends of the good people for it does too much tend to weaken and
dissolve the peoples love, and affection to their own Right of Parliaments, and
indeed the long Parliament were most likely in our late times, (for many
Reasons) to answer the expectations of the good people, because of the Power
invested in them by Act of Parliament, not to be dissolved unless by Act of
Parliament, or adjourned, unless by themselves or their own Order; And further,
because of those high and Eminent Obligations they had upon them of their Faith
and Promises, and of their Declarations, and invitations to the people in the
case of the original of the War which has caused much blood shed and expense
of Treasure. And therefore sithence you and others had Commissions from the
remainder of them (who were a declared refined party by the excellent
pretenses, and by power of some influenceing Officers of the Army) your
expectations were so much the more liklier and nearer to be answered you in a
peacable way of submission and obedience, rather then a violent way of
interruption. Unlawful and determined Violence many times Causes sad and
lamentable facts against the Virtues of Justice, Temperance, Prudence and
Fortitude, tending only to produce cares and fears innumerable, and only to
leave place for great trouble and repentance, or the severe hand of God.

Question VI.
Notwithstanding the great hopes we had of them, Considering the good
beginnings they made, and the fair opportunityes they had to perfect what they
had begun, I demand whether the most Considerable of the good things they did (
viz) the taking away Kingship, and Peerage, and declaring this Nation a free
State, were not rather the fruits and effects of that force, which was put upon
them, when the Army garbled them, then the Votes and Results of a free
Parliament?

Answer VI.
You take your opportunity to keep the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England out of their Right, supposing you are well backed by a great revolt or
force. But yet you consider they made good beginnings as well as allege and
averr that they had fair opportunities. But whether you do fairly to question
whether the most considerable of the good things you cite and mention they did,
were more the fruits and effects of a force of the Army then the Votes and
Results of a free Parliament, I referr to the rational and unbiased, seeing no
such Result did ever yet proceed from themselves; But yet by this method of
yours, you acknowledge them friends to the Forcers, and you lay a ground
(though I confess unwillingly by what appears) to invalid or weaken the Acts
(as to any thing you declare and esteem as good) because the Law of England is
a great enemy to unlawful force, and violence; Maxim paci sunt contraria vis
and injuria, Force and injury are contraries to peace, and it signifies any
thing that a man strikes or hurts withal, as the Lord Cook in the first part
of his Institutes his Commentaries upon Littleton. And you also by this your
doubting, questioning, way, pass a censorious* Judgment upon their minds and
Consciences; upon all the intrinsical considerations they moved in their
public affairs, and so you make your self and others Examples, or Presidents
to devise and lay everlasting methods of private discontent or change to this
or any future Parliament, upon your and their own accusations and Judgment.

Quest. VII.
Whether the Parliament did not Act highest against the interest of the good
People of this Nation when there was no force at all upon them?

Answ. VII.
No good man, or a man of good and sincere desires, will (upon due
consideration and entering into the Closet of his heart) justify any action in
the Parliament against the Interest of the good people before the force was
upon them: so the good people ought not to do wrong or injustice to those whom
they account evil, or worse then themselves; And it is very possible that any
person or persons, who remain alive, and were in Parliament, may see their
error in any thing you can justly charge; But however Generals are no method of
satisfaction or conviction to any person, or charges in Law or Equity, against
any person, by a Fundamental Maxim and Rule of Law, and Reason. And the force
being upon them, as you confess, and the pretended ground of the force used,
being publicly declared to try whether things were so yea or no; if those
persons that were the cause, and principle Authors of the force had pleased;
and if there declared aims and zeal had been for good people, they had time to
manifest themselves by way of integrity to their pretenses; But whether they
did any thing legally in order thereunto, I appeal to God and the World. I
forbear at present to cite particulars.

Quest. VIII.
Whether there was not a time when the Army, and diverse others, were accounted
the great Assertors of their Countries Liberties when they refused to comply
with the Votes of the then Free and uninterrupted Parliament? --

Col. Rainsborough, Lieut. Col. John Lilburn, Capt. Bray. Cornet Joyce, Cornet
Thomson, Mr. Richard Overton, Mr. William VValwin, Thomas Prince, etc.
Answ. VIII.
You need not question whether there was a time or not, when the Army or
others, some of whom you are pleased particularly to name, were accounted
Assertors of their Countries Liberties; But you should have told particularly,
in what they refused to comply with the then Free and uninterrupted Parliament;
for it is a Maxim in Law, and approved Reason, Dolosus versatur in
generalibus, The crafty man lodges, and busies himself in generals, (they
being vain and insignificant) And peradventure, if they or any of them did not
comply, it might have appeared adissent in such thing or things as the whole
Parliament may be well satisfied in their Noncompliance. And I question not
but diverse of those Non-compliers, (as you call them) continue to the faithful
affectionate asserting those principles, and malice it self, cannot in any
lawful way, or means blemish their integrity. But if you think that it is their
temper, disposition, or judgment, to refuse to comply with the Votes of a Free
and uninterrupted Parliament, I believe you are much mistaken, unless you take
them in this Legal sense, that they might be (in these times of division and
Faction) in their peaceable, legal, judgment, and in Conscience, contrary to
any thing that was particularly against the Fundamental Laws, Rights and
Liberties of the People. And doubtless, or peradventure in the same sense they
were, and have been LAWFUL NON-COMPLYERS WITH THE ARMY ALSO. But I suppose, you
are deceived by your own heart, if you think to make your self a legal or
warrantable Accuser in this your apt opportunity, and blast them if you could,
with their Noncompliance as a Crime; For if in the days of MONARCHY an ACT of
PARLIAMENT, against the Fundamental Laws and Liberties, is VOID, and shall be
held for an ERROR, and called a MISCHIEVOUS ILLEGAL ACT, and be comptrolled by
the Peoples COMMON-LAWS, and LIBERTIES, as I conceive I have proved before:
much more may Votes which are not drawn to an Act, and which may be changed or
anulled, (upon clear conviction of Consciente, and Reason, and understanding in
a Parliament it self (upon revising or reminding the Fundamental Laws and
Liberties before it comes to be Enacted) be consciensciously scrupled, or not
complied with, without a blemish; but rather justified as a LAVVFUL AND
COMMENDABLE NONCOMPLIANCE, both before God and man.

Quest. IX
Whether there was not as much the hearts and spirits of all People,
concurring to their interruption in 1653, as ever was to their Election?

Answ. IX.
I suppose you presume too highly, and too far to imagine that the hearts and
spirits of all People did concur to their Interruption, as ever to their
Election. How can it be supposed you should know the hearts and spirits of all
people in this matter? Surely you have not conversed with all People that were
at the Elections. They did never tell you their judgment, and acquaint you with
their hearts and spirits, if you made any such inquisition in the matter. And
if your meaning by the words all the people, must be taken for the major part
of the people, or the major part of the Electors, thereby you would have every
man take you according to your meaning, and not your saying; But however this
General Charge does not accuse or concern any persons with any triumph, or
concurrence of hearts or Spirits in the Fact, but your own, and those that did,
or you know did, concur, it cannot reflect upon any other persons. For there
were many who had been faithful in the public Cause, who received many and
great injuries, and oppressions, by means of the influence and Power of the
then General Crumwell, etc. yet their hearts did not concur in that violent
fact in 1653, not only for that unlawful violence is not good in it self, but
also because of the inevitable ill consequences thereof, they foresaw the sad
ensuing evils and dangers which took effect, and had its suitable course
(agreeable to the Cause) after the year 1653. And so I shall conclude this my
Answer with the saying of Charron in his Book of Wisdom; Male cunsta minstrat
impetus. Violence does nothing well.

Question X.
Whether those men that last sat were not rather admitted to serve the present
Exigency (as the best expedient that then could be thought on) rather then out
of consciousness to their just Authority as a Free Parliament?

Answer X.
If you and others were engaged by terms in your Commission, to be obedient to
such orders and directions as should be given from the men that last sat, you
had then termed this your tenth Qustion in apt words. And for their being
admitted to serve a then present exigency, I could never find that it was any
published end. And if it was a secret intention, only it was not a mutual
Compact, and so could not bind the publicly invited. But by this you do
inevitably and Consequentially charge them that invited the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England (into possession of their interrupted Session) with
Hypocrisy, as if they did not intend what they publicly and manifestly
pretended. And that you may see your Error, and inconsideration by Declaration
of the 6th of April, 1656. diverse Officers of the Army declared a Commemoration
of what they had solemnly before declared not without appeals to God; And they
complained therein that those which had been Enemies to that FAMOUS LONG
PARLIAMENT had meetings and grew very insolent, to offer affronts and assaults
to the friends thereof; That the FAMOUS ACTIONS of the Parliament were vilified
and evil spoken of, And of persons dareing to speak against the Authority of
PARLIAMENTS, and to call their proceedings and such as acted in obedience to
them illegal and unwarrantable, so that there was but a step (say they
expressly) between the PUBLIC CAUSE and the FUNERAL thereof. And they bewailed
their great failings and turnings aside, and desired wherein they had
backslidden to take shame to themselves. The 6th. of May, after, they invited
the Members of the Long Parliament from the year 1648, that continued sitting
till the 20th of April 1653. And therein they called to mind and declared That
the Long Parliament were EMINENT ASSERTORS of the Good Old Cause, and had a
SPECIAL PRESENCE of GOD with them, and were SIGNALLY BLESSED in that work, And
they did judge it their DUTY to invite the said Members to the Exercise and
discharge of the said TRUST. And they promised them that they should be ready
in their places to yield them (as they said expressly did become them) their
UTMOST ASSISTANCE to sit in SAFETY as will appear by their public
Declarations, not declaring and inviteing them to serve the then present
Exigency, etc: as the best expedient, etc. And if they did not submitt to them
as a free Parliament, Consider who made them unfree, or in any sort of Bondage
or Servitude; And therefore they themselves that were any Cause or color of
diminution to their just Freedom have no Reason to make it any Argument or
ground for any violent violation of their Liberty.

Question XI.
Whether there did not remain a Force upon them aell the time of the last
Session in as much as the greatest part of their Members were secluded?

Answer XI.
If the Force did remain on them all the time of their last Session, you
accuse the Forcers whom you seem to pretend to clear and justify; Consider who
forced them? or who caused the Force to remain? If the greatest part of the
Members were secluded. Consider they did not seclude themselves; And Albeit it
is man's duty in General to deny to do that which is malum in se though under a
force or terror and although in some Cases force may excuse in some measure,
yet it is no argument that because one force was before acted, that therefore
another must be done, no more then a second sin should be committed to justify
a precedent on. And therefore the Querent had been better to have urged this
question, or tendered this Case, and his Reasons in a peaceable humble manner
to the Parliament of the Commonwealth, from whom he had his Commission in the
time of their Session then justify the present Case of the Confusion and
interruption.

Question XII.
If all Force Fetters and Shekles had been taken of, and they had enjoyed the
free and accustomed Power, and Privileges of the Parliament of England, I
demand if ever Sir George Booth and Major General Brown, etc: had been voted
Traitors?

Answer XII.
You enter upon Judgment too far and before your time, for you know not what
the Parliament would have done if Force Fetters and Shekles had been taken of,
if they had enjoyed the Free and accustomed Power and Privileges of
Parliament. I think you cannot divine. I may say in the judgment of Charity,
Peradventure they might have entered into a Righteous and equal consideration
of things without respect of persons as in the sight of God and man. Therefore
I suppose that place of Scripture, 7 Matt. 1. may be applied to you in this
matter, Judge not, that ye be not judged. And if you have any thing to say to
those Gentlemen you name, in a legal manner, or when the Law is open, and has
its legal free indifferent and impartial Course, you may have the Liberty to
accuse, as they or any Englishman else ought to have the fullest liberty of
defense, which the Righteous ancient Fundamental Laws and Liberties afford;
And so I (who am not privy to their affairs) shall close this Answer in
defense of our Fundamental Laws and Rights, with the sentences and wise
sayings of the Town Clerk of Ephesus, 19 Acts 38, 39, 40. against the confusion
and Uproare raised by Demetrius. Wherefore if Demetrius and the craftsmen
which are with him have a m^tter against any man, the Law is -- (or indeed
ought to be) open, or the Court days kept, and there are Deputies let them
implade one another: But if ye inquire any thing concerning other matters, it
shall be determined in a Lawful (or ordinary) Assembly. For we are in danger to
be called in question for this days Uproare. there being no cause, whereby we
may give an Account of the Co^course, Verse 36. Seeing these things cannot be
spoken against. ye ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rashly.

Quest. XIII.
And whereas it is objected, That by an Act made by King, Lords, and Commons,
that 40 of them should make a Quorum, and that they should not be dissolved
till they dissolve themselves; and therefore being yet a Quorum, they are
therefore a Free Parliament. I demand, Whether by this Argument those which
the Army secluded when they came to Hounsloe-Heath, may not as well call
themselves a Parliament, seeing they were a Quorum, and kept their places in
the House, when the rest went away to the Army, and were as truly forced out
then as these were afterward; and whether this very Argument would not make
them a Parliament, if another Interest should prevail to take off that
Interruption. Again the intent of that Act was not that any 40 whom the Sword
should separate from the rest should make a Quorum, but rather, if by degrees
some should dye, and others by consent of the Major part should be Voted out as
incapable to sit, or that others should be absent by reason of any emergencies,
that then and in such case 40 should make a quorum; and this is the Reason why
a fixed number are appointed a quorum in all State Conventions; Therefore it
remains, that the last Parliament were rather chosen and elected by the Army,
in the capacity they stood since they were first garbled: then the Peoples
Representatives, because the Army might have elected that number they forced
out, as well as those they kept in, unto whom they might have subscribed
obedience?

Answ. XIII.
I shall only (in brief) answer to this Question, (grounded upon a supposed
Objection, which you have heard or made) If there is an Act that 40 of them
should make a Quorum, and that they should not be dissolved till they dissolve
themselves; This Act did invest them or any of them with a Legal Session
against any illegal dissolution whatsoever, either by Army or any other. And
the Law considers the Cause, the Common interest, and not parties, or Factions.
I further enforce my answer (with submission) to the deep Judgment of a Sage,
Honorable Person, upon his going to the Army, ( viz.) by the Declaration of
William Lenthal Esquire. Speaker, etc. (in the Book of the Declarations of the
Army, Printed by special Order, by one Matthew Simmons 27 Sept. 1647. page 107,
108. wherein is set forth particularly, the violent acts against him) He
demonstrateth in express terms That in 1647 The Votes then passed were all
null and void, being extorted by force and violence, That the omission of a
circumstance or some formalities in the adjournment of the House (when through
force and violence, it cannot sit in any sort as a Parliament) cannot be any
prejudice to the future meetings and proceedings thereof, when it may sit, and
meet again, as a Free Parliament, it being well known, that nothing can
dissolve this Parliament but an Act of Parliament?

Quest. XIIII.
I demand then, how any can cry Hosanna to the last Assembly, as to a just and
Free Parliamentary Authority, and endeavor to restore them to the exercise
thereof, upon that foot of account, unless they also endeavor to take off the
first as well as the last interruption, which how safe that will be, I leave to
the others to judge?

Answ. XIIII.
To this, I only Answer, That when you did accept of a Commission from the last
Assembly, or their Delegates, I suppose you cried Hosanna, and not interrupt,
or crucify, crucify them. But to conclude, this; I Judge any interruption, or
seclusion of any party or parties, contrary to Justice or the Fundamental Laws
of England, is void in Law, and destructive to Freedom, and lays a ground and
method for animosities and perpetual Wars amongst the people, instead of love,
quietness, and amendment of errors; And as for the latter part of your
question, concerning the unsafenesse to take of the first interruption, It is
fit to be debated Legally and peaceably in a Parliamentary way; and that
Justice be done in the case.

Quest. XV.
If we should assay to restore them upon a prudential account, then I quaery,
what reason there is to believe such a thing will be effected, unless they will
recede from their Votes, or the Army subject unto them, which how they can do
with safety to themselves or the good people of this Land I leave others to
judge?

Answ. XV.
If you should essay to restore them upon a Prudential account, you thereby
would make your self a Judge, so far as to put a limitation upon their
Restitution, unless your prudential intentions therein, did relate to the
Justice of it requirable in the present case: so likewise to oblige them
without doors, (if it could legally be) to recede from their own Votes, would
continue an apparent force upon them; and so it would not be so valid, as if
they should after the interruption taken off, in a voluntary manner consider
and recede. And then if there be no taking of the force (which hinders their
Session) unless they will recede from their Votes, this continues their
Bondage, and that cannot be safe for the people, to have their Parliaments in
fear, or under Force or servitude, no more safe then it can be lawful or
honorable for Parliaments (the Supreme Conservators) to act above and contrary
to the Righteous Fundamental, and unalterable, Laws and Liberties. But however
the People do (I conceive) justly incline to have the face of a Civil
Authority, rather then the Force of a Sword over them; which way of Force (in
the Case) may produce innumerable evils, both at present and in future,
peradventure greater then the chief Authors of this Force may either foresee,
or ought upon due consideration to desire or aim at; and it may not only
produce evil., but hinder that good, which no good man but would desire to be
enjoyed; I mean our Fundamental Laws and Liberties.

Quest. XVI.
If it should be effested, and they should come to the exercise of their
Authority; I demand, what reason there is, to believe they will answer the ends
of the good people of the Land?

Answ. XVI.
If it should be effected that they should be restored, there might be reason
in the judgment of charity, to hope or believe that they will answer the ends
of the good people of the land. It is possible they may enter into a mature
grave and pious consideration of things. It is much to me that you should seem
to have so great a prejudice to them, for why should you judge so of your
friends, that they should not make a good ending of their Session, as well as
acknowledge as you do in your 6th. Question that they made good beginnings? Can
it be supposed or justly expected they would Vote a Period to their own
Session, as they did, and yet resolve to go forth without giving a sweet smell
and savor, and taking into consideration all the blood and treasure and their
own promises and solemn obligations, I must confess if they should not take
those things into consideration; for my own particular, I who am a Member of
the oppressed people for about eleven years should have no remedy unless I
should obtain Justice from another, and succeeding Honorable and just Council
of Parliament.

Quest. XVII.
If their restoring cannot in reason be thought practicable, and if practicable
not profitable; why should we labor in the fire of contention to effect it?

Answ. XVII.
I know no reason why it cannot be thought practicable or profitable, or why it
should be accounted a laboring in the fire of contention to effect it. You
make the difficulty greater then it is; For do you think the obligations upon
them are of so light a nature or of so little value that they will end their
Session with dishonor? Or do you think the obligations that are upon the Army
or the Officers thereof to the Parliament are of so little moment, as that they
can be in this way (of the sword or sire of contention) evaded, and dispensed
withal.

Quest. XVIII.
If then this cannot be a Free Parliament upon their readmission considering
the force that remained upon them, and that most of the eminent good things
they did were by force squeezed from them, and therefore in Law cannot be the
free Representatives of the People of England. I demand, whether some number of
honest men chosen out to serve the present exigency, may not be as Lawful an
Authority as they, and sooner answer the desire of all good people?

Answ. XVIII.
By any thing whatsoever I can see presented from you of reason in the present
case, this Parliament may be free if their interrption be laid aside or the
force discontinued, but if the force be upon them, their readmission (as you
call it) may prove of little effect: And if your supposition be never so true,
that most of the eminent good things you aver they did were by force squeezed
from them, and therefore in Law you say cannot be the free Representatives of
the people of England, this is an Argument to take of the force. And besides it
does not appear by any Act of their own confession or public Declaration, that
most of the eminent good things you aver they did were by force squeezed from
them. Peradventure they on the other hand will say they had done far greater
good things then they did, if the force had not been upon them; and likewise
paradventure they will say they had not done or consented to such Acts, which
(in the judgment of diverse good and conscientious men even of destroyed or
undone persons and families) were evil and contrary to the Laws and Liberties.
And as to the last part of your question, what do you mean by some other number
of honest men to serve a present exigency. If the Power by which an Election is
created, is unlawful and usurped, it would be void, erroneous, or dangerous,
both as to the Electors and Elected, and full of dsssatisfaction, in its being,
introduce Innovations, and subvert our righteous Laws, and Liberties, for
defense of which there has been so much precious bloodshed, and Treasure
consumed; And further, whether you mean that number of honest men should be a
lawful FREE PARLIAMENT in its Election and Session? I know not: you leave it in
doubt. And whether that any number of honest men can, and will, hazard
themselves to serve an exigency, least they should be served as others have
been before, is questionable, not only because of the unlawfulness of the
imposition of those your number of honest men (so called) upon us, but also
because of the inconstancy of Judgment, etc. and motions in these public
affairs; For in some part of your Questions, you seem to be for a full and Free
Parliament, Then in the 4 th Question you account it dangerous to have one, for
fear of influenced Lawyers, Priests and Cavaliers: Then in your 10 th Question,
you say or conclude strongly, That the men who sat last were rather admitted to
serve a present exigency; which admittance (as you call it) was after the
dissolution of another Assembly before them. And why may not the other number
of honest men, which you drive at be also admitted to serve an exigency, or a
danger foreseen? And where are our Laws and Liberties, Fundamental,
uninterruptible, ancient and undoubted Rights all the while, the possession of
which would be a lawful means to repair the wrongs, and intolerable burdens
of the oppressed, and discover who are the friends of public Justice, Peace
and Amity? Thus I have given my thoughts concerning these Questions, intendedly
to manifest my affections: to the just LAWS and FREEDOMS of our Country to
Truth, and right reason, (I hope) in sober contrariety to rash and illegal
Violence, without unjust respect or disrespect to parties and Factions; And I
do apprehend, at present I shall displease none herein, except my particular
enemies, who may rejoice in my wrongs, or such as are willful oppressors, and
resolved in their way.

W. B.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HAving received the Copy of this Book diverse weeks since from the Author, I
thought it necessary to inform thee, that it should have been published the 22
of December last, it being a time more seasonable then at present, and
agreeable to the intentions of the Author; but was interrupted by some persons,
the Agents of the late Council of safety (so called) who preyed upon the
written Copy, amongst other Papers, then ready to be published in vindication
of the present Parliament; and the Laws and Liberties of England.


