A SERMON, PREACHED At the Opening of the LECTURE AT MALDON in ESSEX. Lately
Established By the Lord Bishop of London: In Vindication Of the Antiquity of
the Doctrine of the CHURCH of ENGLAND. By William Bramston, Late Fellow of
Queens-College in Cambridge, and Rector of Woodhamwater in Essex. Published at
the Request of the Auditory.

LONDON, Printed for R. Clavell, at the Peacock in St. Paul's. Churchyard,
MDCXCVII.

A SERMON, PREACHED At the opening the Wednesday Lecture in All Saints Church
in Maldon.
Acts, Chap. 24. Verse 14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way
which they call Heresy, so worship I the God of my Fathers.


IN the way to my Text, I judge it a reasonable tribute of our gratitude to our
Diocesan, to observe, how those blessed Effects, and Influences of his paternal
care and watchfulness, which are conspicuous in all places of his Jurisdiction,
are in the most sensible manner made apparent to you, the Inhabitants of this
remote, and almost forgotten corner of the Kingdom; and that in the occasion of
our present meeting, wherein you have restored to you a most laudable
Privilege, which you have long wanted, your Weekly Lecture: In which you must
needs acknowledge your engagements to your Bishop, who has made himself a
debtor to many Brethren for your sakes: Nor is the Benefaction its self more
worthy of your Gratitude, than the piety of his Lordships intention in this
Lecture, may be commanding of your Thankfulness: Our Bishops Hopes and
Counsels, and Prayers, are, not only that you may have the gracious Arguments
of Virtue, Patience, Righteousness, and Holiness, without which, No Man shall
see the Lord, unfolded, and recommended to your Practice in the most persuasive
Applications; but also, that you may continue in all soundness of Doctrine, and
become armed against the arts, and surprises of false Teachers, who do either
obtrude their own Traditions, for the Commandments of God, or attempt to
withdraw the Affections of Men from our most excellent Church by false and
unwarrantable misinterpretations of her Doctrines. I say our most Excellent
Church, which is loaded by Rome, with the imputations of Heresy, because the
endeavors to shroud her Members from the taint of Rome's Defilements: And has
been reviled by another sort of mistaken Christians, as being her self Popish,
because she labors to preserve the Holy Services of God clean, from the
unhallowed violence of Man's Profaneness: Now there cannot be a greater Service
done to the Church of Christ, than when his precious Depositum is kept
unviolated, or to the Edification of his Faithful, than, when the Instructions
tendered to them proceed purely from Truth and Soberness: This being our
Bishops (now Charitable) intention in this Lecture which I am to open, I have
made choice of this passage of St. Paul, who here answers the impeachment of
the Jews, who had censured his Labors in Christ, his professing, and
propagating the Christian Religion, (just as our Adversaries of the Church of
Rome do all our holy Ministrations, and Services in the support of the Faith,
and truth of the Blessed Jesus) as a work of Heresy, with this Confession, But
this I confess unto thee, that after the way that they call Heresy, so worship
I the God of my Fathers. That which I shall endeavor at present, shall be the
vindication of the Doctrines and Measures of our Church, as to some Matters of
her Faith and Practice, which are quarrelled at by our Roman Adversaries;
which, in the most insolent Pomp, and disdain, are exploded by them as Spots,
and Deformities in our Reformation. First, then, That wherewith they think they
shake us most, is this, that we are of a new Religion, a novel and up-start
Church, not able to make out a continuance for two of sixteen Centuries.

This I take to be the most gainful plea of the Crafts-men of their Diana, that
by which she most fatally allures many into the Labyrinth of her Delusions:
Certainly as to her Doctrines, the Monstrosities of Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, of the Sacrifice of the Mass, and Prayers in a strange Language;
these can have no appearances so beautiful and tempting, as to prove Charming
in themselves, and captivate our Souls enlightened by the wisdom of the Gospel:
But when they are told they embrace a new Religion, a Religion not heard of in
the Christian World till these last two Hundred Years; this may possibly
startle ignorant Men, and justly requires our Consideration: In answering
therefore this Objection, I doubt not to expose the vanity, and disappoint the
impressions of such light pretenses, and manifest them to be no other but Noise
and Cant. First, Then, if by a new Church, they mean a Church introducing a new
Scheme of Faith and Belief; methinks that main part of old essential Verities,
wherein they and we agree, together with our explicit belief of all the known
Doctrines of the Scriptures, and our implicit belief of all things therein
contained, may in great measure declare the Antiquity of ours; especially since
we retain all that Faith, and religiously adhere to all those Creeds, which the
third General Council held at Ephesus, adjudged to be so material and
comprehensive, as positively to forbid the imposition or addition of any other,
if that was the Old Faith which was professed by the Primitive Fathers of that
Council, how can ours now be denominated a new one, who have neither diminished
nor added to the Articles of their Belief? The Creeds confirmed, and authorized
in that Council, were that of the Apostles, and that of Nice, and therefore
methinks the Faith founded on them may with some face pretend to Antiquity.

Again, if by a new Church, they mean a National Church of but late Strength
and Establishment; we deny not the present Church of England to be a new Church
in such a sense; but then we answer withal, that such a new Church may be said,
without a Paradox, to contain as Old a Religion as the ancientest foundation of
Christ, though not for the Age of its Establishment, yet for the Antiquity of
its Truths and Doctrines, which only (properly speaking) can Entitle any
National Church a part of the ancient Church of Christ: And this is the highest
mark of Antiquity our Church pretends to assume, that she now professes that
very Faith which our Savior taught, which his Holy Apostles professed, and
propagated in the first Ages of Christianity. And let Men pretend what they
will, the only Demonstration and Test of any particular Churches Antiquity (as
it is a true or a corrupted part of the Catholic Church of Christ) must be the
Antiquity of her Doctrines and Principles, by reason as no Christian Church can
be ancienter than Christ, the Author and Finisher of our Faith: So again, no
particular Church, professing his ancient Faith and Truths, can be said to
introduce, or embrace a Religion younger than that of Christ, because it then
professes that very truth of Christ, which has been professed by his Faithful
in all Ages: So that though the Church of England may be later than the Church
of Rome, in such respects as these; either, because our Conversion to the Faith
might possibly have been after theirs; or again, because our particular
establishment, as it now stands, was enacted many Ages since the first
settlement of a Christian Church at Rome: Yet our Religion now may be ancienter
still, than their's at present; if they are now changged, and degenerated (as
it is demonstrable they are) from that Christian Purity, which anciently
denominated them an uncorrupted part of the Catholic Church; and we now
faithfully adhere with all Uprightness and Integrity (which we are ready to
make appear we do) to that Faith of Christ which was once delivered to the
Saints; and as by many other Churches, so anciently maintained by the Church at
Rome: For, as their new corruptions, and additional definitions of Faith must
fall short of those Ages wherein Christianity flourished with all Truth and
Purity; and those can be no other than the Days of Christ, and his Apostles; so
the old truths retained and prosessed by us, must have been then most
triumphant and prevailing. And therefore that which has puzzled so many weak
and unlearned People of our Communion, to wit, the question about the Age of
our Religion, and our Church, may easily be resolved if they distinguish the
Antiquity of Seat and Place (which is nothing to the business) from the
Antiquity of Truths and Doctrines; and this distinction must be allowed good
even by our Adversaries themselves, if they consider, that the dispute now is
not about the Antiquity of particular Sees and national Constitutions, but the
Antiquity of Faith and Religion its self, which I hope may be the same in a
Church of Yesterday's Conversion, as it was in Antioch, which had the honor to
give the first Name to Christians.

Did the Church of Rome at any time esteem her own Antiquity lessened, upon
such a Consideration as this, that St. Peter erected his Apostolical Seat first
at Antioch, before ever he had arrived at Rome? Or will she acknowledge a
deference due to that Church in point of Faith and Purity, because she had the
happiness to be Christened before her? I doubt the Mother and Mistress of all
Churches, as she delights to style her self, could never stoop to such a
Condescension: If my Faith be found, and perfect now, can it be believed the
more new, and up-start, because not professed by my Forefathers, who knew not
the Truths? Or does my late Conversion if good and upright diminish, or
derogate from the Antiquity of Truth its self? The Antiquity of all other
things is calculated from their Original, and beginning in the World, and why
the same rule will not do in Faith and Religion I understand not. Indeed, if any
particular Church could make out a continued Succession in all circumstances of
Doctrine and Discipline, from the times of the Apostles, unto this very day,
this would no doubt be an incomparable Argument both of her Antiquity, and of
God's especial Goodness and Providence over her: But the present Roman Church
can no more make out such a Succession than the present Church of England; and
if she could, still such a Succession is not to be esteemed the only mark of
Truth and Antiquity: And this I think cannot be more clearly illustrated than
from Matter of Fact, to which, we may appeal in this case; for instance, there
can be no Question, but the ancient Faith of Christ is now professed by the
true Faithful of Christ, and shall continue to be so professed till the Day of
Judgment; and yet there is now no particular Church of the Faithful that can
make out such a Succession, nor any one Church endowed with an assurance of
continuing indefectibly in that very State in which she is now, till the Day of
Judgment.

I know the Church of Rome would fain have us believe her inspired with these
infallible Accomplishments, but she must produce a better Scheme of her
Perfections, than what we meet in her Trent Definitions; or she will never
persuade us, that she is any more like the Church Established at Rome by St
Peter, than St. Peter himself was like the most changed and backsliding
Apostle: For as to her Magnificent Style in writing her felt the Church
Apostolic, this must appear rather a Character of Ornament and Show, than any
certain signification of her necessary continuance in Truth and Purity. For,
were not the Apostolic Sees as liable to relapse, and degenerate, as any
founded by their Successors? Where is the glory of Antioch, Ephesus, and
Alexandria, which the Apostles themselves planted and watered with the Dew of
Heaven, which those Heavenly Shepherds nourished with the blessed Food of
Evangelical Righteousness? And notwithstanding all the applauses with which the
present Romanists exalt themselves; I doubt not, but were St. Peter to arise
this moment from the Dead, and visit the Conclave, or inspect the Councils of
Rome, but he would be very much put to it, where to find Faith on Earth.

I say therefore, her being founded by an Apostle (if we grant thus much) can
no more Entitle her indefectible in the Faith, than it has the Churches of
Antioch, Ephesus, and Alexandria, which have either altogether failed, and
forsaken the Name of Christ; or are (at least according to their own Roman
Tenants) quite cut off for Schism or Heresy from the Communion of what they
call the true Church; let her show when, and where, God has anointed her with
this Oil of Perfection above her Fellows: But now then, if an Apostolic Church
may thus recoil, and become impure, (nay, since Christianity shall not fail)
why must not some Churches be most pure, which yet are not Apostolical, I mean
taught and instructed by the lively voice of the Apostles? If this be bad
arguing, what may we think of all the Churches Converted, and founded many Ages
since the days of the Apostles? Or, if this be a good Inference, what Objection
can it be against any particular Church which is sound, and upright in all her
Doctrines, that she has not continued for ever, that she is yet but of a very
late Birth and Duration? If her Doctrines are as Old as the Scriptures, can the
Religion of such a Church fall short of the Age of the Gospel? If her holy
Principles flourished in the ancientest Creeds and Councils, can she reasonably
be Reproached for an Innovation of Two Hundred Years ago? This is the very case
of the Church of England, and for the truth of it, we appeal to the Scriptures,
to the ancientest Creeds, and Councils. Indeed, the Church of Rome makes a
great noise and show with the flourish of her Succession; but if she means a
Succession in purity of Doctrines, we may easily convince her of Vanity and
Tattle; if she means a Succession in the outward circumstances, and appearances
of a Church, such as consists in true Pastors, Bishops, and the like; I answer,
that there may be such a visible Succession, and yet that Church that enjoys it
in many respects may be very corrupt and unwarrantable; and this I think is
sufficiently acknowledged by the Church of Rome her self, which does so far
acknowledge the Succession of the Greek Church, as to receive those Ordained by
her, into her Communion, with allowance of Orders received before; and yet
whoever considers the terms in which the Eastern Church now stands, with that
at Rome, must see little reason to conclude much of its Perfection, from the
Argument of Succession; indeed, there cannot be a true Church without true
Pastors and Bishops, but there may be true Pastors and Bishops, i. e. Pastors,
and Bishops rightly called, and truly ordained, without a true Church in other
respects: Such Succession will indeed prove the Antiquity of the Seat and
Place, and justly denominate it a part of the Catholic Church of Christ; but
it can be no convincing Demonstration of the purity of its Faith and Doctrines:
And therefore it must sollow, that, even from an erroneous Church, may be
derived a true Ministry and Ordination; but, yet it can be no greater
Argument, that such a particular Church, namely, as the Church of Rome, is a
pure Church now, because an other, to wit the Church of England, who is really
so, owes her Orders or first Episcopal imposition to hers; than it can be, that
because such a particular Man, for his own personal Virtue and Integrity, shall
certainly go to Heaven, therefore he also shall do so, who made him a
Christian: And this I the gladlier mention, because it plainly answers that
Sophistical Induction of the Romanists, which infer that, because we say our
Church derives her Orders from her; therefore by proving our selves to be a
true Church, we must necessarily conclude their's to be so, which is the same,
as if a Man in declaring his Opinion of their being Orthodox in some points and
particulars, should be concluded positively to maintain them to be most regular
in all others. A more rational Inference from what has been said in this case
of Succession, must certainly be this, that such a Local Succession of Pastors,
and a settled Establishment from the days of the Apostles to this time, is not
essential to the constitution of a true Church; but rather on the other side,
whatever Church has a lawful Ministry, and a right Profession of sound
Doctrine (let her Succession be never so inconsiderable, though not exceeding
two years) must have an equal Right and Title to a Membership in the ancient
Body of Christ, as any particular Church of the most venerable Succession: And
the reason of the thing is very plain, for, if a Church has a true Ministry,
and a right belief, now what signifies it how long she has enjoyed it; she can
then want no means to bring Souls to Heaven, and what advantage can the
ancientest Constitution in the World obtain above her: The Seat where the
Religion is sixed may be new, but the Religion Established, as Old as Truth it
self: And thus I hope the Churches which were the earliest planted in the
World, were as true Churches the first day after their Plantation, as when they
had survived various Centuries: So that it must be impertinent in our
Adversaries to require us to produce a Succession of Protestant Bishops, so
long as there could be no reason any Bishops should be called Protestant; i. e.
Such Bishops, who protest against Innovations and Corruptions in the Religion
of Christ, till they had defiled God's heavenly Truths with their Traditionary
Pollutions; or again, so long as we prove our Protestant Faith and Church to be
no other, but a Professor of that Faith, and a Member of that Apostolical
Church, which they have Corrupted; or lastly, so long as they are Corruptions
introduced by them, which we disavow, and protest against: Let them prove us
defective in any one essential point of a true Church, and we will yet
thankfully receive it, but this their own fruitless endeavor toward it, may
evince they cannot, and therefore to talk of Novelty and Innovations, where the
Truths are as ancient as the Gospel, and the Apostles, must argue great Folly
in them that urge it, but more inconsideration in us should we regard it. As we
are able to justify our cause from all their foulest Imputations, so shall
they never be able to prove our Religion a Novelty, though its Establishment
were but of Queen Elizabeth; for it is the Antiquity of true Faith only, that
we contend for, which can never be obscured by the latest Profession, because
what was truth in the Apostles time must be so now; and that Church, which
cleaves steadfastly to that, (be its Succession never so late) must be both
Catholic and Apostolic in the purest meaning.

After all this stir of Novelty and Antiquity, I see no other difference in our
case, and that of the Romanists but this, that our Religion is apparently
conspicuous in the best and most Apostolical Centuries; and their's manifest
enough in the flourishing Days of Ignorance and Superstition, when Scriptures
were banished, and the least appearance of such Truth, as seemed to thwart the
progress of an aspiring Monarchy, was silenced and disabled: That which seems
so much to take with inconsiderate Men, to wit, such Queries as this, Had not
God his true Church in these days of Blindness and Ignorance, which you
Protestants allude to, if so, Then which could be this true Church, but that at
Rome, may easily be removed if they observe First, That a local and visible
Establishment, such as can be pointed to (though we have many such to refer to
in the Eastern parts of Christendom, even in the blindest Ages, besides that at
Rome) is not essential to the proving of a true Church, because the true Church
of Christ was most illustrious before it had enjoyed any Local Establishment
whatever. Secondly, If we consider, that though there were in those times true
Christians, yet it cannot be imagined that they should have appeared forward to
make Discoveries of themselves, in such Seasons, when they experienced the
sharpest Eyes and heaviest Hands ready to destroy them: So that though we must
believe God had always a true Church, yet we stand not necessitated directly to
know what numerical and individual People made up that true Church, much less
to confess it to have been the present Establishment at Rome; no, we can no
more be obliged to such a Confession as this, than to acknowledge, that the
visible company of the Jews made up the true Church of God; than, when they
were even swallowed up of Idolatry, and none but the All-seeing Eye of God able
to discover the 7000 Knees which had never bowed to Baal; it is no
Tergiversation therefore; it is no Shuffling, I say (though we cannot point to
it is individual Members) to assert, That God had even then a true Church,
because he has expressly told us, he will have a true Church for ever; but it
must be a most irrational consequence to conclude, that it was the Roman, when
it was the Roman alone, from whence arose all those misty Tempests and
Darkness, which had obscured the Truth, nay, which had most grievously then
oppressed and overborn her: If we are not now able to name who those good
Christians were, that then made up the true Church; we may thank their
Furnaces, Inquisitions, and Expurgatory Subtilties, which affrighted them from
the Light, and still took care to stifle the least occasions of their
manifestations. We confess, God had always his true Church, and this is
agreeable to his Word, but we acknowledge not that it was the Church of Rome,
for this reason, because she was then, as she is now, most contradictory to the
Truths of his Word.

And thus I proceed to another Principle of our Church, impeached of Heresy by
that of Rome, and that is our ways and methods of finding out the Truth: Now
these are no other than what depend upon these two divine Principles, Scripture
and Reason, which, as they are the immediate Gifts of God, flowing from the
Excellency and Perfections of his own blessed Spirit, so methinks they may not
improperly be employed in his Divine Service: The Religious Man, in Scripture,
is frequently Entitled the Wise and the Understanding Man; and Wisdom, and
Religion are generally used to denote one and the same thing, but how there can
be the greatest Wisdom and Understanding where there must not be the least use
or pretenses to Reason, I leave to these Despisers of Reason to illustrate. The
Wise Man tells us, A blind Sacrifice is an abomination to the Lord, and we
often meet the Holy Ghost in the Scriptures, lashing at the Sacrifice of Fools,
both which are demonstratively comprehended in that rebuke of our Savior
against the People of Samaria, saying, Ye know not what ye Worship; and now
what can all these Passages suggest to us but this, that whosoever will pay a
sit and suitable Worship to God, ought thoroughly to know and understand the
Nature and Excellency of the Divine Majesty, as far as he has been pleased to
reveal himself; and then as one would think, nothing can more effectually
instruct us in this Celestial Knowledge, than the very Writings and express
Revelations of God himself; so it seems to me next door to a contradiction, for
any Man to aver, that the most infallible way to come to a right Knowledge and
Understanding of God, is to set aside our Reason, without which, it is
impossible to know or understand at all; or again, to renounce the Scriptures
which are the only Books in the World, which his infallible Spirit has left us
for our surer guidance and direction to that blessed Knowledge.

Perhaps, it may be suggested here, that the Mysteries and sublime Articles of
our Religion, such as the Incarnation, the Trinity, and the Resurrection, which
all infinitely transcend the highest Capacities of our Reason, depend not on
the use of our Reason, but Faith, which is of those things which are invisible,
even to the most piercing Eye of Man's Reason; so that we must leave our Reason
in the way to our embracements of them, but this no way weakens the force of
our Argument: For these Mysteries surpass indeed the comprehension of our
Reason, yet the authority upon which we receive them into our Creed, lies open
to our Reason, such as is the voice of the Scriptures, and the example of the
purest Ages of the Church of Christ; which Reason recommends to us as the
surest guides, to direct us in all Matters of Religion: And though indeed
Reason cannot demonstrate to us the ineffable ways and explications of these
Truths, yet Reason furnishes us with this Demonstration, that they ought to be
received for the Truths of Christ; upon this account, because whatever is
proposed to our belief upon such infallible Evidences as the Revelation of
God's Word, and the uninterrupted Authority of his Primitive Church in all
Ages, ought in reason to be believed as true.

I acknowledge, were not these Articles of our Creed manifestly contained
either in the express Words, or in the necessary conclusions of Scripture, or
in the explications of the purest Ages of our Religion, the belief of them
would be irrational, and these unwarrantably crowded upon the belief of a
Christian: And therefore, even in those very Articles, which exceed our Reason,
it is still Reason which must justify our Faith: What, is our Reason given us
for no other end; than to consult for the ease and satisfaction of our Bodies,
or must that most sublime faculty of our Souls be no ways interess'd or engaged
for its own Happiness and Salvation? Again, can we think the Divine Wisdom had
no design in dictating the Scriptures, or has he expressed his intention to
reach only the Learned and the Wise? Did not our Lord once make this the most
expressive Argument, that the Messiah was come, viz. The poor have the Gospel
Preached unto them? And must it not seem very strange, that Matters should be
so inverted since he is gone, and this very Gospel left to us in Writing, that
it is to be inspected now only by Doctors and Philosophers? Though the Poor
have the Gospel still Preached unto them, yet the use of the Scriptures may
well be registered to make up those defects and imperfections which our
Preaching now abounds with, in respect of those more powerful and efficacious
Institutions of Christ and his Apostles.

I know none of us who are able to Convert Three Thousand with a Sermon; nor
indeed, can we pretend to enforce any thing worthy of belief in you that hear
us, but what we our selves fetch from that Fountain of heavenly Wisdom, which
is the written Word of God: And then, why every Man may not as well Read, as
hear the Gospel read to him; I leave to that blessed Spirit to determine, which
exhorts all Men to search the Scriptures. No doubt, as God has given us
Reason to make us capable of Understanding, and Glorifying his Divine Majesty,
so has he given us his Scriptures also, on purpose to exalt and enlighten our
Reason, and convince us all of the reasonableness of our Religious Services;
and I confess, I see not how that Man can be able to pay his reasonable Service
to God, who has taken up a belief in him without Reason; for let the Religion
professed by such a Man be never so Holy and Pure, and true in its self, still
in respect of such a Professor, this must be owned rather to Chance and
Fortune, than such a choice and wisdom as may affirm with the Blessed Jesus, We
know what we Worship: For without Knowledge, there can be no Belief, and
without Belief, no true coming unto God: But further, what reasonable
Satisfaction can this be to any Man, to encourage him in his Perseverance in
his Religion in times of Trials and Temptations; to consider, he has taken up
his Religion by Chance, and though he knows not why, yet still he is to be sure
that he is in the right.

But can any thing here touch the Proselytes of Rome, who, without troubling
Scripture or Reason for the confirmations of their Evidence, tell us, they
enjoy a far more insallible Rock, and certainty of their Faith, to wit, the
Voice and Testimony of the Church. In truth, if we search into this Rock, it
will appear no other than that Sandy Foundation, which was the choice of the
foolish Builder: Let us reason the Case with some Roman Votary: Does thy
Church, say thou, tell thee thy Faith is true, then let me ask thee how thou
know that the Church which tells thee so is true her self; do thou appeal
to the Marks and Notes of a true Church, then I demand again, how do thou
know what peculiar Marks and Notes are the Marks and Notes of the true Church?
Or again, how is it become certain to thee, that all these peculiar Marks and
Notes do particularly fit and agree with thy particular Church in all respects?
He that gets over these Questions without Scripture and Reason, must be Master
of more than a Jesuitical slight and artifice; for this must be to judge of
Notes without Judgment, to pronounce a conclusion without Premises; for where
the conclusion is the result of Premises, there must needs be reasoning:
Indeed, this can be no other, than to reply, Why she is true, because she is
true: And yet I dare boldly affirm, they shall never be able to get further in
the certainty of Faith, who shall first reject the Scriptures as too ambiguous
and unintelligible; and then renounce their Reason as a thing dangerous, and
reducing all to a private Spirit. But they are not brought to a stand yet, they
have behind a glorious reserve, they will still tell us they have Councils and
Fathers on their side; but to express the weakness of this hold, how many
Volumes of Learned Protestants are there extant, which remain so many monuments
of the groundless vanity of their Plea from Fathers? and if the four first
general Councils may be allowed worthy of the name of Councils, we defy the
most Artificial Crafts men of them all to produce thence but one line which may
appear serviceable to the cause of Popery.

But to leave this Contest with the Learned, must it not be ridiculous in any
unlearned Man to renounce the Scriptures, which were written on purpose for his
Instruction in Religion, and which he may of himself be able both to read and
understand, as to all matters of belief and practice, and betake himself to
pleas from Fathers and Councils, when he is not able so much as to tell the
Letters of that Language in which those Fathers and Councils were written, when
he can be able to judge neither when those Fathers writ, nor yet what one
Opinion they have left behind them: must there not be a much more rarional
satisfaction from such a plain Text of Scripture as this, Drink ye all of this,
to invite us to receive the Cup, than a Thousand pretended Quotations from such
Fathers and Councils which the unlearned are able neither to disprove nor
comprehend, to affright us from the Cup, that we should be deceived by the
plain real truths of the Gospel; it is impossible but the real Doctrines of
fallible Men will be liable to deceive us. But after all, is not this to
relapse and be found tampering with the dangerous consequences of protestant
reasoning, thus to allege Councils and Fathers: For why does any Man appeal to
Councils and Fathers fancies, he makes them the measures of his belief, at
least of the truth of that point in which he appeals to them? would he believe
as he does, if he apprehended he had no reason from their authorities to
believe so, and then how does his Faith disser more from that of a private
judgment, than the Faith of a credulous Protestant, who declaies he believes
thus and thus, because he judges the Scriptures enjoin him to believe thus and
thus; all the difference that I can perceive between the two Churches here is
this; The one, to wit, the Papist, Reasons from the Testimonies of fallible
Men; but the other, namely, the Protestant, from the assurances of the
infallible Dictates of God's Holy Spirit. That which here determines the Belief
in both, is no doubt one and the same thing, viz. Man's private Judgment, which
influences the one to believe so and so, and the other to believe thus and
thus, because it appears most reasonable to them to believe so: And I appeal to
any one of that Church, whether he would thus absolutely give up his Faith to
the Church, did he not think he had great reason so to do; and then again,
whether that Man which owns thus much, does not in great measure acknowledge
himself a Judge of the Principles of his Religion; let them talk what they
will, the Papist judges for himself as well as the Protestant; for if we are
said to judge, when we declare to believe the Scriptures upon the authority of
an Universal Tradition, may not they be said to judge, when they declare they
believe in the Church, upon the single authority of her own assertion?

If they please, they may deny what both they and we do practice; and indeed,
what is not only undeniable, but what the very Voice and Commandment of God has
enjoined us to perform; in one place, directing us to try all things, and hold
fast that which is good; in another place, believe not every Spirit, but try
the Spirits whether they be of God or no: Again, be ye ready to render a reason
of the hope that is in you, nay, lastly, we have the express approbation of our
Savior himself, telling us, If the Blind lead the Blind, they shall both fall
into the Ditch, and again, why of your selves judge ye not what is right: Can
any thing be more clear, than that the Holy Ghost in these places excites us to
respect our own Judgment and Reason in the choice of our Religion: For, how
shall that Man be able to render a Reason of his hope, who makes a Profession
of a hope upon no Reason at all? How shall he judge the Spirits that tries them
not? Or again, how shall he make trials, who professes to use neither Judgment
nor Reason in matters of Religion? Nay, further, how comes our Savior to
wonder so much, why, Judge not of your selves what is right; if nothing be more
disagreeable to true Righteousness, than a Man's own private Conclusions and
Judgment.

I say again, these Texts must refer to the trials of Religion, and therefore
we may bid much good may do them with their implicit Faith, which is as much as
to declare as to my Religion. I believe what I know not, and I know not what I
must believe; which is to approve the Spirits without trying; and to conclude
them to be of God, without so much as enquiring what kind of Spirits they are
of which belong to God: Nay, which is apparently to profess Doctrines, which
it is impossible they should render a Reason of, for without knowledge there can
be no Reason given, and no Man will pretend to know that explicitly, of which
he professes purely an implicit Belief, nay, perhaps which he understands not
that he does believe, till the Church upon an occasion rubs up his Faith and
Memory, and tells him he must, and he does believe it. I am sure this is such a
kind of Faith, which Christ himself detested to impose; for we may observe,
that he never recommended any thing to the belief of the Jews, but what he
still confirmed with such Tokens as might convince the meanest Spectators of
its Truth; nay, we find he taught his Disciples many essential Doctrines before
his Death, which they believed not, but did not Anathematize their incredulity,
till they became able to bear them, till they had beheld that most convincing
Demonstration then remaining, even the irresistible sign of his Resurrection:
Nay, that nothing of certainty might be wanting to the satisfying the Reason of
Man, even after that glorious Demonstration, he humbly condescended to let
mistrustful Thomas thrust his Fingers into the very holes of the Nails, and
behold the Prints in his Side.

Is here any thing like the imposition of an implicit Faith, or such a
groundless Belief as obliges us not only to abandon our Reason with all the
strongest Convictions of our Senses, but also to renounce the helps even of the
inspired Writings of that blessed Comforter, which was sent on purpose to lead
us into all Truth: Since Christ himself was pleased thus meekly to condescend
in the giving satisfaction to our Infirmities, what kind of relation can that
Church bear to him, which disdains a submission to an Examination, either by
Reason, or the blessed Rule of God's own Word: I am sure it must be a shrewd
sign, that that Church, which makes this refusal, is reconcilable neither to
Reason nor Scripture; for were she agreeable to either, why should she so
imperiously decline a trial by the two most Godlike Principles we are enriched
with, which certainly Scripture and Reason may be acknowledged to be; neither
can it be any great disgrace to the purest Church to be made appear conformable
to them. I confess, I cannot but admire the subtilty of the Church of Rome, in
usurping thus an Authority above all Examination, since her Definitions of
Faith are such, as far transcend the Explications either of Scripture or
Reason, the clearest measures which God has left us to examine by: Is it not
much the wisest way to put off such Commodities by the Gross, which we are
satisfied will not bear a particular inspection? Is there not much greater
security to such a Cause in an implicit Faith, which swallows down all at a
lump, than such an explicit one as may be curious and inquisitive, and desire
the satisfaction of Sense and Reason; I see no false step here on their
Churches side, in point of Carnal Prudence and Worldly Policy, but methinks
that must be an unintelligible Devotion indeed, which does thus contentedly
ensnare his Soul for a Pig in a Poke, for what he is neither to scruple, nor
yet to understand.

And thus you see upon what contradictory and irreconcilable positions the
Church of England and the Church of Rome are founded at present: that they are
as far from one another as Scripture and no Scripture, Reason and no Reason,
Antiquity and Innovations, Truth and Falsehoods; and as the Churches stand at
variance, so have the faithful Members of our Church upon all occasions and
opportunities appeared in defiance of Rome's Corruptions; it is not many years
since most of us beheld, and all of us heard with what steadiness and Devotion,
with what Resignation to the will of God, and disdain to the pollutions of Men,
the Members of our Church, like so many Illustrious Confessors withstood the
attempts and solicitations, the threatenings and invitations of the Whorish
Woman: Withstood them, I say, even then, when many of the Members of our
separate Congregations, who had before showed themselves most uneasy in their
fears of Popery, gave life and boldness to her growing hopes, by their
unseasonable Addresses and Compliances. I speak not this with a desire to make
advantages of the weakness, or by way of insult over the inconstancy of our
fellow Christians now in Charity.

I persuade my self they were rather outreach'd by the policies, than debauched
by the principles of Rome, and there is nothing we ought all more heartily to
pray for, or more religiously endeavor than a mutual forgetfulness of all
infirmities: but I speak it with hopes, that as such Protestants must
acknowledge their error in siding with Popery then; so they will blush when
they upbraid our Church as a Daughter of Babylon now: if Men would but credit
their own eyes, or give place to the arguments presented to their own
understandings, we need not appeal to other than our adversaries themselves,
whether they can still believe our divine service to be (what some people do
ignorantly miscall it) Popery in English, who remember the toleration and
liberty given to every Soul, to run as far out of our Church and the sound of
its divine service as they pleased, managed by the artifice set on foot, and
carried on by the influence of the Papists: if the way to Rome lies through a
Communion with our Church as such Men dream, how come the Romanists (who are no
strangers to their own interests) to seduce Men out of our Communion as the
readiest road to Popery; had they seen with some Men's eyes amongst us, and
found any thing in our Communion which looks kind and serviceable to the cause
of their own superstitions, it is not to be believed they would so publicly
have tempted all Men out of our Communion, with the alluring promises of the
royal favor; I take that liberty and toleration then given by the Papistry, to
be so manifest an argument and declaration, of that opposition which our
Church, in every particular of its constitution bears to Popery, which, as
every eye might discern it, so every well-meaning Man ought to be convinced by
it, and retract his censures. The Papists knew well enough there would be no
enlarging their own, without first thining our Churches, that the Mass Book
could make no advances, whilst the Common Prayer stood in reputation; that the
only probability they could have of making any Proselytes must be to get Men as
far out of the bosom of our Church as possible.

Methinks the pretenses of some in separation from us, who reproach our service
for Popish, and the practices of the Papists who were for drawing all Men out
of our Communion as a bar to Popery, are very hard to be reconciled. The
Conclusion from such considerations must be this, Either the Papists understand
not what makes up the Popish Religion, or the divine service of our Church,
which they appeared so eager to suppress and disgrace, can be no friend to
Popery.

No, be not deceived my Beloved, the infamous names and characters, such as
Schismatics, Heretics, and the like, which they fasten upon us, and wherewith
they attempt to blacken the brightest services of all our holy ministrations;
the continual succession of Plots, Stratagems, and Intrigues, which from Age to
Age we have heard and seen formed by Papists against our holy reformed Church,
from the very first appearance of its establishment, are and have been
Arguments sufficient to convince all Generations, of the irreconcilable
distance between the Doctrines of Rome, and the principles of the Church of
England: It must be astonishing therefore to consider, what Sport and Pastime
Rome makes of us after all: when she still so far intoxicates our heads by her
snares of Division, wherewith she lies in wait to deceive, and shatters all the
foundations of our wisdom and understanding, by those winds of Doctrines which
she has raised and let loose amongst us, that we turn the wrath and
disaffection we profess to Popery, against that Church which has in so many, in
such illustrious instances manifested her self the noblest bulwork against
Popery, which we may with modesty express to be the only terror and envy of the
Papists. Is not this the most formidable masterpiece of those deluders, to
work up a professed enemy to such a thoughtless zeal of indignation, as to make
him fall foul upon his friends, and under the pretense of wounding his enemy,
give the mortal stroke to his own strongest defense, which must be the
accomplishment of all those (should they ever have their end, which God forbid)
who labor to overthrow the Church of England (whom Rome has ever treated as
her most deadly foe) in order to the reforming Religion in such a manner
wherein it may remain out of all danger of Popery; this is such an undertaking
wherein I am sure the hearts and hands of Romanists will never be wanting.

The most weak and feeble Animals are seldom to be caught twice in the same
Ginns, neither will the silliest of Creatures run with open Eyes upon the naked
Toil; nay, is it not a common proverbial Observation among us, that even the
burnt Child dreads the Fire? and shall we with our singed Fingers catch at
those flames of Disunion, wherewith our Adversaries have so often reduced us to
the most terrible Extremities, wherewith in the last Age they had well nigh
consumed both us and our Religion? When we have so fatally smarted under the
Sting and Poison, shall we still hug and cherish the Viper that breeds it? O
no, let not us who really wish well to the true Israel of God, who have
experienced, and must be abundantly sensible of the Uncleanness and
Abominations lodged in the inworks of Babylon; let not us, I say, fortify her
Walls by the works of our Hands, let us not protest against her Pollutions, and
at the same time do the Drudgeries of her Tyranny; exclaim against her
Superstitions, and pull down the Holy Temple of God's Truth, carry the name of
Protestants and Reformists, and apply all our Parts, and Wisdom, and Counsels
in the undermining the sacred foundations of that Protestant Church, which is
the most solid and beauteous Pillar in the Reformation; no, I beseech you my
Beloved, in the name of our Lord Jesus, that ye be rather clothed with
Meekness, and like that glorious Author and Finisher of our Faith, put on
Bowels of Love and Reconciliation, that this may appear before all the World to
be the true, natural and proper Character of an English Protestant, That he is
one, who is more large in his Charities, and humble in his Censures, more
compassionate to his Brethren, and forgiving to his Enemies, more devoted to
God, and inseparable from the Services of his Church, than all other Sects and
Professions of Christians whatever. To conclude all, let not us, to whom God
has vouchsafed the inestimable Blessing of a right Knowledge and Faith in
Christ, suffer so glorious a Treasure to lie dead and languid, and fruitless in
our Souls for want of Works: Let us convince the World of the Excellency of our
Faith and Religion, in the Uprightness and Purity of our Lives, always bearing
in our Minds this Description of the Holy Apostle, in which he explains to us
the end and intention of our Christian Faith, saying, the Grace of God which
brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men, teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly, and Righteously, and
Godlily in this present World.

FINIS.

