Licensed,

To. L'Estrange.
August 9. 1679
THE APOLOGY: OR, THE GENUINE Memoires OF Madam Maria Manchini, Constabless of
Colonna, eldest Sister to the Duchess of Mazarin.

Written in Spanish by her own Hand, and afterward made into English by a
Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley, in Russel Street, near the
Piazza, in Covent Garden. 1679.

A Catalogue of some BOOKS Pinted for J. Magnes and R. Bently.
Quarto
BUrnt Child dreads the Fire: or, An Examination of the Merits of the Papists
relating to England, mostly from their own Pens; in justification of the late
Act of Parliament for preventing Dangers that may happen by Popish Recusants:
And further showing, That whatsoever their Merit have been, none ought not be
gratified in Religion, by Toleration therefore, unless we intend to inslave our
selves and our Posterity.

Romish Doctrines not from the beginning: or, A Reply to what S. C. or Serenus
Cressy, has objected against Dr. Pierce's Sermon, in vindication of our Church
against the Novelties of Rome. By Dr. Whitby.

Falsehood unmasked: or, An Answer to Truth unvailed.

An earnest Request to Mr, J Standish.

Plays in Quarto.
Tartuff: or, The French Puritan. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants. Written in French by the famed Wit of France Monsieur
Moliner, made English by Mr. M. Medburn.

Plays written by Madam Behne.
The Forced Marriage: or, the Jealous Bridegroom. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes
Theater.

Abdelazzar: or, The Moor's Revenge. A Tragedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Town-Fop: or, Sir Timothy Tawdry. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

Plays written by Mr, James Howard.
All mistaken: or, The Mad Couple. A Comedy, acted at the Theater Royal, by
their Majesty's Servants.

The English Monsieur. A Comedy acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's
Servants.

Plays written by Mr. Crown.
Andromiacheh, a Tragedy.

Calisto: or, The Chaste Nymph. A Mausque, acted at Court, by the Lady Mary, the
Lady Anne, and many other Persons of the greatest Quality in England.

The Country-Wit. A Comedy, acted at the Dukes Theater.

The Destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, in two Parts, acted at the
Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants. Price 2 s.

Plays written by Mr. Lee.
The Tragedy of Nero. Acted at the Theater Royal, by their Majesty's Servants.

Sophonisba: or Hannibal overthrown. A Tragedy, acted at the Theater Royal; by
their Majesty's Servants.

The Court of Augustus Caesar, or Gloriana. A Tragedy, acted at the Theater
Royal.

The Rival Queens: or, The Death of Alexander the Great. A Tragedy, acted at
the Theater Royal.

Mithridates King of Pontus: a Tragedy.

Books in Octavo.
A Discourse of the Idolatry of the Church of Rome, wherein that Charge is
justified, and the pretended Refutation of Dr. Stilling fleet's Discourse is
fully answered. By Dr. Whitby.

The natural History of the Passions-By the Lord Clarendon. Price 2. s.

Mauger's Letters, French and English, on all Subjects, Moral, Divine, Amorous.
Price 2 s. 6 d.

Covent Garden Drollery: or, A Collection of choice Songs, Poems, Prologues,
and Epilogues: Never printed before.

The Memoires of Madam Maria Manchini Constabless of Colonna, eldest Sister to
the Duchess of Mazarin.

Books in Duodecimo
Zelinda: A Romance, Translated from the famed Mounsieur Scudery. By T. D.
Price 12 d.

The Happy Slave. A pleasant Novel. in 3 Parts. Written in French by the famed
Wit of France Monsieur Bromond; and rendered into English by a Person of
Quality. Price 1 s. 6 d.

COLONNA's Apology: OR, The Genuine Memoires OF Madam Maria Manchini.
THE Actions of Persons of Quality, as they are more exposed than any other to
public view, are also more subject to censure and obloquy; especially in
France, where Libels set forth of mere malice against the reputation of our
Sex, are entertained with undeserved applause, and looked upon as pieces of
Court-Gallantry and Wit. I very well knew Writings of that kind, spare not the
most sacred Persons, yet, I confess, I thought my self privileged from their
Lash by the favor of the Age, and constant Regularity of my Life, till I was
undeceived by News sent me from France of a History of my Life published there
in Print, of which I was supposed the Author: You may believe me (upon
receiving this News and the Circumstances that attended it,) not a little
curious of seeing the Book; but when I had read it, the indignation I was in at
the intelligence sent me, was quickly changed into that slight and contempt the
Author deserved: I need not inform those who are acquainted with me, there is
not in this pretended History any one incident but what is fictitious, and as
contrary to my Humor, as to Truth; there needs but a slight knowledge of my
Inclinations and Conduct to persuade the Reader it is a pure Invention of the
Author of it; and that if it contain any adventure of my life, he has
disguised and made it quite another thing, by the Circumstances he has added
to it: I pass by the baseness of the Style, than which nothing more ordinary
and mean; and (to say all in a Word) nothing more like the Genius of the
Author: But because those who know me not, may give credit to what he has
endeavored to make them believe: I thought my self concerned to vindicate my
reputation from the injury offered it, by giving you a true and faithful
Relation made by my self of all that happened to me from a Child, to which the
pressing Instances of several Persons interressed in my concerns, have further
obliged me.

I was born at Rome, and descend of a Family of Illustrious Nobility, and no
less considerable for Merit; which needed not the Glories of Cardinal Mazarin
my Uncle, to make it appear with Splendour in the Chief City of the World. When
I came to seven Years of Age, my Mother not finding in me the Beauty she
observed in my Sister Hortensia, (now Duchess of Mazarin) disposed me to go
into a Covent of the Order of St. Benedict, called Campo Martio, with design to
make me a Nun; and fancying that an Aunt of mine in the same Covent, who had
the tuition of me, would be very instrumental for the purpose.

After two Years spent there, my Mother, though she had not equal tenderness
for me, as for my Sister Hortensia, yet pitying the ill health I had there,
and attributing it to my being so straightly cooped up, and to the Air of the
Place, which was very ill, she took me home.

About two Years after my leaving the Covent, my Uncle, arrived almost at the
height of his Fortune, was willing to improve his happiness by communicating
it. He writ to my Mother and my Aunt Martinozzi to come into France, and bring
with them each her eldest Daughter. The order being so strict, seemed to
exclude my Sister as a Cadette; but being my Mothers Favorite, her Beauty
gained her in my Mothers Affection a right of Seniority: However, I was made
acquainted with my Uncles Orders, and my Mother would doubtless have been very
glad to have found me unwilling to obey them. I am sufficiently assured of it
by her having put it to my choice to go into France, or stay at Rome with my
Aunt to be made a Nun; and her asking me very seriously if I had not made a Vow
to that purpose: I very well remember the Answer I made her, was, There were
Covents every where, and that if ever I chanced to be so piously disposed, I
could be a Nun at Paris, as well as at Rome; and that I was not yet of a
competent Age for making a choice of that consequence.

My Mother undeceived by this Answer, resolved to take me along; and to ease
her self of the trouble she was in for the preference my Uncles orders gave me
above my Sister, she took us both with her.

We embarked in a Gally of Genes, sent us by that Republic, whom my Uncle had
particularly obliged. I shall not take upon me the description of that floating
Mansion, that I may not lose time in setting forth the Richness and
Magnificence of its Tackle and Furniture, it shall suffice to acquaint you that
during our Voyage, the Pomp we were treated in was no less than Majestic, and
that the Tables of Kings are not served with more Splendor, or greater
Magnificence than ours was four times a day.

We landed at Marsellis, where my Aunt (more scrupulous than the Custom of the
place required) made a long time some difficulty to receive the Civilities of
the Town, as not able to persuade her self to comply with some formalities that
attend them: But at last with much pain she mastered the difficulty, though not
without giving just cause of complaint for opposing things so long authorized
by Custom.

From Marsellis we passed to Aix, where we were lodged in the House of the
Governor of Provence, being the Duke of Mercoeur, who of all the Nobility of
France had made the first Alliance with the Cardinal, by marrying Victoria
Manchini my eldest Sister, having gone as far as Cologne, to desire her in
Marriage, when his Eminence was forced to quit the Court.

Two Months after our coming to Aix, my Sister arrived there to keep us
company. And for six Months more that we tarried there, all her care was to
divert and treat us, at the charge of the Duke her Husband, who regal'dus every
Day with extraordinary Magnificence.

These eight Months expired, our Uncle thought us by that time pretty well
fitted for appearing at Paris, and sent us order to come to the Court there,
whither my Sister Victoria who was big with her first Child would bear us
company, notwithstanding the great severity of the Winter; the danger she
exposed her self to, and the desire we had to give the Duke her Husband
satisfaction, made us wish she would have been persuaded to forbear giving us
this proof of her kindness, but the tenderness she had for us, overrul'd all
our Reasons, and prevailed more than any consideration of danger or
inconvenience she might fall into: Those that know her will easily believe
this, and confess that Heaven never united a more Noble Soul, with a handsomer
Body, nor so much Virtue with so much Beauty.

After a Months happy Journey we arrived at Paris, where my Uncle saw us in
private, and received us with such particular expressions of kindness, that
wanting Words to describe them to the Life, I shall satisfy my self by giving
you an Idea of them, in telling you, it was an Enterview like that of Joseph
and his Brethren, which was attended with all possible evidences of a tender
Affection. And though my Sister Hortensia had no order to come, as was hinted
before, her Beauty excused my Mothers bringing her along, and the Cardinal was
extremely pleased at the sight of her.

Being pretty well recovered of our Journey, we went to kiss their Majesty's
Hands, who received us with particular demonstrations of kindness suitable to
their Royal Grandeur: But this happiness was very short lived, being soon
interrupted by a sudden and sad change, of which I am going to give you account.

I was not fully recovered of the fatigue of our Journey, the liveliness of my
humor disordered by so much agitation, and my ill observation of diet (eating
indifferently what was bad, as well as what was good for me,) made me look so
pitifully, that my Uncle resolved to put me into a Covent, to try, as he said,
if that would recover me. Besides, he loo'd upon me as too young and raw, and
so great a stranger to the Language of the Country, that he thought me not fit,
as yet, to be introduced into so glorious a Court; my Sister in all appearance
should by reason of the like inconveniences have run the like fortune; but she
was so young, or rather so beautiful, that she was dispensed with: Thus was I
put into the Covent of the Visitation in the Fauxbourgs, St. Jacques, where my
Sister came two Months after to bear me company, by order from his Eminence,
who at length thought her too young to continue at Court, where her Beauty had
introduced her, and great pleasure was taken in seeing her, insomuch that
Mounsieur, though very young, could not live without her. But that which
principally moved his Eminence to take this Resolution, was an humorous
obstinacy he observed in my Sister, which was thought to proceed partly from
the liberty they gave her in the Palace; by this means we were both in a Covent
under the direction of Madam La Mere de Mignon, Sister to the Prince President
of Paris. She took care of our Education, and taught us French, and all other
things necessary for Maids of our age and quality, and acquitted her self of
her Charge with great pains and industry: when we had been in that Covent a
year and a half, my Uncle sent to us Madam de Venele, Maid of honor to my
Sister the Duchess of Mercoeur, with order to bring me to Fere a Town in
Picardy, where the Court then was.

Before this progress, his Eminence desirous of an alliance with the Marshall
Milleray had proposed a Marriage between his Son the Great Master and me,
thinking it but just to dispose first of me who was the elder: But the conduct
of Love and of Reason are so very different, his Eminence found he had to small
purpose designed me for the Great Master, who had already made Choice of
another object, and wholly devoted himself to my Sister Hortensia, from the
first moment he saw her, with such particular Circumstances, that he said
aloud, he could rather spend his life in a Covent then marry any other.

I came to Fere wholly ignorant of the Design of marrying me, but when I
arrived there, I had some confused knowledge of it by flying Reports, which in
few days vanished with the Treaty then on foot, the Grand Master having by his
answer declared the constancy of his affection for my Sister: I continued at
Court, where by the help of that Light I had attained by age, and care of my
Instructors, I discovered some Charms till then wholly unknown to me, although
I had not the full liberty of taking the pleasures of the place: My Mother
seeing me lively and brisk, had not the same kindness for me she had for my
Sisters; but kept me Locked up as long as she could, and watched me so narrowly
that I stirred not abroad but in Company, and was frequently left at home all
alone. This was no small mortification to me, and appeared far the greater,
when compared with the indulgence used to my Sisters, and the liberty given
Olympia, (now Countess of Soissons) and Hortensia who came two Months after out
of the Covent: I Confess I was vexed at the heart to see them allowed to spend
their time at Court, when I was mewd up alone in a Camber, and deprived of the
pleasures they enjoyed. I could not forbear making my Complaint to my Mother
for her using me so, and told her sharply, that if my Sister Hortensia deserved
by her beauty the Chief place in her affection, however she could not but know
I was her Elder: my Mother at this was touched to the quick, and told my Uncle
there was no living with me, and that it were better make me a Nun than venture
me into the World, where she clearly foresaw I should be very miserable, having
neither ingenuity, nor respect for those I was obliged most to esteem.

The Remonstrances my Uncle made me, after these Complaints, were so harsh and
cutting, they would have made impression on any other but me, who minded them
so little, that though I remembered very well what he said, I never laid it to
heart.

The Great melancholy my Mother soon after fell into, was a certain presage
and forerunner of her Death; she became of so strange an humor, 'twas
impossible to endure it: And I whom she loved least was to bear the torment of
all her ill conditions, my Sister Olympia having a distinct Apartment to her
self, and Hortensia was at the Duchess of Mercoeur's, where her Governess
Madam de Venele brought her up, with extraordinary tenderness and care. The
life I led was very sad, and my troubles unparalleled. And to mend the matter,
my Apartment was the worst of all, and no company but an old Chambermaid
called Rose, who waited on us when Children. And to complete my misery, I saw
my self on the point of returning into the Covent.

This was my condition when my Mother fell sick. And though at first her
sickness did not appear dangerous, His Majesty honored her every Evening with
his presence, and observing I had some wit and briskness, he said to me one
thing or other every day by the by, which helped me a little to bear with
comfort the affliction I was in by my Mothers ill humors: but this was no
small addition to my Mothers disease, who could not endure I should enter her
Chamber when company was there.

My Mother at length grew better, but afterward relapsed and died. The
Hemettick Wine (which is used as a remedy in Cases of extremity) was given her
in her sickness, and quickly brought her to her Grave.

Education is the greatest present Parents can bestow on their Children after
their being: But it is very necessary it should be attended with Gentleness, too
much Severity being often a means to root out Natural Affection; so
inconsistent are Love and Fear: I speak it by Experience, the fear my Mother
had kept me in, having made such impression in me, that Two Years after her
death, I still dreamt she was alive, and when broad awake, I often fancied I
saw her, to my very great trouble.

Soon after Madam de Mercoeur died suddenly in Childbed, to our general
affliction; who could not but lament the loss of a Beauty so rare, and so
extraordinary Virtue.

My Mother being dead, Madam de Venele was made my Governess, with the like
power and charge over my Sisters Hortensia and Mariana, who was lately come to
us with our Brother Alphonso, who died very young and very unfortunately,
having been wounded in the Head as he was at play with his Scholars of the
College of Clermont, where he boarded.

The death of my Mother having made me a little more mistress of my self, and
my Sister Olympia being married, I enjoyed the Privileges of an elder Sister,
and was in a fair way to lead a Life full of Tranquillity and Pleasure. The
condition I found my self in, convinced me that the health of the Body depends
almost altogether on the satisfaction of the Mind. And in the condition I was
then in, I might have said without Vanity, that Fortune had been no less
favorable to me in the Gifts and Endowments of mind, she conferred on me, than
in outward advantages, and that the Sovereign Faculty of my Soul had a strong
influence over my carriage, and formed my deportment.

In the mean time my manner of living with the King and his Brother, was so
familiar and pleasing, that I had liberty to speak what I thought, and the good
fortune to find what I spoke very well taken. At my return with the Court from
Fountainbleau, I was assured I was not hated by the King, who though very
young, had penetration enough to understand that Eloquence which, without
speaking a Syllable, persuades more than all the fine words in the World. And
the particular inclination I had for the King, (whose merit and Quality I
easily discovered, greater than any Man's in his Kingdom) had perhaps rendered
me more skilful in this than in any thing else. I thought the Testimony of my
Eyes not sufficient to convince me of so important a truth, till confirmed by
the extraordinary respects and devoires paid me by the Courtiers, who as so
many spies of the Actions of their King, had clearly discovered his Majesty's
Love for me.

In the midst of this my ravishing prosperity, a small storm arose, but was
quickly over. It was reported the King would marry the Princess Margaret of
Savoy Daughter of Madam Royal, and afterward Duchess of Parma, a Lady of
extraordinary merit: This occasioned the Court to go to Lions: I leave it to
those who have Wit and Affection to judge, how capable a Proposal of this kind
is, to trouble and afflict a person in love, and what a torment it is to fear
the loss of what we have an extreme passion for, especially a passion grounded
on extraordinary merit, and occasioned by so exalted an Object, when reason
does countenance and authorize our affection, and not only inclines, but
commands us to love. But this storm was too violent to last, and the marriage
was as suddenly broke off as proposed. I was obliged for this to Don Antonio
Pimental, who luckily arriving with Proposals of Peace between Spain and France
(whereof he had a Project) their Highnesses presently returned for Savoy, and I
recovered my former Tranquillity, and found that the pain I had newly endured,
being short, and followed by the happiness I regained, had improved my taste of
the pleasures I enjoyed, and heightened their sweetness, and made those sensible
expressions of Love the King honored me with, more charming than ever: Nor was
it a small addition to my happiness that the Queen Mother gave me constant
evidences of a particular esteem for me, and that my Uncle was much kinder than
before.

The Excess of my prosperity made my satisfaction imperfect; and I could have
wished my self some little misfortune that I might the better relish the
happiness I enjoyed. It was not long ere I had my desire, and fortune (with a
Witness) granted my Request.

Being returned to Paris, our time was wholly taken up in divertisements, which
made this the pleasantest part of my Life. His Majesty to make our delights
durable, commanded all those of our Company (being the principal Lords and
Ladies of the Court) to treat us by turns, which, though in the Country, was
performed with the highest magnificence. Love is the life of such
Entertainments, and there was not one of the Lords of the company but had his
engagement; the Grand Master spared no cost to regale my Sister Hortensia, the
Marquess Richlieu was no less careful to please Mademoiselle de la Motte
Augencourt, Maid of Honor to the Queen. The Marquess d'Alvy was in love with
Mademoiselle Touillons, our Confident, who was also Maid of Honor to the
Queen, and afterward married to the Marquess; not to speak of the rest as
deeply engaged.

It would take up a Volume to tell you what happened in those Gallant Treats,
and the Divertisments that attended them. I shall content my self with the
Relation of a single adventure, to demonstrate the Gallantry of his Majesty,
and how well he knew to take his occasion to show it. It was, as I remember, at
Bois le Vicont, where, as I was walking very fast under a row of Trees, His
Majesty would give me His Hand, and having hit mine a little with the Pommel of
His Sword, He presently drew it out of the Scabbard, and threw it away, in a
manner no words are capable to express. These Pleasures had lasted a pretty
while, and 'twas now time I should taste of ill fortune, who had so long
enjoyed good; but my misfortune was greater than I desired, and in a time I
least expected it.

The Spaniards no less weary of War, than the French, had (as I said before)
sent Don Antonio Pimental into France to make an Overture of Peace; and the
Treaty of Marriage with the Princess Margaret, when almost concluded, being
broken off at his arrival, France cast her Eyes on the Infanta of Spain, whom
the World looked upon as the only means to make Peace between the two Crowns,
and restore Christendom to general repose.

It was not likely the King should have Love for a Princess he knew only by
Report, but the Picture of that charming Lady being come into France, produced
in the Affections of that Monarch the effect a sight of the Original would have
wrought, and presently inspired into him an ardent desire to complete the
Alliance proposed, which the Charms of the Infanta would have made him embrace,
though the Queen Mother's persuasions and the Cardinal's, and even Reasons of
State had been wanting to press him to it.

Before the Court made ready for that famous Expedition which restored Peace to
these Puissant Monarchies, His Eminence began his Journey, and would have us
with him, to remove me from the Kings presence, as fearing my stay at Court
might obstruct his designs. This part of my Life offers my Pen a large field to
enlarge upon, by discovering the favorable inclination his Majesty had for me,
answerable to the general Report that has past of it. But my modesty forbids
it, and will not allow me to speak of the trouble that Prince was in at my
departure; having retired to Chantilly for eight days, whence he incessantly
sent Courriers to me, the first whereof was a Musketeer who brought me five
Letters from him, all very long. But I cannot pass in silence the grief I had
at parting nothing having over gone so near me as this separation: I thought
the most exquisite torments, pleasures, if compared with the afflictions of so
cruel an absence, that was to put an end to hopes so glorious, and make all my
high and tender Ideas vanish into nothing. I wished for Death as the sole
Remedy of my Misfortune, and the Condition I was then in, was such as cannot be
expressed.

There are few so unfortunate to have no hope of relief: All the comfort I had,
was my hope the Treaty might be dissolved, the Obstacles of Peace appearing so
great, and that the ill success of the Treaty might turn to my advantage; but
the Ministers of the Crowns surmounted all difficulties, nothing remaining
invinsible but my misfortune.

My Uncle being gone to Bordeaux, to attend the coming of Don Lewis de Haro,
chief Minister of Spain, and the Court being shortly after arrived there, he
sent us to Rochell, with leave to take our pleasure of walking over all the
Country of Aunis: But solitude being more suitable to the sadness of my
thoughts; I chose for my residence the Castle of Brouage, a place destitute of
divertisement, and where my Sisters and the rest of my Company could not, as at
Auris, go every Day to a Play; as if I had fancied all the World obliged to
share in my sorrow, and the pleasures of others to be my Crimes.

All my divertisements in this Fortress, was reading some Letters received by
the Post, and the kindness of my Sister Hortensia, who often quitted my Sister
Mariana to bear me company: Then it was the Bishop of Trejus arrived there from
my Uncle, to propose to me Marriage with the Constable Colonna, who had for
that purpose sent to his Eminence at the Conference, the Marquess Angeleli, a
Gentleman of Bologna, to make the Proposal to my Uncle; and at the same time
engage Don Lewis de Haro, to obtain from his Catholic Majesty the permission
(necessary for the Constable, being his Subject) to marry me.

The Bishop of Trejus failed not to represent it to me as the most advantageous
Match in Rome; the Constable being equally illustrious for Nobility and
Fortune, and with very great earnestness desiring me in Marriage before any
other. Any one but I would have been comforted with a Proposal of such
advantage, but the grief I was in had so filled me with disdain, that the
pressing Instances of the Bishop did but enrage me, and forced me to answer
him, He might have saved himself the trouble of his Journey, if he had nothing
else to propose to me but my leaving France; and that my Uncle, before I left
Court to go along with him, had given me his word he would never force me to
marry against my Inclination.

The Bishop returned with this Answer to my Uncle, who having a great desire to
see my Sisters, was already disposed to send for them, and had done it, but
that the fear I was in of being left alone, and the requests of my Governess
prevailed to the contrary.

The Peace being made, and the Kings Marriage concluded, his Eminence sent our
Governess orders to bring us to Paris; where we arrived some Days before the
Court removed from Bordeaux; and Prince Charles of Lorrain, a Person equally
Gallant and Handsome, began to make Love to me. His Passion was as pleasing to
me as to my Governess, who very well knew the honesty of his designs. But my
Sisters were not pleased with his Assiduities, and being often obliged to
follow me to the Tuilleryes, they grew weary of those continual walks; and as
we seldom pardon the least defect in those we have no inclination for, the
amorous Prince fell often under their Censure, insomuch that the Respects he
paid me, and the esteem I could not deny his merit, were usally made the
subject of their Raillery.

The Duke of Lorrain, having discovered his Nephews design, and fearing this
Prince, being his lawful Successor, might by the Marriage he intended espouse
the Cardinals Interest, and receive from his Eminence advantages to the
prejudice of the Duke, not only forbad him further address to me, but pretended
to me himself, but to very small purpose, being too old to supply the place of
a young Prince, or rationally expect his waiting on me at the Tuilleryes,
should have the success the assiduities of his Nephew might have met with.

While this new Lover was making his Court to me, the King arrived at
Fountainbleau, and the Cardinal sent for us thither from Paris, to kiss the new
Queens Hand: I quickly foresaw how dearly I should buy this new Honor, and
must confess I had much ado to persuade my self to receive it; expecting my
Wounds (for which absence was the best Remedy) would bleed afresh at sight of
the King. I could not imagine the King would have received me with the
indifference he did, and I must acknowledge I never took any thing so much to
heart, which made me wish every moment I might have leave to return to Paris.

It Is an ordinary fault of our Sex, not to endure to hear others commended,
though very deserving, if the Praises be given by one we love, to a Person who
robs us of his affection. It Is the greatest of torments. And the King
frequently put me to it. I was to be pitied the more, that I could not complain
of him, or disapprove a proceeding my Reason excused. And the orders my Uncle
had given me, never to speak on that Subject, left me no color of blaming him.
Yet all these considerations but augmented my grief, and the impatience I had
to find an occasion to tell the King my Mind, who received my Complaints so
ill, I resolved never more to acquaint him with my troubles.

But my Disease wanted remedy, and in search of cure, I removed from my sight
all Objects capable to foment my Passion, and studied all plausible pretenses
to stifle it: I earnestly prayed my Sister, (in whom I had great Confidence) to
speak all the ill she could invent of the King; which was a hard Task for any,
much more for one of her age. I shunned Company, and quitted the Court then at
Vincennes, and came thither as seldom as possible. There it was my Uncle fell
ill, and finding himself grow worse and worse daily, he resolved to have me
married to the Constable, who still desired it with much Constancy and
Affection. His Eminence finding me willing, writ to the Marquess Angeleli, then
at Bruxelles, who had made the first Overture of this Marriage to my Uncle at
the Conference at Bordeaux: The Marquess came into France, and being a person
of Gallant and agreeable deportment, he made so good use of it in favor of the
Constable, and the Customs of Italy, that I made it my request to the Bishop
of Trejus to solicit my Uncle to conclude the Treaty of my Marriage, which his
Eminence did some Days before the conclusion of the Treaty of Marriage of my
Sister Hortensia with the Duke Mazarin, and soon after finished the course of
his Heroic Life in a death equally illustrious. His Majesty having been
pleased to honor him with all possible expressions of esteem and affection.
Having done right to his memory, the King was so far from lessening the
kindness he had for us, it seemed to increase; not a Night passing but he came
into our Apartment, attended with the greatest part of the Court, than which
none was ever more rich or more splendid, or had greater Affairs in hand.

Amidst the divertisements of the time, my Heart was full of cares and
disquiet, the Articles which the Constable should have sent under his Hand,
being not come; 'twas generally believed this delay proceeded from the change
of Affairs by the death of my Uncle, and His Majesty was pleased to offer me
several Matches among the highest Nobility of his Court. But being as much
concerned to keep my word with the Constable, as I was to see my great hopes
all vanish, I answered the King, if the Constable had altered his Mind, I would
spend the rest of my Days in a Covent.

A few Days after, the Courrier arrived with the Articles expected; in
pursuance whereof we began to celebrate the Ceremonies of my Marriage in the
Kings Chapel, where Mass was said by the Archbishop of Amasia, now Patriarch
of Jerusalem, who made me a Present of very great value, on the part of his
Nephew the Constable, in whose Name the Marquess Angeleli took me by the Hand:
This Ceremony being over, I was treated as a Princess Stranger, and as such I
had the privilege of sitting on a Tabourette in the Queens presence. This was
the beginning of this affair, which was to end in my departure; I solicited it
with a great deal of earnestness, and could not be at rest till I was on my
way; I had taken my Resolution, and thought it requisite to execute it
speedily. As I took leave of their Majesty's, the King had the goodness to
assure me he would always allow me a place in his thoughts, and that he would
favor me with his affection where ever I went. With that I went away,
accompanied by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Marquess Angeleli, and our
Governess, attended with Fifty of the Guards, whom his Eminence had before his
death ordered to conduct me safe to Millan, where the Constable was to receive
me.

I pass by the Accidents of our Journey, as not worth relating. The Constable
came to meet me, accompanied with the Marquess de los Balbaces his Cousin. This
Gentleman making as if he were the Constable (who followed him to observe how I
would receive him) advanced to salute me; but appearing very different from the
Idea I had of the Constable, I received his Complement with a little surprise,
and very coldly, and turning on the sudden toward my Maid Hortensia, I told
her, if that same were the Husband provided me, he might go look out another
Wife, for I would never have him. Hortensia having seen the Constables Picture,
knew him, and observing him hide himself behind the Marquess, she, to disabuse
me, showed me him, who to clear the mistake and put me out of doubt, advanced
presently, and having saluted me, gave me his Hand to lead me to a House of
Pleasure he had hard by, within six Leagues of Millan, where he had provided us
a magnificent Entertainment. Having eaten, we embarked to go lie at Millan,
where we were received in very great State: The Marchioness de los Balbaces
took me in her Coach, and the Duke Caltano, then Governor of Millan, being
come out of the City to receive us, accompanied the Constable, who would
consummate the Marriage that very Night, notwithstanding the scruples of my
Governess, who would have had it deferred till after Mass on the morrow.

I was so tired with my Journey, so displeased to see my self at that distance
from my Relations, and above all so troubled that I had left France, and so
much the more as I compared the way of living there with that of Italy, (though
I was then not advanced beyond Millan to learn the difference) that I was in
very ill humor, which was no small affliction to the Constable, who did all he
could to divert me, with Balls, and Dancings, and running at the Ring, and
other Entertainments of that Nature; wherein I may without flattery or
partiality affirm, the Constable deserved the applause of all, as having
surpassed all others in the dextrous performances of those Exercises.

The principal Ladies of the Town feasted me sumptuously in their Houses,
particularly the Marchioness de la Fuente, who surpassed the rest both in
Quality and Magnificence; but I was melancholy, and out of order, being newly
recovered of a Fever, and could not relish those Pleasures: At last, after ten
Days continuance of these Divertisements, it was resolved, notwithstanding my
ill health, we should set out for Rome, where the Constable was very desirous
to be before the hot Weather came. The Governess and Guards that accompanied us
took their leave, and returned for Paris, and we embarked on a rich and
glorious Vessel for Bologna, where the Marquess de Angeleli received us in his
House with extraordinary kindness, and regaled us very magnificently; the Ten
Days we staid there were spent in several Divertisements, but I grew worse and
worse of my Distemper, and could not find any pleasure in them.

We continued our Journey by the way of Lorretto, to avoid the Ceremonies of
Florence, where, of all the Cities of Europe, Ceremonies are most in use. When
we arrived at Pesaro I was so ill, that the Constable was obliged to take with
him a Physician to take care of my health, and, traveling pretty hard, we came
in two days to Loretto, but I was not able to go further. The trouble the
Constable was in for my illness was incredible; and the greater, because it
hindered his being at the Cavalcade yearly made at Rome on St. Peter's Day, for
which he had hastened our Journey, and traveled very hard. But my Malady
appearing desperate, and the Symptoms mortal, the Constable sent for all the
Eminent Physicians in the Neighboring Cities, but with very ill success; for
of Ten or Twelve that came to me there was not one capable to undertake the
Cure; they all agreed it dangerous, but none of them knew what to propose for a
Remedy: They had every Day Consultations together, but I received not the least
comfort from their Conferences, which ended still without any resolution. This
obliged the Constable to dispatch a Courrier to Rome for some of the most
famous Physicians there, and the same time he gave the Cardinal Manchini, my
Uncle, an account of my condition. He came to us almost as soon as the
Physicians, and was very much grieved to see me so ill, and took incredible
care to comfort me.

The violence of my distemper, and the disorder it put me in, was so far from
permitting me to make the Constable those great demonstrations of kindness were
due to him, that I must acknowledge he was not a little tormented with the ill
humor I was in, which the Cardinal used his endeavors to put me out of; and
had been more successful, had he applied himself also to cure the ill humor of
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, whose imprudent ingenuity and indiscreet Zeal
persecuted me with that violence, that he never entered my Chamber, but he told
me there was no hope of life, that it was high time for me to set my House in
order, and not think my self a Woman for this World: And although I was not
altogether of his Opinion, yet I made some preparation for death, and gave
order for a Priest (who could speak French) to be sent for. They brought me a
Jesuit, who was an eminent Man, and helped me three or four times to make my
General Confession. The Constable more concerned than I for my Sickness,
informed himself every moment, by the Physicians who attended me, if there were
hopes of my life; and being answered there was, if I were not worse the third
day, he came into my Chamber with a cheerful Countenance, and having told me
the good News, prayed me with great tenderness not to trouble my self for the
Patriarchs impertinent Preachments: The success verified the judgment of the
Physicians, I grew visibly better, and was in few days out of danger; soon
after I went to give God thanks at the Chapel of Lorretto, where I received
the Communion; and the Constable, to perform a Vow he had made for my health,
sent thither one of the fairest and richest Lamps to be seen there, which he
consecrated on that account to our Lady, in whose Treasury it remains.

The ill Air and heats of Lorretto being prejudicial to my recovery, I was
carried to Recanati, a place not far distant, where I continued six days, in
which time by the care taken of me, and the good Air of the place, I recovered
strength enough to pursue my Journey, and satisfy the Constables desires of
taking me to Rome. The Feast of St. Peter being over, there was no entering that
City, by reason of the excessive heats, and the manifest hazard of health they
run who will venture it. But we, though advised to the contrary, slighted the
danger, and, having taken a small preservative against ill Airs, escaped
without hurt. The melancholy and weakness I was under after my late sickness,
obliged me to keep my Bed for some days, in which time the Cardinal Colonna
presented me with some Jewels of very great value, besides a hundred and fifty
pieces of Gold worth two thousand Pistols.

Having in few days recovered my health, (though without any care of my part,)
I began to walk abroad for divertisement, and appeared in an Italian Dress for
the Novelty. The Constable one day asked me if I would go visit the Nieces of
Cardinal Chigi, then Pope, to desire them to bring me to kiss his Holiness
Feet; I who was used to see every Day a great Monarch come into my Lodgings,
innocently asked the Constable if his Holiness would not first come and visit
me. The Constable and those in company answered me, smiling, that the Popes
were not used to do any body that Honor.

The Customs of Italy were not at all agreeable to my humor, yet the love I
had for the Constable made them tolerable, and I bore with them pretty well. As
for the Constable, he forgot not any thing that might give me content,
appearing always neat, gallant, and extremely careful of me, with an
unexpressible Complaisance: And though he be not naturally very tender and
kind, I may truly affirm I was the Person he had most love for, and most
constancy: No man ever was more passionately desirous of Children, and I was
then in hopes to satisfy his desires; when I told him the News of it, it gave
him incredible joy, though it lasted but two Months, at the end of which I
miscarried; this accident occasioned by trouble and sickness, was attended with
a Fever of forty days, which made them report commonly at Rome, that the
Constable had married a Lady that was incurable, who had more need of a
Physician than a Husband, and would never have a Child: None more busy than
the Patriarch in spreading these Reports, which seemed to be justified by the
length of my sickness, having lasted all Winter; but being recovered toward
Spring, and having found my self the second time with Child in the Summer,
those Reports vanished, and People altered their Opinions. My former
miscarriage accasion'd the greater care of me now, so that I was not allowed to
stir abroad but in a Chair. As I was in my sixth Month, the Duke of Nevers, my
Brother, came to Rome to pass the Carnaval there: it is not possible to express
the joy I had to see him after so long absence, and so unexpectedly: The
Constable was no less glad than I at his coming, and making it his business to
find out means at once to regale him, and divert me, he asked us if we would go
a hunting to Cisterna, a place belonging to the Prince of Caserta then in
Exile, but we found there (in his Room) Monsieur de Gactan, who received us
with all possible civility, and treated us magnificently: We continued there
fifteen days, and spent most of our time in hunting: The Constable, who knew
that besides the pleasures and divertisements of that sport, some Glory may be
gained in that innocent War, by clearing the Country of the wild Boars that
harrass and infest it, desired the assistance of several Gentlemen of the
Neighborhood to help him and his Retinue to destroy those Monsters of the
Forests. He had that success in it, that it was said we left not one alive
thereabouts; and we carried with us to Rome enough to feast half the Town.

I was then so big, I durst not venture hunting on Horseback; yet I lost not
the pleasure of the Chase, the Huntsmen causing several wild Boars to pass near
a close Chariot I rid in, which was so large and substantial, that the
strongest Boar could not overturn it; so that I had the pleasure of seeing the
sport without apprehension of danger; besides the satisfaction of my Brothers
Company; who, naturally averse from pains and fatigues, sat with me in the
Chariot.

At our return to Rome, we found all sports and divertisements prohibited by
Pope Alexander; who, to express the small inclination he had for entertainments
of pleasure, would not permit a Comedy to be presented: The Constable to supply
this defect, resolved to divert us with an Entertainment in Masquerade: The
Subject was taken from the Fable of Castor and Pollux, whose persons were
represented by the Constable and my Brother, attended with a Train of
Gentlemen, and ushered in by a Man in the shape of a Swan; so much to the Life,
that had Nature produced Swans of that bigness, the most discerning Eye might
have mistaken this Man for a Swan. As they marched along, they threw among the
Ladies the following Verses composed by a Person of known Ability.

Questi d' Amor e fe' dui vivi Lampi
Figli d' Aethereo Cigno,
Van con genio benigno,
Seminando di gioia i Latii Campi,
Son la gemina Luce
Di Castor and Polluce:
Che con accese voglie
Accorsi in queste spoglie,
Lascian del Aethra i Laminosi Chiostri
Sol per Arder, O Belle, agli Occhi vostri.
These two bright living Lamps of faithful Love,
Sons of the Celestial Swan,
Who from the place their course began,
Fill Italy with Joy still as they move,
The admirable Twin-Star
Of Castor and Pollux Are:
Who from the Aetherial heights descrying
Beauties here with those in Heaven vying.
Quitted their Station in the Starry Skies,
TO appear more bright (fair Ladies) in your Eyes.
Pleasure and Pain commonly succeed each other, the one usually beginning where
the other ends: After the delights of the Carnaval, we had the displeasure of
my Brothers departure, but allayed with his promise to come again when I should
next lie in. Not long after, I had the News of the death of the Marquess
Angeleli; who having resolved, against the advice of all his Friends, to return
to Bologna, was murdered by the procurement of Count Bovio; who according to
the Custom of the place, took his Revenge upon the Marquess for an Injury done
by his Cousin and intimate Friend, who was the principal Object of the Counts
wrath; but a Person from whom he had not been able to obtain satisfaction. I
was extremely concerned for the misfortune of the Marquess, who, while he
lived, made it his business to oblige me, and had occordinly done me many good
Offices, being withal a Person of great Merit and excellent Parts. All the
time I went with Child, my prayers were it might be a Son; my desires were
accomplished the seventh of April, being the Coronation Day of Pope Alexander:
The News of my being brought to Bed of a Boy were received with incredible Joy
by the Constable, the Patriarch, and all the Family, who as passionately wished
it as I: And though the weakness of the Child gave small hopes of long Life,
yet the Joy at his Birth was extraordinary, and those who brought the first
News of it, were richly presented.

Cardinal Colonna looking on me as the principal cause of this Joy, came in
Person to congratulate me, and presented me with a thousand Pistols, and
several Jewels: At forty Days end (having lain in so long) I was to fit my self
for receiving the Visits of the sacred College, and of the Princesses and
Ladies of the Town; to perform this with the formality requisite, I made use of
a Bed prepared for my first lying in, and never since used, being generally
admired for its Novelty and Magnificence. It was made in imitation of a
Shellfish floating in the midst of a Sea, artificially done, and exactly
represented; the waves serving as a bottom to the Bed, the Posts whereof stood
on four Sea-Horses, mounted with as many Sirens, so excellently cut, and
curiously guilt, all that saw them thought them made of Massy-Gold, ten or
twelve little Cupids served for Hooks and Claspes to hang the Curtains on,
which were of the richest Cloth of Gold, and hung down loosely to hide from
sight whatever might be thought ordinary in this sumptuous Bed, which indeed
was more for Ornament than use.

My young Son being much better, and I so well as to give the Constable hopes
of another Successor, his Joy was so great, that he declared he was never
better satisfied, never more at ease, and to complete his happiness, he made it
his business to give me cause of equal satisfaction. I took my advantage of
this favorable disposition, and having a great desire to pass the Carnaval at
Venice, I proposed a Journey thither; he promised to go with me, if the
Cardinal his Uncle would bear us company. His Eminence at my first motion made
some difficulty to consent, but yielded at last, upon my assuring him I was not
with Child, the fear of my miscarriage being the Obstacle he objected. We left
Rome about the end of April, and had a pleasant Journey, the more to my
satisfaction, in that the Constable was not so scrupulously careful of me as
formerly, but allowed me to use my Coach, or ride, and sometimes at full speed,
as I pleased. Till this occasion, he had always seemed to love me very well;
but was now so far from being angry at my excesses, that he bid me one day, not
discover my condition to any, lest it might come to the Cardinals Ear. Having
escaped very well all my Journey, I miscarried the second time, soon after my
arrival at Venice: this deferred for a while the effect of the Constables Vows:
but I lay in of this miscarriage a fortnight only, and was perfectly recovered.
While I went with Child, I was always pretty well; and being now the fourth
time so, I passed the Carnaval with much pleasure, in seeing Plays, in
feasting, danceing and other Entertainments, playing often at Bassette, a Game
I was much taken with, wherein I had the Company of the Prince of Brunswick,
and the Duke of Mantua, and other Persons of quality, who were come to Venice
to enjoy the pleasures of the Season. In the midst of which I was tormented
with the fear of leaving a place of so much divertisement, and returning to
Rome. Accordingly the Constable told me one day, we must of necessity be gone,
and that having gone with Child a pretty while, I was to prevent the like
accident as had happened to me at my coming to Venice. I was much troubled at
this order, though expected, and to make me comply with it, he was forced to
give me his word to come thither the next Carnaval; with that we parted, having
taken leave of our Friends, particularly the Prince of Brunswick, who was so
pleased with our company, and the Constables civilities, that he promised to
come to Rome on purpose to see us, and would bring with him thither the
Princess his Wife.

I was carried all the way in a Litter, our Journeys were easy, so that it was
the beginning of Summer when we got to Rome; where having past the great heats,
which were more troublesome for my being so big with Child; I was brought to
Bed the beginning of November of a second Son, the night before Cardinal Colonna
was to take his Journey for Spain, to bring the Infanta, Margaret of Austria,
to the Emperor. His Eminence was extreme glad at the news brought him of a
second prop of his Family newly born, and not content to express his Joy in
words, he made me several very fair presents, and no less rich than the former,
and presently took his leave, in obedience to his Majesty's orders.

By the Cardinals absence, the Constable came to have the absolute command and
disposal of all his Estate, the management whereof had been left to his
Eminence: A few days after we went to Cisterna, where the Prince of Brunswick
with his Lady the Princess, came from Rome to see us, and stayed with us three
days: The Constable and I expressed our selves very sensible of so extraordinary
an Obligation, and I particularly thanked him for keeping his word so exactly.
I will not undertake to speak of the civility and generosity of this Prince,
being qualities as well known as his name. As soon as I came to Rome, I went to
pay the Princess her visit, and found in her carriage, her humor, her wit, and
her dress, an Abridgment of all the charming Perfections and exactest Beauty of
France: About that time my Brother being come to Venice, writ to us to come to
him, which we could not then do, but respited our Journey till Spring; when we
set out for Venice, to be there at the Ascension, to see the solemnity of that
Feast, and that famous Fair, which so many curious Persons from all parts of
Europe resort to see. The Circumstances of the one and the other, are too long
to be inserted here. I was then with Child, but being more careful of my self
than formerly, I escaped without any ill accident in my Journey, or at Venice;
where having seen all the Solemnities of the Feast of Ascension, we went for
Millan, the beginning of Summer, which we spent very pleasantly, till the
Constable, finding himself obliged the beginning of September to pass over into
Spain, left me in much trouble for his absence, which the Marchioness of
Balbaces, the Marquess her Husband, and my Brother (who was pleased to bear us
company) endeavored to sweeten to me, by the great kindness they expressed for
me. While I was afflicting my self for the Constables absence, he was in
extreme danger by a terrible storm that overtook him in the Mediterranean,
being aboard a Gally of the Squadron of Scicily bound for Spain. But having
narrowly escaped it, he went ashore, and (though without equipage) continued
his Journey by Land. He took the first Coach he met with, till he might
accommodate himself better with necessaries to carry him to Madrid, where he
arrived at length, three days after the death of King Philip the Fourth. The
death of this Monarch having changed the face of Affairs, caused the Constable
to change his design, and made him resolve to return after a fortnights stay in
that Court, where the extraordinary solitude on that sad occasion, and his
impatience to see me, would not permit him to stay long; to satisfy this
desire, and perform his promise to me of being back by that time that I was to
lie in; he came by the way of France, and arrived at Millan about the end of
November: His Sister and I went to meet him out of Town, where I was as joyful
to see him, as I had been troubled for his absence, and the very night he
arrived I brought him a third Son for his welcome-home. But having been in
labor of this Child to the apparent danger of my Life, I took a resolution to
avoid, for the future, all occasions of exposing my self to the like, by
bearing any other. The Constables consent being necessary to make valid a
resolution of this nature, I pressed him for it, and obtained it, having ever
since found him, in that particular, a Man of his word. Having made this
agreement, all my care was to recover my health to go pass another Carnaval at
Venice: As soon as I had gathered strength, we set forwards on our Journey,
leaving our third Child to the care of the Marchioness de los Balbaces, the
second being at Rome, and the eldest with us. I had spent this Carnaval with a
great deal of pleasure, had it not been for my jealousy of the Constable, who
went in search of reparation abroad, for the loss incurred at home, by our late
agreement. And, I must confess, I was not a little concerned his keeping his
word with me should cost me so dear.

There were at Venice many excellent Opera's, particularly that of Titus, which
I saw very often, being extremely pleased with the sweetness of the Voices, and
excellency of the Actors, especially a Musician of his Highnesses, called
Cavagninro, and one of my Maids, who did wonders; not to speak of the Comedy,
which was one of the best that ever was acted.

The Carnaval being over, the Constable went to Rome with my Brother to
dispatch some Affairs. At his return (which was within three weeks) I spoke to
him of going to Millan, where I desired to be at the Infanta's arrival. I was
more troubled to quit Venice at this time, than formerly, as having more
acquaintance there, and being of opinion it was the pleasantest City in the
World, and of the choicest divertisements: but the more unwilling I appeared to
leave it, the more did the Constable hasten our departure, so that we set out
in the hottest of Summer. At Millan I did my endeavor to pass my time as
pleasantly as possible, to which the Marquess de los Balbaces and his Lady
contributed not a little. We spent the day in walking, and sumptuous
Collations, and the night in Music, prepared for us at The Place Marine, the
pleasantest of that Town. A while after our company was increased by the
addition of some persons of quality, which came to us from Venice and Turin,
from whence his Royal Highness had sent us one of the principal Lords of his
Court, with several Gentlemen his Friends to complement the Empress, who
arrived there about the end of Autumn: I kissed her hand, having waited on her
in a Spanish Dress, and in deep moorning for Cardinal Colonna, who died at
Final of a Sickness he fell into, attending this Prince. Her Majesty received
me with very great kindness, telling me, I appeared, by my Deportment, and the
air of my Countenance, to be what my Habit promised. A Complement whereby she
intended to give me the advantage over the Ladies of all other Nations; there
being no doubt but she looked upon the fashion her self appeared in, the most
excellent, and preferrable to all others. She continued her Journey for Vienna,
but the Constable was not disposed to wait on her thither, though I very much
desired it. He has a Soul so generous, I should do him wrong, should I impute
his not going, to his fear of expense necessary for such a Journey. The truth
is, the Love he had had for me, was very much diminished, and too weak to
incline him to so much complaisance. I proposed to him then, that we should
pass another Carnaval at Venice, which I was assured he would not deny me,
though I was sensible his inclinations for the place, prevailed with him more,
than my request for going thither. We set forwards on our Journey, and though I
found in that City the same divertisements as formerly, they did not please me
so well, being now very much altered, and perpetually tormented with my
jealousy of the Constable, which the stories I heard of him did but too
clearly justify. I was so grieved that others took advantage of my politic
Barrenness, that I found my self already in a very sorrowful condition. And as
if I had not had reason enough to torment my self with jealousies abroad,
Fortune provided me a new occasion at home, by a Marchioness who lodged with
us. Her Youth, and her Beauty, drew the Eyes of all toward her, and amongst
the rest, the Constable was of her admirers. Had I not made that conjecture by
his looks, his sighs and assiduities had been sufficient to convince me; I had
too much reason to make that Interpretation; my resentment, though concealed,
was great, but that of the President Donaville, whom my Brother had taken with
him to Rome, was greater, who looked upon the Constables addresses as no small
Obstacle to the happy success of his passion, rivaled also by Quaranta Lupuli,
a Man of excellent parts, natural and acquired, and a most affectionate Lover,
powerful advantages for obtaining of Love. The Winter, as well as the Carnaval,
being over, we went for Rome, by the way of Bologna, where the Cardinal Legate
gave us, in his Palace, a splendid Entertainment. The Marchioness traveling
with us, found the number of her Lovers increase by the way; but the most
passionate, and he who evidenced his fidelity, by a Sacrifice very unusual in
our days, was Quaranta, who extremely concerned to see his Love slighted, and
fancying others more successful, abandoned himself so to jealousy and grief,
that within a days Journey of Bologna (in his way to Rome, whither he intended
to bear us company) he fell into a violent Fever, which quickly ended his days.

We continued our Journey, and at our arrival at Rome, had the news of his
death. The Marchioness wept, but many tears were not to be expected from a
person surrounded with the flames of so many Lovers. After the death of this
Lover succeeded the absence of her Husband, whom she enjoyed a very short time,
a military employment they had bestowed on him at Amona, having called him away
thither to live in a House of his own, after seven or eight Months time spent
in ours; the Pastimes and Feasts we had constantly at home, appeared to me too
dull for the Carnaval, and desiring to spend it with more pleasure, and prevent
censure of the liberty I enjoyed, I resolved to have a Masquerade, wherein I
presented Clorinda, and being attended with thirty or forty Gentlemen in
Soldiers habit; I threw about, as the custom was, some Verses, which my
Brother and a Gentleman his Friend, called Marescotti, made for the occasion.

The Carnaval being ended, the Marchioness spoke of returning to Bologna, which
the Constable appeared not concerned at; the Correspondence, between them,
having for some time past been less than formerly. A few days after we went for
Millan to receive my Sister Mazarin, who we heard was retired from Paris, for
some differences between her Husband and her: The tenderness I always had for
her, made me undertake this Journey with a great deal of pleasure, and I forgot
nothing that might oblige the Constable to come thither also, who did all he
could to excuse himself, and divert me, alleging, among other reasons, I was
not obliged to go so far: Yet he resolved to go upon the arrival of a Courrier,
sent by the Marquess de los Balbaces, to inform us my Sister was arrived at
Altoff, and to invite us to Millan. The Constable having, with some difficulty,
answered he would go, we set forward. The Marchioness and I in a Caleche, in
which we went away Post, and the Constable in another, with the Countess d'
Estela, whom I formerly mentioned by the name of Hortensia: Our train was
reduced to three or four Valetts, whom we thought most necessary for a Journey
of haste, with whom we arrived at Millan in six days; where I found my self
extremly disordered, not only with the fatigue of the Journey, but the
perpetual Jars I had with the Constable, who was never better pleased, then
when he saw things fall out ill in this Journey undertaken against his will, in
the worst time of the Year. Being arrived, we learnt by the Marquess de los
Balbaces, that Madam Mazarin was at a Country house, six or seven Leagues from
Millan, and set out presently for the place, where we found her a-Bed, which
she was obliged to keep for a hurt she had received in her Knees by a fall from
a Horse: the hurt was considerable, though she said it was nothing, and bore it
so well, she appeared not troubled at all with it: Being newly come from
France, she had her fancy full of the fashions of that Country, and the humors
of the Nation; which, considering only the outside, takes the measures of
esteeming others, merely from the dress they appear in: The Marchioness and I,
very defective in that point, found after a very cold reception, our ill
equipage had met with the contempt it deserved. This mortification being over,
the passage by water being thought more convenient for my Sister, we embarked
for Millan, where we arrived that Night, and the Marchioness soon after
returned for Bologna.

Every one was desirous to see Madam Mazarin; the greatest things seldom answer
the Ideas we conceive of them beforehand, and generally fall in their value
with us, when acquainted with them; but 'twas otherwise with my Sister, who
exceeded at sight all that had been imagined of her, and discovered new Graces
every day she was seen, which was not so often as was wished, by reason of the
great pleasure she took at Millan in being alone, appearing only to her own
People, and locking her self up in the Apartment we had provided for her, where
she kept her Bed for the most part, that she might be cured the sooner of her
hurt; so that if she went sometimes abroad with us (which was not ordinary) yet
she went very negligently dressed, though she appeared beautiful as ever; her
hurt (which was rare) having added new Graces to her Person, so that in a loose
dress, she looked as charming as in the most exact and complete the World could
afford. Some weeks after my Brother came to us, and was ravished to see her;
but this mighty kindness was quickly broke off on the account of a Gentleman of
my Sisters, whom she gave a little too much encouragement, it being usual with
those of his Character, to forget themselves and abuse the liberty allowed
them; yet I reconciled them, though but for a few days; they falling out again
upon a difference of which you shall have an account in its proper place. I was
then so weary of so long stay at Millan, that I prayed the Constables leave to
go with my Brother and Sister to Venice: The answer he made my humble request
was, he could not go so soon, nor would go thither any more, but that I might
go without him. I was so shocked at the refusal, and especially the manner of
it, when I saw him take pleasure in crossing me, that I had left his House that
very moment, had not my resentment yielded and submitted to the arguments of
the Marchioness his Sister against it.

The reason the Constable staid so long at Millan, was only to attend the
coming of the Marquess of Mortara, the new Spanish Governor, but finding his
coming deferred longer than expected, he resolved to be gone. My Sister and
Brother desired of him that I could not obtain; not able to deny it them, he
gave his consent, on condition we should not make any long stay at Venice,
knowing it a place I was most pleased with, and pretending the cause of our
short stay to be a promise he had made Cardinal Chigi to meet him at a hunting
match at Sienna: We quitted Millan with the satisfaction of having reconciled
my Bother and Sister the second time; my Brother promised to come to us before
we left Sienna. But having heard by the way the Cardinal was not there, we went
to Bologna to attend his coming. The Constable here lodged in a House belonging
to one of his Gentlemen, to aavoid the trouble of complements would have been
expected from him, had he lodged in a greater. The short time we staid there,
the Marchioness de los Balbaces was very good company for us: but though we
were entertained in the Country with great and sumptuous Collations, I was so
troubled to see my Sister so sad, that I took no delight in the Entertainments.
At last we went for Sienna, upon the news we had of the Cardinals arrival
there, where I began to recover my good humor, through the pleasant reception
given us by his Eminence, who feasted us for fifteen days, wherein the pleasure
of hunting contributed not a little to our divertisement, my Sister being much
taken with that exercise, and doing often as mortal execution on the Game with
her Hands, as with her Eyes on the Gamesters.

Amidst all this joy, I had the grief to see a new falling out between my
Sister and Brother, who came to us according to his promise, and presently
after this third broyl returned for Venice. My Brother being gone, we went to
Marino, an Estate of the Constables, qualified with the Title of a Dukedom,
within twelve Leagues of Rome: Having staid there till Allhallantide, we went
to Rome, where my Sister, continuing her way of living at Millan, made our
House a very Wilderness, letting us see her very seldom, avoiding our
conversation, and not receiving any visit: Her retreat extremely troubled me
and my Brother, who in few days came to Rome, where he had new cause of
displeasure. Every body looked upon her retirement as an effect of the ill
Counsels of a Gentleman of hers, in whom she had great confidence, and I was
willing to use all my Endeavors to persuade her to other courses: And moved
with a just resentment, to see all my care and pains made the subject of their
raillery and laughter, I told that Gentleman (who was called Courberville) what
I thought fit on that account, looking on him as the sole cause of this
misfortune, it was not in my power to remedy. This Fellow (who was brave
enough, but a little too presumptuous) thinking it perhaps, beneath him to
excuse himself, answered me with so much incivility, and spoke of my Brother
with that insolence, I was forced to bid him get out of my Chamber, and
threatening him he should find some below who would teach him the respect he
ought to pay Persons of my Brothers quality; he went down in a Huff, and my
Sister extremely offended at this business, instantly left my House, and went
to my Aunt Martinozzi's, and Courberville to the Cardinal Manchini's, my Uncle;
whence in few days he went to Civita Vecchia, where he was taken, and, for his
insolence, clapped up in the Castle, but he quickly got out again, by the favor
of the Popes Nephews who procured him his liberty at the request of Madam
Mazarin; who, not able to endure the subjection she was in at my Aunt
Martinozzi's, resolved to go live with another Aunt we had at Campo Martio, who
was very glad to have her there. As for me, who never wanted kindness for my
Sister, I visited her often, but being always received very ceremonially, I
could not penetrate her intentions, or discover her designs.

About this time I desired leave of the Constable to go to Naples, which was
easily obtained, for two reasons, the one, that the Journey was not very long,
the other, that it was a place I did not like so well as Venice. We had for
company, the Patriarch, and the Sieurs Marescotti and Acciaioli, the first of
Bologna, the other of Sienna, both very good Friends of the Family. We had with
us besides them the Constables Brother, then called the Abbot Colonna, and my
Brother: My company was the Countess d' Estella, with one of her Chamber Maids,
called Constance, whom my Brother had liked very well: This which was intended
a Journey of pleasure, was unhappily disturbed by a quarrel between the
Patriarch and the Abbot Colonna, which had like to have proceeded to the utmost
extremity: But having reconciled them, and continued a Fortnight at Naples, we
returned to Rome, where I found my Sister in a deep Melancholy, for the choice
she had made of her place of retirement. No Person is more sensible of the
troubles of a Relation than I, who have in my nature a generosity, rare in this
Age, which puts me upon attempting the difficultest matters for their ease and
relief. This made me consult only my own ardent affection, and pass by the
coldness my Sister entertaind me with, and propose to her a way how to get out
of this Covent, telling her, she might rely on the protection of the Queen of
Sweden, and that her Majesty had given me hopes of receiving her into her
Palace; she accepted the offer, and I went immediately to take order for putting
the design in execution. But when I thought all things in readiness, the very
day I had resolved to go take out my Sister, I was told, by some I had employed
in the business, that it was not in the Queens power to meddle in the Affair,
(as she made me hope she would) nor to protect my Sister. I was not discouraged
by this ill success, but resting assured of favor and protection if I could
get out my Sister; I went to the Covent, and took my Children with me, that
while my Aunt and the Nuns should be playing with them, I might put my design
in execution: After a little discourse with my Aunt, I took my leave of her,
and told her at parting, she should not stir a step further for fear the Air
might do her harm, being not very well: The same Instant I made signs to my
Sister to follow me, which she did on pretense to bring me to the Gate; we went
on together, and pretending private discourse, (to give them who followed us
occasion of coming after at a distance) we were quickly at the Gate, while my
Aunt and the Nuns were busy in caressing my Children; I fell a talking to her
who was Porter, and so made way for my Sister to get out, with a Maid of hers
called Anne, and without taking leave of any, I presently ran after them. We
stepped into the Coach which waited us hard by, and went directly to Cardinal
Chigi's, to beg his favor, or at least his advise: But not finding him within,
we went to our Brothers house, where we had been all born and bred, but,
unluckily, found it all unfurnished, being newly left by an Aunt of ours, who
had lodged there: Here we resolved to send to Don Juan Baptista Rospigliosi,
the Popes Nephew, who presently came to us: Having informed him of the
Circumstances of what we had done, my Sister and I entreated him to bespeak the
Cardinal Nephew and the Pope in her favor, lest Cardinal Manchini, our Uncle,
should incline him to some violence against my Sister. Don Juan acquitted
himself so obligingly, that we had the success we desired; and Cardinal
Manchini found it out of his power, to prevail with his Holiness, to come to
any resolution to the prejudice of my Sister. On the contrary, the Pope
declared, that Madam Mazarin having fled for refuge into his Estate, it could
not be agreeable to Civility or Justice, to give her trouble; so that she stayed
at the house I last mentioned, where she was safe, and I visited her every day.

Not long after, the Constable and I went into the Country for some days, and
at our return persuaded my Sister to take a Lodging at our House, but we had in
a short time a little quarrel, and she would stay no longer. The beginning of
Spring, the Chevalier de Lorrain, (whom the King had banished, as was reported,
for ill Language given Monsieur Colbert, about an Abbey he pretended to, but
could not obtain) after some stay at Genes, had the curiosity to see Rome,
where he arrived accompanied by Count Marsan, his Brother, a Gentleman of
excellent parts, and pleasant conversations, with two other Friends, the one
named Garcey, the other Moreli; the former discreet, honest, and faithful; the
other dextrous, and of a quick and clear apprehension, but a little too subtle:
Subtlety, if moderate, is a necessary quality, but a fault if excessive: A
Gentleman is to make use of it, not as a Weapon to offend, but as a remedy,
cure, or arms of defense, to save himself from harm. The Chevalier de Lorrain
was much taken with Rome, but that which did the rather oblige him to spend his
two years exile there, was the concourse of Persons of the highest quality who
frequented our House, which seemed to be the Center of all the divertisments of
the Town, where I may say without hyperbole, that Plays, Discourses, Gameing,
Music, Treats, Collations, Feasts, and all divertisements imaginable,
succeeded one another in such a manner, as instead of cloying our taste of the
pleasure of them, heightened it by the variety. The Chevalier in his first
visits endeavored strongly to gain an interest in Madam Mazarins affections,
but not meeting with the success he desired, he had not the patience to wait
longer for it, but all on the sudden broke off his amorous Addresses. In a
short time after, I designed to entertain the Queen of Sueden at a Consort of
Music, and at the same time to take a little recreation, as necessary for my
self, whose Element was Action; and my greatest delight to set others at work.
My Sister and Brother were pretty good Friends then, and though I knew both
cold enough toward me, I was so far from resenting it in the least, that I
told them, with all sincerity (my humor being incapable of dissimulation) I
was not troubled at the care they both took to avoid seeing me: The matter
rested not there, but my Music applauded by every body else, was so jeered by
my Brother, that he told me, the Voices and the Airs were the pityfullest in
the World, and the Symphony worse: My Sister, though she said not a word,
confirmed by her looks the censure he had past. This angered me so, that I fell
out with them both, being unwilling to be made their sport, and their
laughing stock, or to allow my Brother the satisfaction of the pleasure he took
in provoking me by his crossness and contradictions. Things being at this pass,
they plotted privately to go together into France, and never let me know it
till three days before they set out, which they did without bidding me adieu:
The greater love we have for any person, the more we resent an injury done by
him. I was both surpised and grieved at their absence, and willing to know the
cause of it, I received a Letter from each of them, wherein they told me with
very good words, that they had great business in France which called them
thither, but that my ill humor made them hasten their Journey, yet they would
come back again without fail, if I desired to see them, for which Madam Mazarin
gave me her word. To satisfy my curosity I expected their return, without
giving my self the displeasure of reading out their kind thoughts of me.

Soon after my Brothers arrival at Paris, he married a Kinswoman of Madam de
Montespagne, called Mademoiselle de Siange; whose beauty, assisted with the
Kings persuasions, brought him under a Yoke he never expressed any inclination
for: Madam Mazarin not thinking her self safe at Nevers where she staid, and
fearing the Duke her Husband might make use of his right, and attempt something
against her liberty, she went to the Abby-Royal within ten Leagues of Paris,
where she continued till the King sent for her, to know what she desired;
having at her arrival answered his Majesty, she desired only a Pension to live
handsomely in Italy, she obtained it without difficulty: The Chevalier de
Lorrain in her absence accompanied us to some houses of Pleasure of the
Constables, where we commonly went a hunting: Having spent some time in those
Country sports, we returned to Rome, where the Walks, the Collations and
sumptuous Treats given us, sometimes in the Vineyards of the Family of
Borghese, sometimes at Montalto, and sometimes in other places, contributed not
a little to our pleasure; to continue which we resolved to treat one another by
turns every Sunday, Cardinal Chigi, Prince Savelli, the Chevalier de Lorrain,
the Dukes Sforza, and Basanello, who was the Constables Cousin, being of the
company, so that we past the Carnaval with more pleasure than usual, Pippa
Acciaioli having obtained leave of the Pope to present an Opera.

About the end of the Spring, Madam Mazarin performed her promise, and I had
the pleasure to see her again after nine Months absence, more beautiful than
ever. But this satisfaction had like to have cost me dear, for having taken
Physic that day, I got so strange a Colic by going abroad the day I had been
purged, that had it lasted a little longer, it had certainly made an end of me.
I was so ill the most stony heart would have pitied me, yet the Constable was
not in the least moved at it, at least in appearance, having with wonderful
tranquillity, and unconcerned repose, heard me groan frightfully a whole Night:
My Sister appeared as little concerned as the Constable, while his Brother and
all those about me expressed their sorrow for my pain, they only excepted who
were my nearest Relations, who never troubled themselves for what should become
of me. However the violence of my Disease yielded at last to the strength of
the Remedies used, which effectually cured me: Then it was the Chevalier de
Lorrain presented me from Monsieur a full hunting Equipage, of the value of a
thousand Pistols, garnished with an infinite deal of Ribbands, the finest and
richest in Paris, which his Royal Highness had sent him to present me with:
Having been pleased to accept of a Present I had made his Highness of Gloves
and other Toys not worth the speaking of: The Chevalier procured me this
Present, who had not done him any service, nor lent him any thing as was falsely
reported, it being certain he never wanted Money, and was extremely displeased
with me for going about to borrow some to pay him my loosings at play.

The following Summer intending to take the pleasure of bathing, my Brother,
Madam Mazarin, and I, went to Sebaron, a passage very dangerous, through the
rapidity of the stream, where the violence of the Water carried me with such
force, I had been certainly drowned, had I not been helped by a Turkish
Maidservant, that Monsieur Rospigliosi General of the Popes Galleys in Candy
had bestowed on me. She was more strong than big, and with my Brothers
assistance drew me out of the danger I was in. This made us choose a place of
more safety in the Tyber, near which we caused a Cabin to be made to undress
us in, from whence we had a Gallery that reached just to the bathing place, all
made up of Canes, Leaves and Boughs, with admirable art. The Autumn we spent in
the Country, and the Carnaval in seeing Operas, as we used to do, though not
with equal pleasure; the Constable of a long tme not having the same
complaisance, tenderness, and esteem for me as formerly; he seldom spoke to me,
and when he did, it was in such Language, I could have wished rather he had not
spoken at all to me. The Count Sermino, his Brother, formerly known by the name
of the Abbot Colonna, who had several times composed our differences, and by
his prudence hindered them from breaking out, is a witness of my sufferings.
Not able to endure any longer such sensible displeasures and injuries, I
applied my thoughts to find out a remedy. My Sister and I in the time of our
bathings and walks, had contracted a stricter amity than ever. I resolved to
take the advantage of the tenderness she had professed for me, and earnestly
prayed her not to return into France without taking me with her. She faithfully
promised it, having first represented to me the inconveniences she lay under,
and I was to expect, if I took the course she had done. Nothing being more true
than that, she was so far from inclining me that way, that she did all she
could to make me sensible of the ill consequences of an undertaking of that
nature, as she has written in her Memoires.

Soon after this, the Chevalier de Lorrain was called home from Exile; his
Friends were not a little pleased at the surprise he put them to at his arrival
at Court, so much sooner than they expected. The mean while as the Constables
freaks and slights increased every day, so did my trouble and vexation: My
Brother the better to persuade me to conceal my resentment, told me often, he
feared I should not long enjoy my liberty, adding once in Madam Mazarin's
presence, that when I least expected it, I should be clapped up in the Palliano,
a Castle of the Constables, standing on the Confines of the Estate of the
Church and the Kingdom of Naples. These reasons added to my natural averseness
against the customs of Italy, where dissimulation and enmity between Families
are more in vogue than any where else, hastened my putting in execution the
design I had of retiring into France, the place of my Education, the residence
of most of my Relations, and the Center of my Genius, having a particular
inclination for their free and gay humor, still affecting novelty, and for the
warlike Air and gallant Deportment of the brave Men there; and being quite
weary of living at ease in a quiet Country, and under a peaceable Government.
We left Rome the twenty ninth of May, with a very slender Equipage, all I had
about me being seven hundred Pistols, my Pearls, and some Roses of Diamonds,
Madam Mazarin having lost all her baggage by leaving it at Rome, when the
Constable went to see a breed of Mares he had at one of his Country Houses,
called Trattocchie. As we stepped into the Coach, we told the Coachman aloud, he
should drive us to Trascati, which we did to deceive a company of our people
who stood at the Gate of the Palace Mazarin. At the first turning, a Valet de
Chamber of my Sisters, a German born, called Pelletier, bid the Coachman drive
straight for Civita Vecchia, where a Feluca of Naples waited our coming. The
Coachman was threatened if he did not make haste, and obeyed his orders so well,
that by night we got within sight of Civita Vecchia. Pelletier had agreed with
the Mariners they should take us aboard five Miles from the Town, lest we
should be discovered at the Port: we sent them news of our coming, the rather
for that a Lacquey we had dispatched before to that purpose, and expected with
extreme impatience, was not returned. Notwithstanding our cares and fears of
being taken, Madam Mazarin and I ventured into a thick Wood near the Sea, and
slept there two hours so quietly and soundly, that a Maid of my Sisters, and
Morena one of mine, who served for a guard for us, were astonished to see it:
When we awaked, we discerned my Sisters Valet de Chamber coming afar of, who
told us, he could discover nothing of the Feluca, and that the Lacquey took his
rest at an Inn, to sweat out the Wine he had drunk, so that we were upon the
point of returning to the Coach, and resolving to go forward by some by-way,
for fear of being met with on the Road, but the Horses being tired, my Sister
said it was better send them back with the Coach to an Inn near Civita Vecchia,
and give the Coachman order to say, if any came in search of us, that he had
seen us go aboard, which he promised to do for a little Present that was made
him. We got the while into the bottom of a Wood near the Highway, having sent
Pelletier in search of the Feluca, with order to hire another if he could not
discover the first. He promised to do it whatever came of it. The extreme heat
of the Sun having scalded my Head five hours together, a forced fast of twenty
four hours, and the trouble I was in for having no news of the Feluca, made me
absolutely despair, and tell my Sister I would go back again, and that I were
as good dye of any other death as of hunger. My Sister, who is the best
humored and patient'dst Lady of the World, qualified me a little with her
discourse; adding, that if within half an hour we should not receive some good
news, we might go back again. I resolved to wait the time she had set, and
within a quarter of an hour, we heard the noise of a Horse gallopping toward
us, which, with the trouble I was under, and the fear I had we should be
presently apprehended by the Horseman, made me absolutely despond. My Sister
armed with a pair of Pistols, and resolved to kill the first that came up to
her, advancing before us, saw it was our Postillion who had been in search of
the Feluca, without acquainting us with his intentions: Thus my fears vanished,
and my sadness was turned into joy, upon the Boys telling us our Feluca waited
for us within five Miles of the place we were in. Hereupon, having filled our
Portmantles, which were neither great nor heavy, we set forward in the heat of
the day, through a Plain where we could see nothing but Locusts. Indesatigable
Madam Mazarin was got so far before me, that to follow her the better, I was
forced to rest me several times; and at length hunger, thirst, weariness, and
heat had reduced me to that extremity, I was compelled to pray a Labourer I
spied there, to carry me about a hundred Paces toward the Sea, telling him, I
had lost my company a hunting, my Sister and I having changed habits in the
Coach. The Country Fellow made some difficulty at first, but persuaded at
length, by some Pistols I added to my request, he carried me in his Arms to the
place where my Sister was: Much about the same time Pelletier arrived, who told
us he had hired another Feluca at a thousand Crowns, but that in truth he did
not like the Faces of the Master or Mariners, who all looked like Rascals; we
answered, that fortune had favored us with news, by the Postillion, of the
first Feluca, and that he was gone to meet her: Pelletier was no less joyful
than we at so happy an adventure. At last, partly a foot, and partly in the
Laborers Arms, I got to the Seaside, where our Maids arrived presently after
us; but no Feluca appeared, and I finding all our hopes frustrated, remained
sad and disconsolate. My Sister, though equally concerned, concealed her
trouble, that she might not increase mine: In this miserable condition we laid
us down on a little Straw we found in a Cabin, and sent Pelletier the second
time in search of a Barque, the while I prayed the Labourer to go fetch me a
little Water: In a quarter of an hour Pelletier returned, who with a sad
Countenance and troubled Voice told us, we were undone, and that we were
pursued: I was so weary, that the news made no impression upon me, being
insensible of what he said; my Sister pressing him to tell truth, and finding
by his manner of expressing himself he spoke not in earnest, she angrily bid
him tell her seriously how things were; he answered, what he had said was only
to frighten us. My Sister chid him, saying, 'twas no time to jest. We went
thence to the Barque, and with that which was first hired found the other,
where the Master and Seamen would have persuaded us to come aboard. But
Pelletier having given me a more favorable account of the former, I stepped in
without regarding the other, my Sister and our Maids having done the like. The
other Mariners began to threaten us, and hinder our putting out to Sea, so
that we were obliged to buy our peace of them, and get out of their danger. I
was scarce out at Sea but I felt the effects of it, yet was more sensible of
the new proposition our Master made us of more Money for our passage than he
had agreed for with our Valet: He grounded his demand on the danger he exposed
himself to for serving us. Pelletier (who wanted not Stomach) was enraged to
find himself deceived in the good Opinion he had had of our Master, who,
contrary to promise, demanded more than was due, and in great wrath would have
made him stand to his Bargain. But the Master had the power on his side, and to
his Reasons good or bad added threats to throw us Overboard, or set us ashore
in some desert Island, so that I commanded Pelletier to be quiet, and with one
hundred Pistols, addition to the Rate first bargained, silenced the Master,
assuring of further recompense at his landing us in France, which he promised
to do.

We had the Wind very favorable for the first six hours, after which we were
so becalmed, we made no sail at all. About Evening we discovor'd a Brigantine,
and the Master fearing it might be a Turkish Vessel, we drew near some Rocks on
the Coast of Tuscany, where he showed us a place where we might disembark and
be in safety, in case he should be forced to fight. Coasting near the Rocks, he
at last knew the Vessel, and having asked whence she came, and finding her a
Genoese, we continued our Voyage to Monace: where the Calm being on the sudden
turned into a Storm, my Sister grew very Sea-sick, the Tempest being so great
that we were in great danger of Shipwreck.

The Plague was in the Neighborhood of Civita Vecchia, where we took Shipping;
and having not had the opportunity or liberty to disembark for want of a
Certificate (that we came from a place uninfected) till we got to Monaco, we
obtained a false one there, with the help of some Pistols given for that
purpose. Our Master unwilling to land us at Marsellis, by reason of some
difference he said he had with some of the Town, it proved lucky for us by
preventing our falling in among the Felucas and Galleys the Constable had sent
in pursuit of us, which could not have missed of us, had not our Master steered
his course to avoid Marsellis. After nine days sailing, we arrived safe at
Ciutat, where having rested four hours, we mounted Horses we had hired for our
Journey; and traveling all night, arrived betimes at Marsellis. I inquired
there for Monsieur Arnous, Master of the Galleys, hoping he had a Pass for me,
having desired it of his Majesty before we left Rome; being told he was very
sick, I thought my self obliged to give him a visit; and having told him who I
was, and that I was sorry to find him in the condition he was in, I asked him
if he had not something from the King to give me. He could scarce answer me,
for an Apoplex he was fallen into, but gave me a Packet sealed, wherein was a
Pass, with a Letter from his Majesty, and another from Monsieur de Pompone,
for Monsieur Grignan the Kings Lieutenant in Provence, who had a particular
charge to receive me at Aix, and assist me with his Authority, and any thing
else in his Power. At our return from Monsieur Arnous's, we went to Bed, but
had scarce rested an hour, but they awaked me, to let me know Captain Manchini
desired to speak with me from the Constable. All my People trembled at the
news; and to prevent further inconvenience, I gave Monsieur Arnous intelligence
of it. He presently sent me a Guard, and prayed me very earnestly to take a
Lodging in his House, where I might be safer than in any other place. I did so,
having first given Manchini audience, who had no proposal to make me, but to
return to the Constable, or stay there at least till he could send me a Train
more suitable to my Quality, and such things as were necessary for my
continuing my Journey with more decency and splendor. He forgot not to mind me
of my Children, judging the tenderness I had for them, might perhaps prevail
with me to take the resolution he endeavored to persuade me to: But though I
loved my Children infinitely, I feared more my own danger, and making no doubt
but all his good words were only a Cloak for some ill design, I told him I was
resolved not to return: With that I stepped into the Coach Monsieur Arnous had
sent me, with a Gentleman in it, and went to his House, where we were so well
received, entertained, and lodged, that in a short time we were quite recovered
of our Voyage. The day after, news was brought me from Monsieur Grignan, (to
whom I had sent Monsieur de Pompones Letter) that he had sent a Gentleman with
six of his Guards to attend me, with order to furnish me with whatever I
wanted: I accepted the Gentleman's offer, and having eat something, Madam
Mazarin and I went with him into the Coach, and arrived in the Evening at Aix,
in company with Monsieur Grignon, who came to meet us a League out of Town with
his Coach, where he desired us to step in, telling us he was much troubled he
could not lodge us in the Governors Palace, who then was the Duke de Vendosm my
Nephew, the Son of the Duke Mercoeur, and my elder Sister Victoria de Manchini.
Having thanked him for his care of us, we prayed him not to give himself
further trouble for our Lodging, having given our words to a Gentleman of my
Brothers, called Mories, that we would lodge in his House, or at Monsieur
Casteletts the President, his elder Brother; as we did, and were treated there
magnificently fifteen days.

My Sister could not go to Paris, by reason of an Arrest of Parliament obtained
against her by her Husband, which made me dispatch Pellitier with a Lettter to
the King, wherein I prayed him to let me know what House he pleased I should
live in at Paris; and that my Sister might be permitted to come to Court,
without fearing the pursuit of her Husband; I proposed the Palace Mazarin,
where my Sister desired to lodge with me: Pelletiers return was delayed by an
ill accident he met with by the way, having been robbed, and in danger of his
Life, to my very great trouble. This ill accident was attended with a piece of
bad news, which gave me new displeasure, in the assurance I had, that Monsieur
St. Simon, who had been at Aix, and made me the same Proposals as Manchini had
done, was at Paris; where he solicited for the Constable, and being a Creature
of Cardinal Altieri's the Popes Nephew, he did all he could against me, and,
the better to serve his turn, made use of the Popes Authority. To prevent the
Storm that threatened me, I would have been gone without staying for Pelletiers
return, or regarding my Sisters objections, with whom I went to Mirabeau, where
the Gentleman, who was Lord of the place, accompanied us with six of the Guards
of my Nephew the Duke of Vandosme, of whose Company this Gentleman was Captain,
and treated us very handsomely. In this Village Madam Mazarin, seeing me
resolved to go forward, prayed me to stay a while for Pelletiers coming, which,
for fear of putting her out of humor, I consented to. But having staid six
days to no purpose, I told her I would be gone without farther delay, and get
near Paris, where I understood they endeavored to hinder my entrance. The
Chevalier de Mirabeau seeing me resolved to go, accompanied us with the Guards
as far as Pont St. Esprit, where we heard that Polastron, Captain of Duke
Mazarins Guards, was passed by Aix in search of us. This news obliged us to
quit the Road, and retire into a Country House. My Sister the same night
pursued her Journey by the way of Savoy, accompanied with the Chevalier d' Anne
and one half of the Guards, the other half remaining with me. I continued much
afflicted at the separation from my Sister, and upon her word she would stay at
Chambreri (whither she was then bound for) till the King would permit her to
live in France, I promised her not to go beyond Grenoble, that I might be near
her, and hear how she did. I came to that City, and having continued three days
in an Inn on the other side the Water, not one knowing who I was, a Gentleman
arrived, sent by the Queen, to whom his Majesty had left the Government of the
Kingdom, while he went in Person to command his Army against the Hollanders:
The Gentleman brought me a Letter from her Majesty, wherein she commanded me in
very obliging Terms, not to come beyond the place where this Letter should find
me; adding, she doubted not but it was the Kings Intention it should be so. I
answered, mine was so too, and to obey her orders with absolute submission. The
Duke d'Esdignieres, Governor of that Province, had received like orders, and
gave me a Visit, and invited me to take a Lodging at his House, or at the
Arsenal. Being loath to give him trouble, I accepted of a Lodging at the
Arsenal, where Polastron (whom I believed come in pursuit of my Sister) came to
see me, and, to the Complements he made me on the the behalf of the Duke his
Master, added the offer of his Palace, and all that depended on him; protesting
he had order to make the like offer to the Duchess his Mistress. Upon this
assurance, and the word of the Governor, I gave my Sister notice by an
Express, desiring her to come to me: But having gone a great way about by Turin
and the Mountains toward Chamberri, it was a Month ere she got thither; so
that my Courrier was there before her. As soon as she received the Letter, she
made ready for her Journey, and I to receive her: At our Enterview she gave me
an account of the fatigues of her Journey, but thought them well endured to
obtain the Honor done her by his Royal Highness of Savoy. Polastron spoke with
her, but his Proposals proving ineffectual, he returned for Paris, and we for
Grenoble, where we were till the beginning of August, when the King returned
from the Campaign, and Pelletier came to us (having miraculously escaped the
danger I spoke of) with a Letter from his Majesty, wherein he advised me to
retire into a Covent, to stop the mouths of those who made ill construction of
my quitting Rome; to which he added as to Madam Mazarin, that the Conditions of
separation from her Husband were well known to her, and the same as formerly.

I was so far from being satisfied with this Letter, that I resolved to go
directly to Paris, and throw my self at his Majesty's Feet. I acquainted my
Sister with my design; she with extraordinary Complaisance answered, I was to
consider only my own interest in the case, without regarding her concern in it,
being very willing to return to Chamberri. We went from Grenoble in a Litter
without saying any thing of our intended Journey, for fear of being staid by
the Governor; We went together as far as Lions, and there parted, my Sister
for Chamberri, and I for Paris, with a Courrier belonging to the Kings Cabinet,
called Marguein, whom I had known at Rome, a Man honest, faithful and witty. I
engaged him to come with me, and entrusted him with the management and care of
all the expenses of my Journey, wherein he so well acquitted himself, that he
advanced what Money was necessary: I went post in a Caleche, Morena and he
following me on Horseback. A Days Journey beyond Lions I embarked, in hopes to
pass by Water with more decency and ease; but the Water was so low, and the
passage so disagreed with the impatience I was under of getting quickly to
Paris, that I went ashore the first Town we came to. But not finding there any
Posthorses, I was forced to make use of such as we could borrow in the
Neighborhood of the Carriers; but not one of them would draw in a Caleche
without leading, which troubled me extremely, considering the fate that
attended me, who could not rid way by Post or by Water, some Obstacle happening
always in the way to stop the designed swiftness of my course. At last we came
to Nevers, where I learnt, undiscovered, my Brother and his Wife were at St.
Elay, three Leagues from thence, getting Post thither; I met with another
trouble I had not foreseen, but very luckily escaped. When I asked for
Posthorses, they denied me any, telling me they durst not without first giving
notice to a Gentleman, who had forbidden them hiring out any Posthorses
without order from him, I was afraid he had given the like order in all the
Post-Towns on my Road, and having heard at Lions the King had dispatched a
Gentleman from Court, I presently apprehended it might be to meet me, or rather
to stay my coming to Paris. To defeat all their preventions, I told Marguein he
must by any means get me some Posthorses; he did it so dexterously, that they
furnished us with as many as we needed for our Journey; while Monsieur de la
Gibertrere (the Gentleman I mentioned) watched my coming on a Bridge, where he
thought I must pass, having heard I had taken Water at Roane, and never
dreaming my impatience had made me disembark to travel by Land.

While my Caleche (which wearied me more than the Posthorses) ran all on the
Nayl by the Road, and I endeavored by traveling all night to repair my loss
of time in my Voyage on the River, and thought my self past all danger, my
Caleche having twice overturned without hurting me, yet the ill Fate
inseparably attending my Pilgrimages, to complete my misfortunes, as I arrived
about noon at Montargis, afflicted Morena with a grievous Colic, and more to
my vexation than his, filled Margueins head with fancies of strange
considerations and cares, he immagin'd himself obliged to have, of those
inconveniences his politics suggested might fall upon him and me, and my
Family, upon my arrival at Paris against the Kings order: Adding that Morena
being sick, and not able to go along with us, he thought it our best course to
stay where we were. Tired and sleepy as I was I submitted to his Reasons, which
would not have prevailed with me on another occasion. Having yielded as much to
the necessity of refreshing my self, as to his persuasions, I agreed, that
while he went to Paris to carry a Letter to the King, and another to Monsieur
de Louvoy, I would take the way of Fountainbleau, whither I traveled, taking
Morena with me in my Caleche: Marguein went his way, having substituted, to
supply his Room with us, a Man of his acquaintance, whom he furnished with
Money to defray our Charges by the way: This man was very faithful and honest,
but withal very troublesome; and not knowing me, judged of me by my Train, and
took me to be a person as inconsiderable as my Equipage was poor. At every
Stage he quarreled with the Postillion, who was unwilling to carry any more
than one Person in a Caleche for fear of tyring his Horses. After all their
brangling and noise we arrived at Fountainbleau about seven in the Evening,
that being the only place Monsieur Gibertiere could have expected to overtake
me in, having rested my self at Montargis. I have been since told he would have
punished the Postmaster for furnishing me with Horses, but at last he pardoned
him, partly out of Clemency, as a quality becoming a Gentleman, and partly not
to lose time, seeing himself obliged to make haste after me, who made such
haste before him. Having left Nevers at Rome, he arrived at Fountainbleau two
hours after us, and forbid any there should furnish me with Horses. About nine
in the Morning I heard of his arrival, by the news he sent me he had business
to speak with me; I sent him word he might come when he pleased. Having
delivered me a Letter of Credence from his Majesty, he endeavored to persuade
me to return to the Constable; as the best course I could take: things being
not for my advantage in France, where the King was informed I presumed much
upon his favor, and pretended to govern him as I pleased. He added, that his
Majesty was much troubled he had granted me his protection upon frivolous and
Chimerical Pretenses of mine, and for Reasons which had no other ground but my
humor and caprice. He concluded in case I would return home, I had no more to
do but take the way of Grenoble, and go into the Abbey of Montfleuri. He had the
Heads of his Embassy written under the Letter, and my answer was, that I had
not left my House to return thither so soon, that what I had done was not upon
imaginary pretenses, but for good and solid reasons, which I neither would, nor
could declare to any but the King; that all I desired was to speak with him, in
confidence, that having obtained audience of him, I should find him so wise and
so just, that he would permit himself to be disabus'd, and lay aside those ill
impressions they labored so industriously to give him of my conduct. That I
was very far from flattering my self with the vanity of the presumptuous power
he had mentioned, that I had neither Merit, nor Quality, nor Parts to pretend
to a share in the management of his Affairs; that I desired leave to retire to
Paris, and limit my ambition to the straitness of a Cloister, where I begged
his Majesty's Permission to live among my Relations, as the great Duchess of
Tuscany, the Princess de Chalais, and many more Ladies who were Widows, or
separated from their Husbands, had been allowed to do. As to my returning to
Grenoble, I was too weary to bebegin another Journey; and further, that I
waited his Majesty's answer, by which I would govern my self.

These were my last words to him, which having spoken, I presently fell a
playing on my Guittarre. He took his leave of me, and a while after, by a
Letter from Marguein, I had news the Duke de Crequi was coming to see me from
the King, with orders to answer my Proposals: He arrived, and Marguein also
almost together: I prayed the Duke to come in, who seeing me a-Bed in an
ordinary Room in an Inn, and considering the poverty of my Condition, compared
with the Grandeur and Pomp he had seen me in at Rome, he told me he was no less
astonished than sorry to see such a change, supplying with his discourse and
commiseration my insensibility of the illness of my Fortune; but finding him
enlarge too much on that subject, I prayed him to pass on to what he had to
communicate to me of greater importance. He answered very clearly, the King was
not willing I should either enter Paris, or speak with him, having given the
Nuncio and the Constable his Royal word he would grant me neither, for reasons
I could not be ignorant of; that my best course was to return for Grenoble,
unless I would rather choose to go home, which would certainly be safest and
most honorable for me.

Moved, more than can be imagined, at a declaration of this nature, I answered,
the King might well refuse me the Honor of seeing him, and forbid me entrance
into Paris, but it would not appear very handsome to oblige me to return for
Grenoble in the condition I was in, no less tired with the heat than with haste
of my Journey: That it was a strange piece of severity in a King to deprive me
of the Honor of his Royal presence, but since there was such necessity of my
obedience, I begged his Majesty to permit me to enter into L'ys Abbey. Monsieur
de Crequi prayed me to write a Billet to the King for that purpose; and having
returned to Paris with the Billet, he sent, the day following, a Page who
brought me the leave I desired, with order to the Abbess to receive me, and to
Monsieur Gibertiere to accompany me thither. Much about the same time arrived a
Gentleman from Monsieur Colbert with two Purses of five hundred Pistols a
piece, which his Majesty had ordered should be sent me; being the sum it
pleased his Royal Grandeur to oblige me with every six Months while I continued
under his protection. I went immediately to L'ys, where the Abbess received me
with great expressions of Esteem and Affection. Soon after my Sisters came to
see me, and brought me many considerable Presents. I cannot express the joy I
had to see them, whose Civilities and Caresses to me, for three or four days
they were to see me, were no small comfort to me in my afflictions. The
Countess of Soisons, of her natural generosity, sent me a very rich Bed with
Tapistry and other Furniture of value; and in a word all she thought I stood in
need of. The Count of Soisons her Husband who not long after died, by an
accident in the Army, not without suspicion of Poison, and the Duke of Bouillon
having obtained leave of the King, came to see me, none daring to visit me
without permission from his Majesty: I lived very quietly in this Monastery,
the kindness of the Nuns being such, I have not words to express the
complaisance and tenderness they used me with, by the example of the Abbess.
But Fortune, who never permitted me to enjoy long any happy Estate, made use of
my self as the surest Instrument to deprive me of this, and to disturb my
repose, brought me into great disgrace with the King, by means of a Letter I
writ to Monsieur Colbert to complain of the small Courtesy I found at his
Majesty's hands; concluding, that since he denied me leave to come to Paris, he
would permit me to go where else I pleased. His Majesty was very angry at this
Letter, which my Enemies laid hold of to incense him the more against me,
acquainting him I was too near Paris, and that I might come thither in a
moment. This made him order Monsieur Colbert to tell me from him, I had no more
to do, but choose a Covent threescore Leagues distant from Court, and that
having written him such a Letter I deserved not his protection. By this answer
I saw my fault, and sorry, though too late, for my rashness, I writ to Monsieur
Colbert, that in truth I had done ill to write the Letter I had sent him, but
that he had not done better in showing it the King. And that since he was in
part, though indirectly, the cause of his anger against me, he was obliged to
pacify him, in telling him how sorry I was for my folly, and to solicit my
pardon: Having done what he could to serve me, he sent me word the day after by
Letter, that his Majesty had pardoned me, but persisted in his resolution to
send me threescore Leagues from Paris: I answered very submissively, I had not
yet been such a wanderer as to be able to make choice of a Covent at that
distance, and therefore if there were no possibility of altering his Majesty's
mind, I begged he would be pleased to name a Covent, and I would obey without
reply, though I could not but be troubled to go out of a Covent where I was
well acquainted, and lived with some pleasure: The Answer I received was four
or five days after to see Monsieur Gibertiere coming with a Coach, and bringing
an order to the Abbess to let me go. I obeyed, and going out with four Maids I
then had with me, (the Constable having at my request sent me three who had
served me at Rome) we traveled to Avenay, an Abbey three miles from Rheims,
where his Majesty commanded I should be, at half the distance first mentioned
from Paris. The Abbess received me with all the honor and kindness I could
wish: A month after the Archbishop of Reims, Brother to the Marquess de Louvoy,
came to see me; he pressed me very much to tell him what reasons I had given
the King for my coming from Rome: I desired to be excused: he asked me,
somewhat displeased, whether I came with a design to prevail with the King as
formerly: I replied, that it was a thing he could grant me the least of any,
and I had the least thought of.

Every day I received proofs of the generosity and goodness of the Abbess and
her Nuns, who were all very civil, and strove who should divert me most for the
three months I continued in that Covent: At three months end my Brother
obtained leave to bring me to Nevers; the hopes I had one day to have leave to
go to Paris made me take the Journey with a great deal of pleasure, but the
success was not answerable; for having engaged my self to my Brother upon my
word, that if he left Nevers I would go into a Covent, he told me about the
weeks end he had business called him suddenly to Venice, and that he hoped I
would not fail to perform what I had promised him. I was very much afflicted at
the news of this unexpected Journey, which dissipated all my hopes of returning
to Paris, and obliged me to quit a place where I lived pleasantly enough, and
deprived me of the company of the Duchess his Wife, who was one of the most
lovely and obliging Ladies in the World, and most did all in her power for my
comfort and ease. However resolved (as always) to keep my word, though to my
dissatisfaction and displeasure, I visited all the Covents in Nevers to see if
there were any could please me: but having been used to great and famous
Abbeys, I found not one to my mind there. But my Brother pressing me more and
more every day (though more out of policy than for any business he had at
Venice) I told him, to satisfy him, that the best expedient was for us to go
to Lions where I might have choice of Covents: He liked my resolution, in hopes
it would give him an opportunity to take me further, as it did. We went for
Lions, whence the Coaches of the Marquess de Villeroy, who commanded there in
his Fathers absence, came to receive us two or three Leagues from the Town.
Having rested a while I went to view the Covents, particularly that of St. Mary
of the Visitation, situate on a height which overlooked the City: I had taken
up my residence there, had not my ill fate made the Marquess and my Brother
dissuade me from it, by aggravating my sufferings, and the flight put upon me
in France, to that height, that I took a resolution to go into Italy, without
acquainting them what place I would choose for my retirement. The Marquess about
that time was called home from Exile; so we parted; he for Paris, we for Italy.
I had scarce set foot in that Country but I perceived my Error, and the fault I
had commtted in quitting Lions; to retrieve this miscarriage, I designed not to
pass beyond Turin, hoping his Royal Highness would afford me his assistance. I
discovered the design to none but my Sister, as I passed through Chamberi,
where I prayed her to write to his Highness in my favor, to facilitate my
putting my design in execution; she did it readily. Having past the Alps, I
acquainted my Brother with my resolution: He was extremely astonished at it, but
durst not oppose it, knowing the time and place inconvenient. Being with
Monsieur Boniel, a learned and honest man I had taken at Gnenoble for my
Chaplain, who came to me at Avenay, I dispatched him with a Letter I had
written to his Royal Highness, beseeching him to give me leave to retire into
some Covent in his Dominions; and assuring him his most Christian Majesty would
not dislike of it. The next day he answered me, with much kindness, he would
very willingly grant me his protection, if (as I writ) the King would be
pleased with it: He sent a Gentleman to complement me, with a Coach to bring me
to Turin. My Brother took leave of me, and went on his Journey, avoiding to
pass by Turin that he might not be obliged to see his Highness. This Prince
came to receive me a League out of Town, and made me go into his Coach, wherein
were some Lords of his Court, and with a great Train of Nobility on Horseback,
he accompanied me to the Covent of the Visitation, where he had commanded an
Apartment to be furnished for me, and disposed the Abbess to receive me, by the
intercession of the Archbishop, who was present at my entrance: The Nuns were
kind and obliging as possible during my three Months abode there; about the end
of which, being informed Madam Mazarin was suddenly for Paris, partly out of a
desire to see her, and partly to endeavor to repair the fault I committed in
leaving France, I resolved to go to Chamberi; and desired his Royal Highness
not to permit any Courrier to pass for two days, for fear of my being pursued.
His Highness very obligingly granted my request, yet forgot not to condemn my
resolution; and express his displeasure at it. Assured of his word, I set
forward with a thousand Pistols the King had returned me of his usual bounty.
Morena and my Chaplain were all the company I had: With this small train I
arrived at Chamberi more weary than ever: There to my comfort I found my self
frustrated of my hopes to see my Sister; who, prevailed upon by interest more
than by affection, had hid her self from me, for fear of being concerned in my
designs. I slept in the Castle she dwelt in, and asking her People where she
was, and when she would be at home, I could not obtain a satisfactory answer:
At last not to hazard a certain enjoyment for an expectation, I resolved to
return to Turin, under the protection of his Royal Highness, with whom I had
all the reason in the World to be satisfied, his care and bounty having been so
great while I was at Turin, and particularly at my last address to him, that I
could not desire more. I writ him a Letter to pray him send me a Coach to the
Foot of the Alps, which he did with his usual exactness: The Marquess Drone
and a Gentleman belonging to the Constable, called Don Mourice de Bologna, who
was come to me by the Constables order, came to receive me near Turin. They
were no less glad of my return than they had been apprehensive of my executing
my former design, which they endeavored to prevent by sending Courriers into
several parts to hinder my passage: The same time the most Christian King, at
the Constables request, sent orders to the Governors of the Frontiers and
other Provinces of his Kingdom, not to permit me entrance. When I arrived at
Turin, I went to the Prince of Carignan's, where I found the Count de Oreux and
the Chevalier de Savoy, his Nephews and mine. And fearing he would not receive
me, if I gave him notice of my coming, I took possession (without saying a word
to him) of an Appartment where I contied above a Month, till leave was come
from Rome for my returning into a Covent, and that I might go abroad once
a-week, which Cardinal Porto Carrero procured for me. The mean time I
frequented the Court, and went to a House called La Venerie, about which was
store of all sorts of Game and Divertisements, so that I never spent my time
with more pleasure than there, receiving continually from his Highness Royal,
and Madam Royal, all imaginable Expressions of Affection and Honor.

My happiness was too great to last long; Fortune making it her business to
persecute me, suggested to his Royal Highness Reasons of State to make me a
Proposal of returning whence I came, and to tell me it were better for me to be
at my own House than in a Covent: And that if there were no other Obstacle but
the present disunion from the Constable, he would undertake to reconcile us. I
was so offended at this and some other things he said to me at La Venerie,
that, carried away by my choleric humor, I would have gone away that moment
in a pet, and returned into the Cloister, and had certainly done it, had not
Madam Royal hindered it, by staying me with them eight days more; at the end of
which they accompanied me to the Covent: Our difference increased by the way,
through the impatience of my humor, and my unwillingness to pardon him any
thing, which put us in a greater heat than ever. Letting go my hand, as I
entered the Covent, he told me, after long silence, that as humoursome and
pettish against him as I was, he would be still ready to serve me: This offer,
which should have appeased me, angered me more than ever; so that I told him,
haughtily enough, I made just as much account of his protection as I did of his
person: This answer madded him, that he went away without saying a word more to
me: My Enemies looked on this as a good occasion to work me out of favor with
him, and succeeded in it.

About this time I endeavored by several Letters to the Ministers of France,
to prevail with the King to revoke the Orders he had given to prohibit my
coming into his Kingdom, but I could not obtain the favor: The mean time his
Highness Royal past all the Summer at La Venerie, without as much as sending me
one complement: At his return he came to see me with Madam Royal, to comfort me
for the death of Count Soisons; he performed this melancholy Complement with a
great deal of Ceremony, the sadness of his Countenance suiting very well with
that of the occasion. Finding my self distitute of hopes from France, and less
honored than formerly by the Sovereign of Savoy, I laid hold on an opportunity
offered me by a Voyage of the Marquess de Bourgamanero to Turin, to entreat him
to prevail with the Constable, his very good Friend, to give me leave to go
into France, being assured the King would not deny me that favor if the
Constable desired it. The Marquess returned to Millan to serve me on this
occasion, and with full purpose to return to me as soon as he should obtain the
permission requisite from the Court of Spain, where he said he must write to
obtain it, being not disposed to ask it of the Duke d' Ossuna, then Viceroy of
Millan, for fear of being denied by him, who had already, by his fault, lost
the Love and Esteem this Gentleman had once had for him. While matters stood
thus, the Constable flattered me with hopes the most Christian King would
permit me to return into France, assuring me he had entreated his Majesty to do
it. 'Twas no hard matter to make me believe a thing I so much desired: I was
the more induced to believe this, as knowing it for the Constables interest I
should leave Turin: The Marquess de Borgamanero, the beginning of Autumn,
returned with the permission (I mentioned) granted by the Queen Regent of
Spain: But finding the Constable writ to me every day he had not received
answer from France, and judging he would be better pleased I should retire into
Flanders than any other place, I resolved to go thither; intending to set out
within eight days, I spoke of it to the Marquess who highly approved it. About
this time I received several visits from the Duke of Savoy, but not with the
satisfaction I had formerly from them, being grown so weary of the uneavenness
of his humor, that though he often prayed me to communicate my resolution he
could not prevail: This did so anger him, that Madam Royal took notice of it;
and, when I took my leave of her, asked me what I had done to the Duke, that he
returned so vexed and out of humor from the Covent: I answered, he must
attribute to himself and the inequality of his temper all I had done to him,
and that if he had not given me cause to complain of him, I had not given him
cause of complaint against me. Yet the Morning before we set out, the Marquess
pressing me very much to take my leave of that Prince, I did him that Devoir
more out of civility than inclination. The Duke made several Complaints, and
told me he was much displeased at the resolution I had taken to be gone, and
pressed me very much to let him know whither I went, protesting that wherever I
went I should not find a Prince more willing to oblige me. I heard very
attentively his complaints and his offers, and as I took my leave of him, I
thanked him for the latter, which I could not accept, being resolved to quit
his Dominions. He gave me his hand and brought me to the Coach: We went for
Rone in the State of Millan, with design to pass thence into Switzerland; but
being a days Journey from Turin, the Marquess, and the Abbot Oliva who was come
from Rome, to serve as Chaplain (being in truth a learned Man, but far short of
the other in Zeal and Fidelity) began to dissuade me from passing through
Millan, telling me, they were well assured something would be attempted against
my person, and that I was to save my self as long as I could from ambushes laid
for me, and that the Duke d' Ossuna would certainly order me to be staid.

It was a pretty while ere I would yield to their Counsels, but submitting at
length to their Eloquence and the strength of their Reasons, I took the Road of
St. Bernard, accompanied with the Marquess, the Abbot, Morena, and a Valet de
Chamber called Martin, having sent away the rest of my people by Rone: I was
soon convinced of the truth of what they said, for the Duke d' Ossuna, being
informed of my departure from Turin by a Courrier Don Maurice had dispatched,
and pressed by Letters from the Constable to send me to the Castle of Millan,
gave order I should be arrested, believing I would pass by Rone, having sent
some of my People that way: My Maid Constance received in the Prison there all
Honor imaginable, being taken for me, till Covonago a Knight of Malta sent by
the Duke to see me, undeceived them, and at the same time delivered those of my
Train out of the pleasantest Prison imaginable, where for eight days they had
been splendidly treated, and afterward enjoyed, as an effect of that Dukes
generosity, all sorts of divertisements. We came far short of that pleasure in
our Journey over the Mountain St. Bernard, traveling throw Snow, and over
horrible precipices: However we arrived safe at Basse, where we had the news of
what had happened to my People at Rone, who, a few days after they were at
liberty, came to us at Mayence, whence we past to Francfort, to go thence to
Cologne, taking that compass to please the Marquess and the Abbot, who were not
wiling to be at the Siege of Bonne, or meet the Spanish or French Troops then
on their march: I had the honor to see the Duchess of Lorrain, and to receive
of her Highness all the demonstrations of affection I could wish, during our
three days stay at Franckfort. Having so long enjoyed the sweet conversation of
that Princess, impatient of longer stay, I set forward on my Journey, wherein
is impossible to comprehend, much more to express, what I suffered from the
suspicious humor, the intolerable phlegm, and continual watching of one of my
Fellow Travelers, who still had an Eye upon me, and from the impertinence of
the other. This lasted till I came to Cologne, where the former, thinking it
neither safe nor civil to continue troubling me, altered his course; being well
informed, the Ambassadors of several Crowns had made me offers of their
Services, and fearing perhaps the advice I received from some might make me
alter my mind; as I had certainly done, if Fortune, obstinately bent to
persecute me, had not (by hindering me to give credit to what Monsieur Courtin,
and Monsieur Barrellon, foretold me would come to pass, if I went into
Flanders) unhappily caused me to slight their advice. But the Marquess and the
Abbot, fearing the Discourse and Correspondence I held with these Ambassadors,
might not only obstruct, but ruin their designs, made use of all the Credit
and Eloquence they had to persuade me for Flanders. The Marquess could not rest
till he saw me on my way; letting me know, that Don Manuel de Lyra, the Spanish
Envoy, had given him intelligence of a Spanish Regiment, which was on their
march to convoy Money to the Army, and to return: He made us believe this the
most favorable opportunity we could wish to guard us into the Camp of the
Marquess d' Assentar, Camp Master General, afterward killed in the Battle of
Sennef, to whom the Marquess Borgamanero had written, as to his intimate
Friend, to receive us, and permit us to follow him till we came to Flanders,
with the Regiment, for fear we should meet with some French Troops, who
committed great disorders in these Countries.

Before we arrived into the Camp of the Marquess d' Assentar, Fortune having
designed to use Borgamanero as an Instrument to persecute me, found the means
to help us out of a scurvy accident befallen us by the breaking of our Coach;
which happening to be in a place where we had neither time nor materials to
mend it, Horses were offered us. And the way being very dangerous, the Weather
cold, and the Night dark, being not far from the Marquess d' Assentars Camp, I
accepted of a very fine Horse offered me by the Marquess of Marber, Camp Master
to the Regiment, and a Gentleman of one of the best Families in Flanders. Two
of my Maids mounted other Horses provided for them, and the rest of my Train
went with good Passports for Holland: Four or Five Days after our arrival in
the Camp, we continued our Journey in a Coach of the Marquess d' Assentars.

This Horse so good and so sure was, though indirectly, the cause of all my
future sufferings, and threw me headlong into misfortunes I had not foreseen.
The Marquess de Borgamanero having from that time resolved my ruin, and
executed his designs with so much Art, it was not in my power to defeat: During
my Journey, the Principal Officers as well Spaniards, as Hollanders and
Flemmings, expressed for me all the care and complaisance imaginable,
endeavoring to divert me sometimes at Play and sometimes by discourse. As I
was thus passing my time, with a great deal of Pleasure, I observed the
Marquess often out of humor, and in deep meditation: I little dreamt of what
he and d' Assentar plotted against me, who could not imagine the ill prepared
for me, with the help of the Count de Monterey, then Governor of Flanders,
sufficiently possessed with reports to my prejudice. We arrived at Malines, where
the Governor told me, the Count had written to him not to let me pass further,
till things were in readiness for my being received into a Covent at Brussells.
It Is impossible to express how I was astonished at this admirable Complement,
and unexpcted Reception. The Marquess fearing I might attribute this proceeding
to him, made as if he had been extremely surpised, to which he added Oaths and
Protestations I thought so sincere, that I instantly prayed him to go presently
to Brussells, and entreat the Count to give me leave to come into that City,
and retire into the Covent of Barlemont, to recov^r, in some measure, the
liberty taken from me by the Governor of Malines; who, under pretense of doing
me honor, placed Guards about my House; a civil way to color my imprisonment,
but a double offense to hide an injury under the vail of an obliging action:
The Marquess promised to do me all the good offices in his power with the
Count, and I expected his performance; hoping that the protestation he made of
sincerity, and my confidence in him, notwithstanding the just cause of
suspicion I had from the order above mentioned, would have obliged him to lay
aside all thoughts of revenge, and serve me faithfully in this affair, or at
least to remain neuter, and not do me harm. But the pleasure of Revenge is a
weakness incident to Men as well as Women, and more criminal in the former. The
Marquess and Abbot did all they could to inspire into the Count a hatred
against me, and advised him to clap me up in the Citadel of Antwerp, to
prevent my going to France or England: So that when I was fully persuaded th^se
two Gentlemen labored my liberty, and, to banish from my mind all umbrage to
the contrary, I looked on the passages at Malines as an illusion of fancy,
behold with Bourgamanero a Gentleman from the Count who told me, his Excellency
being obliged to march the next day with the Army to meet the French Troops,
desired me to stay at Antwerp till his return: The Marquess to confirm the
complement, or (to name it right) the order, told me with a feigned trouble,
that there was a necessity of obeying it, but that it should be for few days,
and so long only till an answer might be had from the Constable, and leave from
the Pope for my entering a Covent: that he was extremely sorry it had not been
in his power to obtain leave from the Count for my coming to Brussells: that
the refusal was to be attributed to the ill informations he had received of me;
adding, that time must be allowed to take away the ill impressions they had
made, and that he would undertake the doing it. I did not yet mistrust him, not
doubting but he proceedded with the generosity he pretended, but told him I was
very sensible of his kind offers, and accepted of them. And, seeing there was
then no other course to be taken, I went with the Admiral a board a fine Barque
he had brought to take me in. The next day we arrived at Antwerp very early;
they kept me so long aboard after our arrival, that I began to suspect
something in hand against me. Yet after three hours waiting, news being come
that the Marquess d' Osseyra, Governor of the place, waited for me in his
Coach, I thought all well again, concluding, by all appearances, it was done
for my honor. Having landed, I went into the Coach with Borgamanero and the
Governor, who carried me strait away to the Citadel, where continuing in my
mistake, and thinking my self at liberty, all my care the first day was to
recover of my weariness. The second day I prayed the Governor to let me have a
Coach to go abroad in: Borgamanero astonished at this, told me with some
trouble, that the weather was foul, and that I were better rest my self a
little longer: Having thanked him for so obliging a care, I made no further
reply: But the next day, Borgamanero being gone to the Count de Monterey at the
Army, and the Abbot Oliva to Brussells, under pretense of returning that way to
Rone, they placed two Guards and an Officer at my door: Then it was I clearly
saw my former blindness, and the treachery of my pretended Friends; and that if
Borgamanero had kept them from using me thus till after his departure, it was
for no other end, but that he might not be thought the Author of my ill usage:
But in the Affairs of this World the blow is often felt when the hand that gave
it is not seen: This was not all, but, as if I had been an offender against the
State, they received and opened all the Letters written by me, or addressed to
me; they proceeded yet further, for Borgamanero, not thinking himself
sufficiently revenged of my slights and contempts, which proceeded only from
the small obligation I had to him, and knowing I had received a Letter from the
Constable, and a Brief from the Pope, wherein he permitted the Archbishop to
give me my choice what Covent I would go into; he advised the Count Monterey to
stay for an answer and an order that was to be sent me from Spain, telling him,
he was very well assured whatever he had done to me should be very well
approved; not only by the Constable, but by the Queen Regent. By this artifice
he broke the neck of the business, when I thought it almost concluded: The
informations he had sent against me into Spain and Italy, had the effect he
desired. The Queen ordered the Count to make sure of my person, and the
Constable commending highly their conduct as to me, sent me a Letter in
justification of it: That upon advice had of my intentions to go into France or
England, they were obliged to deprive me of liberty to execute the design.
'Twas in vain to stand upon my defense, and endeavor to clear my self of the
false accusations. I told the Count, when he came to see me in the Citadel as
he returned from the Army, (as I had by Letter acquainted the Constable) that
if I had had the design they spoke of, it would have been an easy matter to
have put it in execution at Cologne, where the one and the other very well knew
I wanted neither Friends nor Favor. This had been reason enough to any other
to have laid aside all suspicions of of this nature: But the artifice of the
Marquess prevailed over my innocence. The second visit the Count made me, upon
my complaint of the continuance of my rigorous usage, and entreating his leave
to go to Brussells as I was promised, he resolved to satifie me, and gave
Borgamanero charge to provide for my reception there: He hired me an Appartment
adjoining close to the English Covent, wherein he set up more Grates than were
in the Covent. This famous habitation being fitted for me, he went to
Bourgoigne, and notice was given me of the Lodging provided for me: Two of my
Maids, whom I had sent to Brussells, having reported to me the Circumstances of
this honorable Prison, and told me I were better stay where I was; I would not
believe them, as not able to imagine, though they had deprived me of liberty to
go abroad and walk the Town, they would also deny me entrance into the Covent.
All things now ready, and this pleasant habitation in order, the Count sent the
Captain of his Guards, with whom I embarked for Brussells, where I had a great
desire to stay: Having in this short Voyage informed my self better of the
particular conveniences of my future habitation, I began in good earnest to be
afraid of lying there, and resolved to take Sanctuary in a consecrated place
near it; so that a very fine Coach of the Counts being sent for my reception,
to carry me to this Lodging, without allowing me the liberty of seeing the
Countess or Count at the Palace, I went into the Church, belonging to the
Covent, under pretense of saying my Prayers, and the same time declared to the
Captain of the Guard, who had accompanied me, that I would not stir out of the
Church, but to go into the Monastry, as the Count had promised I should, in the
Citadel. The Captain carried the news to his Excellency, who came presently to
me, and adding threats to his requests, and all to no purpose; my refusing to
quit the Church provoked him so, that he sent to the Nuncio and the Archbishop
for leave to take me out by force. After a short conference with them, he came
to me the second time, but receiving from me as high and hard words as he gave
me, he went his way, leaving several of his Guards to watch me, besides four
Sentinels at the Church Door, having before that, in the Queens name, forbidden
the Abbess to receive me into her Covent.

I was at last resolved to sleep in the Church, when Monsieur Bruneau, a
Magistrate of Brussells, advised me to come out fairly, assuring me he had good
information his Excellency had given the Soldiers order to steal me away as
soon as I should be a-sleep. I knew this to be an honest man, and believed him,
and according to his advice, I went into my stately Lodging, which I found
stronger and better guarded than the Tower of Danae. But notwithstanding all my
trouble, which were not small, I was so tired and sleepy, that I never had a
better Nights rest: But the Grates, and Guards, and Sentinels put upon me were
not enough, for the Count fearing I would one way or other find a passage into
the Covent, sent a Spanish Gentleman called de St. Lorenzo to be witness of all
my Actions, with order not to permit me to go out of his sight. In this
lamentable condition, and having not been able to obtain any thing of the
Governor of Flanders with my sighs and my tears, I resolved at last to go to
Madrid, and retire into a Covent, not doubting but this would be granted me.
The Count approved of the Proposal, and dispatched a Courrier to the Constable
to inform him of it, and obtain his permission, which I pressed for extremely,
out of a desire to see that Court, and in hopes to better my condition.

While I expected an Answer from the Constable, the Count wanting his Guards,
and being obliged to go to Antwerp to dispatch some affairs, pressed me much to
return to the Citadel, giving me his word I should be better used, and allowed
to go sometimes abroad, accompanied by the Lieutenant of the place. I found an
opportunity to get him sign the conditions of this Treaty, at a visit he made
me before he went for Antwerp: I had, to my cost, found it necessary to use all
the caution, and obtain the best security I could, against my falling under the
inconveniences I found there the first time, and the next day set forward for
Antwerp, accompanied by Monsieur Bruneau and Don de St. Lorenzo. I had
thenceforth more liberty in the Citadel, and every where else, after the
arrival of the Abbot Colonna, who was come from the Constable to take care of
me, and accompany me in my Voyage. He contributed very much to my better usage,
by representing to the Count that I might be guarded with more decency, and my
Person sufficiently secured, without using such disobliging and rigorous
cautions. My Voyage for Spain being resolved on, I writ a Letter to the
Admiral, wherein I prayed him to do me the favor, when I came to Madrid, to
receive me into his House; and that he would get me leave, from the Queen, to
go into a Covent belonging to the Court. All things being ready for my
departure, I went to Ostend, where Don Fernando Vallederes, Governor of the
Town, treated me magnificently for eight days I staid there, waiting a
convenient opportunity to embarque: At the end of that time I sailed away, in
company of an English Vessel, which, with a favorable Wind, arrived in nine
days at St. Sebastian: I was scarce landed, but finding no answer from the
Admiral, nor consequently from the Queen, I writ him a second Letter to the
same effect with the former. And to see if he would answer me, I staid eight
days at St. Sebastian; during which, the Governor Don Baltasar Pantoja used me
and my People with all imaginable civility. These eight days being over, and
vexed no answer was come, I resolved to pursue my Journey toward Madrid, in
hopes to receive answer by the way. Being a days Journey beyond Burges, and
seeing no appearance of what I expected, I sent an Express to the Admiral, to
to know if I might depend upon the favor I desired of him by my Letters from
Antwerp, and from St. Sebastian. Continuing my Journey I arrived at Alcobendas,
a Village three Leagues from Madrid, where the Courrier brought me Letters; one
from the Queen, wherein her Majesty did me all the honors I could wish; the
other from the Admiral, who very obligingly granted me the house I desired,
adding he would come in person to receive me, and offer it with his own mouth:
The Abbot Vigliani, to whom I had dispatched a Gentleman to give notice of my
coming, arrived, as I was eating something, with his Coach, and another from
the Nuncio, who had sent with it one of his Gentlemen to wait on me: Tired with
heat and with traveling, I asked the Abbot Vigliani if it were not possible to
get me a little Ice. He was no less astonished at the question, than I was
ashamed I had asked him for so ordinary a thing. He presently sent for all
sorts of pleasant Liquors for me, who heartily thanked him for so seasonable a
Refreshment. At his request I went in his Coach to our Ladies of Belvedere,
about two Leagues from Madrid, where I was received by the Duchess d'
Albuquerque, and the Admirals Daughter in Law, Wife to the Marquess d'
Alcannizas, the Admirals second Son, and by the Duke d' Albuquerque (since
dead:) They brought me to a House of pleasure of the Admirals, on the East Side
of Madrid, very richly furnished, and adorned with the most excellent and
rarest Painting in Europe; and, in a word, the finest and most pleasant place
of all Spain. I was there about two Months, and then, fearing I might be
troublesome to the Admiral, (who treated me splendidly enough) and seeing him
naturally careless, so that he did not press the Queen for her permission, for
my going into a Covent as she had promised me, I went my self to speak to her
Majesty, and entreated her Order to the Nuns of St. Domingo el Real, to receive
me into their Covent, or allow me a House they had hard by, between their
Covent and that of our Lady de los Angeles, of the Order of St. Francis. The
Queen received me with great kindness, and granted my request; and the next day
sent order to the Nuns to receive me, or give me the House I mentioned: Their
answer was, they would obey the order, but entreated her Majesty, with all due
respect, she would be pleased to make an Authentic Declaration under her Royal
Signature, that the favor they did me should not be drawn into Example; which
her Majesty granted them, for preserving their Privileges, and with
Circumstances much to my honor. I entered this Covent the last of August,
accompanied by the Nuncio, (now Cardinal Marescotti) the Admiral, and the
Marquess d' Alcannizas: That I might neither give, nor receive trouble in my
new habitation, they assigned me the half of the next house for my Apartment,
where they placed Grates, and left the rest of it for the Abbot Don Fernand de
Colonna, and my Family: I was at first at a great loss for want of the Spanish
Tongue, and my ignorance of the Customs of the Nation; and had it not been for
Donna Victoria Porcia Oresco, Sister to the Marquess Mortara, then Abbess, who
could speak Italian pretty well, and is very ingenious, I had had a very ill
time on it. Afterward I made an acquaintance with some of the Nuns, and past my
time pleasantly enough among them, till having asked leave to go abroad once a
week (as I had been made to believe I should, and was granted me at Turin) I
understood it had been denied me at Rome. Soon after this I had news that the
Constable, whom I had pressed with much earnestness to send me my second Son,
(and in order thereto, that he would take him along with him into Flanders,
where the Queen, at my motion, had honored him with a command of two Troops of
Horse) was so far from giving me that satisfaction, that he had written to the
Queen and the Admiral, who had desired it of him for me, that he had no mind I
should stir out of the Covent, and entreated her Majesty not to permit it; that
I was safe, and in good hands at Madrid, and that he was loath to hazard the
seeing me at liberty elsewhere. Nothing provokes me more than contradiction;
it is hard to express how highly I resented this usage, especially considering I
was continually watched by a number of persons, who were spies upon my actions,
by the appointment of the Abbot Don Fernand, who with a furious rigor executed
the Constables orders: Besides, there were several disaffected persons, who
made it their business to set my Husband against me, and do me ill offices,
writing to him I had a mind to be gone, and would certainly do it, if not
carefully watched. This made me resolve to quit the Covent, and let them see
all the pains they took to keep me up close, could keep me there no longer than
I pleased. Don Fernand being abroad, and all my Men with him, I commanded my
Maids to throw down those strong, thick, and high Walls, the Author of my life
says were the only Obstacle could stop me: I gave the Duke d' Ossuna, the
Admiral, and the Prince d' Astillano, notice of what I had done, by a Billet
written to every of them, entreating their favor on this occasion, since it
was not my design (as my Enemies gave out) to fly into France or into England,
but to be at liberty in the House I was in, it being not just I should be kept
up in a place I had freely and voluntarily entered: The Duke of Ossuna, though
an honest and a gallant Gentleman, was willing to see the storm over; and
having sent on the morrow to complement me, respited his visit for some days,
convincing me on this occasion he was more a Pollititian, than gallant or
obliging. It was a whole week ere I could see the Prince d' Astillano, who
excused himself, saying, the news came to him late. The Nuncio Melini and the
Admiral, whom Don Fernand had prayed to come presently, failed not to do it,
not to favor my design, but execute their own, which was to oblige me to
return into the Cloister. I did all I could to prevent it, and found no small
help from the difficulty the Nuns made to receive me: yet wanting protection,
and having cause to fear the worst from them who had proved so contrary to my
expectations, I followed the advice of returning into the Cloister, the Nuns
having submitted upon the Nuncio's threating to excommunicate them, in case of
resistance. The Admiral, after so important an expedition, proud to see me
cooped up, solicited their Majesty's to have me continued in the Cloister, and
strictly confined. The Constable was extreme glad at the news of this happy
success, and will certainly be still well pleased with this Court, while they
continue to vex me, his mind being so much altered, that he finds matter of joy
in the oppression of my liberty.

I endured some Months, with impatience enough, the violence they used to keep
me in the Covent. I had little hopes of redress under the Queens Government,
who answered my petition for liberty, that she would grant it me with all her
heart, if the Constable would consent to it. Besides, the Admiral being the
main Instrument to execute the resolutions of Don Fernand Valenzuela, was too
great a Friend of my Husbands, to admit of any proposal that might give him
offense, in crossing the resolutions they had taken against me, what the
Constable had given full power to execute.

In this lamentable case was I, when Heaven, pitying the distressed State of
this Monarchy, and concerned for the preservation of it, inspired the Grandees
to insinuate to his Majesty, how necessary it was to call home his Highness Don
John of Austria, his Majesty's Brother, to attend his Royal Person, as the sole
remedy for those mischiefs that threatened the Government: This let in a Beam of
hope, and brought into my remembrance the saying of Father Ventimilla, a person
no less illustrious for Virtue than Birth, That I must owe my liberty to that
Prince, who at his return, would certainly restore it me. I resolved to make
use of so favorable an occasion, not doubting but it would fall out as had
been foretold, the particular esteem I always had for the excellent qualities
of that Prince, made me passionately desire to see him in full possession of
all the honors due to him. My desires were heightened by the advantage I hoped
to draw thence to my self, who looked upon my liberty as an infallible
consequent of his return. All I could contribute to his Glory and Interest, was
my good wishes, and insinuations in his favor; I addressed my self to the Duke
of Ossuna my Kinsman, and the person I was most obliged to. As for the Admiral,
and some others, they had given over visiting me, lest I should employ them in
business inconsistent with the good intelligence they would hold with my
Husband. The Duke I found so well disposed to undertake this famous
negotiation, that he longed for the happy moment to put it in execution.
Matters being in a pretty forwardness, and notice given me by Father Ventimilla
that his Highness was parted from Saragosa, I thought it time to put my designs
in execution, and allowing no longer time than I thought absolutely necessary
for the Princes Voyage, though performed with all imaginable speed; when, by my
computation, I thought his Arrival not far of, I went in open day out of the
Covent, not as before, but through the Gate, and the Porters looking on. Having
stepped into a Coach, with a Lady my Friend, who came on purpose to receive me, I
went directly to the Marchioness Mortara's, who happened to be abroad, but at
her return received me with great kindness, though much surpised to see me.

I had given the persons above mentioned notice of my second (as of my first)
coming out of the Covent; and the Marchioness sent word to the President of
Castille, I was at her House; Don Fernand having beforehand given order all
about for arresting me, that I might be forced to return into the Cloister,
though he knew not where I was, but thought I designed to leave the Kingdom.
The Admiral, at Don Fernands instance, and for reasons he knows altogether
indisposed to favor me, no sooner knew where I was, but he presently fell to
consider how to have me clapped up again into a Covent, or some other place of
confinement. The short time I was at liberty I received not a visit from any
but the Duke d' Ossuna, whom the Marchioness advertised of my being with her;
in all the discourse I had with him, there was nothing remarkable but his
telling me, it was impossible to make amends for the fault I committed in
quitting the Covent, but to retire to a House where I might find the piety and
innocence of a Cloister, without the rigors and austerities in practice there.
The Prince d' Astillano neither came nor sent me answer, but had the gallantry
to send Don Fernand the Billet received from me, and assure him, by Letter, he
would do the Constable all the service he could: The Admiral, willing to appear
as honest a man as the other, came not to see me, being wholly taken up with
business that concerned me; which (if you would know it) was a Council held
against me, and he thought fit to defer his visit till the Council were over. I
knew nothing the while of what was plotting against me, no person daring to
give me information, till Monsieur de Lindenau, extraordinary Ambassador from
Denmark, a Man of Honor and Merit, gave me intelligence of all, by a Maid he
sent to me. I could not speak with him, and attributing his advice to his
Friendship, without taking further care to prevent what might follow, I thought
no more of it; though the fears I was continually in, were so many presages to
induce me to believe the truth of his advertisements. The Embassadrice of
Denmark a Lady of great resolution and wit, and the Duke d' Ossuna had so
dissipated my fears, by assuring me positively they were causeless, that I
thought my self very safe. However, two days after, the Nuncio, the Admiral,
and Don Garcia de Medrano, one of the Council and Chamber of Castille, made me
an important visit by the Kings order: The business of it was to oblige me to
return into the Covent; telling me, that having entered it by his order, I
should not have left it without permission from him: The Admiral spoke first,
and told me, he was come only to acquaint me with his Majesty's pleasure; to
which the Nuncio added, that his business was to facilitate the execution of
it, and remove the obstacles might be expected from the Nuns: the third,
speaking like a Minister of Justice, told me, with a severe tone, he had order
to take me along; and, that in case of resistance, he would not stir from me
but watch me very narrowly. Their Remonstrances and Threats would never have
prevailed upon me, had not the Marchioness pressed me on the other side, and
told me, it would be a very great displeasure to her, to see any violence
offered me in her House, in case of my refusal to obey the Kings orders;
adding, I were better submit, and that when I was in the Covent, I might get
out every day with his Majesty's leave: With these weak reasons of hers I was
persuaded to return once more into the Covent: She accompanied me thither: The
Nuncio, to surprise the Nuns, went before, and having had the Gate opened,
ordered it should not be shut, as if some Gentleman of Quality had been to
follow him: At my arrival I found the Duke of Arcos, who being on his way to
give me a visit at the Marchioness Mortara's, and having heard I was upon my
return to the Cloister, went after the Nuncio to wait my coming: As soon as he
saw me he gave me his hand, and accompanied me to the Covent, where several of
the Nuns having known me (by taking up my Manto) filled the Air with their
Cries, saying to the Nuncio, what their resentment to see their Privileges
broken suggested unto them; so that he was forced to send his Coach for the
Provincial who lived at Our Ladies of Attochia, at the Gate of Madrid: He
brought them to reason, and made them obey his Majesty's Order read by the
Nuncio, having appeased the noise raised by the different opinions and
inclinations of a hundred and thirty persons of which that Monastery consisted:
Amidst the confusion I took their part who were most against me, and
notwithstanding the despair I was in, to see my self used with such violence, I
took no small delight in the bustle and division I had occasioned among them.
The better to foment it, I told them it was a strange and unheard of proceeding
of theirs, to have so little care of their privileges which they saw not only
broken by their being forced to receive me at first, but violated anew by
being obliged to a second admission.

But this Civil War was quickly at an end, and all Spirits quiet but mine. I
was vexed to the heart to think with what violence they endeavored to keep me
confined under conditions more rigorous than was promised: But the ill success
of my two first attempts could not discourage me from a third enterprise to
recover my liberty which I, looked upon as the greatest pleasure of life; to
enjoy which, a noble and generous Soul thinks nothing too much to hazard: I
considered seriously what means to obtain it by, and had been in consultation a
whole week with my thoughts, when by the favor of providence, that happy day
so much longed for by the Subjects of this Monarchy, appeared; The day the
famous Duke of Alva desired so passionately, and had so zealously labored for,
when after the banishment of Valenzuela his Highness, with infinite applause,
gloriously entered Madrid. The particulars of this Affair, and Circumstances of
the Princes entry, I leave to abler Pens, and shall say only, that though I had
the least hand of any in the management of the enterprise, yet no Person was
more concerned for the success; And I doubt not but my joy would have been far
greater for the restitution of the Prince, and that he would have done me right
upon the memorial I presented to the Queen soon after my return into the
Covent, (which her Majesty referred to the President of Castille, who would do
nothing in it before his Highnesses arrival, had not Don Fernand Colonna, to
prevent Execution of what the Prince had resolved in my favor, represented to
his Highness that the Constable desired nothing more than to see me in a
Covent; and that he would take it for a Singular favor to have me continued
under Confinement. This Declaration Suspended the resolution of the Prince, who
saw himself obliged to refer the matter to the President of Castille, who
proceeding as slowly as he had formerly done, I presented a Memorial to his
Majesty, and another to his Highness by the Duke de Medina Sidonia: just as the
Prince was resolved to grant me all I could expect from his Justice, a Letter
was received from the Constable who having heard of my second leaving the
Covent, earnestly begged his Majesty to send me into some Castle: his Highness
hereupon, to quit himself with his usual prudence of a troublesome Affair,
would not come to a resolution, but referred my memorial and the Letter to the
Council of State. Having Solicited the Counselors to favor my Cause, the
Dukes of Alva and Ossuna, and the marquess d' Astorgas gave me their words to
do me all the service in their power: they performed their promise, and the
matter being put to the vote of the Council, I had the Majority of voices, and
it was Carried I should have my liberty and a house to live in with decency and
honor, suitable to my Quality. When I had notice of this favorable vote of the
Council, I writ to Don Geronimo D' Eguia, Secretary Of the Universal dispatch,
entreating him not to defer acquainting his Majesty with it, that he might do
his pleasure in it: the Secretary gave me not an answer in writing but sent one
to tell me very civilly, he would give my business all the dispatch in his
power. He was as good as his word, having within two days obtained a Decree
which was sent me by Don Bartholomew de Legasa Secretary of State: the tenor of
it was, that the King having seen my Memorial and the Constables Letter,
thought fit to Suspend his resolution till his Majesty writ to him; And that in
the mean time if I pleased to retire into some place about Madrid, his Majesty
gave me leave to do it until a definitive sentence should pass. Don Fernand
Colonna having heard how things went, and been Charged by the Constable to use
all possible diligence to have me put into a Castle if there were no keeping me
in a Cloister, he omitted nothing that might put a stop to my Liberty, insomuch
that he presented a Memorial wherein he insisted at large upon the
inconveniences that would attend the granting it me; And that it was necessary
for the Constables satisfaction I should be kept in a Cloister or a Castle.

I apprehended Don Fernand's opposition might turn to my prejudice, and produce
an alteration in the resolution had been taken: which was not unlikely, the
Remonstrance he had made having already staggered some of the Counselors of
State. I thought it my my duty by getting timely out of the Covent to prevent
the mischief that Threatened me: I gave the Nuncio and the Duke D' Ossuna and
Dorma Vitoria notice of my design: she did not disapprove it, thinking I had
obtained a full and formal Decree: I got up very early for fear a Nun who lay
in my apartment should discover my design: I went out by six in the morning,
and sent for some Nuns into the Hall to discourse them while my Coach came; the
Marchioness of Mort^ca whom I had the day before desired to lend me hers,
excused her self as advised by her friends not to meddle further in any
business. The Coach I had hired being come, I went with my mayds to Attocha,
where I found the Father Procurator of the Nuns to say Mass at my request. Four
days before I left the Covent I informed Don Bartholomew Legasa of my design to
retire to Ballacas, a place belonging to the King within a League of Madrid,
that he might give his Majesty notice. I had taken care the Marquess de
Camarasa should send me a^nother Coach under pretense of sending two of my
maids thither, to fit an Apartment for me in the house of Dona Cecilia de Vera,
who had given me the Choice of my Apartment there, except that in the
possession of the Prince de Monte Sarctno, who was prisoner there on his Parol.
This Coach made no more have than the other, and I had time in staying for it
to hear four masses: Being come at last with a Gentleman in it who had been
formerly recommended to me by the Constable, we went together to the house I
mentioned, where we found only the Princes people who gave us their Apartment
as the best, and provided for us a sumptuous dinner. About four in the
afternoon the Nuncio arrived accompanied by Don Fernando: Having absolved me of
the Excommunication I had incurred by coming out of the Covent without leave
from him, he gave me so good reasons that Don Fernando could do no less than
present that memorial to the Council of State, and excused him so well for the
Declarations and Remonstrances he had made against my liberty, that he
prevailed with me to pardon him at his request. I lay that night at Ballacas,
though without any Sleep having had no rest for a Rhume that troubled me
occasioned by the dampness of the Room, and attended with a fever: this induced
me to return to Madrid to live in the house of Don Fernando Colonna: In order
to it I dispatched a Page to the Duke d' Ossuna, entreating him to send me
presently a Coach and six Mules: Don Fernand coming into my chamber I
acquainted him with my design, and desired him not to oppose it, which he was
so far from doing, that he writ to the Nuntio, and having represented to him
the poor Condition he found me in, and that it was better I should be at Madrid
to wait (at his house) His Majesty's orders, he entreated him to send me a
Coach as soon as possible; I was glad of this, fearing the Duke of Ossuna being
a Minister of state would have excused himself from sending any. The Nuncio
presently showed Don Bartholomew Legasa the Letter received from Don Fernand,
which having been showed to some of the Council, answer was sent me; It was not
thought fit my request should be granted: the Nuncio was not discouraged at the
answer, but having showed the same Letter to Don Jeronymo d' Egua, he carried
it to his Royal Highness, and received order from him to tell the Nuncio he saw
no inconvenience in granting what Don Fernando desired. Upon this the Nuncio
presently sent me a Coach with some wagons for my family, having in vain
expected the Duke of Ossuna's Coach, who sent me word by the Page after eight
hours waiting he would come in person to seem. This was in truth a great
honor, but it would have been a greater obligation had he sent me a Coach,
when I was under that impatience of returning for Madrid, fearing I might be
prevented by an order to prohibit my entrance there, especially when I had
received a Letter from his Highness wherein she told me I had mis-interpreted
his Majesty's order, and that before my leaving the Covent several
circumstances ought to have been adjudged as well for Choice of the place I
should go to, as for my being there in that splendour his Majesty thought decent
and fit for my person. But my fear was pretty well over, when I considered this
was not an order, but advice and a gentle admonition let me see the error I
committed.

While I continued under these troubles the Nuncio's Coach arrived: I quickly
went into it, still fearing an order to stay where I was: We were scarce got
half way to Madrid when we met the Dukes of Ossuna, Veraguas Uzedas, with
Father Ventimilla coming to see me, followed by four Coaches and a great Trayn
on horseback: I railed the first for his being so punctual; he answered I had
no cause to complain of him who instead of sending a Coach was come himself,
and for one Coach brought me four, which were all at my Service, if Don Fernand
would be my convoy: We traveled together to the gates of Madrid where we
parted. I met the Nuncio walking afoot; He came very civilly to my Coach and
gave me some advice for my conduct which I observed to very good purpose. This
accidental conference being over, I went to the house of Don Fernando Colona,
where I am yet, expecting every day how his Majesty will dispose of me, of
which I am hitherto altogether ignorant, though I have reason to believe his
Majesty's Justice and Clemency, and the great prudence of his Royal Highness
will put an end to my Troubles, and permit me to enjoy that repose and
tranquillity I have so much need o^ and earnestly long for.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some BOOKS Printed for J. Magnes and R. Bentley.
Folio.
LOrd Bacon's Natural History, in Ten Centuries: Whereunto is newly added, The
History Natural and Experimental of Life and Death, or of the Prolongation of
Life.

The History of Lapland, wherein is showed the Original, Manners, Habits,
Marriages, Conjurations of that People.

Fodinae Regales, or, The History of the Laws and Places of the chief Mines and
Mineral Works in England, Wales, and the English Pale in Ireland; as also of
the Mint, and Money: With a Clavis, explaining some difficult Words relating to
Mines.


