Gallant Memoirs: OR THE ADVENTURES OF A Person of Quality.

Written in FRENCH, By Monsieur S. BREMOND.

And Translated into ENGLISH, By P. BELON.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bentley, and M. Magnes at the Post Office in
Russel Street in Covent Garden, MDCLXXXI.

To Her Grace the DUCHESS OF ALBEMARLE
MADAM,
I Am in doubt whether your Grace will have the goodness to Pardon me the
Liberty that I have taken; but I am persuaded that a Cavalier of the quality
that mine is, who crosses the Seas on purpose to have the Honor of
entertaining you with a Recital of his Choicest Adventures, cannot be ill
received by so Generous a Lady as you are. For my part, seeing him in such an
ardent Passion of going to give you that Divertisement, I could not but abandon
him to his happy destiny.

But if for his Audacious Enterprise,
He punished were by those bright Suns your Eyes,
And forced to yield his Breath;
Yet where is that Mortal that would not despise,
And to Your Greatness his Life Sacrifice,
To gain so sweet a Death?
He is a Stranger, Madam, who is going to choose you out in the midst of one of
the greatest Cities in the World; There might be cause for him to fear the
committing of a mistake in this enterprise, were there not so great a
difference between you and all the rest of your Sex, that thereby you may
easily be distinguished from the whole Universe. Yet at his setting forth he
has been Furnished with most faithful Memoirs upon your Illustrious Person, as
your Grace may here perceive.

She is a Lady, who by the Qualifications of her mind, as well as those of her
Body, sets a remarkable distinction upon her self wherever she appears; She
has the Soul of a Sovereign, Greatness and Pomp attend her even in the least of
things, nothing in this World, more High, and more Great then her Heart; and at
the same moment, nothing more sweet, and more generous; insomuch that according
to the varieties of occasions, with the same mind that she is observed to
maintain her Rank with those of her Quality, she is seen to stoop, for to rise,
and approach to her self; those that being beneath her greatness, fly for
succor to her Generosity. Magnificent, Liberality, and even Profession it
self, are Qualities, which are ordinary with her; Yet not without order, and
choice of time, and Persons. I omit mentioning the Charming air of her Person,
her agreeable conversation, which affords pleasure and delight, in all places
that she makes happy with her presence. Of the agreements of her Face, of her
Shape and Stature, and of all that which appertains unto a body perfectly
accomplished; Those are such advantages, as may be termed in common with other
Ladies, who might expect the same praise for them; but in the representation of
a Person so extraordinary, none but such strokes and touches are to be
employed. That secret Grace, which is the Spring whence all the others flow,
bestowed by the Heavens on so few Mortals, which all the World admires, but
cannot express it, though it is the desire of all Hearts, does appear in all
her words and actions, in such a measure, that all that she says or does, is
Illustrated with this particular Charm, which attracts the Love and admiration
of the whole World upon her. None can have a more Penetrating Wit, and quicker
apprehension then she is Mistress of, wherewith she unravels in an instant the
most intricate things, and Judges of the most Witty ones. It is a very modest
way of praising so Illustrous a Duchess, to only say, that she is a capable
Judge of the works of the mind, since that it can be aver'd, that when she
pleases, she can produce most accomplished Pieces of her own growth; And if we
will believe those that have a more Particular Knowledge of her sufficiency; it
has happened, that by way of Divertisement, and as it were in play, her great
Genius, has produced such Works, as the Famous Drayden would with Pride have
owned for his. It suffices to say, that she is the Protectress of the curious
Wits, not to doubt that she has a large store of her own. It were very easy to
know her by so many advantageous Qualities, which are so rare in this Age; But
that which is to make up the perfect knowledge of her, and which is a most
Glorious and Splendid advantage in a Person whom Heaven and Nature have taken
delight to accomplish, is, that she is Daughter unto the Duke of Newcastle,
Granddaughter unto William Duke of Newcastle, who did command the late Kings
Armies with so much Valor and Conduct, that thereby he has merited that
glorious memory which the Historians mention of him. It is that, that she is
Wife unto the Illustrious Duke of Albemarle, who through his rare merit, has
acquired the esteem and affect (...) of his King, (...) has Honour^^ him with
the Quality of Knight of the most Honorable Order of the Garter, of one of his
Bed-Chamber-Men, one of his Privy Counselors, and Captain of his Guards; Those
Favors from the hands of a Prince, who can discern Persons, were sufficient of
themselves to make up the Elogy of so worthy an Husband, if there was not to be
added, that he is Son to that Great General Monk, unto whom the Royal Family
would be more indebted then it were able to return, if a Subject did not owe
all unto his King. What Nobler union then that of those two Houses, which have
been as the two Colombs that have supported the Crown, which the most furious
of Rebellions had so much shaken'd, and in whose Bosom, the almost expiring
fidelity of a whole Nation, has not only found a refuge, but such a succor
also, as it stood in need of, wherewith to re-establish it self.

Doubtless, Madam, but that it is very surprising, that I should at this
distance, draw so just and so particular a Portraict, that it seems as made
after the life; but I will confess to your Grace, that I am Indebted for the
principal strokes thereof, unto the Illustrious Author of Cleopatra, and the
thing is not so extraordinary, that he who has Painted with such neat Touches a
Princess, for whom he could have no other Passion then that, which such Learned
men as he himself have for Antiquity, should furnish me with such Curions
Colors, in favor of an incomparable Duchess, for whom he has so much
veneration; Yet I must confess that they had had quite another effect, had they
been laid on with his own Pencel; and had his Courteous assistance accompanied
me to the end, my respects would not be reduced to have no other advantage then
that of Distance, to assure you from more then an Hundred Leagues, that I am,

MADAM, Your Graces, Most Humble and most Obedient Servant. S. BREMOND.

Gallant Memoirs: OR THE Amorous Adventures OF A Person of Quality.
THE Mode of writing ones Own Adventures, is now so much in Fashion, that I
Thought I might, (without the least scruple) make a Present of Mine to the
Public. For, through the great Noise which they have made in the World, they
have been known to so many Persons, that it would be almost impossible, but
that some Authors, (as they are in these days very greedy of these sorts of
News,) would undertake to publish mine. I will free them from that trouble; And
though some other, more versed in the manner of Writing then I am, might
perform it with more agreements, and after a more Polite manner; yet I am very
certain that none can relate it with more order, and sincerity then I shall do,
which is not the least agreeable, seasoning of these sorts of recitals.

I was born at Madrid, of one of the most Illustrious Families of that Kingdom,
and my Father having no more Children but me, he left me at his Death a
sufficient Estate, to appear in that Court, in Figure suitable to my Birth. But
an inclination of visiting Foreign Countries, (which is so rare in my
Contrymen,) having seas'd on me, in my very youth, without the liberty of
enjoying that satisfaction during my Fathers life, I did no sooner find my self
Master of my own liberty, but that I designed to leave the Court of Spain for
some years. I was then in my twenty third year, my affairs were in very good
order; and I having communicated my designs, to some of my principal Relations;
I went from Madrid with their consent, to begin my Travels through Italy.

There lay at that time two Galleys at Barcelonia, that were bound for Naples;
I came there with a considerable retinue for a Traveller; and every thing
concurring with my desires, my Voyage was so happy, as to bring me to Naples in
eight days of favorable weather. The Duke of N. who governed there, in Quality
of Viceroy; and who was advertised of my coming, as an Intimate Friend to my
Family, was Ravished with joy at my Arrival, and did give me the kindest
reception, that I could expect from his Generosity and Friendship.

I found that Court very delightful, and filled with diverse Persons of Quality;
that the Dukes Gallant and Obliging Nature, did draw thither from all parts of
Italy; He being the Lord in the World, that most affected all manner of
divertisements, and the most Ingenious Contriver of them.

My Relations had sufficiently instructed me, after what manner I was to
conduct my self in that Court; but there is not any thing like the practice,
which with some natural inclinations of my own, did make me learn more in eight
days experience, then could have been told me in eight Months. I found, that as
in all other Courts, Love, or if you please, the Mistresses did Govern; each
Courtier being provided with his, after the Dukes example; and that the time
was ill spent there, without some amorous engagement; Yet I had no great mind
to engage my self so soon in any such concern; Love Frights young Persons, who
know not yet what it is; And besides, I have such an esteem for Liberty, that I
was fully resolved not to part with Mine, but as late as I could.

Many times, by reason that in all the Matches of Divertisment, which were
daily repeated, I was the only Person that did not as the rest; I was therefore
in a manner obliged to entertain the Duchess, and those Ladies of her Retinue,
that through disdain, or their ill Fortune, had no share in those Love
Gallantries. This at last put into my mind, that I ought at least to pretend
Love. I was young, a Stranger, Genteel, having a great Retinue, and making a
great show in Expenses, which were sufficient qualifications to gain Ladies
with, who would no doubt have received me on the bare account of Gallantry, as
I desired to be; Yet being to fix upon one, I would willingly have chosen one,
for which none could have blam^d me, there being in my design more of Ambition
then of Love. I did cast my Eyes on diverse, and if I durst have followed my own
Inclination, I had not failed of adressing my self to the Dukes own Mistress;
Who from the very first moment that I have seen her, did appear to me one of
the most agreeable Persons of the whole Court. Yet I was not so far gone as to
venture to become the Concurrant of so considerable a Rival. All the other
Ladies were equally indifferent to me; and be it that the prevention which I
had, for Signora Theresia, (so was she named) did leave me but very little
inclination for all the rest, or that my time of Love, was not yet come, I knew
not on whom to pitch.

Signora Theresia, was a Lady of one of the prime Families of Naples; her
Father being dead, the Duchess, unto whom she was near allied, did desire to
have her with her; This invitation being both Honorable and Advantageous for
her, she left the Country where she lived, some ten Leagues from Naples, and
appeared at Court, as a rising Sun. There was at that time but very few empty
Hearts at Court, but as there is never want of such Persons as have a great
inclination unto double dealings; Her Beauty was soon assaulted by diverse
sighing Lovers. The Duke, who was the Man of the World, the most apt to receive
any impressions of Love, and who Loved the Duchess but just as much as needed,
not to hate her; though she was one of the most Amiable Ladies of Spain, did
find such Charms in Theresia, as did sufficiently agree with the desires of his
Heart; It is probable that if he could have foreseen, and imagined, that an
engagement of this nature, would have gone so far as it proved at last, and
that it would have had such dangerous consequences, he had been just enough to
have said some restraint upon his inclinations; But as it is usual, Love did
not give him time to make all those reflections, that we have made use of, and
he found himself surpised unawares.

The Duke did daily behold Theresia, who never stirred from the Duchess, who
loved her as her own Sister. All the kindnesses and endearments, which he did
express for her, did pass at first, but for the pure effects of his usual
Gallantry; But the Duchess, who knew best her Husbands Weakness, and who had
greater cause to observe him then any other had, having taken notice that all
his care for Theresia did daily increase, was not long finding out the true
cause thereof. It is very rarely that a Woman deceives her self on that
account, they rather always believe a little more then there is in it. She was
a penetrating wit, and of a Jealous Temper, as are generally all the Women of
that Country. She at least feared that this Gallantry with the cares and
assiduity which attended it, would soon be converted into a passion; to prevent
which she did design to use all the cautiousness and other remedies, that a
prudent and discreet Woman should judge necessary. She takes Theresia aside,
she tells her all the Gallantries, that the Duke had formerly been engaged in,
she makes her Husbands unsconstancy, such as had been sufficient to disgust a
young Lady less nice then Theresia, if it had come from any other Hand then
that of a Wife; and passing from this general discourse unto a secret
conference, she told her, that if she had not a great care of her self, the
same Misfortune would fall unto her, as had happened unto others; that the
Dukes designs were very discernable, and that the whole Court did already look
upon her, as on his Mistress. Theresia, who was neither young as to the World,
nor a novice in Gallantry, did harken unto the Duchess whole discourse with an
amazement; in which there was much more of affectation then of truth; She had
not been the last that had taken notice of the Dukes Amorous designs. It is
always such a Charming thing for a Woman to be folow'd, and she who had some
considerable time to spend at Court, she could not be sorry to be beloved by
him that did command in it, that she might have the advantage above all the
other Mistresses; Yet she was desirous to observe some measure with the
Duchess also, to whom she was obliged; and perceiving the Disturbance which
was already in the Dutchess's mind on that account, she endeavored to appease
it in telling her that she had not yet preceived any signs of it, that she had
looked upon all that the Duke had done for her, as on so many obliging
Testimonies from a Kins-man, and that she should perceive by her future
conduct, that she had no design of giving her the least cause of Complaint. And
in affect from that day she shunned the Duke, and did ever ill Treat him in the
Dutchess's presence; Ways that rather provoke then allay a Lovers Passion. So
sudden a Change in a young Lady, who had a Caracter of a mild disposition, who
till then had received so acceptably all that the Duke had expressed of
affection toward her, could not but surprise him, and make him to seek after
the Cause of his Change. The Duchess was the first that he taxed in his mind,
but unwilling to make any noise about it, till he had Learned from Theresia the
ill Offices which his Wife had rendered him, he waited, (not without much
impatiency and restlessness,) till the hour in which the Court was wont to walk
in the Garden were come, to speak to her about it; The evening was fair, and
that day the Court being more numerous then of late, the Duke did hope that
with the greater ease he might meet with some opportunity in the Crowd of
having some private discourse with Theresia. The Duchess was buisy, with some
Ladies in gathering of Flowers; and this young Lady, was at some distance from
them, which gave the Duke, (who was upon the Watch,) the opportunity to accost
her. She no sooner did preceive him, but she feigned to shun him, but it was by
withdrawing her self the further from the Company, which the Duke judging to
his advantage, he redoubled his pace, and perceiving that she was getting into
a close Arbor; he run after her, and with an Air in which he expressed more of
Love then of Anger; You use me very cruely to day, says he, Madam, If I was
not convinced that I have not done, and that I am incapable of acting any thing
that can displeasure you, I should entreat you to tell me in what I have
failed, to beg your Pardon for it; but as all my thoughts and desires, tend but
to show you what esteem I have for your Person, and that I am well assured,
that when you will be pleased to examine me, you will find me, more deserving
your Love, then your hatred, I shall only entreat the favor of you, to tell
me, who it is, that since this day, has inspired you with thoughts so
prejudiciable against me; Theresia with the have that she had made from the
Duke was come in Breathless, having seated her self on a Bench of Turfs, she
had let him speak without interuption; but having gathered a little strength,
My Lord sais she, with a Languishing air, which her weariness did give her, if
you have any esteem for me, make it appear in having no longer that
complaisance for me as you have had, and entreating me with the same
indifferency that you do all the others Ladies at Court, or rather more;
neither Seeing nor Speaking to me but as little as you can, I, Madam,
interrupted the Duke with some emotion, that I should be capable of doing what
you say; that I should have less respect for you then I have had, and that I
should make no distinction betwixt you and the rest of the Women that are here?
Rather condemn me to renounce that reason that would oblige me to render unto a
young Lady as amiable as you are; a Thousand times more services then I do,
and know that all the force that I can impose up-my self, is in abstaining from
the performance thereof. You have then a design, to ruin me, my Lord, replied
Theresia. I ruin you Madam, replied the Duke again, going back a step or two,
Do you know me well? Added he, Looking on her with Eyes full of passion, and
can it be possible that since the time that my Eyes speak to you, you should
have dived so little into my Heart? No continued he Sighing, you are too clear
sighted; and since that it is no longer time for me to disguise any thing from
you, Learn that my discretion has obliged me to conceal till now, which is,
that all that can be felt of tenderness and vehement desires in a Soul, I feel
from you. How ill you serve me in this, My Lord, interrupted Theresia, and how
dear will that tenderness and vehemence cost me, I foresee it too well, and you
need but to persist obstinatly in it, to render me the most miserable Person in
the World. In ending these Words, her Eyes became moist, which made her to
convey her Handkerchief to them to conceal some Tears; at which the Duke was so
sensibly touched, that being wholly transported with Love, he said; What, has
such a Passion as mine is so, full of respects, of so dangerous a Nature in it,
that you need to fear it so much? You know it, answered Theresia, and if you
doubt of it continued she rising, because that she did see the Duchess coming
with the rest of her company, you will soon be further informed thereof. In
this manner she went out o the Arbor to meet the Duchess who was strangely
surprised, and did wonderfully change color, to find her alone with the Duke.
I know not, said Theresia to her, smiling, who perceived what effect this sight
had made on the Duchess her mind, what you may think to find us together, it
seeming as if there had been something of design in it, and that we had
something to say in private one to the other; as for me, I know not well,
(answers the Duchess, with a disdainful Look,) what I ought to think of it;
but you shall ask the rest of the Company, what Judgment they make upon it. The
Duke, who was touched to the quick with his Wives words; Seeing Theresia
something at a stand, did answer for her, and looking on the Duchess with Eyes
full of indignation, the Company, (answered he,) will not have so ill an opinion
of me as you have; and for having found me alone with a Lady, it will not give
it any ill construction; and presently taking the Duchess by the Hand, to
prevent the continuation of that discourse, he walked with her; but it was
saying all that his Amorous resentments, could inspire him to utter of most
severe against her. The Walk was not long, and through this little noise, those
suspicions which part of the Court had of the Dukes inclinations for Theresia,
having been wholly confirmed therein, those that have some Amorous designs upon
her, and that were not willing to displease the Duke, did think of withdrawing
themselves toward their former Amors, or to seek out for new ones.

After that, the Duke, in his passion had breathed forth all the rage which
Love had suggested to him that night against the Duchess, he having had
leisure to make some Reflections upon it, did perceive that in that he had not
acted like a true Politician, and that he was not in the right way with his
Wife, as thus to Imitate her the more against his Mistress. He was desirous to
repair his fault, and knowing how to flatter the Duchess, the next Morning, at
his rising, there was not any submission that he did not make to her, in asking
her Pardon for all his Passionate expressions; after which he gave her an
account of his accidential meeting with Theresia in the Arbor, Protesting that
he had no ill design upon her; but that, as she knew very well, seeing that she
could not Live without some Diversion, and that if it was not with her it would
be with another, he did therefore entreat her (that she might be the less
troubled at it,) to give way for him to amuse himself with a young Lady of his
Relation, (on whom she should daily cast her Eyes,) then with another, whose
actions she would not have so much opportunity to observe, and of whom she
might be apt to imagine, more then there would be. And I do Conjure you,
Answered the Duchess, by all that you owe unto a Wife; who never had any
thoughts in all her life, then of pleasing you, that you would cast your Eyes
on any other then my Kins-woman, to whom I could less Pardon so unworthy an
Action, then to any Person else. Do all that you please against me, added she,
I shall endure it with patience, but grant me the Favor, not to Discourse my
Kins-woman; or at least permit her to retire, I conjure you to do it; and if
that is not sufficient, continued she with Tears in her Eyes, I beg it of you
on my Knees. The Duke being moved at this his Wifes Action and Tears, he took
her up, and assured her, that he would do all that she should desire: but that
he feared she would be the first that would repent it; and that in order to
cure him from that small inclination, he should be obliged to make new Amors
in some other place, which in time might draw to greater consequences, for
which she should thank none but her self. The Duchess having agreed to all
that, rather then to see him in Love with Theresia; the Duke went out of his
Chamber as if he had no more thoughts of it: and having left his Wife to her
Toilet, he immediately went to the fair Theresia's Chamber, to put in execution
those fair promises which he had newly made to the Duchess; Where he found her
lain upon her Bed, overwhelmed in Tears, having passed the whole Night in
desperate thoughts, on the adventure which had happened unto her the night
before in the Garden; The Duke overcomed with Sorrow, to see her in that
condition; she not having so much as pulled off her Clothes that night, he cast
himself at her feet, and taking hold of one of her Fair Hands, which he brought
to his Eyes, to let her feel that he did accompany her Tears with his, he did
conjure her to tell him what she ailed, thus to afflict her self; and making
use of that little time which he had, he did tell her the most passionate
things, that Love could suggest unto the tenderest and most transported of
Lovers. Theresia, who was yet more fearful then he, least the Duchess should
surprise them, did entreat him to Retire; telling him, that she had such
tremblings on her, that she could not feel her self, putting off to some other
time, the clearing of that which he desired to know from her; to which the Duke
did readily obey; after he had demanded the permition of Writing, since that he
was not to see her, as his Passion did incline him to do. He did endeavor,
(during some days) to constrain himself before the Duchess, and did feign the
re-ingaging of himself in Amors with a certain Lady of whom the Duchess had
formerly been extremely Jealous, putting himself to a greater expense of
Gallantry then ever, for her sake; but all the world did guess that this was
but a pretense, and that those Festivals were celebrated but in Honor to
Theresia, who in earnest did not very well relish the pleasure of it, she being
of an humor rather to Love the public show of Gallanty, then to be the secret
cause of it; and though she might easily perceive, that what the Duke acted in
it, was all on her account; there were some certain moments in which she could
have wished, that his Love had outgone his Craft, and that he might Love her so
well as not to prove always so exact a Politician. This would happen to her,
chiefly, in public occasions, where her Mock-Rival, who was an high spirited
Woman, and perfectly Beauteous, did affect to triumph in her presence on all
the favors which the Duke bestowed on her; Insomuch that some time, Theresia,
could not forbear having a Grudge against him for it; and this is how she did
one day declare her mind in Writing, unto him concerning it.

I must consider, Sir, that you are a Person to be admired in the Art of
Feigning, I could scarce have believed it, for you not only persuade those whom
you would deceive, but those very Persons also that have a hand in the deceit;
I entreat you to continue, for therein you serve me better then I can wish; and
to tell you the truth, there is danger in trusting too much; unto such Persons
as know too well, as you do, how to disguise themselves. Fare well.

The Duke having been surprised and as struck with a Thunderbolt at the
Reading of this Letter, was a thousand times on the very point of spoiling, all
that diverse days of an extreme violence upon (...) gained of advantage on the
(...) mind, and of Running to Ther^^^^ Chamber, to Justify himself from those
reproaches, which that No^e did contain; But thinking that it might be in
Raillery, that she had Writ to him after this manner, be would not hazard any
thing, and did put off till night, when there was to be a Ball in Masquerade,
to find an opportunity of clearing that business with her. This Ball was the
more magnificent in that all the Courtiers, Lords, and Ladies had been three
days in preparing themselves to appear at it, in most sumptuous apparel; the
Duke whom Love did animate more then all the rest, did not only extend his
magnificence on his own Person, but on five or six Gentlemen of his Court also,
who were much of his Sise, which he caused to be Apparelled just like himself,
the better to deceive the Duchess, so that he might with more liberty
entert^^^ the Reuteous Theresia; but all (...) cautions did avail him nothing;
the Duchess who was Masked, as were all the rest of the Court Ladies, did
presently discern him from the rest, and did follow him so close, that what
ever he could do, he could never get an opportunity to speak one moment to
Theresia; who on her part did not make one step to procure him that
satisfaction; so that to rid himself of his Wife, he was forced to quit the
Ball, and shift his Clothes, to try whether that would not suceed better. The
Duchess (who notwithstanding all those shifts, which her unkind Husband did
use, (was not absolutely cured of that Jealousy, which she had had of
Theresia, had not so crossed him, but merely to prevent his speaking to her;
and she had taken good notice of the great desire which he had to do it, and of
all the little shifts which he had used to that purpose; so that she did no
sooner see him go out of the Room, without knowing with what design, but that
she entreated Theresia, to pass into the Chamber with her, where being come,
she did engage her; under the pretense of a Frolic, that she would put upon
the Duke, to change Clothes with her. Theresia did very well foresee the
Consequence of that business, but she was that day so little pleased with the
Dukes behavior, that she was not much concerned at the putting of the Change
upon him.

The Duchess did presently dress her self in Theresias apparel; and having
desired her to stay till her return, and also given a private order to all her
People, not to let her go forth of the Chamber (in case she should attempt it,)
she returned to the Company, where she came just a moment before that the Duke
was returned. These two Ladies were of so exact a stature, that it was almost
impossible to be discerned; The Duke was no sooner returned into the Hall, but
that he cast his Eyes every where to find out his Dear Theresia; and did no
sooner observe that the Duchess was not in the Ball, that he did run with an
extreme joy toward the False Theresia; and accosting her in a Corner of the
Hall, where he could not be heard of any one; How well you requited me, said
he, for all the pains and troubles that you have made me suffer this day; you
are not only satisfied with Writing to me the most unkind Letters in the World;
but to add to your unkindness, while I am seeking after you every where, and
that you see what trouble I have to rid my self of a Jealous Woman, you not so
much as give me the least oppertunity to speak two Words in private to you; on
the contrary, as if you were of Intelligence with the Duchess, it seems as if
you took delight in augmenting the troubles which she gives me, and you design
not to make one step toward me, to lessen them; But lett's form hence;
continued He, for I have many other reproaches to make you, and I fear least
this Importunate Woman, should come again to trouble us; get into your Chamber,
and I will be with you in an instant. Having said this, he rises from his Seat,
and mixes himself with the rest of the Company, to take off all suspicion. The
Duchess, who had a mind to see how far this Comical part would go, went to
Theresia's Chamber, where she sat on the Bed; Courage, Monfieur the Duke, said
she to her self, I must needs confess that you are a most worthy Husband, and I
know very well what you deserved, were I not a greater Fool then you; However I
am resolved to see the end of it; after which I shall endeavor to serve you
with the same sauce: your Perfidious dealings do not deserve that you should
have so virtuous a Wife as I am; and it is but reasonable that the Letters of
Mart should be granted in Loves Wars, as well as in all others. The Duthess had
not time to entertain her self any longer with the like thought, for the Duke
coming in, who presently Kneeling on the Ground before her, Which of us two,
said he, is the most guilty, and ought to ask the other forgiveness? I, for
having performed (not without exceeding trouble) that which you had commanded,
and horribly constraining my self in Feigning Love to another, the better to
deceive the Duchess; or you for reproaching me on that account, and for
imputing to me as a Crime, that I omit nothing, even to the most difficult of
things in the World, to endeavor to please you? Answer this, continued he, and
pluck off your Vizard, I beseech You, that I may see You blush at the very
thoughts of the malicious Trick which this day You have put upon me. The
pretended Theresia did hearken unto all these fine things with that
satisfaction as may be imagined; But the Duke, who was not pleased with her
silence, no more then at her continuing masked, did press very hard to say
something; or at least, if that she was resolved to be silent, not to deprive
him of the only happiness which he could have near her, which was, of beholding
her Face; saying further, That this good fortune did so rarely happen to him,
that she ought not to think much of it at that time. But yet no Answer to all
this; the Duke did continue his Discourse to her, and told her a thousand fine
things on her silence, adding, That there was some certain times in which it
was more inconvenient to remain silent then to speak, and that she should not
take it ill, if he did construe it to his advantage: And finding that all that
would not do, What, continued he, shall I be a whole Evening by You without
drawing one Word from Your Mouth! Well, I know a way, added he, to make You
speak, at least to call me Names. Being now strengthened with this Resolution,
he ventured to lay his Hand on her Bosom, but the Fair One gave him a Repulse,
because of some difference that was between her Breasts and the true Theresia;
but the Duke was not in the least daunted at it, and threatening to proceed
further if she continued silent, he began to take greater Liberty then ever;
and perceiving that there was but a very slight resistance made, and that both
the Mask and the Silence did invite him to proceed; he went on, and was using
the extremity of Violence, when the Masqued Fair One, perceiving it time to act
another part, pulled off her Masque, and showed the Duke the Face of his own
Wife. Never was there such a change put upon a Man so passionate as he was; his
surprise was such, as may be imagined, but not related. He went out of the
Chamber more affrighted then if he had seen all the Spirits of the other World;
and as he passed by some Lords and Ladies that were in the next Chamber, he
enquired of them what was become of the Lady Theresia: The Lady Theresia,
replied one of the Ladies, who had seen her go into that Chamber with him, Was
she not with You? The Duke made no Answer, but went on, to seek after what he
asked for.

The Duchess having composed her self out of those disorders in which her
false Husband had left her, she went out of the Chamber, and passed by the
Company with much haste, that here Gate, which was somewhat different from
Theresia's, might not discover her. These Lords and Ladies, who did see her
come forth, did not know what to think of the Duke's Question; Is not that
(said they one to another) the Lady Theresia? What ails the Duke? In fine, they
gave an ill construction to the business, and every one thought of it as he
pleased. But the Duchess having some Fears that the Duke, who was very
passionate, might ill treat those that had detained Theresia in her Chamber,
did run presently toward it, to prevent Mischief, where she met him coming
forth leading Theresia by the Hand; she had not the Power to look with Patience
upon them, and her passion (which had been so lately stirred up with what had
passed in Theresia's Chamber,) breaking forth, there was no injurious Words
that she did not say, nor no Threatenings which she did not use, against that
Lady: But she who did think to have at least as much cause of complaint against
her, for the violent detaining of her in the Dutchess's Chamber,
notwithstanding all her endeavors to get out, did return the Duchess as smart
Language as she brought. The Duke, who could not remain Newter in a business in
which his heart was so much concerned, was twice or thrice upon the point of
putting in for one; but at last, his Prudence carrying it above the Transports
of his Heart, it not becoming him to take Theresia's part against his Wife, nor
agreeing with that tenderness of his Heart to take his Wives part against his
Mistress, he entreated the last to pursue her way, and he conducted her into
her Chamber. This business having made a great noise at Court, it was variously
discoursed off, no Person knowing what had passed in Theresia's Chamber.

The Duke himself, did not relate it justly, to his own Mistress, for Fear of
drawing her anger upon him, as Doubtless it had done, had she known all. He
only told her, that having mistaken the Duchess for her, and having Conducted
her into her Chamber, he had pressed her very much to unmask; but she not
answering his desires at first, he had said so many things to her, that at last
she had discovered herself. Theresia could not forbear smiling at the Cheat,
though it was at her Cost; but desirous to have satisfaction at what rate
soever, for this late insulting which she had received without cause; she told
the Duke that he was to prepare himself to see her depart the next Morning, and
that she could no longer remain with Honor in the Court, after the manner with
which the Duchess did daily Treat her; and that she did very well perceive,
that how virtuously soever she should behave her self, his Wives Jealousies
would be ever finding fault with her, so that it were best for the satisfaction
of all parties that she should retire. The Duke, who did harken unto her
without the least motion; could you, said he, to her, Abandon me unto all that
rage would make a Man do? For there would be no desperate attempt, in which
your absence would not lead me; and I do declare to you, that if you have so
little consideration for my Life, you may perform what you threaten to do, but
you will no sooner be out of the Gates of Naples, but that you will hear of my
Death. Alas my Lord, replied Theresia, What would you have me do? Shall I be
all my Lifetime exposed to be ill Treated in the Eyes of the whole Court? And
though you could engage to the contrary, shall it be said that after that the
Duchess has diverted her self at my cost, shall run down with all the abusive
Language imaginable a Person of my Quality in your presence? What have I done
to deserve so severe a usage at her hands? Or rather, added she with Tears,
What have I done to you, to make you have so little regard for my Reputation,
that you will not let me quit this place, that is so fatal to my Life? Oh!
Heavens, what did I come here to do? The Duke who was pierced through the very
heart, with her Words and Tears, remained some time without answering, Sighing,
and looking upon her, with Eyes which did sufficiently express how much he was
concerned at all that she had said to him; No, Madam, said he to her at last,
It shall not be said, that that Person which I most Honor in the World, and
that I may safely say I Love a thousand times more then my Life, does receive
any Injury in my Court on my account, and I not resent it; give me, continued
he, but twenty four hours time, and all Persons shall know what is due unto
you, Ah! my Lord, replied Theresia, who feared some dangerous effects from the
Dukes Passion, I do conjure you to make no further noise about it, there has
been but two much already, and I shall fear, that at last it will all fall upon
me; no Madam, replied the Duke, you have been offended, without cause, I will
have that satisfaction given that is due to you, and you shall see Persons
return to you without the least noise. The Duke did continue some time longer
in discourse with that Fair one, to conclude the diverting of her from a
design to, which, of truth she had no great Inclination; and having left her at
last, he returned not to the Duchess, who spent the whole night in a fruitless
expectation of him, the Disconsolate Lady, did believe, that she had had
sufficient cause of Complaint, and of afflicting her self, without the addition
of this last unkindness, of not seeing the Duke all that night, she was
extremely concerned at it; she sent secretly some Person of trust, to learn
where he had lain, but none could give her any account of it; at last she was
informed that he had been ever since five in the Morning, in Castle Novo, which
was formerly the habitation of the King of Naples, and that stands at the end
of the Palace Garden, belonging to the present Vice-Royes; where he was causing
an appartment to be Furnished, with all the richest things that were in the
Palace; this did perplex the Duchess more then all the rest; she knew not
whether it was for himself, that the Duke caused this Appartment to be fitted,
in order to be separated from her, and to live by himself; Or whether it were
for her Rival.

Either of them was very cruel to her, but much more if it were for Theresia;
Judging well that it would be there, that for the future the Court would be
kept; and that she should be no longer Confined, but as a useless Person.

Amongst those cruel vexations which those sorrowful thoughts did give her; she
had not the patience to let her self be Dressed, but just as she was in her
Night Attire; She goes into her Chair, and is Carried to Castle Novo, where she
really found the Duke, who was very busy to get it Adorned according to his
fancy; and who did not give her, as it may easily be imagined, an over-kind
reception.

The poor Duchess was so troubled, that besides the disorder that she was in,
with having passed the whole Night without Sleep; so many vexations which
gnawed her, did render her so unlike her self, that she would have moved
compassion in any one but her Husband; who did not daign so much as once to
look upon her; May a Person ask you, My Lord said she, with an Humble and
Languishing voice, for whom is all this? You shall see it, Madam, he answered
coldly, when it is ready; But however, replied the Duchess, since that I am to
see it, give me the satisfaction as to let me know it before hand, for I must
confess to you, that it is a great trouble to me, and that I am come hither on
purpose to ask it of you.

Well, Madam, replied the Duke, with some haste, since that you so much desire
to know it, it is for the Lady Theresia; For the Lady Theresia, replied the
Duchess with a trembling voice, which failing her, she Fainted away, falling
in a swoun, into the Arms of one of the Dukes Gentlemen, who was luckily there
to support her; The Duke who was not so hard hearted as to look upon her in
that condition, Withdrew himself; and the Duchess in a little time after
coming to her self, inquired where he was? and learning that he was Walking
alone in the Garden, she went thither, and threw her self at his Feet; she
entreated him to do what he pleased with her, but that he should not give that
appartment to the Lady Theresia, but that she should remain with her, where he
should see her if he pleased from Morning till Night.

The Duke raising her up with some Signs, that he was mollified with her
submission, did tell her that he had given his word to his Kinswoman, that he
could not fall from it, and that the thing was to be mentioned to her self; and
endeavors made to bring her to live with her again.

The Duchess did perceive to what all that tended, and to what cruelty she was
exposed thus to be obliged to submit to a Rival; But there was nothing that she
would not have done to prevent her being lodged in that retired place, which
she looked upon as on the greatest and last of all her troubles; So that having
left the Duke, she Retired to her own Appartment; whence she sent one of her
Gentlemen to Theresia, entreating her to be willing to live with her again, as
she had formerly done, and to forget all that was passed.

Theresia, received this Embacy with a great Coldness, and made answer unto the
Dutchess's Compliment, That she thanked her for the Honor that she did her;
but that having Resolved to withdraw her self from the Court, that she might
not give her any further occasion of disquiet, she did entreat her to dispense
with her from it.

The Duchess did well perceive that she must resolve her self, to make all the
advances; and that nothing would be done, except she went her self in Person,
to entreat her to it; These are strange kind of Submissions, and that cost very
dear, on such occasions, to a Woman of that Quality, Young, and Beuteous as she
was, in respect of a Rival, who was her Kinswoman, and who she had her self
invited to Court, to be as it appeared, her Sorrow and Ruin.

Nothing more severe in this Life, yet there was no way to avoid it, if she
would prevent the design of Castle Novo, which would cause her a thousand times
more troubles then that; therefore she went thither, and it is certain, that
this Interview, was one of the rarest Scenes, as ever was Acted; Theresia,
although her heart was yet grieved at the injury which she received the Night
before, Could not deny a Reconciliation with the Duchess; after so many
Civilities it was, who should outdoe one another in Courtisies, and one would
have Sworn that they had both forgot their rancour, and all the reason which
they both had, not to forget one another, so much power has certain
Conjunctures of time on the minds of Women; in whom it is said, that Passions
are very Powerful.

There was then made a kind of Reconciliation, at least in appearance, for as
to the Inward, there was preparing a greater War than ever; The Duke was the
Person that was the most pleased at it, who overjoyed for having compas'd his
ends, was desirous to Publish the share that he took in this new Friendship, by
living in so good an Intelligence with the Duchess, that there was no care or
regard that he had not for her, as if he never had any other desire in his mind
then to please her.

Things were much at this rate, when I came to this Court; Whenever I looked on
Theresia, so Beauteous and Charming as she was, I did in some measure excuse
the Duke for being taken with her; for of truth, there was nothing more
Amiable; But when I did turn my Eyes upon the Duchess, who was also a
Beautiful young Lady, that had no other fault in her, (as to the Duke,) but
that of being his Wife; I had a great compassion for her; and it wanted but
little, that I did not offer my self to repair that defect; and as if it was my
fault, to be concerned in all the Dukes Amors, whom I was obliged to respect
for a Thousand reasons; it daily fell to my lot to entertain her; of which
Employ I did acquit my self with so much complisance, that it might easily be
perceived it was not very troublesome to me, and of truth, as the Duchess had a
world of Wit, and that I had no particular designs on any Person except
Theresia; I would have always preferred her to all others, if it had been in my
own choice, but as I was not to pretend any thing on that side, no more then on
the other, and that I was seeking after some subject that might give me some
occasions of expenses, and of appearing rather then to be tied unto, by any
other inclination; I was obliged to turn my Eyes another way, to find out one
that might be worth my Labor.

The day of the Dukes Festival was growing near; and as on that day the Court
was to be more Gallant then ever, and the Ladies better Adorned then all the
rest of the year, I did resolve to stay until that day; and in the mean time to
continue my usual Devoirs toward the Duchess, who did give me sufficiently to
understand, that she was well pleased with it, having told me more then once,
that I was not altogether useless in assisting her, to support the Domestic
vexations which she was to suffer.

At last, that day came in which I did design to be in Love, or at least, in
which I was to find out a Mistress to make me so. There were but few Lords at
Court that had such Curious and Rich Apparel as I had; and I did that day put
one on, which had not yet been seen, and which was as fit to make my self be
beloved, (as some times some have been by that means,) as any that ever was
invented; I was very much looked upon, and not to extend my self on the
particulars of the Regalio, which the Duke gave, which was one of the most
magnificent, that ever had been made; I shall only say as to what concerns my
self, that be it, the inclinations which I had already for Theresia, or the
tender compassions that I did feel from the Duchess, who certainly were the
two Persons of the Court, most deserving to be considered; I could not see any
thing amongst all the rest, that was of Power to draw so much as one single
Sigh from me; so tha^ I was in great danger to return home, as indifferent as I
was to come forth: when that toward the latter part of the Banquet, where
every one did set a value upon his Inclinations in Drinking of Healths: all the
whole Railery being fallen upon me, for Drinking none but such as were serious.

The Duke who was the Man in the World, that had most Wit, and who did not let
slip the least occasion in which he might oblige me, did speak of my
indifferency unto the Ladies; saying, that it was a great scandal to their
Beautyes, that I had been so long at the Court of Naples, as cold and
insensible as the first day of my Arrival.

I do Swear, by the God of Love, continued he, That this the day of my Festival
shall not conclude before I see an end to this indifferency. Upon this pulling
from off his Finger, a very fair Diamond; Here my Lord, said he, Here is a Ring
that I present you with, and which I do entreat you to bestow without any
distinction of Persons, on that Lady of the Company which you Judge to be the
most Beautiful.

The sport was pleasant, but I did find some considerable danger in it; there
being no question to be made, but that my preferring of any one before the
rest, would offend the major part; For Women are never in the humor of
yielding any advantages to one another, especially in matters of Beauty:
Therefore I did entreat the Duke to dispense me for it; but besides, I did use
much stronger motives which I was unwilling to declare.

However I was condemned to it, by the loud clamor of the whole Company, who
were desirous to see on which side my heart would incline.

This did oblige me to rise, and to present the Ring unto the Duchess. This
was presently looked upon, rather as an act of prudence, then an effect of my
inclination. For though the Duchess was in the Eyes of all the World a most
Beautiful Woman, it was reasonably thought, that I would not address my self
there, or at least declare my self so openly before the Duke in case that my
inclinations should lead me that way; but it was concluded, that I had thought
fit to present to the Wife that Ring with which the Husband had honored me.

If there was any one, to whom what I had done was displeasing, it was
Theresia, who did highly pretend to that advantage.

As to the Duchess, I did render her such a signal and sensible piece of
service, in giving her that Tryumphant advantage over her Rival before the
Duke, that she had not thought to express too large an acknowledgment of it,
though at that very moment, she had given me her whole heart, in exchange of
that Diamond.

Peradventure, that had I followed my Inclinations, Theresia had had a greater
share in them, then the Duchess; but I was not so bad a Politician, and I
foreseeing the Advantageous Judgments that would be given me on that account;
and that besides it was the best way to please all in this Addressing my self
to the Duchess; I did not defer one moment from making her that present, of
which I had some confidence, that she would keep a good account: However the
Duke was pleased to have this my choice, to pass for an exact declaration of
Love in all its forms; Upon which the Duchess was presently saluted as my
Mistress.

I did Drink her health, as being her Gallant, and all the rest of the Night
that this Feasting lasted, was spent in Gallant Ceremonies, upon the conquest
of my indifferency, to the Honor of the Dutchess's Beauty, that had overcome
the Insensibility of my Heart, and who did appear that night of better humor
then she had ever been seen before.

As for Theresia, from that day, she declared open Wars against me; not that I
had any great access or Familiarity with her before, I had scarce Spoken three
times to her, and that too, by accident and very succinctly, but I had always
found her very complaisant with me, either in the general conversations, or in
other occasions, when she did always delight to praise me, and to approve of
all that I did; but after the business of the Diamond, she was in perpetual
debates with me on all accounts, expressing many sighs, with a thousand other
Aversions and Antipathies against me, from which I did not draw worse
consequence, then from all the Complaisance that she had formerly had for me.

In a word, we did live like real enemies, though in the bottom there was
nothing which was less in our hearts then hatred. Mean time, all those seeming
contrarieties of humors, between Theresia and my self, did not a little
contribute to Augment certain motions, which the Duchess did feel of not
hating me.

She was Born with great inclinations to virtue; but at last the Love which she
had for the Duke decreasing, as fast as he did render himself unworthy of it.
It did leave an empty place in her Heart, which she had a desire to fill up
with some Idea, that might pleasingly Revenge her, of that wrong which was
offered to her Beauty.

And I believe, that she already did look upon me as a Person that would be
very fit for that purpose; but were it, that I did put forward sufficiently, or
that the Duchess, in which Honor still held a combat Maugre, the reasons
which she gave herself of not following its Dictates on her Husbands account,
did not give me a sufficient overturn to make her an open Declaration; Our
Affairs did rest for some time at a stand, in which Love can scarce be reckoned
any thing, though it had a being, till that one day that I went to give the
Duchess a visit, one of her Gentlewomen in whom she most confided, having told
me, that she was walking upon the Tarrass, and that I was come the most luckily
in the World to comfort her, in a relation which she had newly received; I
presently went to her, and having found her with Eyes full of Tears, holding a
Paper in her Hand, I inquired of her, with a passionate Air, what cause she had
to afflict her self so severely? Here, replied she, giving me the Paper to
Read, which was a Note that the Duke had lately Writ to Theresia, this Note
will sufficiently inform you of it. I took it from her, and in it Read as
follows.

Well Madam,
SInce that you do desire one day longer, to examine if I have well deserved
that favor which I have been requesting from you these six Months, or rather
six ages, I grant it you, but consider, that it is the last day of my Life, if
you defer any longer the happiness which I expect; I shall to morrow give a
Festival at the Poggio Reale, to celebrate so blessed a day, which I shall ever
account the happiness of my life.


I ended the Reading of that Note, which I could not return to her, without
Smiling; at which she said, You take but very little share in Peoples
afflictions, since that you can laugh at him.

Heaven is my Witness, Madam, said I to her with a serious look, that no other
Person can be so much concerned as I am at yours, and that if my Blood could
repair it, I would offer it to you all to the last drop, but -- But, there is
no occasion here for Blood, Interrupted the Duchess, only tell me what you
think of the Dukes carriage? You too well know, Madam, I answered, what I am to
think of it, without obliging me to explicate my self on so nice a point.

No, replied she, I will have you to immediately tell me, what your thoughts
are on this Subject?

I obey, Madam, said I, Since you compel me to it; but if I fail in my respects
to your concerns, blame none but your self for it.

I value it not, replied she, Speak, I will have it so; Tell me what one may
Judge of such Proceedings as are the Dukes.

What strange fancys is there in the World, said I; for there is no Person that
does pretend to the least knowledge in Beauty, Wit, and all other things, that
men of Judgment are taken with, that would not prefer you to all that is seen
of most Charming at Court.

Are you well pleased, said she, with a little Redness, that came over her
Face, of what you say? And may I flatter my self that you Speak sincerely?

I should say a thousand times more if I durst, I replied, with some Emotion of
Spirit; Dare it, then, answered she, And say all that you think in my concerns,
I do conjure you to it.

This was giving me sufficient liberty, yet I did stagger for some time, but at
last finding my self too far gone to retire, and observing that the Duchess
Eyes, as well as Words did expect a further Explanation.

Well, Madam, said I, since that you command me to Speak, I will tell you, that
for my part, I am so concerned at the Dukes unjustice, that if you had judged
me worthy to fill up his place, I had long since offered my self to repair
those wrongs that he does you: for in a word there is nothing more deserving
then you are. And finding that she remained silent.

Yes, Madam, continued I, If that the vows of a Heart that never yet Loved any
thing else, and that cannot Love any thing but you, does not appear unto you
wholly unworthy of that Choice, permit me to Consecrate them to you this very
moment; The Duke is of the Humor of those, that are never well pleased with
their own Fortune, be it never so good; Another would make better use of it;
And the least of those Favors which he Condemns, is able to render a Person
most happy.

A Person Madam, continued I, Born with those Excellent Qualities that you
possess, such as are of Power to Create Love in the most insensible Persons,
ought not to suffer those kind of Scorns; I do forget my duty, Madam, added I,
but your Interest is Dearer to me then my Life, and I having at first taken
your Interest by reason merely; Love now has so firmly united me unto it, that
I suffer the same pains you endure; others in your Place, has already taken
some Resolution to force People to Reason, but those are extremities, which
makes too much noise, and that are ever avoided by Rational Persons.

There are milder ways to Reduce a Man to his Duty; after which if he remains
Obstinate, the only way is to return Scorn for Contempt.

There being nothing in all that I had said to the Duchess, in which I was not
highly concerned; I therefore did not omit saying any thing which I thought
would invite her to believe me.

I must confess that then there was yet more of Vanity then of Love in my
Design; And that seeing I could not be the Dukes Rival to his Mistress, a
thousand Reasons of Youth did engage me not to loose the fair opportunity of
becoming the Dutchesses Gallant.

She was, or at least did appear to me to be concerned at what I had said, and
with Sighs which were mixed with Anger against her perfidious Husband, and that
had some mixture of Gratitude toward me; She let me know, that it was not from
that day, that she had taken notice of my being concerned at her Misfortunes,
and that the trust that she had always reposed on me in all her Afflictions,
might have sufficiently informed me, of the esteem which she had for me, and of
the disposition which was in to make use of my Councils; Further confessing,
that nothing had ever pleased her so much, as the present which I had made her
of the King, which daily did come into her mind with delight, and that of truth
she might one day show me how sensible she was of it, if the Duke should drive
her to it. I did endeavor to Animate her the more, and at last before we
parted, to show me that her indignation was not far from breaking forth; she
gave me her hand to Kiss, and let me on the Terras, saying, Prepare your self
to Morrow, to see great things come about.

I did return very well satisfied to see my Affairs advanced so far on that
side, and the next Night after this conversation, I passed with most pleasing
fancies.

Poggio Reale, is a place of pleasure, some three Miles distant from the City,
where the Duke did frequently divert himself.

The Company were very numerous and Gallant there that day, and the Supper most
Magnificent; but that which was most pleasant to behold, and made, on design to
amuse the People, were a great number of Fire Works, which lasted above an
hour. They had scarce been Lighted, that every one running to see that pleasant
spectacle; the Duke and Theresia under pretense of the same curiosity,
disapear'd from the Eyes of the Duchess, who had diligently observed them,
till then that she lost the sight of them in the Confusion.

She was immediately disturbed at it, and sought after them, and meeting me by
accident, Do you not know said she, quite out of Breath, What is become of the
Duke and Theresia? No, Madam, I replied smiling at the trouble she was in, And
if you would believe me, you would not seek any further after them; You will
but put by an adventure, which if not achieved to day, will be so to Mo^row.

It is no matter, replied she, Blushing, I will go see if they are not in one
of the Arbours of the Labyrinth, you will do well to repair there, where, if I
find them not, and meet with you, it is likely that I shall seek them no
further; I promised her to go there, and did follow her presently after.

This Labyrinth, is very large, and the Alleys of it so close covered, that at
midday there appeared but a dull Light in them; so that I, who did not well
know the windings of it, and that feared to engage my self in that obscurity,
so far, as not so easily to get out again; I went a slow pace on, till at last
I did think that I heard a voice; I went forward without any noise, to
endeavor to understand what was said, and at last I understood that it was the
Duchess, Well, My Lord, was she saying, Will you this Night Revenge me of all
the Dukes Injuries? He is false, and does not deserve the pains that I take
after him, I know it, and since that he is the only cause that I have met with
you here alone, it will be your own fault if I return not well satisfied, for
my fruitless search after him so far without success.

This Discourse did the more surprise me, by reason that I knew it to be
intended to me, that the Duchess did mistake her self, and that to both our
Sorrows, it was peradventure the Duke that was with her; upon this I did harken
more attentively then before, to hear what he would answer; But presently after
I heard the Duchess proceed in this manner.

Why are you so silent? And what is become of that sensibility which you have
shown till now for all my Troubles? And that has made you share in all my
sorrows and afflictions, as well as in the aversion which I have against a
Perfidious Husband? Will you become insensible when it is no longer time to be
so? This Discourse did make me mad, not so much because that I could not answer
her expectations, as I would have done, if I had been in that place that the
Duchess did think me to be, as for the evil consequences that would follow,
both as to her, as well as to my self, especially if it was the Duke that she
spoke too, as I had little reason to doubt it. There being none but he that
could keep thus the Lady so long in her Ignorance.

He had that day on a Justecoes imbroider'd as I had, and I did guess, that
that might be the very occasion of the mistake.

During these Transactions, I got so near the place they were in, that there
was only the Hedge between them and us, and I could hear all, even to the
Dutchesses Sighs, who judging ill things from this silence, and the
indifferency which she found in the Person which she took from me, She began to
examine him more nearly; there was a great silence, and I fearing to make some
noise, did seat my self on the Ground, to see the effects of so sad an
accident; when I heard some body move behind me, who pulling me by the Coat,
and casting his Arms about my Neck, did bring his Mouth close to my Ears, Is it
you My Lord, said he, as low as he could? I was afraid that you had met with
the Duchess, but I believe that it is the Lord N. that is with her, (continued
he,) naming me:

The surprisal that I was in, joined to the pre-ocupation that I had of what
was passing with the Duchess, had so strangely disturbed my mind, that I did
scarce know the Persons voice, but that the conjuncture of the place, the
Clothes that I felt, and what had been said to me, did persuade me that it was
Theresia, who doubtless had taken me for the Duke, while the Duchess did
mistake the Duke for me.

At last, the Duchess finding the mistake at the touch of her Husbands
Clothes, she had occasion to make use of all the quickness of her Wit, to get
off of so bad a business. Therefore in an instant recalling into her mind all
the causes of Anger that she had, to animate her self the more against her
Husband; Go, thou Traitor, said she to him, go seek thy Theresia; for I am too
virtuous to carry on this disguise any further, thou well deservest that I
should make thee feel all those anguishes which my fidelity keeps from thee,
but if thou do persist in thus making me grow desperate, I will not warrant
thee but that I may perform in earnest that Personage, which I but now acted.

This sudden charge did smell too much of Art, not to be perceived by so
skilful a man as the Duke, who reflecting upon every little circumstance of
this adventure, did amongst the rest, find that the embraces with which the
Duchess had accosted him at first, were too full of heat, and accompanied with
too many Ardent Sighs, to proceed from a Woman, who had a heart filled with
Jealousies only, and that had no other design then to feign; he was not
Ignorant of the Affairs of the World, and his own experience had made him too
capeable, to be subject to make so gross a mistake, so that speaking with the
voice of a Person that had no mind to be cousen'd by a Woman's Subtilty.

If I mistake not, said he, Madam, there is much more of mistake then of
feigning in this business.

Confess the truth, and that you did not expect me here, that you intended that
Honor to some other, and that I own to my silence, and to my Clothes perhaps,
the saving of the Shameful Conclusion of this adventure.

Who could have seen the Dutchess's Face, might easily have guest at the
transactions within her breast; she was at first something daunted at the Dukes
Words, but at last taking Courage, by the advantage of the obscurity of the
place; Well, (replied she,) Were it true as you say, that this was an
appointment, and that I had taken you for an other; For whom have you taken me,
and what came you to do here? At this kind of confession, the Duke passing from
doubts to a certainty of the Dutchess's mistake; He did take it very ill, that
she made no difference between a Wives Treachery, and that of an Husbands,
going about to prove to her by good and sufficient Arguments, that the first
did thereby dishonor a whole Family, and that the other was mere Gallantry;
But the Duchess, maintaining her Right, would make him see that the obligation
being equal, so was the injury also; and that if the use of False-hood was
esteemed more pardonable in Men then in Women on that account, it was only
because that they as more Impudent, had made it more frequent amongst them,
then it was amongst Women; But that she thanked Heaven for it, Women had began
so to order those Affairs, as to render them equal on both sides; That she had
already tormented her self sufficiently on that account, but that she would no
longer be a Fool, and that she should soon find out some body, that would
comfort her for all his Baseness.

Could we not know, said the Duke, who was not pleased with all those
reasonings, as may well be imagined, whom you have made choice of, to render
you that single piece of sense? You need not trouble your self about it,
answered she, Go find out Theresia, who doubtless will be tried in waiting for
you, and leave me here, for I am weary of you.

Nay, this is driving too far, said the Duke, It suffises that you have showed
me what you are willing to do, without requiring of me such a Complaisance, as
is not usually desired from an Husband.

The whole Complaisance is for your self, replied the Duchess, you are
expected, and I consent that you should go, what would you have more; I will
replied the Duke, that whosoever stays should stay on still, and I will remain
by you; If you have so much goodness left as to permit; I think it a very
humble request, added he, and that an Husband like me, is well worth a Gallant.

I shall tell you that, replied the Duchess, when you will show me that I am
well worth a Mistress.

After these Words there was a General silence reigned, whence it might easily
be conjectured, some conjugal reconciliation to proceed.

Theresia, who had no sooner heard the Dukes voice, but that she did endeavor
to be gone from me, had I not held her by the Coats, did strive more then ever
to get out of my hand, when she perceived to what a conclusion the Dialogue was
come, which she understood as well as I did.

But there was no entreating of her, she was seated on the Grass as I was, I
lay at her Feet, giving her to understand as well as I could, that we two were
the happiest couple of the adventure; There is no question that how hard soever
it be, for any one to see that which they love in the possession of another,
nothing inspires so much Indignation, as when it is in the Husbands.

Of all Rivals, they are the most insufferable, and the contempt that is had
for them; does frequently outpass the hatred that one would have against others.

For my part, if any thing was capeable of Diverting me, during the vexation
that I was in, because another held my place; It was the satisfaction which I
had to imagine that Theresia had as great a share in it as I had; for those
kind of things have a far greater effect upon Women's minds, then Men's.

Mean time, as in all such Fair opportunities there is some putting forwards, I
did then endeavor, (notwithstanding the Hatered that there was between that
fair one and me;) to make use of this conjuncture in taking some small liberty.

The Darkness of the place, its Situation, the example of others, all did seem
to dispense at such a time, a Man for all manner of Discretion, and it had ill
becom'd me to have preserved so much near so Beautiful a Person. Yet I did not
drive my rudeness too far neither, and Theresia, (who had more of fear then I
had of holdness,) was quit of it, for some small Stealths, which she Revenged
with Scratches.

The Duke and the Duchess, having changed their Entertainements, they likewise
altered their Discourse; the Duke did presently ask his Wife if she was well
pleased with her Mistake.

It will be your fault only if I am not, replied the Duchess; but it is
certain, that if you continue in your slights toward me, another shall gain by
it.

That others (with whom you do so whreaten me,) can be no other then the Lord
N. replied the Duke; If it were not He replied the Duchess, (rising to be
gone,) It should be another; But I will confess to you, (added she, moving
forwards,) that he shall always be preferred to any other when ever you give me
an occasion for it.

They being then got at a further distance, we heard not any thing further of
their discourse; So when Theresia, who feared remaining alone with me, after
what I had already done, rising also, Are you not said she, the most rude of
all Men, thus to prevail upon my goodness, and to have so little of respect for
me, who you see could not find in my heart to mind you?

Rather say, Madam, I answered, that I am obliged unto that danger which was
equal to us both; And what danger replied she? I neither fear the Duke, nor the
Duchess.

I fear them as little as you do, I replied, but it is probable that you would
not have had the Duchess to know, that you were so near her Husband, nor that
the Duke should think me so near his Mistress.

Theresia having Highly defended her self on that point, and making use of the
same Reasons against me; there happened a pleasant dispute betwixt us, which at
last did terminate in raillery on all that had happened to us both that Night,
without any further explication on either side.

In this manner we rejoined the company, where we found the Duke and the
Duchess, who doubtless being concerned after us, were not a little surprised
to see us come in together, not knowing whether we had not had the same
fortune, that they had met with.

All the rest of that Evening, the Duke did appear very Discontented, and the
Duchess had her Eyes incessantly upon us; while, as if we had been agreed to
make them both very uneasy; Theresia and I, affect to be of great Intelligence
together, and we did continually Whisper in one another Ears, Laughing at
their Cost. So that the whole Court, that had always seen us of very contrary
Humors, were much surprised to see us on the sudden so well agreed, and
entertaining one another with so much familiarity before the Duke. The Feast,
which was then all ours, lasted not much longer; The Master of it having great
reason to conclude it before the time, which he had designed it should.

After which every one having taken the way to the City, I took leave of
Theresia, who put her in the Dutchess's Coach with whom she had come thither;
and the Duke who was to accompany them, did not, but came to ask me room in
mine.

I did receive that Honor as I ought, but I did soon perceive to what it
tended; and after we had been some time without speaking.

I must needs confess, My Lord, said he, in a slighting manner, which did
sufficiently express, with what a Passion his mind was possessed, that for a
young Man, you are very knowing, and that your love of indifferency has had no
bad success. There are none but for you now at Court, and your vanity extends
so far, as to carry your designs on Persons toward whom you ought not so much
as to lift up your Eyes.

I know not, my Lord, I replied, in what it has ever appeard, that I have lost
that respect which I owe you.

That business answered he, has not need of any further clearing; what I tell
you is sufficient to put you in mind of your duty, it is time for you to
re-enter into it; you are Young, I have some considerations for the Family
whence you came, without that it is like, that I had not acted with all the
moderation that I do at present; But abuse not any of it, and make good use of
this advice that I give you.

I am very unhappy, My Lord, I replied, thus to incur your displeasure; but
more that I know not by what means I am fallen into that misfortune; all that I
can do, is to depart the Court; and if you desire it, I will quit the Kingdom
also, rather then give you the least disquiet.

Those ways that make such noise, are not convenient, (answered he,) when you
know what it is that I desire of you, do it, and then, when you think good to
be gone, you may, without giving any intimation of the cause thereof.

The Conversation went no further, we remained all the rest of the time in
silence, until we came to the Palace, where he told me again, that I should
think on the advice which he had given me. But I had no sooner quitted him,
that seeing him take the way to the Dutchess's Appartment, whence I did not
think that he would come forth again that night, that I went to Theresias
Lodgings, being impatient to learn what Entertainment she had had with the Duke.

I found her undressing, and she no sooner did see me, but that she told me in
a Languishing strain, that the Duchess had given her an Entire Divertisement,
and that now she did believe her more Jealous of me then of the Duke; all her
business having been to learn where we two had met so as to return together; I
also related to her, all that had passed in my Coach with the Duke; So that we
were both Laughing heartily at it, when the Duke came into the Chamber, which
did very much surprise me.

But Theresia Laughed more loud then before at it, which put him as much out of
countenance, as I had been, who had no other thoughts but of retiring as I did
personally.

I did well imagine that this last surprise, would make an end of placing me
ill in the Dukes opinion.

Therefore I did design not to appear at Court all the next day, fearing, as he
was very hastey, that in some sudden action he should express his resentments
against me.

But I was scarce out of my Bed the next Morning, that one of his Gentlemen
came to call me, as from him.

I went into a Gallery where he staid for me, and after he had received me with
such a cold Air, as did sufficiently show how he forced himself; I did believe
Lord N. said he, that I had sufficiently given you to understand how far my
nicety extended in respect of some Persons, and I know not if it is that you
would have me to express my self in that manner, that such a contempt as you
make of what I say to you, does deserve.

You did only mention to me, my Lord, said I, such Persons toward whom I ought
not to lift up my Eyes, and I did not believe that that command did extend so
far, as on all kind of Persons, and that I ought not to look on any body;
especially when you could not imagine that I should have any design in it.

Whether I have spoken to you of it or not, (replied he, in a louder voice) you
know sufficiently those Persons, in which I pretended to have some Interest,
and if I find you there again; I would not advise you to carry it off without
Laughing; for it would be Dangerous for any Person whatsoever to Laugh in the
Court at my Cost.

You being not in the Chamber, My Lord, I answered him mildly, when we began to
Laugh -- No no, interrupted he, what I say is sufficient, it is not good to
play the Jester with me here; You forget your self; see where you are, and you
will know what you owe me.

Upon this he left me hastily, not harkening any longer to what I said.

This Treatment did seem something harsh, though I had deserved part of it, and
I judging that I should not pass my time very well in that Court, being thus
out with the Duke, who would certainly have my steps observed, I took the
resolution to be gone.

But in the condition that I found my heart at that time, it was almost
impossible to get his consent to leave so soon that Country; it was not now the
Duchess that did detain it only, It was Theresia also, for whom I had always
had a greater inclination; who notwithstanding the cause that I had given her
that Night of Anger against me, had not treated me with all the rigor that I
might have expected from her. And even the manner after which she had returned
with me to the Company; and that we had after that discoursed together, had not
any thing in it, which gave me not hopes that she had no mind to hate me long.

Finally, so many other things which came into my mind, and so many Amorous
Ideas which I had upon all those liberties which I had taken with her, having
rendered me more passionate then ever.

I changed the resolution which I had taken of absolutely quitting that
Kingdom, to an eight days absence from Court, to give way to the Dukes Anger,
and to learn in what disposition of heart my two Ladies were, and how they
would take my absence; I did think my self obliged to give them notice of my
departure, and this is the Note which I Writ to the Duchess.

IF I had not feared disturbing the joy of your being so well reconciled to
your Husband, I could not have hindered my self from seeing you, and of taking
leave of you at my Retiring from Court, notwithstanding any orders to the
contrary. But I must let you enjoy in peace the happiness of possessing him,
Yet I fear it will not last long, and that there will happen some Amorons
relapses that may steal him from you a second time; Then you will have some
thoughts of me, and perhaps wish me near you again. Though it is a greater
Honor to be at any time servisable to you on any account, yet it is but an ill
requital to have the whole misfortune of the adventure, to fall wholly upon me,
at the same time that I expected to be over com'd with favor.


I sent her this Note by a trusty Agent, and this is what I Writ to Theresia.
IF I had any hopes of Living pleasantly in this Court, I would not leave it;
but it being forbid me to see you, and what is more; to laugh with you, what
pleasure can I receive in it? or rather how could I forbear those things, but
by timely withdrawing my self from all the occasions of doing them? I did
partly guess that so much good fortune in one day could not last long, of which
had I been as certain, I would have made better use, in declaring to you a
Secret which concerns my Life that you should know it, but that it is of too
dangerous a Nature to commit to Paper; To what should I not be concerned if it
were known? I shall tell it to none but you, because that th^re is none but you
that ought to know it.


These two Notes being Writ and sent, I got on Horse back, and I retired my
self with a Lord that was a Friend of mine, some ten Viles from the City. Where
the next day, I received answer to both my Letters, and this is that of the
Dutchess's.

I have been strangely surprised at your absence, but the sorrow that I feel
for it Surpasses that; you little know what passes in my Heart, when you speak
to me of joy; I am no longer capable of any, but when I see you, and He you
speak of, has bethought himself too late of his duty. You have made so good use
of his negligence, not to say more, that there is no room left for him in my
Heart. It fell very unlucky that she possessed your place at Roggio Regale; but
where were you? Were you as unfortunate as I was? But why sais I, unfortunate,
after seeing your return so well accompanied. Oh! Heaven, it is possible that
that Creature must be the cause of all my Miseries? Farewell, I shall have no
rest till I see you, therefore return with the soonest; there will be ways
found to see one another, and not be known.

Farwell,

Two hours after this I received that from Theresia, which was in these Terms.
THose Persons know not what they do, who would deprive me from the Innocent
pleasure of Langhing with you; I have an heart wholly addicted to mutiny, and
at the least opposition that it finds, it has no greater delight than to bend
it self against those obstacles. It were fine indeed, to hinder us from
Laughing and seeing one another; Do but return, that we may have that
satisfaction, in spite of all; I am almost dead with longing to know the secret
which you mention, and if it be such a one as I imagine, I promise you
beforehand, that none shall know it but my self.


This commerce having lasted seven or eight days, during which the tender
confidence that was between Theresia and I, did daily increase my affections,
and the Hearts correspondency which I had with the Duchess, did very much
decay; of two Letters that she did Write to me, I made but one answer; whereas
Theresia, had always two Letters from me, for one of hers; and I did so employ
my self of tenderness, with this, that I had scarce any thing left for the
other, the which she was not long without perceiving, and attributing to
absence that which was the mere eflect of an inconstancy. At last she Writ to
me this Note.

IF absence was to you so hard a thing as you say it is, you would do more then
you do to see us again. These reasons which you aledge in justification of it,
proceeds not from a very passionate Man, pray, not so much reservedness, and
somewhat more of Love, and then you will find nothing difficult; This you would
know, did you Love as you should. I have a thousand things to tell you, but
they are kind reproaches which I will make you in Person; Be this night in the
Garden of the Palace, I send you the Key of the Port-Gate, I shall stay for
you there, from twelve at night till two.

Farwell.

The Passion which I had had for the Duchess, did awaken again at the lecture
of this Letter; and notwithstanding all the love that I had for Theresia, I
could not refuse such a rendezvous as that.

I was so in Love with those kind of adventurs, that I would have quitted all
to have such an Entertainment for a Lady.

I therefore prepared my self for that, and parted from that place where I was,
at a convenient hour to get to the Garden at the appointed time; but I made
such haste in the Impatiency I was, that it was but Eleven of the Clock when I
found my self at the Gate; I had but one Man with me, whom I caused to wait
with my Horse at some distance from thence, in a very private place. I did open
the Gate, and I gently advanced from one Alley into another, it being early
enough yet to meet with People there; as I did hear some walking, I hid my self
between two Hedges, to see who it was, for it seemed to me as if they were
coming my way; At last I heard a voice that spoke very low, but as they still
did draw nearer me, to rest themselves on some Seats that were not far from me;
I was near enough to discern that it was the Dukes voice. I did not doubt but
that he was discoursing with Theresia; and Jealousy, as well as some
curiosity, insenssibly engaging me to draw nearer still; I at last creept so
close to them as to understand what they said; But what is then the Cause,
(said Theresia,) of his absence from Court? You know it, Madam, replied the
Duke, but to free you from the trouble of asking it me again; I will tell you
that he has trespassed a little too much upon my hounty; I Love you, Madam,
continued he. My Lord, (replied Theresia, Interrupting him,) and is that the
cause of his disgrace? And have you any cause on that account to complain of
either of us? But too much, replied the Duke, You strangely surprise me,
answered Theresia, and you will much oblige me, to let me know, in what it has
appeared that the Lord N. has ever made one step only in favor of me.

I am but too well experimented in those things, (replied the Duke) to become
the Interpreter of his actions, and grant that I had deceived my self, you take
too much his Interests, to prove that, he is wholly innocent.

This conversation which had something in it very pleasing to me, was growing
to go warm in good earnest; when that the ruffling of some Petticoats, which
were heard at the end of the Alley, made the Duke to listen that way; and
fearing least it should be the Duchess, that came to espy him, he entreated
Theresia to hide her self in the Hedge, and stayed till his Wife came up to
speak to her.

By good fortune, the Duchess had taken along with her a Woman, in whom she
did conside, having not Courage enough to venture singly in the Garden at that
time of the Night, and perceiving the Duke, she did at first take him for me,
which might have spoiled all, had not his Impatiency so transported him, that
he arose and going toward her^ What! Madam, (said he,) will you never give me
any rest? What is it you desire? What come you here for? Is it nor Bed time
with you yet? The Duchess was so surprised and confounded at the Dukes voice,
that she knew not at first what to answer; But fearing least her silence should
betray her, or that at least it would make him to distrust somewhat of the
truth, she told him with a trembling voice, That she was come with no other
design, than to walk; which if it troubled him, she would retire into her
Chamber.

Yes, Madam, replied he, (giving her his hand,) and you will much oblige me not
to stir from thence at such hours as these; and upon that, he led her back
himself to be the more secure.

Mean time I was very loath to lose so fair an opportunity, and being not very
far from Theresia, I did rise to come to her, but she no sooner heard the noise
which I made, that she got out of the Hedge, and began to run away, I followed
calling softly to her, for fear of being heard by the Duke, who could not yet
be very far, but she still did run on, till I did overtake her, and let her
know who I was; Oh! my Lord, (said she, quite out of Breath) in what a Fright
have you put me? I am half dead with it; after which, she sat her self on the
Grass, to compose her a little.

While I was Kneeling before her, I did ask Pardon for the trouble that I had
given her, for which I was so sorry that I would have repaired it with my Life.

I will forgive you, (said she,) if you will tell me what you were come here to
do? It was my happy fate, Madam, (I replied,) that did conduct me here, to be
Charmed with the Honor that you do me, in concerning your self so much for me.
You have then heard the discourses which I have had with the Duke, (answered
she,) I have not told him (she continued,) half that I had to say to him on
that account; But that is not the business now in hand; I only ask you what was
your design? And if it is not for Love of the Duchess that you have left your
solitude; for in all probablity she came to seek you, and this was an
assignation which she had given you, or I am much mistaken.

I Love Theresia too well, to conceal the truth from her, and thought this was
no better, then sacrificing of the Duchess to her; I rather chose that the one
should reproach me a little with Treachery, than the other that I had not been
sincere to her in an occasion of this nature; I therefore told her the truth,
(adding,) that the success had been more favorable to me than I durst have
expected, since that I had been so happy as to meet with her; You had been much
more happy, (answered he,) if you had met with the Duchess; It was in my power
to do it, (I answered,) and I could have prevented her coming up, in running
to meet her, so as that she had not come so near you, as to be known. But how
can it be, replied Theresia, that you being Charmed with the Beauty of a Lady,
for whose Love you thus expose your Life, that you should neglect her so much
when you are so near? If you had not been here, I replied, she had not been so
neglected, but where e're you are, I cannot think of any other Person; (What
you tell me now replied she,) is something difficult to be believed; and should
I require from you some Assurances of it, I think that I should puzle you.

I am ready, Madam, (answered I,) to give it you; And my Heart, who did Sigh
for you, from the very moment that I did see you first, and that has never
ceased doing so, wheresoever otherwise I my cares and steps have been employed,
shall give you such proofs thereof, that you shall have no longer cause to
doubt it.

I am very sensible, my Lord, (said she, after a little pause,) that I am weak
enough to be persuaded into that belief, had I not before my Eyes an example
which ought to make me mistrust you.

You would be too unjust, (I answered,) should you condemn me on those
appearances. No, I shall not condemn you, (answered she,) but I will examine
your Heart a little better yet, there is enough for this time; For in the fears
that I am in of the Duke, I cannot tell you half the things which I have to say
to you.

I did endeavor to obey her, but in that impatiency that I was to conclude
this conversation, having asked of her If that could not see her in private;
she told me, That it would be very difficult, by reason that the Duke did
observe her continually after such a manner, that she lived like a Slave.

I Sighed upon this, and told her, That if she pleased, I would meet her the
next day in the same place; but she answered, That there was too much of danger
in it for me; And that she should fear on her part both the Duke and the
Duchess.

Finally, after I had entreated her to tell me her self, what happy moment
there might be for me to entertain her in, more at large; she told me, That if
I would stay till she had retired her self with the Duke, she might perhaps
find out some means to return to me again; Upon which I did cast my self at her
Feet, and kissed a thousand times one of her fair Hands; but she presently
caused me to retire, because she heard the Duke coming, she tenderly pressing
my hand with both her hands, as I took leave of her.

The impatient Amorous Duke gave me but just time sufficient to hide my self
through the haste that he made toward Theresia; and very much concerned at the
interest that she had in my affairs, there being no interest that can proceed
from indifferency; he prsently began the discourse on the same Chapter.

If, said he, you have any consideration in the World for me, you must no more
mention the Lord N. to me, and you must likewise forbid him of seeing of you;
As to no longer speaking of him to you, that will not be difficult for me to
do, replied Theresia, but I cannot forbid him seeing of me; It would too much
concern my reputation; What would he think of it? continued she, that you are
Jealous of him? or it may be that I Loved him; Do you not put me, my Lord,
(added she,) on such observances; You have already but too much exposed me to
public talk, and I will not make an end of ruining my self.

Well, Madam, (replied the Duke, with some passion,) I shall forbid him my
self, since that you will not. That were the way, (replied Theresia,) to
increase my design of seeing him; That you say, (replied the Duke,) is the way
to give you the greater desire of seeing him; Yes doubtless, (replied
Theresia,) and I do confess to you, that that manner of Living to which I am
daily reduced by you, is very cruel, it will at last come to pass, that I shall
be compelled to be Locked up like a Prisoner in my Chamber, as in a manner I am
already, without the liberty of seeing any body; Rather say, Madam,
(interrupted the Duke,) that you have not began to take notice of this cruel
Life, which others would not call so; But since the Lord N's. absence, that
wheresoever he is not, you will think your self uneasy, and restrained; and
that in fine, to gain your favor, I must my sef^ invite him again to Court,
and if you please conduct him to your Appartment. It is pity he hears you not,
(replied Theresia,) and I do believe that if he did but know the good Offices
that you render him toward me, that he would return you thanks for them; For,
to tell you the truth, to act as you do, would not be a means to drive a man
from my heart; If he were there, it would rather be. Yes, it would,
(interrupted the Duke in a passion, having not the patience to let her make an
end,) be the way to make you Love him. This is already done, (continued he,)
but I shall prevent him, for enjoying such an happiness. It is not from this
day that I know you to be Passionate, (replied Theresia, rising to be gone,)
but if you would believe me, (continued she,) you would not be too hasty on
that account; I shall not take Council of you (replied the Duke;) and I do
engage, that before it be Twenty-four hours longer, I shall rid my self of a
person that gives me too much vexation, not to invite me to Banish him out of
the Kingdom. And I engage to you, (replied Theresia,) that before Twenty-four
hours are passed, I shall be no longer in this Court. That Is the way, (replied
the Duke,) to make me drive more home my resentments; Drive or not, (replied
she,) this is what I will perform by to Morrow.

By this time, they were got too far from me, to hear any more of their
discourses; neither did I think it convenient to follow them, after what I had
heard; It is certain, that there never was any pleasure like to that which this
conversation did give me; and that if Love had not engaged me already to give
my heart unto the Beautiful Theresia; the bare knowledge of what she had done
that night for me, had obliged me to Love her most passionately; There wanted
nothing to make me perfectly happy, but the satisfacton of seeing her again one
moment only, before I went from thence, as she had promised me; but it appeared
to me too much happiness at once; Yet she out-went my hopes, and I did see her
return, even before I expected it, by reason that the Conversation which she
had had with the Duke in the Garden, being not pleasant, as to invite him to
the continuation of it in her Chamber, he had retired as full of Jealousy and
Spite, as ever was a Lover.

I did run toward her, so soon as I perceived her, and casting my self at her
Feet; What is it that I do not require of you, Madam? (said I,) after that
goodness, which you have expressed toward me this Night, had I a thousand
Lives, though I should expose them all for you, I could not repay so many
Graces and Favors.

Alas, my Lord, (replied she, causing me to rise,) I fear very much, that on
the contrary, I have given you cause to hate me, I am returned but only to tell
you, with what rage against you, the Duke has left me; and at the same time to
entreat you, not to wait the effects of his Passion, but to depart this very
night from these Dominions. I, Madam, said I, (interrupting her,) go out of
this Kingdom, to leave in the hands of a most violent man, and of a Rival, all
that is dearest to me in the World, a Lady that has laid a side all other
considerations to take my part, and to show that I was more then indifferent to
her.

Yes, my Lord, (replied she,) I have done so, and I can farther say, that I
have done nothing in that, but what my heart has allowed of; And that if you
have found me according to your heart the first time that you did see me, I
have not found you unworthy of mine from the very first moment that I saw you,
and that if ever any thing did vex me in all my life, it was when you gave the
King unto the Duchess, which in truth, I expected for my self.

And you had had it; that Ring, (answered I,) if it had been the Choice of my
heart, which did then sufficiently draw me toward you; But the Duke -- Yes,
the Duke, (interrupted she,) always contrary to my happiness, will be the cause
of my Death.

The cause of your Death, (Madam, said I,) I it is not now time to extend your
self on this Theme, (replied she,) you must think of returning your self with
the soonest, into some place of safety, that I may have no more to fear as to
your Life.

You, to fear in regard of my Life, Madam, (I replied with an Air wholly
transported;) know, that if it must be saved, it cannot be but without you, and
that I should sooner deliver my self up into the Dukes hands, than abandon you.

If I had not my Honor to mind, my Lord, (replied she sighing) I find a
sufficient willingness in me to follow you, and to desire no other ^ortune then
yours, but the Honor of a Person of my Quality --

What Danger is there in this, as to your Honor, (said I interrupting and
Embracing her, with all that Tenderness that I had,) with a man that gives you
his Faith from this very moment.

She remained some time after this without answering, and presently leaning
gently on me. If you give it me, (said she, with a languishing voice) Will you
keep it then? I redoubling all the protestations, that a man in such a Passion
as I was, could utter.

It is sufficient, (said she,) I am satisfied; let us retire, and do what is
most convenient, to shelter us from the Dukes violent temper, for in the
condition I am at present, I do not find my self capable of giving you any
Council.

I did then propose to her, to Imbarque our selves that very night, and to
retire into the Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction; which she did approve of: and
having at the same time turned toward the Gate of the Port of which I had the
Key; We had scarce made some steps toward it, but that we perceived the
Duchess coming from behind some Trees, who had heard all that we had said, and
who throwing her self upon Theresia, to prevent her from following me; She
called me a thousand times Perfidious, and Treacherous, while I was
endeavoring to make her let go her Rival; which having done, at last, she
cried out so loud that the Duke, who was not far from thence, and who in that
despair that he was gone to Bed, did think of nothing less then sleep, not
knowing what was become of the Duchess, did not believe that she was returned
into the Garden without some design; So that running thither with Five or Six
Musketeers, and as many Halberteers of his Guard; He came there at that time,
that the Duchess was making of that noise; and presently falling upon me,
calling me by all the Infamous names that he could think on.

I had made him to pass by something of his fury, though I had nothing but a
short Sword and my Dagger, if he had not been accompanied with all those
Halberteers, who after they had wounded me in two places, they knocked me down
with a blow which I received on my head, which caused Theresia to fall into a
Swound, who was seconding of me as much as she could, and who saw the Blow
given me.

The Duchess, who in spite of all the Anger that she had against me, had also
declared on my side; seeing me assaulted by so many, did think me Dead with
that blow, and after that she had furiously flown out against the Duke; She
took my Sword which she found on the Ground, and had like to have Killed with
it the last that had wounded me, there being no extravagancy that she did not
commit; threatening her Husband with Death, to revenge mine.

The Duke, whose fury was something appeased at the sight of my body lying on
the ground, knowing well what parties my Parents would be for him to deal with,
who would ask him an account of my Blood, even to the very last drop, having
his mind wholly taken up, with all those troublesome thoughts, did not mind what
his Wife said; and after he had given order to some of his People to Carry me
into Castle-Novo, and immediately to run for Surgeons, to see if there was any
hopes of life left in me; But gave charge to others to take care of Theresia,
and taking upon himself the care of the Duchess, he led her back into her
Appartment.

The Duke did what he could to prevent this business from breaking out; but in
two or three days, the whole Court did know it.

Is was diversely discoursed, every one according to his fancy, there being no
Person that could imagine, how I had happened to be between those two Ladies,
and why the Duchess, (of whom there was a rumor that I was in good
Intelligence with,) had cried out after me in that manner; and yet afterward
took my part against the Duke.

In fine, never did business give so much cause of reasoning in all Italy as
that did, without being well understood; Theresia's Friends did immediately
come to fetch her home; whence presently after, News was brought that she was
dead, either with Grief, or with Poison.

As for me, my Wounds being nor Mortal, I was judged past all danger at the
very first dressing; and some days after in a condition to stir abroad; But the
Duke who would uphold what he had done; and what was more, call me to an
account for the attempt which I had committed in the night season, in his own
Palace, against his Life and Honor, accusing me of both.

He caused me to be under greater restraint than ever, in Castle-Novo, without
the Liberty of seeing any body; so that he imform'd the Court of Spain, as he
pleased himself, of all that passed, and if any of my Friends did write
concerning it, to oblige me, it was so weakly, and in such obscure terms, not
knowing how the business had really past; that part of my Relations, (who were
pre-possest with the Dukes complaints,) were against me, and I had been
absolutely condemned, (if it were usual to do so,) without hearing of both
parties.

I remained Six Months in this manner in Castle-Novo, without the least
knowledge of any thing of my business, daily wishing for Death; After that of
Theresia, which the Duke had been so cruel as to inform me of, not doubting but
that it would be an addition of troubles to me, which would conclude my Life.

When one day, about Nine or Ten at Night, I saw come into my Chamber a kind of
Servant, which I thought that I had formerly seen, but where I could not
remember; He drew near me, and presented me a Note; Do you not know Julia, my
Lord? This was one of the Dutchesses Women, whom she had made her confident,
and who had disguised her self like a Serving-Man to bring me this Note from
her. I opened it, and found in it these Words.

SO long as my Anger has lasted against you, I have hindered my Heart from
Making its resentments appear, by those reproaches that had just cause to make
you. This was too great an advantage for you, and you know, what merited that
treachery, which you have done me; But since that all my Anger is over, and
that there is no more danger to fear, for my Heart, I let pity Act. It is not
refused to the most indifferent Persons, and some it is to be allowed unto your
Youth, were there none to spare for the misfortunes which you have drawn upon
your self; see what may be done for you, and you shall be served in it; You
have not given me overmuch cause for it; but when a Person is thoroughly
Generous, it is to this hight.


What occasion soever I had, to be very Angry with the Duchess, on whom I did
look on as the cause of all my misfortunes, this excess of bounty that she
expressed toward me, when I did least think of it, and when I stood most in
need of such a considerable assistance, did make an end of dissipating a nest
of resentments which were remaining in my Heart against her; And after that I
had told Julia, That I would willingly have made an answer to her Mistress, but
that I had not Pen, Ink, or Paper, and that it had always been refused me; she
promised to get me some the next day, by the means of two of my Guards, which
the Duchess had gained, after two Months endeavor, and that were with me
Twenty-four hours every Week, which was from the hour of Twelve, till the next
day at the same hour; So that it was absolutely necessary, that my Letters
should be ready against that time, if I would have the same Guards to carry
them.

I promised that they should; and after that, having asked her some News of my
concerns, she satisfied me as well as she could: But fearing to be surprised
with me, because that all the Night I was hourly visited in my Chamber, I gave
her leave to retire, with a Thousand Testimonies of acknowledgments, to her
Mistress, of which I desired her to give her an account.

Julia returned, and the next Morning, I having been furnished by one of the
Guards with all necessaries for Writing, I began with my Relations, unto whom I
had diverse things to relate; after which I Writ a Note to return the Duchess
thanks, and to recommend my Letters to her care; This is the contents of that
Note.

IT is most certain, Madam, that your bounty does as much surprise me, as I am
depressed with confusion; the using me after so generous a manner as you do, is
the way to punish me more severely then with giving me all the names of
Traitor, Perjured, or even my Death; others there are that have betrayed as I
have, and perhaps with less reason, yet my crime is greater then ever yet was
committed because that I have offended that Person, which in the World did the
least deserve it; If I could repair it with my Death, you should not remain
long unsatisfied? for as in all likelihood, I shall not get out of Prison
suddenly; I hope from the assistance of my sorrow, not to Languish much longer
in this place; I take the liberty to entrust to you some Letters, for my
relations, in which you will see Madam, such a relation, as I ought to Pen it,
on the occasion of my misfortunes, and this shall be the last favor which I
shall require of you, protesting to you that I shall not dye without the regret
of having been forced by a necessity much stronger then that of duty, to
abandon a Person, whose esteem I did not discern, no more then that tenderness
that she had for me.


The Duchess could not read my Note without melting into Tears, and though I
had left open those Letters that went into Spain, she would not read them; but
having sealed them up, she had them both secretly and securely conveyed to
Madrid.

From that time I did begin to find some comfort through the Dutchesses kind
Assistance; who did not fail on all occasions, to give me some notice of all
that passed, and daily to Write to me, more kindly then the other; it may be
guest at, by this Note which she sent to me after a Bleeding.

I have been this day indisposed, and have caused my self to be let Blood in
the left Arm, to leave the other at liberty to Write to you; I should not gain
much in depriving my self, for a little pain that I feel, from that
satisfaction which alone does cure me of diverse Evils; I feel all yours, and I
would do more then barely alleviate them; But ought I not to fear the effects
of ingratitude, once again? Why can I not forget that you have been so? I
should be happy then, but how can that be, when you do not assist me in it? Ah!
My Lord, how little do you deserve, that one should have so much tenderness for
you.


I must confess, that in the sad condition that I was brought to, after seven
Months of Imprisonment, in which time I had not seen any one, my sorrows and
afflictions did leave but little room for such kind of Sentiments; there was
nothing but sorrow in my Heart, I made the Duchess this answer.

I confess to you, Madam, that such an unfortunate wretch as I am, do deserve
some compassions, but nothing more, because that I should not be in a condition
to return what I should owe, to and other resentments, that should be had for
me; If I were not Perfidious, I should at least be ungrateful, which is yet a
greater crime; your bounties are too large, not to reach my heart; but that
heart is too much loaded with miseries, to have wherewith to answer your
bounties. Permit me to dye, Madam, rather then thus to overcome me with favor,
which I never have deserved, and of which I shall never render my self worthy


These Letters of mine, which were more filled with complaints, then with
tenderness, did not however less inflame with love; The sensible Duchess, who
did Bathe them in her Tears at the Lecture of them. My Relations in Spain had
received mine; but at Court, they were so prepossessed to my prejudice, and the
Dukes party was so great, that all the answer which I had, was, That it might
be hoped, they should obtain from Court, to have me transferred to Madrid.

But those Court deliberations are such tedious things, besides the oppositions
that would be made by the Dukes party; that as Powerful as were my Relations,
and though they were never so dilligent, it was likely, that those Afflictions,
and that Melancholy which I had upon me, would Kill me, before that the order
of this transportation should be Arrived at Naples.

And of truth, in the midst of all those troubles that I was sorrow'd with, I
had rather have dyed then live; This was my condition, when one night, when it
was those two Guards turn, that the Duchess had gained to watch me, after that
they had informed me that that night they had nothing to say to me from her,
which had plunged me yet into a greater forrow, I perceived come into my
Chamber a Cavalier, very well accoutred, who was Ushered in by a Servant, that
did bear a Flambau before him.

I was surprised to receive such a visit at that hour of the night, and I
believed that it was not without some great consequences; I arose from my Bed,
on which I was seated, and advanced toward him, but he presently running
toward me, he did embrace me with his Eyes full of Tears, which I I felt
falling on my Cheeks; This action did surprise me more then the visit, and I
did not doubt but that it was some friend from Madrid, who had obtained from
the Duke to see me; but what was my astonishment, when that having looked on
him, I found that it was the Duchess, and she that bore the Flombeau, Julia,
What Madam, is it you, (said I, going back two steps) thus to Honor me with
this kind visit, in such a miserable place as this is?

It is not now time, my Lord, (answered she,) to examine that point of Honor,
your liberty is the present business: See if you will receive it at my Hands,
for it absolutely depends on me.

These sorrows Madam, (I replied,) which I feel in this place, are so great,
and I am detained in them with so much Justice, that I should be excusable,
should I receive that favor from my very Enemies: much more from a Person, to
whom I am so much obliged.

But do you know, (said she Sighing,) what is expected as a reward from this
freedom?

If that my Life, (I answered,) and all that belongs unto me. --

No, (replied she,) it is not that; What then could you desire? (I answered)
that I were not highly obliged to perform, though you should not free me out of
Prison?

It is, (said she,) that you should conduct me into Spain, where, when I am
Arrived, you should be at liberty to go, and to do what you please.

I presently did find that this would not mend my business, but there was not
any thing that I would not have done, to get out of Prison, hoping to defend my
self better when got at liberty; Therefore I told the Duchess, That what she
desired of me, was rather an Honor then an Acknowledgment; and that I should
receive a very great satisfaction in doing her that service; And having asked
her where we should go, she answered me with a Transport of Joy; Presently, if
I pleased, that there was a Vessel ready in the Harbor to transport us to
Barcelonia.

So that I having no great preparations to make, we went out of my Chamber,
each of us covered with Hooded Coats, after the manner of the Soldiers of that
Country; We did pass without any opposition quite through the Guards of the
Castle, and came to the Key, where there was a Shallop that waited for us,
which did carry us on Board the Vessel, and that very Night, the Wind being
favorable, we weighed Anchor for Barcelonia: I then began to feel some comfort.

The Duchess, who did very well Imagine that we ought to part so soon as we
arrived in Spain, either for convenience, or that she did believe that I did
not Love her at such a rate, as to wholly give my self up unto her service, she
did make all the advantage that she could, of that short time which was so
favorable to her desires.

I must confess, that my heart did not plead very much in her behalf: But so
many things which she had done for me, did require so much of gratitude and
acknowledgment, that it performed out of duty, that which it was to have done
through the dictates of Love,

Of certain, had I never loved any other but she, we had been both the more
happy; for she did deserve a Gallant Persons whole heart.

I would often tell her so much, and give her a true account of my heart; but
all that I could do did not in the least abate any thing of her Affections
toward me.

Theresia was Dead, and therefore she having nothing but some few mournful
Idea's to overcome, that had no Charms in them, she did not despair to compass
her design in some short space of time.

At last we Arrived at Barcelonia, where the Duchess, no more then I, did not
think fit to make our selves known.

We both Writ from thence to our Relations about our Concerns, and she had no
desire to go to Madrid, till she had received an answer; which she did sometime
after, though not very pleasing.

The Court had been already informed of her flight, by an Express from the
Duke: And her Action had been rendered there, the most guilty in the World; Of
truth there were some circumstances in it, that could not well be excused,
especially those wherein I was concerned; so that her Relations being Highly
Incensed against her, they Writ her word, that all that she had to do, was to
return to her Husband, and that she should be but very ill received at Madrid,
should she come there; where there was no more Friends or Relations on her
account, if she would not follow their Councels.

Those Letters did sorely afflict her, and I was concerned at them my self as
much as I could be.

You see my Lord, (said she,) how that all the World does forsake me, and you
are upon the point of doing the like.

Who I Madam! (I replied,) I hope that you know me better, to make that
Judgment of me: I will not leave you, till you are no longer in a condition of
having occasion of my services.

Ah! my Lord, (replied she Sighing,) how contented should I be, notwithstanding
all my misfortunes, if I could but believe that what you do for me, did proceed
from a mere effect of your Heart, that only Thought would comfort me, against
all my Misfortunes and Afflictions.

I have told you more then once, Madam, (I replied,) that I had not a Heart
that was Insenssible, and that you had acted too much for me, not to
acknowledge. --

Will you never speak to me, (answered she, interrupting of me,) but of
acknowledgments.

It is tenderness that I require from you; you know Madam, (I replied,) that I
have of it for you, as much as I am capable to have.

Yes I know, (replied the Duchess) that you have but very little of it for me,
most miserable that I am, who having abandoned and done all things for a Man,
have yet much to do, to be beloved by him.

She could not end those words without Tears. At which I being quite Molifi'd,
What is it that you desire of me? (I cried out,) all that the most passionate
Love can do, I will perform.

You will do all things, (replied the Duchess,) but Love me; and beside that
what can I desire from you?

Do you doubt, (I replied,) of my Love?

Ah! (replied she) would I could not.

We often had such like discourses, which would somewhat comfort her in her
afflictions.

At last, she was desirous to go to Madrid, in hopes to find a Sanctuary near
her Mother, who had always Loved her most tenderly, and who had not approved of
her Marriage with the Duke; I did offer to accompany her there, as I was
obliged to do, and in Fifteen days we came to that City.

She was received by her Mother, with that tenderness, which she had expected.

As for my part, I remained unknown and concerned, in a House that was not far
from hers, and where she daily did visit me, in a Thousand sorts of disguises,
her Mother having that Complaisance for her, that all Women have that Love
their Daughters.

But at last wearied with that sad and sedentary life, and it concerning my
reputation also, as well as my liberty, that my being there should not be
known; I did resolve to depart, for fear at last of being discovered, as it
could not fail in time to happen.

I mentioned it to the Duchess, and told her, That it was time for us to part.

That word as if it had been a Thunder-stroke, did not only affright her Soul,
but overcame her Heart also; at which changing color, Part (said she,) and
after that a flood of Tears did hinder her from continuing.

I let her know, with a sensible air, That she should have expected it; And
that she did know that we had agreed at first, that I should not be above three
days at Madrid, and that it was about three weeks since our Arrival there.

Alas, and what is three weeks, (replied she,) where there is Love?

Yes, (continued she,) I did expect that if Love did once lead you to Madrid,
that it would have detained you there during three days; But do you Love, and
then you will know what three days are in Love, which cannot be confined to
three weeks.

I did endeavor to defend my self against all those reasons of Love, which she
alleged, by reasons of Interest.

Saying, that both our concerns did require some small time of separation, and
that one single unfortunate moment were capable of running us both, that we
should be narrowly watched by her Husbands Friends; and that if ever it should
so unhappily fall out, that they should prye into our visits, that I might take
leave of my liberty, and of her also; that I would be immediately mewed up in a
Prison, and she in a Monastry.

From those reasons, that she would not allow of, I passed to those which
concerns the affairs of the Heart, protesting to her That some Months of
absence, should not in the least diminish that passion which I had for her, and
that she should have the satisfaction one day to see me return to Madrid, with
more passion then ever for her, so soon as our concerns were in a better
posture.

Good Heavens! (cried she, with Eyes full of Tears,) with what assurance can I
build upon those promises, the very impatiency that you show of leaving me,
(continued she,) does contradict what you say,

You are still perfidious, and your designs in leaving me, are but to run after
some new engagements, which will make you forget that which you have for me.

I did endeavor to settle her, and to divert her from all those fears: And as
it is no difficult thing for a Lover that pleases, to persuade what he will; I
at last gained her on my side, and made her resolve to see me go within three
days.

Those three days were no sooner expired, but that her Tears began afresh, to
ask me another; so that every night I took leave of her, and every morning I
was retained.

But at last my Affairs groing worse by such a length of time ill employed, and
my Enemies taking advantages from my neglects; I did see the absolute necessity
that there was to depart, which I was resolved to do without giving notice to
the Duchess of it, but all in vain, for by three the next Morning she was at
my Lodgngs, where she did strangely surprise me; There we began our Caresses a
new, there were Tears, Sighs, Groans, Faintings, and all the Sorrows that
could accompany so cruel a separation; but it could not divert me from the
resolution that I had taken.

So that after I had been some hours in comforting her; I got into a Coach,
which carried me half a League out of town, where my Horses waited for me, and
having passed through France, I went into Flanders, where I still pursue my
Concerns.

FINIS.

