THE Amorous Abbess: OR, LOVE IN A Nunnery.
PARIS being in its greatest Solitude, by reason of the King's Absence, when He
was following the Wars in Flanders; the Season of the Year and the Novelty of
the thing, invited certain Persons of Quality to a retreat in the Country; who
had Souls so well fitted for Conversation, that having given the first part of
the day to other noble Divertisements, such as the place afforded them variety
of, they spent their Evenings in discoursing upon the Passions, and other
things, which even in Deserts people of Sense may find entertainment in. But
one night their Pleasures were interrupted, or rather, to speak more properly,
varied by the arrival of the Post with Letters to several in the Company, and
'twas the general proposal, they should be read publicly, for the common
satisfaction. -- Monsieur Le Chevalier, one whose Wit rendered him not the
least considerable amongst them, received that which follows.

IT is two Months since I had any Letter from you; from whene proceeds this
silence? Have you so much forgot me, or has any Misfortune happened to you? Ah!
how cruel are you? Tell me if there be any that has a greater Interest than I,
in all that relates to you; and whether you ought to neglect me at such a rate,
as to believe you owe me not at least this satisfaction. Alas! you love me not,
since you can be thus long and not tell me you do. I find too unhappily, that
all the marks you have given me of your Tenderness, were but purely an effect
of your Wit; your Heart had no share in them, at least they proceeded from
Complaisance rather than Kindness, and were more the effects of Gratitude than
Inclination: for I cannot imagine how a man can love (after the manner that I
understand Love) and live as you do. You know, that you promised me in leaving
this place, to give me an account of your Life every eight days. I suffered my
self to be so pleasingly flattered with it, that it enabled me to bear more
easily the first days of your absence. There is nothing more easy than to
abuse the credulity of a Heart that loves one, but there is nothing more base,
and unworthy. I endeavored to comfort my self for your departure, after a
continued happiness, as your Presence gave me, by the pleasure I expected in a
converse by Letters, which would further engage Us: But you have allowed me
that Pleasure but a short time; what have I done? and why had you not told me,
that absence was a destroyer of Friendship in you? Then perhaps I should have
been prepared for it, and not found my self under the necessity of making
complaints to you, of your self. Endeavor to justify your self if you can, or
deceive me by some false Reasons. I am even desperate to think you Criminal,
and not to find an Excuse for your Ingratitude, Adieu. Neglect not any thing to
make me believe you are Faithful, and that you have not wronged me, Adieu.

The Company were so well pleased with this Letter, that they would not be
satisfied without knowing upon what occasion it was writ; and Monsieur Le
Chevalier with some difficulty, was brought to make the following Relation.

It is some time since, That I made a Journey a considerable distance from
Paris, where I was called by my affairs: But being the first time I was in that
Country, it is no wonder I lost my way. This misfortune happened to me when I
least thought of it; and I perceived my Error too late to remedy it; for as it
was dark, I found my self in the midst of a Wood, where the farther I went, the
more I was entangled, and out of hopes to get out. -- In fine, the Weather
being very bad, and the ways worse, I concluded it best to take my Lodging
under a Tree, rather than expose my self to a thousand Accidents I might meet
with in passing Rivers and ill ways, at such a time of Night. I need not tell
you the little pleasure there is in being reduced to this Extremity; but it
made me hope it would be the last Adventure of Knight-Errantry, that would ever
happen to me.

Whilst I was entertaining my self with these unpleasant Thoughts, a Peasant,
who by happy chance passed that way to his own House, came pretty near me; I
sent my Servant to desire him to come to me, whom we engaged by good Words and
Promises to guide Us to some Inn. -- He told us, that we were three Leagues out
of our way, and that he knew of no Lodging, but a League off, by the most
detestable way in the World. -- We arrived at last at a little Village, where
there was but one house of Accommodation. God knows how ill I was Treated
there, after having Knocked an hour at the door, to oblige our Host to rise;
who, after all, would not open it, but upon the Faith of our Guide, who swore
we were honest people: The Peasant stayed with us, and eat, and drank with us,
and lay in the same house. I, that had but a little miserable Straw for a Bed,
and a couple of vile Coverlets, passed not the Night so well as he, but better
however than I should have done in the Wood. The trouble, and weariness, I had
endured, supplied the want of a better Lodging, and served me at last for a
Pillow, so that about break of day I fell asleep. I had not slept two hours
when the Peasant entered my Chamber, and waked me, very briskly to tell me,
that Madam the Abbess expected me. I received this Complement with a very
wicked Air, and knew not what he meant by this Madam the Abbess, and was in a
mind to have forgot the obligation I had to him the night before: The poor man
knew well, by the reception I made him, that I was not pleased, although he
designed to do me Service; he went out to carry my Answer to the Person that
sent him: But for my part, I could not possibly recover my Sleep, and thought
only of what this Man had said to me, that an Abbess asked for me: I knew none
in that Country, yet believed there might be some Convent there-abouts; but
could not divine, why they should send for me, unless they took me for another.
What soever it was, I confess that I made but an ill return to this Civility;
and if the Peasant was of an humor to tell all he saw, and the displeasure
which I discovered when I sent him back, this Abbess had as much cause to
complain of me, as I had reason to praise her: This reflection began to give me
a little trouble, out of which I was delivered by the coming of the Almoner of
this Lady, to tell me, with a little more Ceremony, that the Lady Abbess, to
whom this Village did belong, being informed by her Shepherd, that a Man of
Quality that had lost his way, was constrained to take up in that miserable
Inn, had sent him to entreat me to accept of a Lodging less incommodious than
that was. This Complement brought some allay to my trouble; and I was in
Charity with my Peasant, since he procured me this honor that the Abbess did
me; I answered the Almoner the most civilly that was possible, and desired him
to tell his Lady, that I had the most acknowledging Sentiments in the World for
the favor she did me; and that I would come my self immediately to assure her
of it: My Man was up, and I made him give me Clothes better than ordinary, and
with Gallantry enough prepared for this Visit. The Peasant that served me for a
Guide here, conducted me thither also. I was brought into the Parlour where I
stayed not long for her coming.

I think it is best before I proceed further, to give you a description of this
Abbess: You must imagine her to be a Lady of about twenty eight years old, of
an indifferent Stature, but well made; her Hair fair and thick; her Eyes blue
and sparkling; her Mouth admirably well; her Nose very handsome, and her Teeth
passable, with the shape of her Face so round and charming, that to say Truth,
it was more fit to inspire Love than Devotion: She had nevertheless an Air so
sweet and modest, that in pleasing, it imprinted a respect in us, which abated
our Courage; her Voice even had something so particular, one cannot express it.
I saw this Person; and, if I must disguise nothing from you, will confess she
touched me at first fight. I remembered no longer the ill night I had passed; I
almost forgot my self, in suffering my self to be wounded by this fair
Prisoner: It Is true, I was not taken by Lines so strong as could not be broken,
or at least stretched; yet not so slight neither, but that there remained in me
a desire to please a Person, that pleased me extremely. She told me most
obligingly, that she wished I had passed better hours than I had done in the
Inn; and beseeched me to spend that day with her, to repose my self after the
hardships I had endured the preceedent Night: Her request was very kind, and as
I excused it, I did it so coldly, that it might be easily seen that I had no
mind to leave her yet; but as she had a discerning and quick Wit, she told me,
that if she had not all the power over me, that was necessary to engage me to
stay, she did not doubt, but two or three of her Friends would be able to
prevail with me, as soon as I had seen them, and that I had not resolution
enough to resist their Prayers as I had done hers: She had no sooner said so,
but she made the Ladies to be called, of whom she spoke; but I (who was willing
to give her the entire honor) assured her that she would tempt me in vain on
that side, for a thing which none but she could obtain of me, and that I did
not believe that there was any thing in the World that had so much Power over
the Spirit of a reasonable Man, as she, or could better make themselves to be
obeyed. This Complement was received of the Abbess, as I desired: She had
modesty and virtue; yet flattery always found her weak side, and she could
rarely defend her self from it: She knew, she had beauty, and though she served
not her self of it, as a worldly person; neither did she neglect it so much,
but that she had a certain joy in having it please. The three Nuns, her
Friends, arrived as she was going to answer, and changing suddenly her
Thoughts; Here is (said she* turning toward them) sufficient to make you recall
your words: these Ladies will perhaps teach you not to answer so easily for
your self, I will leave you with them for an hour, about some little business,
and expect to find you at my return of another mind. I swear to you, Madam,
(answered I softly) I will remain in it for ever; and if I could imagine that I
should change, I would depart immediately. She answered only with a Smile, for
fear of explaining her self too much before these persons. I began a very free
Conversation with these three Ladies, and knew presently that they affected
not, what was serious, but with people whose Censures they apprehended: In
effect, they seemed pleased with my freedom, and seated themselves about me
with much satisfaction. I never in my Life conversed with Persons that had so
much Wit; every thing, they said, was spoke with much vivacity, that it charmed
the Ears; and had not any thing in it of that Monastical Air, which spoils the
best things that one can say, that is infected with it. I believe it will not
tire you, if I make a description of these Ladies, as well as the Abbess;
especially one of them, which was her Sister; and who has the greatest part in
this History, and writ me the Letter which you have read. She was a Woman of an
admirable stature, very fair complexion'd; the shape of her Face oval; her Eyes
fair, and full of fire; and if she wanted any thing, 'twas a little color; her
Voice was very sweet, and she sung divinely; there was never any thing better
formed, and more Vermilion than her Mouth; the whiteness of her Teeth answered
well to this admirable Carnation; and the Breath which came from this fair
Mouth, was so sweet, that it purified the most noisome Air: I must add to all
these perfections, that she had as much Wit as 'twas possible one could have,
and a Wit always at command, never speaking any thing that was not worthy of
admiration. I will go no farther with her description, it will be tiresom,
since no longer the Mode; and will only say, that there was not any thing
common in this Lady. The two others were Persons amiable enough, the one had a
little more Spriteliness than the other; who in exchange had more Sincerity,
which rendered her a particular Friend of the Abbess's Sister.

In entertained these three Nuns for some time with indifferent things, wherein
I endeavored to discover as much Wit as I could: They did Wonders on their
side to maintain the Conversation, particularly the Abbess's Sister: This
Charming Person said not any thing, but what was new; in so much, that I
believed there was not any thing in the World that had so much Wit, or could
make so good use of it. The Abbess came at last, and certainly a propos. if she
had the least desire to retain what she had gained upon me, for to speak the
truth, the merit of her Sister appeared to me too great to give her less than a
Heart. I was upon the point of changing my first opinion, as she at her
departure almost divined I should; and I was just going to be perjured, if her
presence had not renewed the Flame, which the first sight of her had kindled in
my Soul: her Sister at least hindered the progress of it; and I confess that had
I not seen her, I should have loved the Abbess very well. I never stirred from
the Parlour all that day, being sometimes with the one, and sometimes with
other of these two persons.

I believe (continued Monsieur Le Chevalier) that the company will not desire I
should make a long Story of this Adventure, nor trouble them with every little
Circumstance. Make not account (replied the Marchioness) that we will allow you
to omit the least particular, which may be of Consequence; and we expect You
should be as faithful in your Relation, as in your Gallantry. We may permit him
(answered the Duchess) to pass over many little things which he may tell us
another season, that we may have time now for the rest. I would know (pursued
the same Lady, speaking to the Cavalier) with what Air, and how you managed
your self with these two Ladies? and being VVitty, as they were, how could
either of them suffer a Competitor? For methinks it is very difficult to
deceive two Mistresses, much more two Sisters, that you must almost always see
together. I will tell you Madam (answered the Cavalier) what has happened to me
in a year and halfs time, that I had the honor to be known to them. For the
first time that I saw them, I stayed but a day and a half in the Visit, but
found enough in this, to make me desire not to be long absent; for all the time
I stayed in that Province, I left them as late as I could, and came back again
as early as possible. When I consulted the different Sentiments I had for the
two Sisters, I found, (at least I thought so) that I was in love with the
Abbess, and had a great esteem; and a most tender Friendship for the other. I
was charmed with the Beauty and Sweetness of the first, and at the same time
sensibly affected with the Perfections and Merit of the other, and had for her
a strange kind of tenderness, even when I was with the Abbess.

I was not much put to it, to study my Actions at first; if there happened any
thing remarkable in favor of the Eldest, the Younger was ready to attribute it
to her Quality above her; and the Elder took all for Gallantry of Spirit, that
I said obligingly to the youngest: It is true, this simple Error lasted not
long, for the more we love, the clearer sighted we are in the matters to
Rivals; so that both growing to have a little more esteem for me than they had,
they began to distrust one another, and observed my Words, and Actions, with
other Eyes than they had done hitherto: Sometimes, one told me, that I praised
her Sister, with that Exaggeration as was only proper to Love; the other
reproacht me, that I always sought the Abbess; and that she observed, that I
was not pleased, but when I was with her: All these little Complaints were but
to make me declare my self; and there was no Remedy, but I must do it, after
having in vain avoided it.

The Abbess's Sister (whom we will call Egidia) was the last that pressed me, but
succeeded best. She found the opportunity of a particular entertainment, at a
season when she knew her Sister was engaged by some affairs, that she could not
dispense with: and looking upon me, with an Air the most tender in the World;
Monsieur Le Chevalier (said she) It is no longer time to dissemble any thing
with you; you have Wit, and know but too well, that you are not indifferent to
me; it is now five or six months since we have been acquainted, yet I have
never said any thing positively on this point; but this day I will do more for
you, than you can expect from a Woman of my humor; it is to confess to you,
that I have much tenderness and esteem for you; if you know me, you will not
think this Confession little; and if you are obliged to me, it is for telling
you that, which if I pleased might have been concealed all my Life*

In the Transports, that this favor put me, I would have taken her Hand, and
Kissed it a thousand times to testify my joy to her; and how I considered so
charming a Declaration; but she hindered me, and pulling away her Hand, she bid
me hear her out. If you believe (pursued she) that the favor I do you in this
Declaration, merits any acknowledgment, give me that proof of it which I shall
demand. You are too Gallant a Man, to be guilty of so much baseness, as it is to
deceive any one; much more, those who have an esteem, and Friendship for you:
-- It is some time since I discovered that the Lady Abbess loves you; she her
self conceals it not from me. -- Perhaps, because she knows, that I too am
guilty of the same weakness: but she is of opinion, that you love none but her;
and, if I may believe your Eyes, your Heart has intelligence with here is. Tell
me the Truth. -- Do you love her in good earnest? Tell me, that without
imbarquing my self further in this affair, I this moment sacrifice to her the
inclination that I have to love you: I am yet reasonable enough to render
Justice to my Rival (if you will have me call her so) and to confess to you
that She merits all your thoughts; and she is too haughty and conscious of her
worth to be satisfied with less; and to tell you the truth, though I am her
Inferior, I am so jealous in this particular, that I should not without much
pain, consent to give place even to her. Consider with your self a little, and
-- Madam, (said I to her, not being able to forbear interrupting her) I have no
need to consider. -- It is not three days, since I have but too clearly
explained my self to your Sister; if she would have understood me. -- I avow,
that her Goodness engaged me to many things, that I stole from you; but I am
like to prove very ungrateful, if no less than my Heart will pay the
Obligations I have to her. -- 'Twas on Thursday last, in the evening, when you
were in the Garden, that she took her time to tell me, That I had but one step
to make me to possess her Heart entirely, and that this was, that I should
hereafter forbear to be so exceeding civil to you. -- What is that you propose
to me Madam? (Answered I, much surprised with what she had said) are you unjust
enough to make me purchase your Heart, by such a baseness? -- You must pardon
me Madam, if you please -- but I cannot believe, that you would indeed, make me
so Criminal. -- I understand you (replied she hastly) and begin to know the
fault, which my imprudence has made me to commit. -- You esteem not my Heart
enough, to engage you to such a loss, as that of my Sisters. -- But before you
go too far, I would advise you, to examine what Sentiments she has for you, and
whether no other possess that esteem, you pretend to, alone. Madam (answered I)
I know not what passes in your Sisters Heart; but since I have received all
imaginable Civilities from her, I should have the greatest regret in the World,
if I gave her the least cause to repent of it. You must however, resolve upon
it (replied she, with a tone, fierce, and disdainful) or pretend no more to any
Kindness from me, which cannot be obtained at another price. I was going to
answer her, and should have declared my self so plainly, as to give her
occasion no longer to doubt of what past my Soul; when she retired her self,
leaving me to consider what I was to do.

Thus you see Madam (continued I speaking to Egidia) what happened in this
Conversation; I have seen the Abbess several times since; but whether she could
not find me alone, or that she feared to know too soon, what she would rather
be ignorant of, she has not since spoken to me of any such thing. -- I must
confess the Truth, I esteemed her fair, her Charms at first, surprised my
tenderness; and what I yet feel for her is worthy a true Friend; I cannot
refuse to rank her in that number, though even your self should command the
contrary.

This Charming Virgin was so pleased with the sincerity, wherewith I spoke to
her, and to find that there had no more passed between her Sister and I, that
she willingly consented to our friendship: and being assured (as she was) of
the entire possession of my Love, she could not reasonably do less.

We parted very well satisfied, and more amorous than before, at least it was
so on my side; that soft tenderness, which I at first had for her, had already
took the form of a strong Passion, which increased daily, whilst that I had for
the Abbess diminished as fast, almost before I perceived it. The Confession of
Egidia, of what she felt for me, appeared to me so full of Charms, that it
finished the Conquest of my Soul; and there remained no more of it to her
Sister, then what was sufficient to say, I did not hate her. I looked upon her
no more, but as a Friend, and a Person to whom I was very much obliged: She
quickly observed it, either that she perceived some alteration in my manner of
acting, or that she feared her Sister more since we discoursed together. I
observed, that she took notice of all I did, and that she had not that
Confidence in me, she was accustomed to have: She affected even not to believe
any thing I said to her. -- But when with Egidia it was not the same, for what
jealousy soever she felt, she discovered none of it to her; but always spoke
of me, as possessing a Heart, which she did not fear to lose. She forced her
self sometimes to rally upon what she saw Egidia do for me. In so much, that
one day Egidia could not hide her Resentments, nor suffer without impatience to
see her Triumph over her, when she was well satisfied, that she had no reason
for it; and that, she intimated to her in terms malicious enough. I believe
(answered the Abbess, in a fierce tone, and full of scorn) that my interest is
so great in that Chevalier, that none will dispute it with me, or if any durst
do it, that it would be in vain. Egidia failed not to answer her, and this
little difference proceeded so far, that not being ^ble to be Judges, where
themselves were parties; they agreed to refer it to me, and engage me to
explain my self before them, and that she who should be worst treated, should
sacrifice to the other all the inclination she had for me.

I imagine, that this conversation had something in it very singular, and that
there would have been a very delightful Scene for any one that had heard it.
This resolution being taken, Egidia, who was a prudent Woman, when she
reflected on what she had engaged her self too, chose rather to renounce the
Glory, which this Victory might bring her, (for she did not at all doubt of it)
then expose me to those ill Consequences, which might follow this Declaration.
Whereupon she writ me this Letter.

I Am just now come from laying a Wager, in which winning or losing, I am
furiously interressed: the Abbess and my Self, are coming to ask a final
Declaration from You: After Dinner, You must Discover to which side your Heart
inclines: I am ready to flatter my self, that you Owe it to none but me. -- But
alas! How can I guess, what will happen? I could not refuse the Wager, and it
would have been too much my Rivals Glory, if I had. -- Be^^^d* nevertheless, to
what my Generosity can carry me! I consent (to pre^ent the ill Consequences
that may happen) that rendering me Justice in your Heart, you pronounce it in
Fa^^ur of my Eldest Sister. Adieu. Tell her you love her better than I; but for
ever love me better than hr.

This Letter put me into some Confusion; but since I must take the part of One,
I resolved without dispute what to do. -- And as I remember, this was the
Answer I made to Egidia's Letter.

I Beg your Pardon, Madam, that I cannot obey You; I must Declare my true
Sentiments when I am obliged to speak; and your Generosity must not be repayed
with Baseness; it is true, it would be only so in appearance, yet since: you are
engaged, every thing shall go on your side. -- But after such a proof of my
Passion, will you be at least persvaded, that I love you as I ought? You must
permit me to absent my self, for some time after I have undeceived your Sister;
for there is no doubt but your Wager will produce ill Consequences; -- it must
be you that must sustain the burden of them, since you would entangle your
self in them. Adieu.

I gave this Answer to the Boy that brought me her Letter; and bid my Man the
same moment, get every thing in order, to go away presently, if there were
^ccasion for it. I past the rest of the Morning in the Garden, in musing upon
the question that was prepared for me.

I forgot to tell you at the beginning, that this was one of those Convents,
where the Nuns enjoy a honest liberty, and where Kindred, and particular
Friends are permitted to enter, and see them in their Apartments.

I went to Dine with the Abbess, as the place where I ordinarily eat at, and
was very melancholy at Table contrary to my Custom, for commonly I was so happy
as to divert the Company well enough, which is often the best ragoust at Meals:
the two interessed Ladies, were the first that observed it, and the Abbess said
several obliging things to me, to put me in a better humor; but seeing I did
not answer her; She at last, asked me, what the matter was with me, that made
me so serious? I told her it was a desperate pain in my head that had taken me
since the Morning.

She had not neglected any thing that day, to make her self appear fair; and
though the Dress of all Nuns, are almost alike, yet I avow to you, that I found
something in hers so particular and agreeable, that with the sweet, and
obliging manner wherewith she spoke to me, the resolution I had taken to break
with her, began to give me some pain, and without the presence of her Sister,
she had been powerful enough, perhaps to have made me repent it. -- There was
always two or three other Nuns of the Abbess's Friends, that used to eat with
us, whom she subtly rid her self of, so soon as she had dined. -- There was
no need of Witnesses to what past between the Abbess, her Sister, and my Self.
The Abbess touched again upon the Sadness she saw in my Looks, and said that she
had never seen me in so ill a humor, and that I would oblige her, to let her
know the cause of it. I answered her, as before, that it was a great pain in my
head: But not satisfied with that, she told me, that she saw something in my
Eyes, that made her judge that my Distemper was something more than I seemed
willing to discover; and that I was unjust to conceal from my Friends (who were
equally concerned with my self in any misfortune that could befall me,) any
thing wherewith I was so much affected; and that I ought to give her the
satisfaction at least of trusting her, though perhaps it was not in her power
to cure me. -- I do not believe (said her Sister, to save me the trouble of
answering her) that there is any other cause than what he has told you. One
often sees (continued she) that people who have so much Wit as Monsieur Le
Chevalier, are subject to these terrible Headachs, and that they pass from one
extremity to the other, that is, from great Mirth, to as great Melancholy. You
believe then Sister (answered the Abbess coldly) that you know Monsieur's
distemper, since you take upon you to answer for him; yet I will imagine that
it is not as you say, but believe what he shall tell me, of it. And if he will
follow my advice (said Egidia) he shall tell you nothing. -- I do know it; and
it is so much the harder, for people that know it not, to judge well of it.
Believe me (said the Abbess, with a malicious Smile) if I ask to know it, it is
not that I am ignorant of it; but to disabuse others, who, I see, are so fond
of what they fancy they enjoy, that they fear to be undeceived. -- I conjure
you Ladies, (interrupted I, all of a sudden) leave me as I am. -- Whatsoever my
Disease is, and whencesoever it comes, I neither can -- nor will be cured of it
if I could; -- I would only suffer less. For my part (said the Abbess) I who
pretend not to divine, nor to penetrate so deep into Hearts, as my Sister,
would willingly be told of what nature this Distemper is; and perhaps
(insensibility not being my Vice, for certain people in the World) I might give
'em ease, if it lay in me to sweeten their Torments. There could not be any
thing more Gallant, nor Favorably said for me; and I believe, that I should
have answered her as she desired, had not Egidia, (looking suddenly upon me)
made me, remember my promise, and put me in a state of not knowing what to say.
This amiable Lady perceived the Confusion, I was in, and very opportunely put
in, to the discourse. It is true (said she) there are certain ills, that one
must have recourse to the person that caused them, for a remedy: but if I be'nt
mistaken, this is not Monsieur's case; and you are deceived if you believe,
that you are capable of curing his Distemper. -- Whatever it is (pursued she) I
am so sensible for all that concerns him, that I shall not be inquisitous to
hear any of his misfortunes. For you Madam (continued she, speaking to her
Sister) if you have this desire, you may satisfy your self, -- but you shall
permit me, if you please, to retire.

-- And after these Words, she went away, and left me alone with the Abbess,
who believing she had cause to triumph told me, with a joy, she could not
conceal, that she saw well, that my Heart was quitted to her, since the place
was, and that it was she must cure me of the ills whereof I complained; but she
said, She must know of my self, how she was established in my Heart, and how
much above her Sister, -- that she had given me time enough to consider of it,
and that I must resolve one way, either not to hope any thing from her
Tenderness, or not divide a good that she desired the entire possession of. --
That she would allow, I should have a tender esteem for her Sister, but for my
Heart, she would fill it wholly her self; and that she had merit enough for it.
-- She was silent here, to see a little what I would say, but I made no answer;
and I believe that my silence told her enough, and that she took it for a
wicked Omen. Some moments after, (seeing me ready to speak, as one that had
studied what to say) she prevented me (apprehending (it is likely) that I would
explain my self contrary to what she desired) My God! (said she) one has little
reason to be satisfied with you to day; if one were not of a humor to pardon
you every thing, and that one had not pity for you in this disorder. -- Go, and
repose your self in your Chamber, -- the pain in your Head requires it, -- and
I shall take care that none disturbs you. -- I retired with this permission, --
with so much Confusion that I scarce knew what I did; but I was not got to the
door when she called me back. -- Hark ye Monsieur (said she with an Air full of
sweetness) I will see you at eight of the Clock this Night in the Arbor of the
farther Alley, where I Will expect you with one of my Friends; and, if you love
me you will not fail to be there. What do I say (continued she hastily) if you
love me? -- Though you should not love me, you are too much a Gentleman to fail
at a Rendezvous that I give you, there not being any thing that I know, that
can dispense with you, from it. -- Adien, -- fail not to be there. Finishing
these words, she smiled, and went into her Closet, to conceal from me a Blush,
that came into her Face.

Behold! (continued Monsieur Le Chevalier) how I came out of this Conversation
that I had so much dreaded, which was much more lucky for me than I expected,
having escaped a terrible Confusion, that I should have been in, to have
declared my self before these two Ladies, what choice my Heart had made: But I
was not without fear of my Evening assignation; I saw well, she would expect
me, and that it was the last favor I was like to receive from her. -- But
since there was no avoiding of it, I was resolved not to disguise any thing by
unworthy Equivocatings; thinking I should do well to serve my self of this
occasion, that I should find her alone to disabuse her, and not delay it to a
longer time: The honors and favors she did me augmented daily, and so did my
ingratitude, whilst she continued in her Error. It is true, it would have been
unpardonable, if it had been voluntary, but there is no choice against powerful
inclination. -- I determined upon this piece of justice, and was the rest of
the Afternoon preparing my self for it.

They went to Supper about Six of the Clock, to have more time to Walk, and I
appeared less melancholy at Table than at Noon: Egidia, who had not seen me
since she left me with her Sister, (though she had sought me with extreme
impatience, to ask me what passed in that enterview) judged from the alteration
she saw in my humor, that I had betrayed her. I saw her much discomposed, and
that she scarce eat any thing, she was so full of thoughts: She had her Eyes
always upon me or the Abbess, to surprise our looks, and see whether we were of
Intelligence to deceive her. She had not patience to sit so long at Table as
the rest, but left us upon a slight Pretext that she took, and retired into her
Chamber; from whence she sent me word by one of her Friends (that cunningly
acquitted her self of the Commission) that she desired me to come speak with
her there, so soon as I had Supped. I failed not to wait on her, and took so
well my time when the Abbess was with two or three Ladies that came to visit
her, that she perceived it not. I found this Lady fitting by a Table which she
leaned upon, with a very sad air, who told me as I entered, that I had no small
obligation to her, for giving me occasion, by quitting the place, to come so
well out of this affair at her cost; and that she doubted not but her Sister
too had made an advantage of it, but that she loved me so well, that she could
not repent of any thing that was for my satisfaction; and that when it was for
my repose, she would sacrifice all things, even her heart. But changing
presently her discourse, By what charm (said she) or rather by what engagement,
has the Abbess brought you into good humor? For methinks you appear very gay
this Evening. Alas! You were very melancholy this morning, have you some pledge
of her heart that gives you thus much joy? Speak, Monsieur, conceal not any
thing from me: You have betrayed me, and without doubt could not save your self
out of my Rivals hands, but on these conditions. Betrayed you, Madam I
(answered I) I beg you will tell me upon what ground you have such a Suspicion?
Believe, if you please, that being far from thinking it, I -- No, no, Monsieur,
(said she interrupting me) I see well you know me not: I am capable of loving
better than you think, I cannot be satisfied with your heart by peace meal, I
would have it entire to my self, and I confess I have lived in a doubtful hope
for some time, that I should obtain it as I desired to have it. My Sister has
given me a thousand Inquietudes, and I was alarmed by the least of her looks;
that a continual trouble has not left me, to enjoy in quiet the pleasure there
is to believe one is loved where one loves. But after so many alarms, I am a
little persuaded -- I am resolved your Love shall not continue divided, though
I lose my share of it; And you, Monsieur, (continued she) must resolve in good
earnest to love the Abbess, and endeavor to please her only. You Will not
possibly have so much pain to do it as I wish, but however I expect she should
confess to owe the obligation of it to me, and know that I was the first that
motion'd it. I avow to you (pursued she, making a sign to me not to interrupt
her) that I am not without pain for the loss of you, and that what I am now
doing is harder to me than death; but I will conquer, and if I have any power
over you, make you do as I say, and look upon me no more but as one of your
Friends. As she ended these words, as stream of Tears forced themselves from
her fair eyes, and she was so strangely overwhelmed with grief, that my Heart
was racked to see it: I could not answer her suddenly, but embracing her
tenderly, I admired the Generosity and good Nature of this Lady: This tender
passion which I discovered through her Tears, pierced to the very bottom of my
Soul; and I determined rather to sacrifice my Life, than give her occasion to
doubt my Faith to her. I made her a thousand protestations of my constancy,
when I was able to speak; and in the Estate wherein I was, not being capable of
any weak expression, I said so many touching things to her, that she was no
longer willing to lose me. After we had spent some time in tenderness, and
Transports which are not to be described; I left her, excusing my self with
pretense of some business (without telling her of my assignation with the
Abbess, lest she should prevent it) but that I would wait on her again before I
went to Bed.

The hour was past that I promised to meet the Abbess, and the tears of the
charming Egidia had so well disposed me to do all things for her, that I dyed
with desire to give her this testimony of my love, after that she had given me
of her tenderness. I went then to the place, where I found the Abbess with one
of her Friends, that retired so soon as ever she saw me coming.

She told me that she began to be weary of expecting me, and if I had stayed a
moment longer, she would scarce have pardoned me. I believed Madam (answered I,
coldly enough) that I should come time enough for what you had to say to me.
She was much surprised with that answer, after the obliging Reception she had
made me; but she endeavored to dissemble it, and without taking notice of my
unjust coldness, treated me with all the sweetness in the world: There was
nothing that was engaging but she made use of it, nor enchantment that she
served not her self of. It suffices that a Woman is fair, and not indifferent
to one, to make one find a thousand charms in her, when she designs to please.
The resolution I had taken against this fair Abbess, became by little and
little unprofitable, at least very weak: She drew from me a thousand
tendernesses I know not how, and was no longer the Person I would abandon: She
possessed me so much in those few moments, that there was scarce room left in
my Soul for the Idea of the amiable Egidia: To say the truth, the Abbess knew
so well how to rekindle flames she had once made burn, that 'twas impossible to
defend ones self from her: One would say, that she had studied nothing all her
life but to charm, and the most faithful of Lovers had been pardonable for
every infidelity she had made him guilty of; for it was not in the power of man
to do his duty when she seduced him. But not to detain you longer, (when there
are so many things to say) I must confess to you that she made me know, one
cannot be assured of any thing where a woman uses complaisance. If this Lady
was not satisfied with me, she had, at least, no occasion to complain: One
thing might surprise you, and give you an ill opinion of me, after the
resolution I had taken; if I had not told you that the Abbess had charms none
could resist; and that was, that I begged of her my self that she would not
press me to declare my self in that she would know of me, but content her self
with the power she had over me. And it was so great, that without lying I
believe she might have made me guilty of the blackest perfidiousness in the
world; but by good fortune she was willing not to pass further, because perhaps
she feared not to succeed, and that 'twas not yet her time. She had had
intelligence by some of those that were continually her Spies, of the Visit I
made her Sister, and that they had seen her Eyes wet with Tears: She made some
ralleries upon it, and told me that she well knew by my accost, the strange
impression these tears had made in my Soul; but she would pardon me hoping that
in time I would accustom my self to see people weep. She said all this, and
many other things, with an air so agreeable, that I knew not how to be
displeased with it. the mean while, it grew very late, which I gave her notice
of, though she was not much pleased with it, and told me that I was the most
impertinent Gallant in the world; but it was time for us to retire, which we
did with a tender adieu, that engaged us more than ever.

All the sweetness she had overwhelmed me with, hindered not a great repentance
that succeeded it, and filled my heart with a horrible gall, so soon as she was
out of my sight: But this was nothing, there must be something more to punish
me for my injustice to Egidia. The Abbess met her upon her return back, and
maliciously asked her where I was. I know not (answered Egidia) but I suppose
that not being well, he went to his Chamber betimes. You are deceived, Sister,
(answered the Abbess) and I will tell you that I know his distemper better than
you do: I persuaded him to take the Air in the Garden, and that would cure him;
as in effect he finds himself better: You may know it from himself, whom I
parted with here not a moment since. Egidia remained the most surprised in the
world, and knew not what to answer her; it was not possible to conceal from her
a part of her resentment, for which the Abbess triumphed with an extreme joy,
and left her in that estate. This poor Lady could not tell what to think, after
what I had said to her, and the Oaths I had made her two hours before: She had
too good an opinion of me, to believe lightly at another time what my Sister
would say to my disadvantage, but in this she could neither doubt nor excuse
me. the Treason was but too manifest, and every thing spoke against me. She was
at first agitated with a thousand different passions, and so much grief seized
her at once, that she was not the same; one is always apt to believe what one
fears. The first thing that she desired was to see me, and she sent her Footboy
to fetch me to her: I came, and by the impressment she had to speak with me, I
had some suspicion of the truth: I imagined that this rendezvous had not been
so secret, but that she had made some shift to come to the knowledge of it; but
did not think that the Abbess would so spitefully declare it

I found this afflicted Lady alone in a retired room, and saluting her, I saw
her so moved, and in such disorder, that I no longer doubted but she knew of my
being in the Garden with her Sister. She spoke not to me at first, and, for my
part, my guilt, and the grief I was in for being in a fault, had the same
effect upon me, that anger and jealousy had upon her; so that we were both
sometime without saying any thing: But at last, From whence come you? (said
she, with low voice and with looking at me) I answered her that her Boy had met
me as I was going to my Chamber. What! (replied she, with a more elevated
voice, and regarding me with eyes fuller of grief than anger) have you to do a
new Treason? Did you make me so many promises this Evening, but to deceive me
with more ease? What have I done to you? After these words grief deprived her
of speech, and she was just swooning away.

I cannot represent to you the estate I was in, to see a Person dying that was
so dear to me: Ah! How cruel were the moments, and how happy I should have been
to have dyed also, if Heaven would have heard me, and not laugh at the pains
which Love makes us suffer? I looked upon her as a man without sense or motion,
and had not the power to assist her nor call, for help* This fainting had not so
far taken away her senses, but that she observed upon my face a concern that
spoke for me, and nothing (as she has since told me) made her return sooner
from this cruel indisposition, than the interest she saw I had in it. The
silence and confusion I was in made my peace, and all her grief was not strong
enough to resist the satisfaction she received from mine.

By good fortune two Nuns passed by just then, who seeing her in that estate,
immediately run to us, and thought that she was fallen into some Fits that
Women are subject to: This made a noise in the Convent, and the Abbess was with
the first informed of it, but was not overhasty to succor her. For my part, I
retired as soon as I saw there were people enough about her: Although the Abbess
sent three or four times to speak with me, I prayed her to excuse me, and said,
that next day I would wait her pleasure. Egidia (that they had carried to her
Chamber) was come to her self again, and seeing me not by her Bed side, at a
time that she believed, if I had loved her, I could not have left her; asked a
Maid that served her softly, if she knew where I was? This Maid that had seen
me go into my Chamber the moment I quitted her Mistress, with tears flowing
from my eyes, made a faithful relation of it to her, wherewith she was so
extremely touched, that she prayed her Sister, who sat by her, to send for me.
The Abbess put her off a good while, and told her that she had already done it
twice to no purpose; and that she would no more ask to be refused. Egidia, who
passionately desired to see me, and could not endure I should pass the Night in
the sadness wherein I was; resolved to try if she could prevail: She thought
she should not hazard much, nor lose much credit, if she could not obtain of me
more than her Sister. She sent to me then the same Maid that she confided in so
much, to tell me, that if I desired she should be better, I should come to see
her before I went to Bed, and that she expected it, if I had yet a little Love
for her. I cannot tell you how ready I was to obey her, those who love may
easier imagine it: I came then to her Chamber, where was none but the Abbess
with her; who expected with impatience to see how this Scene wou^d pass: Both
of them perceived presently a change of countenance in me. I know not well what
the Eldest thought, but I am sure* I caused pity in the younger. This poor Lady
looked upon me with an air so tender and touching, that I could not forbear
(notwithstanding the presence of her Sister) casting my self on my knees before
her, and taking one of her hands, kissed it a thousand times, and wet it with
my tears which I had not power to restrain. There is no doubt but the Abbess
saw with an ill will these sensibilities: These were cruel strokes, which she
could not forbear discovering her resentments* of, whatsoever endeavors she
used to prevent it. Certainly Sister, (said she with a tone that surprised us)
Monsieur Le Chevalier has done you some great injury, by the manner wherewith
he seems to beg pardon of you: You cannot refuse it to his tears; yet
(continued she, rising to go away) if you will be advised by me, you shall not
do any thing, till he has promised you never to relapse into the same fault
again; and I Will answer for him, that he cannot promise it, or if he do, that he
will be perjured. Make this gallant peace, I will retire and leave you alone,
for I believe you desire no Witnesses. I turned my head to answer her, but she
was got out of the Room, and saved me the displeasure I should have had
afterward, to have said any thing in a passion unbecoming the respect I owel
her. I remained then alone with Egidia, and in greater confusion than when the
Abbess was there: Although I had many things to say, I knew not where to begin,
and silence was the only Language of which I served my self: But she, who
suffered to see me afflicted, (though it was for the Love of her) after having
endeavored to reassure me by her looks; Well, Monsieur, (said she in a soft
tone, and squeezing my hand) don't you repent of having betrayed the best of
your Friends? Think well what you have sometimes said to me: How had you then
the courage to deceive me? Speak! -- She made me yet a thousand other
reproaches, to which she added a hundred things that I cannot relate as they
were said. In a word (to pass lightly over a Subject which touches me yet in
describing it) I justified my self to her as well as I could; confessed our
rendezvous, what had obliged me to it, and the reason I had to conceal it from
her; so that she was well satisfied with me. I saw her as sweet as ever, and
she discovered more tenderness and confidence in me than ever, that it made
amends for all the pain we had endured that night: We never loved so well, and
this little discontent served but to increase the flames which were kindled in
us. The hour was already passed that in civility I should have retired at: I
had no mind the Abbess should send me word so, as she might have done, but the
misfortune was, (the doors of the Convent being shut, except those of her
Apartment) I must of necessity pass that way to my Lodging. It Is true, that in
the estate wherein I was, fortified with the powerful charms of her Sister, I
made little reflection upon what I ought to fear: I examined not the danger
there was, and felt Egidia so deep in my heart, that I was even glad (at least
I fancied so) of this occasion to defy all the enchantments of the Abbess. I
took then, since there was no avoiding it, that way to my Chamber, passing
through the midst of hers; where she was alone and undressed. She offered at
first to stay me a moment with her, but I excused my self upon pretense it was
late, and should incommode her: She answered me, that she knew well enough I
was persuaded I could never be troublesome to her, whatsoever hour it was. But
to avoid the ceremony I might yet use, she commanded me to take a Seat by her,
for she had something to say to me, and would be obeyed. If you please
(answered I) I will wait till to morrow. No (replied she briskly) once more I
will say it now to punish you for your want of complaisance -- it is less to
oblige than torment you. I turned this constraint into rallery, and called it a
sweet violence, being it was not in my power to disobey her, for she had caused
the doors to be shut by which I was to pass. I told her then (not to appear
rude, nor having a desire to break unhandsomly with her) that the endeavors
she used to stay me were extremely charming; that there was never a man in the
world, that would not esteem it great favor, especially at such an hour. I am
of opinion (said she) that it might pass for such in most men's thoughts but in
yours, and who expresses any goodness to you, must expect in return but
indifference and slights. I believe it is not requisite to make you a longer
relation of what the Abbess said to me, and what I answered her: It suffices
that you know in general that I needed only to see her, to be shaken in my
strongest resolutions: Once more I knew not what weakness I had when near her,
but it is certain she made me quite different from what I was, and I remembered
no more the design I had to disingage my self from her. She was this night in a
charming undress, that in its negligence had a great deal of Art. I am afraid I
shall pass with you that don't know this charming Abbess, for the greatest
Traitor, and basest of Men: I was near two hours with this fair Enchantress,
and left her as a Man that had scarce the power to do so. What joy, what
triumph was this for her? I was no more the indifferent that despised her
favors, but a re-conquer'd Lover, who left her not without regret; but certain
it is, that I passed the rest of the Night very sadly, and made my self all the
reproaches imaginable. The charms of this Abbess had something in them which
had not power longer than I saw them; for a moment after I had lost sight of
her I came to my self, saw my crime, and could not enough repent of it.

In the first visit I made Egidia, I gave her a faithful account of all that
passed between the Abbess and I: I told her the perfidiousness I had been
guilty of, at which she but laughed, seeing with how much freedom I confessed
it; yet she had a desire to be revenged of her Sister, which she was after this
manner.

I have already told you how the Apartments of these two Ladies were not far
from each other, which made them always together, though they loved not much.
Egidia knew how desirous her Sister was to have my Picture which I had given
her, but she always kept it locked up for fear of her; the Abbess waiting but
an occasion to seize of it: Egidia gave her fair hopes: for one day leaving her
Cabinet open (having taken the Picture with her) went to walk in the Garden,
and gave the Abbess time enough to satisfy her self if she could have found
what she sought, and had not seen there what for her repose she desired not to
see. The poor Abbess perceived not the intended malice of her Sister: She
searched every where unprofitably for the Picture, but believed not wholly to
have lost her labor, having found several of my Letters to Egidia. She shut
her self up in the Closet to read them: There was two or three wherein I spoke
of her; of which here is one, whereby you may judge of the rest.

I Am desperate, Madam, when I hear you say that I love you not; and that,
Madam, the Abbess has seized on my heart: Do justice to your merit, and if you
know your self well, you will believe you are not to be put in the balance
together. If I could have divided my heart (as you say) I would take away the
half of it from you this moment, to punish your incredulity. Fear not any
thing, possess this poor heart in quiet, and leave appearances to your Sister,
which I cannot refuse her without passing for the most ungrateful of men, as in
effect I am. Adieu.

You see well this Letter was none of the most obliging for the Abbess, and it
is not necessary, I imagine, to tell you how much she was enraged at it: Spite,
Jealousy, and Shame, to see her self so used by a man that she had had so much
goodness for, inspired her at first with the most cruel designs that an injured
woman is capable of. She came furiously out of the Closet, after having tore
all the Letters in a thousand pieces, as she would have done my heart had it
been in her power; and but for the entreaties of a Lady that was her friend, I
know not whither her resentments would have hurried her. This Lady (who was her
confident in all things, and had much discretion) endeavored by degrees to
make her come to her self: She told her that she ought to be careful of her
conduct, and that to make a bussle in such an affair would not be to her
advantage; that she ought to consider the place she was in, and that this would
prove no good example for her Nuns. But what arguments could make her digest
so cruel an affront! All that this good Lady could obtain of her* was, that she
should not see me all that day to have more time to consider what she had to do.

Egidia returned at last from her walk, and going into her Closet, found all in
disorder there, and the Letters in the condition that I told you: The pleasure
of revenge (which is the greatest of life to women) made her taste, in this
occasion, contentments, that one must be a Woman and a Lover to comprehend. She
could not be long without communicating to me an adventure that she rejoiced so
much in; but first she would prepare me to receive it, that I might not be
troubled at it: And having sent for me into her Chamber, she asked me what I
would say if she had made a quarrel between me and her Sister? I answered her,
that provided she was not interested therein, I should not be concerned at it.
She related to me afterward the effects of the Abbess's jealousy, and showed
me in what a condition my Letters were. I discovered no trouble at first, but
at the bottom of my heart I approved not the action; and when I reflected on
all that I had writ to her, I could have wished that she had made use of some
other means, and that she had taken other arms for her revenge. I doubted not
but the Abbess was in a strange fury, and that this affair would draw some ill
consequences in which Egidia would be the first sufferer: I could not forbear
expressing some of my fears to her, but assuring her withal, that I would never
censure any thing that she did; but that knowing so well as I did her Sisters
temper, I feared all things from her passion, and that it would be through her
that she would revenge her self of me. I said all this in a very tender manner,
but however Egidia took it not so, who looking upon me with spiteful smile, I
see (said she) I have alarmed you, and that I have not done you good service.
Go, Monsieur, (continued she, rising at the same time to go away) go, and cast
your self at her feet; swear to her that you adore her, and ask her pardon for
all you have writ to me. I! Madam (answered I in stopping her) to accuse me of
so much baseness is to disavow my heart. Ah! suffer if you please, that I tell
you, you know me but ill, and that I am ready to confess to her all the passion
I have for you in my heart: You shall see it if you will, and exact from me
even greater proofs of my Love; you may do it, and I give you all this day to
have yet this pleasure, but to morrow I must leave you, and you shall see how
little I am in pain for your Sisters favor. This sudden resolution surprised
Egidia a little, and she was troubled that she had driven matters so far: She
embraced me tenderly, and did all she could to make me change my design; but
with much difficulty I left her without promising her any thing. I spent the
remainder of that day thinking what to resolve upon, and after all I concluded
it best to depart; but that which troubled me was, how I should take my leave
with the Abbess, which was a duty I could not dispense with. I took the time
that I knew most company would be with her, to avoid a thousand bitter
reproaches, that I was confident she durst not make me before Witnesses.

I went then at night to her Apartment, and asked a Nun I met (who was sent
without doubt for that purpose) if I could not have the honor to see the
Abbess? She said, No, for she was not very well; but not taking that for an
excuse, she whispered me in the ear, that this Order was expressly for me, and
she counseled me as a friend to retire. I confess that this proceeding
surprised me not so much as it would have done, if I had not been prepared for
an ill reception; it is true* however, that I resented this refusal with some
despite, and should not have been consol'd for it, but by the means it gave me
of acquitting my self another way, of the respect I owed her: 'Twas, in fine,
by writing that I resolved to bid her adieu, as you shall see by this Letter.

I Know not, Madam, if it is in earnest that you are sick, that I could not see
you; or whether you are weary of seeing me here. The one or the other give me
equal pain, and for fear of knowing too much, I inform not my self of that
whereof I am glad to be ignorant; and lest I be more unhappy than I am, I
design not to press you further to declare it to me, but to depart hence to
morrow. If you were visible I should be glad to take leave of you in form:
Suffer, if you please, that I make use of the only means that is left for me to
bid you Adieu. I kiss your Hands most humbly.

This Letter, as you see, was not very gallant, nor well made; and I must see
her (to speak truth) when I said any thing of tenderness. She received the
Letter, but made me no answer.

Egidia, who saw I would certainly leave her, and that she must be exposed to
all the tempest, prayed me that before I went, I would, at least, make some
sort of peace with the Abbess, and not give the Nuns occasion of discourse by
such an abrupt departure. She added moreover, that her Sister would infallibly
believe that 'twas she had made me hasten my going away, and that she would be glad
of this pretense to turn all her resentments upon her: For my part, who feared
not death more than the thoughts of this interview, which represented to me all
the reproaches she would make me, and to which I could make no reply; I could not
tell how to resolve to see her. Egidia, who saw my fear and unwillingness,
graciously consented at last that I should depart, without taking my leave of
her any other way than as I had done; but to absent my self but for some days,
expecting till the Spirit of the Abbess was a little sweetened, and that I
should return if it were necessary, at the least notice she should send me. I
put all things in readiness to go away next morning, to see one of my friends
in the Neighborhood; and as I was just going a Horseback, a Footboy brought me
a Note, wherein I read these words.

Dare thou depart without seeing me, thou most base and ingrateful'st of all
men! But go, for 'twould be too great a favor to suffer thy Sight after thy
Treasons: Yet take thy choice, that I may see how far thy black Ingratitude
will carry thee; and if thou can even forget that thou owe me at least this
civility in leaving my House.

Never was man so astonished as I was, after the reading of this Letter: I saw
well that whatever it cost me I must see her, and only asked the Boy where his
Lady was, who telling me she was alone in her Chamber, I went thither; but
'twas as a Criminal that presented himself before his Judge.

I found the Abbess so changed, and so sad, that she would have touched the
heart of a Barbarian. I know not what I did then, but it is certain I was not my
self, and that the confusion her sight put me into, cannot be expressed. She
looked upon me some moments without speaking to me, afterward said she to me,
What come you here for? I thought you had been gone already. I did not believe,
Madam, (answered I) that I ought to do so, when I might have the honor to see
you before I went. I come to take my leave of you, and at the same time, to beg
the favor to know wherein I have offended you. Wherein you have offended me!
(said she sighing) Ah! Traitor, you know it but too well: Well, Madam, (said I
to her) since you will have me know it, tell me what I must suffer for my crime:
If Death, be assured my Life depends upon what you please to ordain. Death!
(replied she again) alas! you have but too well deserved it, and that is my
greatest trouble. What do you expect then (replied I in a passion) if there
wants but a Sword to give it me, take mine. In saying so, I presented it ready
drawn to her, and opened my Breast for her to pierce it; but she only turned her
head away, and said with a louder voice, Cruel! thou know ill my heart, if
thou believe I can be revenged of thee that way: I wish only that my Life
were dear enough to thee, that I might punish thee by taking away that; but I
should not have the satisfaction to see thee breathe one sigh at my death. As
she spoke these words, abundance of Tears covered her Face, and Sobs took away
from her the use of her Speech, insomuch that my heart was torn with pity. I
knew not what to say, fearing she would take any thing I said to her for new
infidelities; but as it is no hard matter to pacify a Person that loves, and
that would be loved, I behaved my self so well, that by degrees I vanquished
her anger, and left her not till I saw her in a humor to pardon me all things.
That which obliged her to it the sooner, was that seeing me resolved to be
gone, she had a desire to stay me, and she thought she could not prevail by
treating me rudely. I was not yet so indifferent to her, that she could be
willing to part with me altogether; and perhaps she did not despair (so
ordinary is it for them in love to flatter themselves) to carry me at last from
her Sister: She did not know that I designed to absent my self but three or
four days, but believed that I intended not to return any more; and I made her
to have an obligation to me for it. I prayed her, at least, that she would
suffer me to to make a little Journey thereabouts, to which she consented the
more willingly, that none might take notice, and censure my changing of my
resolution, and how soon she was come to her self. She was glad to observe some
circumstances, that her weakness might not appear, and that it might be
believed that she recovered by time. Above all, she exacted of me that I should
not speak to her Sister of our reconcilement, and that I should not so much as
see her at parting; if I would not make her repent of her great indulgence to
me. I promised her I would not, and though Egidia sent to desire me to come to
speak with her; I prayed her, by one of her friends, to dispense with me, for
reasons I would write to her, which I was sure would satisfy her. To say
truth, I owed thus much, at least, to a Person that I had so great obligations
to, and that had so much reason to complain of me.

I went away then to one of my Friends houses, from whence I writ several
Letters to these Ladies, and received as many from them. In the last I received
from the Abbess, she desired me to come the day after the receipt of it, to the
same place where I last saw her; and very secretly, especially not to let her
Sister know any thing of it: That she would be there at Nine a Clock at Night,
and expect me till Eleven. I saw well enough, by this Letter, that the Abbess
was calmed: I believed I could not handsomely balk the assignation; but by
apology of Love, I thought fit to advertize her Sister of it, that she might
not complain of me, if she came to know it, as she did the other assignation. I
answered the Abbess, that I would not fail to wait on her at Nine a Clock, and
this Letter I sent to her Sister.

IF you were in my place, you would without doubt do what I am going to do this
day, but I assure you, it is with all the regret in the world. I received a
Letter yesterday from your Sister, wherein she desires me to meet her at Nine a
Clock in the Evening in the Garden, and forbids me above all things to let you
know any thing of it. I believe it will not displease you that I obey her, and
that you would counsel me to it your self if you were here: Fear not any thing,
my Fidelity is proof against all her charms; for I am never more yours, than
when I am with her. Adieu.

I gave to the Abbess's Boy my answer to her, and sent this by a Servant of
mine to Egidia, but a little before I went away my self, that it might be dark
when he came to the Abbey, to deliver it more securely. He was there at the hour
I desired, and got into the Parlour without any bodies taking notice of him.
When he was there, he heard some body go, but the Night hindered him from
knowing who it was: He asked at a venture, if they would do him the favor to
call Madam N -- You must know this was the Abbess, who was walking in the
Parlour, and expecting with extreme impatience, the hour of our meeting. She
knew at first my Man's voice, and said, if he would have any thing with that
Lady, 'twas she. These two Ladies voices were so like, that sometimes their
most familiar friends were deceived. My Man, that knew not the danger of a
mistake, and believed that it was she he asked for, gave the Letter without
delay into her hands, and believed he had acquitted himself very well of the
Commission I had given him. The Abbess, after she had taken the Letter,
dispatched my Man, and told him it required no Answer. You may easily guess at
her impatience, to see what I had writ to her Sister; but it would be difficult
to represent her trouble after she had satisfied her curiosity. She was not
naturally very wicked, and if jealousy had not been in it, she would, perhaps,
have contented her self with reproaches: But this passion does not usually rest
in such weak revenge; it always carries its designs to extremity, a love
offended is the most terrible of all furies. The Abbess went immediately into
her Sisters Chamber, where she found her alone: Confess after all, my Sister,
(said the Abbess to her, after having spoke indifferently enough of me before)
that we are both deceived in the advantageous thoughts we have for this
Gentleman, who has paid with Treasons all that goodness we have showed him. For
my part (added she) I am now sufficiently disabus'd, and it is true that I am
partly obliged to you for it, and that without seeing the Letters in your
Cabinet, I should have been yet in a strange error. If you please, I Will, in
exchange, do you the same service: But, my poor Sister, you are so prepossest
to his advantage, that whatever one shall say to you, you will not believe that
any thing is so true, as what he has told you. What do you mean (answered
Egidia coldly) I see not any thing that Monsieur does, that I can blame him
for, nor but what discovers he has much respect for me; and till I have cause
for the contrary, I am reasonable enough not to change the Sentiments I have
for him. But if one makes you see (said the Abbess) that you deceive your self
in those Sentiments, that he betrays you, and is the basest of all men, What
would you then say? Perhaps (replied Egidia) I should not be so acknowledging,
as such a Service might merit: For, not to lie, though commonly one takes no
pleasure in being deceived, yet in this I must confess my weakness, that I love
to be in an error; an evil is not so till one knows it. How you are to be
pitied, (replied the Abbess again) and yet you deserve not to be disabus'd; but
you are my Sister, and against your will I must pity you. Know then, that this
honest Man, this faithful Friend, and what else you are pleased to call him,
begged of me by a Note yesterday, to have an interview with him in the Garden
this Evening; and conjured me, as much as he could, that it might be secret,
and especially that you knew nothing of it. If you will not believe me,
(continued she, seeing she was troubled, and had changed color 'twice or
thrice) you may but come along with me to believe your own eyes. Whatever
constancy of Spirit this amiable Lady had, she was shaken by this discourse:
The infidelity was manifest, and she could not doubt of it, when her Rival
assured her so positively of the thing, and offered to bring her to the
rendezvous, to be witness of it her self. She agreed to the proposal, gave her
Arms to poniard her self, and would not defer a moment to see her death, since
the hour of it was come.

THE CONTINUATION Of this HISTORY:
Told by a Lady of Company.
I Cannot tell whether Monsieur Le Chevalier's account be all true, because he
was acquainted with these Ladies a year before I came to the Convent; but this
I can say, that it bears good report with what I have heard: But I will warrant
what I am going to tell you, for a very faithful relation of all that passed in
my time.

I was very well received in this Abbey, which some cross affairs obliged me to
make use of for a retreat: 'Twas near a Month when I came there, since Monsieur
Le Chevalier had been absent. I heard him spoke of sometimes as a very gallant
man, for whom the Abbess had a great esteem, and from whom she received Letters
often: I perceived quickly that this esteem had something in it very tender,
and that there was something in this friendship, above what we ordinarily see
in that passion. The Abbess, who had much goodness and confidence in me, said
to me a thousand advantageous things of him: She put him above all men, and she
could have wished that I had not only commended him to her, but that I judged
it reasonable in her. As long as things seemed not to me to go far, I appeared
very complaisant; but when I came to know that these importments were more of
Love than Friendship, that it excited jealousy between the two Sisters, that
it caused Tears, Sighs, and Langueors, I could not forbear speaking my thoughts
of it freely to the Abbess, and to represent to her, that an engagement of this
nature would do her an injury one day, and that an amorous affair ought not to
enter into a Religious House. She, in appearance, took pleasure in my freedom,
but indeed it begot in her coldness to me: She would have been glad of a little
more complaisance in my friendship, and her pain being without remedy, could
have wished I would have helped her to support it. This was the cause that I
had less converse with her, and seldom saw her but as my duty, that I might not
break altogether with a Person that commanded where I was, and to whom I had
many obligations. Her Sister managed her self a little better, and though she
had not less esteem and tenderness for Monsieur, she acted nevertheless, before
the world as if she were indifferent; for she had much more wit than her
Sister, though not so much beauty.

I will begin my recital, if the company please, where Monsieur left yesterday;
all that he has yet said, being nothing in comparison of what I have to tell
you.

Into what anger and transports fell the fair Abbess, when she saw the Treason
of her Lover: The least thing her passion suggested to her, was to be revenged
of the Traitor, and to make him be killed.

A Maid that she most confided in, and who was too young to take the liberty of
advising her, came every night before she went to Bed, to recount to me part of
these follies, with which, in truth, I could but divert my self.

The Abbess took then (as Monsieur has told you) her Sister with her to this
assignation, where he failed not to be at the hour appointed: His surprise was
great, as you will imagine, to see the two Sisters together, after what the
Abbess had writ to him, that none should know of this enterview, especially her
Sister: He remembered moreover, what he had writ to her, and the request he made
her in his Letter, that she should not be troubled at this assignation. He knew
not, in fine, what to believe, and of a thousand thoughts which passed through
his Mind, none came near the right, so little likelihood there was that such a
thing should happen. In the midst of those cruel pains that Spite and Jealousy
made the Abbess suffer, she tasted an extreme joy to see the trouble that
Monsieur was in; but her Sister had nothing to allay her grief, and used the
greatest violence to her self imaginable, to forbear reproaching him. She had
not patience to stay long there, but went from them, after she had viewed him
from head to foot, with an air of Scorn and Indignation, without saying a word
to him. This poor Lover, who began to recover of his first surprise, when he
saw how she looked upon, and avoided him, fell into a second much more cruel. I
know not (said he, speaking to the Abbess) what I have done to your Sister,
that my presence drives her hence. It is (answered the Abbess coldly) because
your return here was not expected so soon, where you have but little business.
Ah! if it be as you say, Madam, (replied Monsieur) I swear to you I will not
continue here long, for I hate above all things to be troublesome to people: But
yet, Madam (added he, suddenly) you must not take it ill, if I go and know of
your Sister, if this be the reason that she treats me thus; after that I shall
stay no longer with you, than is necessary to bid you adieu. In saying this, he
run after the fair afflicted, whom he overtook just as she was going into the
Convent. What Is the matter with you, Madam, (said he to her, almost out of
breath) that you fly from me? And why did I find you in a place where I ought
not to see you? Say rather, thou most perfidious, (answered she) that I ought
not to see thee there: But at last thy Treasons are discovered, and thou shall
not deceive me any longer, for I will not see thee again all my life. After
these words, she went into the Convent, shut the door upon her, and left
Monsieur in the most deplorable condition that a man could be reduced to: He
can tell you that he was a hundred times going to kill himself, and that he
would have made a thousand reproaches to this ungrateful, if she could have
heard them. His Conscience accused him not of any infidelity, he believed he
had not done any thing contrary to his duty in this Assignation, since he had
given her notice of it, and he knew well that in relation to this fair one, he
deserved not the name of perfidious. So severe a treatment made him resolve to
depart without expecting any longer, hoping time would convince his Mistress of
the wrong she had done him; or that despite and absence would cure him of his
Love. The Abbess, who had followed him, and was not desirous the mistake should
be cleared, arrived as he was in this resolution: He accosted her of a fashion
as sufficiently testified his despair; and scarce looking on her, What you told
me, Madam, (said he to her) was more than ever I could have thought, and I am
treated here with so strange an air, that I am astonished: There Is no other way
to take, than not to stay a moment longer in a place where my presence is so
odious. Behold! (answered the Abbess) how Traitors ought to be recompensed for
their Treachery? I have not time, Madam, (answered Monsieur) to ask you what
reason you have to give me that name. I must depart this instant to deliver you
from a Man, that is more than troublesome to you: It Is enough, if you will be
pleased to remember, that 'twas you that caused my coming here at this time: I
am come, as I promised you, and you, perhaps, brought your Sister, that you so
strictly charged me should know nothing of it. Yes, Traitor, (answered she,
transported by her passion) and it was in that, that thy base heart has failed
thee. Speak! Tell me, base! -- If thou have not writ to her, what thou were
desired to conceal. Monsieur was so strangely surprised here, that he remained
immovable; and believed effectually that Egidia (to continue the Name which he
gave her in his relation) had made her privy to the Letter he had writ her. So
soon as he was recovered a little from the disorder he was in, I know not well,
Madam, (said he to her) what you mean; but if all these injurious reproaches
are but to drive me from hence, I assure you that you give your self this
trouble without need, and less would serve to make me resolve never to see you
more. I am just going from this Country (continued he, going away) and bid you,
Madam, an eternal adieu. The Abbess stayed him, and told him a little more
calmly, that whatsoever reason there was to treat him yet worse, it was not fit
he should go away at such a time of Night. Whether there be reason or no,
(replied Monsieur briskly) I am so little accustomed to be thus received
wherever I go, that I shall support very impatiently those moments that I am
confined here. I beg of you, Madam, (pursued he, endeavoring to disengage
himself from her) not to strive, out of a formal piece of ceremony, for that
which would be troublesome both to your self and me. But I will not have you go
to night (said the Abbess to him) and if it be true, that I have yet power
enough lest to oblige you to do any thing for me, you shall make me know it in
this: I have business with you, and 'twill be time enough to morrow for you to
go. Monsieur prayed her if she had any thing to say to him, not to delay it;
and that in another occasion he would be ready to testify the respect he had
for her, but that he could not stay now. We shall see that, said she, and
leaving him, she hastened to the Abbey, to give order that his Horses should be
stopped; but those that had it in commission, came a little too late, for he
was just going, and seeing the endeavors that were used to hinder him, and
that he wanted time to pack up his Baggage, he chose rather to leave his
Servant behind him, and went to lodge that Night a League from the Abbey, where
he bid him come to him the next morning.

The Abbess that but a moment before would not only have been glad never to see
him, but to have revenged her self upon him with destruction, had not now the
power to bring her self to consent to his departure: How weak is anger against
an object that is used to charm us? and how ill can a heart revenge it self of
what it loves? when the Lover suffers most, in the sufferings of the beloved.

The Abbess heard of Monsieurs departure with a sensible displeasure, and gave
severe words to them she had sent to stop him for letting him go. When they
told her that his Servant was not gone, she bid him be called to her, whom by
strength of Presents, she drew to tell where his Master was: She was eased of
half her pain, when she knew that he lay but a league from her. Her passion,
which at that time would have made her attempt any thing, put into her head a
design, which was not pardonable in one of her habit, except we will pardon all
things to love. This little God uses not to inspire us so weakly, as to leave
it in our power to consult reason or justice; and there is not any that they
baulk, who are possessed with him. The Maid that I have already spoke to you
of, that was her particular confident, came into her Chamber, and seeing her in
a profound study, believed she had committed a fault, and went to excuse her
self for interrupting her. No, no, my dear Companion, (said the Abbess to her,
for so 'twas she called her) you come more luckily than you think, and I have
need of you; and I may say that it is from you alone I can hope assistance in
the pains that I suffer. The Maid answered with much acknowledgment to the
favor that the Abbess did her, to consider her at that rate; and assured her
with a thousand protestations of her fidelity, and that there was not any thing
that she would not undertake to serve her. The Abbess embraced her most
tenderly, sighed, wept, and touched so nearly the heart of her dear Confident,
that she was impatient to know what she was to do for her; and with tears in
her eyes, beseech'd her to tell her, for what it was that she was afflicted.
You are not ignorant of any thing that passes in my heart, (said the sad Lady
to her with an Air extremely deplorable) nor with what ingratitude Monsieur Le
Chevalier has of late repayed the tenderness that I had for him. This Traitor,
after all my kindnesses, has been so base to go away without my consent, and
even without bidding me Adieu. You ought to see, Madam, in that (replied the
Maid discreetly) how unworthy he is of your favors, and that he merits not any
longer your esteem. I am resolved to do as you say (answered the Abbess) and am
sufficiently disposed to it; but the pain that I suffer at present, and that I
cannot conquer, is but to have the pleasure to ease my full heart with
reproaching him with his Treasons, and that he go not away, perhaps, in the
opinion that I am not yet persuaded of his perfidiousness. I would have the
satisfaction of making him blush for his last fault, which I have not yet
acquainted thee with. If thou love me (added she with her shaming air) thou will find some way whereby I may satisfy this desire; and, in fine, break off
entirely with the most ungrateful of all men: Without that, my Child, I cannot
promise thee to live long in the displeasure and rage I am in, and thou art
like to lose suddenly the best of thy Friends his Maid, who in intrigues of
Love, was not the most skilful in the world, and saw not yet into the depth of
the Abbess's design; proposed to her to write a Letter of reproaches to this
Traitor; but this satisfaction was too weak for a passionate Lover: One can
never express ones self well by writing (said she) upon a Subject of this
nature: To punish as we ought, one that is so culpable, the Person offended
must, with her own mouth, make all the reproaches he merits, that she may have
the advantage of seeing his confusion. Ha! (said the Maid) Well then, Madam,
What will you do? Stay to expect his return? The innocence of this Maid almost
made the Abbess laugh. Can we (replied she) keep anger so long against one that
has once pleased us? No, no, if thou will believe me (pursued she, with a blush
that covered all her face) we will not defer our revenge so long a time: I have
courage enough to execute the design, if thou have enough to follow me: We will
go find out this Traitor that is but a League off, and thou shall be witness
with what scorn I will manage the business; and if it be possible to overwhelm
a man with reproaches, Monsieur Le Chevalier shall be he. So hardy a proposal
at first strangely surpised this Maid: She that could scarce go in the Night
through the Monastery without starts and fears, could not but think it dangerous
and terrible, to expose themselves alone to those troublesome accidents they
might meet with in the road: But the Abbess represented the enterprise so
easy, and so unlikely of any troublesome rencounter in that little way they had
to go, and so fair a Night, that at last she persuaded her, and made her love
the novelty of the diversion. The Abbess, extremely ravished to have gained her
dear companion, thought now only where to get Horses. She would not make use of
her own, that her going might be the more secret, but chose rather to have
recourse to her Farmer, that lived about a thousand paces off her; to whom she
presently dispatched her Valet, that had always been very faithful to her, and
that she resolved should wait upon her in this Journey. Her order was to tell
the Farmer, that she had need of three Horses, and that he should not fail to
send them her that Night. Her Valet departed the same moment, whilst the Ladies
went to prepare themselves to get a Horseback. The first thing the Abbess did,
was to give out that she was not very well, and would go to Bed; giving leave
to all those that waited on her to do the like, and kept only her dear
companion with her, as she often used to do. So soon as they were alone, they
began to undress themselves, and to change their holy habits for those of the
Country, of which the Abbess had very handsome ones: She adorned her self with
as much care, as if she had been going to some public Assembly: She was the
last dressed, but there could not be any thing more fine and gallant than she:
Her Apartment was not far from the Garden, and they could go to it without
noise, or being seen of any, as they did; and took with all speed a way to the
back door, where the Valet was to be with their Horses. One would have said
that had seen them, that they had been two Amazons, that went to assault some
place, they did so encourage one another. When they were come to the door, and
the Abbess, who had the Key, had opened it, finding no body there, they began
to be soon impatient of the Valet's stay; but, at last, they heard a noise of
Horses, which gave them some hopes; but we are often deceived in those things
which we desire most: As the noise increased, they began to fear they were in
an error, for the Valet that they expected was not to come that way; but the
Abbess, who had a little more resolution than her follow-adventurer, that even
trembled with fear, endeavored to re assure her, telling her that without
doubt it was he, but that he had taken a compass not to meet any body by the
way, and that this was the occasion of his staying so long; bidding her go two
or three steps, to see if she were not in the right: This poor Maid, that every
thing terrified had not the courage to do as the Abbess commanded her; and
beseech'd her most humbly, not to put her valor to this trial; and that she
could not leave her a step without dying, for the shake of every leaf put her
into a mortal fright. The Abbess could not forbear laughing at her cowardice,
and bid her not to fear any thing, for she would go along with her. Our two
valorous Adventurers, with prodigious courage, went some paces to meet those
that came; but they had no sooner discovered that they were two men that rid
apace toward them, but they run away without so much as remembering to shut the
Garden door after them, never stopping till they arrived at last near the
Monastery, but so out of breath, that they could scarcely speak: Their courage
returned a little when they saw themselves at home, and panting with their
hands on their sides, they began to laugh at their ill grounded fear of two Men
that sought only their way. After a little reasoning upon the case, they took
heart and returned the second time to the door, where they found two Horses
tied to a Tree, without any body by them. The Abbess, when she had looked well
on both sides her, without discovering any body, was in some pain to divine,
why these Horses should be here without her Valet; but she believed that he was
not gone far, and that they must wait for him, concluding (as it is easy to
make any conclusion to our own advantage) that these must of necessity be her
Farmers Horses; and this was not wholly unlikely, for who else could be
imagined to leave two Horses so: But the Valet came not, and the Abbess dyed
with impatience at it; time pressed her so much, that she was afraid there was
not Night enough left to execute her design. This was a great torment to her:
She would have sworn a thousand times (but that Abbesses use not to swear) that
these were her Farmers Horses, that she knew them, and that certainly her Valet
was hindered with getting another Horse. It Is true, this might be, but 'twas
possible also these might be the Horses of the two men they saw; but on that
point she would not reason, for ordinarily we love not to be convinced of what
we do not desire; and we often choose to be deceived with a false show of
reason, rather than to be certain of a truth that does not agree with us.

Our most amorous and impatient Abbess, seeing her Valet did not come, told her
faithful Companion, that they could not stay any longer for him, and that he
was not so necessary to them, but that they might go without him, and he might
come after if he would. She consented to all that she pleased, and our two
Adventurers mounted without an Esquire, and in less than an hour arrived,
without any wicked adventure, at Monsieur Le Chevalier's Inn. The Abbess
knocked at the door, and inquired for a Gentleman that lodged there: They told
her that indeed such a one came there that night, but that he went away again
about an hour after, with a Valet that brought him a Letter. She questioned
again the Master of the House what way they had taken, what Livery the Valet
was in, if the Gentleman was to return quickly, if he had eat, till in fine,
she came to question him, if he had appeared sad or joyful. But the Host knew
not what to say to her, all that he knew was, that he was not likely to return
that Night, and that he had not left any Orders with them. Never any one was so
afflicted as the poor Abbess then was: A thousand thoughts oppressed her at once,
of which there was not one that overwhelmed her not with trouble: What numbers
of inquietudes, what cruel suspicions, well or ill grounded, what rage, what
despair, to have promised her self so much satisfaction in coming, after all
the charming Chimera's that she had framed in her Mind, to return more desolate
than ever? Her companion, who suffered extremely to see her so strangely
afflicted, would have been glad she could have comforted her. Why do you
torment your self, Madam, (said she to her) it is true, we have lost our labor,
but who knows whether that is not better for us, than if we had succeeded in
our design, and have found Monsieur Le Chevalier: You know him, Madam, and that
he is not the discreetest Person in the world; perhaps this visit might have
been talked of, we are at least assured, that we have taken a Frolic that none
knows of. That none knows of, (replied this distracted Lover?) alas! see thou
not that my Sister knew our design, and that 'twas she without doubt that sent
this Valet, to advertize him of what we intended, and to oblige him to avoid
me? But how is it possible (answered her companion) that this should be as you
say? If Monsieur has been so long gone from this place as the Host tells us,
you had then scarce framed the design of coming hither. But what cause (replied
the Abbess) will thou then find for his sudden departure? In fine, whatever her
Companion said to her, and whatever arguments her wit could frame to persuade
her, she always ended with saying her Sister had done the business, and that
nothing could have obliged him to leave his Lodging at that hour, but she. This
thought furiously tormented her, her jealousy was augmented by it, and she was
assaulted with so many pains at once, that she saw on all sides her nothing but
despair. How far different was it with her now, to what it was some moments
before; when she was filled with the joyful expectation of seeing her dear
Chevalier? Whatever her Companion said to her, to divert her musings, she
answered her only with sighs.

Being at length got home again, they were a little troubled how to dispose of
their Horses; but at last, they judged it the safest and easiest way to draw
them into the Garden, and tie them to a Tree till it was day, that they might
send them back to the Farmer: After that, they had no more to do, than to go
strait to the Convent; but they were scarce come to the middle of the Garden,
when they fancied that they heard people talk: The Maid, who was three or four
paces before the Abbess, and had not her Spirit so pre-occupyed, was the first
that perceived it, and turning to her all of a sudden, extremely surprised,
told her that, assuredly, there was some body in the Garden. The Abbess
hearkened very attentively, and found that she was not deceived: 'Twas now that
all her pains were suspended, and that she labored not under any but
curiosity. Whatever cause we have of trouble, if we meet with any thing that
surprises, it diverts our pains for the time, and they are, as it were, asleep
in us. All her suspicion awaked at this noise, she knew that only she and her
Sister had a Key from the Convent to the Garden; and this reason alone was
sufficient to make her believe, that 'twas certainly she and Monsieur Le
Chevalier, that entertained an amorous conversation; at least, she was resolved
to be satisfied. Jealousy serves instead of courage to women, and Love makes
them hazard every thing. This Lady, that perhaps upon another occasion, would
have been terrified with less cause, now feared not to go forward, to discover
if her Suspicions were true or no, bidding the Maid (who trembled with fear) to
follow her softly. They went so lightly as they could, under the covert of a
Hedge, (for the Night was very clear, and they might be seen at a distance)
toward a thick Arbor from whence they were a little troubled how to dispose of
their Horses; but at last, they judged it the safest and easiest way to draw
them into the Garden, and tie them to a Tree till it was day, that they might
send them back to the Farmer: After that, they had no more to do, than to go
strait to the Convent; but they were scarce come to the middle of the Garden,
when they fancied that they heard people talk: The Maid, who was three or four
paces before the Abbess, and had not her Spirit so pre-occupyed, was the first
that perceived it, and turning to her all of a sudden, extremely surprised,
told her that, assuredly, there was some body in the Garden. The Abbess
hearkened very attentively, and found that she was not deceived: 'Twas now that
all her pains were suspended, and that she labored not under any but
curiosity. Whatever cause we have of trouble, if we meet with any thing that
surprises, it diverts our pains for the time, and they are, as it were, asleep
in us. All her suspicion awaked at this noise, she knew that only she and her
Sister had a Key from the Convent to the Garden; and this reason alone was
sufficient to make her believe, that 'twas certainly she and Monsieur Le
Chevalier, that entertained an amorous conversation; at least, she was resolved
to be satisfied. Jealousy serves instead of courage to women, and Love makes
them hazard every thing. This Lady, that perhaps upon another occasion* would
have been terrified with less cause, now feared not to go forward, to discover
if her Suspicions were true or no, bidding the Maid (who trembled with fear) to
follow her softly. They went so lightly as they could, under the covert of a
Hedge, (for the Night was very clear, and they might be seen at a distance)
toward a thick Arbor from whence they heard the voice. The Abbess soon knew
Monsieur Le Chevalier's, but could not understand distinctly what he said;
therefore advancing a little forward, she heard her Sister speak: But do not
you consider, (said she) to what you expose me? and how you hazard your self?
for without speaking of what has happened to so many, other unhappy Maids that
have abandoned themselves on the Faith of Men, whereof there have been but too
many deceived; but granting you to have more honesty and honor than all the
World besides, think what discourse my flight will occasion; the furious search
my Parents will make for us, and into what strange misery I should cast you, if
you should fall into their hands: My God! (continued she) once again attempt
not any thing so dangerous! Leave me rather to dye here with grief, than
precipitate our selves to so hazardous an enterprise. You will have me then
(answered the other, that the Abbess knew at first to be Monsieur Le Chevalier)
to expose you to all the ills that Jealousy can contrive against you; to all
the affronts and injuries that you may receive from your furious Sister, and a
hundred other things that makes me tremble for you: You know that I have no
longer the liberty to see you here, and that it is forbidden me; and that I
cannot for shame present my self here any more, after the ill treatment that I
have received; and it is to say that you will have me dye. If you love me,
Madam, -- If I love you (interrupted she) you know it but too well: If you
would not have me doubt of it, (pursued Monsieur Le Chevalier) and that my Love
and Assiduity have merited that you should do every thing for me* as you have
told me several times, give me this demonstrative proof of it: Let us render
our selves happy, my charming Queen, since it is in our power; our flight is
easy, your Valet and mine are at the Garden door, who attends us with Horses;
all things favor us, and I promise you in three hours to put you in a place,
where not only none shall know where we are, but where there would not be any
thing to be feared if they should. Monsieur was then silent, to see what answer
his dear Egidia would make him. Get you gone, Monsieur, (said she, sighing) for
I Am afraid if you press me longer, that you will obtain of me more than I ought to
grant: I beg of you to go, before my weakness misleads me from my duty. Do you
your self, if you are more reasonable than I, as you ought to be, fortify my
heart against your self, have pity on my sinking virtue, and rest content with
the glory that nothing but your self is able to resist you; for I confess that
I am not assured, that I have the power of my self to withstand you and Love.
Adieu, leave me. After these words they heard her weep, and Monsieur, Let your
self be overcome (said he) My Dear Soul! Let your self be persuaded by a Love
so tender and so passionate: Give up your self to my care and my fidelity, that
is too well known to you to doubt of it. There was not any thing he omitted to
say that might gain her, which tore the heart of the Abbess, as it tendered
hers. It is not necessary to represent the different passions of these two
Ladies: The Love, the Languors, and tender Sighs of the youngest, no more than
the despite, Shame, and Rage of the eldest: Who yet had the patience to
hearken to the end of a discourse, as cruel for her as it was charming for her
Sister. She saw her wholly disposed to do as Monsieur Le Chevalier would have
her, and going to prepare her self to go away with him, for she was to fit her
self with a habit more suitable the liberty of the Country, than that she wore;
and went to her Chamber to change it. The Abbess let her pass, and stirred not
from the place where she was of some time after, that (her thoughts laboring
of a design) she took a considerable compass, to come, with her Mask on her
Face, into the Arbor where Monsieur Le Chevalier was; who (as she would have
it) taking her for her Sister, embraced her with all tenderness. How charming
are you, Madam, (said the transported Lover) to make me attend so little in
this extreme impatience I had to see you return! Come, let us go, since nothing
opposes our design, and serve our selves of Fortune, now she is for us. After
these words, he led the way, because they went in a path that but one could
walk in. It is easy to imagine the little pleasure, or rather the despair,
wherewith the Abbess received so much sweetness that was not designed for her;
and what violence she used to restrain her anger, this being not a time to let
it appear, nor make her self known. You ought not to wonder at Monsieurs
mistake, considering 'twas Night, and that there was little difference in the
stature of these two Ladies, besides a thousand other things which helped to
deceive him.

As this was not a proper place to entertain her in, he said but little to her,
and thought only of securing her and himself where he had designed; and to what
he did say she answered him not a word, whereof he took no notice, having his
mind so full of his enterprise. They went in this manner quite to the Garden
door, where Monsieur was not a little surpised to find it shut; but she
quickly eased him of his pain, and took the key that she had about her and
opened it. By what means, or rather by what happiness, (said he then to her,
knowing that none but the Abbess kept that Key) came you by this Key? She
answered him no more than before, at which he stayed not but hastened to get a
Horseback; but his Horses were not there, and his Valet, who had been looking
them, told him, with a very sad tone, that he did not know what was become of
them, and that he had been more than two hours in pursuit of them to no
purpose; that he was come to tell him of it, and going again to seek them, for
he knew they could not be lost, and that no body went that way. I could never
learn the Abbess's design, whether what she did was only subtly to prevent
this enterprise, or whether she would in earnest have taken the place of her
Sister; but this I can tell you, that as soon as she heard what the Valet said
of the Horses, she returned into the Garden, and shut the door upon her. Never
was man more surpised than this Lover, scarce could he believe what he saw,
that his Mistress should leave him in such a manner, and what was more strange
to him, the shutting the door after her. I believe that none but himself can
describe his thoughts in so cruel an adventure. He knocked five or six times at
the door! called his Mistress! complained of Love and Destiny! Cursed! Swore!
threatened to kill his Valet! and, in short, there was no extravagancy that his
rage made him not to commit. In the mean time, the Abbess returned toward her
companion full of joy, for what she had done, and to hear her traiterous Le
Chevalier in that passion. She was not yet come to the Arbor, that I spoke of,
when she heard the noise of one coming that way, and who, in all likelihood,
must be her Sister, whom with a slow pace, she went to meet. This poor Lady,
that had not all the courage in the world, and who, besides the fear she was
in, and that attends all such actions, walked musing upon a thousand obstacles
and accidents that she might meet with in the way. She no sooner cast her eyes
upon the Abbess, than she believed she was a Spirit, and trembling with fear,
she made a dreadful outcry; and flew with all her might back to the Convent.
The Abbess acquitted her self very agreeably of these adventures, and believed
she was in part revenged of the displeasures her Sister had caused her; whom
she let flee, and that while returned to seek her companion, who expected her
with extreme impatience, being furiously terrified to be alone in the midst of
the Garden, exposed to all the noises she heard, and even assassinated with
fear: She related to her all that she had done since she left her, how she had
deceived Monsieur Le Chevalier, and terrified her Sister; wherewith they were
very merry, and laughed heartily. They stayed a little, to see if she would
return, but 'twas in vain; for she, poor Lady, was so dismayed, that she almost
dyed with the fright; and was forced by it, to keep her Bed a long time. The
Abbess and her companion retired at last, and took care that none should go out
of the Convent, having double locked the door of it.

This is (said Madam d' Eyrac, in concluding her Story) all the particulars
that I know of these Ladies adventures with Monsieur Le Chevalier. He can tell
you now what I have not been informed of: I will only add, that 'twas no sooner
day, than the Abbess sent for her Valet, and asked him what was become of him
the Night past, and why he had not been at the door she appointed him? The
Fellow told her, that he had been with the Farmer, and his Horses were not at
home, and that at his return he saw two Gentlemen going into the Garden, whom
he durst not come near, for fear of being known; and that returning half an
hour after, he found the door shut. The relation of this fellow finished the
discovery, and the Abbess questioned no longer, but they were Monsieur Le
Chevalier's Horses that she had made use of. She gave order to her Valet, to
turn them out of the Garden, but so as they might be found.

It Is from you (added Madam d' Eyrac, turning to Monsieur Le Chevalier) that we
must expect the rest: All the company made him the same request, so that he
could not deny them. Madam d' Eyrac (pursued he) has told you so much, that I
have no more to do than to close up the Story. You must know then, that after
my ill treatment in the Garden by Egidia and the Abbess, by whose appointment I
came there, I prepared all things for my departure, but first I writ this
Letter to Egidia.

I Know not, Madam, what I have done to be so cruelly treated as I have been.
The Abbess desired to have in interview with me, and though she had expressly
commanded me to conceal it from you, I forbore not to give you an account of it
by a Letter, which I sent by my Valet. Is this to betray you? I see well you
design my death! Ah! Well, Madam, you shall be satisfied, but shall not have
the pleasure to see it, for I stay not here a moment; but you shall quickly
hear the success of your unjust proceedings, and if the death of the
faithful'st of Lovers is capable of touching such a heart as yours, I can
promise my self that you will, in a little time, repent of having given it me.
Adieu, too cruel fair * and Adieu for ever.

As I finished my Letter, I saw people come from the Abbess, who, after having
in vain entreated me to stay that night, would have hindered in good earnest my
going away; but seeing me upon the point of being angry, they opposed me no
longer: But my Valet was somewhat long, and I was afraid the Abbess would come
her self, to try once again her power over me, which constrained me to depart,
and leave him with my baggage. I gave him my Letter to Egidia, with order to
deliver it into her own hands, and bring me an Answer if she would write one; and
thus I forsook a place, that for a years time, was the dear Scene of all my
pleasures, lost, as I may say, with sadness, and overwhelmed with different
pains, without coming to my self, or recovering my Senses in all the way
between the Abbey and my Lodging. It may easily be guessed, that when I came
there, I desired neither to eat nor sleep: True Lovers, in the estate I was
reduced unto, feast only upon Tears, and Sleep avoids them as a mortal enemy.
'Twas in the heat of these cruel moments, that one came to tell me there was a
Valet below would speak with me: I bid that they should bring him into my
chamber, and saw that 'twas one that belonged to my dear Egidia. I embraced him
kindly, who, after he had complemented me from his Mistress, gave me a Letter,
wherein I found these words.

YOu do not think I wish your death; you know me too well, and are sufficiently
persuaded that if you had done me all the injuries in the world, you have but a
word to say to make me believe you have not wronged me. I know not what Letter
you mean, for it is above three days since I had any from you: Come and tell me
what it is, for I shall dye with displeasure if you leave me thus, with the
fear that I have done you wrong. I hear that my Sister could not prevail with
you to stay with us this evening; if you love me better than you do her, will
you not do something more at my request? Return, I conjure you, I am of a
humor to pardon you all things, and if you would have me believe that you love
me, you will give me this proof of it; for I shall not sleep till I see you,
and will expect you two hours after midnight, in the Great Arbor in the Garden,
and I will judge of the force of your Love, by the little time you make me stay
for you. Adieu.

So soon as I had read this Letter, I got a Horseback, and arrived in a very
short time under the Walls of the Garden, where I knew there was a place that I
could get over with ease: But having found the door open, I profited my self of
the occasion, which, I confess, surpised me at first, but upon second thoughts
I imagined, that it happened through the contrivance of Egidia. I bid her Valet
tie our Horses to the foot of a Tree, and go to advertize my Servant to prepare
himself to come away with me in an hours time. After I had given this order, I
went, or rather flew to the Arbor, where I was to find my dear Egidia. 'Twas
then that the Abbess, returning to the Garden door, found my Horses that she
took for her Farmers, and made use of them to make me that extraordinary visit.

But not to dwell upon a little Story, that begins already to seem tedious, I
will only tell you, that Egidia received me in the Arbor with a joy, that made
me forget all the ill usage wherewith she had so lately treated me. We let some
time pass in transports and tenderness, and the fairest day in the world was
never so agreeable to me, as that charming Night. When I spoke to her of the
Letter I had writ to her, and that she assured me that she never received it;
we concluded at first that 'twas fallen into the Abbess's hands; and that my
Valet had either been guilty of a mistake, or betrayed me. In fine, after much
justification on both sides; after, I say, many new amities, sighs, and
languors, that Lovers abound with in a happy reconciliation, I proposed to her
to steal her away, as you have heard from Madam d' Eyrac; and pressed her with
so much earnestness, that in the end, she consented, and went to prepare her
self to follow me I confess her quick return a little surpised me, but who
would then have thought of Madam the Abbess? I saw her masqu'd, in the habit of
the Country, that she did not scruple to go with me; and, in a word, if my
Horses had been ready, I do not doubt but I should have carried her away
instead of her Sister.

I will not enlarge, by telling you with what astonishment I was seized to see
her go back again into the Garden, and shut the door after her: At first I
believed that she only designed to make sport with me, but as the rallery
lasted a little too long for people that had no time to lose, and that she did
not return; in spite of me I concluded this was no longer jest. I thought that
she had consented to follow me only to deceive me, and that I had been the most
abused man in the world. 'Twas then that shame, despite, and disdain, excited
terrible tempests in my Soul, which together with the displeasure of not
knowing what was become of my Horses, nor what I should do with my self, put me
in so furious a passion, that I vented a thousand complaints and reproaches
against the perfidious Egidia. I considered this as the greatest affront that a
Man could receive; I examined every particular, and there was no circumstance
that seemed not impossible to me. In this humor I took my way to the Village,
that being the best course I could then think of; and went to lodge at my
ancient Hosts, where I passed a much more cruel Night than the first time I had
been in that House. I called to mind all the cares and services I had rendered
to this ingrate; and all the false promises of amity that she had made me; and
being astonished not to have found out the lightness of her humor, I accused my
self of stupidity and blindness, adding to my first despair, an indignation
against my self. What extravagant discourses had I with my self that Night!
What numbers of unlikely designs I framed! In truth, one is liable to many
follies when one loves extremely. It was no sooner day, than I called to my
Valet for Ink and Paper to write to her, but it was with so much trouble and
disorder, that whatever I writ I defaced it as fast. Nothing pleased me,
sometimes I fancied I complained too sweetly, and sometimes I feared to offend
her; sometimes I resolved to take leave of her for ever, and a moment after I
repented of that resolution: But at last I writ thus to her.

YOu ought, Madam, rather not to have obliged me, than repent of it so soon;
nor to have come to the door with me, to forsake me in such a manner: 'Twas my
ill fortune that my Horses were lost, you saw 'twas not my fault, and you ought
rather to have comforted me, than treat me with that cruelty, as to leave me
without saying a word to me: But above all, why did you shut the door? Or why
did you flee from me? Did you fear any violence from me? And wherefore did you
promise me so much happiness, if you did not intend it? I see well what I ought
to conclude from all this, and that I was deceived to believe you ever loved
me. The Masque is off now, and without accusing you of Ingratitude or Perfidy,
I leave you to make your self the reproaches you merit, whilst I go to to waste
the remainder of my miserable life, in some place more happy for me than this.
Adieu.

This Letter was given her by her Valet, who an hour after brought me another
from her, telling me withal that she was very ill, which I might easily
perceive by her writing, that I could scarce read; and where I found these
words.

ALl that you have writ to me terrifies me in such a manner, that I believe I
shall dye with it: I know not what door you talk of, and all I can say is, that
I never saw you after I parted with you in the Arbor, but met a Spirit as I was
coming, the fright whereof will I think kill me: 'Twas certainly the same
fantasm that you speak of, and which, without doubt came to you in my shape.
Behold l how God corrects those that are not wise! I have not slept since, and
I always fancy I see the Spirit that pursued me. I see the hand of Heaven in it
that I have so long offended, let us profit of its advice, my dear Monsieur,
let us endeavor to be wise; for my part, I am wholly resolved to lead a better
life, and if you love me you will do so too. We were going to ruin our selves,
and God would preserve us, let us render him* the thanks we owe him for his
goodness: See me not of some days, I will think a little of my salvation, and
do invite you to do the same, and to look upon me no longer but as one of your
friends. Adieu.

I was exceedingly surpised with the reading of this Letter; but to tell you
the truth, if she had not been very sick, I should have taken all she said for
chimaera's and pretenses that she made use of to excuse her inconstancy: Though
I never gave much faith to such foolish stories as that of the Fantasm; yet
when I reflected upon what she assured me, that she had not seen me since she
left me in the Arbor, I began to be afraid to examine all that had happened to
me with this pretended Spirit: I remembered very well it had not said a word to
me, that it was come sooner than I could have expected Egidia; I fancyed even
that it had opened the door without a key, and that it vanished when it left
me: In a word, I yielded insensibly to that error, which served to make me
think in good earnest of my Conscience, and to make my peace with God. I was
some days without ever going to the Convent, to avoid the sight of the Abbess,
though she sent several times to desire me to take up my Lodgings at her house
as formerly; excusing my self so well as I could, till I received this Letter,
that Egidia made one of her Friends write to me.

I Believe God will grant me the mercy of a longer time for repentance: The
Physicians have some hopes of my recovery, however it happens come and see me,
to the end that if Death parts us, I may, in dying, have at least this
consolation of discharging my duty, by telling you things that I am obliged to
tell you. I expect you. Adieu.

This scene (pursued Monsieur Le Chevalier) will divert you but little, it
being all of tears. I went to see her, and I avow to you I was so sensibly
touched with her condition, that I was in one little better my self. I could
not master my self, nor forbear to ease my afflicted mind by a torrent of
tears: All those that were present bore me company, and none but the Abbess
that was not moved to see me thus afflicted. This poor creature, who suffered
with me, made some efforts to say things to me the most kind and tender in the
world: She spoke to me as if she were to dye that day, and certainly none
thought she could live much longer: But Heaven would preserve her to oblige the
world with a most rare example of constancy, and a most honest and sincere
friendship, wherein we have since lived.

You know not perhaps (said Madam d' Eyrac to him) that none contributed so
much to her recovery as I; which was in this manner.

This Maid, or if you please, the Companion of the Abbess, which, as I told you
more than once, had much confidence in me, failed not to give me an account of
this last adventure in the Garden, and the fear your Mistress was in, that it
was not hard for me to guess the cause of her illness, and to find out means
for her cure. Every body observed an extraordinary trouble in her eyes, and
such disorder in her words, as though she were in a continual study: I pitied
her extremely, and though it was an injustice to my Friend to declare the
secret wherewith she had trusted me, I believed that in the extremity whereto
this poor Lady was reduced, I ought not to omit any thing for her recovery: I
took my time when there was none with her but a young Wench that served her,
and that I could not suspect; and asked her with an air of confidence, if her
indisposition proceeded not from some disturbance in her Mind, and if she
believed me not enough her friend, to trust me with it. She looked fixtly on me
and blushed, believing I meant to speak to her of Monsieur Le Chevalier; but
when I told her afterward that I knew the cause of her illness perhaps better
than she her self, and that I could deliver her from the fear she had been in,
in the Garden, she raised her self of a sudden upon her Bed, My God! Madam,
(said she) is it possible that in my ravings I have spoke of any such things!
No, no, (answered I interrupting her) I know it by another way, and I believe
no body has heard any such thing from you: The persons that caused you this
fear, told it me; and I believed I ought not to leave you longer in this pain:
I imagine you will be so discreet, as I shall have no reason to complain of you,
and that you will use as you ought the confidence I have in you. She promised me
secrecy, and I told her all that had passed in the Garden, as I was informed of
it; at which she was so astonished she could scarce believe it, if I had not
told her all that had happened to her self, to the discourse between her and
Monsieur Le Chevalier She blushed at it, and I saw well she was ashamed that I
knew this particular of her Life: But to be short, since that time her Mind was
composed by degrees, till it came to its first settledness. She recovered her
health, and in a little time her strength also: I do not know how she has since
carried her self toward you, but this I know, that she made strong
resolutions, though she could not forbear loving you, to do it in such a manner
as should not offend God.

I Will assure you, Madam, (answered Monsieur Le Chevalier) she had kept them,
and that our friendship is no more than what might be between a Brother and
Sister; though in truth, I have had much pain to reduce my self to it, but at
last I have brought my will to hers. Tell us a little, I beg of you, (said the
Marchioness de Sandal) what you did with the Abbess, and how you were rid of
her. I believe (pursued Monsieur Le Chevalier) that the Abbes, was furiously
exasperated since that last evening, and that what she heard when I was in the
Arbor, perfected her cure. I always avoided being alone with her that little
time I was in the Abbey; and when I took my leave of her, 'twas in the presence
of five or six Ladies, her Friends.

Thus Monsieur Le Chevalier finished his History, to the general satisfaction
of the Company.


