Apostolic Charity, ITS Nature and Excellence CONSIDERED. IN A DISCOURSE Upon
Dan. 12.3. Preached at St. Paul's, December. 19. 1697. at the Ordination of some
Protestant Missionaries to be sent into the Plantations.

To which is Prefixed, A General View of the English Colonies in America, with
respect to Religion; In order to show what Provision is wanting for the
Propagation of Christianity in those Parts.

By Thomas Bray, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, for William Hawes, at the Sign of the Rose in
Ludgate Street, School.

A GENERAL VIEW OF THE English Colonies in America, With Respect to RELIGION,
In order to show what Provision is wanting for the Propagation of Christianity
in Those Parts.
Colonies. Parishes and Churches Ministers Libraries I. New found land Has 5
or 6 English Settlements, wherein are near 500 Families constantly upon the
Island, besides the great Numbers of Ships and Seamen, who put in at
Fishing-Seasons. II. New England. Well provided for the Propagation of Religion
in the Independent Way, having 110 Churches, together with an University; as
also a Fund for the Propagation of the Faith amongst the Native Indians. There
is also 1 Church at Boston after the Church of England Form. 1 Minister. 1
Library. 1 Assistant. III. New York. 1 Church in the Fort. 1 Minister in the
Fort. 1 Library. 1 Church in the City. 1 Minister in the City. 2 Dutch
Churches. 2 Dutch Ministers. 1 French Church. 1 French Minister. 1. Long Island
A (...) Colony belonging to the Government of New York, having in the East-part
10 English-Towns, wherein are computed above ^00 Families, and in the West-part
9 Dutch-Towns. wherein are up^^^^^ of 500 Families. 13 Churches. Not 1 Church
of England Minister, though much desired in the English Part. 3 Dutch Ministers
in the West-part. 2. Albany, A large City, consisting of 400 Families,
bordering upon the Indians, and belonging to the Government of New York. 1
Church in the Fort for the Garrison, consisting of 2 Foot-Companies, and the
English Inhabitants of the Town. 1 Dutch Church. 1 Dutch Minister. 1 French
Church. 1 French Minister. 1 Swedish Church. 1 Swedish Minister. IV East New
Jersey In East-Jersey there are 8 Towns, no Church. 1 Minister going over A
Library begun. V. West New Jersey In this Province there are also several
Towns. VI Pensylvania. 1 Church at Philadelphia, having a considerable Number
of Church of England Protestants. 1 Minister. 1 Library. 1 Schoolmaster. VII.
Maryland 30 Parishes, but meanly Endowed, the Country being but lately divided
into Parishes, and the Churches but lately built, to the great Charge of the
present Governor Colonel Nicholson, and the Country. 16 Ministers. 16
Libraries. VIII. Virginia. 50 Parishes, with 100 Churches and Chapels. There is
also a Noble College now Erected, and Endowed by His present Majesty and the
late Queen; and carried on from the first Foundation with the great Charge,
Application, and Management of Colonel Nicholson, and the other Trustees and
Governors thereof. 30 Ministers. IX. North Carolina 1 Church lately built at
Charlestown. 1 Minister going over 1 Library. X. South Carolina XI. Bermudas.
8 Tribes or Parishes, wherein are 9 Churches, and near 1000 Families. 3
Ministers 3 Libraries XII. Bahama Islands, viz. 1. Providence. Has 80 Families
with 1 Church lately built. 1 Minister. 2. Eleutheria. Has about 20 Families.
3. A^dros. Has several Families. XIII. Jamaica. 15 Parish-Churches. 8 Ministers
2 Libraries begun. XIV. Anguilla. A poor Island, having several English upon
it, but not able of themselves to build a Church, nor maintain a Minister. XV.
St. Christophers. 6 Parish-Churches. 1 Minister. 1 Library begun. XVI. Antego.
5 Churches. 3 Ministers 1 Library begun. XVII. Mevis. 3 Parish-Churches. 3
Ministers 1 Library begun. XVIII Monserrat. 3 Parish-Churches. 3 Ministers XIX.
Barbados. 14 Parish-Churches. 14 Ministers. XX. St. Vincents.

1. By what goes before it may appear, That several of our Colonies do want
Churches and Parishes, and that one half at least of the Parishes want
Ministers.

2. By Experience, as well as the Reason of the Thing, I Am convinced, That 100
l. laid out in a LIBRARY, is what will best induce a Learned and Sober Minister
to go into the Service of any part of the Church in the Plantations; And that
the same is a necessary Encouragement, considering that few Men of Fortunes,
who are able to purchase Books for themselves, will go into such remote Parts.

3. By what goes before it may also appear, That merely the settling of
LIBRARIES in the several Parishes of each Province will require a very
considerable Fund, Fifty Pounds worth of Books being the least that can be
supposed requisite to enable a Minister to discharge the Duties of his
Function. Besides that, in the Chief Town in each Province it would be
requisite to have a Library of more Universal Learning, for the Service and
Encouragement of those who shall launch out farther in the pursuit of Useful
Knowledge, as well Natural as Divine.

4. Besides LIBRARIES of Necessary Books in Divinity, for the Use of the
Clergy, it will be requisite, in order to propagate Christian Faith and
Manners, to furnish the respective Ministers with some Numbers of Bibles,
Catechisms, Common Prayers, and other Practical and Devotional Pieces, to
distribute gratis, especially in poorer Families.

5. It will be farther requisite to have free Schools erected, at leastwise one
in every County, for the Education of their Children: And it would, in a more
especial manner, become the Professors of so Excellent a Religion as ours, to
have a Provision made in one or two Schools at leastwise, in every Province,
for the Instruction of half a dozen Indian Youth, to be sent afterward amongst
their own People, to civilize and convert them.

Thus, in short, I have endeavored to give a General View of the State of the
Plantations, with respect to Religion, and to hint at what is wanting to
promote it: And from this very slender View how easy is it to see, and with
what Indignation can we behold, how many English Colonies there are, the Trade
of one whereof is sometimes computed to be worth 500000 l. per Annum to this
Nation, in which there is no Church, nor Preacher, nor Public Worship, nor
Sacraments administered. The Mohammedan does not so little regard his false
Prophet. He no sooner gains any new Province, but he erects his Moschs, and
places the Crescent upon the top of them, to intimate that his Religion shall
increase, or it is not his fault. And the Papists, we do well know, spare no
Cost in sending their Missions into all the parts of the known World. And it is
very worthy our Notice, that the Dutch East India Company do Yearly expand, and
that with great Success, 15000 l. per Annum in the East Indies alone, for the
Maintaining and Propagating the Christian Faith. And now, that so little should
be yet done, so much as to preserve in Being that Pure and Undefiled Religion
which we profess, even in those Colonies of English Men, from whence the whole
Kingdom has been so much Enriched, as well the Gentleman, by the Advance of his
Rents, as the Merchant, by the Increase of his Stores, and the Mechanic, by
the Vending of his Manufactures, is truly an amasing, as well as a melancholy
Consideration to such as have any true Love to God, or the Souls of Men.

But, alas! how few are there amongst us who do in the least reflect upon, or
at all value the inestimable Advantages which, above the rest of the World,
they enjoy by being Christians. It is now an indifferent thing with many what
Religion Mankind is of; so that, according to those Men, the Son of God did in
vain descend from Heaven; and that grand Dispensation of the Gospel, and that
Mystery of our Redemption, the Wisdom and Goodness of which the Blessed Angels
do with Admiration adore, was to little purpose, and might have been as well
spared, for that the Heathens are in as good a Condition as we. Nay, Christ
Crucified is now become, as well as formerly, to some, a Stumbling Block; to
many, Foolishness, even the Subject of their Ridicule and Raillery. And these
cannot but be looked upon as Ominous presages of some heavy Judgments upon us;
for as an ingenious Person does singularly well observe, Whenever a Country
loses that Reverence that is due to Religion, and the Laws, we may safely
pronounce that its Ruin is not very distant.

And as Contempt of Religion and the Laws is a sure mark of a declining Nation;
so new Colonies and Societies of Men must soon fall to pieces, Disc. of the
Trade of Eng. Part II. p. 265.
and dwindle to nothing, unless their Governors and Magistrates interpose, to
season betimes the Minds of such a new People with a sense of Religion, and
with good and virtuous Principles.

These are Sentiments, I know, quite different from the Politics of some Men,
But those who heartily believe God and his Providence, are firmly persuaded,
that the Happiness and Well-being of any People does advance, or decline, in
proportion to the Supports that are given, and the Regards that are paid to
True Religion.

And I must with Gratitude acknowledge, that some such I have met with in the
Prosecution of this Design, which I have engaged in for the Plantations, or
else the Expense, as well as the Fateigue, had been wholly insupportable. But
as what has been hitherto done, does but let me into the View of so much more,
which is still wanting to Propagate and Maintain Christianity in those Parts,
so after that my Expectations of a more Public Provision for this great Work
have failed me, I must again renew my Applications to such Pious Persons who
have a just Value of the Worth of their own, and others Souls. And if the
following Discourse upon the Nature and Excellency of this kind of Charity
above all others, shall contribute any thing to promote the Design, I shall
obtain an End, to accomplish which I could be content to sacrifice my Life,
with the Remainder of my small Fortunes; and those worthy Persons will
doubtless find it upon their Account, when to be found a good Steward, to the
Honor and Glory of God, of the Talents which He has given, will afford them
those superlative Degrees of Joy, which are beyond the Imagination of us here
below to conceive, and which therefore the following Discourse does not pretend
so much as to shadow.

DAN. XII. 3. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament,
and they that turn many to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever.


THIS, and the two preceding Verses are a Prophecy of the future State of the
Church, at the two great Advents of our Savior to it. In the first Verse is
foretold, what dreadful Distresses and Difficulties it should struggle with. In
the second and third, are declared, what inexpressible Rewards will Crown the
Labors of Christ's Faithful Servants, especially of those who have been
Instrumental in the Instruction and Conversion of Mankind. They that be wise,
or Teachers, or Instructers, as some render it, shall shine as the, etc. In my
Enlargement upon which Words, I shall do these four things.

First, I will show you what is meant by turning many to Righteousness.

Secondly, Who they are that have, whose Duty yet it is, and who may still be
said to turn many to Righteousness.

Thirdly, That it will be found one Day the highest pitch of Wisdom to have
been Instrumental in this blessed Work. Because,

Fourthly, and Lastly, Such shall be the most gloriously Rewarded. It is they
that shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever
and ever.

And, First, I will show what is meant by turning many to Righteousness. Now
Righteousness, in the strictest sense of the Word, does denote only one Virtue
amongst the whole Train of Christian Graces, namely, Justice and Equity betwixt
Man and Man. But in its more comprehensive Acceptance, (and so it is generally
to be understood throughout the Scriptures) it does import no less than the
whole of that Religion, which will render us accepted by God, and in which, if
we be found, when we come to die, God will pass a favorable Sentence upon us
at the Day of Judgment.

And such a Righteousness, as it is now fixed, and stated under the Gospel,
consists in this, that in the first place we Renounce the Devil and all his
Works, that is, abandon the Service of that Arch-Rebel the Devil, and detest
and forsake all his Works of Sin. He having himself most ungratefully Revolted
from God, has not only carried whole Legions of fallen Angels into a cursed
Rebellion against their Creator, but has drawn off the far greatest part of
Mankind into the same wicked Apostasy with himself; insomuch, that divide the
whole Earth into thirty Parts, it is computed by skilful Geographers, that
nineteen of it are Inhabited by Idolaters, that is, Men ignorant of the true
God; and in effect worshippers of Devils: Not to say what Idolatrous, and other
destructive Heresies he has brought into Christendom it self, and even in those
Churches of Christ where God is best known, the Christian Faith the best
understood, and Christianity professed in its greatest Purity. It is a
sorrowful Consideration, how much the Works of the Devil, Magic, Sorcery,
Lying, Perjury, Uncleanness, Murder, Rapine, and Violence, and indeed, all
manner of Wickedness, are confidently and openly committed and avowed. And now
a most considerable part of that Righteousness we are here upon consists in
this, That we abandon the wicked Party of Satan's Adherents, either Foreign or
Domestic; and that being listed in the Service of the true God, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, we give up our selves to his Government and Obedience. And this
is that so material a part of Righteousness, called Repentance from dead Works,
Heb. vi. 1.

A second part of this Righteousness is Faith, that is, the Knowledge and
Belief of God in his Nature and Attributes, and a firm practical Belief of
Christ the only Begotten Son of God, as the great Mediator betwixt God and Man,
who, to that End, having took upon him our Nature, was Invested with the
threefold Office of a Prophet, to Instruct us in the way to be Reconciled to
God; of a Priest, to satisfy his Justice for all our past Offenses; and of a
King, to Conduct and Govern us; and finally, to Reward us for all our Services.
This also is Life eternal, or another part of that Righteousness for which we
shall be Rewarded with Life Eternal, Thus to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, John xvii. 3.

A third is, to Obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same
all the Days of our Life, that is, having abandoned the Service of Satan, and
yielded our selves up to the Faith of Christ, the Completion of our
Righteousness will be this, to live the remaining part of our Lives to the
Honor of God, by paying him a faithful Obedience to all his most Just and
Righteous Commands. And Blessed are they who do his Commandments, for they only
shall have right to the Tree of Life, Rev. xxii. 14. Thus, in short, you see
the state of that Righteousness, upon the account of which we shall be
justified and saved.

And now it will be easy to understand, what it is to Turn many to
Righteousness. And in the highest and most exalted sense of the Phrase, it is
to Reduce whole Provinces under the Obedience of God. It is to rescue that
unhappy part of Mankind, which have for so many Ages past, labored under the
Tyranny of Satan; it is to reduce them to the just and happy Government of
their rightful Lord and Master Jesus Christ. It is to Instruct those Dark
Corners of the Earth, in which the Light of the Gospel has not yet shone, or
but very dimly: It is to enlighten them with a full and bright Knowledge of
their Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. And it is lastly, to render them
obsequious Servants to a just and holy God, whose Service is perfect freedom:
It is, I say, to divest them of that Inhumanity, Savageness, and Brutality,
whereby they are Beasts of Prey to each other, and to stamp upon their Souls
that lovely Image of God, consisting in Knowledge, Faith, Love, and Purity,
whereby they will become Angels, nay, God's, one to another. This is to Turn
many to Righteousness, in the highest Sense of the Phrase: But in a Lower, yet
a very Noble Sense, it is to be any ways Instrumental in the Instruction and
Conversion of any Considerable number of Souls in any part of the World, as
well within the Christian Pale as elsewhere: Within the Christian Pale, I say,
where, God knows, there is still that Ignorance, Profaneness, and Immorality,
which loudly call for more Laborers into the Vineyard, to carry on to
Perfection the Information and Conversion of Christians. And in both these
Senses

Secondly, Who they are who have heretofore, whose Duty yet it is, and who may
still be said to Turn many to Righteousness, is the second thing I proposed to
show you. And here we are to consider, that as the Apostasy of Mankind from God
began soon after the Creation, so God had his Ministers from the very beginning
contesting with the Powers of Darkness, and with all possible Application
rescuing Mankind out of the Snares of the Devil, as Abel, Seth, Enos, and Noah
before the Flood; which last, for his eminent and painful, though unsuccessful
Services in this great Work, was called the Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet.
ii. 5.

Nor did either the Occasion for the like Preachers of Righteousness cease,
even after the dreadful Destruction by an universal Deluge; nor was God
afterward wanting to his own Honor, or the Good of Mankind, in sending his
Prophets and Priests to be Preachers of Righteousness to a wicked World.

It was but very few Centuries after the Flood, that the whole Earth was again
Revolted from God, and overspread with Wickedness; and it was not without a
constant Succession of Priests and Prophets, as well as of Mercies and
Destructions, that the Divine Providence did secure one only Nation, the Jews,
in their Allegiance to him. And yet even these his peculiar People, This Holy
Nation, in process of Time, had so corrupted themselves, that their very
Righteousness was as filthy Rags, Isai. lxiv. 6. And both their Principles and
Morals were so far debased, and the most demure and precise amongst them, the
Scribes and Pharisees so defective in both, that our Savior told his
Disciples, Except their Righteousness should exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matt. v. 20.

And now when the Defection of Mankind from God was become so Universal, that
it was time for him, either utterly to root out from the face of the Earth, all
the Inhabitants of it, or he had no other way but by some Miracle of Mercy to
Reform it; Then did the Divine Goodness, which always enclines him to the most
Merciful part, choose to send an Ambassador Extraordinary to propose Terms of
Reconciliation, and to invite Mankind home to God. And accordingly, God, who at
sundry Times, and in diverse Manners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, did in these last Days, (or in the last great Age of the World) speak
unto us by his Son, whom he appointed Heir of all things, by whom also he made
the World, Heb. i. 1, 2.

And here, how without Wonder and Astonishment, can we behold, with what
prodigious Zeal, Application, and Industry the Blessed Jesus set upon the great
Work of Reforming Mankind. It was his Meat and Drink to do the Will of him that
sent him, and accordingly he continually went about doing Good, both to the
Bodies and Souls of Men. To their Bodies, by Healing them of all those manifold
and mighty Distempers that had then invaded them: To their Souls, by Curing
them of those most fatal Maladies of all, their Sins; to rid them of which, was
so much the main and principal Design of his coming into the World, that from
hence he was denominated a Savior to it; And they shall call his Name Jesus,
for he shall heal his People from their Sins. But the Original cause of all
their Miseries, both Bodily and Spiritual, proceeding from the mischievous
Enmity of Satan, he did with the utmost diligence pursue that Rebel, driving
him out of the Bodies and Souls of Men; both which he had so universally
Usurped, and did at that time so cruelly Tyrannize over.

And that he might at length be utterly dispossessed of all his Dominion, and
that no Corner of the Earth might be left him to exercise his Tyranny upon,
when the Blessed Jesus was leaving the World himself, in pursuance of that
Power which was given unto him in Heaven, and on Earth, he Commissioned his
Apostles to prosecute the glorious Conquest over the Devil, and all his Works,
which he had begun, commanding them to go, and disciple all Nations, Baptizing
them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, promising
to be with them always, even unto the end of the World, Matt. xxviii. 18, 19,
20. And so faithful were they in the Execution of their Trust, that they soon
dispersed themselves into the utmost parts of the Universe, so that not an Age
had past, till their Sound went into all the Earth, and their Words unto the
Ends of the World, Romans x. 18. And thus you see who they are that have
heretofore Turned many to Righteousness.

But who those are, whose Duty yet it is, and who may still be said to do the
same, remains to be considered, and may God enable us to find them out.

And, First, This is a Work incumbent upon every Christian Church and Nation;
but ought to be the Concern and Care of none more than ours, and can never be
more seasonably set upon than at such a juncture as this. I say, to consider,
and assist in the best Methods of Turning many to Righteousness, ought to be
the Care and Concern of every Christian Church and Nation; and this out of a
grateful Return for that Blessed Light of the Gospel which has shone amongst
them, by which Christians are, or may be, (if they suffer themselves to be
regulated by the Rules of Christianity, which so directly tend to render both
private Persons and public Societies happy) by which Christians may be, I say,
so much distinguished from the deplorable State of those Barbarous and Savage
Nations, where Ignorance of the True God and Religion overspreads their
Country. Nothing more naturally diffuses its self than Light, and how
prodigiously ungrateful would it be for a People themselves enlightened, not to
spread that to all Mankind which was given them to show others, as well as
themselves, the Way to God, and their Happiness!

But especially this is a Care and Concern incumbent upon such a Church and
Nation as ours. A Church so pure in its Doctrine, and so Heavenly in its
Worship, as in that respect is the fittest in the World to be the Model to the
New Acquisitions which shall be gained to the Church of Christ. But, alas, that
it should be ever said, that another Church, whose Religion is so sadly
corrupted by Paganish Superstitions, should yet be ten thousand times more
Zealous, in Banishing Infidelity and Paganism out of the World than ours is!

And it is a Work in Gratitude due from such a Nation as this: A Nation so
enriched by the Commerce and Commodities of so many Barbarous and Pagan
Countries. Surely, since we have in so plentiful a manner been made partakers
of their Carnal Things, it is our Duty also to Minister to them in Spiritual
things.

And such a Work surely can never be more Seasonably promoted by any Church or
Nation, than at such a juncture as this. What has made up so great a part of
our Devotions, for some Years past, as our Thanksgivings for the little less
than Miraculous Deliverances we have received, in the Preservation of our
Religion and Liberties?

And when had this our Preservation so glorious a Completion, as at this time?
and so solemn an Acknowledgment paid to Heaven for it, as lately in this Place?
But what fulsome Hypocrisy would it be to thank God with such seeming
Devotion, for the Preservation of a Religion we do not in the least Value? or,
How can we be thought to Value it at all, if when it is in our Power to extend
the Christian Pale so far as we may, and to the bringing into it so many
Thousand Souls, over whom we have an absolute Dominion, should we yet take no
Care about it?

Secondly, Those whose Duty it is in a more peculiar Manner than others, to
Turn many to Righteousness, are the Ministers of Religion; I say, in a more
peculiar Manner than others; for we are not only ordained and separated for
this Work, but the Instructing, Inlightning, and Informing of the World, which
is the Foundation of all Righteousness, is peculiarly the Pastors Province. I
do call the Instilling of Divine Knowledge into the Minds of Men, the
Foundation of all Religion: For why? Knowledge of the true Nature of God, and
of all the parts of that Religion which is to be paid him, is a necessary Guide
and Director to all Virtuous and Religious Practice, it being the same thing to
the Soul, as the Eye is to the Body. Nor is Divine Knowledge necessary to Men's
living Virtuously, only as it is a Guide and Director to us so to live, but it
is requisite also, as it is the Principle and Reason whereon all virtuous and
worthy Deeds are to be founded; insomuch, that a thing which is otherwise well
done, if it be not done knowingly, but ignorantly, will not be imputed by God,
nor Man, as a virtuous and laudable Action. Nay, the chiefest of all Divine
Graces, if it be not acted out of a through Knowledge of the Nature of God, and
of true Religion, will even become, for want thereof, the Blackest of all Sins:
as Zeal, when not guided by Knowledge, will easily be transported to Cruelty
and Murder. What shall I say? The want of thoroughly understanding the true
Nature of God, and the Nature and Design of the Christian Religion, is the only
Cause of all that Superstition which is in the World; of Superstition I say,
than which there is not a more grievous Malady that can possibly infect the
Souls of Men, so as to render them more troublesome to themselves, more
mischievous to the public Good and Welfare of the Church, and to act more
dishonourably and provoking to God. In short, it is Ignorance which is the
Natural Parent of that Atheism and Infidelity so rise amongst Men; and indeed,
not only of that, but of all other Vices and Wickednesses whatsoever.

And now it is the great Duty of the Ministers of Religion, to remove from the
Minds of Men that Ignorance of Divine things, which is the cause of all their
Miscarriages, and to instill into them those Doctrines and Religious Principles
which are the Fountain of all their farther Righteousness. This we are to
attend upon, by Catechizing, and Preaching, and Conference, and whatever
Methods can be thought most successful and effectual in the Instruction of
Mankind; and those who shall best instruct their People, shall most effectually
Turn many to Righteousness: And therefore,

Thirdly, Those Persons will be reputed to have no small share in this Blessed
Work, who have put the Ministers of God in a Capacity of so Instructing his
People, by making a Provision for the Acquisition, Maintenance, and Propagation
of Christian Knowledge. Such are those who have been the Founders of Churches,
Schools, Colleges, and Libraries. And not here to speak of the Excellency of
such Charities, which directly tending to the Everlasting Happiness of the
Souls of Men, must be as far beyond what terminate only on this Mortal Life, as
the Soul is more Excellent than the Body; and as an Eternal is to be preferred
to a Temporal Felicity: But not to insist on this: The Advantage of being thus
Instrumental in Turning many to Righteousness lies here, That it is not only in
the present Generation, that such are thus serviceable to the Souls of Men, but
in all Ages to come, and when they shall be long dead, they will yet speak, and
so speak as to have a Share in all the Conversions, which shall be made by
Virtue, and through the Assistance of that Stock which they have laid up for
the Promoting of Religion and Learning.

And especially, the Erecting of Libraries of necessary and useful Books in
Divinity, is of all others a necessary Provision for the Propagation of
Christian Knowledge. For why? The Priests Lips should preserve Knowledge,
because the People are to seek the Law at his Mouth, Mal. ii. 7. And the
Measures of Knowledge a Minister is to be Master of, must be necessarily such
as shall enable him to give his People an entire View of the whole Scheme of
Christian Doctrine in that Connection, wherein one part of it depends upon
another, and for want of which, the Generality of Christians are so ignorant of
the true Nature and Design of Christianity. Farther, a Pastor must thoroughly
understand the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, and the
Nature of Christ's Mediation, through which it was obtained. More particulary
yet, he must be able clearly to explain, and fully to prove each Article of his
Christian Faith; many of which not being obvious to our Natural Reason, but
capable of Proof only from the Scriptures, he must be well versed in the
Language, and Manner of Speaking of the Holy Penmen, before they can be so
explained and proved. And he must be able to state exactly the Nature and
Extent of Christian Duties, which Knowledge depending upon a right
Understanding of the Nature, and different Obligations of all those many sorts
of Laws, Natural, Divine, and Humane, which regulate and direct our Duties.
This is a part of Knowledge as extensive as it is necessary.

All which Premises being duly considered, and withal, that we cannot now work
Miracles, and that Inspiration is no part of our Talent; but that we are left
to the Ordinary means of Converting the World; namely, the Common Measures of
God's Holy Spirit accompanying our hard Study: It must therefore clearly
follow, that those Persons will be reputed to have no small share in this
Blessed Work, who shall lay such a Foundation of Christian Knowledge, as
without which, Humanely speaking, it is not possible the Pastors of Christ's
Church should feed their Flock with necessary Instruction.

Thirdly, And now I am to show you, That it will be found one day the highest
pitch of Wisdom to have been Instrumental in this Blessed Work of Turning many
to Righteousness. It is the part of Wisdom to propose to it self a Good End,
and then to pursue it by due and proper Means. And proportionably, as the End
is more or less excellent, and the Means more or less adapted to carry it on;
in the same degree is a Man's Wisdom to be judged greater or less with relation
to it. Now here the End is incomparably excellent, beyond any other that can be
named. For why? to Turn many to Righteousness is, in effect, to consult, and
that in the highest Manner, the Honor and Glory of God, and the greatest Good
and Happiness of Mankind, than which nothing can be thought of more Excellent.
To Turn many to Righteousness, you have also seen, is to dispossess Satan of an
unrighteous Usurpation he has made upon God's Dominion over his own Creatures,
and it is to reduce them under the Government of their Rightful Lord and
Master. And can any thing be more glorious than such an Achievement? And it is
so to rectify the corrupt and sinful Nature of Men, and to bring them under
the Direction of such Laws, as alone can make them happy: And what is it to be
a Benefactor, if this be not?

Nor can any Means be more worthy and great, and better fitted to the Purposes
proposed, than those we have considered. For let the whole Nation, let the
Clergy, and such as have Wealth and Substance, set heartily about it, and the
Work is done.

This, in short, is to be wise to Salvation, and alas! what is the Wisdom of
this World in comparison with this? What an Idiot is David's Fool, who when he
might make to himself Friends in Heaven of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, heaps
up to himself Riches, not knowing who shall gather them? And who is wholly
solicitous to find out some one, from whom he might call his Lands after his
own Name, (fondly thinking, that by this means his Houses shall continue for
ever, and his Dwelling-Places to all Generations). When by such Charities to
the Souls of Men, as have been mentioned, he might provide that his Name be
written in the Book of Life. Which brings me to the last thing proposed; and
shows, that to Turn many to Righteousness is the highest Wisdom, because that,

Fourthly, Such will be the most Gloriously rewarded. Besides, the Proposing of
a Good End, and the Prosecuting of it by due and proper Means, there is
something yet farther wanting to complete the Wisdom of our Actions, and that
is, to do all in the Prospect of an excellent Reward. And here, as the End,
viz. the Glory of God, and the Good of Mankind, is the most transcendently
Glorious, and the Means proposed in order to accomplish it, are what do most
become Christians in their several Stations, and according to their several
Abilities; so the Reward that will Crown all this, is here in my Text spoke to
be such, as is not in the power of Words to express a greater. They that are
wise shall shine as the Brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many to
Righteousness as the Stars for ever and ever.

And indeed, as of all other Sinners, those will be the most exquisitely
punished, who shall any ways corrupt and deprave the Principles and Manners of
Mankind: So of all the Righteous Servants of God, those will be exalted to the
highest degrees of Glory, who shall be most industrious in the Instruction and
Conversion of Men.

I say of all other Sinners, those will be the most exquisitely punished, who
shall any ways corrupt and deprave the Principles and Manners of Mankind. Such
as do sow ill Principles, and do any ways discourage and discountenance Piety
and Virtue, are said to put a Stumbling Block, and to be an Occasion to fall in
their Brother's way, Romans xiv. 13. And woe to that Man (says our Savior) by
whom the Offense comes: For whosoever shall offend one of the meanest of those
that believe in him, it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about
his Neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea, Matt. xviii. 6, 7.
And a most emphatical Threatening this is to all those wicked Instruments of
Uunrighteousness abroad in the World, who make it their Business, and seem to
be intent upon this very thing. It is sad enough to have one self done or acted
wickedly: But whosoever shall not only break, though it be one of the least
Commandments; but shall teach Men so, he shall be called the least in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. v. 19. that is, none at all: He shall be cast out of
it, and punished as one of those who are the greatest Enemies to it. There is
in the Words a vast deal more to be understood than is expressed, as is usual,
both in the Sacred Writings, and in profane Authors; so that the Case of those
Men is most dreadfully and desperately bad, who by profane, atheistical, and
lewd Discourse, or whatever other evil Communications do, corrupt good
Principles and Manners. But above all others, it is a dreadful thing to
consider what will be the Doom of those Men, who by wicked Books, such as both
Atheists, Deists, Socinians, and Antinomians do now, to the Reproach of our
Church and Nation, daily publish amongst us. It is dreadful, I say, to consider
what will befall such in the End. What Evil of this Nature is done only by
Discourse, is but transciently bad, and may ruin the Souls only of some few of
their unfortunate Companions. But the wicked Principles which are propagated by
Books are lasting Mischiefs, from whence, as from a Pandora's Box, fly out
those Plagues and Mortal Diseases that can never be recalled, and will spread
Destruction and Ruin amongst the Souls of Men to the World's End.

And indeed it is hard to say, what Measures of Repentance may be sufficient
for these Men. The Repentance they must come to, or be everlastingly and
immeasurably Undone, must be such as comes not under the ordinary Definitions
given that great Condition of our Salvation. It is not a private Grief and
Sorrow, nor barely an Amendment for the future, will be sufficient to reconcile
such to God. But as the Dishonours done to the Great Creator, by their means,
are never likely to end, but with the World; so the Reparations to be made for
these kind of Affronts and Injuries to Christ's Kingdom must be by a
Recantation as public and lasting as the Nature of the Offense is. And the
exacting of such a Repentance as this, I must needs recommend to you, my
Brethren, who are entering to day into the Ministry, whenever you are called to
the Sick Bed of any notorious Atheist or Deist whatsoever. And this was the
Resolution of a very eminent Bishop of our Church, in the Case of one of a
considerable figure amongst them, after he had written his Book de Veritate.
You are the Stewards of the Mysteries of God, so that you cannot, with Fidelity
to your Great Master, dispense the Sacrament of Reconciliation to those, who
have erected lasting Batteries against his Kingdom, till they themselves, by a
like public Recantation, shall have pulled them down with their own hands. So
that you see the very Repentance of those, who shall Turn many to
Unrighteousness, is a hard and fearful Discipline. And what then? How much
beyond the common Measures will the Punishment of those amongst them be, who
shall remain Impenitent? And indeed it is but reasonable to believe, that the
Case will be vastly different betwixt those who have only in their own Persons
transgrest the Laws of God, and such who make a Party, and fight the Devil's
Battles against Him. These Men must be supposed to be first at perfect Enmity
with Him, and their whole Nature must be envenomed against Him; and therefore
it cannot be expected but that the Fury of his Wrath, and the very Dregs of his
Anger will be poured out against such.

And now, if of all other Sinners those will be the most exquisitely punished,
who shall any ways corrupt and deprave the Principles and Manners of Mankind;
then, by parity of Reason, of all the Righteous Servants of God, those will be
exalted to the highest degrees of Glory, who shall be most industrious in the
Instruction and Conversion of Men; or shall lay the Foundation of Christian
Knowledge, or Contribute toward the Promoting of it. For this we need no other
Testimony than that remarkable place of St. James v. 20. Know, that he which
converteth a Sinner from the Error of his Ways, shall save a Soul from Death,
and shall cover a Multitude of Sins. These Words speak such a Regard to the
Charitable Endeavors of those who do any ways promote, or do Labor in the
Instruction and Conversion of Sinners, that through the Merits and Satisfaction
of Christ, (by which only it is that God becomes propitious to our best
Performances) this kind of Charity will be had in no mean Consideration when
God shall take Cognizance of our Sins and Failures. And if the Converting of
one Sinner shall be so considered, what Glories will await those who Turn many
to Righteousness? I cannot possibly express them in any higher Words than those
of my Text, in which alone there is a force and luster, like to the Rewards
themselves which they bespeak.

And proportionably as the Assistances given to Turn many to Righteousness
shall be most extensive and lasting; in the same measure we must suppose the
degrees of Glory will be allotted to such Piety. And therefore, since, next to
what the Apostles did by their personal Labors, and inspired Writings, to
Convert Mankind to God, scarcely any thing can be thought of a more direct and
immediate Tendency to the same Glorious and Blessed End, than to lay up those
Magazines of Christian Knowledge on the Confines of Satan's Kingdom, out of
which the Ministers of God's Word may be constantly supplied, both with the
Food of Souls, and with that Spiritual Armor wherewith they may carry on the
War with Success, so as at length to drive that Arch-Rebel out of those vast
Territories he now possesses: It will therefore follow, that those pious
Persons will most effectually consult their future Happiness, and provide best
for an Exalted Glory, who shall expend most in fixing Libraries of necessary
and useful Books in Divinity, in order to the Instruction both of Minister and
People. Such indeed cannot be said, by so doing, to hazard their Persons in the
Converting of Mankind, and so may not be entitled thereby to the Reward of
Martyrs and Confessors. But however, they may be much more instrumental in
Turning many to Righteousness, even than those who actually labor in the Work
it self; because that, in effect, it will be they who shall Preach, Catechize,
and Instruct those Parts of the World, as well in future, as in the present
Age. It is they will be the Fountain, we shall be only the Conduit-Pipes
through which the Waters of Life will be conveyed to the People: And therefore,
except we shall bestir our selves very much, they will far outstrip us in the
Persuit of Eternal Glory.

In short, Those who shall make such a lasting Provision for the Instruction
and Conversion of any considerable part of Mankind, may, in so doing, be very
well looked upon as a sort of Apostles to those Parts of the World. And if so,
we may conclude a great deal concerning the Degrees of Glory wherewith such
shall be recompensed, from that Promise of our Savior to his Apostles, Matt.
xix. 28. Verily, I say unto you, When the Son of Man shall sit on the Throne of
his Glory, ye also shall sit upon Twelve Thrones, judging the Twelve Tribes of
Israel: For though we are not to conclude from these Words, that any besides the
Twelve shall be exalted to the highest Degrees of Happiness, yet from hence we
may clearly gather, that proportionably as Persons shall approach nearest to
the Apostles in Evangelizing Mankind, they shall be placed nearer and nearer to
them upon the several Ascents, to the highest Stations in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Not that I would lessen the Hopes of Glory to you, my Brethren, who shall
labor in this Great and Glorious Work, of Gaining Souls to God. No, but rather
give me leave, with the great Apostle to the Gentiles, Romans xi. 13. to magnify
to you your Office, who are entering to day upon the Sacred Ministry, and some
of you in order to a Blessed Mission. And you have this Advantage of all other
Professions of Men, that whereas others, by a due discharge of the Duties of
their proper Calling, can only become Righteous themselves, you, in the due
Exercise of your Ministry, will Turn many to Righteousness: So that whilst
other Christians can expect only the common Rewards for well-doing, you may
promise your selves, upon the Performance even of the ordinary Duties of your
Function, to be extraordinarily recompensed. And the Reason is this, because
the Good that you will do is doubly and trebly beneficial; for you will not
only consult thereby your own Happiness, but will render your selves
Benefactors to Mankind, and what is above all, will enlarge the Bounds of
Christ's Kingdom.

I say you will render your selves Benefactors to Mankind. For why? the
Religion you are to propagate and promote, is of such a Nature and Tendency,
that were it heartily embraced, the most Wild and Savage of Men would become
Innocent, Kind, and Sociable to one another; they would not hurt nor destroy in
all the Holy Mountain. And it is Prophesied, that this will be the Fruits of
Christianity, when the Earth shall be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, Isai.
xi. 9. And you will also, by a diligent Application to the Duties of your
proper Calling, pull down the Kingdom of Satan, and enlarge the Bounds of
Christ's Kingdom, or at leastwise increase the Number of his faithful Subjects.

This will indeed engage you in great Conflicts with the Powers of Darkness;
and the Difficulties and Oppositions they and their Agents, the wicked Men of
the World, shall give you, will call forth all your Courage and Prudence to
resist. But the greater are the Dangers and Difficulties, the more noble is the
Virtue; and the greater the Virtue, the more glorious will be the Reward.

And therefore I cannot forbear to bless that Providence which calls both you
and me into the Service of those darker parts of the Church, where we shall
have occasion to do more Good than here we could be able, to contest with
greater Difficulties, and thereby to entitle our selves to the chiefest
Rewards. For a bad as it is to be Ambitious after Earthly Honors, it is nobly
Virtuous, and Christian-like, an Emulation to excel in the Favor of God, and
in those Stations of Glory which he will bestow upon such as shall exert
themselves in his Service. And to be Instrumental in bringing Light to them
that sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, whether we consider the
Service, or the Recompense, has enough in it to satisfy the most pious
Ambition.

To conclude therefore in the Words of St. Paul, 1 Timothy vi. 12. Fight the good
Fight of Faith, that is, maintain and propagate the Gospel against all
Opposition, and live according to it; lay hold on Eternal Life, nay, strive to
excel in those Achievements that shall entitle you to the chiefest Glories of
it; for this is that whereunto you are called, and are now to profess this good
Profession at an Holy Ordination before many Witnesses.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
A Short Discourse upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, being an
Exposition upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers of our Church Catechism,
proper to be read by all young Persons, in Order to their Understanding the
whole Frame and Tenor of the Christian Religion, and to their being duly
prepared for Confirmation. With Devotions Preparatory to that Apostolic and
Useful Ordinance. To which is added, An Appendix, being a Method of Family
Religion. By Tho. Bray, D. D.

Printed for W. Hawes, at the Sign of the Rose in Ludgate Street.


