A JOURNAL OF AN Embassy from MVSCOVY INTO CHINA, Over Land.

Peter Alexiovitz the present Grand Czar of Moscovie Anno aetat. 27.



A JOURNAL OF THE EMBASSY From Their MAJESTY'S John and Peter Alexievitz,
Emperors of MUSCOVY, etc. Over Land into CHINA, Through the Provinces of
Vstiugha, Siberia, Dauri, and the Great Tartary, to Peking, the Capital City of
the Chinese Empire.

By Everard Isbrand, Their Ambassador in the Years 1693, 1694, and 1695.

Written by Adam Brand, Secretary of the Embassy.

Translated from the Original in High Dutch, Printed at Hamburgh, School.

To which is added, Curious Observations concerning the Products of Russia. By
H. W. Ludolf.

LONDON: Printed for D. Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar;
and T. Goodwin at the Queens Head over against St. Dunstan's Church, Fleet
street. School.

The Habitts of the Ostiacken and Kerrgiesen people.

The Habitts of the Tungusen and Daurischn people.



AN ACCOUNT OF AN Embassy from MVSCOVY INTO CHINA OVER LAND.
THE now most Illustrious Princes Ivan and Peter Alexievits, Great Lords,
Emperors, Grand Dukes, and Conservators of all the Great, and Little, and White
Russia; of Muscovy, of Volodimir and Novogorod; Emperors of Casan; Emperors of
Astrachan; Emperors of Siberia; Lords of Plesko; Great Dukes of Twersco,
Leghorscho, Permsco, Veatsco, Belgarsco, etc. Lords and Great Dukes of
Novogorod in the Lower Countries; of Rosansko, Rostessko, Gerestessko,
Beteozarsko, Oudersco, Obdorsko, Condinsko, and all the Northern parts; Lords
of the Country of Versco, of Cartalinsko, and of Gruzinsco, and of the Country
of Cabardinsco; Czars and Dukes of Circasco, and Igorsco, Lords and Monarchs of
several other Dominions and Provinces, East, West, and North; which are their
Inheritance from Father to Son: These, I say, my most gracious Lords and
Princes, having after mature deliberation resolved to send a most splendid
Embassy to the Great Amologdachan (or Emperor of China); Everrard Isbrand, a
Native of Germany, born in the City of Gluckstad, in the Dukedom of Holstein,
was pitched upon by the abovementioned Two Czars, as a fit Subject to discharge
so great a Trust; and being accordingly declared their Ambassador to the Great
Amologdachan, he gratefully accepted of the Favor bestowed upon him by both
their Czarish Majesty's; and after his humble Thanks for the Grace received
from their hands in putting so much confidence in him, he ordered his Equipage,
and all other matters requisite for so great a Journey, to be got in readiness
to depart at a minutes warning.

After some time spent in providing several rich Presents, which we were to
carry along with us into China, and all other necessaries; the Ambassador and
the chiefest of his Retinue were in the Year 1692, the 3d of March, introduced
into the presence of Ivan Alexievits, to Kiss his Czarish Majesty's hands; and
on the 12th of March following, having been admitted into the presence of Peter
Alexievits, the Youngest of the Two Czars, to receive the same Honor from his
Hands after his return to Musco from Peresla, we set out on our Journey the
next following day, being the 13th of March.

The whole Attendance of the Ambassador at his departure from Musco, consisted
only in One and twenty Persons; among whom were Twelve Germans, the rest
Muscovites. We were provided with a good Chest of Physic, a Physician, and a
good number of Baggage-Waggons to carry our Provisions, Wines, and all other
Necessaries for so great a Journey; and having taken our leave, not without
some tears, of our Friends, both Germans and Muscovites, who conducted us for
some Miles out the Town, we continued our Journey toward Troitza.

But before I go any further in giving an account of this Embassy, I hope it
will not be looked upon in me as a presumption, if by way of digression, I
touch upon some general matters concerning Muscovy, which being otherwise known
by the name of the Great or Black Russia, extends its Frontiers to the utmost
Borders of Europe and Asia. It is of a vast extent, its length reaching from
the Confines of Poland as far as to the great Asiatick Tartary, and its breadth
from the Frozen Sea to the Caspian Lake or Sea; but many of its Provinces
(especially those bordering upon Asia) are almost desolate.

Among many others, it has Four great and famous Rivers; the first is the River
Wolga, arising not far from the Confines of Poland, and exonerating it self in
the Caspian Sea. The second is the River Oby, which disimbogues in the Frozen
Sea; and on that side divides Asia from Europe. The third the River Don, which
discharges it self in the Euxine Sea. And the fourth the River Dwina, which
falls near Archangel into the White Sea.

The City of Musco, besides its antiquity, has this to boast of, that ever
since the Year 1540. at what time Czar Ivan Basilovits began his Reign, it has
been the constant Residence of the succeeding Czars, to wit, of Fedor
Ivanovits, Boris Goudenou, Fedor Berisovits, of the Counterfeit Demetrius
Ivanovits, of Basili Ivanovits Zusksi, Michael Federovits, Alexoi Michaelovits,
Ivan Alexiovits. and of the present Czar Peter Alexiovits. It is near Fifteen
English Miles in compass, being situate on the River Mosco (which not far from
thence joins its current with the River Occa, and falls afterward into the
great River Wolga) in the Center of Muscovy.

The Castle, called Cremelina, where the Czars of Muscovy keep their ordinary
Residence, is Fortified with a very strong Wall, a deep Ditch, and some
Demilunes, upon which are mounted good store of large Cannon.

Russia has its own Patriarch, who exercises the same Authority all over the
Muscovian Empire, as the Pope does in other Roman Catholic Countries. But for
the convenience of Commerce, the Lutherans, as well as other Protestants, are
allowed the free exercise of their Religion in the City of Musco, as well as in
some other places of Muscovy. The Lutherans are very confiderable for their
Number in the Capital City, where they have Two Churches built of Stone in the
German Suburbs. The Calvinists have also one very finely built in the same
place. The Roman Catholics and Jews, who have not been tolerated till of late,
only exercise their devotion in a private house, and the Jesuits are excluded
from that benefit also, under pain of Banishment, as it happened to one of that
Fraternity not many years ago.

It is very well worth taking notice here, That the present Czar Peter is a
Prince of an excellent good Humor, and a great Favourer of the Lutherans, whom
he presented with all the Stone Materials which were made use of in building
their new Church, and gave them permission, without the approbation of the
Patriarch, to adorn their Church with a Steeple.

But to return to our Journey; We Traveled the 14th of March to Troitza, a
place very agreeable both for its Situation and the Fertility of the
circumjacent Country. This place is chiefly famous for the Convent of Troitza;
which by reason of its strong Fortifications resembles a great Castle at a
distance, being situate about 60 Versts or English Miles from Musco. The
present Czar Peter is so extremely taken with the delightfulness of this place,
that scarce a Week passes but he diverts himself there.

After we had passed here one Day and two Nights to refresh our Horses, and to
take a full view of the place, we Traveled the 16th of March as far as
Pereslaw, a great and magnificent City, according to the Muscovian Fashion, the
Houses being all of Wood. It is situate on a Lake about 60 Versts or Miles
from Troitza, near it are fine Saltpits, which afford great store of very white
Salt, which is from thence transported to other places.

From hence we pursued our Journey to the City of Rostof, having a Convent of
the same name; it is the Capital of the Province of the same name, which in
former Ages was, next to Novogored Vetiki, accounted one of the most ancient
and most considerable of Muscovy, and afterward was appropriated as an
Appenage to the use of the Younger Brothers of the Imperial Family; but the
last Prince of that Race being in the Year 1565, by the Tyrant Ivan Basilovits
bereaved at once of his Dominions and Life, the same was reincorporated with
the Crown of Muscovy.

The City of Rostof it self is a very large and stately City, situate on a
Lake; from whence arises the River Coterius, which discharges it self into the
River Wolga; it is dignified with the Title of an Archbishopric, and the
Archbishop keeps his Residence in the Castle, which is Built of Wood; it is 60
Versts distant from Pereslaw.

We did not tarry long here, being afraid to lose the convenience of making use
of our Sleds, by reason of the approaching Spring; for which reason having
provided our selves with fresh Horses, we came on the 18th of March to
Iaroslaw, the Capital of the Province, situate near the River Wolga, and one
of the largest Cities of the whole Russian Empire. It is a place of vast
Traffic, but especially celebrated for its Trade in Muscovia-Leather; of which
such prodigious quantities are dressed in this place, that it furnishes not
only Muscovy, but also a great part of Europe with this Commodity.

The Province of Iaroslaw is of a very large extent, and extremely fertile,
especially where it borders upon the River Wolga. This Province, like the
former, was allotted as an Appenage to the Younger House of Muscovy; who
enjoyed it for a considerable time, with the Title of Princes, till being also
subdued by the aforementioned Tyrant Ivan Basilovits, they were forced to rest
contented with a certain yearly Allowance under the Jurisdiction of the Czars
of Muscovy.

We were forced to stay here the 19th of March, partly to take a little Rest,
partly to expect the Coming of our Baggage. The 20th we again set forward in
our Journey, and arrived at Midnight in the City of Wologda, situate upon the
River of the same Name, about 180 Versts or Miles from Iaroslaw. All the
Country betwixt this City and that of Musco is extremely populous, we seldom
Traveling a Day but within sight of 14 or 15 Villages or Towns.

This City is the Capital of the Province of the same Name, which is almost
impassable at some times of the Year, by reason of the many Forests and Boggs:
It formerly was under the Jurisdiction of the Dukes of Novogorod Veliki; but
since the Peace concluded in the Year 1613, betwixt the Swedes and Muscovites;
by virtue of which, the last were put in possession of the Dukedom of Novogorod
Veliki, that of Wologda, as being its dependency, also devolved unto the
Muscovites. It is a pretty large City; but what is most remarkable is its
Castle, which by the indefatigable Care of the Muscovites is surrounded with so
strong a Fortification of Stone, as to be accounted impregnable.

The River Wologda, which has communicated its Name both to the City and
Province, runs from West to North, till it joins its Current with the River
Dwina.

On the 21st Day of March (as good fortune would have it) the Weather turned
again to a hard Frost, to our great Satisfaction; for without it we must have
quitted our Sleds, and must have stayed there till the Frost had been quite
broke, which in all probability would have stopped our Journey for several
Months. We therefore pursued our Journey the 22d, and on the 23d came to
Scuskajam; where being provided with fresh Horses, we, after Dinner was over,
went forward upon the River of Sucagna. On the 24th of March we again changed
our Horses in a small Place called Tettma; which having nothing in it to stay
us in our Journey, we Traveled on with all the Expedition imaginable, in hopes
to take up our next nights Quarters in the Village of Vsgorodishna; but meeting
beyond Expectation there with more fresh Horses; and being willing to improve
our Time to the best advantage, we Traveled on the same Night; and the
following Day, being the 26th of March, to the Village of Bobroffskajam, where
indeed we refreshed our selves a little; but having again the good fortune to
find new Horses ready for us, we set forward the same Night; and the next
following, being the 27th of March, and the first Easter Holiday, arrived in
the Capital City of the Province of Vstiugha; where we spent that day and the
following night in affording our selves necessary Rest, and such other good
Cheer as we thought most convenient to restore our decayed Spirits.

Scarce had we taken a few hours Rest to recover our selves from the past
Fatigues, but the Governor of the Place sent one of his Servants; who after a
Compliment from his Master, offered us in his Name every thing that might be in
his Power to serve us; and I must confess, that we were not only very
handsomely entertained here, but also furnished with every thing that was
thought convenient for the prosecution of our Journey.

The City of Vstiugha, as well as its Castle, is situate upon the very Bank of
the River Sucagna, being a very populous and well built City; its chief
Traffic consists in all sorts of Furrs and Skins, but especially in white
Fox-Skins.

We Traveled all the way from Schuskajam to Vstiugha, upon the River Sucagna,
not without great Danger, the Ice being almost melted by the Beams of the
approaching Sun: This is the same River by which the Merchants of Wologda
travel to Archangel.

Being again provided here with fresh Horses, we came on the 29th of March to a
small Place called Lolowitzgoth, upon the River of Wictzegda: This River
joining its Current with the River Dwina, is very well known to the Russian
Merchants, who from this Place travel in six or seven Nights to Archangel,

For the rest, this Place having nothing in it, which was inviting enough to
detain us there; and meeting with fresh Horses, we traveled the same day near
50 Miles through a very large Forest, which is accounted by the Inhabitants to
contain 800 Miles in length.

It is in sundry places inhabited by a certain People called Sirenes, who though
quite different from the Muscovites in their Language and Manners, yet profess
the Greek Religion, and are therefore in great Esteem among the Russians.
Wherever we came we had our share in the public Rejoicings, which are made,
during the Easter-time, all over Muscovy, in remembrance of the Resurrection of
Christ; it being an ancient Custom in Russia to present one another not only on
Easter Day, but for 14 days after, with painted Eggs, of which you see great
Quantities ready boiled, to be sold on all the Corners of the Streets, no body,
of what Quality, Degree, Age or Sex, daring to refuse either the Eggs or the
Kiss, which is always given as you present the Eggs. If they meet in the
Streets, they salute one another in these Words, Christo vos chrest; that is,
Christ is risen: whereto the other having answered, Woe is tenoros Chrest; that
is, he is certainly risen, they Kiss one another. This Custom is so general,
that if during this time you are invited at a Russian's House to partake of
their Merriments, and you should not offer to kiss the Ladies there present,
(where it is to be observed that you must take care not to touch them with your
hands) you would be looked upon as an ill bred Clown; whereas if you acquit
your self handsomely in this Point, you are sure to receive a Cup of Aquavitae
in return for your Civility.

But to return to our Journey, which for some days after proved very
troublesome to us, being obliged to cut down many Trees, to facilitate our
Passage through the Forest: Besides which, the many Rivers (amongst which the
Siasellae, Chasim, and Nactim Peris, were the chiefest) we were to pass,
rendered our Passage not only difficult, but very dangerous, many of our Men
and Sleds falling into the last of these Rivers by the breaking of the Ice;
but, by the help of the rest, having happily escaped the danger, we were
obliged to take new Measures for the future.

For which reason, when we came to any of these Rivulets, which coming from the
adjacent Hills, run through the Valleys, we fastened many pieces of Timber
together, over which (in the nature of a Bridge of Boats) we drew our Sleds by
the help of strong Ropes, whilst we were forced to walk it on Foot, and to let
our Horses swim through the Rivers; We had at last the good fortune to surmount
all these Obstacles, without any great Damage or Loss; but being extremely
fatigued by so troublesome a Passage, we rested our selves for some time in a
Village.

Having a little recovered our selves, we continued our Journey, and arrived
safely on the 6th of April at Kaigorod, upon the River Kama. This Place has its
own Governor, and a good Garrison, who keep a watchful Eye over the Inhabitants,
who are Sirenes; besides, that the Cosacks sometimes pay them a Visit when they
least expect it.

Of this the Governor of the Place, Ivan Mikietivits Lopugin, related us an
Instance which had happened two Years before, in the Year 1690, being the first
of his Government. It seems thirty of these Cosacks having had intelligence
that the Place was at that time not sufficiently provided for its Defense, had
taken a Resolution to attack it on the Waterside: For which purpose, having
provided themselves with all necessary Arms, and, among the rest, with one
great Piece of Cannon, they took the opportunity of the Night, when every body
enjoying the benefit of Rest, they surprised the Town, murdered and plundered
all that came in their way, and were within an Inch of having seized the
Governor; who happily escaping their hands, caused the Alarm to be given to
the Inhabitants; who being thereby made sensible of the Danger, run to their
Arms, and soon obliged these Vagabonds to betake themselves to flight. They
pursued them for some time upon the River; but the darkness of the Night
covering their Retreat, they escaped with the greatest part of the Booty.

Our Sleds being now become quite useless to us, we were obliged to tarry here
till such time that the Ice were sunk in the River: In the mean while we
diverted our selves with Hunting, and such other Pastimes as the Place and our
present Circumstances would afford. For we had not been here many days, when we
were frightened with a new Report, That a considerable Number of these Robbers
had again associated together in order to come and surprise our Baggage, which
put us under no small Consternation, till the Governor having ordered us a good
Guard, and disposed the Garrison so as to be ready upon all occasions, we were
soon freed from these Apprehensions, and passed the rest of our time in our
usual divertisements.

The River being by this time cleared of the Ice, we took our Leave of the
Governor, and embarked in a Vessel built for that purpose, on the 23d of April,
upon the River Kama; in our Passage we saw several Monasteries on both sides of
the River, but very few Villages.

The large River Kama comes from the North-East, and with a swift Current runs
as far as Casan, where it exonerates it self on the left side of it into the
River Wolga. It approaches in Bigness to the River Weser in Germany. It is
increased by several lesser Rivers, among which is the River Wiesetzca, which
falls into it about 25 Miles from Solokamsko.

We left the River Kama on the 26th of April, toward Evening, directing our
Course to the Left, to the small River Vsolsko, from whence we had 7 Miles to
travel to Solokamsko: But going against the Stream, we came not till the 27th
to Solokamsko, being a Place situate in a very pleasant Plain upon the River
Vsolsko, built there on purpose by the Muscovites for the convenience of such,
as have occasion to travel into those far distant Places. It is inhabited both
by Russians and Tartars, who trade in all sorts of Cattle, but especially in
Horses; which being very excellent hereabouts, are preferred before others all
over Muscovy.

There being constantly fourscore Coppers employed here in making of Salt, this
makes this Place, as well as the adjacent Villages, (where they follow the same
Employment) very considerable, it being very fine, and from hence transported
to Casan.

On the 29th of April we had the misfortune to have one of the Ambassador's
Attendance to fall overboard, and to be drowned: He was a Muscovite by Birth,
his Name being Simon Callaction, for the rest a good honest fellow; but being
overcome by the strength of Aquavitae, came by this Accident, by tumbling
overboard, and was, notwithstanding all the care taken by his Comrades to save
his life, carried away by the swiftness of the Current: His Body was found
floating on the first of May, when it was interred near the Shore.

On the second of May the Ambassador, with most of his Retinue, were invited by
a certain Muscovian Gentleman, one of the Czar's Factors, whose Name was Alexi
Astaffi Philatoff, to his Countryhouse, about 20 Miles distant from Solok,
where we were entertained with a very handsome Dinner, and passed the Day very
merrily. Near this place his Czarish Majesty employs above 20000 Workmen in
making of Salt. The Gentleman whom we mentioned before, had, at his own cost,
two large Vessels built in this place, of 400 Tuns each, for the Transportation
of Salt; and hearing of our coming that way, had caused them to stay for some
time, to make us eyewitnesses of the manner of convoying these Ships, and what
Order and Discipline there was observed among them. Each of these Vessels had
500 Men on board, who were to labor without intermission at the Oars,
relieving each other at certain and convenient times, under the Command of
several Officers; so that by the continual supply of fresh Men, these Vessels
could perform a great Voyage in a little time. Both these Vessels being laden
with nothing but Salt, were bound to Casan, where they sold it to a great
Advantage: For whereas the Pode (being 40 Pound weight) did not stand the Owner
in above half a Copeck upon the Spot, it was sold at Casan for twelve or
thirteen Copecks.

The night, betwixt the 3d and 4th of May, it began to Snow and Freeze so hard
again, as if it had been in the Winter; which continuing till the 6th, put us
to no small trouble, being obliged to stay here seventeen Days, which however
we passed pleasantly enough. The worst of all was, that by the melting of the
Snow, and the overflowing of the Rivers, we were disappointed in our design of
going by Land to Wergaturia, situate upon the Frontiers of Siberia; which being
but a small Place, and furnished with very low and indifferent Buildings,
notwithstanding this has its own Waywode or Governor. But, as I said before,
being disappointed in our design, we were forced to make use of five Boats,
each of them Manned with five Watermen, who, by the help of their Oars, brought
us on the 14th of May as far as Vskogorod; but the Wind veering about as we
were within sight of the Place, drove us back down the River Vsolka, into the
River Kama. They count it 50 German Miles from Solokamsko to Wergaturia. On the
16th of May we entered the small River Susora. From Solokamsko to this River it
is counted 30, and from hence to Vlko 40 Miles. Here we were again in no small
Danger; for the River having overflowen all the circumjacent Country, just as
we passed upon it, to such an extraordinary a degree, that our Boats often
passed over the tops of the Trees; if there had happened a sudden Fall of the
Waters, we must have infallibly perished; but we happily escaped the Danger,
and arrived safely on the 19th of May in a small City called Niesna Susowa,
where we refreshed our selves. On the 20th we came to another small Town, the
Inhabitants of both are employed in making of Salt. From hence upwards the
River, the pleasant Woods and Hills on both sides afford a very delightful
Prospect.

In these Forests you meet with the Agarius Tree, whose spongeous substance is
from hence carried to Archangel, and from thence into other Parts of Europe. We
saw several Villages on both sides of the River; and on the 25th of May took up
our Lodgings in one of them, situate upon the very Banks of it. After we had a
little recovered our selves from our past fatigues, we had the curiosity to
enquire into the Manners and Customs of the People inhabiting those Parts.

They are called Wogultzoi, Subjects to the Czar of Muscovy, and are all
Pagans, much addicted to Superstition. Their Stature is low and mean, not
unlike the Tartars; their Habitations having also a great Resemblance to the
Tartarian Huts, but they are never without a Chimney in them; They use a
Language different both from the Muscovites and Tartars.

They being asked concerning their Faith, gave us for answer, That they
believed a Creator, who resided in Heaven, for whom they had a great
Veneration; They pay Adoration to the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Water; they
sacrifice Horses, Cows and Calves; They expose their Skins only upon a Pole or
high Tree, to which they pay their Devotion; the Meat they eat afterward. They
were altogether ignorant of any thing relating to Baptism; they only told us,
that it was a most ancient Custom among them, to name the Child after the most
ancient Person of the Village. They are very careful to inter their Dead in
their best Accoutrements, being of opinion that at the Resurrection (which they
believe, without the least sense, whither they are to go afterward) every one
is to appear in the same posture and condition as he was buried. The Muscovites
observe many Fasts throughout the Year, but these were ignorant of what Fasting
meant; yet we observed that they did not eat any Fowl, but only their Eggs,
which they looked upon as a great Dainty.

Their Marriages are contracted and performed in a very odd manner: If a young
Man, who intends to marry a young Woman, comes to ask her Father's consent, the
Answer is, If thou be'st in a condition to pay for her, thou may have her;
so they make the bargain as well as they can, the Bridegroom being obliged to
purchase the Bride from her Father, sometimes for 40, sometimes for 50 or more
Rubles, which amounts to 20 or 30 Pounds sterling. The Money being paid, the
Bride is surrendered to the Bridegroom without any further Ceremony; but if the
Money be not ready, there is no Bride to be had; they are yet so civil to allow
the Bridegroom a certain time to raise the Money, and in the mean while he has
the liberty to court his Mistress; who, when the bargain is fulfilled, is
carried veiled to his Bedchamber. After the Bridegroom has gathered the first
fruits of his nuptial Bed, their Friends and Relations are invited the next day
to a Feast, where they make themselves heartily merry with Eating, Drinking,
and Dancing till the next morning; when, after they have made some Presents to
the young Couple, they part, to their own homes.

What was credibly related to us concerning their Childbearing Women, is no
less surprising than the former: For when the time of their Delivery
approaches, they retire into some Forest or another, where they stay for two
Months after, till having recovered their full strength, they return to their
Husbands. During their stay in the Woods, their Husbands dare not approach them
under pain of Death; these ignorant Wretches being persuaded, that there are
certain invisible Persons inhabiting these Forests, who, as they are very
careful to preserve these Women against any misfortune that might befall them,
so they would be sure to punish the Husband with Death, if he should be so
presumptuous as to come near his Wife, whilst she is under their protection in
the Forest.

We had the opportunity to be present at the Burial of one of their Dogs: He
was of a very large Size, and had been, as it seems, a good Hunting-Dog in his
lifetime; for which reason, these poor Wretches made sad moans and lamentations
for the loss of so serviceable a Creature: After having uttered many things in
his praise, they put him into a Grave dug for that purpose, with a piece of
Wood under his Head, for fear he should lie uneasy; and as a Monument of their
gratitude for his past Services, they erected a little Hutt over his Grave. We
were credibly informed, that it is a very ancient Custom among these People, to
bury all their Dogs, and to reward their past Services in the same manner.

Their manner of living is very miserable, Husbandry being a thing unknown
among them: Hunting is their only livelihood; Sables and the Reen-Deer being
the only Commodities this Country affords.

We pursued our Journey on the 26th of May, leaving the small River called
Silva Reka on our right Hand, and toward Noon the small River Kine, on the
same side, and toward Evening the River Serebrena Reka, to the left of us. On
the 28th of May, we passed by Vlko Mesovasa and Sullem Reka to the left of us.
On the 29th of the same Month we left Vlko Serebrena Reka on the same side, and
on the Right the River Doria Reka.

On the 1st of June we came to Vlk^gorod, a Place fortified after the Russian
manner, with wooden Fortifications, but very small, containing not above twenty
Families.

We spent above three Weeks upon the River Susowa, our Vessel being sometimes
drawn, sometimes rowed, but always against the Current; which, by reason of the
many windings of the River, is very swift, and so violent, that we were
sometimes droven back for a quarter of a Mile before we could recover our
selves; besides, that we met with several Cataracts, which took up a whole day
before we could pass them, and that not without great danger. To add to our
affliction, we were continually pestered with such an infinite number of Gnats,
that, whatever precaution we took, it was impossible for us to preserve us
against their fury.

All the way betwixt Solamsko and Vlko we saw nothing but Deserts and Rocks on
both sides of us, which are most dreadful to behold at a distance; and because
we could not go further up the River, we were forced to tarry nine days at
Vlko, before we could be furnished with Land-Carriages; which time we spent in
providing our selves with Forage and all other necessaries; and on the 10th of
June set forward again in our Journey to Newa, leaving our Baggage to follow us
the next day.

The 12th of June we traveled through a Town called Ajat, situate upon a River
of the same name; and the 13th to another Town called Romasheva, upon the River
Resh. The Grounds hereabouts are very fertile and well peopled, abounding in
all sorts of Corn; and whereas, whilst we were upon the River Susowa, we scarce
got sight of a Village in 60 Miles; we now could not travel a Verst, or English
Mile, without meeting with a good Village, where we were furnished with every
thing we stood in need of.

Whilst we were in this Town, the Inbabitants received Intelligence by
Messengers and Letters sent for that purpose, that the Calmu^k Tartars, to the
Number of 6000, had made an Inroad into the next Province; where they had made
such miserable havoc, with Murdering, Burning, Plundering, and Driving away
both Men and Cattle, that they had put all the Country round about under a
great Consternation, as dreading the same treatment.

On the 14th of June we reached Newagorod, a small, but very pleasant Town; it
has but an indifferent Fortification, not much better than Vlko; but is
remarkable for its Situation upon the River Newa, the Boundary of Siberia on
this side. This Journey was very pleasant and diverting to us after our former
Fatigues and Dangers, the Country being everywhere filled with Inhabitants, and
the Fields well cultivated, the wild Roses, and other sweet Herbs, affording a
very agreeable scent, and a most delightful prospect. The pleasantness of the
Place invited us to tarry here a whole day, which we spent in walking about the
Fields, and gathering of Roses, Lillies of the Valley, and such like* On the
16th of June our Baggage arrived at Newa-Gorod; and the next following day we
again received intelligence, that the abovementioned Calmuck Tartars were
advanced within four days Journey of this Place; and that after they had made
themselves Masters of a certain Frontier Town, which they had besieged, they
intended to march this way: The Inhabitants hereabouts being sufficiently
sensible of the Cruelties exercised by these Vagabonds in their Excursions,
were in most dreadful fear of these Barbarians; and we forewarned of the
approaching danger, hastened the equipment of our Vessel; which being got ready
in five days after, we stayed not one moment longer: but after we had thus
spent seven days betwixt hope and fear at Newa, we set out from thence on the
21st of June, steering our course upon the River for Tobolsko, being provided
with a Convoy of 12 Cossacks of the Garrison of Newa, for our better security.

The River Resh falls 5 Miles above Newa into another River, where, with its
stream, it loses its Name, and is from thenceforward called Niatza. The first
Town we met with upon this River on the 22d, is called Rudna; and not far from
thence another goodly Town called Nigniske, situate in a very fertile and
populous Country, fit both for Pasturage and Tillage, the Fields and Plains
being surrounded and covered with Rose-trees, which afford a most delightful
prospect.

On the 23d of June we passed by three very handsome Towns, to wit, Iebitzke,
Kerginskoy, and Suborara. On the 24th we came in sight of the Town called
Ialan, famous for nothing else, but that near it, this River joins its Current
with the River Kira. Toward the Evening we saw another Town at some distance
named Krasna Hobod; and on the 25th, about Midnight, came to the City of Tumen.

It is a large and strong Place, being fortified with a very good Wall; the
Inhabitants are for the most part Tartars, who have settled here for the
convenience of Trade: They are much more civilized than any of the other
Tartars, by reason of their frequent Conversation with Strangers. Most of these
Towns furnished us with fresh Watermen; who being well rewarded for their
pains, so warmly plied their Oars, that we advanced apace.

I cannot pass by here in silence the extraordinary Liberality and Hospitality
of the Inhabitants of these Parts; for we scarce could pass by a Town, though
never so indifferent, but the Inhabitants would come forth and bring us
Provisions, and sometimes Furs, without the least reward or recompense, to our
no small astonishment, who were not used to meet often with such kind treatment
among such Barbarous Nations, they being generally of the Tartarian Race.

The next Town we met with, was called Makowa, situate on the Confluence of the
Rivers Pishma Reka, and the Tura, which runs by the City of Wergaturia.

On the 28th of June we came as far as Sutska, situate on the Confluence of the
Rivers Tura and Tobol. The next day we passed by Piesda Reka, and Turba Reka;
and on the 30th of June leaving the River Taffda to the Left of us, we arrived
safely on the 1st day of July in the City of Tobolsko.

This City, which is the Capital of Siberia, is situate near the River Tobol,
about 3000 Miles from the City of Musco. It is situate upon a Hill of a large
Extent, the Suburbs being most inhabited by Tartars. There is here a very fair
Monastery, surrounded with a very strong brick Wall. Near this Place the River
Irtish joins its Current with the River Tobol; Tobolsko is not only the
Capital, but also the chief Place of Trade of all Siberia. Their Traffic
consists most in Furrs, such as Sables, Ermins, Fox Skins, and suchlike.

The Kingdom of Siberia is watered by a great many large Rivers, among which
the River Oby is the chiefest. This River has many Islands, which by reason of
the thick Woods are unpassable. In some places the Oby is a League, in other
places half a League broad; it abounds in Fish, such as Sturgeon, White-fish or
Belluja's, and others.

The principal Cities of Siberia are, Werchaturia, Iapahzeen, Tumen, Tobolsko,
Narim, Tomskoy, Kosnezi, Krasnojer, Ker, Ienokisko, Ilim, Mongassy, most of
which are very large and populous Cities. The Kingdom of Siberia is surrounded
by several Tartarian Nations, such as the Calmuck Tartars, the Tartars of
Mongul, and others, as the Tungoskoy, Bratzkoy, Ostiacky, Barrabinsy, governed
by their own Princes, and each of them distinguished by their different
Languages. The Samoyedes are under the Jurisdiction of the Czars of Muscovy.

The Natives of Siberia are much addicted to Sorcery and Idolatry. The Russians
inhabit most of the Cities; Czar John Basilovits was the first who brought this
Kingdom under his Jurisdiction, after he had conquered the two Tartarian
Kingdoms of Casan and Astrachan; since which time they pay their yearly Tribute
of all sorts of Furrs which are found in Siberia, to wit, Sables, Martins, red
and white Fox Skins, which amount to Two hundred thousand Rubles per Annum.

The Sables are caught by the Inhabitants by Traps, not unlike our Rat and
Mice-Traps; but they have also another way of Hunting and Killing the Sables,
of which we shall have occasion to speak anon. They go a Sable hunting with
Sleds drawn by Dogs, who carry the Sleds with more ease over the Snow than
Horses. The Czar of Muscovy has the Twentieth of all the Sables that are
caught throughout the Year; we being obliged to stay for some time at
Tobolsko, as well to repose our selves after so tedious and troublesome a
Journey, as to make all necessary Preparations for the future; we passed our
time very pleasantly in the Company of the Waywode or Governor Stepan Ivanovits
Sotticove, and his two Sons Fedor Stepanovits, and Ivan Stepanovits, who showed
us all the Civilities in the World, and there passed few days but that they
either were with us, or we with them, and entertained one another with every
thing the Place would afford.

The Ambassador having dispatched in the mean while an Express to their Czarish
Majesty's, and every thing being provided for the prosecution of our Journey,
we put as many Provisions, Forage, and other Necessaries on board our two
Vessels, as would serve us for three Months: For, from hence to Ienokisko,
whither we were bound, is 6000 Miles, for the most part through a desolate
Country, where there is but little Forage and Provision to be met with.

Accordingly after we had all taken our leave from the Governor and his Sons,
we went on board our Vessels on the 22d of July, under convoy of 20 Strelitzes
or Musketeers, who were to conduct us to Surgutt, and directed our Course upon
the River Irish, toward Ienokisko. The 24th we sailed with a fair Gale by a
Town called Dernjan; but having occasion for fresh Watermen, we went on shore
till we could be supplied with some. Near this place the River Derjansko falls
into the Irtish on the Right hand, and the Inhabitants hereabouts being
Ostiaky, a lazy and idle People, we changed our Watermen sometimes twice and
thrice a day: Of their manner of Living we shall speak more hereafter.

On the 28th of July, early in the Morning, we came to a Town called
Samurskojam, where we stayed till the 29th, when we got on board again by break
of day. We had scarce sailed two Miles upon the River Irtish, when we passed
into another lesser River; which being a Branch of the River Oby, we were towed
up against the Current, and at last, on the first day of August, entered that
famous River Oby. This River rising among the Calmuck Tartars from the
South-West, disembogues in the Tartarian Sea; it is very dangerous for Ships,
by reason of its depth, and the many Rocks, which render its Waters very
boisterous. The 6th of August we reached the City of Surgutt, a Place which has
nothing remarkable, but a small Garrison; the Governor of which having given us
16 of them to convoy us to Narim, we sent back those we had taken along with us
from Tobolsko. Hereabouts you see nothing but a barren desolate Country,
inhabited by a few miserable Wretches, who have scarce wherewithal to cover
their Nakedness, all their Employment being Hunting of Sables, Ermins and Foxes.

They catch here the Sables in a quite different manner from what we have
related before; for they shoot them with Arrows, or they make fire under the
Trees where they know the Sables do shelter themselves; who being suffocated by
the Smoke, fall from the Trees, and are soon caught. The Ermins they catch in
Traps, and the Foxes they hunt with Dogs. We stayed here till the 9th of
August, when being furnished with fresh and sturdy young Watermen, who
encouraged by the hopes of a good Reward, stood briskly to their Oars, We
passed the 13th the River Wache to the Left of us, on the 19th the River Tim,
and on the 24th arrived safely at Narim, a City situate on the Left-side of us
upon the River Oby.

It is worth observation, that in the Wintertime there is no Traveling from
Tobolsko to Narim with Horses, but this Journey must be performed in Sleds
drawn by Dogs; they put three or four of them before the Sled, and whip them
along as we do our Horses. When they go abroad a Hunting, they put their
Provisions and Hunting tackle, such as Bows, Arrows, Lances, and suchlike, in
one of these Sleds drawn by Dogs, and thus travel to their rendezvous, which is
sometimes 14 or 15 days Journey from their Habitations, and many times don't
return in two months.

The Ostiaky living in these Parts, make use of these Sleds in the same manner
when they go abroad a Fishing; so that you may see them bring their Fish to
Market in many Sleds all drawn (in the Wintertime) by Dogs.

We were provided here with new Barge-men, and 24 Cossacks, who were to convoy
us to Ienokisko, and on the 25th of August re-imbark'd upon the River Oby,
which we left on the 29th of the same month, and entered the River Ketto, where
being obliged to Row against the Current, we were above a month before we could
reach the Town of Mokuskoy, from whence we continued our Journey by Land to
Ienokisko. We saw abundance of Cedar-trees on both sides of the River Ketto,
and on the first of September refreshed our selves at a small Town called
Kettskoy. But meeting with very slender Accommodation, we got on board again
the same night, and did not stir out of the Vessel till the 28th following,
there being nothing but Deserts on both sides of the River. On the 16th of
September we were all on a sudden put under a great Consternation; for it
having frozen very hard the night before, we were in no small apprehension of
the danger of perishing for want of Necessaries in these Deserts, which must
have been infallibly our fate, if the Frost had continued longer; but, as good
fortune would have it, we were soon freed from this Danger by a very agreeable
Thaw; and being, besides this, encouraged by a fresh and favorable Gale, we
made use of all our Skill; and on the 28th of the same month came to a
Monastery, situate upon the Banks of the River, where we reposed our selves for
some days, after a long fatigue of a whole month; and in remembrance of the
past danger, kept a Thanksgiving day there on the 2d of October, to offer our
Thanks to God Almighty for our Deliverance, and to implore his Mercy for the
future.

After Prayers, etc. we set Sail again the same Evening, when we passed a small
Village, which contained not above six Families. We saw hereabouts abundance of
Currant-trees, both black and red; we had met with some of them before near
this River, but no where else in so great a quantity, which made us judge, the
Grounds hereabouts were more kind and fruitful than in other places. On the 3d
of October died one of the Ambassador's Retinue after 13 days illness: His Name
was John George Weltzel, a Native of Germany, of the City of Golding in
Silesia, by his Profession a Painter. On the 7th of the same month, we got
safely to the so long wished for small City of Mokuskoy, where, among other
things, we gratified our selves with a cool draught of very good Beer. By
Orders from the Ambassador we interred the dead Body of our Friend upon a Hill,
upon the very Banks of the River Ietto, where we put a Cross; this being the
only Monument we were capable of dedicating to the Memory of our deceased
Fellow-traveller.

After we had a little recovered our selves from the past Fatigues, the
Ambassador, and most of his Retinue, pursued their Journey by Land on the 10th
of October, leaving nine of his Attendance behind to take care of the Baggage,
which was to follow us, as soon as the Roads should be rendered convenient for
the passage of Sleds. We traveled for two days and nights through a most
dreadful Forest, till on the 12th of the same month we came in sight of
Ienokisko, where we made our public Entrance the same night, with so much
Magnificence, that the Inhabitants were surprised thereat. This City lies upon
the River Ienska, famous not only for the convenience of Shipping, but also for
the most prodigious Plenty of Fish it affords. Betwixt this Place and Tobolsko
the Ostiacky have their Habitations. They are low of Stature, and very
deformed; besides which, both Men and Women constantly are subject to a certain
Weakness in their Eyes, the cause of which they attribute to the want of Bread;
which being a scarce Commodity among them, they seldom are masters of it,
unless they are by chance furnished with it by Travelers; which happening very
rarely in so remote a Country, we supplied them with what we were able to
spare: Their common Food is River-fish; and instead of Bread, they make use of
the same Fish dried. Whilst we were as yet upon the River Oby, we were every
day supplied with great Quantities of the best River-fish by those Ostiacky,
who refused our Money, but earnestly entreated us to give them in lieu of it
some Salt, Bread, and Chinese Sharr or Tobacco, which we did accordingly.

Not far from the Banks of the River Ketto, I espied one day some wretched
Hutts, which believing to belong to the Ostiacky; and being willing to satisfy
my curiosity in taking a view of their Habitations, I got on shore; and having
easily got admission by the help of a small Present of Bread and Salt to the
Owners, I entered them, which made a wretched appearance, being made only of the
Barks of Trees.

One among them, somewhat bigger than the rest, and distinguished by certain
Figures, invited my Curiosity to take a full View of it. Being entered, I found
three Women lying upon the Ground, who at the sight of me arose from their
places, and by their noddings and threatenings sufficiently testified their
displeasure of seeing a Stranger to interrupt them in their retirement; but
being sensible that I had prepared my way by the Presents given to the Owners,
I took, notwithstanding all their wry Faces, the liberty to search every corner
of the Hutt. These three Women, as I was informed afterward, were the Wives of
so many Knezes or Dukes of the Ostiacky, but their Equipage appeared little
suitable to their Quality, for I could not meet with any thing worth taking
notice of all over the Hall but their Sheitan, or (as they themselves called
it) their God: This Idol was of Wood, of about a Yard in length, appearing most
dreadful at first sight; the Head of it being covered with a strong Tin or
Iron-Plate, which looked as black as a Chimney-stock, by reason of the many
Incenses which they offer to this Idol. For the rest, it was dressed up in a
ragged Coat of woollen Cloth, patched together with 1000 pieces of all sorts of
Colors; I don't remember that ever I saw the most wretched Beggar make so
miserable an appearance as this their God, unto whom this superstitious People
attribute a Power of preserving them from ill. All the while we were upon the
River betwixt Sergutt and Mokuskoy, we had no other Barge-men but these
Ostiacky; who, though they were young and lustly Fellows, and were well
entertained on Board of our Vessels, yet were so lazy, that they would rather
have sat at home and starved, than to come and work for a good livelihood. It
is by reason of this their lazy Temper, that they seldom take the pains to go
abroad a Hunting. And for the same reason it is, that they change continually
their Habitations, sometimes 16 or 20 times in a year, because, say they, we
are willing to put our selves beyond the reach of such Travelers who come this
way, and oftentimes, sorely against our wills, force us to the Oars.

The Ambassador being willing to divert us with the simplicity of these
ignorant Wretches, he caused his Valet du Chamber to bring forth a wooden
Drummer; which being very artificially made with Clook-work within, beat the
Drum, and expressed some other Motions of the Head, Eyes and Hands so
naturally, that the Ostiacky being at first surprised at it, started back; but
having a little recovered themselves, and taken a full view of all his
Postures, they knocked their Heads against the Ground, prostrating themselves
before the wooden Drummer in the same manner as they do before their Sheitan,
or God; at which we could not forbear laughing.

To continue the sport, a wooden Bear was brought forth by the Ambassador's
Order, who, as he was made after the same fashion, so he beat the Drum with his
fore-paws, and all the Motions of the Head and Eyes as artificially as the
Drummer; wherefore they also paid him the same Veneration. But they soon gave
us to understand, that they were much more taken with the Drummer than with the
Bear; for they with a very profound Reverence begged the Ambassador to bestow
upon them the Drummer, offering to give the weight of him in Money. But the
Ambassador, being unwilling to encourage their Idolatry, and for some other
Reasons, denied their Request.

Their Garments are made of the Skins of Beasts, with the Furr on the outside;
in the Summer they cloth themselves with the Skins of Fishes. We also made
this Observation among them, That some have their Sheitan or Idol made of Wood,
others of Lead, and others again of Brass, according to their several
Abilities; and the poorer sort dress them up in Rags, the richer in Sables.

They have a very odd way of paying their Devotion to this Idol: For, instead
of saying their Prayers, they whistle a certain Tune, with strange Postures,
clapping their Hands together, beating their Heads to the ground, and making
many Gesticulations with their Feet as they lie prostrate before them, with
many more suchlike ridiculous Ceremonies, too many to insert here.

Whenever they Feast, they set a certain share of the best Dish aside for the
Sheitan; which if they should neglect, they are of opinion, that the Victuals
they eat, would turn to Worms in their Bowels; and if they should take it away
again from before the Idol, they are persuaded, they should be struck Lame in
all their Limbs. We were credibly informed, that at certain times they met in
their Hutts, where they first began with Whistling, and afterward continued to
make most horrid Outcries and Lamentations, till a certain Spectre appeared to
them, which foretold them what was to happen to them the next year: as for
instance, whether they were to be plagued with Famine; whether they should be
fortunate or unfortunate in their Hunting and Fishing; whether they should
continue in Health or not; whether they should marry young or old Wives;
whether they should die a Natural death, or whether they should be slain or
torn to pieces by the Bears and other wild Creatures; and more of such like
Predictions: which done, they pay their Adoration to the Spectre; and that
being vanished, they look upon its Predictions as infallible, and accordingly
attend their Fate with an unshaken resolution. They also pay a kind of
Veneration to the Bear-Skin, and swear by it. When they have shot a Bear, they
cut off his Head; and paying their Veneration to it, they whistle and ask, Who
is it that killed thee? the Russians did it. Who cut off thy Head? the Russian
Axe did it. Who is it that has handled thee thus? the Russians have done it;
laying thus all the fault upon the Russians.

These blind and ignorant Wretches have nevertheless this good Quality
belonging to them, that they don't Curse nor Swear; for which they show such an
abhorrence, that they take care to make very lively Impressions against this
Vice in their young Babes; being persuaded, That he who Swears falsely or
foolishly, shall certainly be unfortunate the whole Year, and be in danger of
being torn to pieces by the Bears, or other wild Beasts.

For the rest, the Ostiacky are great Admirers of Chinese Sharr or Tobacco,
which they take in a manner peculiar to themselves: For when they intend to
Smoke, they fill their Mouth with Water; and so sucking the Tobacco-smoak in
greedily, swallow it down with the Water. For which reason it is, that
generally at the taking of the first Pipe in the Morning, they fall down drunk
and insensible, but soon recover themselves. They seldom take Tobacco sitting,
but always standing. For want of Tobacco, they smoke the shavings of their
Tobacco-pipes, which are made of Wood, after a very course fashion.

We stayed in the City of Ienokisko, or Ienessay, ten Weeks, where we were
extremely civilly treated by the Inhabitants, but most especially by the
Governor. On the 13th of December we sent our heavy Baggage before upon Sleds,
and the Ambassador with his Retinue followed on the 21st of the same month,
taking our way toward Irkutskoy. We were conducted out of the Town to the next
Village, as well by the Governor himself as the chiefest Inhabitants; and after
having bid one another farewell, we continued our Journey for some time upon the
River Ienska, which we afterward left to our Right, and passed all along the
River Tungusko Reka, or Tongusi, the Boundary of Tungoeses on this side, of
whom we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter. We passed by several
Villages on both sides of the River, and on the 30th of December took up our
Quarters in the Village called Buhutsha, where we refreshed our selves for four
and twenty hours. Beyond this Village begins the great Wolock or Desert, where
you travel 8 or 10 days, without meeting any Village, or House fit for
Entertainment.

In the Year 1693, on New-years-day, we left the abovementioned Village, and
entered the abovementioned Wolock or Desert, which proved very troublesome to
us by reason of the Coldness of the Weather, which was so excessive, that our
Victuals and Drink (which was only fair Water) froze, and turned to Ice, before
we could bring it from hand to mouth. And when we had occasion to travel upon
the River, the Mountains of Ice, which often obstructed our passage, were such
Obstacles as were not easy to be surmounted, being obliged to cut our way
through them with Axes. This prodigious Quantity of Ice, and the uneven Ways
which are all over the Desert, deter most Travelers from taking this Road in
the Wintertime. We had once more the good fortune to overcome all these
difficulties, and on the 8th of January came safely to the Village called
Kasma. To refresh our selves and our Horses after so troublesome a Journey, we
were obliged to stay here 13 days, which time we employed in sending for fresh
Horses, and in taking a view of the Habitations of the Tongueses, of whom I
will give you a short Relation.

They were formerly a Warlike Nation, governed by its own Princes, inhabiting
a very large Country. But they have of late years been conquered by the
Victorious Arms of the Czars of Muscovy, unto whom they pay a yearly Tribute.

As to their Persons, they are very lusty and well proportioned, their Clothes
being nothing but the Skins of Beasts, with the Furrs on the outside of diverse
Colors, neither Sex being to be distinguished by the least difference in their
Habits. They take a particular pride to have their Cheeks stitched (whilst they
are young) with black Thread through and through, some crossways, some in
imitation of a Square, or any other figure they like best. This unaccountable
piece of Pride, as painful as it is, (as causing great Swellings in their
Faces) they look upon it as Badges of Honor, transmitted to them from their
Ancestors; the marks of which they retain with a great deal of satisfaction
till their dying-day.

Their Cabans or Hutts are generally made of the Skins of the Reens, or some
other wild Beasts; those of the better sort of the Barks of Trees: It is a most
surprising thing to conceive how these poor Wretches are able to defend
themselves against the Violence of the Cold, in such miserable Cottages; but
Custom has inured them to endure these Hardships without the least
inconveniency to themselves. For no sooner are their Children come into the
World, but they lay them in the Summer in cold Water, in the Winter in the
Snow; by which means they are so accustomed to Cold, that they are the hardiest
People in the World.

They are distinguished into three sorts: The first are called Kunny Tungoesi,
who make use of Horses. The second Alenny, who live altogether upon Hunting.
The third Sobaltzy, who live more like Dogs than Men.

Their Idols are made only of Wood, every one has his domestic or tutelar God.
There is one who is looked upon as the Patron of Hunting, who sends them good
fortune when they go a Hunting after the wild Beast or wild Fowl. Another makes
them successful in catching of Sables; another in Fishing: But sometimes they
use their Gods but scurvily; for, if they have offered up their Prayers to
them, and are deceived in their expectation, the God is thrown out of doors,
till they happen to have better luck; then they are admitted again, and have
their full and best share of what they have got abroad*

If five or six of these Tonguese Families happen to live near one another
(which is very rarely seen) they maintain betwixt them a Shaman, which
signifies as much as a Sorcerer or Priest. At their Meetings this Priest
appears in a Habit distinguished by many Figures of Beasts, such as Lions,
Bears, Serpents, Adders, and suchlike; which being all of Iron, weigh
generally above Two hundred pounds weight. Then he beats a Drum in a very
doleful manner, at which the standers-by break out into most dreadful
Lamentations and Outcries, pretending that they see certain Specter in the
figures of Ravens and other strange Birds; and the Priest, as if stricken with
an Epileptick-fit, falls down upon the ground, and is reverenced by these
ignorant People as a Saint.

How mean and miserable soever their Condition is, they all of them have
several Wives, whom they look upon as their greatest Treasure: The richer sort
have often 10 or 12, whom they buy from their Fathers, sometimes for 10,
sometimes for 15 Reen-deers a-piece.

Their manner of taking an Oath is most abominable: For, he that is to confirm
the truth of a thing by his solemn Oath, is obliged to suck the Blood of a Dog
wounded for this purpose, with a Knife in his left fore leg, till he expires.
They don't bury their dead Corpse, but hang them on Trees, where they putrify,
and at last waste away. They are very cautious of Swearing or Cursing; the
worst Curse they give one another, is to wish them to be forced to live among
the Russians, or to Till the Ground, and suchlike.

On the 21st of January we left the Village of Kasma, and continued our Journey
in Sleds upon the River Tunguska, or Tongusi, till after some time leaving it
to the right of us, we passed from thence to the small River Ilim; both these
Rivers are well peopled on both sides of the Shore. On the 25th we arrived in
the small City of Ilimskoy, situate upon the River Ilim, in the very Center of
some high Mountains which surround it. On the 27th we continued our Journey
from thence through a great Forest, which by reason of the badness of the Ways,
we did not lay behind us till after a troublesome Journey of three days and
nights, when we came to the River Angara, where we passed by many others of
less note, the Isle of Balagansko and Kamenko, which are well peopled.
Hereabouts live the Brattskoy, who being of the Race of the Mongul Tartars, are
Tributaries to the Czars of Muscovy. Betwixt Ienokitsko or Ienessay, and
Irkutskoy, great Quantities of Martins and Foxes are caught in the beginning of
the Winter; but about Ienokisko are the best black Foxes, which are sold at 20,
25, and 30 Rubles a-piece.

On the 11th of February we arrived safely in the City of Irkutskoy, situate
upon the River Angara, where, for several Reasons we stayed a whole month, in
which time we received all manner of civility from the Governor Knez Ivan
Petrovits Gargaran. As he used often to invite us to Dinner, I met several
times there with a certain person, who being accounted a Saint among the Mongul
Tartars, used to mutter out his Prayers, which were very long, holding in his
Hands a long String with red Coral Beads, which he told without intermission.
On the 15th of February the Ambassador dispatched a Messenger to the City of
Naun, on the Frontiers of China, to notify our Arrival in those Parts. On the
9th of March we left the City of Irkutskoy, and being conducted out of the Town
by the Governor and the chief Inhabitants to the next Village, we spent the
whole night there in making good Cheer; and having bid one another Adieu, the
next morning we came on the 10th of March in sight of the Lake of Baikala,
where the River Angara has its rise.

This River was from the City of Irkutskoy, to its Entrance into the Lake,
quite free from Ice, and had been so all the Winter long. They count it 30
Miles from the City to the Lake, the utmost Boundary of the Kingdom of Siberia.

The Lake of Biakala is about four days. Journey in length, but at this Season
we passed its breadth with Sleds in six hours. It is more dangerous in the
Summer by reason of the changeableness of the Winds: The Inhabitants have this
superstitious opinion concerning it, That whoever calls it Oser or a Lake, will
scarce pass it without danger; but those who give it the Title of Mor or Sea,
need not fear any thing. We dined on the 11th of March upon the said Lake, and
toward Evening discovered six Cabans or Hutts belonging to the abovementioned
Brattskoy. Near these Hutts we saw a dead Sheep and Goat fixed upon a Tree with
the Heads upwards, which, they told us, were two Sacrifices made to the
Heavens. I made the best inquiry I could concerning their Religion, but could
get no satisfactory Account, only that they used to sacrifice a Sheep and a
Goat once a year to the Creator of the Heavens, and that they adore the Sun.
They are very industrious in Breeding of Cattle, but especially of Camels for
the convenience of the Caravans traveling to China.

We came the same Evening to a Monastery on the other side of the Lake, situate
upon the Frontiers of the Province of Dauri, a very large and fertile Country.
The next Morning, being the 12th, we passed through the Towns of Kabania and
Bolsko Sainko, both small Places, but well fortified by the Inhabitants, they
serving them as Bulwarks against the Tartars of Mongul, On the 19th of the same
Month we came in sight of Vdinskoy, and the Ambassador was met three Miles out
of Town by an Officer at the Head of 50 Cossacks, who conducted him to the
City, where he was received under the discharge of the Cannon. This Place,
which is considered here as the Key of the Province of Dauri, has not been
inhabited above six Years. The Castle, which is very well fortified after the
Russian manner, lies upon a Hill, from whence they have at several times
bravely repulsed the Mongul Tartars that assaulted them. We lay still here
three Weeks, which time we spent (as we had done at Irkutskoy) in buying of
Cattle for the convenience of our Carriage. We bought Camels at 10 or 15 Rubles
apiece, and Horses for 4, 5, or 6 Rubles. We provided our selves also with as
many Oxen as might furnish us with Beef in our Journey to China, and back again.

Being now to travel through the great Desert belonging to the Mongul Tartars,
we packed our Baggage upon Camels and Horses, the first carrying about 600
weight, the last about 250: We entered the Desert on the 6th of April, our
Caravan consisting of 250 Men, some Hundreds of Camels and Horses, and 400
Wagons, which in the nightime being drawn up in a Circle, enclosed the rest,
and at some distance from thence we placed our Centries, to advertise us of the
approach of our Enemies, if any should appear. But they not daring to attack
us, took another course to vex us to the utmost of their power; for during the
space of three Weeks, that we traveled through this Desert, where we often
were in want of Water for Men and Beast, the Monguls and Tongueses burnt that
small quantity of dry Winter-grass that was left, before us; so that being
unprovided with Forage, we saw our Beasts, but especially our Horses, drop down
dead for want of Fother; and what was the worst of all, the rest were become so
lean, that they were almost rendered quite unserviceable. We lost above a
hundred Horses in this Journey, to the great satisfaction of the Tongueses; who
Iooking upon Horseflesh as a great Dainty, devoured them so soon as we had
left them. The Tongueses, who are dispersed through these Deserts, are of the
same Religion with the Brattskoy, whom we have mentioned before. They bury with
the dead Corpse of their Friends all their best Movables; and if they become
decrepit before they die, they lead them upon a high Mountain, where they burn
them, and impale their best Horse near it.

The 24th and 25th of April we passed to the left of us by a Lake called
Ierawena, abounding with all sorts of very good Fish; it is 20 Miles long, and
15 broad. Here it was we met with the Messenger who had been sent before by the
Ambassador to Musko. On the 26th we came to a small Place called Ierawena,
where we provided our selves with as many new Horses as we could get for Money.

It is to be observed, that in the Deserts round about Ierewena, there are the
best black Sables; the Cossacks of Ierwena, who are the Sable-hunters
hereabouts, go abroad a Hunting sometimes for three or four Months together;
they make use of Scates, by the help of which they pass over the Snow with
great Agility. We bought some of these Sables of them, from 8 and 10, to 20,
30, and 50 Rubles a pair.

On the 28th of April we again entered the Desert, but met here and there with
some Woods. The 29th we passed on Horseback the River Vda, which arises from a
great Lake, and is here not above three fathoms broad. The want of Fother
continuing among our Cattle, occasioned by the revengefulness of the Monguls,
we lost abundance more of our Horses, and the rest were so fatigued that we
were in danger of wanting Provisions, before we could pass the Deserts. For
which reason the Ambassador commanded 10 Men to go in quest of Horses, which
they effected with good success; for on the 3d of May they met us with a good
number of fresh Horses near the Lake, called Schack's Oser, which is four Miles
long, and two broad. We had the good fortune to find here some Fother for our
Horses and Camels, which obliged us to stay here till the 5th of the same
Month, when leaving the Lake to our Left, we continued our Journey to another
Lake, which we passed by on the 6th in the Morning, and the same day in the
Afternoon reached the end of this troublesome Desert, after a most tedious and
fatiguing Journey of near four Weeks.

The first Place we came to, is called Plotbus, near the small River Skieta,
containing not above six Families, who are settled there but very lately.

On the 15th we continued our Journey from Plotbus by Water upon Floats of Wood
to Nartzinskoy. About a Mile from Plotbus the River Schieta falls into the
River Ingeda, as the River Okkon joins its Current with the same at a small
distance from thence, and is afterward called Schiteka. The Rivers Nertza and
Argun fall afterward into the same River, out of the last of which arises the
famous River of Yamour, which disembogues into the Ocean. On the 20th of May we
came to the City of Nertzinskoy, the last Place of Note (unless it be Argun, a
small Town eight days Journey from thence) under the Jurisdiction of the Czar
of Muscovy. Nertzinskoy is situate upon the River Nertza, where about 6000
Tungoeses, all Subjects to the Czar of Muscovy, have their Habitations; who
have fortified themselves here against their Enemies. Hereabouts are abundance
of Lucerns and Sables, which are in great Esteem among the Chinese. We were
fain to stay two Months in this place, to give time to our Horses and Camels to
recover themselves in the adjacent Pastures. The Cossacks hereabouts are very
Rich, by reason of their Traffic with China, where they are exempted from
paying any Custom.

We then began to make all the necessary Preparations for our Journey through
the Desert; we provided our selves with Oxen, which were to be killed by the
way as occasion should require; 50 Cossacks were allotted us as a Convoy to
China, and to see us safe back again to Nertzinskoy, and the Ambassador
appointed such Gentlemen as belonged to his Retinue to manage all the Affairs
belonging to the whole Caravan, each in his respective Station; who having the
Command both over the Russian Gentlemen and Merchants, were treated by them
with a great deal of Respect, especially the Germans, who led the Van, in
regard they had had the Honor before their departure from Musco to be admitted
to Kiss their Czarish Majesty's hands. On the 18th of July, when we were just
ready to leave Nertzinsko, two Cossacks brought Letters to the Ambassador from
Offdokim Andre Kurdikoff, who, as we said before, had been dispatched from
Irkutzkoy to the City of Naun, on the Frontiers of China. The Contents of these
Letters were, That he being not permitted to go to Peking, the Residence of the
Emperor of China, had been obliged to deliver his Letters at Naun; which being
dispatched from thence to Peking, a certain Person of Quality, attended by a
great many Servants, was come to Naun to expect the Ambassador's Arrival. That
the said Chinese Lord having sent for him, had asked him, among other things,
upon what account the Ambassador was sent to the Kams Hi Ammaogdo Chan? To
which he had answered, That he did not know the least thing of it; but if he
did, it would not become him to discover it. He had further asked him, What
Countreyman the Ambassador was, and in what Station at Court? To which he had
replied, That he was not able to give him an exact account of the matter, he
having been only taken into his Service at Irtkutskoy, from whence he had soon
after been dispatched to Naun; That all what he could tell was, That the
Ambassador was a German by Birth, and in great Favor at Court, desiring him to
supersede to ask him any further Questions, which he was not in a capacity to
answer.

We did not set out from Nertzinskoy till in the Afternoon, to wit, on the 18th
of July, and reached the same Night with part of our Caravan the River
Schileka, where we ferried over. But our whole Caravan consisting of 400 Men,
we stayed here three days, this being the place of our rendezvous. From hence
the Ambassador dispatched a Messenger, whose Name was Andre Avonass Kruhoff, to
their Czarish Majesty's in Musco.

There were abundance of Gentlemen and Merchants belonging to our Caravan, who
traded with Furrs to China. Each of them had 30 Pounds weight of Biscuit
allotted him for his share, during our whole Journey through the Tartarian
Desert, which took up two Months. This slender Allowance did not proceed from
any Covetousness of the Ambassador, but because we were obliged to manage our
Carriages to the best advantage. Besides which, our ordinary Food was good
Beef, and sometimes Venison.

From the abovementioned River Schileka, we traveled three days together
through a great Forest full of Bogs, and three days after through a Desert; and
further, two days again through a Forest, before we reached the River Samur,
which falls into the River Schileka. In the nightime we lodged in our Tents,
of which we had 50 in Number. There is otherwise no Traveling hereabouts with
Wagons, but only with Camels and Horses. For several days after we met with
very bad Ways, the Ground being very boggy till you come to the River of Argun.
At last we came on the 3d of October to the City of Argun, where we stayed till
the 7th, it being so long before our whole Caravan could pass the River. This
River is at present the Boundary betwixt the Emperors of Muscovy and China,
this City being the utmost Frontier place of the Province of Dauri, as far as
it is under the Jurisdiction of the Muscovites. Some years ago the Territories
of the Czars of Muscovy extended to the famous River of Yamour, but these were
by virtue of a Treaty made in the Year 1689, (when Fedor Alexievits was sent
Ambassador to China) betwixt both the Emperors, granted to the Chinese, as was
also the strong Fortress of Albazin, situate upon the same River.

The Mongul Tartars being always abroad in Parties, we were obliged to be
continually upon our Guard, for fear of our Baggage and Horses: These Monguls
are generally great Cowards, ten well disciplined Men being able to beat a
hundred of them.

The Ambassador dispatched from hence some Cossacks to the beforementioned
City of Naun, on the Frontiers of China, to desire the Chinese Governor to send
us some Carriages to a certain place. The best of our diversion was Hunting in
the Desert, where there was such vast Numbers of Deer, that one night, when we
were drawing up our Wagons to make our usual Fence, some Deer leapt among us,
of which we caught one with our hands. The River Denbu, which exonerates it
self into the River Argun, is four days Journey from the City of Argun.

The 15th of August we came to a large Navigable River called Gaun, whose Banks
being overflown by the late Rains, we could not pass with our Camels; whereas
at other times it is Fordable in many places. Being unwilling to lose time, we
contrived a way to transport our selves and the Caravan, by killing a good many
of our Oxen, the Hides of which we joined together; and with what Wood we could
gather, we made a kind of Floating-Boats for the convenience of Transportation.
But the Hides were carried two Miles lower by the Current, and were not brought
on the other side without great danger. Our Floating-Bridges succeeded better,
which did us good service: The Horses being unloaded, were forced to swim cross
the River; We spent two days in passing the River, and lost but one Horse. On
the 16th of August some Tongueses, who having surprised some Monguls in their
Habitations, and after they had massacred 50 of them, had carried the young
ones into Slavery, offered us five of these Slaves, to wit, three Boys and two
Girls, whom they would willingly have exchanged for Horses. We could have
bought them at the rate of 4 or 5 Rubles apiece; but the Ambassador considering
that we were entered the Chinese Territories, would not allow us to buy any of
them. On the 23d of August we reached the small River Keilar, which falls into
the River Arguin; we crossed the same River the next day on Horseback. The
26th of August we crossed again the River Saduma, a small, but navigable River,
which likewise discharges it self into the River Argun. The 27th we passed by
the River Gnar, which joins its Current with the River Saduna; and on the 28th
we met a Caravan, consisting of 150 Russian Merchants, and 300 Camels, but no
Horses. They had left Nartzinsko the last Winter, in their Way to China, and
were now returning home. They brought us the good News, that the Chinese
expected the Arrival of our Ambassador with a great deal of impatience. We
tarried here two days, which time we spent together as merrily as the
circumstances of the Place would allow of; they presented us with some Tea,
which was very welcome to us, who were grown quite weary of drinking cold Water.

After we had taken our leave of one another, we traveled for two days through
a Country, very agreeable for its pleasant Hills and fertile Valleys, where
the River Iall has its rise, and afterward becomes a large navigable River. On
the 31st of August our Messenger Kundikoff (whom the Ambassador had dispatched
from Iokutskoy to Naun) returned and brought advice, that a certain Person of
Note, in the Quality of an Adogeda (or Conductor of Ambassadors) was arrived
from Peking to Naun, where he expected the Arrival of the Ambassador. On the
1st of September there came a Messenger from the said Adogeda to the
Ambassador, who having complimented him in his Master's Name, brought us the
first Chinese Carriages, and a Present of 10 Sheep, some Rice and Oatmeal, he
was sent back immediately.

On the 2d of September we reached the first Out-Guards (consisting of 12
persons) of the Chinese, on the 3d we came to the second, and on the 4th to
the third. These Scouts lay concealed upon the Hills, and as soon as they
perceive any Caravans or other Strangers coming that way, they give notice to
one another by certain Signals, which reach to the Cities of China. For several
days together we traveled through very pleasant Forests, where, among other
Trees, we found abundance of Oaks, which were very low, but spread their
Branches in a very large Compass. We saw here also Filbird-trees in the Plains,
differing in shape from those we have in Europe, as being not above half or
three quarters of a Yard high, and their Stalks very thin; they bear a
prodigious quantity of Nuts of a very large size.

The next Place we came to, was inhabited by the Targuts Chinay, who are
Pagans, subject to the Chinese; they are good Husbandmen, the Country
abounding in Oats, Barley, Oatmeal and Tobacco; and we being in want of some
Oatmeal and Salt, we furnished our selves with as much as we stood in need of.
These People live on the utmost Confines of the Province of Dauri; for that
part of the Province which is under the Muscovite Jurisdiction, extends only to
the River Argun, from whence to the Village of Suttegarshe, all the rest
belongs to the Chinese, by virtue of the abovementioned Treaty. On the 10th
of September several other Messengers arrived from the Adogeda, who were sent
back immediately. After we had traveled three days longer through a Desert, we
arrived at last to the Village of Sutt^ga, belonging to the Chinese; where
meeting with the Adogeda, whose Attendance consisted of 50 persons, he invited
us the same Evening into his Tent, where he presented us with some Thee boiled
in Milk, with Flower and Butter, in wooden Dishes, and some Preserves and
Sweetmeats. The 13th of September the said Adogeda invited the Ambassador,
with all his Retinue, to Dinner, where he met the Ambassador at some distance
from his Tent, and after a very obliging Salute conducted him with his left
hand thither. We stayed about half an hour before Dinner was brought in, which
time they bestowed in entertaining one another with several Questions: The
Adogeda asked the Ambassador, How long he had been traveling from Musco to
this place? Unto which he replied, A year and a half. He asked him further his
Name; which he told him was, Ilesar Ilesarevits Isbrand. Whilst they passed
their time in suchlike discourses, Dinner was served up, upon a small Table,
without a Table-cloth, the Ambassador and the Adogeda having each his own Dish,
as had all the rest: Our Dishes were filled with Mutton and Pork; the second
Course was Pottage, wherein was a mixture of fine Flower, made in the nature of
a Pudding, but very long and thin, not unlike a Gut: We were put to a nonplus
how to manage this Dish; but two Secretaries belonging to the Adogeda, who were
much better acquainted with it than we, showed us the way. For, instead of
Knives, they had two Bonesticks; betwixt these they took up these Puddings,
which they thus conveyed to their mouths, which they held over the Dishes; and
after they had bit off a good mouthful, they let the rest drop in the Dish
again. These Sticks used by the Chinese, in lieu of our Knives and Forks, are
straight, of about a quarter of a Yard long, made either of Ebony-Wood, Bones
or Ivory, tipp'd on the end where they touch the Victuals, with Gold or Silver,
which they use with a great deal of dexterity, without touching the Victuals
with their Fingers.

After Dinner two Silver Cups filled with Brandy were brought to the Adogeda,
one of which he presented to the Ambassador, the other he drunk himself. All
the rest had also Purcelain Cups with Brandy presented them, which they were to
take off to the bottom. The Feast concluded with a Service of Sweetmeats in
wooden Dishes.

The 14th of September the Ambassador invited the Adogeda to his Quarters,
where we observed, that our way of Entertaining seemed to them as strange as
theirs had done to us the day before.

After Dinner the Ambassador desired the Adogeda to provide us the necessary
Carriages and Passes, which he performed to our satisfaction. The Ambassador
had for his daily allowance two Sheep; for each of his Secretaries, one Sheep;
for each of his Gentlemen, one Sheep; for the rest of his Attendance, some two,
some three, some four to a Sheep; for the Cossacks, Laborers and Grooms, ten
Men to a Sheep; for the ordinary Fellows, a Measure of Oatmeal each a day; and
for the better sort, a Paper with Tea, which was a very plentiful Allowance,
but that we wanted Bread, which is a Commodity as little known among the
Chinese, as some other Asiaticks.

The Inhabitants of the City of Naun, 5 Miles distant from the Village of
Suttigatt, are Idolaters, adoring the Devil in the nightime, with most horrid
Outcries. Their Houses are very commodious and neat, their Livelihood being
most Planting of Tobacco. On the 16th of September the Ambassador sent to the
Adogeda the following Presents: 10 Sables. 50 Ermins. 5 Yards of black Cloth. A
looking-glass with a gilt Frame. Another Looking-glass with a black Frame.
Several Glass-bottles with Aquavitae. Some pieces of gilt Leather. And several
rare pieces made at Augsburgh, that moved by the help of Clock-work.


It was a great while before the Adogeda could be prevailed upon to accept
these Presents, by reason they are under an obligation not to receive any
Presents; for which reason it is, that, when any Presents are offered them,
which they cannot in honor refuse; they have them valued, and are to return
double the value of it to those who presented them. On the 21st the Adogeda
sent to the Ambassador six Tables covered with Sweetmeats, and two Earthen
Bottles of Chinese Brandy. On the 23d he invited the Ambassador to Dinner, and
he was invited by us again on the 24th.

Having thus diverted our selves for 14 days in the Village of Suttigett, in
the mean while that our Carriages were got ready, we continued our Journey on
Michaelmas-day. Each person of the first Rank had a Wagon drawn by Oxen, and a
Horse allowed him. The rest of the Attendance were provided with Wagons,
three, four, five and six in a Wagon; we came the same night to a Village,
where we took up our Quarters, and the following night to another, where we
also stayed all night, after we had passed the day before through a Desert.

It ought to be remembered here, to the great Honor of the Chinese, that they
treat Strangers with a great deal of civility: For, though we passed through
uninhabitable Deserts, yet did we never want Conveniences for Lodging; a
sufficient number of Cabans being brought from distant places, which were
always ready provided against our Arrival. They were stored with all necessary
Utensils for the Kitchen, and each Hutt had a Servant, whose Business was to
take care of the Fuel, Water, and other Necessaries. Every other day we had
fresh Horses ready at hand, and the Chinese kept all night a constant Guard
round our Wagon fence, to prevent any surprise; they were provided with Bells,
to give the Alarm to one another in case of necessity.

The Adogeda keeping constant Company with our Ambassador during the whole
Journey, they often fell in discourse together concerning the Nature and Policy
of several Nations, which commonly ended in the Praise of China, of which the
Adogeda, but especially of the Chinese Wall, (round which he told us, a Man
could not travel in three years time) related us such Wonders, that we could
not but be surprised at it. Nothing was so troublesome to us in this Desert, as
the want of fresh Water, which we were forced to dig for very deep, and was
commonly so muddy, that it went against our stomachs. If we met with any that
was tolerably good, we took care to carry some of it along with us in Leathern
Flasks. Our best comfort was, that the Ambassador had every Morning a small
Kettle-full of boiled Tea allowed him for his Breakfast, of which some of us
had our share, which was served us in Cabans or Hutts set up for that purpose,
at certain distances. We often used to divert our selves with Hunting, these
Deserts being full of all sorts of very good Game. I and another, a particular
Friend of mine, rid out one Morning a Hunting, to shoot some wild Sheep, but
paid dearly for it; for having lost our Caravan, we rid two days and nights up
and down the Desert, not knowing where we were, till at last we came in sight
of some Hutts belonging to the Mongul Tartars, but durst not approach for fear
of being assassinated by them. But they having espied us at a distance, came up
with us, inviting us to their Cabans, where, beyond all expectation, they
treated us very civilly: It is possible they had heard of our Ambassadors
coming that way, and judged that we belonged to his Retinue. Our greatest
Trouble was how to find out means to send to the Ambassador, who had sent
several of his Men in quest of us: We made them at last understand by many
signs who we were, and what our Errand was with the Ambassador; upon which they
sent a Messenger to give him notice where we were: It is easy to be imagined
that we were very eager of going along with the Messenger; but our Horses being
quite tired, we were forced to tarry there till our Caravan came by that way.

On the 15th of October we arrived near the River Casumur, which exonerates it
self in the River Naun, where we halted 24 hours, and refreshed our selves with
fair Water, which was as welcome to us as if it had been the best Wine, because
we had been in great want of it before. Having provided our selves with as much
as our Leathern Vessels would hold, we continued our Journey, and on the 19th
passed by the Ruins of several Cities, where we observed the Remnants of very
ancient stone Monuments, representing several Figures, quite different from
those we meet with in Europe. They say that these Places were destroyed by
Alexander the Great. We saw also hereabouts several large stone Pillars of an
excessive bigness, which being hung about with small Bells, made a great noise
when they were put in motion by the Wind. Beyond these we saw again the Ruins
of several Places, and several Figures cut in Stone, representing Men, Women,
and several sorts of Beasts. Deer, Hares, and wild Sheep we meet in vast
numbers, of the last we saw sometimes 2 or 300 together; but they are very
difficult to be caught, they being nimbler than a Deer. The Hares are
hereabouts very small, not much bigger than our Leverets. Pheasants are also
here in great quantities, but not easily to be reached by the Gun, for they
don't settle upon the Trees, but run all along upon the Ground, swifter than
other Birds can fly in the Air. We took a great deal of delight in the
dexterity of the Chinese, who with their Arrows would shoot any Bird flying.
The Adogeda had very fine Falcons, who seldom let escape any Pheasant or Hare
they met with.

The nearer we approached the Chinese Wall, the more populous we found the
Country: For three days together, before we came in sight of it, we traveled
all over Rocks and Precipices, through which there was cut a safe Road for the
convenience of Travelers; and in the midst of these Rocks there is a goodly
City, called by the Russians, Schoma Gorod, or Kora Katon. All hereabouts are
abundance of Tigers, Leopards, and Panthers, for which reason the Ambassador,
upon the persuasion of the Adogeda, ordered that no body should ride at any
distance from the Caravan, unless there were at least three or more in Company.
In the City of Karakaton some Alterations were made in our Provisions by the
Chinese; for, instead of Sheep we had Hogs allowed us, and a Measure of Rice
for each person. The Hogs in China have such hanging Bellies, that they touch
the Ground.

From hence we had a long days Journey to the Chinese Wall, betwixt Rich, and
the City of Naun; the Country is inhabited by the Mongul Tartars, who
acknowledge the Dalaclama for their Head. They keep their Idols in their
Houses, and present their Offerings to them, which is commonly Victuals and
Drink. When they bury their Dead, they put a white Cock upon the Coffin. A
Mongul Nun, who was continually muttering her Prayers with her Beads in her
hands, being asked by the Ambassador, who it was she adored, she gave for
answer, I adore the same God, who being deprived of Heaven by your God, will
certainly return thither, and put your God out of his place; when you will see
strange Alterations upon Earth.

On the 27th of October, toward Evening, we came in sight of the famous
Chinese Wall, which is four Fathoms high, and of such thickness that eight
persons may ride upon it abreast. It is 1500 English Miles long in a straight
Line; for if you will count the Hills and vast Mountains upon which it is built
in some Places, it would amount at least to 500 more. At each Miles distance
there is a Tower. At the first Gate we entered, the Wall appeared to be much
decayed; but at a Musket Shot from thence we passed through another Gate, which
resembled a large Bastion. We were conducted through two more, and those three
last enclosed a large place with their Walls, the three Gates serving for as
many Bastions. Upon the first Wall we saw a very large Corpse de Guards, where,
as they told us, there was kept a constant Guard. At some distance from the
first Wall without the Gate, there was also a Watch kept, consisting only of 20
Soldiers. About a Mile within the Wall we passed by to the left of us the City
of Galgan, which is surrounded with a very fine stone Wall. Near this Place we
met with the first Chinese Idols. It is to be admired what vast Numbers of
Temples the Chinese have dedicated to their Idols, all their Cities and
Villages are full of them, nay you meet with them upon unaccessible Mountains;
they show very well at a distance. But as to the Figures of their Idols, they
are so dreadful as if they had been contrived on purpose to strike Terror into
the Beholders. They are made either of Wood or Clay, and are sometimes gilt. In
all their Temples you meet with a certain Idol, which being of a terrible
aspect, holds a Scepter in his hand, him they call the God of War, and pay a
great deal of Veneration to him. This God is surrounded with Drums of all
sizes, which are beaten whilst they are at their Devotion.

We were Quartered in the Suburbs, and at our arrival were met by their Pipers
and others who played upon Cymbals, and beat the Drums, but made a very doleful
noise. The Adogeda invited us to Supper, where we were very well entertained,
and were treated with Tarrasun, a Liquor made of Rice. After Supper the Adogeda
diverted us with a Play, or rather Farce, acted by the Players that were sent
from Peking to meet him. What was most remarkable was, that they acted the
Mimicks to the life, and changed their Postures and Clothes, which were
extraordinary Magnificent, frequently to our great astonishment. On the 28th of
October we passed by another Chinese City, and toward Evening arrived in the
City of Xantuning, where the Ambassador was entertained by the Governor with a
magnificent Feast, and another Play. All the Apartments were hung with very
rich Tapistry, and the whole Entertainment was very noble. The Ambassador, the
Governor and the Adogeda, were placed each on a Table by themselves, but we
were all put together on one Table. The dishes were brought in one after
another, but none taken away till after the Feast was ended. There were in all
eight Courses, and as often as a dish (which were all of Purcelain) was brought
in, the Clerk of the Kitchen led the way, admonishing the Guests to eat
heartily. At the beginning of the Feast, the Adogeda putting out his Sticks,
showed them to the Ambassador as a Signal, that we should follow his Example.
Before Dinner we were entertained by a Boy of 10 years of age, who very
naturally acted the Mimick, and made strange Postures upon the Ground, which
was covered with Tapestry: Which done, seven Purcelain Cups were placed upon a
Table, which he took up backwards with his mouth; which he repeated afterward,
holding his hands upon his back. This was followed by an Entry, where a Man and
a Woman acted the Lovers, and, to conclude the matter, a Man dressed up in a
Tigers Skin passed through the Room upon all-fours, to the no small
astonishment of those who were ignorant of the contrivance. The Feast lasted
above three hours, and the Adogeda desiring the Ambassador to take a Walk with
him, they were just going to take their leave, when one of the Adogeda's
Servants whispering his Master, that the After-course was going to be served
up, they changed their Resolution, and stayed near two hours longer; during
which time they were again diverted by the Players, who changed their Clothes 8
or 10 times. The 29th of October we came in sight of the City of Xunguxu; in
this as well as in all other Cities where we passed, the Ambassador was treated
with all imaginable Respect and Civility. We were again entertained in this
City with a Play, in a Playhouse fitted up for that purpose. In one of their
Temples there, we saw a Goddess, which being of Stone 128 Feet high, had 700
Hands. I had often the curiosity to enter their Temples, and to take a view of
their Idols, who are of very different shapes and figures, and very terrible to
behold, but most magnificently dressed. Near this Place there is a famous Pagan
Temple built upon a very high Rock, near the Monastery of Iugangu.

On the 30th of October, as we were traveling upon the Road, we met a great
Number of Men and Women, who followed an Idol carried by two Men, and played
merrily upon their Pipes, Cymbals and Drums. The Ambassador asked the Adogeda,
What the meaning was of this Procession? To which he answered, That they were
going to a neighboring Temple to perform their Devotion.

The same day we passed in sight of a goodly Place, called the Red City, the
Residence of the Sister of the Bogdegan, and famous for the Tombs of several
Chans. This City lies near the Chinese Wall; we were fain to take up our
Lodgings that night in a Village. Early the next morning the Adogeda sent word
to the Ambassador, that, having some business of moment to dispatch, he begged
his pardon that he could not wait upon him immediately, but that if he would be
pleased to go before, he would follow him as soon as possibly he could. We had
scarce rid three or four hours, when the Adogeda's Steward overtook us near one
of their Temples, desiring us to tarry a little in this place, his Master being
upon the Road to overtake us. We took this opportunity to take a view of the
Temple, where meeting with three more of the Adogeda's Servants, we saw them
prostrate themselves first before the Idol that stood in the middle of the
Temple, and afterward to perform the same Ceremony to two others that stood on
both sides of it. Toward noon we got to the City of Xangote, where having been
entertained with a very handsome dinner by the Governor, we continued our
Journey, and took up our nights Lodging in a Country Town. The first of
November the Ambassador was again treated at dinner by a Governor of another
City, and was Quartered also in another Country Town at night.

All the way as we passed along the Roads we met with such a prodigious Number
of most magnificent Temples, that we could not but admire at the ignorance of
these people, who show so much Veneration to these Idols.

The 2d of November we came to the great and famous City of Tunxo, situate on a
River, where the Ambassador was invited also to dinner by the Governor, who
conducted us afterward out of the Town. That night we were Quartered in the
next Town to the City of Peking. The City of Tukxe is famous for its, Traffic
in Purcelain, which is sold here much cheaper than in Peking. The Chinese have
a way of Pleating their Sails together in a very small Compass.

On the 3d of November, toward noon, we made a public Entry in the Capital
City of Peking, in very good Order and great Splendour, the Streets being
crowded with vast Numbers of Spectators on both sides of the way, which raised
such a dust, that we scarce could see one another: We had our Lodgings assigned
us in the Court, which is the ordinary Residence of Foreign Ambassadors.

On the 12th of November the Adagada and his Tawares or Associate, waited upon
the Ambassador, to give him notice that he was to be admitted to his public
Audience the next day, and to be conducted thither by 30 Horses, desiring him
to get his Credentials and the Presents ready against that time. He asked the
Ambassador who was to carry the Presents? and being answered, That this was to
be performed by the Cossacks, he showed his dislike, desiring that it might be
done by some of his Retinue; which the Ambassador refused, telling him, That
when they were carried to the place where they were to be delivered, he would
do it with his own hands, wherewith he was very well satisfied, desiring only,
that they might be conveyed with good Couverts. Matters being thus settled, the
Ambassador drank to him a Glass of Spanish Wine, to the Health of the Dorgamba;
who being one of the first Men of the Empire, he took it off to the bottom;
whereas before this time, we could never persuade any of them to pledge us,
they being a very obstinate people, and very noisy with their Tongues, if not
gratified in their desires.

It was the 14th of November before the Ambassador could be in readiness to
deliver his Credentials, when we were conducted to Court in the following
manner: 15 Cossacks, who carried the Presents, led the Van; these were followed
by one of the Masters of the Jewel-Office belonging to the Czar of Muscovy.
After him the Secretary of the Embassy, who carried the Credentials After him
came the Ambassador betwixt the two Adogeda's; and lastly, the rest of the
Gentlemen belonging to the Ambassador.

At the Entrance of the Castle, we did alight from our Horses, and marched on
foot through a long Gate, arched on the top. Before we entered the second Gate,
we passed over a very fine Stone Bridge, about 50 or 60 Paces long, on both
sides of which we took notice of a Wall about three foot high, with many
Figures cut in Stone. Within the Gate we were conducted through a very spacious
Court, where we saw two large Pillars, very artificially wrought with variety
of Figures. From thence we went into a very fine Hall, where we found two
Tables. No sooner were we entered there, but the Adogeda desired the Ambassador
to sit down upon the Ground upon such Bolsters as were brought thither for that
purpose; and soon after we saw four Lords, who are the Chiefest of the whole
Empire, to enter the Room before the Bogdegan himself. These four were the
Dorgamba, the Askamba, the Aligamba, and the Adogamba. After the Credentials
were delivered to the King himself, the Presents were given to the Adogeda, who
laid them upon the two Tables. Which done; the Dorgamba, with the other three
Lords, came up to the Ambassador, and after having made their Compliments, and
given him each both their Hands, the Dorgamba, after his congratulatory Speech
upon our happy arrival, inquired after Health of both their Czarish Majesty's,
telling him, that his Credentials should be forthwith translated, and he to
receive an Answer to the same. After which, he told him what allowance was to
be given to himself and his Retinue; to wit: every day for the Ambassador
himself, two Sheep, one Goose, three Pullets, three Fish, a large measure of
Flower, a large measure of Rice, two Pound of Butter, two Papers of Thee, Salt,
and other Things proportionable, besides two Gallons of Tarrasun. The rest of
his Retinue and other Servants, had the same Allowance as before, with some
addition of Flower, Butter and Tarrasun.

The Ambassador being reconducted to his Quarters by the two Adogeda's, scarce
three hours were passed, before the youngest of the two Adogeda's brought word,
that the Czar's Letters had been received with a great deal of Satisfaction,
desiring him in the Bogdegan's Name, to come and take a share, with all his
Retinue of his own Table. As they were going along the Streets to Court on
Horseback, the Adogeda told the Ambassdor, that he ought to look upon this
Invitation as a most particular Grace, it being not customary for Ambassdors to
receive this Honor immediately after the delivery of their Credentials.

Being entered the same Hall where the Credentials had been delivered before,
the Adogeda invited the Ambassador to sit down, and soon after entered the same
four Lords before the Bogdegan, and saluted the Ambassador very obligingly.
Immediately after, four Tables were brought into the Room, two of which were
covered with forty Silver Dishes, full of all Sorts of Sweetmeats, for the
Amhassador, the other two (where there were also some Sweetmeats, and a Dish
with boiled cold Mutton) fell to our share. After Dinner, we were treated with
Thee boiled in Milk, in wooden Dishes, which we took, and re-delivered to the
Servants, with making deep Reveences. So soon as the Ambassador arose from the
Table, all his Sweetmeats were given to his Attendants; but what was left upon
our Tables, was divided among the Cosacks.

The 16th of November, the Dorgamba, with several other Chinese Lords, and the
two Adogeda's, came to pay a Visit to the Ambassador; who entertained them with
a Set of very good Music, at which they seemed to be extremely well
satisfied; and after they had staid some time, the Ambassador made to the
Dorgamba these following Presents.

A large Looking-Glass with a black wooden Frame. A less Looking-Glass.

A round Looking-Glass with a gilt Frame. Two Watches.

Twenty pieces of gilt Leather.

Several fine Cuts.

Six very fine Crystal-Glasses.

A large Case for Glasses.

Three large Dogs spotted like Tigers.

A fine black Gun-Dog.

A piece of fine Hollin Linen-Cloth.

Four Laced Handkerchiefs;

Besides some Sables, black Foxes, Ermins, and other Siberian Commodities,
which were received in a most obliging manner by the Dorgamba. On the 17th of
November, two Heralds at Arms, were sent to invite the Ambassador and fourteen
of the Gentlemen of his Retinue, to the Bogdegan's Table; and we were not a
Musket Shot from our Quarters, before we were met by the Adogeda's, who
conducted us into the Castle. Being entered the same Hall, where we had
delivered our Credentials before. The Adogeda presented the Ambassador and his
Retinue, with Chairs; immediately after, came the four abovementioned Lords,
who after having paid their Complements to the Ambassador, asked him, whether
he could speak Latin; and being answered, he did not: they asked further,
whether any of his Retinue were Masters of the said Language; and it being told
him, that there was one who had some Knowledge of it, but not to perfection;
they left us to return our Answer to the Bogdegan. We sat above four or five
hours before word was brought us, that we were to come to the Bogdegan; but
were in the mean while treated with Thee boiled in Milk by the Adogeda. An
account was likewise taken of our Names, how many there were of us; which done,
the Adogeda received Orders to conduct us. We passed through three several
Gates, and as many large and handsome Courts; among which, one deserves to be
particularly taken notice of. For in the midst of it, there was a Bridge of
Marble, sustained by very fine Arches; under which was a Water, which being
called, the Bogdegan's Fish Pond, had the resemblance of a fair small River,
and surrounded the Castle. So soon as we entered the Room, where the Bogdegan
was seated upon his Throne, the Ambassador was placed by the Adogeda's on one
side of the Throne, which was surrounded with above three hundred Courtiers,
who all wore the Emperor's Arms upon their Breasts and Backs. The Roof of
this Room was extraordinary high, and the sides adorned with a great number of
Marble Statues. Just opposite to it was the Emperor's Temple, a most
magnificent Structure. On the other side of the Room, you looked into another
Court, where were the Lodgings of the Enuchs and other Women, that attended in
the Emperor's Seraglio. The Ambassador was placed on the left hand of the
Throne, and his Attendance about four Rods behind him, on the right hand; just
opposite to the Ambassadors were the four abovementioned Lords; About forty
Persons, armed with Half-Pikes and Battle-Axes attended about the Throne. We
had not sat very long, before we saw a Table covered all over with Dishes of
Massive Gold, and filled with Sweetmeats brought in, which was set before the
Emperor; After this, two Tables with Sweetmeats were brought in for the four
Lords; and next to them, another Table with Sweetmeats for the Ambassador;
several Tables were placed for us, three belonging to a Table; The Sweetmeats
were all served in Silver Dishes; besides which there were Grapes, Apples,
Pears, Chestnuts, China-Oranges, Citrons, and other Fruits. As for the Chinese,
of whom there were above a hundred, each had his own Table, with several Dishes
of Meat.

So soon as we saw the Emperor begin to eat, we were obliged to pay our
Reverence by a low inclination of the Head, and then we eat of what was before
us. After Dinner, which lasted above three hours, two large Cups of Brandy were
presented to the Bogdegan, who ordered the Dorgamba and another Great Lord, to
conduct the Ambassador upon the Throne; Being advanced upon the Steps, the
Dorgamba, by orders from the Emperor, presented one of these Cups to the
Ambassador, telling him, that he must make a low Reverence, and drink it all
off at a Draught.

In the mean while, some Jesuits having been sent for, they appeared instantly,
and by Orders from the Emperor, spoke to the Ambassador in Latin; who
answering them in Italian, that he was not very well versed in the Latin
Tongue, one of the Fathers began to talk in Italian with the Ambassador, whom
he asked many Questions, and among the rest, How long it was since he left
Muscovy? Unto which he having given a suitable Answer, he was re-conducted to
his place. We were also each in his turn, placed opposite to the Throne, and
presented with a golden Cup of Brandy, which after we had taken up, with a very
low Reverence, we were re-conducted to our respective places. Soon after we as
well as the Chinese there present, had some Thee boiled in Milk presented to
us in wooden Dishes, which as before we received, and returned with a very low
bow to the very ground. The Tables being removed, we were conducted out of the
Room, which done, both the Adogeda's made a sign to the Ambassador to follow
them into another Apartment, which was done, because we should not see the
Bogdegan descend from his Throne. He is originally a Mongul Tartar, of a brown
Complexion, of about 45 years of Age.

The Ambassador desired to be dismissed for that time, but the Dorgamba
returned from the Emperor, and asked the Ambassador, whether he could tell any
tidings concerning some Jesuits, who about three years before intended to
travel to China, by the way of Muscovy, but were stopped in their Journey? The
Ambassador having answered that he knew nothing of them, the Dorgamba returned
with this Answer to the Emperor. In the mean while we were conducted to our
former places, where the Adogeda desired the Ambassador to sit down a little,
till the Sweetmeats that were left, could be given to our Servants; which was
done accordingly; it being a very ancient Custom among the Chinese, always to
let the Remnants of the Emperor's Table to be carried home. Our Servants being
well laden with Sweetmeats, the two Adogeda's reconducted the Ambassador to
his Quarters.

On the 18th of November, we as well as the Cosacks were entertained at our
Quarters from the Emperor's Table. There was a Table in the Ambassador's
Appartment for his own use, those for the Gentlemen was laid in the Hall. All
the Tables being covered with Meats, two of the Bogdegan's Courtiers came to
desire the Ambassador and his Retinue in the Emperor's Name to sit down, which
we did with a profound Reverence, in respect to his Imperial Majesty. Our
Dishes were, boiled Geese, Pullets, Eggs, and all sorts of Meats; Grapes,
Apples, Pears, Wall-nuts, Chestnuts, Citrons, China-Oranges, all sorts of
Preserves and Sweetmeats. The Cosacks dined in the Court; and before Dinner,
were all presented with Thee boiled in Milk. Toward Evening the two Adogeda's
came to tell the Ambassador, that the Bogdegan was going to make a Progress for
20 days; and on the 7th of December, they came to give us notice of his return
to Peking.

On the 8th we were again invited to the Bogdegan's Table, where we were
treated in the same manner as before. On the 11th the Askamba and Surgushey,
were sent by the Bogdegan, to invite the Ambassador and his Retinue to be
present at a great Feast at Court, and to be conducted through the left-side of
the Castle, whereas before, we had been brought in through the Great Court on
the rightside.

Accordingly next Morning, five hours before daylight, the two Adogeda's came
to our Quarters, and conducted us on Horseback to the Castle, where being
entered on the left-side, the Adogeda's desired the Ambassador to sit down,
where we were treated several times with Thee; in the mean while that one of
the Adogeda's was gone to receive his further Instructions. At break of day,
both the Adogeda's led us into a Court, where we saw two Elephants of an
extraordinary bigness, with very rich Furnitures: Opposite to them, we saw a
great many Drums placed upon the Ground, near which stood the Emperor's
Guards, clothed in red Damask, and all round the Court we saw above a hundred
Chairs, belonging to the Chinese Lords. Being from thence conducted to the
place where the Bogdegan was to make his Appearance, we entered on the
left-side, where we saw several hundreds Chinese Lords very magnificently
dressed, with the Emperor's Arms upon their Backs and Breasts, sitting upon
Bolsters or Cushions, upon the ground. Their Caps were adorned with the
Feathers of Peacocks, which were fastn'd to them with fine Crystals. Those of
the first Rank had very large Saphirs upon their Caps. Near to these we had our
Seats assigned us; and scarce had we thus sat an hour, when by the discharge of
a Cannon (which made no great noise) a signal was given for the Chinese to
rise, whilst the Bogdegan was coming in to mount his Throne, which stood
directly opposite to the Door, through which we were introduced. All on a sudden
we heard a Chime of Bells, which being the signal for the Chinese, they in
very good Order made their appearance before the Bogdegan: In the mean while, a
certain Person who stood near the Bogdegan, read for above an hour with a very
loud and audible Voice out of a Book, which done, we heard very fine singing at
some distance from us; After this two Drums were beat, which being another
signal to the Chinese, they fell upon their Knees, bending their Heads to the
ground, three times, one after another. Then they rise, and several Musical
Instruments made an agreeable Harmony for some time, during which they
performed the same reverence twice more, and so took their Seats again. We were
then conducted by the two Adogedan's in the presence of the Bogdean, where we
performed the same Ceremony in the same manner as the Chinese had done; And
the Ambassador being led by the Hand by the Adogeda up to the Bogdegan's
Throne, had the honor to receive a dish of Thee from the Bogdegan's own hands.
We were likewise, after we had taken our Seats, again treated with Thee boiled
in Milk, being obliged every time we took and re delivered the Cup, to turn our
left-Leg under our Bodies, and so to make a low Inclination with our Heads.
Soon after, the Ambassador being re-conducted by the Adogeda to his Seat, the
Chinese, all on a sudden, placed themselves on the right-side upon their
bended Knees, knocking their Heads against the Ground three times, whilst the
Bogdegan was descending from the Throne. We were led by the two Adogeda's to
the same place, where we were obliged to perform the same Ceremony. That part
of the Court where the Bogdegan's Throne was placed, was lined with his Guards,
clothed in red Damask, and armed with Battle-Axes and Half-Piques. The
Solemnity being ended, we passed again through the place where before we had
delivered our Credentials, in order to our return to our Quarters; but the
Adogeda's desiring the Ambassador to stay a little longer, there being some
Chinese Lords, who were very ambitious to see the Ambassador and his Retinue,
he granted his request. As we were coming out of the Castle, we saw one of the
Elephants, which was shown us before, draw a great Wagon, in which was the
Bogdegan's Throne; we were scarce returned to our Quarters, when the Adogeda
again entreated the Ambassador to go along with him to the Bogdegan's
Playhouse, where a very diverting Play was acted that day. He invited not
only the Ambassador's Retinue, but also all the Merchants and Cosacks, to
partake of the Shovv. And as we were on our way thither, we met several
Chinese Lords, among whom was the Askamba, who came on purpose to bear the
Ambassador Company thither. Before Dinner we had the diversion of seeing a
Fellow play all sorts of Tricks. He took a stick, which was sharp at one end in
his Hand, on which he fixed a large round wooden Ball, which turned it self
without intermission upon the Stick, till he threw it in the Air, and caught
it again upon the point of the Stick, where it rolled about like before;
Secondly, he took another Stick, but not so big as the former, which he fixed
upon his upper Lip; in the middle of this Stick was a small wooden Horse, which
continually turned about the Stick, as did another wooden Ball on the top of
the Stick. Sometimes he put the Stick upon his Thumb, where it performed the
same operation. Thirdly, he put the same Stick through a certain Instrument,
not unlike our Flutes, which he held in his Mouth. On the point of the Stick he
had fixed two Knives, not unlike our Shoe-maker's Knives, with their Edges to
one another, which turned themselves upon the Stick to the no small
astonishment of the Spectators. Fourthly, he took three ordinary Knives, two of
which he kept steady in his left hand, but no sooner had he thrown the third up
in the Air, but the other two followed, which he caught all three by the
Handles. He showed us also several fine Postures on Horseback, and whilst we
were very magnificently treated at Dinner, we had the diversion of the Play,
which lasted till night; when we returned home well satisfied with our
Entertainment.

The 18th of December, hoth the Adogeda's came to salute the Ambassador in the
Name of the Dorgamba, and to invite him and the Chiefest of his Domestics to
pass the next day at his House. The next Morning his Horses stood ready to
attend us at our Quarters, from whence we went directly to the Dorgamba's
Palace. We were conducted by the Adogeda's in a small appartment, where we
found the Dorgamba ready to receive the Ambassador, which he did in very
obliging terms. Soon after we were treated with Thee boiled in Milk, and the
Ambassador having communicated for some time with the Dorgamba, concerning the
Instructions, he had received from their Czarish Majesty's, the Ambassador was
conducted from thence into the Dining Room. As we entered the Room, the Players
who were very magnificently dressed, stood ready to begin the Play, which they
did accordingly; It is the Custom in China for the Actors to give a Book,
containing the Contents of many Plays, to the Master of the Feasts, out of
which he chooses which he likes best, which is commonly performed by singing in
the nature of our Opera's.

The Dorgamba sat at a Table by himself, next to him was placed the Ambassador
at another Table, and next to him the two Adogeda's at another. Two other
Tables were brought in for the Ambassador's Retinue; we were treated with great
deal of Splendour. Our Drink was Aqua vitae prepared with Cinnamon, which was
brought to us in golden Cups, and we were forced to take it off quite to the
bottom, the Dorgamba showing us the way by his own Example. The Floor was
covered all over with Tapistry, and behind the Dorgamba stood a little Page
with a Basket made of Straw-work, which was the Dorgamba's Spitting-Pot. Thus
we spent the greatest part of the day with a great deal of Diversion, and on
the 19th, being a great Feast day at Court, we were again splendidly
Entertained at the Bogdegan's Table.

In the year 1694. on the 6th of January, and on the 16th, we were again
invited to the Bogdegan's Table. On the 26th of the same month, the Dorgamba
obliged us with the sight of a very fierce Panther, and the same day we were
again admitted to the Bogdegan's Table. On the 27th we paid a visit to the
Jesuits, who treated us with a very good Breakfast; Their Church is a very
curious piece of Architecture, with a fine Organ, which is placed on the
outside of it toward the Street. There were at that time eight Fathers of that
Society at Peking. On the 29th it was a hard Frost, with a strong North Wind
and abundance of Snow. On the 4th of February both the Adogeda's brought Orders
for the Ambassador to make his Appearance at Court. Accordingly we went on
Horseback to Court on the 5th of February, where after we had been entertained
very splendidly at the Bogdegan's Table, the Ambassador was told, that
according to his desire he should be dismissed in twelve nights.

Accordingly on the 15th of Febr. the Bogdegan sent one of his Coutiers to the
Ambassador to desire him to come to Court the next morning with all his
Attendance, and the Cosacks, to receive the usual Presents of the Bogdegan. The
day before we went to Court we were treated at the Bogdegan's Charge at our
Quarters, when the Ambassador with his whole Attendance went on Horseback,
being conducted by the Adogeda's into a spacious Court, where we received the
following Presents.

A Horse, with Bridle and Saddle, and all other Accoutrements.

A Chinese Cap, with a Silk Puff on the top of it.

A Sur-toot of Damask Brocaded with Gold Serpents, and lined with Lamb-Skins.

A Scarff, a Knife, 6 Handkerchiefs, and 2 Tobacco Bags.

A pair of Leather Boots, and a pair of Silk Stockings.

A piece of Black Satin of 10 yards.

A piece of Ludan of 20 yards. 16 pieces of Kitaick.

7 Lan of Silver worth 14 Crowns.

The Ambassador's Gentlemen had each of them the following Presents.

A Chinese Cap, with a red Silk Puff on the top.

A Damask Surtoot lined with Lambs-Skin.

A piece of Satin of 10 yards.

A piece of Ludan of 10 yards.

A Scarff, with a Knife, 2 Tobacco Baggs, and 6 Handkerchiefs.

One pair of Leather Boots, with a pair of Silk Stockings quilted with Cotton.

16 pieces of Kitaick.

One Lan and a half of Silver worth 3 Crowns.

The Cosacks and Servants received each the following Presents.

A piece of Satin of 10 yards.

Eight pieces of Kitaick.

One Lan of Silver.

On the 18th of February, the Ambassador being again invited to Court, the
Dorgamba told him, that if he were ready for his departure, the Carriages
should attend him the next morning at his Quarters. I am not ignorant that in
this place I ought to give the Reader a particular Account of the Manners,
Customs and Religion of the Chinese; but I will content my self to give only
in this Journal a general Account of the Empire of China, and its Capital City
called Peking.

The most Potent Empire of China is known under several Names among Foreign
Nations. The Tartars call it Katay, those of Siam, Sin, the Iapanneses, Than,
and some of the Tartarian Nations call it Han. The Chinese themselves have
given it many Sir-names; for among the many Families that have swayed the
Chinese Scepter, each Founder of its Race has assigned it its particular Title.
Thus it is called Than, (broad without measure) Iu, (Peace), Tha, (large),
Sciam, (pleasant), Cheu, (complea^); but among all the rest, the Chinese have
retained two, the first of which is, Chungehoa, that is, the Middle Empire, and
Chunque, which is the Middle Garden, being of Opinion that the Earth was four
Square, and their Empire in the midst of it.

This vast Country was in the year before the Birth of Christ 2254, divided
into 12 Provinces by their Emperor Xucus, and by his Successor Iva into 9,
which at that time comprehended only the Northern Provinces, as far as the
River Kiang. But after the Southern Parts were united with this Empire, it was
divided into fifteen Provinces. Most of them were formerly under the
Jurisdiction of their own Princes, but after they were Conquered and United
with the Chinese Crown, were Governed by Viceroy's, who to this day have the
Administration of Affairs in those Places. It is divided into the Northern and
Southern Part. The first is that which is properly called Katay by the Tartars,
and comprehends 5 Provinces: to wit, Peking, Xantung, Xansi, Xiemsi, Honan, to
which some add the Province of Leaotung, and the Peninsula of Corea. The other
9 Provinces, are; Nanking, Chekiang, Kiangsi, Huquang, Suchuen, Queicheu,
Iunnan, Quangsi, Quantung, Fockien, which by one general Name are called by the
Tartars, Mangin. The North and Southern Provinces are divided by the River
Kiang, (by the Chinese,) called the Son of the Ocean.) The Empire of China
borders on the East on the great Eastern Ocean, called by the Chinese, Tung.
Toward the North, on the Chinese Wall, which divides it from the Great
Tartary; on the West it has the Mountain of Thebet to the Confines of Bengala:
On the South Side is the Kingdom of Couchinchina, which is Tributary to the
Chinese Empire. Its whole Breadth, from the Isle of Hanon, situate under the
18th Degree of North Latitude, to the 42th Degree of North Latitude, is 330
German Leagues. Its length from the West, under the 112th Degree, till East
under the 34th Degree, near the City Ningpo or Nampo, is 450 German Leagues.

This whole Empire seems both by Art and Nature made impregnable. For on the
West side is the Mountain of Thebet, and the great Desert of Xama; On the North
side the famous Chinese Wall, which was begun to be built in the year 215
before Christ's Birth, and was finished in 5 years; On the South and East it is
surrounded with the Ocean, where by reason of the many Rocks and Sands there is
no no safe Landing unless it be in a few places.

The City of Peking, the Capital of the Empire, and Residence of its Kings, has
borrowed its Name from the Province of Peking, which on the East Borders on the
great Gulf betwixt Corea and Iapan; on the North-East upon the Province of
Leaotung, on the North upon the Great Tartary, and part of the Chinese Wall,
and on the West the Province of Xansi. This Province has 8 famous Cities, to
wit; Peking, Paoting, Hokian, Chinting, Xunte, Quanping, Taming, and Iunping:
The City of Peking is situate under 39 Degrees 59 Minutes upon the Northern
Confines of the Province of Peking, not far from the famous Chinese Wall. On
the South side it is fortified with two very strong and high Walls. The Suburbs
are enclosed in one single Wall, with 3 very good Bastions on each side of the
Gate. You enter these Suburbs by a Bridge built over a River, which to the
North side surrounds the Wall; from the Suburbs through the South-Gate, it is
half an hours walking before you come to the Body of the City, where, at the
Entrance there is a very high Bastion, and as you turn to the left, another
well-mounted with Cannon, from whence you may go into the City through the Old
Gate. There are many other Bastions to be seen all round the Walls, where every
night the Garrison keeps as strict a Guard as if an Enemy were near at hand; but
in the day time, the Emperor's Gentlemen of the Bedchamber Guard the Gates,
not so much for its Defense, as to look after the Customs, which are to be paid
there. The Citizens Houses are generally finely built, and the Palaces of
Persons of Quality very stately Structures, but their greatest Magnificence
appears in their Triumphal Arches. Their Temples are Adorned with Steeples of
an extraordinary height, and most Artificially built: But the Streets of this
so stately City are in no wise suitable to its Grandeur, there being very few
among them Paved with Stones, which seems to be strange in a place where they
don't want these Materials, the Streets being extremely inconvenient and
troublesome to walk both in fair and fowl weather. In dry weather, when the
Wind blows from the North, the Dust is raised all over the City to that degree,
that it spoils every thing in the Houses. The Inhabitants preserve themselves a
little when they go abroad, by wearing a thin Veil almost like our Gawses, over
their Faces, which comes down to their Breasts; besides that, they can see
every body that passes without being seen by them, and without exposing their
Faces to the Dust; they enjoy by it this convenience, that they are not obliged
to those frequent Salutes and other Ceremonies which are so much admired, and
otherwise practiced among the Chinese.

All the Chinese Women are of a verylow Stature, those of Quality have very
little Feet, in which they take a particular pride, for which reason they keep
them extraordinary straightened, to such an excess, that many thereby quite lose
the use of their Feet. It is looked upon as very ignominious among the Chinese
Ladies to show their naked Feet. There is scarce a Street, Bridge or Gate in
the City of Peking, where you don't meet with Horses or Asses, which may be
hired for a small price to go up and down the Streets, where a Servant attends
you and your Horse. The Streets are always crowded with People; here you may
see one dance upon the Rope, in another place you see one upon the Stage, who
is surrounded with many Auditors, unto whom he relates certain Stories, and
these reward him for his pains with a kind of Brass-Money, which being four
square, signed on one side with four Characters, and a hole in the middle for
the convenience of carrying them upon a string, ten of them make no more than a
Penny. But when any thing is to be bought or paid with Silver they use this
method: they always wear by their sides a pair of Shears, and Weights enclosed
in wooden Cases in their Pockets, by which means they cut the Silver Plates,
and weigh of it as much as they have occasion for at that time. You meet
sometimes in the Streets certain Chinese, who beat their Breasts with stones,
others knock their Heads against Stones, till the Blood follows. There is
scarce a Street but what has many Publick-houses, which are distinguished by
their Sign-Posts, where you find it written what sort of Liquor they sell
within. These Houses are very neatly kept, and affording good Accommodation.

But it is time to look backwards, and to give you a short Account of our
return to Muscovy.

On the 19th of February toward Evening, we began our Journey from Peking,
being conducted out the Town by the two Adogeda's, and several other Persons of
Quality to the next Village. About five days Journey from Peking, the Surgushey
(who was to conduct us as far as to the City of Naun) brought us through an old
ruined City, where in one of their Temples, we saw an Idol made of Clay but
richly gilt, representing a Woman; it was about 15 yards high, and had many
Heads and Hands. Not far from thence in a Gallery, you saw another Figure,
resembling a Woman kind, which they said, was her Daughter, lie in a Bed of
Damask Quilt, covered with rich Chinese Carpets.

On the 30th of May, we came to the City of Naun, and took up our Quarters in
the Village Suttigart. On the 5th of April, I was surprised in my Quarters by a
very strange Spectacle; For my Host's Daughter appeared all on a sudden, as if
she had been possessed by the Devil, making such horrid outcries, as put us
all in a fright. After she had thus continued for some time, she began to sing
very agreeably for half an hour, when the other Women there present, having
begun to sing certain Verses, she answered them immediately. I was so curious
as to enquire, what could be the meaning of all this; to which they replied,
that there being a Neighbor's Child very ill, this Virgin had been consulted
concerning her Recovery, she being one who was in great Esteem among them,
and looked upon as a Saint. The Neighbors were no sooner departed, but an
Aunt of hers took a fevv Coals, upon which she threw certain Incenses, which
holding near her Face, she soon opened her Eyes, and recovered her Senses.

On the 14th of April, we set forvvard in our Journey from Naun, in Company of
a Chinese Envoy, who being a native of the City of Margenn, was sent by the
Bogdegan, to the Waywode of Nartzinskoy. On the 23th of April, we passed over
a very high Mountain, not without a great deal of difficulty, the Snow being
above a Yard high on the top. On the 25th, we changed our Course, being
forevvarn'd by our Guide, who was a Tungoese, that three or four thousand
Mongul Tartars laid in Ambush for us, expecting our coming at a certain place.
This obliged the Ambassador to choose another Road more to the right. On the
27th, we came to the River Laduna, where we halted for some time. On the 2d
of May, we passed over the River Keilar, and we had not traveled very far,
before on the third of May, we were overraken by a Fire: For the Mongul
Tartars, finding they had missed their Aim, had out of Revenge, set fire to the
long and dry Grass, which was remaining, after the Winter Season, in the
Desert, which being augmented by the violent Winds that blew toward us,
surprised us so on a sudden, that we had not time enough left us, to save our
Tents. If this Fire had surprised us as we were upon our march, scarce any body
would have escaped the Flames that surrounded us on all sides. But now we had
the good fortune to save our Cattle, and the damage received by the Fire was
inconsiderable on our side, what was endamaged in our Carriages, being all
repaired in one day. The worst was, that being deprived of Forage, some of our
Cattle died daily for want of it, and we our selves began to be much
straightened for Provisions. For which reason the Ambassador dispatched three
Cosacks to the Waywode of Nartzinskoy, to solicit prompt Succors of Cattle and
Provisions. And wherever we could light of any Horses or Camels, we bought them
up at a dear rate; the first at 40 and 50, the last at 70 or 80 Rubels a-piece.

The 8th of May, we came to the River Margenn, where meeting with good Forage,
we staid two days to refresh our Cattle. And as we were traveling, we lost one
of our Russian Servants, who having lost his Horse, was lost himself in looking
after it. On the 12th, we passed the River Gann with our laden Camels and
Horses; and finding the Trees hereabouts full of green Leaves and a pleasant
Country, we staid here two days. On the 15th of May; we met the Convoy, which
by order of the Governor of Nartzinskoy, was sent us from Argunn. They came to
us in very good time; for if they had staid two days longer, our Cattle must
all have perished, and we been droven to the necessity of feeding on
Horseflesh; for most of our Servants had lost their Horses before, and were
fain to march on Foot through the Desert. On the 21th of May, notwithstanding
there was a deep Snow fallen the night before, we Ferry'd over the River of
Argunn, a long days Journey from the City of the same name, where we staid till
the 25th and provided our selves with all Necessaries, enough to serve us till
we came to Nartzinskoy. Most of our Attendance began to be very sickly
hereabouts, by reason, that having not been used to any Bread before these six
Months, they eat of it with too much greediness. At some distance from Argunn,
the Ambassador, with some of his German and Russian Attendance left the
Caravan, making the best of their way toward Nartzinskoy. On the 1st of June,
we came to a small River, which being by the late Rains rendered impassable by
Horses, we were feign to strip, and so to swim over our selves and our Horses.
On the second, we arrived safely at Nartzinskoy, as did our Caravan on the 9th
following. The 13th of June, three Tungoeses brought the Russian Servant, whom
we had lost on the 8th of May in the Desert to Nartzinskoy. He had swarved
about the Desert for three days, having no other Food, but Herbs and Roots, and
meeting at last with these three Tungoeses, whom he believed to have been
Mongul Tartars, he put himself in a posture of defense, and would not have
surrendered himself, if his Horse had not been so tired, as not to be able to
stir any longer. On the 3d of July, we set forward from Nartzinskoy, after the
Ambassador had dispatched two Messengers to Mosco, to notify our safe arrival,
to Their Czarish Majesty's; and on the same day the Chinese Envoy, whom we
mentioned before, returned from thence to Naun. This last Winter, whilst we
were at Peking, 350 Cosacks of Nartzinskoy, and 500 Tungoeses, had made an
Incursion into the Territories of the Mongul Tartars, through the Deserts of
Nartzinskoy, with such Success, that they had attacked and ruined their
Habitations on two several places, put all the old ones to the Sword, and
carried off the young ones into Slavery. The 13th of July, we came to Plotbus,
the 15th to the Lake of Shock, the 19th to the Lake of Ierawena, near which are
three Lakes more. On the 21th of July, our two Messengers, who had been
dispatched to Mosco, as we mentioned before, returned to us in a pitiful
Condition, they having been overtaken about 10 Miles from Vdinsko, by some
Mongul Tartars, who had robbed and stripped them, but had not taken their Letters
from them. On the 22th, we foarded the River Ana, which falls into the River
Vda: And on the 26th the River Kurba, which running with a very swift current,
disembogues likewise in the River Vda. On the 27th, in the Afternoon, we
arrived safely at Vdinsko; where we sold our Camels and Horses at five Rubels
a-piece; whereas the Camels had cost us 35 and 40 Rubels, and the Horses 10 and
15 a-piece. On the 28th, we embarked our selves on board two large Vessels;
and toward Evening went on shore in a great Village, called Saimkojam Linsko,
on the left-side of the River Selinga. On the 29th in the Afternoon, we set
Sail from thence, and on the 31th came to the entrance of the Lake of Baikela,
where we were fain to lay by for two hours, and afterward rowed three miles
further, before we could make use of our Sails. Toward Evening the wind
chopping about, we were droven back for several miles, and at last met with a
place fit for Anchorage. The Winds being somewhat laid, we early in the Morning
set Sail again, and happily made the River of Angara, and so arrived on the
first of August, toward Noon at Irkutskoy. On the 5th, we again set Sail from
hence toward Ienekiskoy. On the 11th, we went on shore in a Town belonging to
the Bratskoy, on the left-side of the River of Angara, into which falls
hereabouts another very large River. We left that Place again the same day in
the Afternoon, and had not sailed above a Mile, when we were forced to pass a
very dangerous Cataract (or Water-fall) called Pogmaly. Not far from thence we
passed another, called Pyan, much longer than the former; and no sooner were
the Vessels brought over this dangerous Place, but they were in danger of
having been swallowed up in a Whirl-pool. On the 12th of August, we came to
another Cataract, called Poduna, where we were fain to unload our Vessels; the
Passage being very straight and dangerous. On the 13th, we passed another
Cataract, not so dangerous as the former, but which continued for four or five
miles. On the 14th, we came to an Anchor near the Cataract, called Skamansko,
till we could be provided with expert Watermen, who being acquainted with the
River, brought our Vessels safely without being unloaden (the Water being very
high) over the Cataract, though it was near three Miles long. On the 16th, before
Noon, we passed by the River Itim, which falls on the right hand into the River
Tungusko, as the Angara does to the left. We passed the same day over another
Cataract; and on the 17th left the River Ketto to the right of us. On the 19th,
we passed over three several Cataracts, near the last of which, we were met by
a Messenger, whose name being Andreknihoff, had been dispatched by the
Ambassador from Nartzinskoy to Musco. On the 22d, we left the River Kama to the
right of us; and on the 25th in the Morning, passed over another most dangerous
Cataract, and arrived safely the same Evening at Ienekiskoy. We continued our
Journey from thence on the 1st of September by Land to Makoffsko, where we
arrived the 3d day, and on the 7th, set forward again toward Tobolsko. On the
12th, we dined in a Monastery, but did not stay longer than till night. On the
23d, early in the Morning, we came to Iam-Kutskoy; and on the 26th toward
Evening, to the City of Narim, about a Mile distance from the River Oby, where
we embarked on the 28th, but came on shore again in the Afternoon, by reason
of a strong North Wind, which was quite contrary to us; we were fain to lie
here till the 30th. On the 3d of October, the Wind veering about again to the
North, we were obliged to come to another again till night; when we passed by
the River Wache. The 4th, the Wind blew strong again from the North, so that we
were fain to lie still till the next Morning. On the 6th, we were stopped again
by the North Wind, besides which, it froze very hard that night. On the 8th, we
got on shore at Surgutt; and on the 9th the North Wind blew very strong against
us, with great Snows and a hard Frost, so that we were obliged to stay on shore
till the 11th, when it began to thaw; but the North Wind continued till the
13th, in the Morning, when we set Sail again, and passed by two Villages; the
14th, in the Forenoon, we entered the River Irtish; and on the 15th, early in
the Morning, arrived safely at Samorskojam.

The Ambassador being indisposed staid there till the 14th of November, when,
being restored to his former Health by the use of proper Remedies, and the
River Irtish being quite frozen up in the mean while, we continued our Journey
from Samarskojam in Sleds. On the 19th, we came to Demjansko; and on the 20th
to Tobolsko. Betwixt Samarskojam and Tobolsko, we passed by abundance of Huts
belonging to the Ostiaki, most of Wood, and the Roads were hereabouts very
narrow and not well beaten. On the 17th of December, we left Tobolsko; and the
20th in the Afternoon arrived at Tumen. From thence we went on the 21st, and
came on the 23d too early in the Morning to the City of Iapantshin, where we
staid only till the next day; and on the 27th early in the Morning, arrived in
the City of Wergaturia, from whence we went further on in our Journey the 28th.

In the Year 1695, on New-years-day, we came to the City of Sotokamskoy, where
we staid till the next day; On the 5th we reached Kaigorod, which we left again
the 6th; and on the 9th came to Iam-Vsga, situate upon the River Sisella. The
9th we dined at Iata Pyoldie, and the 11th at Ianrspas Vspilsco. The 12th we
reached St. Soto Witzogda, where we staid the next day till toward Evening.
The 14th we came to the City of Vtingha, and left it again the 15th toward
Evening. The 18th we dined in the City of Totma, where we staid till the 19th
toward night. The 21st, early in the Morning we reached Schusca-jam, and
continued our Journey from thencethe next day. The 25th we came to Ieresla,
where we only staid till night. On the 27th to Peresla, from whence we set
forward again in our Journey on the 29th, and on the 31st of Ian. at night,
arrived safely in a Villlage, called Alexeshe on the River Ianse, not above
five miles from the City of Musco.

Here the Ambassador received Orders to stay till the next Morning, when Czar
Peter Alexievits came to this place to confer with him in private. After they
had spent some hours together, the Czar took the Ambassador along with him to
Ischmeiloff, and from thence to Brebolensko; and we arrived the same day, being
the 1st of February, safely in the City of Musco, where we reposed our selves
after our Journey to China, in which we had spent 3 years, wanting 6 weeks.

FINIS.
Some Curious OBSERVATIONS CONCERNING THE PRODUCTS OF RUSSIA, Which may serve
as A Supplement To the Preceding Treatise.

Written Originally in LATIN by Henry William Ludolf.

London, Printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible without Temple Bar,
and T. Goodwin, at the Maidenhead over against St. Dunstan's Church,
Fleet Street, School.

Some Curious OBSERVATIONS Concerning the PRODUCTS OF Russia, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of their Minerals.
THey have three sorts of Salts in Russia; the first is boiled out of Springs,
of which the best is made at Permia in Siberia. The second is, their
Stone-Salt, which is found in great quantity in the Province of Vffa; The third
is brought to perfection by the heat of the Sun in the Salt Pits, near
Astrachan, and in Siberia. There is also great store of the best Saltpeter to
be found, as also good Brimstone, betwixt Siberia and the River Wolga, not far
from the Kingdom of Casan: but the exportation of it is prohibited.

There are also some Iron-Mines in Russia, and near Olonitz, on the confines of
Sweden.

Near Archangel there is Sluida Talck dug, which the English call Muscovy Glass.

In the the Province of Vffa, are found very fine Chrystals.

On the frontiers of Siberia, near the River Ienessay, there is a Mine which
produces an Oar, resembling in color and weight a golden Oar, but it is so
volatile as to fly away in the Smoke, as soon as it is tried by the Fire.
Perhaps this Oar is much of the same nature in comparison to Gold, what a
certain Oar in Germany, called Bismuth, is in respect to Silver, it being of
the same color and weight, and is found in the Saxon Silver Mines.

The Russians are destitute of Silver Mines, but they often dig some of the
Metal out of the old Graves.

The Mammotovoy, which is dug out of the Earth in Siberia, is very well worth
taking notice of. The common People in Russia relate surprising things
concerning its Origin. For they say, they are the Bones of certain Animals,
which exceed in bigness any living Creature upon Earth; They make use of it in
Physic, as we do of the Unicorn. A friend of mine presented me with a piece of
it, which he said was given him by a Muscovite, who had brought it himself out
of Siberia, which appears to me to be nothing else than a true Ivory. The more
understanding Sort believe them to be Elephants Teeth, which ever since the
time of the Deluge, have lain thus under ground.

The Adamavoi-Kost or Adam's Earth, is dug out of the Earth near Archangel; it
is of a black Color, very near as hard as a Stone, but its figure resembles
the Branches of Trees; from whence some conjecture that it is a Wood petrefied.
According to this Opinion, it must be supposed that this Wood being perhaps
laid at the bottom of some River, whose Current has been choked up by the
Sands, and covered these Woods.

CHAP. II.
Of their Vegetables.
THE Ground in many Parts of Muscovy is more fertile than can well be imagined
by Strangers. For it being full of Nitrous particles, these not only promote
the Production of all kinds of Fruits, but also quicken their growth, and bring
them sooner to perfection, than in some of the more Southern Countries; as it
is besides some other Fruits, very observable in their Melons. They have a
certain kind of Apples, called Nativa, which are not only of a fine taste, but
also transparent like Glass. They have also several sorts of Berries, which are
not to be found in other places. The Hostanici are of a black color, but of
the same taste as our Cherries, having also a Stone in the middle. Their
Punanitzi they use to suppress the Fumes after hard drinking. Besides which,
they have those called, Brussenici Kluckva and Gersmici; the two last of which
are also found in Livonia.

But among all their Vegetables, that Herb which they call, Kosa Travic,
deserves to be taken notice of, for it resists Iron, and makes the Sythes if
they touch it, spring to pieces. I cannot question the truth of it, because I
have heard it confirmed by very credible Persons, who have seen the effect of
it in Siberia; though otherwise I am not very apt to give credit to the Relations
of the vulgar sort in Muscovy, among which, that of the Vegetable Lamm is a
general received Fable, sufficiently contradicted by Experience.

There is a certain Root in Russia, endowed with an extraordinary Balsamic
Quality, which also grows in Siberia, they call it Voltschnoy-Koron, which
signifies as much as Wolfs-Root. They attribute to it a specific Virtue of
healing Wounds; But what they related of it, to wit, that it heals a Wound by
only chewing of it, I will not affirm for truth.

Arbusi are called the Astrachan Melons; they are not of so delicious a taste
as the others; they come nearer to a circular Figure, and their Seeds don't lie
in the middle, but straggling through the Flesh of the Melon.

The Astrachan Pepper is more sharp and biting than other Pepper, is enclosed
in a red Husk, the Pepper it self is yellow, and not round but flattish.

CHAP. III.
Of their living Creatures.
AMong the Insects of Russia, those called Toreau, are the most common, they
most infest wooden Houses, but are not mischievous. Among the Fish, the Sterlet
is counted one of the most delicious in Russia. It has a long Head and Tail,
both of them making up above one half of its whole length, the rest of the Body
being but very short. Its Skin is most like that of an Eel; those inclining to
a yellowish color, are accounted the best.

The Fish Sasan is very like our Carps. Somis, a very broad Fish, with a sharp
Nose.

Beluga, or White-Fish, is sometimes found in the Danube, near Comorrah; they
call it Hausam in Hungary, and is carried to Vienna, where it is looked upon as
a great Dainty, its Flesh being very luscious. Out of the Spawn of this Fish
the best Caviare is made in Muscovy; though they also make it of the Spawn of the
Sturgeons and Pikes. The River Kama, which exonerates it self into the River
Wolga, furnishes the City of Musco with the best Beluga.

I don't remember that ever I met with any Birds in Muscovy, but what are
sufficiently known among other European Nations. Among the four-legg'd Animals,
the Muscovites esteem those the most, whose Furs protect them against the
Injuries of the cold Season.

They have four different kinds of Foxes. The first are the ordinary sort; the
second are those who have two dark strokes cross their Backs; and therefore are
by the Germans, called Cross Foxes. The third are the white Foxes, whose Skins
are the cheapest of all; And fourthly, the black ones, whose Skins are sold at
a very dear rate, sometimes, as I have been told, at 80 Rubels or Ducats a
piece.

The Rosomacha, so called by reason of its greediness, affords the most durable
Furs.

But the chief vanity of the Muscovites, consists in their Sables. There is
such a prodigious difference betwixt these Furs, that a pair of them are sold
from three Rubels to a hundred Rubels. The black ones are the most precious;
but the white ones are very rare.

In the great Plains betwixt Muscovy and the Crim Tartary, there are abundance
of wild Oxen, and wild Goats; the first they call Zubri, the last Zajaki.

Vichocolis, a kind of Water-Rats, whose Skins are of a delicious Scent.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Natives of Russia,
THE Muscovites are generally of a very strong Constitution, both very tall and
bulky. They are also very fruitful, which makes the Country very populous, as
may be judged by the vast Armies which the Muscovites bring into the Field in
time of War. I have it from very credible Persons, and such as had considerable
Commands in the present Czar's Army, that a few years ago the Army which was
raised against the Precopian Tartars, consisted of above 300000 Men. Above one
half of the year being taken up with their Fasts, when the common People feed
upon nothing else but Cabbage and Cucumbers, and these raw, only pickled. This
is an evident sign of their natural vigor, though it must also be allowed, that
they promote the digestion by the Brandy and Leeks, which they use in great
quantity, and questionless, correct the viscous Humors arising in the Stomach
by such indigestible Nourishments. They know of no Epidemical Distempers in
Russia, unless you would give the Scurvy, (the general Plague of all the
Northern Countries) that Name. The Russians call it Tsinga.

Among the rest we ought not to pass by in silence here their strange manner of
Traveling betwixt Siberia and China. For they make use of Sleds with Sails,
which carry them over the Snow when the Wind proves favorable; But if it
proves contrary, they have Dogs ready at hand, who supply the defect of the
Sails, which are laid by at that time. I have heard it affirmed for truth, that
twelve of these Dogs will draw as much as a good Horse.

The Commodities exported from Russia are: Rhubarb, but much inferior in
goodness to that which is brought from China and Turkey. Ambergreese, Honey,
Wax, Tar, Course Linen, Caviare Russia Leather and Hemp. The City of Ieresla is
famous for the dressing of Russia Leather, which as well as the Caviare, is for
the most part transported into Italy, The English and Dutch consume abundance
of Russia Hemp, out of which they make their Cables for their Ships. Sometimes
the Dutch are also permitted to export some Corn, of which they make great
profit. The Cities of Archangel and Narva, are the two chiefest Places of
Commerce betwixt the Russians, English and Dutch. The first is most frequented
by the Dutch, the last by the English. The Armenian Merchants have a free Trade
at Narva, for the convenicy of transporting such Commodities as they buy in
Holland, by the way of Narva, into Muscovy, and from thence by the River Wolga
and the Caspian Sea, into Persia. But no body is permitted to return into
Persia by way of Muscovy, unless he be come the same way before; it being
otherwise much easier to return that way into Persia, than to come from thence,
as being against the current of the River Wolga.

Formerly the Banjans (who are Indian Merchants) used to traffic in the
Capital City of Musco. But of late they are forbidden to come any further than
Archangel, where they drive a very considerable Trade.

There is also at present a constant Trade betwixt Muscovy and China; from
whence the Muscovites bring Silks, Thee, and among other things a certain
mixture, almost like Chalk, but of a yellowish color, of an Aromatic Scent,
which is looked upon as a Sovereign Remedy against many Distempers. The
Buchartzi, who, if I mistake not, are Mahometans, inhabiting near Samarkand,
come frequently to Tobolsko, the Capital City of Siberia, with all sorts of
Indian Commodities, for which Reason perhaps it is, that, as I have been
informed, the Arabian Tongue is taught in some places of Siberia.

The Calmuck Tartars bring every year after Harvest-time, a great many
thousands of Horses to Sale to the City of Musco.

They Trade also in Slaves, and sometimes sell their own Children to the
Russians. I met once a young Boy of that Country who understood the Russian
Tongue, whom out of Curiosity I asked several Questions, and among the rest,
how they called God in his Native Tongue; he answered, Bogunasniet, We have no
God. But it is nevertheless certain, that they have a certain Religion, such a
one as it is; their High Priest being called Kutafta, who as well as the
Kutafta of the Mongul Tartars, is subordinate to the Dalac-Lama, who being the
Pagan Pope in those Parts, keeps his Residence at a place called Baontola, not
far from the Confines of China.

I have been credibly informed, that the Chinese Lama's or Priests, do also
acknowledge this Dalac-Lama for their Head. They are persuaded that this
Dalac-Lama is immortal, which Opinion they maintain among the common People
without much difficulty; forasmuch as he scarce ever appears, but to his
Priests, who are all Partners in the Fraud.

I heard once a certain Muscovian Lord, who had been sent as Ambassador from
Musco to China, say, that it was offered him as a particular Favor, to appear
before the Dalac-Lama, provided he would prostrate himself before him; but,
that he gave them many thanks for the Honor they intended to do him, without
accepting their Offer.

I conclude with this hearty wish, that the door of Mercy may be opened to
these blind Wretches, that they may be brought out of darkness to partake of
the light of the true Religion.

FINIS.
Books printed for D. Brown, at the Black-Swan and Bible, without Temple Bar.
A Late Voyage to St. Kilda, the remotest of all the Hebrides, or Western
Islands of Scotland; with a History of the Island, Natural, Moral, etc. by Mr.
Martin, Gent.

Beauty in distress, A Tragedy: as it is Acted by His Majesty's Servants.
Written by Mr. Motteux: With a Discourse of the Lawfulness and Unlawfulness of
Plays. By the Learned Father Caffara, Divinity Professor at Paris; sent in a
Letter to the Author, by a Divine of the Church of England. With a Copy of
Verses by Mr. Dryden, in defense of the Stage.

The Canterbury Guest: Or, Abargain broken, A Comedy, Acted at the
Theater Royal. Written by Mr. Ravenscroft.

The Sullen Lovers: Or, The Curious Impertinents. A Comedy. Written by Th.
Shadwell.

The Cornish Comedy, as it is Acted at the Theater Royal in Dorset-Garden, by
His Majesty's Servants.

Dr. Colebatch's four Tracts; his Treatise of the Gout, and Doctrine of Acids
further asserted.


