THE CONFESSION OF Richard Brandon The Hangman (upon his Death bed) concerning
His beheading his late Majesty, CHARLES the first, King of Great Britain; and
his Protestation and Vow touching the same; the manner how he was terrified in
Conscience; the Apparitions and Visions which apeared unto him; the great
judgment that befell him three days before he died; and the manner how he was
carried to White-Chappell? Churchyard on Thursday night last; the strange
Actions that happened thereupon; With the merry conceits of the Crown Cook and
his providing mourning Cords for the Burial.

depiction of the execution of Charles I

Printed in the year Year of the Hang-mans downfall, 1649.

THE CONFESSION OF THE HANGMAN CONCERNING His beheading his late Majesty the
King of Great Britain* (upon his Death bed) who was buried on Thursday night
last, in white Chapel Churchyard, with the manner thereof.
UPon Wednesday last (being the 20. of this instant June, 1649.) Richard
Brandon, the late Executioner and Hangman, who beheaded his late Majesty, King
of Great Britain, departed this life; But during the time of His sickness,
his Conscience was much troubled, and exceedingly perplexed in mind, yet little
show of repentance, for remission of his sins, and bypast transgressions,
which had so much power and influence upon him, that he seemed to live in them*
and they in him. And upon Sunday last, a young man of his acquaintance going in
to visit him, fell into discourse, asked kim how he cid, and whether he was
not troubled in conscience for cutting off of the Kings head?

He replied, yes! by reason that (upon the time of his trial, and at the
denouncing of Sentence against him) he had taken a vow and protestation,
Wishing God to perish him body and soul, if ever he appeared on the scaffold to
do the act or lift up his hand against him.

Further acknowledging, That he was no sooner entered upon the scaffold, but
immediately he fell a trembling, and has ever since continued in the like agony.

He likewise confessed, that he had 30. pounds for his pains, all paid him in
half Crowns, within an hour after the blow was given, and that he had an Orange
stuck full of Cloves, and a handkircher out of the Kings pocket, so soon as he
was carried off from the Scaffold, for which Orange, he was proffered 20.
shillings by a Gentleman in Whitehall, but refused the same, and afterward
sold it for tens* in Rose-mary Lane.

About 6 of the clock at night, he returned home to his wife living in
Rose-mary lane, and gave her the money, saying, That it was the dearest money
that ever he earned in his life, for it would cost him his life. Which
prophetical words were soon made manifest; for it appeared, that ever since he
has been in a most sad condition, and upon the Almighties first scourging of
him with the Rod of meekness, and the friendly admonition of diverse friends,
for the calling of him to repentance, yet he persisted on in his vicious Vices,
and would not hearken thereunto, but lay raging and swearing, and still
pointing at one thing or another, which he conceived to appear visible before
him.

About three days before he died he lay speechless, uttering many a sigh and
heavy groan, and so in a most desparae manner departed from his bed of sorrow.
For the burial whereof, a great store of Wines were sent in, by the Sheriff of
the City of London, and a great multitude of people stood waiting to see his
Corpse carried to the Churchyard, some crying out, Hang him Rogue, bury him in
the Dunghill; others pressing upon him, saying, They would quarter him, for
executing of the King: Insomuch, that the Churchwardens and Masters of the
Parish were fain to come for the suppressing of them, and (with great
difficulty) he was at last carried to White-chappell Churchyard, having (as it
is said) a bunch of Rosemary at each end of the coffin, on the top thereof,
with a Rope tied cross from one end to the other.

And a merry conceited Cook living at the sign of the Crown, having a black Fan
(worth the value of 30 shilings) took a resolution to rent the same in pieces,
and to every feather tied a piece of pack-thread died in black Ink, and gave
them to diverse persoas, who (in derision) for a while, wore them in their hats.

Thus have I given thee an exact account and perfect relation of the life and
death of Richard Brandon, to the end, that the World may be convinced of those
calumnious speches, ann erroneous suggestions, which are daily spit from the
mouth of Envy, against diverse persons of great worth and eminency, by casting
an Odium upon them, for the executing of the King; it being now made manifest,
that the aforesaid Executioner was the only man that gave the farall blow, and
his man that waited upon him, was a Ragman living in Rosemary Lane.

SIR,
Upon a late dispute and engagement between the two Navyes at Sea, great was
the resolution and gallantry on both sides; and for the space of many hours the
Victory seemed doubtful; but in the heat of the Conflict, Divine providence
proved a Banner to the Parliaments party, and Fortune so attended their
several motions in their heroic achievements, that they soon became Victors
over their insulting Enemies, and in a short space dispiersed that formidable
Fleet, who for many months have lain raging upon the Neptune Seas, and forbed
the two unfortunate Princes to take sanctuary in Harbors; so that now the
Citisens of London may receive comfort from the Ocean, and the Merchants and
others proceed unanimously in free Trade and Commerce without fear or
molestation; The faciliating whereof, may cause thousands to rejoice, and sing
hallelujah, for the vanquishing of this potent Enemy; it being affirmed, that
since our first engagement with them, we have re-taken above 30 ships and
prizes, 200 pieces of Ordnance, and at least 400 prisoners. We hear that Prince
Charles upon the 15 instant, with the Prince, and Princess royal about six
of the clock in the morning went to Dort,, so far the Queen of Bohemia, brought
him on his way. The 11th of June the Electoresse of Brandenburg, went toward
Cleave, by Vi^nen, Rhenea. The 17th of June, Prince Charles went from Breda
toward Bruxels; where an Earl has order to receive his highness. Therr is a
Col. left in the Hague, who is to buy arms for ten thousand men. There passing
a boat from England to Ostend, with diverse English they were set upon by some
English, who lie there and rove to get booty. The Passengers were in great fear
at which one of them stood up, and said to the Pirates, I have lately broke out
of Newgate, being a prisoner for King Charles, and these are all my friends,
therefore do them no harm? at which they cried, Vive la Roy, and bid them pass
there should none of them be touchr.

They tell us that come from Edinburgh, that Scotland is quiet, and that the
Parl. has no enemy in arms, in any part of that Kingdom, which is sufficiently
confirmed by the soldiers beginning to be unruly and unseparable concomitant
to idleness, which has been complained of by the Parl, and Ministers, which
occasioned the Genesis Excellency, the E. of Levin, write to the Liev. Genesis that
there might be a meeting of all the chief officers, for redress of all
grievances, and for ordering matters, so that nothing might obstruct the work
in hand: the particular which fetched in this Gen, was that there were English
Cavaliers scattered up and down in the army, some whereof had entertainment,
others shelter which actions it were necessary to remove, and retain only those
who of them were honest Covenanters. There is displeasure taken, that letters
between Newcastle and this place going for Scotland, were intercepted and
opened, which is likely to procure the like, and is already threatened;
displeasure is apt to catch: Dr. Sibbald the Physician, is discharged of his
imprisonmen. upon the Fine of 500. Scotch marks, he says let them take what
they will, he will not recant his paper, and will rather choose to suffer the
most ignominious death at the openest place in Edinburgh.

The Gent. that brought the letter from Parl. of England, of having neither
countenance nor answer, nor is like to have if the deportment be evidence of
respect to this nation, there is little if an answer should be returred, as it is
unlikely, or not like to be sudden, it will be sent in all probability by
messengers of their own.

The Commis. are at last returned from their declared King and landed at
Kirkaldy: the pure Royalists fay that there is no agreement brought (whether
with joy or sorrow these expressions are made appears not: the Sages and
knowing Divines seem cheerful, and express that Scotland has cause to bless
God for the great condiscention or so much compliance in their King, and this
seems to be the more probable: yer some begin to think it may now be in their
power to act or speak at least in favor of their friends in England.

Berwick the 18 June ^649.

One thing I had almost forgotten, which may give some satisfaction to the
Reader, viz. That a little before the death of the aforesaid Richard Brandon,
he being in some discourse with a neighbor, touching his executing of the King,
said, That even at the very point of time when he was to give the blow, a great
pain and ache took him round the neck, and has ever since continued, and that
he never slept quietly in mind saying, that his Majesty's denying to forgive
him, when he fell down upon his knees unto him, has very much troubled his
conscience, and that he was afraid to walk along the streets, or to go to his
bed and sleep without a candle burning. The other fellow that was upon the
Scaffold, that went in the name of his man, was one Ralph Jones a Rag-man, who
lives in Rosemary Lane; and he who now takes his place (as Executioner) is one
William Lo, a Dust carryer, and cleaner of the Dunghils.

FINIS.

