A SHORT DISCOURSE Upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant; BEING AN
EXPOSITION Upon the Prelimanary Questions and Answers OF OUR Church-Catechism.
Proper to be read by all Young Persons, in order to their Understanding the
whole Frame and Tenor of the Christian Religion; and to their being duly
prepared for Confirmation. WITH DEVOTIONS Preparatory to that Apostolic and
Useful Ordinance.

By THOMAS BRAY, D.D.

The Third Edition.

London, Printed by E. Holt for Will. Hawes, at the Rose in Ludgate Street,
1699.

TO His Highness THE DUKE OF Gloucester.
SIR,
THE vast and universal Influence which the Virtues of Princes have upon the
Rest of Mankind, makes it the concern of this whole Nation, that Your Highness
be thoroughly Instructed in the Principles of our most Holy Religion, whose
whole Tendency is to make both Princes, and their People Happy. And when we
consider that Hopeful Genius, which does already appear in Your Highness; and
the very surprising Account You can give of Your Faith, at so tender an Age, we
may thence promise our selves, by the Blessing of God, a Happy Change in the
Generation of Youth, now growing up; to Retrieve whom to more sober Principles
than have been found in their Predecessors, all possible Application must be
used, or the Nation will be Undone; and to Influence to which, nothing will
more Contribute, than Your Highnesses Pious Example.

Now, that little Piece which does here presume to wait upon Your Highness, is
an Explication of Your Baptismal Vow and Covenant; and this designed to prepare
You for that solemn Recognition of it, which e're long we hope to see You make
at Your CONFIRMATION. And as that Sacred, and Apostolic Ordinance is
singularly Useful and Necessary, especially where Persons have been Baptized in
their Infancy; so there is no part of Christian Institution so immediately
fitted to prepare you for it, as that which gives you to understand the general
Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the same Covenant, as shows you what
Obligations lie upon You to be faithful in it, and teaches You how to form Your
Resolutions to perform your part of it. And that Almighty God may make Your
Highness a Resolute Christian Hero, an utter Enemy to Profaneness, Vice, and
Wickedness; and may always enable You to Repel the strong Efforts of Your
Spiritual Enemies, which will do all that is possible to shake Your Constancy,
shall be the most hearty Prayers of,

SIR, Your Highness's Most Obedient, and Most Humble Servant, Thomas Bray.

TO THE READER.
THE Readers for whom I design this short Discourse upon the Doctrine of our
Baptismal Covenant, are principally you who are the Youth of the Church of
England. And because the first Questions and Answers of the Church-Catechism do
instruct you, in as few Words as possible, in all the Articles both on God's
part and ours, contained in this Covenant, as also in other Points necessary
for you to be taught, pertaining to that great Subject; I have therefore chose
these Preliminary Questions and Answers to be the Text to enlarge upon, in the
Explication of this Important Doctrine.

And the reason why I do so particularly pitch upon the Doctrine of the
Baptismal Covenant, as the most necessary for you to be thoroughly Instructed
in, is for these two Reasons. In the sirst place, because being Instructed in
this, you will know the Sum and Substance of Christianity, even of all that
most admirable Religion in the Study of which it concerns you to bestow a great
part of your Time, and clearly and distinctly to understand the Nature and
Design of which Christianity, you can neven arrive, without comprehending in
the first place, the general Doctrine of your Baprismal Covenant. And,
Secondly, I do more particularly recommend this Subject to your Study, because
a due understanding of your Baptismal Covenant is a necessary Qualification to
Confirmation.

Such is the Paternal and Affectionate Care of the Church of Christ, toward
all her Sons and Daughters, that you were scarce sooner born into the World,
than you were took into her Bosom; and being Baptized, were delivered by her
into the Hands, not only of your Parents, but of your Godfathers and
Godmothers, as Sureties (so much concerned I say she is for your welfare) that
you should be trained up in the Knowledge of that Covenant, and those great
Engagements you then entered into with God. And when you shall be so
Instructed, she requires you should personally appear before the Chief Officer
in the Church of Christ, and He your Spiritual Father, the Bishop, and there
solemnly profess it is your steadfast and unfeigned Resolution, by the
Assistance of God, which you will always pray for, to discharge such your
Covenant: And the Episcopal Benediction will be then given you, by which, and
the Reverend Fathers laying of Hands, you have a Promise that the Grace of God
shall be conveyed to you.

But then it will be requisite you should come duly prepared with a due
understanding of the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the same Covenant you
appear to ratify in your own Person, in so solemn a manner. And that you may be
so prepared with a competent Knowledge of what you do, is the design of the
following Discourse.

And here let me advise you always to bear, even to the end of your Lives, a
profound Regard to all the positive Institutions of our Savior and his
Apostles. There is not a piece of Pride more fatal to the Souls of Men, than to
think themselves above Ordinances; nor is there any more provoking to God than
this is, because it implies as if we were wiser than our Master, and knew
better than he, by what Means and Methods the Graces of his Holy Spirit should
be conveyed unto us. And indeed, considering we are so much Influenced by our
Senses, so that visible Appearances do mightily Affect us, there is not any
thing more naturally tends to make all considering Persons faithful in their
Covenant than this, that they do with such outward Solemnities, first enter
into it by Baptism, and afterward Ratify it in Confirmation, and the
Lord's Supper. And moreover we may with the utmost Assurance depend upon it,
that Christ will be ever present in his own Ordinances, so that they shall
never fail in those blessed Influences he designs them for, and has promised by
them.

As then you have given up your selves to the Service of Christ in your
Baptism, having then solemnly Renounced his Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; So be not backward, so soon as you shall arrive to a competent
Understanding of the Tenor and Force of that Engagement, to reinforce the same
Dedication of your selves to God at Confirmation, embracing, for that purpose,
the first Opportunity of the Bishop's Arrival into your Neighborhood. And soon
after this, having improved your Understanding in Divine Things, the better to
fix your Holy Resolutions, and to draw down from Heaven more plentiful Measures
of his Holy Spirit, to enable you to perform the same, let no opportunity of
the Holy Sacrament ever miss you, though it should be Weekly or Daily
Administered. For this you may ever take for a sure Rule, that the more you
draw nigh to God, and the more closely you engage your selves to him, the
nearer he will vouchsafe to draw nigh to you, and the more you will have your
Interest confirmed in him.

But since Youth are so inconsiderate of themselves, as not to prize these
Advantages as they ought, I must not pass by you who are their Parents, without
a Word or two of Admonition. And to quicken you in your Duty of making it your
chief Care to have your Children duly principl'd in Christianity, give me leave
to tell you, that the very Jews will rise in Judgment against you on this very
Account; for they are so diligent in the Instruction of their Children in their
Law, that There is no Youth under Heaven can at Thirteen Years old give so
exact an account of the Rites of their Religion, as the Jewish. Addison of the
Present State of the Jews, Chapter 10.
And they think themselves chargeable with all their Childrens Misscarriages
till they have so Instructed 'em, and have at Thirteen brought 'em before the
Synagogue, to profess the taking the charge of the Law upon themselves, which
is answerable to our Confirmation.

Nor let any think to excuse themselves from this Care by the meanness of their
Condition. The Vaudois, as Thuanus represents their State, seem to be the
poorest, and the most destitute People upon Earth, and yet there is not any
amongst 'em but can read their Bible, and sing their Psalms. And there is not a
Child to be found who cannot very readily, when asked, give an account of his
Faith, and a reason of the hope that is in him. Thuan. Hist. Lib. 27.
Both which Instances considered, I think it deserves your serious Keflection,
whether your so far despising the Advantages of so excellent a Religion as you
enjoy, as not to think it worth your while to teach it your Children; And
whether your slighting such excellent means of Instrmction as your Children may
have, above those of other Nations, may not provoke God to remove his
Candlestick from you, and so give it to a People worthier than your selves.

THE I. LECTURE.
A Catechism; that is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every Person,
before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.

THE Word Catechize, which is often to be met with in the Greek of the New
Testament, does import a general Instruction in those Christian Truths, which
are afterward to be more particularly and distinctly learned by those who have
entertained the Profession of the Gospel. Some give us its original Meaning by
another Word, which signifies to Build, intimating thereby, that a Catechism
must consist of the main and fundamental Principles of Christianity, such as
are fitted to build up a firm and unshaken Christian withal: And others derive
it from the Word Echo, because these Principles must, by often repeating, be
infused into us.

And now agreeably to this original Meaning of the Word, A Catechism may be
defined to be a General Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the
Christian Religion necessary to be learned of every Person, in order to his
Confirmation.

First, It is a General Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of Religion.
Now the Christian Religion is out of Christian Principles, to live an holy good
Life; and together therewith to depend upon Christ's Mediation for us with the
Father, that our imperfect Righteousness may be graciously accepted to our
Justification.

1. Morality, or a good Life, consisting in a conscientious Dischar^e of our
Duty to God, our Neighbor, and our selves, is a most necessary and essential
Part of Christianity, as appears from that of St. James, 1.27. Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Afflictions, and to keep one's self unspotted from the World.
And to implant this Morality amongst Men, was the great Design of our Savior's
Coming into the World. Thus, Titus 2.11,12,13,14. The Grace of God, which
brings Salvation to all Men, has appeared, teaching us, that denying
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present Word; looking for that blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing
of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar People
zealous of Good Works.

2. But it is not enough to live virtuously, but withal it must be from
Christian Principles. They who are temperate only because it preserves their
Health, just and charitable in order only to maintain their Reputation and
Interest in the World, and fast and pray only to be seen of Men, Verily I say
unto you, they have their Reward. Mat. 6.2.

Nor is it enough to entitle any one to the Name and Reward of a Christian, to
live a good Moral Life, as moved thereunto by the mere Principles of Natural
Religion, as upon the Persuasion there is a God, and Providence, and a future
Judgment; but to render any one capable of being justified by the Law of Grace
(and there is no other Law according to which we can be justified) it is
necessary we believe and act according to Christian Principles; for in the Day
when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, it will be according
to his Gospel. Romans 2.16. And,

3. When all is done, a Christian's Principle will teach him not to depend upon
his own Righteousness, though performed according to the Conditions of the
Gospel, but to depend solely upon the Mediation of Christ, that his imperfect
Righteousness may be accepted; for since we all have sinned, or come short of
the Glory, or Approbation, of God, Romans 3 23. It is in Jesus Christ we have
Bolduess, and Access with Confidence by the Faith of him. Ephesians. 3.12.

And indeed such Dependence upon the Mediation of Christ for our Acceptance, is
the distinguishing Character of a true Christian; for though it should be
supposed that many Pagans, by the Force of the mere Principles of Natural
Religion, have led very plausible and blameless Lives; yet that the best of our
Performances are so imperfect, that it was thought requisite in the Divine
Wisdom, that the Son of God should become a Sacrifice to expiate their Guilt,
and a Mediator with the Father to obtain their Acceptance, is what the proud
hearts of Natural Man never thought of, and no Religion but the Christian ever
taught: And therefore this Dependence upon Christ is necessary to take down
that arrogant Conceit of our own Righteousness, which is a Temper of Mind so
displeasing to God: So the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.29,30,31. To the end that no Flesh
might Glory in God's Presence, Jesus Christ is by him made to us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption, that so he that glories,
may glory in the Lord. And thus you see what is the Christian Religion.

And now the Fundamental Doctrines of this Religion must be such as are the
Foundation upon which such a Religion can only be built, or the Spring from
whence it can flow; that is, such Doctrines as powerfully tend to render those
who do embrace such Principles, in the first Place good Livers; and, next to
that, so humble as to depend upon the Mediation of Christ the Son, for their
Acceptance with God the Father.

And such is the Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace, wherein we learn the
Engagement we made at our Baptism to be thus Religious; such also are all the
Articles of our Christian Faith, which are every one of them most powerful
Motives to a Holy Life, and some of them, moreover, such as send us to Christ
to intercede with God for its Acceptance. Such are the Ten Commandments, which
are the general Rules out of which, all, or most of those particular Duties
wherein consists our Holy Living do flow. And such, lastly, are the Doctrine of
Prayer, and the Sacraments, which are the Means; the former, the Means of
obtaining the Divine Grace and Assistance, without the Help of which we cannot
be Religious; the latter, the Means of conveying this Grace to the Souls of
Men. And thus you see, as what is meant by the Christian Religion, so what are
to be accounted its Fundamental Principles.

And now, A Catechism is a General Instruction only in these Fundamental
Principles. A Catechism must be a general, short, and comprehensive Instruction
in these Necessary and Essential Points of Christianity. Hence Romans 6.17. It is
called a Form of Doctrine that was delivered to the First Christians. And such
is the Catechism of our Church, which does contain those very Points which are
styled the First Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 6.1. So that as to
the Matter you see of which a Catechism is to consist, it is a General
Instruction in the Fundamental, and Necessary Principles of the Christian
Religion.

The second Thing mentioned in the Definition of a Catechism, are the Persons
who are to be instructed. And a Catechism is an Instruction necessary to be
learnt of every Person. No Building can stand without a Foundation: And as to
Religion, you will find, Mat. 7.24. a Person well-grounded in Religious
Principles, shall be able to bear the Shock of the fiercest Temptations; but a
Person, whose Religion is founded upon no Principles, shall not be able to
withstand the least: So that there is an apparent necessity, that every Person
of what Age, Quality, or Condition soever, should be well grounded in Religious
Principles by Catechetical Instructions: And the Contempt of Catechizing, is
ever the Effect of Pride, and the Cause of Ignorance.

True it is, the Seeds of Virtue, and Principles of Religion, can never be too
early sown; and therefore it is undoubted that all Children especially ought to
be Catechis'd. But since the Principles of Religion are for the most part deep
Mysteries, hard to be understood, the fittest Persons to receive an Exposition
of these things, and then to be demanded an Account of what they are so taught,
must be Youth grown up to some Years of Discretion; so that it is not below
Persons of any Age, or Quality, to lay the Foundation of their Christian
Knowledge in Catechetical Instruction.

Thirdly, And now it only remains, in order to complete the Account I have
given of a Catechism, to declare to you the end of it. And its Design is to
prepare you to be Confirmed by the Bishop. Confirmation consists in Two Parts:
First, in a Person's solemn renewing of his Baptismal Vow and Covenant with
God, after that he comes of Years to take upon him those Vows which were made
for him by his Godfathers, and after that he has by Catechizing been
instructed in the Nature, Weight, and Benefit of such a Covenant. And then,
secondly, it consists in the laying on of the Hands of the Bishop, accompanied
with his Blessing and Prayers. And a Rite this is, both greatly necessary, and
of singular Benefit in the Church of Christ.

And, First, It is highly necessary, that every Baptized Person, when he comes
to Years of Understanding, should solemnly declare his Acceptance of all the
Mercies of God, on those Conditions his Sureties have engaged in his Name; or
else he may be reasonably deemed to have renounced that Covenant of Grace, and
to have repented it was ever made in his behalf: To have renounced that Blessed
Covenant, I say, and all claim to the Privileges and Promises thereof; which
puts us so much above the Condition of Infidels and Heathens, who are without
Christ, and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, having no Hope, and
without God in the World; which the Apostle mentions as a most desperate and
forlorn Condition, Ephesians. 2.12. And Confirmation is also highly necessary, as it
consists in the Episcopal Benediction, and laying on of Hands. This Rite of
laying on of Hands being reckoned, Heb 6.1,2. amongst the First Principles of
the Doctrine of Christ.

Secondly, And Confirmation is also an Ordinance of singular Benefit to Men's
Souls, whether, First, As the Solemn Profession therein made to be true to our
Baptismal Covenant, imprints upon our Hearts serious Thoughts, and Religious
Purposes, and Resolutions; Or, Secondly, As the Episcopal Benediction, Prayers,
and Laying on of Hands, have Spiritual Blessings attending them: For that much
Benefit may be expected from the Devout Prayers and Paternal Benediction or
Blessing of a Father of the Church, who is Commissioned to pray to God in the
behalf of others, and to bless the People in his Name, is what we are assured,
Jam. 5.14. Nor have we reason to doubt, but that God will have a particular
regard to his own Institutions, and will bless those means of conveying his
Grace, which he himself has appointed. So that thus you see what it is to be
Confirmed by the Bishop; and withal, how necessary and beneficial it is to the
Souls of ^en to be so Confirmed.

And now, Catechizing is highly necessary to prepare Persons to be accordingly
Confirmed,

And, First, In order to their Solemn Ratifying their Covenant with God. For
what so requisite as that every Person before he takes upon him so great and
weighty a Business, as the performance of the Conditions of the Covenant of
Grace, should be first Instructed, so as to understand them well; both what
those Conditions of Repentance, Faith, and Obedience are; and what mighty
Blessings God vouchsafes to make over to him in the same Covenant, which should
be a reasonable Consideration to undertake so great a Charge. What King, says
our Savior, Luke 14.31. going to make War against another King, sits not
down first, and consulteth, whether he be able with ten thousand, to meet him
that comes against him with twenty thousand? And in like manner, every one who
will act wisely before he engages in a Spiritual Warfare against the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil, ought to be instructed in the Nature and Manner of this
Warfare. So necessary is Catechizing in order to the Renewing and Ratifying in
Confirmation, that Covenant and Vow which was made in Baptism.

Nor, Secondly, Is it less necessary to the receiving Benefit by the Prayers,
the Blessing, and by the Laying on of Hands of the Bishop in Confirmation. For
as beneficial as these really are to all those who shall come duly Prepared;
yet it is certain, that without some necessary Qualifications in such as come
to be Confirmed (amongst which, to understand the Nature, Terms, and Conditions
of the Covenant of Grace, and seriously to intend to perform the same, are the
first and chief) none will be much the better for the Bishop's Prayers,
Benediction, and Laying on of Hands. And therefore Catechizing, which is the
only proper Means to give Persons such an Understanding, must needs be
exceeding necessary to their being Benefitted also by what the Bishop shall
perform in their Confirmation.

And thus you have had an account, First, Of the Matter of which a Catechism is
to consist: Secondly, Of the Persons to be Catechized: And, Thirdly, In some
measure you have been told the End and Reason of Catechizing. But there being
several other great Advantages in this Method of Instruction, I shall defer the
Consideration of them to the next opportunity, as further Motives to you duly
to attend it.

THE II. LECTURE.
A Catechism; that is to say, An Instruction to be learned of every Person,
before he be brought to be Confirmed by the Bishop.

YOU have already been told the Nature of a Catechism: First, That it is a
General Instruction in the Fundamental Principles of the Christian Religion.
Secondly, That the Persons proper to be Catechized, are all New Beginners in
the School of Christ, be they of what Age or Quality soever. And, Lastly, I
have showed you, that the end thereof is to fit and prepare Persons for
Confirmation, both to renew their Baptismal Vow before the Bishop, and to
Quality such as are Confirmed to receive Benefit by the Bishop's Prayers,
Benediction, and Laying on of Hands.

But because there are several other Benefits of Catechizing, and those such as
will raise a due esteem of it, I will proceed to show you those other Ends and
Purposes to which Catechizing serves, before I enter upon Expounding the
Catechism it self.

II. And as for Confirmation, so Catechizing is also requisite to sit and
prepare Persons to be Worthy Communicants in the Lord's Supper. In both
Confirmation, and in the Lord's Supper, you are to renew the Covenant with God.
To both therefore you ought to come with the like Knowledge of what you are to
do.

And alas! to what is it but to their having never been Instructed in their
Catechism, that so many come so Ignorantly, (and if Ignorantly, then
Unworthily) or else not at all to the Lord's Supper? Ignorantly in not
understanding the Importance of that Blessed Sacrament to be the New Covenant
in Christ's Blood, 1 Cor. 11.25. that is, that it is the Seal of that Covenant
which was Purehased by, and Ratified in his Blood.

And to their not having been Catechis'd, whereby they would have understood
the unspeakable Benefit of being in Covenant with God, it is to be imputed,
that so many turn their Backs upon, and come not at all to the Lord's Table. To
which there needs no greater Motive to Invite any considering Person than this,
that God does as well condescend in that Blessed Ordinance to seal to us a
Title to the Pardon of Sins, and to Eternal Life and Happiness, as we do Ratify
our Vows of Faith and Obedience unto him.

III. Catechizing is very useful to render you capable to be Edified by the
Preaching of the Word, and to the Profiting by Sermons. That is truly Edifying
Preaching which explains the Meaning, and proves the Truth of the Doctrines of
Christianity, which states the Nature and Extent of Christian Duties, and which
warms the Heart with a Love of our Duty, and does vigorously excite us to the
Practice of it. And whereas an uncatechis'd and ungrounded Person will be sure
to prefer the most empty and noisy, to the most substantial Discourses upon the
Points of Religion; He who has been truly Catechis'd, will be able to make a
better Judgment of what he hears, and will turn it to far better use. And by
having a Regular Scheme of Divinity laid up by Catechetical Instruction in his
Head and Heart, he will be able to range every thing he shall at any time hear,
into its proper Place and Order; as also to distinguish between the more and
less material Parts of Christianity.

IV. Catechizing is of Excellent Use to prevent your being seduced into Heresy
and Error. That Heresies will arise in the Church, and that by the Permission
of God, for a trial of our stedfastness to the Truth, is what the Apostle does
warn us of, 1 Cor. 11.19. There must be Heresies, that they who are Approved
may be made manifest. But as great as is the Danger, that one who has never
been well Catechis'd, will be seduced; yet he who shall hold fast that Form of
Sound Words, 2 Timothy 3.13. which has been taught in his Catechism, will be able,
by them, as by a certain Touchstone, to discover what are True, what are
Erroneous Doctrines.

Lastly, Catechizing is exceeding useful to preserve a young Person from
falling into any gross and wasting Sin, and especially into any ungodly course
of Living: Or if he has been seduced by evil Company, the having the Seed of
good Principles sown in the Heart, by a timely Catechizing, will be the most
likely means to recover such a one out of the Snares of the Devil.

First, It is exceeding useful to preserve Youth from falling into any gross
and wasting Sin, and especially any ungodly course of Living. Thus it was the
Counsel of the Wiseman, Prove. 22.6. to Train up a Child in the Way he should
go, and when he is old he will not depart from it. And the Experience of all
Men, and of all Ages shows it, that those are not easily, and but very rarely
corrupted, who have had their Minds possessed betimes with the Apprehensions of
God, of his Justice, Goodness, Truth, and Holiness; and who have learned what
the Son of God has done for them, to rescue them from the Power of the Devil;
and who have been made sensible of their Vows and Engagements to God.

Experience, I say, shows us, that Persons thus Principl'd betimes, rarely
miscarry, whereas our uncatechis'd, untaught Youth fall immediately, without
any restraint, into the most horrid and vile Courses.

It may indeed now and then happen, that a Person well Principl'd may be
overcome through the Strength of Temptation, but such a one soon recovers
again. Or it may sometimes be found, that falling into loose Company, he may
become for a time hardened in Wickedness, and be delivered up to follow all
Uncleanness with Greediness; but however, this may be ever observed, that
whereas one who had never received any Principles of Religion, is scarcely ever
after reclaimed by any Methods of Providence, such as Sickness, or other
Afflictions, because he is not sensible from whom they are sent, and whither,
and to whom they would call him; yet if one that has been formerly instructed
in the Necessaries to Salvation shall happen to be so visited, it is very great
odds, but his former good Principles reviving in him, do make him sensible of
his foul Rebellion against his Gracious Father, so that with the Prodigal Son
he will resolve to arise and go to his Father, and say unto him, Father, I have
sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
Son, make me as one of thy hired Servants, Luke 15.18,19. So that in short, by
virtue of good Principles early sown, a young Person shall be either prevented
from falling into a vicious course of Life, or soon recovered out of it, which
alone were enough to demonstrate to you the use of Catechizing. And this I am
sure, together with all the forementioned Reasons for it, speak it to be the
most necessary, as well as it is the wanted Method of Instruction at this Day
in our Church.

THE III. LECTURE.
What is your Name? And the Answer is made by the Christian Name.

THough this Question seems not very material to some, yet a more proper one
could not be put at the beginning of a Christian Catechism than this, which
obliges you to give up your Christian Name to the Minister and Congregation:
For, First, The asking you what is your Christian Name, may put you in mind of
your Christian Profession, which you took upon you under that very Name, and of
that Strictness of Life, which is required of those who bear the Name of
Christians. Secondly, It gives occasion to remind you, that the bad Lives of
such who bear the Name of Christians, do an infinite Prejudice and Dishonor to
Christianity. And, Thirdly, It gives occasion to the Minister to exhort you
therefore to stand upon the Dignity of the Christian Name and Profession, by
living such Lives as may be an Honor, not a Disgrace unto it.


And, First, I say, the asking you of your Christian Name may put you in mind
of your Christian Profession, which you took upon you under that very Name, and
of that Strictness of Life which is required of those who bare the Name of
Christians.

For why? There is the greatest Force in a Christian Name to make a Man lead a
Christian Life, as under that Name having listed himself, 1. A Disciple of a
most Holy and Excellent Religion. Let every one that names the Name of Christ,
or upon whom the Name of Christ is called, depart from Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.
For indeed it is ever expected, that those who profess to be guided by the most
perfect Doctrine, should answerably live the most perfect Lives. 2. Every one
of you, under your Christian Name, have in a Public and Solemn Manner at your
Baptism, listed your selves Servants and Soldiers of a most Holy and Just God:
Of a God that has no Pleasure in Wickedness, neither shall any Evil dwell with
him; in whose sight the Foolish shall not stand, and who hates all the Workers
of Iniquity, Psalm. 5.4,5. 3. It is under your several Christian Names, that you
have Listed your selves to fight under God's Banner against his, and your own
Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, declaring you will so Renounce
every one of them, as not to be tempted, or drawn off by either of 'em to sin
against God. 4. Under your respective Christian Names you have professed firmly
such Articles as are the most powerful Motives in the World to deny all
Vndodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this present World. 5. And accordingly you have engaged your selves under your
several Christian Names in the strongest Covenants, in hopes of the most
Glorious Rewards; and, out of fear of the sorish Punishments, to obey the most
Righteous Laws of God, by living thus soberly, righteously, and godlily. And
lastly, under this very Christian Name, you have received of God most sure
Promises of most powerful Assistances to do all this. Thus may the very Asking
you what is your Christian Name, put you in mind of your Christian Profession,
and of the Strictness of Life, which is required of those who bear the Name of
Christians.

Secondly, And the same Question and Answer about your Christian Name, gives
occasion to remind you, that the bad Lives of such who bear the Name of
Christians, do an infinite Prejudice and Dishonor to Christianity. For nothing
does more hinder the Conversion of Infidels, than their seeing professed
Christians live, as if they themselves did not believe the Truth of
Christianity. Nor does any thing open the Mouth of the Enemy more against the
Blessed Author of our Holy Religion; for the Name of God is blasphemed amongst
the Gentiles, through those who live unanswerably to their Profession, Romans
2.24. But especially it puts bitter Reproaches into the Mouths of Atheists,
when Wickedness is committed under the Disguise, and Pretense of Religion;
which two Considerations should oblige all who are named Christians, to see
that they walk circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise, Ephesians. 5.15.

And indeed since we seldom see a Person of so abject and mean a Spirit, as to
endure with Patience, that the Calling or Profession he is of, whatever it is,
should be set at naught: As therefore you would not show your selves to have
less Honor for your Christian Religion and Profession, than secular Men have
for their worldly Callings;

Thirdly, I must therefore take occasion from the mention of your Christian
Name, to exhort you to stand upon the Dignity of your Christian Name and
Profession, by living such Lives as may be an Honor, not a Disgrace unto it.
For why? 1. It may be considered, that all Titles of Honor are but mean and
inconsiderable, in respect of our Christian Title. 2. There is so near an
Alliance between the Christian Name and Profession, that in Baptism they both
began together. 3. It deserves to be considered how the Primitive Christians
did, by virtue of the Christian Name, resist the fiercest Temptations, their
usual Answer to those that did solicit them, and by Tortures would force them
to renounce their Religion, being no more than this, I am a Christian, it is
therefore in vain for you to tempt me. 4. 'Pray' think upon the Indecency of
living unsuitably to the Christian Name and Profession. Know you not that your
Bodies are the Members of Christ? Shall I then take the Members of Christ and
make them the Members of an Harlot? God forbid, 1 Cor. 6.15. And, 5. Bethink
your selves, that to quit other Purposes we give up our selves to be
Christians; namely, to season and guide the World by the Exemplariness of our
Lives, for which reason we are called the Salt of the Earth, Matthew. 5.13. and
the Light of the World, v. 14. Lastly, And indeed since most Christian Names do
afford some Examples of Virtue, which should prompt Christians to an Imitation
of those who were eminent under these Names; I would therefore advise Parents
to choose for their Children the Names of Persons eminent for Virtue, not
infamous for Vice. And let this suffice to have been observed upon the Question
and Answer concerning your Christian Name.

THE IV. LECTURE.
Quest. Who gave you that Name?

Answ. My Godfathers and Godmothers in my Baptism, wherein I was made a Member
of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

Quest. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

Answ. They did Promise and Vow three things in my Name. First, That I should
renounce the Devil, and all his Works: the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
World; and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. Secondly, That I should Believe
all the Articles of the Christian Faith: And, Thirdly, That I should keep God's
Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of my Life.

Quest. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe, and to do as they
have promised for thee?

Answ. Yes, verily; and by God's help so I will. And I heartily thank our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation through
Jesus Christ our Savior: And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my Lives end.

THe most easy Method of Instruction, and such as does most effectually convey
Knowledge to the Minds of Men, is that which gives first some general Notices
of the Art or Science about to be taught, and which does then descend to a
larger Explication thereof in its several Particulars. And accordingly our
Catechism gives you an entire Instruction in the Covenant of Grace, both
generally and particularly: Generally, In the three first Questions and Answers
now read to you, which are therefore usually called Preliminary: Particularly,
In the Creed, Decalogue, the Lord's Prayer, and in the Doctrine of the
Sacraments.

1. I shall begin with the General Nature of the Covenant of Grace, which I
shall have sufficiently explained by then I have gone through with my
Exposition of these Words now read Now,

As to the general Notion of such Covenants, as are usually made betwixt
Governors and their Subjects; which approach nearest to the Nature of ours;
such a one, if it be perfect in all its Parts, and fully expressed, may be
defined to be

A Mutual Agreement between the Two Parties, wherein there are Promises,
Rewards, or profitable Considerations made over on one part, on certain
Conditions to be performed on the other: And wherein also there is an
Obligation on the one side, of undergoing some certain Penalties, in case of
not performing those Conditions consented unto by him, and imposed on him by
the other.

A Covenant, I say, is a mutual Agreement between two Parties. For where both
the Parties are not Consenting to the Terms, the one to the making good the
Promises, the other to the performance of the Conditions, the Agreement is none
at all, or is not perfected; nor is it obliging on either side. And though where
the one Party has Sovereign Authority over the other, there arises from that an
obligation to Obedience, yet without the Formality of a mutual Agreement, the
Will of the Superior is then only a Law, not a Covenant.

Farther yet, In a Covenant there are certain Promises, Rewards, and profitable
Considerations made over on one part, on certain Conditions to be performed on
the other. And upon the performance of these Conditions there accrues a Title
to the Promises, insomuch that upon our Repentance, and Confession of our Sins,
God will reckon himself in Justness and Faithfulness bound (since the giving of
the New Covenant) to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. And this may suffice, in order to show the general
Nature of a Covenant.

And now to understand the distinct Nature and Notion of the Covenant of Grace,
we must look back even as far as the Creation, and consider how that God having
made Man upright, and put him into a Capacity never to have violated his
Covenant; he did then engage him to a Perfect, Exact, and Unsinning Obedience.
The Result whereof was, that Man being overcome by the Temptation of the Devil,
he did transgress the Law given by his Maker, Genesis 2.17. and did violate his
Covenant with him. Whereupon the Divine Justice, Wisdom, and Holiness required
Satisfaction; and it was requisite that Punishment must ensue, if it were but
to manifest the Divine Hatred of Sin, and for the Security of God's Government
in the World.

But what Creature is there in the Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, whose
Punishment could be of that Value and Consideration, as to be a sufficient
Satisfaction for the Sins of Mankind? It is certain, no Man can redeem his
Brother, or pay God a Ransom for him; for the redemption of his Soul is
precious, (too precious for that) Psalm. 49.7,8. And Man being himself incapable
to make it, by less than suffering an everlasting Punishment; the Son of God
did himself therefore most graciously offer to die in our stead, and did
undertake by the Infinite Merit of his own Sufferings, to make Satisfaction to
Infinite Justice, which we could not; so 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be Sin, or
a Sin-offering for us, who knew no Sin, that we might be made the Righteousness
of God in him; and because whilst under the First Covenant, which required a
Perfect, Exact, and Unsinning Obedience, it was impossble for us to be saved,
the Son of God did therefore Cancel that upon the Cross, and did purchase by
his most precious Blood, a Covenant of Grace in its stead; for which reason he
is called the Mediator of a better Covenant, Heb. 8.6. he did purchase a
Covenant of Grace, I say, consisting of Conditions performable in our fallen
State, wherein Repentance, Faith, and a sincere Obedience is accepted, instead
of a perfect, and an indefective Righteousness.

In short, the Covenant of Grace resembles the Articles of Accommodation made
through the Intercession of a Prince's Eldest Son, betwixt that Prince and his
Rebellious Subjects, to whom upon the Intercession of his Son, the King is
graciously pleased to grant, not only Pardon of all their former Crimes; but
moreover certain great Privileges and Freedoms, Protection, and several
particular Favors, Lands and Possessions, and the like, on condition they will
thenceforward Renounce and forsake all his Enemies, and place no farther Trust
nor Confidence in them, and on condition they will not disobey him for the
future, in any of his just and reasonable Commands, but pay him a true and
faithful Obedience to all his Laws.

Much of the same Nature is the Covenant of Grace; and as it does extremely
much concern every Christian to be well instructed in it; so there is little
necessary to be known in the Christian Religion, besides the Articles of this
Covenant. And the Catechetical Method of Instruction being the most useful to
that purpose, of all others, it does therefore very much concern you to pay a
due attendance to it.

THE V. LECTURE.
Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.

A General View of the Covenant of Grace, I have already given you. And these
Words, Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, do contain the first of these
invaluable Privileges made over to us in this Covenant.

Now, to be a Member of Christ, is to be a Member of Christ's-Church, as will
appear from Col. 1.18. compared with Ephesians. 5.30. And that you may be sensible
how happy a thing it is to be a Member of Christ's Church.

First, I will show you what kind of Body the Church of Christ is. Secondly,
What it is to be a Member of it. And then, Thirdly, What exceeding great and
invaluable Privileges do belong to every Member of Christ's Church. And,
1. I will show you what kind of Body the Church of Christ is. And it is the
Universal Society of all Christians, consisting both of Lawful Governors and
Pastors, and also of the People of God committed to their Charge; and who are
called from out of the wicked World by the preaching of the Gospel, to a Holy
Profession and Calling; namely to Repentance, Faith, and Obedience toward God;
and to the Enjoyment of unspeakable Privileges from God: And who to the end of
being incorporated into one Society, and of having God to be their God, and
they themselves his People, have entered into Covenant with him by Baptism, and
do often renew the same in the Lord's Supper, and are Incorporated thereby into
one Body, subdivided indeed into several particular Bodies, and Churches, for
the convenience of Government and Worship; but holding Communion with one
another, in one and the same necessary Points of Christianity, necessary to
constitute the Church under Jesus Christ their Supreme Head.

And first, I say, the Church of Christ is the Society of Christians,
consisting both of Lawful Governors and Pastors, and of the People of God
committed to their Charge. The Church of Christ is not a Headless Multitude,
but a well ordered Society, consisting of Superiors and Inferiors; of Governors
and Governed. Hence it is called, The Kingdom of Christ, Rev. 11.15. And Ephesians.
2.19,20,21. the Members thereof are styled Fellow-Citizens, Members of an
Household, and Parts of a Temple; all which Expressions speak the Church of
Christ to be a Regular Society of Men, combined and knit together by Laws,
derived from some Supreme Head and Governor.

And in the Constitution of Christ's Church, it is requisite that the Governors
and Pastors thereof should be lawful ones; that is, such as Christ has
Commissioned to these Offices; for St. Paul does sharply demand, Romans 10.15.
How any shall Preach the Gospel, except they be sent? And that an Episcopal
Clergy are undoubtedly Authorized, and sent (whatever others are) cannot be
questioned, since our Savior, when he sent forth his Disciples into the World,
to Preach the Gospel, and to gather a Church, he told them, Mat. 28.20. That he
would be with them, or stand by them in giving Authority and Success to their
Ministry, to the end of the World; whereas for 1500 Years it is certain, that
he did Authorize no other than those Episcopally Ordained; for there were no
other than Episcopal Churches during that time, as appears from the Histories
of all Ages.

Secondly, The Church of Christ is the Universal Society of Christians. The
Church under the Law was confined to the Jewish Nation, but now under the
Gospel, in every Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him, Acts 10.35. For Christ is our Peace, and has made both one,
and has broken down the middle Wall of Partition between us, Ephesians. 2.14. It is
not indeed either Jews or Gentiles, while they continue such, that are of the
Church of Christ. But,

Thirdly, It consists of such, who are called forth out of the wicked World,
from amongst both. The whole World by then our Savior came into it, was
overrun with Wickedness; and therefore did Christ come to call us out of the
World; for which Reasons, Christians are in many Places styled the Called: And
Joh. 17.6. they are said to be such, whom the Father has given our Savior out
of the World; and though they are in the World, yet they are not of the World, v.
16. And though it is too true, that many of those of whom the Church is composed,
do not effectually obey this Call, but continue ungodly; and therefore the
Church is liken'd, Mat. 13.24.30. to a Field in which the Wheat and the Tares
grew up together until the Harvest. However,

Fourthly, All the Members of the Church of Christ, are called by the Preaching
of the Gospel, to a Holy Profession and Calling; namely, 1. To Repentance; for
so our Savior says, that he came to call Sinners to Repentance, Matthew. 9.13.
And, 2. they are called to the Knowledge, Belief, and Service of the One True
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. The greatest part of the World before our
Savior's coming into it, were ignorant of the True God, and Slaves to the
Devil; but our Blessed Lord when he gave Commission to his Disciples to gather
a Church out of the World, he bid them go and Disciple all Nations, Baptizing
Persons into the Knowledge, Belief, and Service of Three Persons, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, in that one Godhead, Matthew. 28.19.

Fifthly, And as Christians are a Society of Persons called out of the World to
Repentance, Faith, and Gospel-Obedience; so to the Enjoyment of those
inestimable Privileges of the Gospel, viz. most Reasonable and Excellent Laws
to conduct them to Heaven; Laws written in their Minds, and in their Hearts,
Heb. 8.10. They are called also to the Enjoyment of Divine Grace and
Assistance, to enable them to obey those Laws; for Grace is come by Jesus
Christ, John 1.17. They shall be privileged with the Pardon of Sins, upon their
Repentance, for the Violation of those Laws; for God has promised Christians to
be Merciful to their Unrighteousness, Heb. 8.12. And lastly, they shall be
called to the Enjoyment of Eternal Life and Happiness, upon their sincere
Obedience; for Christ does assure us, Joh. 17.2. That the Father has given him
Power over all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as are given
him, or are given him out of the World, v. 6.

Sixthly, The Church consists of such, who to the end of being incorporated
into one Society, and of having God to be their God, and they themselves his
People, have entered into Covenant with him. It is the Royal Charter granted by
the King that makes any number of Men a Corporation. And it is the Covenant of
Grace granted by the King of kings, which embodies and joins us Christians into
one Spiritual Society. So that we are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but
Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2.19.

And by being in Covenant with him, we come to have God to be our God; and we
do thereby become his People. Thus Heb. 8.10. This is the Covenant that I will
make with the House of Israel after those days; that is, in the time of the
Gospel, I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People.

Seventhly, Christians are thus entered into Covenant with God, and thereby
made Members of Christ's Church, in their Baptism, which is the Outward Sign
and Solemnity whereby our Blessed Lord thought fit to initiate all the Members
of his Church into Covenant with him. Go and Disciple, or make Disciples and
Members of my Church, out of all Nations, Baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Matthew. 28.19. And hence 1 Cor. 12.13. it is said
That we are all Baptized into one Body, or admitted by Baptism into one Church.

Eighthly, And all the Members of Christ's Church, when grown up to some State
of Perfection, are appointed to Renew the same Covenant, by Feasting often
together at the Lord's Supper. Upon the account of which Feasting together, it
is said, 1 Cor. 10.17. That we being many, are one Bread, and one Body, for we
are all Partakers of that one Bread.

Ninthly, And now upon these forementioned Accounts, the Church of Christ is
one Body. Thus Ephesians. 4.4,5,6. There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are
all called in one hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one
God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all.

Tenthly, This one Body or Society the Church, is divided into several
particular Bodies or Churches, both for the convenienee of Discipline and
Government, and also the convenience of Divine Worship. For the convenience of
Government, the Church has from its first Foundation been divided into Diocesan
Churches, inspected by distinct Bishops, as will appear from Rev. 2.3. Chap.
where you will find that the several Churches of Asia had their distinct
Bishops (there called Angels) presiding over them. For the convenience of
Divine Worship, because all the Christians of one Diocese or City, could not
meet together in one Place, the Bishop's See was therefore sub-divided into
particular Congregations and Assemblies under its respective Pastors. Hence we
read 1 Cor. 14.34. of several Churches in that one Church and City of Corinth.

But notwithstanding that, for the forementioned Reasons, the Church of God is
divided and subdivided into Diocesan and Parochial Churches, yet they are all
united by Virtue of the same Covenant, Spirit, and Sacraments, into one Church;
For as the Body is one, and has many Members, and the Members of that one Body
being many, are one Body; so also is Christ, or the Christian Church; for by
one Spirit we are all Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles,
whether we be bond or free; and have been all made to drink into one Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.12,13. And these several Churches were also one. Because in the

Eleventh Place they all hold Communion with each other. And their Communion
with each other, consisted in Hearing the same Word or Doctrine together, in
joining in the same Common Prayers, in partaking of the same Sacraments, and in
affording to each other mutual Assistances, as you will find, Acts 2.42. They
continued steadfast in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, or Communication
of Charitable Assistances, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.

Lastly, The Church of Christ, or this whole Society of Men, called forth out
of the World to such Duties and Privileges, as has been spoke, is to be united
into one Body, as has been declared, under Jesus Christ its Supreme Head. There
can be no Body without a Head. And Christ is both the Political Body of the
Church, Governing this his Spiritual Kingdom, as a Monarch does his State, by
his Laws; for the Father having raised him from the Dead, did put all things
under his Feet, and gave him to be Head over all things to the Church, which is
his Body, Ephesians. 1.20,21,22,23. And as a King he sends his Ambassadors and
Ministers to Teach Mankind, to observe all things whatsoever he Commanded them,
Matthew. 28.20. And Christ is also the Mystical Head of the Church; for as the
Natural Head of the Body is the Fountain of Life and Spirit, from whence it is
derived into all the parts of the Body, to enable and enliven all the Members
thereof to discharge their several Offices and Duties; so is Christ said to be
the Mystical Head of the Church, from whom all the Body, by Joints and Bands,
having nourishment ministered, increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19.

And thus in order to a due understanding of this first Privilegial Article of
the Baptismal Covenant; Wherein I was made a Member of Christ, you have seen
what kind of Body the Church of Christ is. And from the whole it does appear to
be, what it is often called in Scripture, viz. The Kingdom of God, and of
Christ, as Matthew. 21.31. Rev. 11.15. that is, as ye have been told, it is a
Spiritual Kingdom put up by God in the World, on purpose to reduce Man to his
due Allegiance to his Maker, and to destroy the Dominion of Satan, which he had
so long usurped over Mankind. And thus having as briefly, as possibly I could,
showed you what kind of Body the Church of Christ is.

2. I am next to show you what it is to be a Member of Christ's Church.

And from what has been said, it may easily be collected, that a Member of
Christ's Church is every one who has been entered into this visible Society of
Men Renouncing the Devil, and Professing themselves the Servants of God. He is
one who has Covenanted to that purpose with God in Baptism, and who without
swerving aside into Separate Assemblies, holds a constant Communion with that
particular True, and Orthodox Church, whereof he is a Member, and in whose
Verge he lives.

In short, a Member of the Church of Christ, is a Member of the Kingdom of
Christ; and so he is one who is delivered by God from the Power of Darkness,
and is translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Col, 1.13. That is, he is
one of those, who is delivered by the Gospel from under the Tyranny of Satan,
under which the whole World was held Captive, and is made a Subject to the
Gracious Government of the Son of God.

From what has been said, it does plainly appear, I think, that such, and such
an one only, is a true Member of Christ's Church.

And in the Sense of the Catechism, which teaches all to answer, that in their
Baptism they are made Members of Christ: Every Person, who has been admitted
into the Church by Baptism, is a Member of Christ, and shall continue such,
till he is cut off by the just Sentence of those Governors of the Church, who
have the Power of the Keys to receive in, or to shut out: Or till he cuts off
himself from that Mystical Body, by a causeless Schism and Separation from any
of its sound Parts.

Every Baptized Person, I say, is a Member of Christ's Church. So the Apostle,
Gal. 3.27. As many as have been baptized into Christ; that is, the Christian
Religion, have put on Christ, or have put on that Relation to Christ, which
Members have to the Body, and though too many are unsound Members, yet Members of
the Visible Church they will continue till cut off by the just Sentence of
those, who have the Power of the Keys to receive in, or to shut out: Or till
they cut off themselves by a causeless Separation and Schism.

Some are cut off from the Communion of the Church by the Governors thereof,
who have given unto 'em the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, of the
Church, Matthew. 16.19. and who have the Authority, as to admit into the Church
by Baptism, all who have made Profession of Christianity, so to expel out of it
by Excommunication all those scabby Members thereof, who contrary to such their
Holy Profession, either by their pestilent Heresies, or by their scandalous and
ill Lives, are unworthy of its Communion, or in danger to infect it. And when
upon either of these accounts any one is Excommunicated, such an evil Member
becomes no Member, and is to be to the rest as a Heathen Man, and a Publican;
that is, one who is out of the Church, Matthew. 18.17.

And so likewise is he, who cuts himself off from that Mystical Body the
Church, by a causeless Separation and Schism from any of its sound Parts: For
whatever National Church has nothing in its Doctrine, nor Worship, which is
sinful, every Person is bound to continue steadfastly in the Doctrine, Prayers,
Sacraments, and Fellowship of that Church, as in the Apostles Times they did,
Acts 2.42. and to reject the Communion of all other Sects and Parties of
Christians; or otherwise, he will cut himself off from the Church, and will
cease to be a real Member of it, as my Finger will cease to be of the Body,
when it is cut off as well by my self, as by another, from the Arm. But
excepting these two Cases, every Baptized Person is a Member of Christ's
Church, and so shall partake of those exceeding great Privileges, which belong
to the Members of it; which what, and how great they are, I am next to declare
unto you.

THE VI. LECTURE.
Wherein I was made a Member of Christ.

HAving sufficiently made it appear in the former Discourse, First, what kind
of Body that is, which is called, the Church of Christ: And also, Secondly,
having showed you what it is to be a Member of it; it will be now requisite
that I should likewise make it clear to you, Thirdly, What vast and invaluable
Privileges do accordingly belong to every Member of the Church of Christ. And
the Privileges which do belong to them as such, are, First, A most Excellent
Body of Religion, Laws, and Ordinances, appointed us by Christ our Supreme Head
and Governor, as the Rule we must walk by in our way to Heaven. Secondly, A
sufficient measure of Divine Grace and Assistance, derived down upon us from
him our Mystical Head, and conveyed by those his Ordinances, to enable us to
Conform our selves to his Religion, and to obey those Laws.


I. And as the Members of Christ's Church we enjoy the Privilege of having a
most Excellent Body of Religion, Laws, and Ordinances: A Religion so Excellent,
that whether we compare it with the Pagan, or Mohammedan Superstition, or with
the Jewish Dispensation; or whether we consider it in its own Nature, it will
appear to be a most singular Institution, and Body of Laws; and such as we
ought to esteem it our very great Happiness and Privilege above other Men, that
we are under the Government of such.

Alas! As to the Pagan Superstition, what else did it tend to, but to debase
Mankind infinitely below the Dignity of their Nature, and to defile 'em much
more than the Brutes? For why? The very Gods the Heathens worshipped, were at
best the most infamous Men and Women; and many of 'em paid Divine Honors to
the very Devils themselves. And what then could be expected, but that their
Worship should consist in Lewd, Barbarous, and Cruel Rites? And so it actually
did; For they Sacrificed their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils, and shed
Innocent Blood, even the Blood of their Sons, and of their Daughters, whom the
very Jews, having learnt it from the Pagans, Sacrificed unto the Idols of
Canaan, Psalm. 106.37,38.

Nor in the Mohammedan Superstition is there any thing worthy of God, whereby we
should judge him to be the Author of it; but as one observes, It is a Mass of
Foolish Opinions, odd Stories, uncouth Ceremonies, compounded chiefly of the
Dregs of Christian Heresies, together with some Ingredients of Judaism and
Paganism, confusedly jumbl'd, or unskilfully mixed one with another. And what is
worst of all, its Principles do too sadly tend to Lust and Cruelty.

And even Judaism it self, which had God for its Author, was but an Imperfect
and an Unfinished draught of Religion. Its Ceremonial part consisted of poor
and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4.9. and of Shadows only of good things to come,
Heb. 10.1. And even its Moral part was defective, Moses for the hardness of
their hearts, Matthew. 19.8. being forced to indulge 'em, what the Perfection and
Purity of the Christian Religion will by no means allow of.

But Christianity (under whose Guidance we have the Happiness to be, as we are
Members of Christ's Church) is a most Excellent Religion, since nothing can
represent God in more Noble Characters, and Glorious Perfections, and nothing
can give a more Honorable and Rational Draught of his Proceedings with Man,
both in the Creation and Redemption of him, than it does. And as the Christian
Laws are infinitely beyond what the Wisdom of any Humane Lawgivers did ever
yet contrive for the good Order of Man in this World, and for his real
Happiness both in this, and in the World to come; so no Motives, nor Reasons
can possibly be more persuasive than those which Christianity does give us to
obey those Laws.

And indeed even the positive Institutions and Ordinances appointed in the
Gospel, are an Excellent part of a Christian Privilege, which he enjoys as he
is a Member of Christ's Church. And that which our Law giver has appointed of
this Nature, are as follows; He has ordained Solemn and Set days, viz. the
Christian Sabbaths for his Service; He has ordered that Public Assemblies of
all Christians should be held upon these days; He has Authorized and Commanded
the Preaching of his Laws at those Public Assemblies; He has appointed that
Common Prayers, Supplications, and Thanksgiving, principally for Divine Grace
and Assistance to enable us to perform these Laws then preached, and for other
Mercies; I say, he has Ordered that these should be jointly put up to him by
all Christians on those Solemn Days, and those Public Assemblies; And lastly,
He has enjoined therein the use of Sacraments, as means of conveying such Grace
and Assistance, and also as Oaths and Obligations upon us to be obedient to
these Laws. These are the positive Institutions and Ordinances of the Gospel;
and all these are Privileges which belong to the Members of Christ's Church, as
may be gathered from Acts 2.41,42.

And they are indeed most singular Favors and Privileges vouchsafed only to
such as are Members of Christ's Church, and which Aliens and Strangers have no
Right and Admittance to. For alas, the Infidel part of the World, whether Jews,
Turks, or Pagans, have not the Benefit of the Word and Sacraments; and where
there is no Vision, or no Word and Ordinances of Divine Revelation, The People
perish, Prove. 29.18.

And even the positive Institutions also are most Excellent Privileges
considered in themselves; and that first, as being most admirable Helps toward
the Observation of God's most Holy Laws, every one of these outward Ordinances
conducing much to our Edification, and Improvement both in Faith and Practice,
and to the quickening of our Affections to the ways of God: And every one of
them being also exceedingly comfortable to the Souls of those who do enjoy
them, according to the Testimony of the Psalmist. Blessed is the Man whom thou
chusest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy Courts: He
shall be satisfied in the Goodness of thy House, even of thy Holy Temple, Psalm.
65.4.

The Privileges of Public Ordinances are indeed seldom sufficiently valued,
till most wanted; but when through Persecutions, or the like, Persons are
deprived of them, then they become so sensible of the Benefit and Comfort
thereof, as to be at any Pains, Fatigues, or Dangers to enjoy them. They will
then wander from Sea to Sea, and from the North even to the East; they shall
run to and fro to seek the Word of the Lord, and shall not find it, Amos 8.12.
And let this suffice for the first great Privilege, which does peculiarly
belong to all the Members of Christ's visible Church, as they are Members of
such a Society: namely, the Enjoyment of a most reasonable and excellent Body
of Religion and Laws; together with most profitable and edifying Institutions
and Ordinances, given and appointed us by Him, our Supreme Head and Governor,
to conduct us to Heaven. The

II. Privilege we enjoy thereby, is a great Measure of Divine Grace and
Assistance, derived down from Him our Head, and conveyed by those his
Ordinances to enable us to conform to his Religion, and to obey his Laws; for
as in the natural Body every part partakes of Life, and Sense, and Motion, from
the Head, so do we by being baptized Members of Christ, derive Grace and Help
from him our Head, from whom all the Body by Joints and Bands having
Nourishment ministered, increases with the increase of God, Col. 2.19. And the
means of Union betwixt Christ and his Members, being the Members Union to the
Catholic Church, the Body of Christ; and their Union to the Lawful Governors
and Teachers of the Church, which are the principal parts in the Mystical Body.
And lastly, their use of Christ's Institutions and Ordinances, viz. Sacraments,
Preaching, Public and Common Prayers, and such like Public Offices, which are
the Vessels and Conveyances of Divine Grace, through the principal Parts from
Christ our Head: These, I say, being the necessary Means of Union between
Christ and his Members, it will therefore follow, that so long as any Member
shall continue in Unity with the Mystical Body of Christ, his Church, and with
its Lawful Governors and Teachers, and in the use of Sacraments, and other
Divine Ordinances, those Conduits and Conveyances of his Holy Spirit to us; so
long he shall have spiritual Life, and Strength, and Vigor, derived down from
Christ our spiritual Head, in like manner as in the natural Body of Man, the
Animal Life and Strength, and Vigor is derived to all the parts of the Body,
from the natural Head.

And the having of God's Holy Spirit to assist us, is a most singular
Privilege, if compared with that little, or nothing of this Nature, which
others, who are not the Members of Christ's Church, do enjoy; for if God would
have ordinarily, and in the way of a constant Dispensation, imparted so
excellent a Gift as the Grace of his Holy Spirit to any, to be sure it would
have been to the Jewish Church; but so unsteady, and scanty were the Measures
of it communicated under the Law, to what are under the Gospel, that the former
is styled upon that account by the Apostle, the Ministration of Condemnation,
but the Gospel the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8,9.

And this having of the Holy Spirit to assist us is a most exceeding advantage,
considered in it self, considering that all the Members of Christ have constant
supplies of Grace afforded 'em proportionable to their Station and Employment
in the Church, whether Governors, or Teachers, or private Christians; for the
Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. So that to
one is given by the Spirit, the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of
Knowledge, by the same Spirit, to another Faith by the same Spirit, 1 Cor.
12.7,8,9.

And the Graces and Assistances derived down from Christ the Head, to the
several Members of his Spiritual Body, because they may be such as shall be
necessary and proper for 'em, are distributed in such Measures and Proportions
as shall be wanting according to the different Times and Occasions in the
Church; and therefore in the first Ages, because there was a necessity of
uncontrollable Evidences of the Truth of Christianity, as well to beat down the
false Superstition of the Pagans, and the Antiquated Religion of the Jews, as
to convince those who were to yield themselves up to be Christ's Disciples; for
this reason therefore, did Christ, according to these greater Exigences of the
Church in those Times, bestow upon his Apostles diverse extraordinary Gifts of
Miracles, Prophecy, Discerning of Spirits, diverse kinds of Tongues, and the
Interpretation of Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.10. And so much for the first of these
Privileges made over to us in the Covenant.

THE VII. LECTURE.
Wherein I was made a Child of God.

THis is the second of those invaluable Privileges made over to us on God's
part, in the Covenant of Grace. To make you sensible of the vastness of which,
I will, First, Show you what is meant in Scripture, and here in your Catechism,
by a Child of God. Secondly, What an inestimable Privilege accordingly it is to
be a Child of God. And,


I. As to the Importance of the Words; A Child of God, is a Phrase which bears
various Acceptations in the Holy Scriptures, which must all of them be
cousider'd, ere we can come to the proper meaning of it here in the Catechism.

And, First, In the highest, most natural, and most proper meaning of the Word,
there is He who is the Son, or Child of God by an Eternal Generation, viz. our
Savior Jesus Christ, who being begotten of God the Father from all Eternity,
in a peculiar, inconceivable, and inexpressible manner, so as to be coequal and
coeternal with the Father himself, is called the only Begotten Son of God, Joh.
3.16. But this is a Sense infinitely too high for either Angels or Men to
pretend to.

Secondly, By a Temporary Creation all reasonable Creatures, both Angels and
Men, are the Sons of God, as may be gathered from Job 1.6. and Luke 3.38. But
that which is meant by the Son of God here in the Catechism, being a Privilege
such as all Mankind cannot pretend to, this is a sense too wide wherein to
understand the Phrase.

Thirdly, By Spiritual Regeneration, all those who have been sanctified by the
Holy Spirit, and have their whole Natures and Dispositions so altered for the
better, that from Vicious and Ungodly, they are changed to Virtuous and Holy
Tempers and Inclinations; in a way of Spiritual Regeneration, I say, all Holy
Men and Women are the Children of God: So the Apostle affirms, As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14.

But then, since it is plain, that in Scripture many are called the Children of
God, who are no more dutiful to their Father which is in Heaven, than all
Children are to their Natural Parents, according to that complaint of God
against such, Hear, O Heaven, and give Ear, O Earth, for I the Lord have spoken
it; I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against
me, Isai. 1.2. And since in the Catechism it is required of every Baptized
Person to Answer, that in his Baptism he was made a Child of God, whereas many
Baptized Persons are not actually renewed and converted; It must therefore
follow, that a Child of God by Spiritual Regeneration or Godlike Imitation must
be a meaning of the Phrase as much too narrow to be the sense of it here in the
Catechism, as a Child by Creation was too wide.

Fourthly and Lastly, Then, by a Child of God must be meant in the Catechism,
every one who may be so styled either by a Covenant Relation, or by virtue of
Adoption. By a Covenant Relation all those who have entered into the Covenant
of Grace, and have been Baptized into Christ's Church, and who do profess the
true Religion, and themselves the Servants of the True God, are styled his
Sons, or Children. Thus 2 Cor. 6.16,17,18. you will find that with relation to
all those, concerning whom God declared, He would be their God, and that they
should be his People, which are the express Terms of the Covenant, betwixt God
and all Christians; as you will see, Heb. 8.10. And with relation to all those
whom he commanded to come out from among the Gentiles, and to be separate, and
not to touch the unclean thing, that is, not to partake in their Idolatry,
which is the very Description of the Members of Christ's Church; I say, with
relation to all these, he declared He would be a Father unto 'em, and that they
should be his Sons and Daughters. So that by virtue of their Covenant Relation,
all Baptized Persons may be truly styled the Children of God.

And so also by virtue of their Adoption, which according to the use of it,
both among the Jews and Gentiles, was the Taking in of a Stranger, upon the
want or loss of Natural Issue, into the Relation of a Child, and into the
Rights and Privileges of a Son by Nature.

And now that we may understand how we Christians, especially such of us as are
descended from the Gentiles, are accordingly Adopted to be the Children of God,
we are to consider that to the Israelites did once pertain the Adoption, and
the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of
God, and the Promises, Romans 9.4. But that Covenant, by entering into which they
were made his Children, was only Temporary, to last no longer than till the
Publishing of the Gospel; after which they, and all Christians were to be
Children of God by Faith in Christ. Before that Faith, or the Gospel came, the
Jews were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith, which should afterward
be revealed, which was their Schoolmaster, to bring them to Christ; but after
that Faith, or the Gospel was come, they were to be no longer under a School
Master, but were to be Children of God by Faith in Jesus Christ, Gal.
3.23,24,25,26. And accordingly, when the fullness of Time was come, God sent
forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were
under the Law, that they might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4,5. But
the Jews adhering to their Law, and refusing Christ and his Gospel, in whom God
had predestined all into the Adoption of Children, Ephesians. 1.5. the Apostles
upon this their Contempt of the Gospel Covenant, turned themselves unto the
Gentiles, preaching Christ and Salvation unto them; And to as many as received
him, to them he gave Power, or the Right and Privilege, to be the Sons of God,
John 1.12. So that by a Child of God, you see, is meant in the Catechism, not
every Child by Creation, which is a sense too wide; nor on the other side only
a Child of God by Regeneration, which is a sense as much too narrow: But every
one is such, who has entered into Covenant with God, and whom the Heavenly
Father has thereupon Adopted into his Family, to partake of the Privileges
which belong to his Adopted Sons; which brings me,

Secondly, To enquire what an inestimable Privilege accordingly it is to be
made a Child of God. And in general, it is such as an indulgent, but wise
Father, may be supposed to allow his Children beyond Aliens and Strangers. But
more particularly, the

First Privilege belonging to us upon the account of this Relation of being
made the Children of God, is pardon of Sins, upon condition of our hearty
Repentance, which is more than what Aliens and Strangers from the Covenant have
any sure Grounds to hope, as may be concluded from Ephesians. 2.11,12,13,14.

Secondly, By being his Children, he will not be so severe as to mark what is
done amiss by Sins of Infirmity. The first Covenant made no allowance for any
the least Offense. Its Language was, In the Day thou shall eat thereof, thou
shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. But the Voice of the Gospel, though it be expressed by
the Psalmist, is, As a Father pitieth his own Children, even so the Lord
pitieth them that fear him; that is, who do not willingly displease him, Psalm.
103.13.

Thirdly, To the Children of God is granted an easier access by Prayer, to the
Throne of Grace, for pardon of Sins, and other Mercies, than was to either Jews
or Gentiles, who for want of such gracious Covenant Promises as we enjoy, were
kept in a servile Fear. Ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to
fear, as under the Law, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we
cry unto God, Abba, Father, Romans 8.15.

Lastly, A Child of God is more surely instated in the Heritance of Heaven,
than others. If a Child of God, then Heirs, we are told, Heirs of God, and
joint Heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. But the vastness of this Privilege will
best be considered in our Explication of the next Article of our Baptismal
Covenant, viz. what is meant by an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

THE VIII. LECTURE.
An Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven.

THis is the third of those Privileges conferred upon us by the second
Covenant; and the Perfection it is of all God's Promises and Favors vouchsafed
to us therein. It comes last and Crowns all the rest. Be faithful unto Death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. And that I may so explain it
to you, as to excite you thereby to render your selves capable to be Partakers
thereof.

First, I will show what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, What it
imports to be an Inheritor of it. And then lastly, I will lay before you the
vastness of our Privilege in being made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
And 1st. By the Kingdom of Heaven is meant in Scripture, either first the
Kingdom of Grace in this Life; or secondly, The Kingdom of Glory in the Life to
come. First, By the Kingdom of Grace in this Life, is to be understood that
Happy and Blessed State of us Christians, now under the Gospel; wherein we
enjoy the Happiness of living under a Government, wholly made up of manifold
Graces and Favors; having a most Gracious God governing us by most Gracious
and Reasonable Laws, affording us a plentiful measure of Divine Grace and
Assistance to perform those Laws, and proposing to us most encouraging Rewards
to a diligent observance of them. It is this happy State which was foretold by
St. John the Baptist to be approaching, Mat. 3.2. The Kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. And it is this, for an undue Entertainment of which, the Scribes and
Pharisees were upbraided. Mat. 13.24.

And the reason why this State of the Gospel should be so often dignified, as
we find it is in Scripture, with the Title of the Kingdom of Heaven, is because
it so directly tends to render Men so exactly like the blessed Saints and
Inhabitants in Heaven, according to that noble Prophecy concerning the genuine
Nature and Disposition of the Gospel, Isa. 11. which you would do well to
consult at large. But,

Secondly, By the Kingdom of Heaven, here in the Catechism, is to be understood
the Kingdom of Glory, mentioned Matthew. 5.3,20. Chap. 7.21. and elsewhere. That
exalted State of Bliss in Heaven, I say, which is a State so glorious, that
there is nothing wherein we can imagine the greatest Glory and Happiness, as a
Kingdom, a Crown, a Throne, a Marriage, a Feast, but are set forth to represent
to us the Joys and Glories of our Future State; and yet as if a Kingdom, a
Crown, a Throne, were infinitely too short to set forth the Joys and Glories of
Heaven, and those infinite Blessings which do await the Sons of God: St. John
tells us, It does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.2.

II. And having thus seen what is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven; next, let us
enquire what it is to be an Inheritor of it. And Heirship does betoken
something of Privilege more than ordinary, as you will find Genesis 21.10. And as
among Men an Heir is one, whose Estate is not precariously depending upon the
mere Will and arbitrary Pleasure of another, but he has it so settled and
secured to him, as to have a legal Claim and Title thereto made over to him, so
long as he does not forfeit his Title by not performing the Conditions on which
it depends: So in Christianity, an Heir of the Kingdom of Heaven, does not
depend merely upon the Vncovenanted Goodness of God for his Hopes of Heaven and
Happiness; but he is one, who being taken into the Relation of a Child of God,
has through Christ a legal Claim to the Joys of Heaven, If a Son, then an Heir
of God through Christ, Gal. 4.7. As an Heir, I say, he has a legal Claim and
Title to the unspeakable Glories made over to him by God; God having by solemn
Promise engaged to bestow upon him the most unspeakable Joys of Heaven,
provided he swerves not from his Allegiance and Obedience to him; but
renouncing all God's Enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, he will
Believe in him, and Obey him, truly and faithfully, all the Days of his Life.
Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right to the Tree
of Life, and may enter in through the Gates into the City, Rev. 22.14.

III. And now it will appear, that to be thus an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is in itself an exceeding great Privilege. And if compared with what
others enjoy, a most singular one also.

1. Consider it in it self, and what can be a greater than to have the
invaluable Possession of Heaven so settled and ensured to us, as to have a
legal Claim and Title thereto made over to us in Christ? Then to have a Right
to the Tree of Life, Rev. 22.14.

And if compared with what the Heathens enjoy of this Nature, it is a singular
Privilege: For why? The best among the moral Heathens could have but faint
Hopes, built upon uncertain Conjectures, of a Future Happiness. And their Hopes
being faint, they could not in the strength thereof overcome any mighty
Temptations: But the Christian Hopes are sure and steadfast, as founded upon the
express Promises and Covenant of the God of Truth: For God, willing more
abundantly to show to the Heirs of Promise the immutability of his Counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable Things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong Consolation, Heb. 6.17,18.

And in Hopes being so strong, and so firmly grounded, there is no Temptation
so alluring, nor Suffering so great, which he may not overcome in virtue of the
same. He that has this Hope purifieth himself even as God is pure, 1 John 3.3.
And he may, with St. Paul, be persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor
Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other Creature, shall be able to separate him
from the Love of God which is in Christ, Romans 8.38,39.

But suppose a well-moralized Heathen could have a Certainty that God would
reward his Virtue, yet depending only upon the Vncovenanted Goodness of God, he
could promise himself no greater measure of Happiness than what his good Deeds
did of themselves deserve, which alas must fall vastly short of what is meant
by the Kingdom of Heaven; since the best upon Examination will find themselves
to have been but unprofitable Servants, Luke 17.10. But a Christian, to whom
God has Covenanted to make sure a Crown of Glory, may, without presumption,
rely upon him to make good the same. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which God the Righteous Judge shall give me at that
day; and not to me only, but to all them also that love his appearing. 2 Timothy
4.7,8.

And now to sum up those infinitely Gracious and Invaluable Privileges made
over to us on God's part in the Covenant of Grace; hereby we are made, First,
Members of Christ, that is, are made Members of that Body of which Christ is
the Head, (viz.) the Church; and so have together with a most excellent Body of
Religion and Laws, all necessary Grace and Assistance conveyed and communicated
to us, as Members from him the Head, to enliven, support, and enable us in the
Discharge of all those Religious Duties, and Christian Performances, required
at our hands.

The second Privilege is, that we are also hereby made Children of God; that
is, having embraced Christianity, and being Incorporated into the Church of
Christ, we are thereby Adopted, and Chosen out of the rest of the World, by
God, to enjoy this grand Privilege of Sons, to have Pardon granted us, when
with the Prodigal Son we return home to him our Offended, but Gracious God, by
Repentance. And we shall find him not over severe in respect of our lesser
Failings, and the unavoidable Infirmities of our Nature, but shall always have
him ready to hear our Prayers for Mercy, both in respect of our greater and
lesser Transgressions.

And, lastly, the third Privilege you have been now told is this, That to
complete all, we are made Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, we have
a Right and Title to the unspeakable Joys and Glories of Heaven secured to us;
a Privilege which considered in itself is exceeding great, and as all the rest,
if compared with what others enjoy, is a very singular one.

These now are the inestimable Privileges made over to us in the Covenant of
Grace; Privileges, which as they are of infinite Advantage to us, so we shall
never fail of obtaining them, if we will but take care to perform the
Conditions required on our Parts; and so, First, renounce the Devil and all his
Works, the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh. Secondly, on Condition we will believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith: And thirdly, obey God's holy Will and Commandments, and walk
in the same all the Days of our Lives. Which Conditions, what they are, and
what they do import, I come next to declare unto you.

THE IX. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

IN my Explication of these Words, A Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an
Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven, having given you to understand those
inestimable Privileges made over to us on God's part, in the Covenant of Grace;
I come now to do the same as to the Condition on ours, showing you,

First, What it is to Renounce the Devil and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. In order to
which,

I. I will show you who the Devil is, and what are his Works, and what is meant
by Renouncing the Devil and all his Works, and how absolutely necessary it is
we should do so.

And First, by the Devil, is to be understood that wicked and infernal Spirit,
who is chief of all the Enemies both of God and Man. He was once, as may be
gathered from his Superiority to Michael the Archangel, who upon that Account
durst not bring a railing Accusation against him, Jude 9. the highest Angel,
the most glorious Spirit; but having himself revolted from God, and withdrawn
many Legions of inferior Angels into the same horrid Conspiracy with himself,
he was banished Heaven into those dark Mansions of Sorrow, which we call Hell,
there to be reserved unto the Judgment of the Great Day, Jude 6. But being a
Prisoner at large, and being acted with a Spirit of Enmity to, and Revenge
against the Glory of God, he afterward withdrew Mankind also to join with him
in his Rebellion; as may be seen in the History of Adam's Fall, Genesis 3. And in
process of time prevailed so far, till God's Authority was almost utterly
banished from among Men, both Jews and Gentiles, by that time our Savior came
into the World, being dead in Trespasses and Sin; wherein in time past they
walked according to the Course of this World, according to the Prince of the
Power of the Air, that now works in the Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.1,2.
Whereupon, at last, the Son of God came into the World to recover Mankind from
under the Dominion of Satan, as we read 1 John 3.8. The Devil sins from the
beginning; and for this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might
destroy the Works of the Devil. Which brings me,

2. To enquire what are the Works of the Devil: And in general they appear,
First, To be Sin. Secondly, The tempting of us to Sin.


And the first general Work of the Devil is Sin: So the Apostle, 1 John 3.8.
The Devil sins from the beginning. Now by Sin God's Authority is thrown off,
his Government disowned, and his Power defied. And therefore whosoever does
wilfully sin, does strike against God's Authority; for which cause no Sin
should be made light of, much less the Subject of our Mirth and Laughter.

But there are some Sins which are more particularly the Works of the Devil;
namely, First, such as are more directly levelled against God's Authority, as
Idolatry, Sorcery, Charming, Witchcraft, and Conjuring; as also resorting to
such as use those unlawful Arts. So also, secondly, are such as express more of
the Devil's Temper than others; as Pride, and Malice. And lastly, such as are
more the Devil's Practice than other Sins; as Murder, Apostasy, Lying, or
Evil-speaking. The Devil was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the Truth, because there is no Truth in him; when he speaks a Lie, he
speaks of his own, for he is a Liar, and the Father of it. John 8.44. And
thus having seen who the Devil is, and, secondly, what are his Works of Sin.

III. We are next to enquire what it is to Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works of Sin, and how necessary it is we should do so.

And as to the importance of the Word Renounce, when it is said we must
Renounce the Devil, and all his Works; to Renounee the Devil, in the Sense of
the Ancient Church, was to disclaim his usurped Dominion and Authority over
Mankind. For the Devil, at the first rise of Christianity especially, having
obtained a visible Kingdom, and in a manner an Universal Monarchy over Men:
whence he is called the Prince of this World, John 14.30. and the God of this
World, 2 Cor. 4.4. When therefore any were converted from Paganism to
Christianity, the Primitive Christians did expressly require from all that were
admitted into that Kingdom of God, the Church of Christ, a public and an open
Renunciation, or Abjuration, of the Devil; or an utter disowning and abandoning
the Devil's Authority, and the paying any Homage, Service, or Obedience to him,
by worshipping him, or his wicked Angels. And to Renounce his Works of Sin, was,
in their Sense, to abandon and forsake every Sin, as being the proper Service
of the Devil; and in the real meaning of it, no less than a throwing off God's
Authority, and a disowning his Power. And that this was the primitive Sense and
meaning of Baptismal Renunciation, may be gathered from Romans 6.11. Where we
shall see, that Christians being Baptized, were to reckon themselves to be dead
unto Sin, but alive unto God, through Jesus Christ our Load.

And now if it be demanded, how far we are thus to renounce and disclaim both
the Devil, and all his Works of Sin, we must absolutely and entirely Renounce
both. For why? There is nothing but Evil proceeds from Satan, who is therefore
by way of Eminence styled the wicked One, Mat. 13.19. And as to his Works of
Sin, whether we consider Sin in itself, or in its sad Effect and Consequents,
it is the utmost Evil. So that no Sin, or any thing the least of Sin, must
willingly be complied with: For if a Man keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one Point, he is guilty of all. Jam. 2.10.

And indeed if the Nature of Satan, and of Sin, and the horrid Consequence of
yielding to either, were well considered, it is hardly possible not absolutely
and entirely to Renounce both: For as the Devil is the worst, and most
dreadful, Being in the World; so he that commits Sin is of the Devil, as we
are told, 1 John 3.8. that is, he is of the Devil's Party, he is a Sharer in
the Devil's Rebellion against God, and in his cursed Designs to destroy the
Divine Authority. But however, whether People will consider it, or no, so
necessary it is that every Christian should absolutely and entirely renounce
the Devil, and all his Works of Sin; that this, if you do not do, you will
forfeit all your Right and Title to those infinite Blessings held forth to you
in the Covenant of Grace, and purchased for you by the Blood of Christ. If you
do not entirely Renounce the Devil, by having nothing to do with him, in his
foul Rebellion against God, you will be accounted no Members of Christ's
Church, but of the Synagogue of Satan; as the Apostatizing Gnostics, those
great Enemies of God, are called, Rev. 2.9. and that for their Halting betwixt
God and Satan. And except you do also utterly renounce his Works of Sin, by
abandoning every known Sin, as that whereby the Divine Authority is thrown
aside, and his Power disowned, you will be far from being Children of God, that
you will be styled no better than the Children of the Devil: For whosoever is
born of God does not commit Sin, as it is said 1 John 3.9. that is, Does keep
himself strictly from all deliberate Sin. And in this the Children of God are
manifested, and the Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness is
not of God, as the Apostle goes on, v. 10. And who else is it, think ye, but he
who overcomes the Devil, and all his Works of Sin, that shall ever Inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven? Why he, and none else, shall Inherit so inestimable a
Blessing. We are assured, Rev. 21.7,8. He that overcomes shall inherit all
Things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my Son. But the Fearful, and
Unbelieving, and Abominable, and Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers,
and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake that burns
with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death. So necessary upon these
several Accounts it is, that accordingly, as has been explained, you should
Renounce, that is, Disclaim, Abhor, and Abandon the Devil, and all his Works of
Sin; which that you may all of you do, God Almighty grant, of his infinite
Mercy, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE X. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works.

I Have already showed you who the Devil is; that he is a Spirit, who Rebels
against the Power and Authority of God: And I have also showed you, in part,
what are his Works, principally his Works of Sin, whereby he has all along, and
does still, continue to rebel against his Maker.

Secondly, And now I am to show you, that as Sin, so his tempting us to Sin, is
another main and principal Work of the Devil; And also I shall show you in what
Sense, and how far, we must Renounce such his Temptations.

Now to Tempt, is in the general Notion of the Word, to make trial of a Person,
and is a Thing either morally Good, or Evil, according to the End for which
such a Trial and Experiment is made. And if it be to prove a Man's Virtue, or
to discover his Corruption, this is no more than what is consistent with the
Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness of a Governor to do: For even God himself tempted
Abraham to slay his Son Isaac, that so having tried his Faith, he might Reward
him for it. Genesis 22.2. And he also tempted or tried Hezekiah, whether he would
vainly and ostentatiously show to the Ambassadors of Babylon his great Wealth;
and this was done in order to discover to that Prince his own Hypocrisy and
Corruption, and the Pride of his Heart, that so he might be humbled in the
Sight and Sense thereof. 2 Chronicles. 32.31.

But now these Temptations of God are not such as we are to Renounce; but
rather, if of the former kind, and in order to try our Faith, We have reason to
count it all Joy when we fall into them; knowing this, that the trial of our
Faith works Patience, James 1.2,3. And if they are of the later kind, and to
discover our Corruption, they tend to make us better.

But as for those Temptations which are properly the Works of the Devil, there
is quite a different End in them; and they are designed merely to enforce and
ensnare a Person into some Sin, that so God may be affronted, his Government
despised, and that his Anger being kindled, the Sinner may be punished for his
Transgression. And because it is to this End that the Devil tempts us, he is
therefore so frequently in the Scripture, particularly, Mat. 4.3. and 1 These.
3.5. styled the Tempter.

And since it does so infinitely concern us to know his Temptations, and in
what Ways and Methods he usually prevails against Men, lest Satan should get an
Advantage over you, I will reduce and consider them under these several Heads.
First, Such whereby he attempted the whole Race of Mankind, to draw them off
from their Obedience to God, to do Service to him. Secondly, Such as he Levels
against the Church of Christ. Thirdly, Such as he Points against the most
eminent Members in the Church. And, Fourthly, Against any Persons
indifferently, on purpose to draw them into Sin. And,

I. Let us consider his first and more general Temptations, those whereby he
attempted the whole Race of Mankind, to draw them off from their Obedience to
God to do Service to him. And the Means whereby he attempted the universal
Rebellion of Mankind were,

1. By Insinuating into the Minds of Adam and Eve false Notions of God, and an
ill Opinion of their Maker and Governor, particularly with respect to his
Justice and Mercy: He insinuated, That it would have been an unjust Tyranny to
give Men Appetites, and not Liberty to gratify them with what they please; and
therefore though Adam should transgress the Command of God, forbidding him to
eat of the Forbidden Fruit, it might be presumed the Divine Mercy would not
permit God to punish the Sin, Thou shall not surely die, Genesis 3.4. But all such
wrong Conceptions concerning the Justice and Mercy of God, as they are still
too common, so they are to be looked upon as the Suggestions of Satan, and are
to be renounced accordingly.

2. And so must that next fatal Wile of his, whereby under the Pretense of
enlarging our first Parents Knowledge of Good and Evil, Genesis 3.5. by making an
Experimental Knowledge of Sin, he brought Ignorance of Divine Things into his
Understanding, from whence there could issue out nothing but Ill. The Mind of
Man naturally desires Knowledge; but no sooner do we experimentally know Sin,
but such filthy Steams of Lust fume up, as do cloud the Mind, so that it cannot
perceive with so much quickness, as before, Divine and Spiritual Things: And
even mere curiosity after less profitable Matters takes off from the Knowledge
of God and our selves, and the Means of Happiness; whence not many wise Men
after the Flesh are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. And now the Devil, by thus increasing
sinful and useless Knowledge, having brought in an Ignorance of what is truly
Good and Profitable to be known, to the Ruin of our first Parents in the
beginning, and to the Destruction of many ever since: The making therefore an
experimental Knowledge of Sin, as also Curiosity about less concerning Matters,
is another of Satan's Politics, which must be renounced and avoided by us.

3. Satan did in the beginning, and does to this day, inveigle the greatest
part of Mankind into Sin, by Bribing their Affections with something that is
nearest their Hearts; and rather than disoblige, or lose which, they will
commit any Thing that is Evil. Thus he tempted Eve, with the Fairness of the
Forbidden Fruit; and Adam, by the Solicitations of his Beloved Wife. Genesis 3.6.
And thus he does continue to ensnare us, by whatever we do place our Affections
most upon: And therefore does our Savior caution us in such unusual Terms,
against loving too much our very nearest Relations; telling us, That if any one
come to him, and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and
Brethren, and Sisters, yea, and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple,
Luke 14.26. that is, he would have us beware lest our fond Affection to them
should withdraw us from God; and he would have us therefore bear such an
Indifferency of Affection, even toward our very nearest Relations, as to be
able to forsake them, and their Interests, rather than God.

4. The last of these more general Sort of Temptations, which Satan did spread
before our first Parents, and does still before us, and that such a One as he
might contrive the highest dishonor to God thereby, was his raising their
Lusts and Appetites, by the Proposal of such Things as would gratify them, to
rebel against their Reason. Thus when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for
Food, and that it was pleasant to the Eye, she took of the Fruit thereof, and
did eat. Genesis 3.6. And nothing could be contrived to reflect more dishonor
upon God, than to have the most brutish Part of us gratified before him. But so
it is, that by the very same Methods he does prevail to this day with the
greatest part of Mankind to rebel against God: For Man being made up very much
of Sense, so that nothing enters into the Soul but through the Door of our
Senses, we are most of us easily prevailed upon by what gratisies them,
especially the Senses of Seeing and Tasting. But our being thus taken with
outward Things, so as to disobey God for the sake of them, is so high an
Ingratitude to our great Benefactor, who has provided so much better for us,
and such an Abuse to our own Souls, which are capable of relishing higher
Enjoyments, as is not to be endured; and the Temptation therefore by those
sensible things which will most gratify our Appetites, must be resisted by us.
And so much for the first sort of Satan's Temptation, those whereby he
attempted the whole Race of Mankind, to draw them off from the Obedience of
God, to do Service to him.

THE XI. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works.

MY present Undertakings, is to lay open before you the Temptations of Satan;
and in order thereunto, I have already showed you by what Temptations and
Methods he overthrew the whole Race of Mankind, and drew it off from Obedience
to God, to do Service to him. And now,

II. I shall discover to you such as he levels against the Church of Christ,
the true Servants of God, either utterly to destroy them from off the Face of
the Earth, or at leastwise so to corrupt the Notions of God and Religion, that
by their very Christianity they may dishonor Him.

And, in order to know this, we must consider, that no sooner had Satan seduced
the whole Race of Mankind into a most unnatural and ungrateful Rebellion
against their Maker, but God, out of his infinite Goodness did recover to his
Service a Body of Men, the Church, listing them under the Seed of the Woman,
Jesus Christ, to Fight against Satan. And the Devil being enraged to have his
Prey thus snatched out of his Teeth, continually attacks it. And indeed,

His first and chief Endeavors have been to destroy the Church of God from off
the Face of the Earth. And this he endeavored to do by nipping it in the Bud,
by the Murder of Abel, to slay whom he excited his Brother Cain. And when he
failed in this, and the Church was afterward recruited in the Family of Seth,
yet he reduced it again by the bloody Posterity of Cain to eight Persons in the
Days of Noah.

Nay, and when after the Flood, God chose Abraham and his Posterity, to be a
special People unto himself, Satan did again endeavor utterly to extinguish
them by his Servant Pharaoh. And indeed, in all Periods till our Savior's
coming, he stirred up the Idolatrous Nations, their Neighbors, especially the
four Monarchies, to harrass them.

But when our Savior Christ appeared in the World, then did he most vigorously
exert his Malice against it; so that for the first 300 Years we hear of nothing
but bloody Persecutions. The Emperors of Rome, true it is, were the
Instruments, but Satan was the Instigator. And to this day, wheresoever any
Attempt is made to Convert a Country from Paganism, he does instigate the
Princes and People thereof to persecute and destroy the Preachers of the
Gospel. Nor is he less industrious to drive Christianity out of those Countries
wherein it has gained possession. And even in the Bowels of Christendom, he has
an Antichristian, and Persecuting Party, most sadly weak'ning Christ's, and
most effectually promoting the Interests of his own Kingdom; of which the whole
Book of Revelations may serve for a Testimony. Thus does the Devil first attack
the Church, by the most violent and furious Methods.

And now all Christians are so far to renounce Satan, with respect to these his
Persecuting Temptations, as to submit to the sorest Sufferings which he and his
wicked Instruments can inflict, rather than deny Christ and his Truths; for
this our Savior has made the indispensible Condition of Salvation to all his
Followers, Matthew. 16.24 If any Man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his Cross, and follow me. But,

Secondly, When these bloody Methods fail him, and instead of extinguishing
Christianity, the Blood of the Martyrs proves the Seed of the Church: Then with
all the Art and close Contrivance possible, does he endeavor to corrupt Man's
Notions of God and Religion, so that by their very Christianity they may
dishonor him.

These Politic Methods of his are discovered to us, Matthew. 13.24. under the
Parable of a malicious Enemy coming privately in the Night, and sowing Tares
where the Husbandman had before sown good Seed. And Satan, like a skilful
Husbandman himself, is exquisitely choice about the Nature of the Seed, the
Temper and Preparedness of the Soil, the Fitness of the Season, and the
Skilfulness of the Seedsmen which he does employ.

And, First, As to the Nature of the Seed, he takes care his Heretical Opinions
and Practices should bear some resemblance of Divine Truth, that so he may the
better conceal their discovery. And therefore he does gild his Errors where the
Light of the Gospel does most clearly shine, as here amongst us, in this
following Method; 1. Under the plausible appearance of advancing God's Honor
in some of his Attributes, he endeavors to render him odious, and despised in
others; as under the color of advancing God's Power and Dominion, he makes him
absolutely to decree Men's Reprobation and Condemnation, to the Disparagement of
the Divine Goodness and Mercy.

2. It is usual with him, or his Agents, under the color of advancing
Gospel Truths, to propagate Heresies, which do undermine Religion, and the
necessity of a Holy Life; as under the pretense of exalting Free Grace, to
preach down the necessity of our own inherent Evangelical Righteousness.

3. Nothing is a more common Artifice of this Deceiver, than to exalt some
eminent Christian Duty, or some part of a Duty, or one way of performing a Duty
to the disparagement of another; as to prefer Prayer to the neglect of
Preaching, or Sermons to the contempt of Prayer. As also Praying by the Spirit,
is by his subtilty made to justle out Bodily Worship, and Extemporary Prayer is
most fatally extolled to the Contempt of Forms of Prayer; by which means Satan
has utterly defeated, and rendered useless to too many, both Families and
Private Persons, as well as Public Congregations, those excellent Helps of
Devotion we have in our Church, and has brought in a total neglect in a manner,
of Public, Family, and of Private Prayers. Thus does Satan make choice of such
Tares to sow in the Field as do nearly resemble the pure Seed. He cunningly
gilds over, and disguises his Errors with something of a resemblance of Divine
Truth, in order to prevent their Discovery.

Nor secondly, Is he less skilful in judging of the preparedness of the Soil;
for in those Churches where the Scriptures are locked up, and Ignorance
prevails, he imposes there the grossest Heresies as Articles of Faith;
especially into such he introduces Idolatry, and Superstition, whereby he is
most directly and immediately served.

Thirdly, And as to the fitness of the Season, he is wonderfully dexterous in
accommodating his Counsels, his Actions, and his manner of acting to such
Seasons as are most proper to his purpose of seducing Mankind. Hence in dark
and ignorant Ages, nothing so common as the Apparition of Saints, as was
pretended; and under this shape he appeared in order to introduce the Belief of
Purgatory, Image Worship, and the like Superstition. And on the contrary in
Learned and Philosophical Ages he is as shy in appearing, lest he should
destroy the prevailing Saducism, which denies the Being of Spirits.

Fourthly, And as to the skilfulness of the Seedsman, Satan is wonderfully
cunning in making choice of fit and proper Instruments, and in furnishing those
with the proper Arts of deceiving, and with suitable Qualities, whom he employs
to sow the Seed of Corrupt Doctrine in the Souls of Men. This the Holy Spirit
is particularly careful to inform us of, and to forewarn us against, especially
2 Cor. 11.14. where the Apostle tells us, That as Satan himself is transformed
into an Angel of Light, so that these Teachers, his Agents, who do infuse any
of his false Doctrines into Men's Hearts, are deceitful Workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ, v. 13. As for instance, such as place
all Religion in Morality, shall be adorned with Humanity; and on the contrary,
such as turn it all into Mystery, shall be gifted with Canting; and yet to see
the crooked windings of this subtle Serpent, you shall often find that by Men
of Godliness he will propagate such Principles as will open a way to a Flood of
Immoralities, as is seen amongst the Antinomians. Thus does this great Deceiver
with all the Art and close contrivance possible, endeavor to corrupt Men's
Notions of God and Religion, so that by their very Christianity they may
dishonor him.

And there is not a more difficult part in a Christian's Warfare than to
preserve ones self untainted with Heretical Pravity, colored over with the
Varnish of Gospel Truth. But the Cheat must be discovered, and Satan's Arts
herein Resisted, and Renounced; for our Salvation depends upon it. Beloved
believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God, because
many false Prophets are gone out into the World, 1 John. 4.1.

And the Scripture does give us two most infallible, and sufficient Rules
whereby we may try these false Doctrines. The 1st is Matthew. 1.10. You shall
know them by their Fruits; that is, if the tendency of those plausible
Doctrines be to encourage, and countenance Men in any sin, they are undoubtedly
false. The other Rule given us to this purpose, is, 1 John 4.2,3. Hereby know
ye the Spirit of God; every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come into the Flesh, is not of God. By Jesus Christ being come in the Flesh, is
meant, that Jesus Christ took our Nature upon him, that he might be a Mediator
betwixt God and us, to reconcile the Father to us, by his Satisfaction and
Intercession for us. So that if there be any Doctrine which takes us off from
our dependence upon the Mediation of Christ, for the acceptance of our
imperfect Righteousness, it is False and Heretical.

And therefore from both those Rules put together, you may conclude, that though
Satan's Agents seem never so demure, and appear never so sanctified, yet if
they shall endeavor to instill into your Minds any undue Apprehensions of God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, contrary to what you are taught out of the
Scriptures in the Doctrine of our Churches; or any pernicious Opinions, which
in their Nature and Tendency shall render a Holy, Good Life, unnecessary to our
Justification: The Teachers, I say, of either of those Doctrines, let them be
never so plausible, you may assure your selves are no Ministers of Christ, but
of Satan; and are set on work by him, to destroy God's Authority amongst Men,
and to set up his own Throne in their Hearts; the thing he aims at. And
therefore beware of these Wolves who come to you in Sheeps clothing, you shall
know them by their Fruits, Matthew. 7.15,16.

THE XII. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works.

IN my last Discourse, I laid before you such Temptations of Satan as he levels
against the Church of Christ, the true Servants of God, with a Design, either
utterly to destroy them, or so to corrupt their Worship, that by their very
Religion they might dishonor their Maker.

III. I am now to show, that next to his destroying of whole Churches, his
great Industry is to gain over to his Party, or to tempt to some Grievous, and
Scandalous Enormity, such Persons, as are more than ordinarily Eminent for
their Rank or Quality, their Order, or their Piety in the Church of God.

First, Such as are most Eminent for their Rank or Quality. Hence Elymas the
Sorcerer, that Child of the Devil, applied himself so diligently to Sergius
Paulus, a Deputy, and great Man in his Country, to turn him from the Faith,
Acts 13.7,8. And the Reason why Satan is so industrious to get over the
Honorable, and the Rich to his Party, is because such being Leading Men, if
their Examples be bad, they are of malignant Influence, because conspicuous:
And because they will bring upon their Souls not only the guilt of their own,
but also of other Men's sins; the Actions of Great Men having the force of a
Precept, as well as of a Pattern, which Inferiors are afraid to show their
dislike of. So that it does infinitely concern Persons of Quality, of all Men
living, utterly to Renounce the ways of sin, because their ill Examples are of
such bad and malignant Influence upon others.

Secondly, The Devil is wonderfully industrious to tempt into some scandalous
sin, or wicked course of Life; or at leastwise to invent and propagate some
scandalous story, against such as are eminent on the account of their Order,
viz. the Ministers of Religion. And he is doubly enraged against such, both
because in the Nature and Design of their Office, they are to destroy his
Kingdom; and because the rest of the World do altogether eye them for their
Pattern. For this Reason no Temptation to draw such into some scandalous
Enormity shall be left untried by him. So our Savior told his Disciples,
Behold Satan has a desire to have you (you above all others) that he may sift
you as Wheat, Luke 22.31. And the more industrious a Minister of Religion is in
doing good to the Souls of Men, the more watchful is Satan to overcome such a
one. Nay, and this Impostor will so order it, that in the very way a Minister
of the Gospel may be most serviceable to the Church of God, he will render him
most mischievous, as by turning his Zeal into Faction, his Spiritual-mindedness
into Enthusiasm.

And to see the Malice of this subtle Adversary, when with all his Wit, and
Artifices, he cannot prevail over the Man of God, but that he is still baffled
in all his Attempts upon him; then he sets his Agents, Slanderers, and
Whisperers on work (for that their Tongues are set on fire of Hell, the
Scripture tells us, James 3.6.) to invent and propagate Scandals concerning him.

He knows very well how much it concerns the Interest of Religion, that the
Reputation of its Ministers be kept unfully'd, and that slanderous Reports
lessen the Authority and Influence of the Clergy, almost as much as real sin;
and therefore it is, that Satan, and Satanical Men are so industrious to blast
it; which St. Paul being aware of, charges Timothy, that against an Elder, that
is, against a Minister of Religion, he should not receive an Accusation under
two or three Witnesses, 1 Timothy 5.19. that is, that he should utterly discourage
the Defamation of the Clergy.

Thirdly, The Devil is most incessantly busied to tempt to the Commission of
some Scandalous Enormity, such as are signal for their extraordinary Piety and
Virtue. Good Men the Devil knows will be grievously scandalized at such a ones
Fall: And the Atheistical will Triumph in it. And withal, the Lapsed Person
will be rendered almost incapable ever after of Converting others by his
Example, or Exhortations; ( excepting the Matter of Vriah, is to this day a
Blot in David's Scutcheon.) Therefore against this Bulwark of Religion, the
Devil draws up all his Artillery, as is seen in the Case of Job, Chap. 1.2. and
there is nothing he will so pride himself in, as in such a Conquest. The more
exemplary therefore, and Pious any Man is, the more it concerns him to beware
of Satan, and all his Temptations. Ye therefore, Beloved, seeing ye know these
things before, beware, lest ye also being led away with the Error of the
Wicked, fall from your own stedfastness, but grow in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.17,18. And so much for
those Temptations which Satan our Adversary does more particularly level
against such as are most considerable for their Rank, or Quality, their Order,
or Piety in the Church of Christ.

THE XIII. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil and all his Works.

HAving in my last Discourse upon these Words of the Catechism discovered to
you how in a more especial manner Satan does level all his Temptations against
such as are more peculiarly eminent for their Rank, or their Quality, their
Order, or their Piety in the Church of Christ; I am now,

IV. And lastly, in order to a more full Display of that Work of the Devil, his
tempting of us, to discover to you some of the more remarkable Temptations at
leastwise, whereby he applies himself to all Persons indifferently considered,
in the Church of Christ, be they high or low, to draw them into sin.

The Devil's Temptations are not easily known to be his, nor are they always
distinguishable from those of the World, and the Flesh, which are managed and
directed by him. However I shall undertake to discover some of the more
considerable of Satan's, Temptations of this last kind, under these following
Characters. As,

First, He permits, if not furthers Persons in a partial Obedience to God in
some Particulars, the better to detain them perfect Slaves to him in others;
and therefore, when Men are thus partially Obedient, it is called a Dividing
betwixt God and Mammon, Luke 16.13. And there is not a more fatal Delusion of
Satan's than this is, especially when the partially Obedient exchange such sins
of a scandalous Name, such as Drunkenness and Lewdness, for their contrary
Virtues, the Person becoming Chaste and Sober, but yet notwithstanding, is
possessed with other Impieties of a higher Nature, such as Spiritual Pride, and
a Sacrilegious Pretense to Inspiration, as is daily seen in most of the
Quakers. In this Case it may be said, That the Unclean Spirit went out of that
Man, only to return into the House, from whence he went out, and to take with
himself seven other Spirits more wicked than himself, that they entering in,
and dwelling there, the last state of that Man might be worse than the first,
Matthew. 12.43,44,45. And there are not more irreclaimable sort of sinners than
these are.

Secondly, It is usual with him to put plausible Names upon the worst sins, and
under that disguise, to cheat Persons into a good Opinion of them, and then to
commit them. And thus he tempted even our Savior to throw himself headlong
from the top of the Temple, and would have this presumption thought a trusting
in God, Matthew. 4.6. And most sins under this disguise, get Reputation amongst
Men.

Thirdly, Nothing is a more usual Policy of his, than to change the Nature of
several Divine Graces and Virtues, so that they degenerate into very great
sins. This he does by transporting Persons out of the Moderation wherein Virtue
does for the most part consist, into that Excess, which much resembles it, but
is really very sinful and hurtful to Men's Souls. Thus the Corinthians Zeal
against the sin of Incest, had like to have been heightened into an
irreconcilableness to the Sinners, which was called a Device of Satan's, 2 Cor.
2.11. And it is seldom that sins of this nature are ever repented of; for even
when your Zealots, and Bigots do Murder and Persecute, they think they do God
good Service, John 16.2.

Fourthly, It is a most destructive Policy of Satan's to put Novices and new
Beginners in the Spiritual Life, upon undertaking Severities greater than they
can go through with, on design that when they grow weary thereof, they may,
together with their voluntary Severities, throw all Religion aside, as too
burdensome, and not at all practicable. And that this is a Policy of Satan's
we may see, 1 Cor 7.5. And yet to see the crooked windings of this wily
Serpent, as much as he is for screwing Persons up to Excess in Religion.

Fifthly, Satan by injecting evil thoughts into our Minds, to disorder and
disturb our Devotions, is very industrious to unhallow, and spoil those
Services whereby we shall really, and immediately, and directly honor and
glorify our Maker, and benefit our own Souls. Thus we read, Job 1.6. That when
the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also
amongst them. And that in hearing the Word; he brings a drowsiness and
inadvertency upon the Hearers, on purpose to hinder its Efficacy, is seen,
Matthew 13.19. When any one hears the Word, and understands it not, or
considers it not, then comes the wicked one and catches away that which was
sown in the Heart.

Sixthly, The Devil observing the outward wants and necessities of Persons is
wont to tempt them to the use of unlawful and undue Means to remove those
Evils. And that thus he tempted our Savior you will see, Matthew. 4.2,3. and
would have him out of an impatience of waiting the ordinary Means of satisfying
his hunger, to tempt God to feed him supernaturally, and by way of Miracle.

Seventhly, The Devil knowing every particular Persons inward Dispositions,
both of Body and Mind, better many times than he himself does, he accordingly
presents such Objects to the Fancy, as shall be likeliest to prevail over such
a one, to commit some grievous sin. And hence no doubt it is, that Persons of a
melancholy temper of Mind, are so apt above others, to be troubled with
Blasphemous Thoughts, though Persons of great Piety, and are sometimes tempted to
kill themselves. Both these apprehensions are some of those fiery darts of the
wicked one, mentioned, Ephesians. 6.16. and are cast into the Soul at such times,
when they are least able to repel them.

Eighthly, The great Battery of the Devil, whereby he does storm the Innocence,
and shake the Constancy of the greatest part of Mankind, is his representing to
the Fancies of Men, the Convenience of Riches, the Glory of Honors, and the
Sweetness of Pleasures, thereby to bribe them to Rebel against God, and to sin
against their own Souls. And thus, when he had failed in all other means, he
tempted our Savior; and when he found that this would not do, he then left
him, Matthew. 4.9,11. And such is Satan's management here, that in his
Representation of this World's Goods, he shows only the outside of those things
to allure us into sin, industriously concealing all that is hurtful therein,
which could deter Men from it; and therefore,

Ninthly, When any have been once prevailed upon by the Convenience, the
Beauty, the Honor, or the Pleasure of any of these outward things, which the
Devil has represented to their Fancies, to commit sin to obtain them: Then he
fails not to lay the Shame, and Disgrace of their sins before them, and will
persuade them to commit another horrid wickedness, to hide from the Eyes of Men
the shame of the former. All which management of his, is seen in the case of
David with Vriah, and his Wife Bathsheba, 2 Samuel 11 chapter

Tenthly, When he has once engaged such a Person into many notorious Crimes, he
will then either lull him into a fatal security, whereby he foolishly persuades
himself, that God will deal more mercifully with him, than he has declared in
his World; or else Satan will not fail to present at last to such an enormous
Sinner's Conscience, the infinite Guilt and Horror of his Crimes, to make him,
if he can, despair that ever they will be forgiven, they are so many and
monstrous: That so the Sinner may never endeavor to repent, or so much as fly
to God in Prayer, to have mercy on him. And now,

Lastly, There are a Sort of far gone Sinners, whom God in Punishment does
abandon over to the Devil, to be wholly in a manner ordered and acted by him.
And these are of Three Sorts.

First, Such ill-disposed Minds, as out of hatred to the ways of God, and out
of love to their own Lusts, do endeavor to possess their Minds with such
Principles; and do seek to themselves such Teachers, as will make Sin easy to
their Consciences, and will reconcile the hopes of Heaven, and a bad Life
together. As to such Men, Because they receive not the Love of the Truth, that
they might be saved, God does threaten to send them strong Delusions, that they
should believe a Lie. 2 These. 2.10,11.

Secondly, There is a farther degree of this Sort of Sinners, who seem to be
wholly abandoned by God, and yielded up to Satan to be managed by him at his
Pleasure; and they are such, who in a long Course of many Damning Sins, have
laid waste the Conscience, have baffled at length all the Methods of his Grace
to reclaim them, and have resisted and Grieved his Holy Spirit so long, till
Grace be wholly withdrawn from them: And such are styled Children of
Disobedience, in whom the Evil Spirit works. Ephesians. 2.3. And if there be any
more abandoned by God, and more under the Devil's Management than these, they
must be,

Thirdly, Witches, Magicians, Conjurers, and the like; who have Covenanted away
both Body and Soul to the Devil, on condition he will be for some time at their
beck, to execute their vile and malicious Purposes.

And thus I have at length, as before, showed you who the Devil is, and what
are his Works of Sin, and how you are to Renounce both him and them: So I have
now, in these last Discourses, laid before you those manifold Methods of
Temptation, whereby he did and does still attempt, First, The whole Race of
Mankind. Secondly, The Church of Christ. Thirdly, The most Considerable and
Leading Persons therein. And lastly, all Sorts of Persons indifferently
considered.

And upon the general View of the Works of the Devil, both of Sin and
Temptation, it does appear, that his drift is no less than to usurp God's
Throne, and to draw the whole Race of Mankind into the same cursed Rebellion
with himself, against the Majesty of Heaven.

And now it remains only to show you, and then I shall have done with this
Point, What it is, and how we must renounce this great Work of the Devil, his
tempting us to Sin. And, in a word, the Temptations of Satan are then only
properly Renounced, when they are Resisted by us; a Thing which we are
commanded to do, Jam. 4.7. Resist the Devil; as also 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom resist
steadfast in the Faith.

And you shall be able effectually to resist his Temptations these Three ways,
First, By keeping your selves always Sober. Secondly, By Watchfulness, that you
may not be ensnared by them. Thirdly, By Prayer to God, to protect you from
them, And,


1. By keeping your selves always Sober, that is, free both from Drunkenness
and from Passion; or else you will be deprived of Reason, and the Grace of God,
whereby alone you can resist them. Thus, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may
devour, whom resist steadfast in the Faith.

2. Watchfulness, is another Means to resist Satan's Temptations. Be sober, be
vigilant, 1 Pet. 5.9 He, for his part is vigilant to do you Mischief, and
watches all Advantages to get you into his Power and Reach; and it lies upon
you to be as careful to guard your selves against all his Batteries, which he
plays against you. And,

3. As you will secure your selves against the Temptations of the Wicked one,
you must constantly pray to God to protect you from them. Thus Jam. 4.8. after
we are commanded to resist the Devil, and he will fly from us; as an effectual
way so to do, we are bid to draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to us; that
is, if we will make our humble Addresses to God by Prayer, he will be ready to
assist us against all his Temptations. In short, Since the Temptations of the
wicked One are so many, and so subtle, it concerns you, according to the Advice
of St. Paul, Ephesians. 6.13,18. to take unto you the whole Armor of God, that you
may be able to stand in the evil Day, and having done all to stand. And
especially to pray always, with all Prayer and Supplication in the Spirit,
watching thereunto with all Perseverance.

THE XIV. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works; the Pomps, and
Vanity of this wicked World.

HAving given you to understand the utmost of what is meant by Renouncing the
Devil and all his Works.

Secondly, I am now in like manner to explain unto you, what is meant by the
Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World; and to show you in what Sense, and how
far, you must renounce the wicked World, with its Pomp and Vanity.

To Renounce the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World. In which Words there
being three Things necessary to be explained: First, The World. Secondly, The
wicked World. And, Thirdly, The Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World.

I. I am to show you, what is meant by the World, and in what Sense, and how
far, you are to renounce the World. And the World is to be considered both
generally and particularly.

1. By the World in general, is meant that whole Frame of Nature which we
behold, and all the Variety of Creatures which it contains, and is given us by
the Bounty and Goodness of God for our Use and Benefit. Now the World, in this
Sense, is not in itself Evil, but only accidentally, by Man's abuse of himself,
or it: Considered in itself, indeed, it is very good, and convenient to us. God
saw every Thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. And
as it is not in itself absolutely Evil, so neither is it entirely to be
renounced; but being Good in its self, it may in some measure be desired and
enjoyed by us.

Nevertheless, through our own Corruption, whereby we abuse the good Things of
the World, it becomes accidentally the Occasion of most of our Sins, and of our
Estrangement from God our Sovereign Good. This it does by captivating our
Affections, and by withdrawing us from God. So far therefore as it engages our
Affections too closely to it, so as to make us inordinately and irregularly to
mind it, and to neglect our great Concern, the business of Religion, it is to
be renounced and resisted by us. Love not the World, nor the Things of the
World; if any Man love the World, the love of the Father is not in him. 1 John
15.2.

So long indeed as we wear these earthly Bodies about us, we are permitted the
Use and Enjoyment of worldly Goods, provided in Things lawful, and Degrees
allowable: But being our Souls are the principal part of us, and are soon to
remove to Heaven, we must chiefly set our Affections on Things above, and
mainly endeavor to attain them. And in this Sense St. Paul professes, The
World was Crucified unto him, and he unto the World. Gal. 6.14. And so much for
Renouncing the World in general.

2. Let us next consider the World in its Particulars, and those Temptations
which result both from the Good and the Evils thereof, as they are
distinguished Luke 16 25. And the good Things of the World are summed up under
these Heads; the Riches, Honors, and the Pleasures it affords: And its Evils,
on the contrary, may be reduced to Poverty, Disgrace, and those Afflictions of
all Sorts, which in innumerable ways do assail us. And there are also some
Things therein of a middle Nature; as different Callings, Conditions, and
States of Life, and also the Cares of this World, which are the Appurtenances
to it, and afford great matter of Temptation and Trial to us therein; and in
what Sense, and how far, you are to Renounce it, with reference to each of
these, I will endeavor to show you. And,

First, If we consider the Riches of this World, these are not in themselves
hurtful; but good and convenient, and are bestowed on us by God to many good
Ends and Purposes; and those who enjoy them have great Advantages of doing Good
therewith, to others Comfort, and the Benefit of their own Souls. Nevertheless
Riches are a mighty Temptation, whether we consider Men as Getting, Possessing,
or as Parting with, or Losing them.

And 1. In the over-eager pursuit and Getting of Riches, Men do run themselves
into many grievous Sins, as also into many miserable Snares, so as to be hardly
ever able to disentangle themselves out of them. For as Restitution of
ill-gotten Wealth is necessary to having Peace with God; so it is extremely
difficult to be willing, or able, afterward to make it. Indeed, They that will
be Rich, who resolve right or wrong to be Rich, fall into Temptations, and a
Snare, and into many foolish and hurtful Lusts, which drown Men in Destruction.
1 Timothy 6.9.

2. And no less Temptations are those subject to, who do possess Riches:
Experience telling us, that a great Estate is a very great Temptation to
Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and Insolence, to Irreligion toward God, and a
profane idolatrous Trust in Riches; and, in a word, to commit the highest
Offenses toward God, their Neighbor, and themselves. In my Prosperity I said
I shall never be removed, holy David confesses it of himself, Psalm. 30.6. But,

3. The great Sins of all are occasioned by a Loathness to part with, and a
Fear of losing our Riches. From a Loathness to part with Riches arises
unmercifulness to Men; as was seen in the Case of Dives, who would spare no
more than the Crumbs which fell from his Table, Luke 16.21. to relieve the poor
Lazarus, his Heart was so much set upon his Wealth. From the Fear of losing
them, Men become Guilty of no less than Apostasy from God, and a Denial of the
Truth, as is seen in the Case of the young Man in the Gospel, Matthew. 19.21,22.
who when he heard, that if he would be Christ's Disciple, he must leave all he
had, as the Case then stood, and does often in Times of Persecution ever since
He went away sorrowful, for he had great Possessions. Thus you see what great
Temptations Riches will give you; whether you consider your selves in the
Getting, Possessing, or as Parting with, or Losing of them.

And now the great Question will be, In what Sense, and how far, Riches are to
be renounced in all these respects? And in general, being they are not Evil in
themselves, they are in those Cases only to be Renounced by us, wherein we
cannot without Sin, Pursue, Possess, and Enjoy them.

As, First, if we consider Riches in the Getting, no Man must so put his Heart
upon them, as to esteem them his chiefest Good and Happiness, for this God
alone is; and he will not endure the Riches of this World should be made a
Competitor with him for our Service. Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, says our
Savior, Matthew. 6.24.

Nor must we labor after Riches with immoderate Care, so as to neglect the
great Duties of Religion and Devotion; but must seek first the Kingdom of God,
and his Righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. Especially you must beware of enriching
your selves by any unjust Means; such as Oppression, Wrong, Robbery, or
Sacrilege. Woe be to him that builds his House by Unrighteousness, and his
Chambers by Wrong; that uses his Neighbor's Service without Wages, and gives
him not for his Work Jer. 22.13. And whoever has unjustly gained any Thing,
must Renounce it, by making Restitution thereof; as good Zaccheus did; Behold,
Lord, if I have taken any Thing from any Man, by false Accusation, I here
restore him fourfold. Luke 19.8.

Secondly, Riches, if considered in the Possession, are to be Renourc'd, by
paring off those Superfluities which tempt to Idleness and Luxury, to Pride and
Insolence, and an Idolatrous Trust in Riches, and by bestowing them to Pious
and Charitable Uses. Nor is this a more hard and unreasonable Lesson, than what
was given by our Savior in a like Case, Matthew. 5.29. If thy right Eye offend
thee, pluck it out, and cast it from thee: For it is profitable for thee that
one of thy Members should perish, and not that thy whole Body should be cast
into Hell. So we may say in this, It is much better to part with Superfluities,
than to be Damned for them; and the giving of them to Pious and Charitable
Uses, is that which is called, Making Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness.
Luke 16 9.

Lastly, And it remains now only to be considered, how far the Rich are to
Renounce their Wealth, in parting with it in Works of Mercy, aad in suffering
the Loss thereof, rather than incur Apostasy. And, in a word, at all times rich
Men ought to make to themselves Friends of the Mammon of Unrighteousness, Luke
16.9. by giving to Pious and Charitable Uses: And in Times of Suffering, they
who have never so much, as they will be Christ's Disciples and Followers, must
deny themselves, and take up their Cross and follow him; that is, forsake all
for his sake, Matthew. 16.24. And alas why should any Man, though the Richest
upon Earth, stick at doing this: For what shall it profit him, if he gain the
whole World, and lose his own Soul; or what shall Man give in exchange for his
Soul? Ver. 26.

THE XV. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works. The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World.

THE subject of our present Consideration, is the Renouncing of the World; and
I have already showed you in what Sense, and how far, we must Renounce the
World in General; as also that first and principal of its Parts, the Riches of
the World.

Secondly, I am now to speak to another of its Particulars, the Honors of it;
and to show you what they mean, and in what Sense, and how far, you are to
Renounce the Honors of the World.

Honor strictly signifies an inward Esteem, signified by an outward Respect.
But in common Language, by Honors are meant the Advantages or Qualities
themselves; upon the account of which, Persons are so Honored, and those
outward Respects given them, in regard to those Advantages.

And they may be reduced to these; Nobility, Pre-eminence, Reputation,
Applause, and such outward Respects, as are given upon the Account of any of
these.

And I. Let us consider Nobility or Gentility, and in what Sense, and how far,
it is at any time to be Renounced by us. This is an Honor derived from worthy
Ancestors, and has usually certain Titles and Badges, which distinguish such
Persons from the Crowd of Men: And such Distinctions in the Body Politic is
both allowable and useful; as may be seen 1 Cor. 12.23. only there are very
great Abuses which this kind of Honor is subject to, and in such Instances it
is to be Renounced. As,

First, A Gentleman, or Nobleman, be he of what Rank or Quality soever, must
utterly Renounce all that Honor which pretends to put him above the Laws of
God or Man; and beyond Reproof or Punishment when he has violated either: Nay,
but on the contrary, such a One is bound above others to be a strict and
orderly Liver, and upon his Failure lies more open to the Reproof of the
Ministers of God here, and provokes more than others the Punishment of an
incensed Deity hereafter. And accordingly Herod the Tetrarch was reproved by
John the Baptist, for Herodias his Brother Philips Wife, and for the Evils
which Herod had done. Luke 3.19. And in the World to come, such a one, as
having received much, will, above all others, be beaten with many Stripes. Luke
12.47

Secondly, And that Nobility, or Gentility, is also to be renounced and
detested, which exalts Persons above their Brethren, to that degree, as to make
them Despise and Oppress the rest of Mankind; as if these were but a Lower Rank
of Creatures, and had not the same God to their Father, Bodies formed out of
the same Clay, and Souls as excellent in their Natures, and as capable of
Improvements; as precious in God's Sight, and as much the Heirs of Heaven as
their own. And let the Proud One's know, that there is no ground in the World
for that mighty Distance, much less for that miserable Slavery which some of
them put their Fellow Creatures to; for have we not one Father, and has not
one God created us. Mal. 2.10. But,

Thirdly, Those Persons ought indeed even to Renounce all Pretentions to
Honor, who have basely degenerated from those worthy Qualities which enobled
their Ancestors. We have Abraham to our Father, was the constant cry of the
Jews, when they had least of the Faith and Virtues of Abraham. But what says
St. John Baptist, Think not to say within your Hearts we have Abraham to our
Father; for I say unto you, that God is able out of these Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham, Matthew. 3.9. that is, by having degenerated from Abraham,
you have forfeited your Title to the Name and Honor of being Abraham's
Children; and the vile Gentiles, as you account them, shall be taken into that
Dignity and Relation in your stead.

Fourthly, But especially such ought to Renounce even all Pretentions to Honor
amongst Christians, at leastwise who despise Religion and its chiefest Virtues,
as Qualities beneath them; which because so many do, Not many Mighty, not many
Noble, are called. 1 Cor. 1.26. So that though such are accounted Honorable,
and may be never so much respected by vain Men, they are really despicable both
in the sight of God, and all wise Persons. And thus you see how far Paternal
Honor is to be Renounced.

II. Let us next enquire, in what Sense, and how far, Civil Honor is to be
Renounced; whether the Favor of Princes, or the Effects of their Favor, Posts
of Honor, which indeed are darling and bewitching Things, and betray many into
very great Crimes. But,

First, A Prince's Favor, though extremely valuable in itself, when it can be
obtained and preserved without Sin; yet no Man must either Gain, Possess, or
Retain it by wicked Arts, or sinful Compliances: But, like good Obadiah, must
take care to be one that Fears God in a wicked Prince's Court, 1 Kin. 18.3. Nor,

Secondly, As to the Effects of these Favors, High Places, and Titles of
Honor, ought any Man to grasp at that which is above his Capacity, and Ability
to manage to the Public Good; An Ambition which is mischievous both to the
Church and State. Instead of which, every Man ought to think soberly of
himself, according as God has dealt to every Man his Measure of Faith. Romans
12.3. Nor,

Thirdly, Ought Persons of the best Capacities, and greatest Abilities, be
over-eager and importunate in their Suits and Applications to those who bestow
them: Especially none, though of the greatest Capacities, must violently thrust
themselves into them to the disturbance of the Church or State, lest they
perish in the Gain saying of Korah. Number. 16. Jude 11. for their factiously
grasping at undue Places.

III. There is another sort of Honor consisting in the high Esteem and
Reputation in which the wise and virtuous part of Mankind have a Person,
oceasion'd by the excellent Gifts and Qualities, and Divine Graces shining in
him, or upon the account of some extraordinary Actions performed by him. This
is what the Wise man calls a Good Name, and is more valuable than Riches, or
Gold, or Silver, Prove. 22.1. And indeed it is not only a more peculiar Blessing
than any the greatest Treasures; but it procures greater Security to our
Persons and Estates. So that whereas in Dearths and Famines, Persecutions and
Invasions, the more Wealthy any Man is, the more he is the object of Envy, and
subject to Rapine and Violence; the very Reputation of Uprightness and
Integrity, Goodness, Mercy, and Charity, will be a safe Retreat, and Shield
against the Storm.

What shall I say? A good Name is a Treasury that must be preserved by Men in
Holy Orders, 1 Timothy 3.7. and for the like Reason, by all others in any public
Station. For why? It is not only comfortable to one's own self, and smells,
like Ointment, sweet in the World; but what is chiefly to be regarded, it
renders a Person capable of doing good in it. Because I delivered the Poor when
he cried, and the Fatherless, and him that had none to help him; unto me Men
gave Ear, and waited and kept silence at my Counsel. Job 29.12. And therefore a
desire of Reputation and Credit is not only a Thing implanted in our Natures by
God; but to preserve it untainted and unsuspected of Evil, is a Duty enjoined
upon us by his Laws. Be blameless, ye Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst
of a crooked and perverse Nation, amongst whom shine ye as Lights in the World.
Phil. 2.15. So valuable is a good Reputation in itself, so desirable to be
attained, and so carefully to be preserved. And yet even Esteem and Reputation
itself, as well as the Temptations it gives us, is to be Renounced by us.

As, First, we must so far Renounce the Honor that shall accrue to us from our
own good Works, as not to make our own Glory the End and Reason of any Good we
do: For that we are bid to let our Light shine before Men, the Reason of it is
this, that others seeing our good Works, may Glorify our Father which is in
Heaven. Matthew. 5.16.

Secondly, We must not Affect, but Renounce those Praises which are above our
Deserts; or we must not be desirous of Vainglory. Gal. 5.26.

Thirdly, We must beware of taking the Honor and Respects given us for any
worthy Performances wholly to our selves; and of not transferring them to God,
to whom the Glory of all that is good in us does properly belong. Not uuto us,
not unto us, but to thy Name be the Praise. Psalm. 115.1.

Fourthly, We must abhor making a Reputation for Religion an Instrument only to
our worldly Advancement. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye
devour Widows Houses, and for a Pretense make long Prayers, therefore ye shall
receive the greater Damnation. Mat. 23.14. But, on the contrary, you must use
the Authority your Credit shall give you to discountenance Vice, and to
encourage Virtue, in the World.

Fifthly, As valuable as is a good Name, and Reputation amongst Men, we must
Renounce all undue Means of preserving it; such as are Duelling upon the
account of Affronts, as is usual amongst the great Ones; and going to Law for
Slanders, as is frequent amongst common People. Now therefore there is utterly
a Fault amongst you, because ye go to Law one with another, why do you not
rather take Wrong? 1 Cor. 6.7.

And, Lastly, we must utterly Renounce and Forfeit the Esteem of Men, rather
than incur the Disfavour of God: For as it will often happen, that you shall be
evil spoken of for well-doing; so when it does, you are to account it a
Blessing, when Men shall revile you, and speak all manner of evil against you,
for Christ's sake, and for adhering stoutly to the Rules of his Gospel, for
great will be your Reward in Heaven, Matthew. 5.11,12.

IV. Next to that high Esteem and Reputation, in which the Virtuous and the
Wise shall hold you, upon the account of well-doing, it deserves to be
considered, how far that Honor is to be Renounced, which consists in the
Applauses of the Vulgar, upon what they may account Praiseworthy and
Honorable; such as insolent Swaggering, Swearing, Drinking, Whoring, and the
like. And in a word, this sort of Honor is utterly, and with all possible
Indignation to be Renounced; for in such Cases, and with respect to such
Practices as these, it is said, Woe unto those of whom all Men shall speak
well, Luke 6.26.

V. And lastly, It now remains only that I instruct you in what Sense, and how
far we must Renounce those Outward Expressions of Respect, either by Word, or
Deed, which are usually given upon the account of any of the forementioned
Honors. And,

First, No Created Being, either Men or Angels, must suffer those Respects to
be given them, whether by Word, or Deed, which are proper and peculiar to
signify our Sense of God's Majesty and Perfections, rememb'ring how the Angel
refused Divine Worship, when it was offered to him by John, Rev. 22.9. And
young Women would do well to take care that they Renounce with the utmost
Detestation those Blasphemous Complements, whereby Divine Perfections are
usually ascribed to 'em by their Vain Lovers, rememb'ring how signally Herod
was punished by the hand of God for suffering himself to be so flattered, Acts
12.21,22,23.

Secondly, All Persons must Renounce, and Refuse those Titles and Respects, and
Precedences, which are not their due, but belong to those above them, There is
an Evil which I have seen under the Sun, says Solomon, Eccl. 10.5,6. viz. Folly
set in great Dignity, and the rich sit in low Places. And,

Lastly, It becomes all Persons in Modesty, and Humility, and good Manners, to
decline in some measure, even their due Respects. And they must ever Renounce
the Entitling, and the Placing of themselves in the highest rooms; for this is
commanded, Luke 14.8,9,10,11. as a necessary, and becoming Piece of Christian
Modesty.

THE XVI. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works; The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World.

HAving already considered the Riches, and the Honors of this World, and how
far we are to Renounce either of them.

Thirdly, I am next to take into consideration the Pleasures of it, and to show
you in what Sense, and how far you are also to Renounce them.

Now Pleasure is that Satisfaction and Delight, which any part of our Nature
perceives, when its Appetites are gratified with what it desires. And
answerable to the several Capacities of our Nature, there are Rational,
Sensitive, Sensual, and Recreative Pleasures; of which in their Order. And,

I. As to Rational Pleasure. This is that high Satisfaction, and sweet Delight
which the Soul perceives, when it finds it self improve in Knowledge, or in
Virtue; or when it reflects upon the good it has done. And a most Excellent and
Divine Pleasure this is: And yet there is room for Renuntiation even with
respect to this. For,

First, No Man must make the end of his Knowledge to be the mere Pleasure of
Knowing; that is, we must not seek after Knowledge, purely for Knowledge-sake,
and not for the Use and Instruction of our selves and others. And therefore it
is required of a Bishop, whose Knowledge is supposed to exceed other Men's, that
he be apt to teach, 1 Timothy 3.2. Nor,

Secondly, Must that Satisfaction and Delight which arises from the Sense, and
Conscience of Good and Worthy Deeds be so much, because we are admired and
applauded for them, as because they are pleasing to God: For whatever Good we
do, if it be to the end we may be seen of Men, we shall have no reward of our
Father which is in Heaven, Matthew. 6.1.

II. Sensitive Pleasure, is when the Animal Life, or the Bodily Senses are
gratified with those Objects which are agreeable to them* and this it is lawful
to do, as may be seen, Eccl. 5.18. till such time as they be come.

III. Sensual, and that they will degenerate into, and must therefore be
Renounced, in these Cases following.

First, When we shall prefer the Pleasures of Sense, as Eating, Drinking, and
the like, in our Judgments and Desires, either before our Joy in God, or the
eternal Enjoyments of his Kingdom; whereas on the contrary, with the Holy
Psalmist, we must be able experimentally to say, The Fear of the Lord is clean,
enduring for ever, the Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous
altogether: more to be desired are they than Gold; yea, than much fine Gold,
sweeter also than Honey and the Honeycomb, Psalm. 19.9,10.

Secondly, We must Renounce it as a great sign of a Sensual Spirit, which
relishes no Enjoyments like those of Sense; when a Person may be observed to be
wholly in a manner purveying for the Belly. Do ye not yet understand, that
whatever enters into the Mouth, goes into the Belly, and is cast out into
the Draught? Mat. 15.17.

Thirdly, It must be Renounced as an high, and sinful piece of Sensuality, to
glut our Senses, so as to Surfeit on these Sweets. And this, not only because
it is most sinful in it self, but because such Sensuality is the Parent and
Cause of the most violent, and outrageous Wickednesses, that are otherwise
committed amongst Men, as may be seen, Jer. 5.7,8.

Fourthly, The Deliciousness of Sensitive Pleasures must not cause any one to
load and burden his Nature therewith, so as to render himself unfit for the
Duties of his Calling and Religion: For the only lawful end of all Pleasures in
general, as well as of Recreations in particular, is to render us not useless,
but more vigorous and lively in the Service of God, and the proper business of
our Calling: Which brings me,

IV. To consider Recreative Pleasures, and to show you what they are, and in
what Sense, and how far we are to renounce those sorts of Pleasures. Now
Recreations are Diversions of the Mind or Body from serious Business and
Employment, and being pleasures of a middle Nature, neither Good nor Evil, in
themselves, they are not absolutely to be Renounced by a Christian. But you
must know that the most innocent Recreations are to be very moderately, and
savingly used by every Disciple of Christ, because every one who will come
after him, must deny himself, Matthew. 16.24. And indeed, whoever aims at
Perfection, must sometimes use Severity in order to mortify the Corrupt
Nature. Nor may those of any Quality, think themselves excepted from such
restraints, as will be not a little uneasy to Flesh and Blood.

And thus having at length finished all that I think necessary to be said
concerning Renouncing either the World in general, or those particular Good
Things into which it is divided, viz. the Riches, Honors, and the Pleasures of
it.

Secondly, I am next to consider the Evils of the World, viz. Poverty,
Disgrace, and Afflictions, and how far, and in what Sense we much Renounce
them. And.

I. As to Poverty and Afflictions, though instead of Temptations to Sin, and
Hindrances to Virtue, those do very often prove Mortifiers of Vice, and the
great occasion of a Holy Life, yet they are often great Temptations to many
Sins and Impieties. And therefore with reference to them,

First, It behooves those who labor under Poverty, or any kind of Affliction,
to beware of Impatience and Discontent, considering that whom the Lord loves
he chastises, and scourges every Son whom he receives, Heb. 12.6.

Secondly, Those who are cast into the worst of Circumstances, must beware of
envying the outward Felicity of the Wicked, Fret not thy self against the Evil
Doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 37.1.

Thirdly, A Person that is poor, must be infinitely careful, lest to rescue
himself out of it, he be tempted to Fraud, especially not to stealing, or
purloyning, but must resolve with Job, though stripped naked of all, Not to remove
his Integrity from him, Job 27.5,6.

Fourthly, Persons must not think that because they are poor, they are ever the
more disengaged from the Service of God, and from their Attendance upon him in
all the parts of Divine Worship, remembering that our Savior applied himself
particularly to them. The Poor have the Gospel Preached unto them, Matthew. 11.5.
II. The last of this World's Evils is Disgrace, and so great a Temptation it
is, and Discouragement to do good, that it made Nicodemus come to our Savior
by Night, John 3.1,2. But this we must despise, considering, that Whosoever is
ashamed of Christ before Men, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he
comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels, Mark 8.38. And thus,
having considered both the World in general, and the Good, and Evils of it in
particular; it only remains, that I do the like.

Thirdly, and lastly, concerning some things therein of a middle Nature, viz.
the Callings, Conditions of Life, and the Cares of this World. And,

I. Let us consider the Callings of the World, and how the Temptations which
they give us, are to be Renounced. And it is requisite in the first place, to
consider that every Man is to betake himself to some Business; and his Calling
must be such as Providence has fitted him with Abilities for. And for
whatsoever Calling his peculiar Abilities do fit him, to that he is to look
upon himself as preparatively called, or appointed to by God; and lawful
Authority in Church or State, is that which must determine his Call. And then
being thus appointed to his Calling, he must employ himself therein to God's
Glory, and his own, and the Public Good. And now the Question will be, what is
to be Renounced with respect to the Callings of this World. And,

First, All Men must Renounce all such Callings, and Professions as are
directly sinful, and wicked, a thing so evident in it self, as to need no
proof. And,

Secondly, All such Callings also as tend to the Hurt, not the Good of the
Public; and consequently, nothing ought to be took up as a Calling, which
impoverishes, or corrupts, the Manners of a People.

Thirdly, Christians must Renounce all those Wicked Arts, whereby some do abuse
the most Worthy and Useful Callings, unjustly to serve their Worldly Ends. And
indeed, as every Calling has its particular Temptations belonging to it; so
what is worse, most Men think they may innocently enough comply with sinful
Methods of Gain therein, and they think it a necessary part of their Profession
so to do. But if Esau stands upon Record for a Foolish, as well as a Profane
Person, who in extremity of Hunger sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage,
Genesis 25.33,34. What is that Christian, who shall sell his Eternal Inheritance,
for a thing in comparison of no value?

Fourthly, All Levity, and Desultory Skipping from one Calling to another is to
be Renounced, according to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.20. Let every Man
abide in the same Calling wherein he was called. But above all, that change of
Callings is to be Renounced, as the highest Profaneness, where Laymen and
Tradesmen; nay, Women, as amongst the Quakers, so expressly contrary to the
Commands of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.34. do Sacrilegiously Vsurp the Sacred
Office of the Ministry, and set up for Teachers without a lawful Call, or
Ordination thereunto. Which brings me,

Fifthly, To show that any Calling whatsoever, is to be declined, for which a
Person is not qualified both by Education, Ability, Inclination, and Legal
Appointment, especially Callings of high Importance, such as the Ministry, must
be declined till all these Qualities and Qualifications concur, which are
requisite thereunto, lest the Pretenders to it fall under the same Rebuke, with
those who desiring to be Teachers, understood neither what they said, nor
whereof they affirmed, 1 Timothy 1.7.

Sixthly, Idleness in any Calling is to be Renounced: Whatsoever thy Hand
finds to do, do it with all thy Might, Eccl. 9.10. Nor is Idleness allowable
even in the Gentleman himself, as being one of the greatest Temptations that is
to Sin, and in it self a very great Sin, the idle Person, especially if one of
Quality and Fortunes in the World, being one that has Powers given him, but
hides his Talents in the Earth, Matthew. 25.25. And Lastly, No Man must live
above his Calling, as that which exposes to many Temptations, and often leads
Men into the most sinful Courses. The

II. Amongst those things of the World of a middle Nature, which are to be
considered, are the different Conditions and States of Men therein. And the
greatest part of Mankind are in the State, either of Masters, or Servants. And
the whole World are either Single or Married Persons. And,

1. As to the state and condition of a Master. He is one who has great
Advantages of doing Good. But all that Dominion is to be utterly Renounced
amongst Christians, which treats Servants no better than Slaves and Beasts,
Knowing that both have a Master in Heaven, with whom there is no respect of
Persons, Ephesians. 6.9.

2. As to the state of Servitude, it is not in it self unhappy; only first, it
concerns those who are to live by a service, to Renounce and Refuse such
Services as a state of shrewd Temptations, where a great deal of Wickedness is
practiced without control, and little of the fear of God is to be seen amongst
Masters and Servants: And, Secondly, If a Servant happen into an irreligious
Family, he must put on a steadfast Resolution, as Joseph in the House of
Potiphar, Genesis 39.8. to preserve his Innocence.

3. The next State, and that wherein the greatest part of Mankind in this World
are found, is the state of Celibacy, or the single Life. And this, though it is
advantageous to Devotion, and is safest in times of distress, yet even this
state must be Renounced, and forsaken by those who cannot contain, according to
the Advice of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.9. And,

4. In the Married State, which is ordained by God, Matthew. 19.4. First, All
solicitations from either of the Married Couple must be Renounced, whereby they
would persuade either the other against the discharge of any Christian Duty, or
to the commission of any Sin. And Secondly, Even in the Married State all those
Worldly Cares which choke up, or disturb Devotion, must be utterly laid aside,
as will be showed under the next. And,

Last of those things pertaining to this World, which afford great Matter of
Temptation to us, viz. The Cares thereof. These are indeed in some measure
necessary, and we are not to be slothful in business, Romans 12.11. But First, It
concerns Christians to Renounce that Multiplicity of Worldly Cares, which
distract their Thoughts, and show them to have no other aim, but at this World.
And, Secondly, it behooves us so far to Renounce any Worldly Care, as is does
alienate our Affections from God, and Heavenly Things, and does withdraw our
Attention from him in the Services we are bound to pay him, rememb'ring how
Martha was chid by our Savior for cumb'ring her self too much with such Cares,
to the hind'ring of her Attention to our Savior's Discourses, Luke
10.40,41,42. And indeed, Lastly, All Persons whatsoever, whether more or less
engaged in wordly Cares, when grown in Years, should wholly, in a manner, throw
them off; and retiring as much as may be from the World, should employ the
remainder of their Time in clearing their Accounts with God and Man; and in
preparing themselves for the Trial of the great Day. To whom particularly may
be applied the Advice of the Prophet, Set thy House in order, for thou shall
die, and not live, 2 Kings 20.1.

THE XVII. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World.

I Have at last explained, and showed you how far, and in what sense you are to
Renounce the World. And now,

Secondly, I am to give you a survey likewise of the Wicked World, and to show
you in what sense, and how far you are to Renounce the wicked World.

Now, by the wicked World can properly be meant no other than wieked Men, there
being no Creature upon Earth besides Man, that is capable of doing any thing
morally Good or Evil, so as to be styled from the latter, Wicked. Nor is it
every Sinner who in the Language of the Scripture, or in common Account, may be
called a wicked Man. But it must be some one of a more than ordinary Impiety,
so as to approach something near to Satan himself in Sin and Wickedness, who
can deserve so black a Character. Now, the Devil is often termed the wicked
One; and particularly, Matthew. 13.19. he is so styled upon the Account of his
Tempting others to Sin. And upon the same account therefore, those do more
peculiarly deserve the Character of wicked Men, who are not only guilty of
notorious Crimes themselves, but make it a part of their business to Corrupt,
and Tempt others to Sin.

And now you must heartily Renounce, and refuse to conform your selves to those
wicked Men, either, First, By becoming Tempters your selves of other People.
Or, Secondly, By yielding of your selves to be overcome by other Men's
Temptations. And,

I. You must Renounce that Diabolical Wickedness of becoming Tempters your
selves of other Persons. Renounce, do I say? You must Abhor, Abominate, and
Detest this their Wickedness of Corrupting others, and of Tempting them to Sin,
as being a practice which of all others will render you likest the Devil; and
such a Wretch will find himself treated with unusual Indignation and Language
upon that Account, as may be seen, Acts 13.8,9,10.

And indeed, it must bring a dreadful Guilt upon that Man, who shall be found
an Instrument of another Damnation. It being an Injury to Men's Souls, in some
Cases hardly ever, in others impossible to be repaired. These Tempters are the
Persons by whom Offenses come. And what says our Savior to such? Whosoever shall
Offend one of these Little Ones, which believe in me, it were better for him
that a Millstone were hanged about his Neck, and he were cast into the midst of
the Sea, Matthew. 18.6. So that of all things in the World, it concerns you to
take care you never become Tempters of others to Sin, and either to Omit that
which is good, or to Commit that which is Evil.

II. Nor does it less concern you to refuse Conforming your selves to wicked
Men, when they shall tempt you, which they will endeavor to do several ways;
namely, by their Examples, by their Company, by their Flatteries, by their
Discouragements and Encouragements, by their Persuasions, and by their Customs.
And,

First, You must Renounce or Refuse to Conform your selves to the evil Examples
of wicked Men, which would influence you to Sin. Examples have the greatest
Influence upon Men's Practices, especially in these four Cases. If 1st. they are
the Examples of Sin. If 2dly, they are Common and many. If 3dly, they are the
Examples of such, for whom we have a great Esteem. And if 4thly, they are the
Examples of those of whom we stand in Awe. But however,

1. We must by all means Renounce and Refuse Conformity to such bad Examples;
for why? First, A Christian is called out to combat against the wicked Examples
of the World, as much as against any one sort of Enemy in his Christian
Warfare: Like Elisha who preserved himself a true Worshipper of the True God,
though he thought there was not one Man left in Israel, who had not bowed his
knee to Baal, 1 Kings 19.14. Nay, Secondly, a Christian is to confront the bad
Examples of the World, with a good Example of his own, and in the midst of an
Evil and Adulterous Generation, he must show himself an excellent Example of
Religion and Virtue. And therefore to this purpose we are to let our Light
shine before Men, that they may see our good Works, and glorify our Father
which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.16.

Secondly, You must refuse to conform your selves, as to the Examples, so to
the Company of wicked Men, when happening into ill Company, they would entice you
to join with them in sin. Alas, the Company of wicked Men is extremely
infectious, insomuch that most of the more heinous Miscarriages of your greater
Sinners are owing to it. It is this which makes Men Atheists, Libertines,
Thieves, and Robbers, Drunkards, and Sabbath Breakers. In short, the Evil
Communications of bad Company corrupt all good Manners, 1 Cor. 15.33. and
therefore it does infinitely concern you to take the Advice of the Wise Man,
Prove. 1.10,11. My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not; nay, my Son
walk not in the way with them, refrain thy Foot from their Path. Particularly,
1st. I would advise you who are Young Women, to shun the corrupt Communication
of those Young Men whose Conversation, when they meet together, is such
Filthiness, and Foolish Talking and Jesting, which are not convenient, and are
forbid, Ephesians. 5.3,4,5. to be so much as once named amongst Christians. 2. And
indeed, it concerns all Persons of either Sex, both Young and Old, considering
how insensibly the Tincture of those Persons Manners and Humors with whom we
do much converse, does glide into our Imitation; it concerns therefore, I say,
all Persons, as much as it is possible, to avoid the Society of wicked Men, who
not only do ill things themselves, but take pleasure in them that do them, Romans
1.32. But, 3. If your necessary Occasions, and the Nature of your Employment
shall draw you forth into the World, then that which you have to do, is
absolutely to refuse to conform your selves to the Manners of evil Company,
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 12.2. Be not conformed to this World.
Nay, but on the contrary, you must first discountenance their Profaneness and
Riot: Secondly, you must endeavor prudently to divert 'em from both, by useful
Discourse: Thirdly, and when these Methods fail, you must openly reprove 'em.

To do this Service to God, though it is what we have listed our selves in our
Baptism, under Jesus Christ the Great Captain of our Salvation, to perform, is
what we shall be much discouraged from by Men. But however we have vast
Encouragements given us by God, to be thus faithful to the Honor and Interest
of his Government. It is what in Scripture is called a Confessing of him: And
our Savior assures us, that if we shall confess him before Men, he will
confess us before our Father which is in Heaven. Matthew. 10.32.

THE XVIII. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, The Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World.

THE thing I am now upon, is to lay before you the Temptations of the wicked
Men of this World, and to show you in what Sense, and how far you must
Renounce, both them and their wicked ways of tempting others to Sin. And the
force of their Evil Examples, and Evil Customs I have already showed you. And
now,

Thirdly, I am to consider the Influence of their Flatteries, and to show you
how you must Renounce, and Resist them. And truly Flattery is a very great
Temptation to, and occasion of Men's continuance in sin. The ground thereof is
that immoderate Self-Love which most Men have of themselves, and which makes
them apt to believe every Man their Enemy, who will tell them the Truth, Gal.
4.16. And the Flatterer observing this, does therefore compose himself to
admire and extol, or at leastwise to approve, as very well done, the very bad
Actions of him, he thus imposes upon, or at least such Practices as if good in
themselves, are very indifferently performed. And thus Flattery keeping Men
ignorant of the good or ill Qualities in them, thereupon the good never comes
to perfection, and the ill that is in them becomes incorrigible. And indeed it
is this wicked Flattery which among all Ranks and Degrees of Men, does
strengthen the Hands of the Wicked, so that he shall not turn from his wicked
way, Ezekiel. 13.22. so mischievous a Temptation is Flattery. And therefore you
must utterly Renounce it, as you will avoid the ill Effects of it, And in order
thereunto,

1. You must see that you cashier every vain Opinion of your selves. For it is
this Inbred Flattery we give our selves, which disposes, and prepares us to a
more favorable Reception of it from others; Be not therefore wise in your own
Conceits, Romans 12.16.

2. And having thus dispossessed your Breast of an immoderate Self-love, you must
so far renounce and reject the Flatteries of other Men, as to take it kindly
when you are Reproved, remembering that he who hates Reproof shall die, Prove.
15.10. And especially the Reproofs of God's Ministers are to be kindly received
and regarded, remembering that he whom Solomon represents as mourning at the
last, when his Flesh, and his Bones are consumed, was one who in his Heart
despised Reproof that obeyed not the Voice of his Teachers, nor inclined his
Ear to them that instructed him, Prove. 5.11,12,13.

Fourthly, Wicked Men will proceed farther to tempt others to sin, even by
their false and fallacious arguings against the necessity of a Holy Life. By
these they would fain persuade themselves and others into such easy Notions of
God and Religion, as that they may sin with more security, and less fear. And
they are a powerful Temptation to sin in all times, for why such Arguments as
these Men are ready, and prepared to believe, because they love the thing they
plead for, they favor their Lusts, and grant them so much liberty in what they
long for, the satisfying the Flesh, and enjoying the World. But it concerns you
to resist those false and fallacious Arguments, be they never so specious,
which do in the least favor your yielding to sin; for there is nothing more
plain in Scripture, than that every Sin must with all possible care be avoided.
It tells us that we must Deny All Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live
Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present World, Tit. 2.12. And that all
true Christians, having such mighty Rewards and Promises, must be cleansed from
All filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2
Cor. 7.1.

Fourthly, Wicked Men will add Kindnesses and Promises to oblige us to do ill
things; and on the contrary, will much Discourage, nay will often with
Threatenings compel you to commit sin, or to omit your Duty. And indeed
Kindnesses are very apt to Incline easy Tempers, Promises to Corrupt
unfaithful Dispositions, Discouragements to cool Men's Zeal in their Duty, and
Threatenings to force their Compliance with Sin. But neither let Kindnesses
Corrupt you, nor Promises Bribe you either to Commit what is Evil, or to Omit
what God Commands, considering how very unprofitable a Bargain it will be,
though a Man should gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, Mark 8.36. Nor
let Discouragement slacken you in, nor the Threatenings of a Mortal Man force
you from your Duty; yea, though he could kill the Body, but be afraid of
displeasing him rather, who is able to destroy both Body and Soul in Hell,
Matthew. 10.28.

Lastly, A very prevailing Temptation to sin, wherewith wicked Men will
constrain others to join with them therein, are the Evil Customs of the World.
And they are the more prevalent, because Custom is apt to take off the Sense
and Fear of hurt in the most unchristian Practices. But a Christian must
courageously, and vigorously Renounce, and withstand the force of all sinful
Customs whatsoever, especially such as are Immoral. And indeed there will be
the greatest Courage required to the discharge of this part of a Christian's
Warfare, Cowardice, and a fear of Reproaches, being, I am persuaded, the only
cause of most Men's complying with even the Barbarous Custom of Duelling in
vindication of their Honor, and of many other of their sinful Courses. But
true Courage and Bravery (as Philosophy and Religion, and the sober Reason of
all Wise Men tell us) will despise the vain Opinions of the Unthinking and
Impious Crowd, which, for the most part are in the wrong; and will steadily
pursue what is Virtuous and Fit, and Reasonable, and Religious, notwithstanding
the foolish Reproaches of the many. And a truly Christian Spirit will signalize
himself by such a close siding with Christ, and his Laws, as being persuaded
that he who thus nobly Confesses him before Men, the same will the Son of Man
Confess, and own as a Faithful Servant, and applaud as a Noble Confessor,
before the Angels of God, Luke 12.8.

THE XIX. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and his Works, the Pomps and Vanity
of this wicked World.

HAving fully surveyed the World, and all therein contained, that is fit to be
Renounced by every Christian; and also represented to you those Temptations
which are given by the wicked World, and how we must Resist them; I come now to
explain to you, what is to be understood by the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked
World, and to show you, how much it behooves every Christian to Renounce, and to
Despise them. And, First, We will consider Pomps. Secondly, The Vanity of this
wicked World. And,


First, As to Pomps, thereby were anciently meant those Pompous Spectacles,
Plays, and Scenical Representations exhibited in the Roman Theaters, which
because they were so Lewd, Cruel, and Impious, the Primitive Bishops and
Fathers of the Church strictly enjoined all Christians at their Baptism, not to
frequent, or so much as to be once present, or ever seen at them.

And answerable to these are our Modern Plays acted in the Play Houses, which
are no less inferior to the ancient ones in Impiety and Lewdness, than they
are in Show and Pompousness. And having such a malignant Influence upon Faith
and Manners, as is owned by almost all Persons, and is generally complained
that they have, they ought never to be frequented by Christians; and it may be
very well looked upon as a breach of your Baptismal Vow, and Covenant, for any
of you to be hereafter present at them.

Secondly, By Pomps in the Sense of the Ancients, were meant the Solemn
Processions of the Heathens in Honor of their Gods, at which to be present was
an Offense, for which that Christian should be cut off from the Church. And not
unanswerable to those are the Processions of the Papists in Honor to their
Saints, and which must not therefore out of Curiosity, or Fear, be joined in by
our Protestant Travelers, when they are abroad; for if they should join, though
compelled thereunto by force, in the Adoration of those Images, and shall
rather comply than suffer, they will be wanting in Confessing Christ, and his
Truth when Called thereunto, which is so much every Man's Duty, as has been
already proved.

Thirdly, By Pomps, reductively may be understood the Revels, and Drunken Riots
common at Wakes and Festivals, which because of the Wantonness an Excesses
usual at them, all sober Christians will make it a part of Religion, to keep
away from. Not but that innocent Hospitality, as well as Thankfulness to God
for the Blessings then commemorated, may be seasonable at such times. And so
much for the Pomps of the World to be Renounced by us.

Secondly, And as the Pomps, so you are also to Renounce the Vanity of this
World. And what that is will appear in these Cases following.

1. When Persons outgo their Ability in Building and Furniture, a piece of
Vanity forbid, Jer. 22.13,14.

2. When they vainly affect the uppermost Places, and strive for Precedence, so
contrary to the Commands of our Savior, Mark 12.38,39. This Vanity appears
when Persons Affect, or are Pleased with Titles of Respect and Honor above
their Degree and Quality, and desire to be Esteemed by others more Good and
Virtuous than they really are in themselves, a temper of Mind so contrary to
what was found in their Lord and Master, who, though he was Lord of all, yet came
not to be Ministered unto, but to Minister, Mat. 20.28. And who though he did no
sin, neither was guile found in his Mouth, yet when he was reviled, reviled not
again, 1 Pet. 2.22,23. And,

Lastly, This sinful Vanity fit to be Renounced, does appear in the Affectation
of Costly Apparel and Ornaments, when Persons exceed what becomes their Rank
and Degree in what they wear, when they are proud of their Ornaments, and
puffed up like Herod when he was Arrayed in Royal Aparel, Acts 12.21. When they
Adorn themselves to undue Ends and Purposes; namely to inflame Lust in the
Beholders, like her mentioned Prove. 7.10. Who met Men in the Attire of an
Harlot. And,

Lastly, When they spend too much time, the time they should bestow in the
Affairs and Business of their Families, and when they deck themselves at
unfiting Seasons, viz. when they should be at the Worship of God, whether
Public or Private, which is often almost over before some can part with their
Glass. In all these forementioned Cases, I say, does Vanity appear, a Vanity
which must be Renounced by the Disciples of the Humble and Self-denying Savior
of Mankind.

It is indeed very hard, if not impossible, nicely to fix the precise Bounds to
Persons in the matter of Apparel, Ornaments, and the like: But the truest and
safest Rule is Decency, and that measured according to what is suitable to the
Age, Sex, or Quality; always taking the more sober and virtuous for our Partern
in such Cases.

THE XX. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World; and all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

HAving explained to you the full meaning of Renouncing the Devil and all his
Works; as also the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, which are two of
those formidable Enemies we are Listed under Christ to encounter, it remains
now only to consider the

Third and last, viz. the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, how far we are also bound
to Renounce them. And thus to know our selves, especially our Natural
Imperfections, as this will give us occasion; so it is the most useful part of
Knowledge; and for the more full discovery of so important a Subject, 1. I will
show you what is meant by the Flesh. 2. What by the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.
3. What by All the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.
And together with each of these, I will also declare unto you, in what sense
and how far we are to Renounce the Flesh, and all its sinful Lusts And,

First, Let us enquire what is meant by the Flesh, and in what sense, and how
far we are to Renounce the Flesh. There is nothing so differently expressed in
Scripture as this is; it is called the Old Man, the First Adam, the Natural
Man, Evil Concupiscence, and lastly the Flesh. And thereby is meant,

The whole unregenerate Nature of Man, spoiled as to its Original Frame and
Constitution, and despoiled of that Image of God, consisting in the Perfection,
Order, and Purity of all his Faculties, whereby he was Originally making
toward God his chief End, and Happiness: And it is that Corruption of his
Nature and Faculties, whereby he is inordinately bent in all the tendencies of
Soul and Body, and all the Faculties and Powers thereof, toward the Creature.
And, 1. I say, by the Flesh is meant the whole unregenerate Nature of Man, Soul
and Body; for even the former is said to be Fleshly, Col. 2.18. But, 2. Thereby
is meant the whole Man, not as Created by God, for God made Man upright, Eccl.
7.29. but as he is now in a state of Corrupted Nature; that is, 3. As spoiled
in its Original Frame and Constitution, as despoiled of the Image of God, and
as inordinately tending toward the Creature.


Now the Original Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature was this, namely, the
whole Nature of Man was perfect in all its parts, the Understanding quick in
discovering momentous and weighty Truths, the Conscience faithful in dictating
right ways, the Will entirely Obedient to the Directions of Conscience and
Reason: The Affections placed upon right and worthy Objects, and both
Affections, Lusts and Appetites, always under the Power and Government of right
Reason. And in the Perfection, Order and Purity of all the Faculties and Powers
of Soul and Body, according to this Original Frame and Constitution, did the
Image of God, in which he was first Created, consist. And so long as he
continued thus, it is plain the whole Bent and Inclination of the Soul was
toward God.

But now in the unregenerate Nature, I say, that excellent Frame and
Constitution wherein Man was originally created, is miserably broken, the
Affections, Lusts and Appetites rebelling against the Reason and Conscience, so
that he sees a Law in his Members warring against the Law in his Mind, and
bringing him into Captivity to the Law of Sin which is in his Members, Rom,
8.2,3. And consequently the Image of God consisting in the Order and good
Harmony of the several Faculties and Powers of Humane Nature is miserably
defaced. And lastly, the tendency and bent of all the Faculties both of Soul
and Body is not toward God, but toward the Creature; for they who are after
the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh, Romans 8.5. and do mind earthly
things, Phil. 3.19. And now this being the meaning of the Flesh, it is easy to
perceive, that,

1. To renonuce the Flesh, is to be renewed in the whole Frame and Constitution
of our Nature, to our former State, and after the Image of God; or as the
Apostle words it, Ephesians. 4.22,23,24. It is to put off concerning our former
Conversation, the Old Man, which is corrupt according to the deceitful Lusts,
and it is to be renewed in the Spirit of our Mind, and to put on the New Man,
which according to God, is created in Righteousness, and true Holiness. Not but
that so long as we continue in this mortal State, some Relics of Sin and
Corruption will still remain within us; so that we cannot become in all
respects Perfect, whilst on Earth, and have the Image of God perfectly
restored. But the Image of God, to which we must be renewed in our
Regeneration, though it cannot attain to that Perfection of Degrees in which we
had it before; yet it must indispensibly have the Perfection of Parts, as
Divines do distingush; that is, we must have an universal Inclination to all
that is Holy, Just, and Good, and an universal Aversion in Body, Mind, and
Spirit to all Sin: Thus far we must Renounce the Flesh, and be conformed to the
Image of his Son, Romans 8.29. And then,

2. We must so Renounce the Flesh, as to be Converted in the whole Bent and
Inclination of the Soul toward God. This being the true Property of the
Regenerate Nature to be exalted above all worldly Things, and to be carried out
in our Love and Affection toward God. And accordingly the First of all the
Commandments, we are told, is this, to Love the Lord our God with all our
Heart, and with all our Souls, and with all our Minds, and with all our
Strength, Mark. 12.30

THE XXI. LECTURE.
First, That I should Renounce the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanity of this wicked World; And all the Sinful Lusts of the Flesh.

YOU have seen what is meant by the Flesh. I am therefore now,

Secondly, To give you, in like manner, the full meaning and importance of the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and to show you in what sense, and how far we are to
Renounce them. And as by the Flesh is meant the whole unregenerate Nature, Soul
as well as Body, in this its corrupt state; so proportionably by the sinful
Lusts of the Flesh, must be understood all the Faculties and Powers of this
corrupted Natture, as well the Faculties of the Soul, the Understanding and
Will, as the Bodily Powers, viz. the Affections, Lusts, and Appetites. Every
Faculty and Power of Soul and Body is properly enough termed a Lust, as it
craves and desires its Object; and they are all of them sinful Lusts of the
Flesh, just as the whole unregenerate Nature was said to be Flesh, that is
either, 1. As those several Faculties of the Soul do move downwards from God
and Heavenly Things, immediately and immoderately toward the Creatures. Or, 2.
As the Inferior and Bodily Powers, the Affections, Lusts and Appetites, do
disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculty of the Understanding and Reason,
and do carry the Will into Slavery to 'em. And as to the Faculties moving
downwards.


I. Consider we the Mind, whose proper Appetit is after Knowledge; and this
very desire of Knowledge becomes a sinful Lust of the fleshly Mind, and such as
must be Renounced by us, in these Cases following, First, When we are desirous
to know things which are either hurtful to be known, as the Experimental
Knowledge of Evil or Sin, the thing that ruined our first Parents; or when our
Curiosity gives us a strange Itch to know Hidden things, such as are not proper
for Man to know, as the Decrees of Predestination, and the Counsels of God's
Will, which are the Ark that no Mortal Eye, ought to look into, and is forbid,
Deuteronomy, 29.29. Secondly, This Appetite of the Mind, the desire of Knowledge,
becomes a sinful Lust of the Flesh, when Persons immoderately Study to be
exquisitly skilled in whatever Arts and Sciences, to the neglect, or contempt
of Divine Knowledge; whereas the Knowledge of the Christian Religion, and all
that concerns our Immortal Happiness, ought to be much preferred to any other;
for which reason the Apostle did so earnestly pray that his Colossians might be
filled with the Knowledge of the Divine Will in all Wisdom and Spiritual
Understanding, and might increase in the Knowledge of God, Col. 1.9,10. And
Thirdly, We must Renounce it as a sinful and fleshly Lust of a corrupted and
depraved Mind, when out of pride, Prejudice, and a Contradiction to all sacred
Truths, Men set up their own Carnal Imaginations and fleshly Reasonings against
those Spiritual Notions, and those Mysterious Articles of our Faith, which are
delivered to us in Scripture. Which being so Rebellious a Lust as it is against
God, we must cast down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the Knowledge of God, and must bring in every Thought to the Obedience
of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5.

II. And as in the Mind and Understanding, so in the Will, there is this innate
Corruption resiing in that Faculty, which renders it Fleshly, and tending in
all its Choices toward the Creature, and so the proper matter of a Christian's
Renunciation. The Will, whilst we remain unregenerate, is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be, Romans 8.7. But in its corrupt State, being
always averse to the Directions of God's Laws and right Reason, it perversely
chooses those things which please only the Senses, and so becomes in the most
proper and immediate sense of the Word, a sinful and fleshly Lust. But we must
bring our selves to that habit of Self-denial, so as readily to submit to God's
Laws, to be governed by them, and that in the hardest Instances, as did Abraham
the Father of the Faithful, when God commanded him even to slay his only Son
Isaac, Genesis 22.10.

III. The Affections in the Carnal Man do sadly degenerate into what may too
properly be called the sinful Lusts of the Flesh. These Passions and Affections
of ours, such as Love and Hatred, are then right as they should be, when, 1st.
we place them upon proper Objects; or, 2dly, when we steer them toward the
thing we love, with Desires proportionable to the Good that is in the Object;
that is, when the best, and greatest, and most worthy things are pursued with
our chiefest and intensest Affections, things of a middle Nature, with less
eager Passions, and the lowest of all Goods with the least Desires.

But, 1st, These Affections of Love and Hatred, and all the rest, must be
utterly Renounced, and subdued, which we shall find our selves to have
misplaced upon wrong Objects; that is, instead of Loving, we must utterly Hate
and Abhor all Sin, and sinful Pleasures; so the Psalmist, Psalm. 97.10. Ye that
love the Lord hate Evil.

2. And we must Renounce and subdue our Affections, so far as we find them
disproportionate to the true Worth and Evil that is in those Objects, toward
which it is lawful to be well or evilly Affected in moderate Degrees; that is,
we must not love God, with an Inferior degree of Affection, and worldly Things,
with a Superior; but as God is the Supreme Good in himself, and the Author of
all the Good we enjoy; we must therefore love him accordingly with the
intensest Degrees of Affection; so Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy
God with all thy Heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind.

III. The last of these Powers of our corrupted Nature, which are here to be
Renounced, are our Lusts and Appetites, which in a state of Unregeneracy are
indeed most directly and immediately, no other than so many sinful Lusts of the
Flesh. And must therefore be so far renounced by us, that First we must not
give our Appetites a Loose after undue Objects, for Christians must relish
better Things than to make Provision to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, Romans
13.15. Nor, Secondly, must we Christians gratify the Cravings of our Appetites
in Eating and Drinking to undue Measures, but indeed must take great heed to
our selves, lest at any time our Hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness, and so that Day come upon us unawares, Luke 21.34. But especially,
Thirdly, it behooves Christians to Renounce those which are peculiarly called
the Lusts of the Flesh; whether, 1st, Lusting after a strange Woman: Or, 2dly,
after a Man's own Wife in unlawful Measures; for Fornication, and all
Uncleanness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints; for this
know, that no Whoremonger, nor unclean Person, has any Inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.3,5. And thus I have fully considered
those several Faculties ahd Powers both of Soul and Body, as they become so
many sinful Lusts of the Flesh, by moving downwards from God and Heavenly
Things, immoderately toward the Creature.

Secondly, And now I am to consider the Lower Faculties, viz. the Affections,
Lusts, and Appetites, as so many sinful Lusts of the Flesh, under another
Notion, and as they do disorderly Rebel against the Superior Faculties of the
Understanding and Reason, and do carry the Will into Slavery to them. And these
we are to Renounce, by subduing them to the Government of Religion and Reason;
by which means we shall reduce Man in some measure to his Primitive State of
Innocence and Integrity, which is the great Design of Christianity. We must
subdue, I say, the Flesh, with all its Lusts and Appetites, its Passions and
Affections, all our fond and foolish Imaginations, and false Prejudices, to the
Power and Conduct of right Reason, enlightened by the Word and Spirit of God,
remembering that We are Debtors, not to the Flesh, to live after the Flesh; for
if we live after the Flesh, we shall die; but if we through the Spirit do
mortify the Deeds of the Body, we shall live, Romans 8.12,13. which brings me to
the

Last Particular proposed to be explained, and that is to show you, What is
meant by Renouncing All the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, and in what Sense, and
how far, we must Renounce them All. And, in a word, by Renouncing All the
sinful Lusts of the Flesh, can be understood no less, than that we must indulge
no part, nor Faculty of our corrupt Nature in the Transgression of any of God's
Commands. There must be no Fleshly Lust suffered to reign in us, for the Wrath
of God is revealed from Heaven against All Ungodliness, and Vnrightiousness of
Men, Romans 1.18. And particularly, our Care and Business must be to oppose Lusts
of Temper and Constitution, which Matthew. 5.29,30. is called a cutting off the
Right Hand, and a plucking out the Right-eye; which because it is an hard
Doctrine to carnal Men, the Necessity of it is much endeavored to be evaded
and shisted off, by perverting the meaning of the Word of God.

And so I have at length thoroughly explained to you this important Subject of
Renouncing the Devil, the World, and the Flesh. And from what has been said
upon it, it does appear, that as the State you have Listed your selves in your
Baptism is a state of Warfare; so now you have in some competent Measure been
instructed how you may conquer and subdue all your Spiritual Enemies; or as
your Catechisin expresses it, how you may Renounce the Devil, and all his
Works; the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World; and all the sinful Lusts of
the Flesh.

THE XXII. LECTURE.
Secondly, That I should believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.

HAving explained to you the First of those Conditions required on our parts in
the Covenant of Grace, viz. That we should Renounce the Devil, etc. I come now
in like manner to explain to you the

Second, Which is, that we believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith. In
commenting upon which Words, I. I will declare to you what is meant by
Articles. II. What it is to Believe them; and then, III. That we must believe
them All. And,


First, I am to declare to you something in general concerning the Nature of
these Articles, or Christian Truths, which are to be Believed. The whole Bible,
both Old and New Testament, is the Object of a Christian's Faith, because All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, 2 Timothy 3.16. But there being some
Truths Revealed in Holy Writ, of greater Importance and Concernment to us than
others, because they do more immediately, and directly tend to give us due and
worthy Apprehensions of God, and to Instruct us in the only sure Method of
Salvation, by Jesus Christ; and because they are the strongest Motives to a
Holy Life; for these Reasons these Truths are peculiarly called the Articles of
our Christian Faith, and must therefore be more peculiarly and explicitly
believed by us. And what those Articles are, you have summed up out of the
Scriptures, and given you in that Form of sound Words which we call the Creed.

Secondly, And now I am to show you, what it is to Believe those Articles, so
as to make you capable of Life and Happiness. And you must be so thoroughly and
firmly persuaded of their undoubted Truth, as to be accordingly Influenced by
the Belief thereof, to the practice of Good Works, and then to betake your
selves to Jesus Christ to Intercede with his Father for his Gracious Acceptance
of the Good that is in you.

1. I say, your Belief of these Articles must be Operative and Practical; it
must be such a Faith as does move and influence you to Good Works, or that
works by Love. Gal. 5.6.

Such was the Faith of Abraham, who by his Belief in God was excited to the
highest, and the hardest Act of Obedience that was possible to be performed;
for Heb. 11.17,18. we read, that by Faith Abraham when be was Tried, Offered up
Isaac, and he that received the Promises offered up his only Son, and he a Son
too in whom God had promised him great Blessings; and yet, at God's Command, he
readily Obeyed, believing however, that God would be as good as his Promise to
him, though it was by raising him again from the Dead.

And, indeed, Faith is always an Operative and Active Principle, whenever the
Things Believed are of great Importance, or Concernment to us. And such it is
certain the Articles of our Christian Faith are, they being all of 'em so many
Motives, and those the most powerful in the World, to stir us up to a diligent
Reformation of our Hearts and Lives. Every one that has this Hope, or Faith in
God, Purifieth himself, even as God is pure. 1 John 3.3.

2. The Belief of the Articles of our Christian Faith must be such, as withal
causes us to betake our selves to Jesus Christ, to intercede with God the
Father, for the acceptance of our good Works; for God has sent forth his Son
to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood, to declare his Righteousness
for the Remission of Sins, that are past, through the Forbearance of God. Romans
3.25.

Lastly, And now I am to show you, what it is to Believe All the Articles of
our Christian Faith. And,

1. To Believe them All, does import, that we must assent with an undoubted
Persuasion of their Truth, and Divine Authority to All, and every one, of those
Great Articles of Christianity, contained in the Apostle's Creed, that Form of
Doctrine which was delivered to the Christians. Romans 6.17. And,

2. To Believe them All, is also to be fully persuaded of All, and every one,
of those single Truths contained in each of those Articles. And an Heretic may
be so by Believing only one of those sacred Truths which are contained in an
Article, if so be there are any more of great Consequence to be Believed
therein: Thus, for instance, To Believe that Jesus Christ was Crucified, Dead,
and Buried, does import, both that he died a Sacrifice for the Atonement of our
Sins, according to that of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.18. Christ once suffered for
Sins, the Just for the Unjust; And it does also imply, that he died to draw us
off from Sin, and to purchase Mercy for us, on condition of our sincere
Obedience. For he himself bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree, that we
being dead unto Sin, should live unto Righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.24. And now the
Antinomian does Fundamentally Err in the Faith for Believing the First without
the Second; and the Socinian for Believing the Second without the First; so
that to Believe All the Articles of the Christian Faith, the Second of those
Conditions required of us in the Covenant of Grace, does imply not only that we
are to Believe every one of those Articles, but every Divine Truth contained in
each.

THE XXIII. LECTURE.
Thirdly, That I should obey G^d's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the Days of my Life.

THIS is the Third of those Conditions required on our side in our Baptismal
Covenant. And that I may fully, and to the best purpose, explain this to you, I
will, First, Lay before you what it is to Obey God's Holy Will and
Commandments; or how far you must be Obedient to the Holy Will and Commandments
of God, as ever you will hope to obtain Salvation, or to be Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven. Secondly, I will show you what it is to walk in the same all
the Days of your Life; or how long you must persevere in such Obedience. And
this you must to the end of your Lives. Thirdly, I will clear the Doctrine of
Evangelical Obedience, as so stated, from those Doubts that may be raised
against it. And,


I. As to the Nature and Measures of Christian Obedience, It is a sincere and
entire Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel. Sincere it must be, by being a
true and undissembl'd Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and
seigned Pretense of Obeying him, when in reality we only serve our own selves,
or our own Lusts and Interests. Entire it must be, by being the Obedience of
the whole Man, to the whole Will of God, and that at all Times; with this
abatement of Rigor, that all our unwilling and involuntary Failings, which,
through Ignorance or Frailty we commit, shall, upon our Prayers to God, be
forgiven us; and even our wilful Transgressions, when we repent of, and forsake
them, through the Mediation of Christ, and the Grace of the Gospel, shall not
be imputed to our Condemnation. And,

1. Our Obedience to all the Laws of the Gospel, must be sincere, by being a
true and undissembled Service of God, opposite to all Hypocrisy, or a false and
feigned Pretense of Obeying him, when in reality we only serve our own selves.
The Lord thy God requires of thee to Love, that is, to Serve him, With all thy
Heart, and with all thy Soul, Matthew 22 37. which shows, that God accepts not of
a heartless Service, nor accounts himself Obeyed by what was never intended for
him.

Not that God does forbid us intending in some measure our own Advantage in the
Performance of his Commands; for the greatest Saints we read of, had a respect
to the Recompense of Reward Heb. 11.26. But,

1. That Man's Obedience is Insincere, who, together with his Intention of
serving God, joins another ^ntention of serving Sin, as those who made long
Prayers, the better to enable them under that sanctified Disguise to devour
Widows Houses. Mark 12,40. And,

2. When a Person shall design some Temporal Ends in his Virtuous Practices, as
much, or more than he intends God's Service; for, in respect of our Love to
God, we must even hate Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, the dearest
Interests and Concerns we have in this World. Luke 14.26.

2. Evangelical Obedience must be Entire; that is, First, The Obedience of the
whole Man. Secondly, To the whole Law. And, Thirdly, Performed at all Times.
And,

First, It must be the Obedience of the whole Man. Thus our Savior states the
Measures of it, Luke 10.27. Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy
Heart, or Will, with all thy Soul, or Affections, with all thy Strength, or
Bodily Powers, and with all thy Mind, or Understanding. And, 1st, we must Love
and Serve him with all our Mind, or Understanding; that is, all the Thoughts
and Imaginations, all the Contrivances and Counsels of our Hearts must be
governed by, and kept in Obedience to the Laws of the Gospel, or we must bring
into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. And as
with all our Minds, so, 2dly, With all our Wills: For the Choice, as well as
the Practice of our Duty, is necessary to render it acceptable with God; for
Instance, Whosoever looks on a Woman, to lust after her, has committed
Adultery with her in his Heart, Matthew. 5.28. So that a wicked Will is in God's
Sight, as well Criminal, as a wicked Act 3dly, As we will render our Obedience
that of the whole Man, and thereby acceptable to God, we must regulate our
Souls and Affections, conforming them wholly to what God Commands. No Man, says
our Savior, Matthew. 6.24. can serve two Masters; for if he Loves the one, he
will Hate the other. By this he lets us know, that our Love and Obedience must
go together. And, Lastly, We must obey God with all our Strength, or bodily
Powers; and it is not a mere Approbation, and Love to the Ways of God will be
enough. Little Children, says St. John, Ephesians. 3.7. Let no Man deceive you, he
that does Righteousness is Righteous; that is, you must not be flattered by
your selves, nor others, as if any Thing less than doing and acting Virtuously,
will be accepted by God.

This is the distastful part in Obedience, and therefore many would build their
Hopes upon cheaper Services; as that God would accept of the Will for the Deed,
and the like. But whatever Men thinks in their Minds, or desire in their
Hearts, or profess in their Words to the contrary, if for all that they
continue to commit Sin in their Actions, Christ has told them plainly, that he
will pronounce (when he comes to sit as Judge) Depart from me, ye that work
Iniquity Matthew. 7.23.

Secondly, To render our Obedience Entire, it must be an Obedience to the whole
Law. We must not think we may pick and choose in the matter of Duty; for if we
Obey not all, we are not right in any; for he who breaks the least, or allows
himself in the breach of the least of God's Commandments, shall be called least
in the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 5.19. that is, none at all. Thus we must Obey
All God's Holy Will and Commandments, which brings me to the

Third Thing necessary to render it Entire, and that is this, that our
Obedience must be performed at all Times. And this is co incident with the

II. General proposed, which was to show you, What it is to walk in the same
all the Days of our Life. And the meaning of these Words is, that we must
continue in such a sincere and entire Obedience, even to the end of our Lives.
We must not think to please God by being Obedient by fits, or by serving him
only at such Times as we are in Humor, and have no Temptation to the contrary:
But our Service must be uniform: We must Obey him in all Things, and wilfully
transgress in none. For if, after Men have once escaped the Pollution of the
World, through the Knowledge of Christ, they are again entangled therein, and
overcome, then is the latter end worse with them than the beginning, 2 Pet.
2.20. And, He that endures to the end shall be saved, says our Savior, Matthew.
10.22.

III. And now I am to clear the Doctrine of Evangelical Obedience, as thus
stated, from those Doubts that may be raised against it. And it will be
objected, that if so sincere, entire, and uniform an Obedience, as has been
said, be required at the hands of Christians, there appears no difference
between it, and that perfect Obedience required of Man in his State of
Innocence, as also that Legal Obedience required under the Covenant of Works.

And negatively, this difference is not so great, but that our wilful and
chosen Sins, committed against Knowledge and Conscience, will still put a Bar
to our Salvation, even under the Covenant of Grace; for if he that despised
Moses Law, died without Mercy, of how much serer Punishment suppose ye, shall
he be thought worthy, who has trodden under Foot the Son of God, and has
counted the Blood of the Covenant an unholy Thing, and has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace, which they do, who sin wilfully, Heb. 10.28,29. So that the
difference between the Law and the Gospel is not such, and so wide, as that
wilful Sins shall be now unpunished. But yet the difference is very great and
comfortable; and it is this;

First, That as to our unchosen and involuntary Sins, which through the
weakness and frailty of our Nature, we cannot avoid; and therefore by
Ignorance, and for want of Consideration, we have committed; such Sins as
these, I say, through the Mediation of Christ, shall now, under the Covenant of
Grace, be graciously passed by; so that those who have sincerely and entirely,
in the Sense as has been delivered, obeyed the Laws of the Gospel, shall not be
called to an account for such. For Christ who is our High Priest, will have
Compassion of the Ignorant, and of them that are out of the way, Heb. 5.2. And
this is the first great difference between the First Covenant made with Adam,
wherein the least Sin was unpardonable, and this second Covenant of Grace,
wherein through the Mediatiion of Christ, all our unwilling and involuntary
Infirmities, shall be graciously passed by.

The Second great Difference is, that even our wilful, and more heinous Sins,
when by our Repentance we bewail and forsake 'em, and take better Care to avoid
'em for the future; they also, through the Mediation of Christ, according to
the Terms he has obtained for us in the Covenant of Grace, shall be forgiven
us, and shall not prejudice, or hinder our being Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven.

Among the Jews, according to the strictness of Moses's Law, the Punishment
took place upon the first wilful Breach. He that despised Moses Law, says the
Apostle, if it were in an Instance where the Law threat'ned Death, died without
Mercy, Heb. 10.28. But our Savior came into the World to abrogate, as well the
Rigor of Moses's Law, as of the first Covenant, and to preach up an universal
Pardon upon Repentance. And so much is Remission of Sins upon Repentance the
great Doctrine of the Gospel, that our Savior both began his Preaching with
it, Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 4.17. And when he left
the World, he commanded his Apostles, that Repentance and Remission of Sins
should be Preached in his Name to all Nations. Luke 24.47.

THE XXIV. LECTURE.
And I heartily thank our Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this state
of Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior.

IN order to a full Explication of all that pertains to the Nature of the
Covenant of Grace, having already, in the first place, given you an account of
the Terms and Conditions of it, both on God's part, and on ours; both what it
is to be a Member of Christ, a Child of God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which are the Mercies and Favors made over to us on God's part: And
what it is to Renounce the World, the Flesh, and the Devil; to Believe in God,
and Obey him, which are the Conditions to be performed on ours: My next Work
must be (and then I shall have Instoucted you in all that pertains to the
Nature and Substance of this gracious Covenant) to show you, II. What a happy
State of Salvation this is, to be in such a Covenant with God. III. To declare
to you by whose Mediation we obtained it. It was through Jesus Christ our
Savior. IV. I am to represent to you by whom we were called into it. It was
our Heavenly Father who has called us to this State of Salvation. And then, V.
And Lastly, I am to make you sensible, what Infinite Thanks we do owe unto God
for Calling us into this State of Salvation.
All which Points we have taught us in these Words, And I thank God our
Heavenly Father, that he has called me to this State of Salvation, through
Jesus Christ our Savior. To proceed then, in order to a more complete
understanding of the whole Nature of the Covenant of Grace, whose Terms and
Conditions I have before explained.

II. I shall now represent to you, how this Covenant of Grace does restore us
to a State of Salvation. Salvation does import a Deliverance from Danger and
Misery, and a State of Salvation does import the being put into a Condition of
Safety where one may be safe and secure if he pleases. And if it be asked, how
we came into a State of Misery before? It was through the Rebellion of our
First-Parents, whereupon they, and all their Posterity were expelled Paradise,
and Condemned to dye, Genesis 3. And had the first Covenant remained uncancel'd,
we could have never escaped. But when we were in this desperate and undone
Condition, then was God of his infinite Goodness graciously pleased to Cancel
the first Covenant, nailing it to the Cross of Christ, Col. 2 14. And he was
pleased to grant unto us, and to establish with us a Second, by way of Remedy
against the Rigor and Extremity of the first; wherein God Almighty, as it were
descending from his Majesty and Glory, does oblige himself to make good to such
as shall enter into it, and continue faithful therein, those inestimable
Favors and Benefits before mentioned, and which I have already explained, and
proved unto you. And now,

III. It will be infinitely worth our while to enquire by whose Mediation we
obtained such a Civenant of Grace, and were restored thereby into a State of
Salvation. And it was through Jesus Christ our Savior. For such was the
Goodness of the Son of God, that when it was necessary that Satisfaction should
be made to Divine Justice, then did Christ Jesus give himself a Ransom for all,
1 Timothy 2.6. And because we must continue still in a miserable State and
Condition, whilst under the rigor of the First Covenant, that required a
Perfect, Exact, Unsinning Obedience, which we in our Fallen State could not be
able to perform, he moreover became a Mediator of a better Covenant which was
established upon better Promises, Heb 8.6. So that through the Mediation of
Jesus Christ our Savior, you see it is, that we have been called to this State
of Salvation.

IV. And now let us enquire, by whom we have been Called to this State of
Salvation. And it was our Heavenly Father who has Called us to this State of
Salvation, through Jesus Christ our Savior; that is, the same Heavenly Father
who granted us, and the same Jesus Christ who purchased this State of Salvation
for us, have also most mercifully called us to it. Our Heavenly Father was much
concerned to have us called into it, as appears from the earnest manner of St.
John's Expression, And we have seen, and do testify that the Father has sent
the Son to be the Savior of the World, Joh. 4.15. And the Son was no less
vigorous in it, It was his Meat to do the Will of God that sent him, and to
finish his Work, John 4.34.

And how did he graciously woe and importune his own Foolish, Rebellious
Subjects to come into this State, and to accept the Terms of Salvation. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee as a Hen gathers
her Chickens under her Wings, Matthew. 23.37. And that no means might be wanting
to the end of the World, to reduce the Rebellious and Miserable Race of Men to
a state of Happiness; As the Father sent him, so he sent Apostles upon the same
gracious Message, John 20.21. And having all Power given unto him in Heaven,
and Earth, he Commissioned those Apostles to go and teach all Nations,
Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
teaching them to observe all Things whatsoever he had commanded them, promising
to be with them in the carrying on this Great and Blessed Work, of bringing
Mankind home to God, even to the end of the World. Matthew. 28.18,19,20. And now,

V. And lastly, What infinite Reason have we heartily to thank Almighty God our
Heavenly Father, that he has called us to this state of Salvation through
Jesus Christ our Savior. This is the last thing to be spoke to in the
Explication of these Words. And indeed it is a matter which infinitely deserves
the deepest sense of Gratitude, and the utmost Acknowledgements of the Divine
Goodness upon two Accounts.

First, Because of the extraordinary advantage it is, to have God in Covenant
with us; for God condescending by Covenant, to engage himself to make good to
us the Benefits contained in it, this gives us all possible assurance of these
Blessings: And upon that assurance the strongest Consolations and Comforts
also, to cheer us in going through the Difficulties we shall meet with in our
Christian Warfare. Thus the Apostle, Heb. 6.17,18,19,20. God willing more
abundantly to show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel,
confirmed it by an Oath, or Covenant, that by two immutable Things, in which it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have strong Consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us; which hope we have as an
Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast, and which enters into that within
the Veil, whither the Forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus.

Secondly, And being called into Covenant, and having all God's Mercies thereby
secured to us: This is a singular Happiness, when so many Millions of his
Creatures, both Angels and Men, do want this favor.

As to the Fallen Angels, the Covenant of Grace was a Favor never afforded by
God to any of them; for Christ, that he might deliver them who all their
lifetime were subject to Bondage, verily took not on him the Nature of Angels,
but took upon him the Seed of Abraham, Heb. 2 15,16.

And as to Men; alas! There are many Nations now in the World, who have not yet
enjoyed so infinite a Blessing, as this happy Call into a State of Salvation,
who have not yet heard of a Savior, nor the good Tidings of the Gospel, or
Covenant of Grace. But now in Jesus Christ, ye who sometimes were afar off, are
made nigh by the Blood of Jesus, who is our Peace: And are no more Strangers
and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of
God. Ephesians. 2.13,14,19.

THE XXV. LECTURE.
In my Baptism wherein I was made.

I Have now given you as brief an Account as I could, of the whole Nature,
Terms, and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace: And now I am to treat upon the
Sacrament, or Solemnity, by which you entered into it, for the declaring
whereof, and the full explication of these Words; In my Baptism wherein I was
made, it will be requisite that I should in some measure, so far as it relates
to the Sealing of the Covenant of Grace, open unto you the Nature and End of
Baptism.

And it is an outward Rite, or Ceremony, of our Savior's own Appointment, for
the solemn admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace; Instituted by
Christ for the better Confirmation and Assuran^ of its Terms; the Promises on
God's part, and the Conditions on ours, it being thus mutu^lly se^l'd to,
betwixt God and us.

First, Baptism, I say, is an Outwa^d Rite, or Ceremony of our Savior's own
Appointment, for the solemn admitting of Persons into the Covenant of Grace. To
understand which, you must consider that to have some Outward Rites and
Solemnities in Religion, is agreeable to the Frame and Constitution of Humane
Nature, as being most apt to receive Impressions from sensible Things. And this
especially is requisite in the Admistion of Persons into Religious Societies by
Covenants.

The Israelites, it is well known, they were entered into the Covenant God made
with them by Circumcision, Gen 17.13. And that they were by Baptism, at
leastwise during their sojourning in the Wilderness, is testified by St. Paul,
1 Cor. 10 2. They were all Baptized into Moses, or initiated into the Religion
of Moses, in the Cloud, and in the Sea. And as to the Heathens, they were
initiated into their Superstitions by Purgations, or Washings.

And now agreeably to both, the Rite or Ceremony whereby our Savior Appointed,
that we should be Initiated into the Covenant of Grace, or the Christian
Religion, was Baptism, or Washing, which no doubt he chose as what would be
acceptable to both Parties; but especially as more significative of Christian
Purity. And so indispensibly necessary to our Admission into the Church he has
made Baptism, that it is expressly and positively told Nicodemus, Joh. 3.5.
Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And that no Pretenses of being Baptized by the Spirit, may be
thought enough, to render Water Baptism unnecessary, St. Peter Commanded, even
those who had actually and really received the Holy Ghost, as well as himself,
to be Baptized in the Name of the Lord. Acts 10.44,47.

Secondly, Baptism was instituted for the better Confirmation, and Insurance of
its Terms, the Promises on God's part, and the Conditions on ours, it being
thas mutually and interchangeably, as it were, sealed to betwixt God and us
There are two Parties, concerned in Baptism, the Minister who is God's
Ambassador, or Agent, 2 Cor. 5.20. and the Person Baptized. And the Ministers
receiving into the Church by the Ceremony of Baptism, is a Sealing to the
Promises on God's part, as the others presenting himself to Baptism, is
putting, as it were, his Seal to the Counter-part of the Covenant.

And as it gives wonderful Assurance of mutual Persormances to enter solemnly
into Covenant together; so that which is especially to be considered in this
case, is this; that the Mercies on God's part are so infinitely above the mere
Merit of our Performances, that we could by no means pretend to such Favors,
upon all that we can possibly do in the Service of God; but now after that God
has solemnly covenanted upon our Repentance, Faith, and Sincere Obedience, to
forgive us our Sins, and to reward us with Eternal Life; we have a Legal Right
and Title, to those unspeakable Benefits conferred upon us. He will be Just to
forgive us our Sins, 1 John 1.9. And we shall have a Right to the Tree of Life.
Rev. 22.14.

THE XXVI. LECTURE.
Do thou not think that thou art bound to Believe, and to Do, as they have
promised for thee? Yes verily.

HAving spoke to the Sacrament, or Solemnity whereby we entered into Covenant,
expressed in these Words, In my Baptism, I come now to show you, The great
Obligation which lies upon us to perform this our Covenant with him. And if we
take the Question and Answer both together, they do plainly import this
Doctrine; viz.

The vash Obligations which lie upon us from the Mercies of the Covenant,
especially from our Vow in Baptism, faithfully and conscientiously to discharge
our Covenant with God. And to begin with the Mercies,

1. If we consider our selves as Members of Christ, or Members of the Christian
Church, why there cannot be an Argument of greater force to keep us right, in a
Regular, Orderly Conversation, than that one Consideration should be. For why?
The Church of Christ are a selected, separated Body of Men, who are Consecrated
as it were, to God's Service, and are Called, and Chosen out of the World, to
live another sort of Life than what the World is accustomed to. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a peculiar People, that ye should show forth the Praises of him who
has called you out of Darkness into his mavelous Light. Wherefore, dearly
Beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts,
which war against the Soul, having your conversation honest amongst the
Gentiles, that by your good Works, which they shall behold, they may glorify
God in the Day of Visitation 1 Pet. 2.9,11,12.

And to purchase such a Body, as shall more peculiarly and zealously serve God,
was the design of our Savior's coming amongst us. Thus Tit. 2.14. it is said,
That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and
purify to himself a peculiar People zealous of good Works. And accordingly he
does enjoin us to let our Light so shine before Men, that they might see our
good Works, and glorify our Father which is in Heaven. Mat. 5.16.

Secondly, Nor is the Consideration of our being Children of God, less fruitful
of good Arguments, showing us those vast Obligations lying upon us faithfully,
and conscientiously to discharge our Covenant with him. For why? Children are
bound to the strictest Obedience to their Parents, as owing to them their very
Being. But Children of God, as owing both their Being, and Well-being. A Son
honors his Father, and a Servant his Master: If I then be a Father, where is
mine Honor? Ad if I be a Master, where is my fear? Mal. 1.6. And therefore
does St. Peter, upon this very Score of being Children of God, most earnestly
exhort us to a Renunciation of this World, and our filthy Lusts, and to a
faithful and careful discharge of our Duty to God our Father. As Obedient
Children, says he, Not fashioning your selves according to the former Lusts in
your Ignorance, but as he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all
manner of Conversation. 1 Pet. 1.14,15.

Thirdly, As Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, we are infinitely concerned
to behave our selves most soberly, regularly, and dutifully; for if the Heir of
a Temporal Inheritance will be so careful to please that Parent from whom he
expects a great Estate, but yet so, that he shall certainly be disinherited, if
he prove undutiful: How much a greater Motive must it be to a regular
Conversation, ^o have an Eternal weight of Glory, an Inheritance laid up in
Heaven, a Crown of Life, infallibly ensur'd to those, who shall be faithful
unto Death. This sure is enough to encourage us in well-doing, and to preserve
us safe and innocent, as it has done thousands before us, amongst all the
Persecucutions of Evil Men on the one hand, or the Allurements of the World on
the other, withdrawing us, or frighting us into Sin. So that in the strength of
the hopes of such an Inheritance, we may be prevail^d upon, faithfully and
conscientiously to discharge this Covenant with our God. But,

Fourthly and Lastly, That Obligation upon us faithfully to discharge our
Covenant, which ought here particularly to be considered, is that Promise and
Vow made for us in our Baptism, that we should do so, Do not thou think that
thou art bound to Believe, and to Do, as they have promised for thee? And it is
answered, Yes verily.

Now a Vow is defined to be a Solemn Promise made unto God, whereby we do in a
peculiar manner engage our selves unto him, to the Performance of something.
And though to do the thing which is Vowed to be done, were left at liberty
before, yet after the Vow, as appears in the Case of Ananias and Sapphira, Acts
5 1,2,3,4,5. It is a provoking Sin to rob God of what has been once devoted to
him. And God's Anger is most commonly observable, and very signal upon such
Occasions.

But when that which is Vowed, as here in our Baptism, is no other than what by
the very Law of Nature, we are antecedently obliged to, as to Renounce God's
Enemies, and to adhere closely to him in a dutiful Observance of his Commands;
to violate such a Vow as this, must be much more provoking to him.

In short, a Vow is much of the same Nature with. an Oath, and therefore to
violate it, is Perjury, a Sin which does more certainly draw down Vengeance
from God than any other. And as you would not put an Affront upon the Divine
Majesty, having been devoted to God, take care you withdraw not your selves
from his Service, but as the Wiseman Cautions, Eccl. 5.5. Pay that which thou
have vowed, and say resolutely with Holy David, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn,
and I will perform it, that I will keep thy Righteous Judgments.

THE XXVII. LECTURE.
And by God's help so I will. And I pray unto God to give (...) his Grace, that
I may continue in the same unto my Lives end.

HAving fully declared unto you the Nature, and Terms of the Covenant of Grace,
the Sacrament or Solemnity whereby we entered into it; and the Obligations upon
us to discharge the same; I come now to the Means of performing it included in
these Words: And they are, I. A firm Resolution, the Importancce of So I will.
II. The Help and Assistance of God; And by God's Help so I will. And, III
Prayer for Divine Assistance. And I pray unto God to give me his Grace that I
may continue in the same unto my Lives end.


And, First, that you may see the Power of Holy and Christian Resolution,
(leaving the two latter Points to be also fully treated upon in their proper
Place) I will show you, 1. Wherein Christian Resolution does consist. 2. How
much the forming of a strong Resolution will crnduce to the Performance of the
Covenant. And,


First, As to the Nature of Christian Resolution; it is a Peremptory, but
Rational Determination of the Will to a vigorous and speedy Execution of those
Vows and Promises made in Baptism, notwithstanding all Temptations to the
contrary; and this publicly and solemnly declared.

The Resolved Christian does not Hesitate and Doubt, or Halt betwixt God and
Baal, with the unresolved Jews, 1 Kin. 18 21. but is determined to adhere to
God. And in this Determination of his, he is fixed and peremptory, not fickle
and unconstant, like some who are sinning and then repenting; and yet after
they have been in their Penitentials, are again sinning.

And Christian Resolution is a Rational Determination of the Will: That is, it
it (...) an Obstinacy and Stubbornness without o^ contrary to Reason; but upon
a due weighing the Dangers and Difficulties of the one side, not to be compared
with the infinite Rewards on the other, it is a fixed Choice of enduring, even
the greatest Difficulties in prospect of such mighty Rewards, as the wisest
course to be taken. And the resolute Disciple of Christ does not weakly and
faintly with he could, but determines actually to proceed to a vigorous
Execution of his Vows and Promises; and that speedily too, like David, who
having thought upon ^s ways made haste, and delayed not to keep God's Commands,
Psalm. 119.60. Nor does he make Exceptions of some particular Lusts, of some
darling Sins, but resolves to mortily his most beloved Lusts, and to encounter
the roughest Assaults of all his Spiritual Enemies, being persuaded, with S.
Paul, that neither Life, nor Death, shall separate him from the Love of God.
Romans 8.38,39.

Lastly, And the sincere Christian, to complete his Resolution, will Publicly
and Solemnly protest it to all the World, that it is the full determination of
his Heart to adhere faithfully to God against all his Enemies, the World, the
Flesh, and the Devil. Publicly and Declaratively he will do thus when Sinners
are most impudent and public in declaring their own Impieties. And Solemnly he
will make these his Resolutions before the Bishop, and the Congregation at his
Confirmation, and by pronouncing then that he will perform in his own Person,
the Vows made by his Godfathers and Godmothers in his behalf at Baptism.

Secondly, And now I am to show you, how much the forming of such a Resolution,
as you have seen, will conduce to the Performance of your Baptismal Covenant.

And 1st, it will go a great way toward it to be Determined in your Will, and
fixed in your Purposes; the having a Will and Mind to a thing; being that which
will put a Person on to do any thing toward the attaining it. As we daily see
those who are Resolved to be Rich, spare no Pains, nor Care, and stick at no
Dangers that they may compass their beloved Mammon. And indeed, Resolution is
necessary toward the gaining of any Point where there is Danger and Diffi^ulty
in the way

But especially, i^ his highly necessary to be very Resolute in opposing the
Temptations of Satan, whom t. resist you must be steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet 5
9. He will try all Methods, not only by subtilty, but by force, to engage you
in Sin, and therefore you must Put on the whole Armor of God, that ye may be
able to stand in the Evil Day, and having done all to stand; that is, all will
be little enough to enable you to stand, but stand therefore you must, having
your Loins girt, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.13,14. which Words do express the
utmost Resolution as necessary to defect him. And that will do; for when he
finds a Christian is Resolved, he then leaves him to the Conduct of God's Holy
Spirit.

And the same Resolution is also necessary to overcome the Lusts of the Flesh,
which are boisterous Enemies, and you must, out of hand, cut them off, and
pluck them out, Matthew. 5.29. for else, whilst you Parley with them, they will
slide into your Hearts. And lastly, the wicked Men of the World are by no means
so successfully Resisted, as by letting them know, that you are resolved
against those Ways and Courses they would draw you into; for finding you
resolved, lewd Companions will no longer haunt you.

And therefore, 2dly, your Resolutions will be the more powerful to repel all
sort of Temptations, the more public they are, and especially if Sealed to in
some Solemn Ordinance, as at Confirmation, or at a Sacrament; for then your
Resolutions will be confirmed as it were, by a Solemn Vow and Oath took in the
Presence of God, and his Church; and Solemn Vows and Oaths being what all Men's
Consciences, which are not seared, will abhor to Violate, your Resolutions so
strongly bound down upon you, will scarcely be broken by you. Having sworn,
your own Conscience will press it upon you, that you must perform it, and keep
his Righteous Judgments, Psalm. 119.106. And upon such an occasion it may be
said, and successfully laid home to you by the Minister of God, of by any other
kind Friend and Admonisher, Thou have Vouched the Lord this Day to be thy God
and to walk in his Ways, and to keep his Statutes, and to hearken unto his
Voice. And the Lord has avouched thee to be his peculiar Servant, that thou
should keep all his Commandments, Deuteronomy. 26.17,18. Than which, there cannot be
a more obliging and forcible Consideration presented to any Person, to keep him
strictly to his Baptismal Covenant and Engagements.

But, Secondly, your Resolution to be faithful in your Covenant with God, must
be made, not in Confidence of your own Strength, but of God's Grace and
Assistance. For, alas! if we consider our selves, such is our natural Weakness,
that we are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, 2
Cor. 3.5. so that we cannot Promise nor Vow that we will Renounce the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, or that we will Believe in God, and Obey him, in
confidence of our own Strength. Yet in full Assurance of the Help of God, we
may firmly Resolve with a So I will; for I can do all things through Christ who
strengthens me. Phil. 4.13. But then,

Thirdly, It is Prayer must obtain that Help and Assistance. You must pray unto
God to give you his Grace, that you may continue in the same unto your Lives
end. Importunate Prayer is a powerful Means to procure from God a supply for
all our Wants, for this is the Confidence that we have in him, that if we ask
any thing according to his Will he hears us, 1 John 5.14. But nothing
certainly is more agreeable to his Will, than that we should ask that Grace and
Assistance which alone can enable us to serve and obey Him; and therefore we
may be sure of never failing in such our Petitions. And for the same reason, as
well as other more weighty ones, you may also promise your selves a Blessing
upon your Endeavors, from the Benediction and Prayers, accompanied with the
Laying on of Hands, of the Father of the Church, when in Confirmation the
Bishop shall pray unto God, to increase in you the manifold Gifts of Grace, the
Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Ghostly Strength,
the Spirit of Knowledge and true Godliness, and to fill you with the Spirit of
his holy Fear, now and for ever.

THE XXVIII. LECTURE.
And by God's Help so I will.

And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in the same to
my Lives end.

HAving showed you how effectual a Means Holy Resolution will be toward the
performance of your Covenant with God.

Secondly, I come now to show you, that it must be a Resolution took up, not in
Confidence of our own Strength, but of God's Grace and Assistance. In order to
make which appear. I. I will represent to you how weak naturally we all are;
and how unable of our selves to overcome Temptations, and to perform our
Covenant with God. II. I will then show you, what the Divine Assistance is; and
what measures of it proportionably to such our Necessity, God will bestow upon
you.


And as to the First, our own natural Weakness, which makes the Divine
Assistance so necessary to us; nothing is more certain than that the whole
Nature of Man is miserably Depraved by Sin. Ever since the Fall of our First
Parents, the Light of our Understanding, which should direct, is become dark
and dim; our Wills crooked and perverse; our Affections are set upon Earthly
Things; and our Lusts and Appetites are wholly bent after what pleases our
Senses, in direct Opposition to the Laws of God, and of right Reason. We see,
as the Apostle Words it, Romans 7.33. A Law in our Members; warring against the
Law in our Minds, and bringing us into Captivity to the Law of Sin, which is in
our Members; so that were it not that Christ, amongst other high Benefits, has
purchased for us sufficient Grace to Renew us throughout, we might have always
reason to bewail our State in the following Words of the Apostle, Ver. 24. O
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin; But now
have reason to thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Ver. 25. For we can do
all Things through Christ that strengthened us. Phil. 4.13.

Secondly, And what the Divine Assistance is, and what Measures of it,
proportionably to our Natural Necessity, God will bestow upon us to enable us
to perform our Covenant with him, I will next show you.

And, by God's Grace, I do mean, A secret Power and Efficacy of the Divine
Spirit, accompanying the Word into the Mind and Will, by means whereof the
Gospel does more readily and effectually work upon both, to the Renewing of
them, and to the restoring the Image of God into the Soul; namely, that
Righteousness and Purity which we had lost by our Fall. Such is the Divine
Assistance.

And the Measures of it were, and always will be, such as are proportionable to
the Necessities of the Church. Governors and Teachers in the Church shall have
the Spirit of Government, and Gift of Teaching, and every private Christian may
expect such Graces and Assistances as are necessary and proper for him.

In the first Ages, when the Occasions of Divine Assistance were Extraordinary,
then did Christ bestow upon his Apostles, and others, diverse Extraordinary
Gifts; viz. Of Miracles, Prophecy, Discerning of Spirits, diverse kinds of
Tongues, and the Interpretation of Tongues, 1 Cor. 12.10. But now, that the
Church is established, and the Truth of Christianity already Proved and
Believed, God does assist the Ministers of Religion only with the Ordinary
Graces of his Spirit, in the discharge of their Ministry.

And yet even the Ordinary Assistances are Extensively very large; insomuch
that every Power and Faculty of our Nature, our Understandings, Wills, and
Affections, which are so much depraved, shall be so strengthened by the Divine
Efficacy, as to discharge their proper Parts in the Service of God. Upon which
account all our Christian Virtues are called the Fruits of the Spirit. Gal.
5.22.

And the Divine Grace and Assistance is also Intensively very powerful and
strong in the working of this Change within us: The Gospel being not a Letter
that kills, as was the Law, but the Spirit which gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6.
that is, Grace which is the Gift of the Spirit, is now joined to, and goes
along with the Gospel in a far greater degree than it did under the Law. And
that in so powerful a manner, that St. Paul tells us, that neither is he that
Planteth any thing, nor he that Waters, but God that gives the Increase, 1
Cor. 3.7. Where the whole Success of our Preaching, in rendering it effectual,
he tells us, is from God's Grace, not from our Skill who preach it. And so much
for the second Means, whereby you shall be enabled to perform your Covenant
with God, namely, the Help and Assistance of God.

THE XXIX. LECTURE.
And I pray unto God to give me his Grace, that I may continue in the same unto
my Lives end.

IN these Words you have Prayer set down, as a third Means whereby you will be
enabled to perform your Covenant with God. And in order to make it appear such
to you, First, I will show you what is meant by praying unto God. Secondly, I
will lay before you how, and in which way Prayer will be effectual to the
performance of your Covenant.


And, First, By Prayer, in the largest Sense of the Word, is meant any
Addresses made unto God, as well Confessions and Thanksgivings, as Petitions
and Intercessions, as appears in the Instance of the Pharisee and the Publican,
Luke 18.10. both which are said to go up to the Temple to pray, when the one
Thanked God, that he was so Perfect, the other Confessed, he was a great Sinner.

Secondly, And now I am to show you, how effectually Prayer will contribute
toward the performance of your Covenant. And this it will do several ways.

1. As it will morally dispose you to be Obedient unto God. For if being in the
Presence of an excellent. Person will cast an Awe upon you, so that you cannot
easily think, much less do a base Action; how much more will it Influence you
to be Good and Virtuous, if you shall constantly approach the Divine Presence
in Prayer.

Nay, 2. Constant Prayer will more than dispose you. It will naturally enforce
you to be faithful toward God. I mean, it is a Duty of that Nature, that it is
scarcely to be imagined how any one should persevere in Prayer, and yet persist
in withal to violate his Covenat with God: The Wise man assuring us, Prove.
28.9. that He who turns away his Ears from hearing the Law, that his Prayer
shall be even an Abomination to the Lord. But,

3. And especially Prayer, duly Qualified, will be a most effectual means to
enable you to discharge your Covenant, as it procures for you the Grace and
Assistance of God, without which you cannot perform it; Of which you have a
full Proof, Luke 11.13. If you being Evil know how to give good Gifts to your
Children, how much more shall your Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them
that ask him? Which Words do, with a great deal of Force, show how plentifully
God will give you his Grace, to enable you to serve him, if you shall ask it of
him. And let this suffice to have spoken of those several Means, whereby you
shall be enabled to perform your Covenant with God.

THE XXX. LECTURE.
Wherein I was made.

HAving Explained to you the Doctrine of your Baptismal Covenant, in what
pertains to the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of it; the Sacrament and
Solemnity whereby you entered into it; the Obligations upon you to perform it;
and the Means whereby you may be enabled to discharge it: It remains now only
to account for two Circumstances relating to it; namely, First, The Time when.
Secondly, The Persons by whom, as by Proxies, you were Initiated into the
Covenant of Grace.

And, First, As to the Time when; This, as is implied in these Words, Wherein I
was made, was in your Infancy, an Age thought by some very improper to enter
into a Covenant by Baptism; and therefore I shall have occasion here to
vindicate Infant Baptism, or to justify your having been Initiated into the
Covenant of Grace by Baptism, even whilst you were Infants, having been the
Children of Believing Parents.

I say, Having been the Children of Believing Parents; for that such have a
right to be Baptized, or to be took into Covenant, may be fairly concluded from
that of St. Paul, 1 Cor. 7.14. For the Unbelieving Husband is Sanctified by the
Wife; and the Unbelieving Wife is Sanctified by the Husband, else were your
Children unclean, but now are they Holy. Where Children are said to be Holy,
not as Inherently Sanctified, but as Privilegially, or Federally Holy; just in
the same Sense as St. Peter, 1 Ep. 2.9. calls the whole Catholic Church of
Christians, Holy, Ye are a Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, meaning thereby that
they were Holy by Profession, as being Confederated with a Holy God, by a Holy
Religion and Covenant. And if the Children of one Believing Parent have the
Privilege to be accounted thus Holy, much more may the Children of both. But
for farther Evidence, I will briefly prove these Six Particulars.

I. That Infants were Initiated by Circumcision, into that Evangelical Covenant
made with Abraham. II. That they were Initiated both by Circumcision and
Baptism, into that Legal One delivered by Moses. III. That it was, without all
doubt, the Intention of our Savior, that under the Gospel Covenant likewise
they should be Baptized into the Covenant of Grace. IV. That agreeably to the
Mind of their Master, the Baptizing of them into it, was in all probability
practiced by the Apostles of Christ. V. That it is very agreeable to the Ends
and Reason of Baptism, and the Nature of the Covenant of Grace, that they
should be Baptized into it. VI. And lastly, That it is a happy, a mighty
Advantage for those Infants who have at that Age been Baptized into it. And,
I. I say Infants were Initiated by Circumcision to that Evangelical Covenant
made with Abraham. The Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. wherein it was
promised, that in his Seed all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed, was
the same in Substance with the Second Covenant made with Adam, Genesis 3.15.
wherein it was promised, that the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's
Head; that is, should destroy the Devil's Kingdom. And it was the same also in
a more imperfect Edition of it, with that which was made with Christ; for it
contained the same Gospel Promises of Pardon, Justification, and Happiness, by
conferring of which, Abraham, and we, and all his Spiritual Seed, are Blessed;
and it had the same Condition on the Performance of which those Promises did
depend, viz. an Obedient Faith, for Abraham Believed in God, and it was
accounted to him for Righteousness. Rom 4.3.

And now, that Infants, even at Eight Days old, were then to be Initiated into
this Covenant by Circumcision, is to be seen, Genesis 17.11,12. And if Infants
were then to be Initiated by an Outward Rite, why not now, since it is but the
same Covenant? Especially when it is considered, that as he was cut off from
the Covenant who was not Circumcised, Genesis 17.14. The Vncircumcis'd Manchild,
whose Flesh of his Foreskin is not Circumcised, that Soul shall be cut off from
his People: So that Person is to be Excluded the Church, who is not Baptized;
for it is expressly said, that Except we be born of Water, and the Spirit, we
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. John 3.5.

II. And as Infants was Circumcised into that Evangelical Covenant made with
Abraham; so they were both Circumcised, and all Baptized into that Legal One
delivered by Moses. That they were admitted by Circumcision, no one doubts; but
that they were Baptized, is not so commonly understood and known, but wants not
its Evidence even from Scripture; as 1 Cor. 10.1,2. where St. Paul tells us,
All our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were
all Baptized unto Moses; that is, the Religion of Moses, in the Cloud, and in
the Sea. And that their very Infants, as well as their Parents, were so
Baptized is certain, for that all were alike under the Cloud, and in the Sea.

And as for the Testimony of Jewish Writers, they tell us, that during their
Travels through the Wilderness, their Children, instead of being Circumcised
(which would make them sore for Traveling) were Baptized into the Religion of
Moses, and that in all Ages, Proselytes and their Children were admitted by
Baptism.

III. And now it seems to me beyond all doubt, to have been the Intentions of
our Savior, that Children should continue to be Initiated into the Christian,
Church by Baptism also, he having Adopted the Jewish Rite of Baptism, for the
Sacrament of Initiation, without excluding Children from being Baptized: For
finding it Customary in the Jewish Church to Baptize them into Covenant with
God, if he had designed any Alteration of the Persons, he would certainly have
forbidden Children to be Baptized. And finding it Customary so to Initiate
them, there was no necessity of his giving any new Command about it, as being
Practiced already. And it is sufficient Warrant to continue the use of it to
Infants, that when he Adopted Baptism to be a Christian Sacrament, he did not
forbid it to Children, whom he found in Possession of it.

IV. And agreeably to the Mind of their Master, the Baptizing of Infants into
the Covenant of Grace, was in all probability practiced by the Apostles of
Christ. For why? In three several places, namely, Acts 16.15. and again, v. 33.
and 1 Cor. 1.16. we find that whole Families were Baptized: And as it is
scarcely to be believed, that there were not Children in some of them; so if
there were, it must be concluded, that they also were Baptized; especially if
we consider, that it was the known Custom in the Jewish Church, from which
Christian Baptism was derived, of Baptizing all, both Children and Servants,
together with the Heads of the Families, when any were Proselyted and Converted.

V. And it was very agreeable to the Ends and Reason of Baptism, and the Nature
of the Covenant of Grace, that Infants should be Baptized into it. It is a very
unreasonable Prejudice to think that Infants are not capable of entering into
Covenant with God. The contrary of which does plainly appear, Deuteronomy.
29.10,11,12. Ye stand this day, all of you before the Lord your God, your
Tribes, your Elders, your Little Ones, that thou should enter into Covenant
with the Lord thy God. And that Circumcision, the Token of the Covenant, Genesis
17.11. was imprinted upon Infants is what every Body knows.

Nor is there any think, in the Nature of the thing, that should exclude
Infants from being Parties in it. It consists, as has been often said, of
certain Invaluable Privileges and Benefits made over to us on God's Part, and
of certain very reasonable Conditions to be performed on ours. And they are
doubtless capable of having Privileges conferred upon them: For the Child of an
Attainted Rebel may be restored to his Blood; and Minority is no hindrance to
the Inheriting of an Estate. Nor are they less capable of being bound to
Conditions, as appears from the now cited place of Deuteronomy. 29.13. where the
Children, as well as the Elders, entered into Covenant, obliged themselves to
be to God a People.

VI. And lastly, And indeed, it is to be atcounted a very great Privilege and
Advantage to those Infants that have been so early entered into Covenant with
God. And this it is, First, Upon the account of their having Original Sin now
washed off, and no more imputed to them; the first Covenant which bound it down
upon them, being not only Nailed to the Cross of Christ, but particularly
Canceled as to them; so that the Condemning Force of it is took away as to
their Particulars, by their being admitted into another more Gracious and
Merciful Covenant. Secondly, And it is their Advantage and Happiness, that they
have been engaged thereby so early in the Service of God. By this means they
become pre-engag'd to God, before that the Devil, and their Spiritual Enemies
can attempt to withdraw them; and it will be their Parents Faults, who shall
not give them an early Instruction, if they Revolt from him. So that upon the
whole, if all these Reasons now given for Infant Baptism shall be rightly
considered, especially as they depend upon, and add strength to one another, I
cannot see but that they carry the greatest Force in them to prove the
Reasonableness, the Expedience, the Necessity of your having been admitted by
Baptism into the Covenant of Grace, even in your Infancy; which was the first
Circumstance to be accounted for, relating to this great Affair of your
entrance into Covenant with God. The second is, your being presented by God
fathers and Godmothers, and is the last thing I am to speak to you upon,
relating to this great Subject of your Baptismal Covenant.

THE XXXI. LECTURE.
Qu. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did Promise and Vow three Things in my Name.

THE introducing you into Baptism by Godfathers and God mothers, is the Second
and Last Circumstance to be here accounted for, relating to your entrance into
Covenant with God at your Baptism. And because the Reasonableness of it is not
so well considered by some, I will therefore enquire. I. Into the Meaning and
Importance of the Words, Godfathers and Godmothers. II. Into the Nature of
their Office; They did Promise and Vow three things in my Name. III. I will
show what reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers and Godmothers, both to
Represent, and to Engage for the Infant in Baptism. IV. And Lastly, For the
further Justification of the Thing out of Scripture, I will prove from thence,
as a Power and Authority given by Christ, to the Governors of the Church, to
make such reasonable Constitutions as they shall think fit, for the greater
Order and Decency of Divine Administrations, and the better Edification of the
Souls of Men; so that their appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers, was a
most excellent and useful Institution to this purpose.


And, First, I am to enquire into the Importance of the Words, Godfathers and
Godmothers. And, in short, they do signify Sureties and Bondsmen; and are a
Collateral Security, joined together with the Natural Parents, in behalf of
their Children, which are entered into Covenant with God. And this their
Security is given to God and his Church, that they will be Instruments in
begetting them to God.

Secondly, And as to the Nature of their Office, it imports these Three things.

1. An express Engagement given by Christ and his Church, to the Godfathers
and Godmothers in behalf of those Infants presented to Baptism, that so soon
as they become capable to be Taught, they shall be Instructed in the Nature of
that Covenant, which they their Sureties have undertook for them. They Engage,
that they will take care to have those Infants, whom they have presented to
Baptism, Catechized in the Nature of that Covenant they have in the way of
Proxy for them, entered into; which is the Importance of these Words, given in
charge to the Godfathers and Godmothers; remember, that it is your Parts and
Duties, to see that this Infant be Taught, so soon as he shall Learn, what
solemn Vow, Promise, and Profession he has here made by you; which it is the
proper work of Catechizing to teach them.

2. Having thus took care to have them well Instructed by Catechizing, in the
Articles and Conditions of their Covenant, their next Care must be to Admonish
and Advise them seriously to apply themselves to live according to those
Obligations laid upon them in their Covenant with God; for so it follows in
that most excellent Exhortation given to the Godfathers and God mothers after
Baptism, Ye shall take care that this Child shall be Virtuously brought up, to
lead a Godly, and a Christian Life. And then,

3. They are to take care that at Years of Discretion, the Child should take
his Vow upon himself, before the Bishop in Confirmation; for so their Charge
runs; Ye are to take care that this Child be brought to the Bishop to be
Confirmed by him, so soon as he can say the Creed, the Lord's Prayer, and the
Ten Commandments in the Vulgar Tongue. So that the utmost Importance of these
Words, They did promise and Vow three things in my Name, is, 1. an Engagement
to Christ and his Church, in the behalf of the Baptized Infant, that so soon as
he becomes capable, he shall be instructed in his Covenant. 2. That he shall be
Admonished to live according to it. And, 3. That he shall solemnly declare it
his sincere Intentions so to (...).

Thirdly, If we now consider what reason the Church had to appoint Godfathers
and Godmothers to the 'foresaid Purposes.

1. It is sufficient to justify this Usage, that is for the better Order and
Decency of the Administration, that some should be the Month of the Child; that
so whilst God by his Minister does Promise on his Part such invaluable
Privileges, the Child, who is so infinitely concerned, may not be silent, but
may engage to perform the Conditions of his; since a Silence on his side would
look like a sullen, ungrateful Refusal of such gracious Overtures, and Terms of
Mercy, which would be very indecent.

2. And it is of exceeding great Concernment to the Church of Christ, that
Security be given that every one who is admitted a Member into it, should live
to the Reputation and Interest of it. This is no more than what Societies,
whose Honor and Interest is of infinite less Consequence do require; there
being no Corporation and Company, that will admit into them any Member, from
whom they apprehend any Danger, without giving Security against all
Disadvantages that may accrue by his Admission. And shall not the Church of
Christ, whose Members, if they should prove Scandalous, it would be of
exceeding great Disadvantage to it, take such a reasonable Security as may be
most likely to prevent such a Mischief to it, as the having ignorant and
vicious Members of it?

Nor is it sufficient Security to the Church, that the Parents are bound to
take this Care of their Children. Parents may Dye, or be Careless; and too much
Precaution cannot be taken in a Matter of such Consequence, where the Interest
and Reputation of the Church of God, and the Salvation of Men's Souls, is so
much concerned.

Nor indeed is the Charge given to the Godfathers and Godmothers any
unreasonable Imposition in itself, it being a Care little more than what is
required from one Christian to another in common Charity; that is, to assist in
the Christian Education of those who want such Care to be taken of them; and to
instruct the Ignorant, and to admonish them that they do not Err. It is a a
Piece of Charity, which is more or less incumbent upon every one: But
Godfathers and Godmothers, by the Nature of their Office, have peculiar
Occasions to exercise it put into their Hands; and for so doing they may expect
the greatest Rewards; the Apostle having inform^d us, That he who should save a
Soul from Death, shall cover a multitude of Sins. James 5.20.

THE XXXII. LECTURE.
Qu. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did Promise and Vow three Things in my Name.

HAving showed you, I. The Meaning of the Words, God fathers and Godmothers.
II. The Nature of their Office. And, III. What Reason the Church had to Appoint
Godfathers and Godmothers, both to Represent and Engage for the Infant in
Baptism. IV. And, Lastly, besides the Reason of the Thing, for the further
Justification of the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers, to introduce Infants
to Baptism, I will prove out of Scripture, as a Power and Authority given by
Christ to the Governors of the Church, to make such Reasonable Constitutions as
they shall think fit, for the greater Order and Decency of Divine
Administrations, and the better Edification of the Souls of Men: So that the
Churches Appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers, was a most Excellent,
Rational, and Useful Institution to this purpose.


I say, Besides the Reason of the Thing; for it is sufficient to justify any
Ecclesiastical Institution, that it be reasonable, though not particularly
enjoined by any express Scripture. Some Things indeed there are in Religion,
quite above our Natural Reason, as the Mysteries of Christianity: And other
Points of Faith and Practice, though they are cognizable by right Reason, Yea,
and why even of your selves, says our Savior, Judge you not what is right,
Luke 12.57. Yet it is by Scripture, as the most perfect Rule that we are to be
Governed in the Belief and Practice of such Things. But as to those Modes and
Circumstances requisite for Order and Decency in Divine Worship, and for the
greater Solemnity of Divine Administrations, it is wholly left to the Reason
and Discretion of Church Governors to appoint such, as appears from 1 Cor.
11.13,14,16. Judge in your selves, is it comely that a Woman pray with her Head
uncovered, does not even Nature, that is the Reason of the Thing, teach you?
But if any Men be Contentions, we have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God;
that is, if People will be so perverse, I think it sufficient to tell them, as
that which ought to govern them, the Nature and Reason of the Thing, and the
Custom of the Church is against them. Well, but to make this Matter clear, upon
the due understanding of which, the Peace of the Church does so much depend;

First, I will farther prove out of Scripture, that there has been a Power and
Authority given by Christ to the Governors of the Church, to make such
reasonable Constitutions as they shall think fit, for the greater Order and
Decency of Divine Worship, and for the better Edification of the Souls of Men.
And then,

Secondly, I will show you, that their appointing Godfathers and Godmothers
was an excellent and useful Institution to that purpose.

And as to the First, in order to make that appear, it is very considerable,
that such a Power was allowed to the Governors of the Jewish Church, wherein,
though there was little need, one would think, of adding to their Ritual, God
himself having so particularly prescribed Things of that Nature; yet we find
that our Savior Christ did himself observe the Feast of Dedication, John
10.22. though a Feast not of any Divine Appointment. And as many other
Observances amongst them were of mere Humane Institution, so our Savior
commanded his Disciples to be conformable to them, Matthew 23.2,3. saying, The
Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses's Chair, and therefore whatever they bid you
observe, that observe and do.

Nor does he correct that Command of his, when, in another Place, Mark 7.7. he
Reprimands the Pharisees, for Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of Men:
Those Commands of theirs, which he there means, not being about Things of an
indifferent Nature in themselves, but Commands that did indeed overturn the
Moral Law, as the Command of denying Maintenance to their Parents in Necessity,
under pretense of having Devoted their Substance before to God; by which
Evasion, he tells them, They made the Commandment of God, concerning Honor due
to Parents, of none effect by their Traditions, Ver. 13. and tells them withal,
That in vain did they worship God, Teaching thus for Doctrines the Commandments
of Men. So that it remain, there was a Power given to the Jewish Church to
Appoint such Things as did pertain to the Public Worship.

And the same Power continued also to those who prended in the Christian, our
Savior committing it to their Care, that all Things in Church Assemblies
should be done unto Edifying, 1 Cor. 14.12. and that all Things should be done
Decently, and in Order, Ver. 40. which Commands being only general, without
particularly expressing all the ways whereby those Things may be provided for,
he must of necessity be supposed to leave it to the Discretion of
Church-Governors to appoint, what, according to the Change and Customs of Times
and Places (which in these Things do often vary) they in their Wisdom should
think to be most fit, decent, and orderly to be observed. And the People he
commanded to Obey them that should have the Rule over them, Heb. 13.17. And to
submit themselves to every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake 1 Pet. 2.13.

The Apostle indeed, Gal 5 1. bids them stand fast in the Liberty wherewith
Christ has made them free, and not to be entangled again in the Yoke of
Bondage. But this was a Liberty from the Yoke of Moses's Law, which neither
they nor their Fathers were able to bear, which he bids them maintain; and
relates nothing to the Observance of decent Ceremonies in Divine Worship, which
are far from being any Yoke.

Nor are such Constitutions an adding to the Book of Life, a Thing forbid under
a severe Penalty, Rev. 22.18. But are indeed, on the Governor's Part, no other
than an Executing the Commands of the Book of Life, given 1 Cor. 14 12,40. as
was before shown. So that, I hope, by this it does appear from Scripture, That
there has been a Power and Authority given by Christ to the Governors of the
Church, to make such reasonable Constitutions as they shall think fit, for the
greater Order and Decency of Divine Worship, and for the better Edification of
the Souls of Men. And now,

Secondly, I am to show you, that their appointing of God fathers and
Godmothers was a most useful Institution to this purpose; that is, that it is
an Appointment which contributes much to the decent Administration of Baptism,
and that it is also very serviceable to the Edification of the Baptized Members
of Christ's Church. How much it makes for the Decency of the Administration, I
have already showed you: And that it will likewise contribute much to the
Edification of the Persons Baptized, will not be doubted, if we consider,

1. The Nature of their Office. 2. The good Effects we often see of Persons
having had Godfathers and Godmothers, as Sureties for them in Baptism.
And, first, if we consider the Nature of their Office, it cannot but be that
Persons who have undertaken to instruct, and to admonish Youth, and to bring
them to Confirmation, should very much contribute to their Edification. And it
would be readily owned, did all Persons who take upon them to be Sureties for
others, make a Conscience of discharging their Obligations; but most are
generally too regardless of what they have undertaken.

But however, Secondly, there are often seen good Effects of Persons, having
had Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism, to whose pious Care many poor
Children owe their Education, and all the Care that has been taken of them,
when their irreligious Parents have been careless of them, or their Poverty
would not enable them to provide them of Schooling, Books, and the like; which
good Effects would be more seen, were none admitted to be Sureties for others,
who have not themselves communicated in the Lord's Supper, as the Church does
appoint: For such would make a Conscience of their Engagements. So that it is
not the Churches Fault, that the Godfathers and Godmothers do not do all the
good they might. But the Office tending so much, as in its own Nature it does,
to the Edification of the Baptized, and to the decent Administration of
Baptism, as has been showed; this is sufficient to justify the Governors of the
Church, in appointing of Godfathers and Godmothers to introduce Children to
Baptism.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Have in way of Comment upon the Preliminary Questions and Answers of the
Church-Catechism, giving an account of your Baptismal Covenant, in which my
Chief Design has been to prepare you who are Young, for a very Necessary and
Solemn Ordinance, viz. Confirmation. And now in Conclusion, the better to apply
the foregoing Discourses to that purpose,

I. I will briefly sum up what has been said upon the Doctrine of your
Baptismal Covenant. II. I will represent how extremely fit it is, that all who
have been Baptized in their Infancy, having been first Instructed in the whole
Nature of that their Baptismal Covenant; I will show how fit it is that they
should voluntarily Recognize, Ratify, and Renew the same at Confirmation. And I
will answer those Objections that may discourage any from it. And, III. I will
then give you some brief Directions for your more Solemn and Serious
Ratification of your Baptismal Vows in Confirmation, together with some proper
Devotions, for the use of such as are to be Confirmed.
And as to the first; The sum of what has been said upon the Doctrine of your
Baptismal Covenant, is briefly this, namely, That in your Baptism you were
Incorporated into that Holy Society of Men, which is called the Church of
Christ, and were made your selves Members of it. You were Adopted to be his
Children, and such as he would have a peculiar Care of, and would indulge with
singular Favors. And as the Perfection of all, you had then an Inheritance of
the Kingdom of Heaven ensur'd to you, so as to have a Legal Right conferred
upon you to all those unspeakable Joys contained in that State. All these
peculiar Favors you had then conferred upon you on God's part, on these Terms
and Conditions to be made good on yours; namely,

That you would first utterly Renounce those great Enemies of God, the Devil,
the World, and the Flesh. The Devil, because he had Rebelled against his
Creator, for which he was Banished Heaven, and has been ever since endeavoring
to withdraw Mankind to partake and side with him in the same wicked Revolt. But
you have Covenanted with God that you will utterly abhor so base a thing, as to
side with so cursed a Spirit, either by your own Sins, or by tempting of others
to sin. And that you will be always upon your guard against all his cursed
Wiles, whereby he would withdraw you into so foul an Apostasy from God. As to
the World, because the greatest part of Mankind have been prevailed upon by
this wicked Spirit to desert their Creator; you have Covenanted to Renounce
their ways, so as not to be tempted by their Examples, their Company, their
Persuasions, their Threats, or their Promises, to desert also the great Captain
of your Salvation Jesus Christ. And as to the Material World, that neither the
Riches, the Honors, nor the Pleasures of it should allure you, nor the Evil
and Vexations Things of it should fright you into sin. And lastly, as to these
Enemies of God and us, you did solemnly engage your selves to exercise a
continual Warfare against the Corrupt Lusts of your sinful Nature, which are
ever and anon Rebelling against the Dictates of your own Reason, and of the
Holy Spirit of God. Thus in your Baptism you did Covenant to Renounee the
Devil, the World, and the Flesh.

And you did, on the contrary, then engage as you have seen, that you would
give a hearty and steady Assent to all those Divine Truths revealed to you in
the Scripture, and given to conduct you to Heaven; particularly and especially
that you would give an entire Credit to those Great and Fundamental Articles of
Christian Faith contained in your Creed, and that you would so thoroughly
Believe them, as to be influenced by them to the performance of the

Third thing you engaged in your Baptism and that was, that you would sincerely
and entirely obey God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all
the Days of your Life.

This was that Covenant we made with God in our Baptism. It was obtained for us
when we were under Condemnation for the breach of our first Covenant, whereby
we had Rebelled against God, and took part with the Devil. For being in this
miserable Condition, then did the Eternal Son of God sacrifice his own Life to
make Satisfaction to the Divine Justice for our Sins; and did moreover mediate
with his Father for us, that we might be received into Favor upon the Terms
now mentioned. And he did not only come down from Heaven himself to Call us
into the State of Salvation, but sent also his Prophets, Apostles, and
Ministers, as his Ambassadors, in all Ages, to invite Mankind into it, and to
pray them in Christ's stead, to be reconciled to God. 2 Cor. 5.20.

And so many of the World as have hearkened to that Call, have been admitted by
Baptism to those Terms of Reconciliation; and have in that solemn Ordinance
dedicated themselves to the Service of God, and have Vowed to perform it, as
has been now declared. To be faithful to which Vows, you have all possible
Obligations lying upon you, and particularly, because you have so solemnly at
your Baptism, sworn to perform it. And in order to that, since Christian
Resolution, especially if publicly and solemnly made, will have a great force
in it, to preserve you from the Power of Temptation, you must therefore
steadfastly Resolve to continue Faithful in your Covenant; only this you must
take care of, not to Resolve so to do, in Confidence of your own Strength, but
of God's Grace and Assistance, which you must therefore earnestly pray to him
for. And this is the Sum of what has at several times been discoursed to you
upon your Baptismal Covenant.

Secondly, I am now to represent unto you how extremely fit it is, that all who
have been Baptized in their Infancy, having been first Instructed in the whole
Nature of that their Baptismal Covenant; I am, I say; to show how fit it is,
that they should voluntarily Recognize, Ratify, and Renew the same at
Confirmation.

1. I say, All who have been Baptized in their Infancy, having been first
Instructed in the whole Nature of that their Baptismal Covenant. For such is
the Pious Care of the Church over her Children, that they are scarce sooner
Born into the World, than she takes them into her Bosom. And they are no sooner
admitted by Baptism into her Society, but she delivers them not only to their
Parents, but for farther Security, to their Godfathers and Godmothers, as
Sureties, with a solemn Charge, that they see the new Christians be duly
Instructed in the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of their Covenant with God. And
no sooner again are they come to a competent Age, and Years of Discretion, but
she enjoins that these same Persons, her Children, Appear before the Bishop,
and that with their own Mouths and Consent, they openly before the Church,
Ratify and Confirm the same, engaging in their own Persons, to do all that was
promised for them by others.

2. And sure now, it is extremely fit that you should accordingly Recognize,
Ratify, and Renew the same at Confirmation. For why, not to do this, would look
as if you did disallow of what was done in your Names at your Baptism. And in
effect, will be to declare, that if it had been left to your own Choice, you
would not have been Baptized at all. And then, judge you, whether by such a
Refusal, you do not turn Renegadoes from Christianity, and Apostatize in the
worst Sense, even to no Religion.

Many perhaps may refuse to Renew their Baptismal Vow, because they are fearful
they shall not be able to perform it. But herein they mistake both the Nature
of that Gospel-Obedience they covenant to perform, and the Importance of that
Vow they make to perform it. For the Obedience required now of us under the
Gospel, is not a perfect, exact, unsinning, Obedience; but a sincere and hearty
endeavor to discharge all our Duties to God, our Neighbor, and our selves,
accompanied with Repenting of what has been done amiss, and with taking all due
care to do better hereafter. And the Vow which in Confirmation you are to
Renew, is not that you will never Sin, but that by the Grace of God you will
endeavor all you caan to avoid Sin, and the Temptations to it; and that if at
any time you shall be overcome, you will immediately Rise again by Repentance,
and take more care for the future. And there is so little frightful in such a
Vow, that there is no Honest and Sincere Mind can stand off from coming under
such an Engagement.

But alas! it is to be feared, that the greatest part of those who stand off
from Recognizing, and Renewing their Baptismal Vow at a Confirmation, do this
out of a worse Principle. And that determining in their own Hearts not to
forsake their Sins, they will not in Confirmation solemnly resolve to Renounce
the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, to Believe in God, and Obey him. But this
is so plainly to Renounce their Baptism, and to tear and cancel their Baptismal
Covenant, and to turn Renegadoes and Apostates from Christianity; That it must
be yours, and all good Christian Prayers, to preserve you from it. So that upon
the whole, you must be always ready and desirous, at leastwise, as our Church
expresses it to be Confirmed, before you come to the Sacrament; I say, before
you are to come to the Holy Sacrament. For,

3. It is extremely fit that every Christian should Recognizae, and Confirm his
Baptismal Covenant, before he be admited to the Holy Communion. For why?
Admission to Communion with God in this Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, is
one of the grand Privileges of the Church of Christ; for therein the Worthy
Communicant is permitted to Feast with God at his own Table, upon the Memorials
of Christ's precious Sacrifice. He has the Spirit of God conveyed, and the
Pardon of his Sins sealed unto him therein. And sure, it is but what is very
requisite, that before a Person be admitted to the enjoyment of such Sacred
Privileges, he should solomnly Recognize his venant with God, and thereby own,
and declare, that he is not an Alien from the Commonwealth of God, a Stranger
from the Covenants, and Promises, without which solemn Acknowledgment, the
Church could scarcely avoid giving, many times, that which is holy to Dogs, or
of Profaning the holy Mysteries, by admitting Apostates from Christianity to
partake in them.

Lastly, I am now to give you some Directions concerning the solemn Recognizing
of your Baptismal Vow and Covenant at Confirmation, together with some short
Devotions proper for that Occasion. And both Directions and Prayers shall
relate to what you are to do Before, At, and After a Confirmation: And I shall
endeavor to make the Prayers as well Instructive as Devotional, with respect
to the subject to which they refer.

And, First, Before a Confirmation, having gone through a Course of
Catechetical Instruction; so that you have at leastwise attained to a general
Knowledge of the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace, that
Covenant you have entered into in your Baptism;

1. I would advise you, that upon Notice of an Episcopal Confirmation, you
would bethink your selves of laying hold of the Opportunity, not only because
Opportunities of this Nature are very scarce in most Places, but also because
you cannot so regularly be admitted to the Lord's Supper, till first you have
been Confirmed; that is, have Recognized that Covenant you are to Ratify and
Renew every time you Feast upon the Memorials of Christ's Sacrifice, and have
received the Episcopal Benediction upon such a solemn Recognition; for so our
Church has upon wise Considerations ordered, viz. That none shall be admitted
to the Holy Communion, until such time as he be Confirmed, or be desirous and
ready to be Confirmed.

2. I would have you sequester some Day, or at leastwise some considerable part
of a Day, to take into Consideration the great Undertaking you are going upon;
and retiring from the World, see that you seriously reflect upon all that has
been declared to you concerning the Nature and Importance of your Baptismal
Covenant. Consider the Forces of your Spiritual Enemies, and your Promises,
notwithstanding their utmost Attempts upon you, to stick firm to your Faith,
and close to your Obedience. And especially, to enforce you to this, weigh well
the inestimable Privileges of a Christian who is in Covenant with God, and what
singular Advantages are contained under these Terms of being Members of Christ,
Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven. And having duly
considered this whole Matter, you may address your self to God in the manner
following.

O Most Gracious and Eternal Lord God! Thou art the Lord, the Lord God,
Merciful and Gracious, Long suffering, and Abundant in Mercy and Truth. When I
come to consider thy Goodness, I am amazed at thy Condescension, to Transact
with us in a way of Covenant, Obliging thy self by Promise to make Good those
Blessings; the Thousandth part of which the Merit of our Performances could not
have given us reason to expect. But we, wretched Creatures, when we had broke
our Covenant with Thee, and made our selves liable to thy eternal Displeasure,
through thy Mercies in Christ, were not wholly cast off, but admitted to such
Terms of Reconciliation, as do put us into a State infinitely beyond what the
fallen Angels, or the rest of Mankind, who are out of the Pale of the Church,
do enjoy. It is an uncomfortable State which those are in, who are Aliens from
the Commonwealth of Israel, Strangers from the Covenant and Promises, who are
without Hope, and without the Knowledge of the True God in the World. But we
the Members of thy Church (blessed be thy Infinite Goodness to us) are no more
Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the
Household of God. For we are called forth of the wicked World by the Preaching
of the Gospel, to the Knowledge, Belief, and Service of the Blessed Trinity,
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the only True God. And it is an exceeding
Privilege we enjoy as Members of this Society, whereof Christ is the Head; for
hereby of thy Goodness, we are not only under the Guidance of most Excellent
and Wise Laws, and enjoy the Benefit of most Edifying and Comfortable
Ordinances; but we enjoy thereby a great measure of Divine Grace and Assistance
derived down from Christ our Head, aad conveyed by those blessed Ordinances, to
enable us to Conform our selves to thy Religion, and to Obey thy Gracious
Commandments.

By being Baptized into the Covenant of Grace, thou have graciously Adopted us
to be thy Children, whereby we have pardon of Sins upon our hearty Repentance:
We find thee not severe in marking what is done amiss; but as a Father pitieth
his Children, even so thou the Lord pitiest those that fear thee, and who do
not willingly displease thee. We find an easy access to the Throne of Grace,
for the pardon of all our Sins past, and for whatever else we want, especially
that Grace which shall enable us to amend, and become better for the future.

And as the Crown and Perfection of all thy Favors, being Children of God,
thou have graciously assured us, we shall be Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven, whereby our Hopes of all the unspeakable Joys of that blessed State
being sure and steadfast, as founded upon the express Promises and Covenant of
Thee the God of Truth; there is no Temptation so alluring, nor Suffering so
great, which we may not overcome thereby, thy Holy Spirit assisting us therein.

And now, O Blessed God! in Mercy look down upon me, whom thou have graciously
admitted by Baptism into this Holy Society, wherein I am listed manfully to
fight under Christ's Banner, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. And
do thou enable me to Renounce and Resist all these Enemies, to thy Honor and
my Salvation. Grant that I may ever with the utmost Detestation, Renounce and
Abhor both the Devil and all his Works, whether they be his Works of Sin, or
his tempting of us to the same. Let me ever look upon Sin as a Rebellion
against thy Authority: And that the Suffering of my self to be tempted by him,
in any manner of way, to sin, is to yield my self up to the Devil's Service.
And therefore to avoid the Snares of the Devil, grant me that I may be always
sober and vigilant, and watch unto Prayer.

Let not the World ever prevail over me, so as either by its Riches, Honors,
or Pleasures to allure me, or by its Afflictions and Calamities to affright me
from thee. Let not the wicked Men of the World, by the Influence of their
Company, Examples, or Persuasions, enveigle me, nor the pompous Vanity of it
bewitch me into Sin.

Nor let any the sinful Lusts of the Flesh, whether the Corruption of my
Understanding, the Perverseness of my Will, the Disorder of my Passions and
Affections, or the Violence of my lustful Appetites, carry me out to unlawful
Gratifications; but enable me always to keep them in subjection to the Dictates
of right Reason and Religion.

And do thou, O God, increase my Faith, and give me such a full and strong
Persuasion of all those Sacred and Powerful Truths, scattered throughout the
Gospel, and summed up in my Creed, as may ever Influence me to a holy Obedience.

And let that Obedience, O God, be sincere and entire to all thy Commands:
Serving thee with all my Heart, with all my Mind, with all my Soul, and with
all my Strength, loving Thee above all the World, and my Neighbor as my self;
and in this Obedince, grant, O God, that I may constantly walk all the Days of
my Life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Secondly, At the Time of Confirmation, or when you are standing before the
Bishop, you are then to Recollect what you have been Instructed in concerning
your Baptismal Covenant; and you are to possess your Soul with those strong and
mighty Reasons that you should solemnly Recognize it, by taking all that upon
your selves, which in your Infancy your Godfathers and Godmothers did engage
for you. And thereupon, whether standing or sitting, as you shall have
Convenience, see that from the Inward Recesses of your own Heart, you offer up
this following Dedication of your self to God.

O Most Blessed, and most Merciful Father, who keep Covenant and Mercy for
them that Love Thee, and Observe thy Commandments; That being in a State of
Misery, we should be called into a State of Salvation; That thy only Begotten
Son should Mediate and Obtain this Redemption for us; That he should himself
descend from Heaven to call us into that Covenant of Grace which holds it out
to us: And should send his Ambassadors, the Ministers of Religion, to pray us
to be Reconciled to God upon those most reasonable Terms contained therein:
This is such Astonishing Grace and Favor on thy side, that we can never
sufficiently admire thy Loving Kindness to us, nor be duly thankful for the
same. But being sensible, O God, in some measure, how in my Baptism I was
admitted into that Covenant, which entitles me through thy Mercy in Christ, to
such infinite Privileges. I do here voluntarily present my self in thy
Presence, to Recognize the same; and do here solemnly acknowledge those mighty
Obligations lying upon me to be faithful in it; and this I do, both in
Gratitude for such an inestimable Favor as it was, to be made a Member of
Christ's Church, to be Adopted into the Family of thy Children, and to be
instated in a Title to the Inheritance of thy Kingdom; and also from those Vows
made in my behalf, that I should Renounce the Devil, the World, and the Flesh;
Believe in God, and Obey him. And that I will vigorously and speedily execute
those Vows and Promises made in my Baptism, notwithstanding all Temptations to
the contrary, I do here with a full Determination of my Will, solemnly resolve
to do, in confidence, O God, not of my own Strength, but of thy Grace and
Assistance, which I trust will be imparted to me by the Laying on of Hands, and
constantly afforded me, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

After you have been Confirmed, retire as soon as you can; and reflecting upon
that Recognition of your Baptismal Covenant, which you have made, and the
solemn Resolution to perform it, you may offer up the following Prayer to God,
that he would enable you to do the same.

O Almighty God, with whom there is no Variableness, nor shadow of Change,
support and strengthen me, a poor fail Creature, who am unstable as Water. I
have indeed Recognized my Baptismal Vow, and have took it upon my self to
perform all that in my Baptism was promised for me. But the Devil, that Roaring
Lion, who walks about the Earth, seeks whom he may devour, and is always
intent to foil a new Professor, will now in an especial manner I expect, make
his fiercest Attacks against me. The World also of Loose and Profligate Livers
enraged that any should Dedicate their Early Years to God, to their Reproach,
will endeavor by all the Methods of Persuasion, to draw me aside, to accompany
them in the destructive Ways of Sin. And what is worse, my own Treacherous
Heart within is ready to yield to any of those Temptations from without. Yea,
alas! I find my whole Nature, Soul, and Body so miserably depraved, that all
the Faculties and Powers of both are sadly disposed to that which is Evil. My
Understanding is very dull in the Apprehension of Spiritual Things, my Will
very averse to choose that which is right, my Affections listless to Heavenly
Exercises, and my Lusts and Appetites apt to rebel against the Dictates of
right Reason and Religion, so that I may with him in St. Paul, cry out, O
wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of Sin!

But my Comfort is, that I can return with I thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord; for thou, O blessed Jesu, have all Power in Heaven, and in Earth given
unto thee, so that thou can succor and strengthen us when we are tempted,
and enable us to overcome. And, O God of all Grace and Might, the Root of our
Life, and Power and Strength, without whom all good Desires and Purposes wither
and die, be ever present with me, to assist, support, and comfort me, who do
entirely confide in thee, and have no hope but in thine Infinite Mercies.

Now that thou enclinest my Heart toward thee, and have given me a thankful
Sense of thy Love, and some Will to Obey thee in Well-doing, I am encouraged to
hope that thou will not deny me the constant Assistance of thy Good Spirit to
strengthen, confirm, and settle me in a perfect Love and steadfast Obedience to
all thy Holy Commands.

Cherish therefore, and increase the most faint, but sincere Motions which thou
see in me toward a more complete Participation of thee. And especially
preserve me in a full Confidence in thy Almighty Love, as ready to accomplish
the Desires and Endeavors of all those who yield up themselves unto it, in
hearty Willingness to be Governed by it, that being born up by this strong Hope
in thee my Helper, and exceeding great Reward, no Temptation may be able to
prevail over me; but I may walk steadfastly and evenly with thee, in all
Conditions and Circumstances of Life. Make me feel so much of the Comfort of
this Faith, and Love, and Hope, and Obedience reviving me to a delightful Sense
of a blessed Immortality; that whatsoever Allurements or Discouragements I meet
withal in this World, they may only provoke me to give a greater Proof of all
these in a constant Adherence to my Duty, and occasion the increase of my
unspeakable Joy and Satisfaction. All which I beg of thee, through the Alone
Merits of Jesus Christ my Savior. Amen.

FINIS.

