A MEMORIAL, REPRESENTING THE PRESENT STATE OF RELIGION, ON THE CONTINENT OF
North America.

By THOMAS BRAY, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by William Downing, for the Author, 1700.

To his GRACE THOMAS Lord Archbishop OF CANTERBURY, Primate and Metropolitan
OF ALL ENGLAND, The following MEMORIAL Is with all Submission Humbly Dedicated
by

Thomas Bray.

THE Society have given me leave, for dispatch sake, to Print what I am
commanded to say in common to their Correspondents, in regard the Number of
them is increased, and that sending the Yearly Packet would be otherwise long
delayed. The Particulars I am to acquaint you with, are as follow.

The Society think it may be of use, to prevent the Concealment or
Misapplication of Moneys, or Land given to Charitable Uses, to have such
Charities Registered in some Public Place; and therefore reommend it to you to
procure an Entry of the Notices of such Gifts, upon Tables to be hung up in the
Parishes to which such Charities belong, or otherwise, as you think may best
preserve the Memory of them.

The Society having heretofore promiscuously used the Words Propagating, and
Promoting, in their Title, and considering that the Coincidence of the former
with the Title of the Society for Propagating the Gospel in Foreign Parts, has
occasioned Mistakes; They have agreed, for the future, to call themselves only
by the Name of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.

And because some Gentlemen have desired to know how a Legacy, for furthering
the Designs of the Society, may be worded, so as to prevent any doubt about
Payment of it, I am ordered to communicate to you the following Clause, viz.

ITEM. I A. B. do hereby give and bequeath unto C. D. of (...) the Sum of (...)
upon Trust, and to the Intent that he do pay the same to the Treasurer for the
time being of a Voluntary Society, commonly called, or known by the Name of,
The Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, which first met about the
beginning of the Year 1699. and now do, or lately did, hold their Weekly
Meeting on Thursday in Bartlet 's Buildings, in the Parish of St. Andrew in
Holborn, London; which said Sum of (...) I desire may be applied toward
carrying on the Charitable Designs of the said Society.

The Society having been informed of some Methods used in Bedfordshire and
Pembrokeshire, for circulating Books among the Clergy; I am directed to
acquaint you therewith, in hopes they may be of Use, where Public Libraries
are not yet erected: One Method is, by communicating reciprocally Catalogues of
each others Libraries, in order to lend what one may be provided with different
from the other: And the other Method is, to facilitate the procuring of New
Books by a small Annual Subscription, which being laid out therein by common
consent, the Books, after they have been perused alternately, are divided, and
shared by Lot among the Subscribers.

And whereas a worthy Correspondent has found by Experience, that his providing
a little Library of Books for each of his Children, has much tended to excite
a Desire in them after the Knowledge of Religion. The Society take the Liberty
of communicating it to you, that you may recommend the same thing where you
think proper, out of a Sense they have, that nothing is more to be regarded in
the Education of Children, than creating in them a Thirst after Knowledge and
Virtue; by which means they will have also a larger Field for the Exercise of
Industry, which is a thing of vast Importance to be encouraged, being, as may
be said, the Parent of all considerable Seize.

The Society being informed, That printed Copy-Books for the use of
Charity-Schools were much wanted in the Country, have ordered a Specimen of
such a Copy-Book as has been recommended to them to be sent to you. Printed and
Sold by Joseph Downing in Bartholomew-Close, London, at the Rate of Six
Shillings per Doz.

That the Account of Schools may be more perfect the next Year than it is This,
and be published sooner, you are desired to signify by Easter Day at furthest,
the State of the Schools in your Neighborhood; Particularly, when such Schools
were set up; What Number of Children are taught and clothed of each Sex, and
by what Subscriptions, Collections or Endowments maintained; How many Children
put out Apprentices, to Services, or to Sea, from the Beginning of each School;
And where there are School-houses, at whose Expense built; And what other
Particulars fall under your Notice in Relation to Schools, or the Account of
them now published.

If you have not already received, you may expect in a short time, a Packet of
small Books from the Society, Carriage paid: I shall be glad to hear when it
comes to your Hands.

A MEMORIAL HUMBLY laid before The Right Reverend the Lord Bishops of this
Kingdom, and other Right Noble, and Worthy Patrons of Religion; representing
the Present State thereof, in the several Provinces on the Continent of
North America, in order to the Providing a sufficient Number of proper
Missionaries, so absolutely necessary to be sent at this Juncture into those
Parts.
May it please Your Lordships, etc.
AMongst other Reasons for my Return at this time, of Consequence to our Church
in America; in reference to which I have been happy in the Approbation of those
my Ecclesiastical Superiors, to whom I am more immediately accountable in
Things relating to my Mission, there is one of Concernment to be laid before
all Your Lordships, the Universities also of this Kingdom; And I dare promise
my self, will not be thought unworthy the Notice of all the Lovers of Christ,
and his Religion. And it is to represent to You, the present State of Religion
in MARYLAND, PENSYLVANIA, the EAST and WEST-JERSEYS, NEW YORK, ROAD-ISLAND,
LONG ISLAND, NORTH and SOVTH-CAROLINA, BERMVDAS, and NEWFOVND-LAND. And this in
order to the Propagation of the true Christian Religion in those Parts, at a
Crisis, when, as many Thousands are in a happy Disposition to embrace it, so
Infidelity and Heresy seem to make their utmost Efforts to withdraw, and to
fix those People at the greatest distance from it.

I. And to begin where I am more immediately concerned, with MARYLAND. Here,
through the Mercies of God, and after many Struggles with the Quakers, it is to
be hoped, we are in a fair way at last to have an Established Church: The Law
for which I have brought over with me for the Royal Assent. And thereby is
provided a Maintenance for the Clergy of 40 l. of Tobacco per Pole, taxed upon
each communicable Person; which amounts in some Parishes to about 80 l. per
Annum, according to the Rate which Tobacco has born these three last Years;
though that is higher than they can promise themselves the same for the future:
But in 12 of them at least, by reason of the thinness of the Inhabitants, not
to above a third of that Value. And yet these latter Parishes having built
their Churches, think they ought to hive Ministers, as well as the rest: And
had I not, in my PAROCHIAL VISITATION, given them good Words, and fair
Promises, speedily to supply them, I fear our Law would not have passed
altogether so easily as it did. And yet how to make good that Promise to them,
I shall be sadly at a loss, except the Proposals hereafter given may find
Favor with Your Lordships, and those to whom you shall please to recommend
them.

The Papists in this Province appear to me to be not above a twelfth Part of
the Inhabitants; but their Priests are very numerous; whereof more have been
sent in this last Year, than was ever known. And though the Quakers brag so much
of their Numbers and Riches, with which Considerations they would incline the
Government to favor them with such unpresidented Privileges, as to be free
from paying their Dues to the Established Church, or rather, would fain
overthrow its Establishment; yet they are not above a 10th Part in number, and
bear not that proportion, they would be thought to do, with those of the
Church, in Wealth and Trade.

II. As for PENSYLVANIA, I found too much Work in Maryland, to be able to
visit Personally that Province, though most earnestly solicited thereunto by the
People. But there passed Letters betwixt my self, and that Church, full of the
greatest Respects on their sides: And by such Notices as I have received from
some of the Principal Persons of that Country, I am fully made to understand
the State of Religion there; where, I think, if in any part of the Christian
World, a very good proportion of the People are excellently disposed to receive
the Truth.

The Keithites, which are computed to be a Third Part, are truly such; and so
very well affected are they to the Interest of our Church, that, in the late
Election of Assembly-Men, even since Mr. Penn came into his Government, they
had almost carried it for the Churchmen, to their great Surprise; so as to let
them see, they had been only wanting to themselves in not timely applying.

There are in Pensylvania two Congregations of Lutherans, being Swedes, whose
Churches are finely built, and their two Ministers lately sent in, nobly
furnished with 300 l. worth of Books by the Swedish King: And they live in very
good Accord with our Minister, and his Church.

There is but one Church of England Minister as yet there, and he at
Philadelphia, well esteemed and respected by his People: And they do most
importunately solicit both from thence, and from other Parts of that Province,
for more, where, I am assured, there are at least six wanting.

There are some Independents, but neither many, nor much bigoted.

III. Adjoining to this, are the two Colonies of EAST and WEST-JERSEYS, where
they have some pretty Towns, and well-peopled; but are wholly left to
themselves, without Priest, or Altar. The Quakers are very numerous in the
Jerseys. But the Keithians, who are many there, are alike affected to us, as in
Pensylvania. And I think there would be a Reception for six Ministers in both
the Jerseys.

IV. From NEW YORK, I have an Account, that a Church of England Clergy are much
wanted there: And there will be room for at least two Ministers, besides one
which they have already; the one to assist at New York, the other to be placed
at Albany; where, besides the Inhabitants of the Town, which are many, we have
two Companies of Soldiers in Garrison, but all without a Preacher.

I shall not here speak of the Number of Missionaries requisite to be sent to
convert the Native Indians, lying on the back of this, and all our other
Colonies on the Continent. Now that the French of Canada do, by their Priests,
draw over so many of these Indians, both to their Religion, and their
Interests, in the Opinion of many wise Persons, who understand the active and
inveterate Spirit of Popery, the Nature of the Indians, and the Situation of
those Parts, the Civil Government has very great Reason to take Umbrage, so as
to think if of the highest consequence to the Preservation of our Plantations,
to have those Indians, which border upon us, brought over to our Religion, in
order to hold them in a stricter Alliance with us. This, I hope, may facilitate
another Memorial relating to that particular Case, so as to obtain from the
Public such a Fund, as may maintain at least Twenty such Persons, as will
learn their Language, live with them, and preach the Gospel amongst them. But
the Reasons for making Provision for the Support of Religion within the
Colonies, being not, as commonly apprehended, of so National a Concern; it is
from particular Persons, and such only as are more than ordinarily zealous for
the Honor of God, and the Good of Souls, that we can with much Assurance
promise our selves a necessary Assistance toward Promoting in these so good a
Work. And therefore shall address, in relation to them, in another way of
Proposal. To proceed then.

V. In LONG ISLAND there are Nine Churches, but no Church of England Minister,
though much desired; and there ought to be at least Two sent to that Colony.

VI. In ROAD-ISLAND, for want of a Clergy, many of the Inhabitants are said to
be sunk downright into Atheism. The New Generation, being the Offspring of
Quakers, whose Children, for want of an Outward Teaching, which those
Enthusiasts at first denied, being mere Ranters; as indeed the Sons of Quakers
are found to be such in most Places, and equally to deny all Religion. However,
through the Noble Assistance of Colonel Nicholson, Governor of Virginia, there
is a Church raised in that Colony, and something subscribed toward a
Maintenance of one Minister. But there will be Work enough for Two substantial
Divines at least.

VII. NORTH CAROLINA lies betwixt Virginia and South Carolina: It has two
Settlements; the one called Roanoak, the other Pamplico, 100 Miles distant from
each other. And as there will be Occasion for at least Two Missionaries to be
sent amongst them; so the Governor, who is now going over to that Colony,
being a very worthy Gentleman, I dare promise will give the best Countenance
and Encouragement which shall be in his Power.

VIII. SOVTH-CAROLINA is the last Province that I shall now speak of, on the
Continent, a very thriving Colony, and so large, as to want at least Three
Missionaries, besides one lately sent there.

IX. Over against South Carolina, lie the Bermudas, or Summer-Islands, formerly
reckoned very plentiful, as well as pleasant and healthful; but are now known
to be very poor and barren; which is commonly attributed to two Reasons: First,
The Fall of their Cedars, that sheltered them from hurtful Winds; since which
time, these Islands, formerly so famous for their Oranges and Lemons, are now
continually blasted: And, Secondly, To a certain Worm or Ant, so much increased
upon them, as totally in some Places to devour their Corn. But from whatever
Causes the Poverty of the Place proceeds, so it is, that though there are Eight
Tribes or Parishes, with so many Churches, endowed with some Shares of Land,
which formerly might afford a mean Provision, now there is but one Minister
upon the Place, and he but barely subsisted; so that considering the Extent of
that Knot of little Islands, Three Missionaries at least will be wanting there.

It is no part of my Province to speak to Virginia, it being under the
Jurisdiction of a very worthy Person, Mr. Commissary Blaire; whose Abilities,
as they fit him for great Designs, so his Industry has been for some Years
exercised in doing uncommon Services to that Church.

But the Gratitude, which all that are well-affected to Christianity do owe,
more especially the Clergy, and above all my self, to that admirable Patron of
Religion and Learning, Colonel Francis Nicholson, the present Governor
thereof, forbids me to pass over in silence those glorious Works which he is
there carrying on, with such unusual Application; and which, when accomplished,
must render his Memory sweet to all succeeding Generations.

The Two great Designs, which he is now so intent upon, for the Good of that
Church, (not to mention here what a Patron, or rather a Founder, he has been to
it, in most of the other Provinces now named) are the Erecting of a College in
Virginia, or rather an University; for which he has obtained a Charter from his
Majesty, with a Noble Endowment, and the Building of which he has already far
advanced; and the Settling of the Church by Law, on such a Foot, and
Constitution, as will render that Clergy and Province mutually happy in one
another.

Considering this Governor's late Heroic Actions in the Conquest of the most
desperate of Enemies, the Pirates, who were so infatuated, as to approach his
Province; and in whose Reduction, his own Personal Presence and Valor had a
share, but that it was necessary to the Service of his Prince, of his
Government, and of its Trade, almost to a Fault: It Is hard to say, whether Arms
or Letters have the greatest Right to challenge him for their General. But when
we consider the extreme disproportion betwixt the Numbers of Persons in Public
Post, who are studious of the Good of God's Church, compared with such, as are
thought serviceable to the State in Arms, it ought to be the hearty Prayers of
all the Friends of Religion and Learning, not only in his own Province, but all
over that Continent, that whenever the Service of the Public shall oblige him
again to expose his Person to such Dangers, that God would preserve him; for
should he sall, in all humane Appearance, the Loss would be irreparable.

Nor do I think my self obliged to speak here of New England, where
Independency seems to be the Religion of the Country. My Design is not to
intermeddle, where Christianity under any Form has obtained Possession; but to
represent rather the deplorable State of the English Colonies, where they have
been in a manner abandoned to Atheism; or, which is much at one, to Quakerism,
for want of a Clergy settled among them. And, I think, I have one remaining
Instance of such Neglect in this kind, as if it provokes me to some warm
Reflections upon our Nation, (for the Church, I know, wants Power and Riches to
do much of it self) I conceive the Occasion will bear me out.

X. And it is with reference to the last Colony in America, that I shall speak
any thing to at present, namely, NEWFOVND-LAND, near whose Coast we were drove,
in my Voyage to Maryland; and I could have been very glad, if, with the Safety
of our Ship and Lives, we had been thrown into it, that I might have Personally
seen the Condition of the Place and People. But this Curiosity was in a great
measure satisfied, by the Account I received from the Master of a Ship on Board
of us, who had made many Voyages there; and gave me this Account of the Island,
so far as it is in the Possession of the English: That there are Harbors in it
belonging to us, 26; Families, 274; Inhabitants, as well Winter as Summer, on
the Island, about 1120; Workers, about 4200; Ships Crew, in the Fishing Season,
3150; and Men in the Ships, sent at the latter end of the Year to carry home
the Fish, 1200.

And now, is it possible to imagine, that from a Nation professing Christianity
in its Purity, defecate of the least Tincture of Dross and Corruption; the sole
Tendency of whose Principles is, to inspire all its Disciples with the noblest
Thoughts of God, with an ardent Zeal for his Honor and Glory, and with a
boundless and unlimited Love to Mankind; a Love as Extensive as the whole
World, and as Intensive as that we have to our selves? Is it credible, that in
a Colony of so many Thousand Souls, who are all of them Natives from England,
from whence our Shipping do sail to it, during many Months in the Year, and in
whose Navigation our best Seamen are bred up; and where so many Hundred
Families abide perpetually, some 20 Years, most the whole course of their
Lives; and from whose Trade such Profit accrues to the Nation, as contributes
next to the Woollen Manufacture, to turn the Balance of Europe in Commerce on
our side? Can any one believe it, when he is told, that from such a Nation so
little Care has been taken, with respect to such a Colony, that there neither
was, nor is, any Preaching, Prayers, or Sacraments, or any Ministerial and
Divine Offices, performed on that Island; but that they should be suffered to
live as those, who know no God in the World! Are Rome and Mecca, whose Sons are
so apt to compass Sea and Land to gain Proselytes to Superstition and Folly, so
regardless of their own People? And will it not then be more tolerable for that
Tire, and this Sydon, than for us, in the Day of Judgment? For if they had
known the things which we do, the most rude and incultivated of those Parts,
which we possess, should not have remained uninstructed in the best Religion in
the World.

The Truth of it is, this Indifference of ours in Propagating the Religion
which we profess to believe, in those Parts, where, as well our Power does
enable us, as our Duty oblige us, to take some Care thereof, is the Amazement
of all whom I ever yet heard make serious Reflections upon it.

But since, from what I have yet found, I am not sanguine enough to hope for
any public Funds for the PROPAGATION OF CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE, either in this,
or the other Colonies: And the only hopes is from the pious Clergy themselves,
and such particular Persons amongst the devout Laity, whose Hearts are inflamed
with a Love of God, and of those Souls which he has purchased with his own
Blood: I shall rather turn my self to you, my most Reverend Fathers, and other
Noble Patrons of Religion, giving you a general Estimate of the Number of
Missionaries, which we hope to be supplied withal from your Paternal Care, and
Pious Assistance: And as there will be need of at least Two to be sent for
Newfound-Land; so, upon the whole, it appears, that there are at present
wanting no less than Forty Protestant Missionaries to be sent into all these
Colonies.

And the Necessity that there should be both so many, and those singularly well
qualified for the purpose, I am next to show you. And that there should be at
least that Number sent into each of these Colonies, as I have now mentioned,
appears from hence, That even then their Business will he extremely wide; but
chiefly for this Reason, that there is so great an Inclination to embrace
Christianity amongst many Quakers, all over those Parts where Mr. Keith has
been, that it will be a fatal Neglect, if our Church should not close with that
Providence, which offers so many Proselytes into her Bosom. And the Plantations
growing now into populous and powerful Provinces, with all Submission, in my
Opinion, ought not to be so neglected, as that it should be indifferent to us,
whether they be made Christians, or abandoned to Infidelity.

Nor is the Necessity less that these Missionaries should be singularly well
qualified, than that they should be at all sent. And indeed, in order to make
the better Choice, agreeable to what I have observed of the State, the Temper,
and Constitution of the Country and People, is one great Reason that has
persuaded me so soon back. And the Persons which alone can do good there, as I
conceive, must,

In the First place, be of such nice Morals, as to abstain from all Appearance
of Evil; there being not such a calumniating People in the World, as the
Quakers are every where found to be. And it is the worst Fault of the
Plantations, that they give their Tongues too much liberty that way, especially
if they can find the least Flaw.

Secondly, They must be Men of good Prudence, and an exact Conduct, or
otherwise, they will unavoidably fall into Contempt, with a People so well
versed in Business, as every the meanest Planter seems to be.

Thirdly, They ought to be well experienced in the Pastoral Care, having a
greater Variety, both of Sects and Humors, to deal with in those Parts, than
are at home; and therefore it would be well, if we could be provided with such
as have been Curates here for some time.

Fourthly, More especially they ought to be of a true Missionary Spirit, having
an ardent Zeal for God's Glory, and the Salvation of Men's Souls.

Fifthly, Of a very active Spirit, and consequently, not so grown into Years,
as to be incapable of Labor and Fatigue, no more than very Young, upon which
account they will be more liable to be despised.

And, Lastly, They ought to be good, substantial, well-studied Divines, very
ready in the Holy Scriptures, able with a sound Judgment to explicate and prove
the great Doctrines of Christianity, to state the Nature and Extent of the
Christian Duties, and with the most moving Considerations to enforce their
Practice, and to defend the Truth against all its Adversaries: To which
purpose, it will be therefore absolutely requisite to provide each of them with
a Library of necessary Books, to be fixed in those Places to which they shall
be sent, for the Use of them, and their Successors for ever: This to be a
perpetual Encouragement to good and able Divines, always to go over, and to
render them useful when they are there: A Design of whose Usefulness, of whose
Necessity, I am now so fully persuaded, since I have been in, and know the
Wants of those Parts, that I am resolved to have no hand in sending, or taking
over any one, the best Missionary, who shall not be so provided.

Well, but the great Quaere is, How we may be able to procure so great a Number
of such able Missionaries? How to maintain them? and how to furnish them out
with such Libraries? In order to all which, I crave leave to offer these
following Considerations.

First, That the Colonies now named, consisting chiefly of Quakers, or such, as
for want of the Gospel being preached amongst them, are in a manner of no
Religion: They are in that respect to be considered as almost so many Heathen
Nations. And it will seem unreasonable, to expect that a People, before they
are converted, and made to understand the Goodness and Advantages of true
Religion, should be in^uc'd to maintain its Ministry: And especially in this
Case of the Quakers, the Persons chiefly to be proselyted, who, above all other
Rites of the Church of Christ, have been deeply prejudiced against the
Maintenance of the Clergy.

Secondly, That if the Missionaries, which shall be sent into each of those
Colonies, shall be well chosen, and duly qualified, I am persuaded they will
find the Work of God to prosper so well in their Hands, that in Three Years
time the People will, out of pure Devotion, subscribe, or settle a plentiful
Maintenance, both for them, and their Successors. To support me in which
Conjecture, we have Two very eminent, and late Instances; the one in
Pensylvania, the other in Carolina. In the former of which, Mr. Clayton, who at
his first going over, Three Years ago, and whilst his Congregation was not
above Sixty Persons, had scarcely 50 l. per Annum Maintenance; yet upon the
Accession of new Converts, to upwards of 700, (for so is that Church increased
in Three Years) has brought the Maintenance of the Minister of Philadelphia to
150 l. per Annum. And in Carolina, Mr. Marshall, through his excellent
Preaching, and singular Conduct, so gained upon the People, that from a poor
Subscription-Maintenance at first, they settled upon him and his Successors,
within Two Years after his being amongst them, what amounts to 200 l. per
Annum. And at his Death, the General Assembly of that Province were so kind to
his Widow, as to present her with 200 l. upon her Return home.

Thirdly, I conceive therefore, that in the Interim, and during the first Three
Years, it will be absolutely necessary, that these Missionaries should be
subsisted from hence; and it shall be my utmost Care in that time to have them
so provided of Glebes, and the same so stocked, as that they may thenceforward
live comfortably upon the Emoluments of their own Places.

Fourthly, The Method by which I would humbly propose to have these
Missionaries, which I desire, both well chosen, and supported from home, in
their Service for the first Three Years, is as follows.

1. As to the Choice, That every Bishop be pleased to pitch upon some proper
Person within his own Diocese, such as his Lordship shall judge bed qualified,
as aforesaid, for the Mission: And then,

2. As to his Support, That his Lordship having countenanced the following
Proposal in such measure, as (considering the many other like Calls upon those
in his Station, more than upon any others) his Lordship shall think fit; he be
pleased to recommend it to the dignified, and other the most considerable
Clergy within his Diocese; and they, to the well disposed Laity within their
respective Parishes, to subscribe what may maintain one Missionary at least, to
be sent from such Diocese.

3. That where there happens to be any Persons, as of noted Zeal for God's
Glory, and the Salvation of Men's Souls; so of Ability withal to maintain of
themselves a Missionary; especially, if such as have not Children to inherit
their Estates, and consequently, whom Providence seems to have designed to be
public Benefactors to Mankind; That a more particular Application be made to
such, as those, who have reason to be glad of an Opportunity to entitle
themselves so expressly, as this will, to the exalted Degrees of Glory, promised
to those wise Persons who turn many to Righteousness, Dan. 12.3.

4. That the Sum subscribed for each Missionary be 50 l. per Annum for Three
years. And as less will not be sufficient to encourage a Person of Learning and
Worth to undertake the Mission; so it will not suffice to subsist even a
private Minister in those Parts, where every thing is very dear, which must be
bought for Money, and not bartered for by the Product of the Country; which no
Clergyman will be Master of, till he can have a Glebe, and shall have
cultivated his Plantation.

5. That the Subscriptions be paid in to the Archdeacons at their
Easter-Visitation, and be forthwith returned by them to the Hands of the Bishop
of the Diocese; or to such Person, or Persons in London, as his Lordship shall
appoint to receive it, and so pay it to the Order of the Missionary sent by
such Diocese.

6. That besides the 50 l. per Annum, allowed each Missionary for his
Subsistence, 20 l. a year be appropriated toward buying a Library of
necessary, and useful Books, both for himself, and his Successors in the Town,
or other Place wherein he shall be settled.

Lastly, That the first Payment of the 50 l. and 20 l. be advanced at his first
going off (which I could wish might be before Christmas next) that so being
sufficiently furnished with all Necessaries, he may not appear to come, as an
indigent Person into the Place where he shall be appointed, and as one that is
to have Free Quarters upon those he is to proselyte. The Quakers being very
prying into the Condidition of those who come over; whom if they find poor,
they proclaim Hirelings, and to come merely for Bread; but if otherwise, they
have been found at a loss what to say against them. And to be well provided at
first, will succeed the better to the advantage both of the Missionary himself,
and the Church: To the support and continuance of which, he will undoubtedly
lay a good Foundation, who being happy in his Conduct, shall come first.

And indeed, my Lords, could we but have such Men at first, as by their real
Worth might be able to gain the Esteem and Affections of those People, I do not
in the least doubt from what I have already found, but that in my next
Visitation I could obtain large Tracts of Glebes, and good Houses, built by the
respective Parishes in Maryland, and the Proselyte-Churches in the other
Colonies; so as both those, who shall now go over, will themselves in a few
years be in a comfortable Condition, and their Successors after them in a happy
Settlement.

And as neither the Clergy's Condition can be comfortable, nor can it be
properly called a Settlement, till they shall be in Houses, and on Glebes of
their own; so now is the time to endeavor both, or it will be too late
hereafter to think of obtaining either. For as yet Land may be taken up, or had
upon easy Terms; but should the Plantations continue to increase, as they have
done of late, within Seven Years Land will not be purchased at treble the
value, as now.

For my own part, I take this to be so happy a Juncture to lay the Foundation
of lasting Good to the Church of God in those Provinces, that though after the
Expense already of above a Thousand Pounds in its Service, and though it is
likely to be still at my own Charge, when I go again, yet I shall not make the
least Difficulty in accompanying your Lordships Missionaries, which from your
respective Diocesses you shall please to send into those Parts. And being
therefore so little interested my self in the Mission, I hope I may with a
better Countenance, through your Lordship's Patronage, presume to offer the
following Proposals to the very Reverend Dignitaries, and wealtheir Clergy, and
other well-disposed Persons of the Church, for a small Subscription from each
of them toward the Maintenance of those Missionaries, their Brethren, whom
your Lordships shall please to send.

PROPOSALS for the Propagation of the Christian Religion in the several
Provinces, on the Continent of North America.
WHEREAS it has pleased God of late to stir up the Hearts of many People in the
American Plantations, who seemed formerly to have forgot Religion, now to be
very solicitous, and earnest for Instruction, so as of themselves to call for
those Helps, which in Duty they ought to have teen prevented in, by us, from
the beginning: And whereas, to our shame, we must own, that no Nation has been
so guilty of this neglect as ours: The Papists, of all Countries, having been
most careful to support their Superstitions wherever they have planted: The
Dutch with great Care allowing an Honorable Maintenance, with all other
Encouragements, for Ministers in their Factories and Plantations: The Swedes,
the Danes, and other small Colonies, being seldom or never deficient in this
particular; and we of the English Nation only being wanting in this Point: And
lastly, Whereas, though it be true, that some of our most considerable
Plantations have set out Parishes, and Allowances for Ministers, yet it is not
so in all; and where some Provision is made, it is as yet far short of being
sufficient to maintain a Minister: And there is a total Neglect of informing
the poor Natives. Out of all these Considerations, we do not think a more
Charitable Work can be carried on, than as much as in us lies, to contribute
toward the Redress of these great Failures: And therefore do subcribe, to that
purpose, the several Sums to our Names annexed.


