THE Cheating Gallant: Or, The False Count Brion. A Pleasant NOVEL:

Translated from the French.

LONDON, Printed for James Magnes, and Richard Bentley, in Russel Street in
Covent Garden, near the Piazza's. M. DC. LXX VII.

Licensed,

November. 17th. 1676. Roger L' Estrange.

TO THE Right Honorable JOHN, EARL of Mulgrave, Gentleman of his Majesty's
Bedchamber, Knight of the Noble Order of the GARTER, etc.
My Lord,
WEre an Author, who Dedicates a Book, obliged to Choose a Subject equal to the
Merit of the Person to whom he Addresses It; I should appear Guilty of an
inexcusable Fault, in presenting You This, which contains Noihing worthy the
Perusal of a Wit so Delicate, and so Clear, as Your Lordship's. And the
Impatience I was under, to make You an Offering out of my poor Stock, must have
submitted to the Censure and Condemnation of a Crime. But, my Lord, the Merit
of Persons of Your Rank is not measured by Books: Those who are Born under the
Influence of Stars so happy as Yours, Read not to Learn; and seldom find Books
Capable to Instruct Them. I, who am only an Author of Trifles, can pretend to
no more than the Honor of giving You a little Divertisement. My Book may pass
for another Scaramouche; The Hero of my Play having Acted (especially when
London was his Scene) a very pleasant Part, which many have thought worthy the
Publishing in Print: I might have, perhaps, succeeded better in my Description,
had I been allowed the Liberty to Represent it fully as it was: But there were
too many concerned; who, though they bore part in the Adventures of my Hero,
would doubtless have been loath to appear in his Memoires. There was a
necessity to suppress many Particulars; and what is suppressed, is often the best
part of the Story: I have said this rather to excuse my self to Your Lordship,
than to Justify my self to the Public. I could have wished, that though the
Present I offer be really a Trifle, yet that my Trifle should not have been
Imperfect; but it was not in my Power; and an Historian must not always Write
the whole Truth of his Story.

Thus far, my Lord, this Epistle has nothing common with ordinary.
Dedications; which are usually made up of Eloges, as well true as false: Yet, I
confess, that an Author as I am, who pretend much to Sincerity, ought not to
have let slip so fair an Occasion (without the help of Art or Eloquence) to
Represent in Your Lordship's Person, the Wit, the Courage, and all other
Qualityes of a Hero Highborn, and every way Complete: But this is a Subject
too Excellent, to appear in the Front of a Book of this Nature. I will reserve
my self that Honor for a better Occasion, in some serious Piece; and rest
satisfied at present, to have Written an Epistle for no other end, than to make
it appear, With how much Respect, and how deep a Passion, I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, and obedient Servant, S. Bremond.

Some Books Printed this Term for J. Magnes, and R. Bentley.
THe Happy Slave, a Novel. The false Count Brion, a Novel. French Novels.
L' Gallant Esorock. L' Horux Eslave. L' Horux Eslave, Second Part.
Plays.
Abdellatzar. Sir Timothy Paudery: Or, The Town-Fop. Madam Fickle: Or, The
Witty False One. The Plain-Dealer. The Fool Turned Critic: In the Press.
Essays Moral. Translated from the French: In the Press.
THE Cheating Gallant: OR, COUNT BRION.
NEver did Men more affect an appearance of Honesty than in our days, yet never
was Age more fruitful in Cheats; they grow in all Countries, each Sex and
Condition produces new instances; and those who Converse in the World, quickly
find, there are not subtler Knaves, or greater Masters of Craft than some who
are taken for the Simplest of Men.

The Gallant I write of, was a Hero of this Make: The best account of his
Pedigree, (being somewhat obscure) is, That he was of the Race of Melchisedec,
and knew no Father, but a Country Curat, whose Nephew he past for, though
strongly suspected to be his Son; being so very like him, it gave cause to
believe, that when he was Begot, the Curat had more than a finger in the Pie.

The Curat in his younger days, had been taken for a Gamester; having a
Complexion and Mein, that discovered an inclination in him to labor no less
for the Increase, than the Salvation of his Flock: However, the great care he
took of his Nephew, and the kindness he had for him, made Men (who judge
according to Appearances) easily believe, The Curat had no small interest in
him. And the rather, for that a considerable part of the Revenue of the fat
Benefice he had, was bestowed yearly on the Education of his Nephew John Le
Brun, for so was his Name: And, as to his Qualities, he was handsome and witty;
but from a Child, a little given to Cousening and Cheating.

The good Inclinations of Youth must be Cultivated with continual Care to bring
them to perfection; the ill, grow up of themselves. Thus the hopeful Nephew did
constantly exercise the patience of his good Uncle, by doing every day one
shrewd turn or other, and playing a thousand wild pranks, attended with as many
Complaints from the Neighborhood; so that the Curat despaired at last of ever
bringing him to Good. But John (at length) being about three and twenty years
old, and moved by the Remonstrances of his good Uncle, or growing more sober
with Age, was so far Reformed, as to give some hopes of Amendment. There was no
more talk of his Fooleries, no Complaints for his Froliques; not but that he
continued as very a Rogue as before, but that he was grown up to the Wit of
covering his Knavery, and concealing his Extravagances.

The good Curat thought it the work of Heaven, and gave God thanks for the
blessed Reformation. John, who knew himself a handsome Lad, was willing to try
his Fortune in Gallantry: The Village he was born in, could not furnish him
with a Beauty suitable to his own; which, he thought, might expect a civil
Respect from a Lady of greater Merit, than a Country Girl could pretend to:
And to compass his Design, he resolved the Scene of his first Adventure, should
be a Castle belonging to the Lord of the Manor: There he soon met with a
Chambermaid, who might serve very well for his first Essay in Gallantry; being
a very pretty Wench, and of a very good Family. He had no sooner discovered his
passion to her, but he promised himself Success. The plain Country Lovers, use
commonly very little Formality in their Amors; it is but telling one another
they are in Love, and the business is done. But our Gallant had read Romances;
and strictly observing the Punctilios of Gallantry, made his Declaration in due
time and place, and was kindly received by his excellent Mistress.

Diana, the Nymph I am speaking of, was more honest and innocent, than those of
her Character ordinarily are: Chambermaides in the Country, having not the
Advantages incident to those of the Town; who, in a short time, become such
Proficients in the Mysteries of Gallantry, that they quickly Commence
Mistresses of the Art. John Le Brun had the Dexterity to persuade her, That his
Passion was arrived to that height, that nothing but her pity could secure him
from present Death. The Good-natured Girl, who would have been troubled in
Conscience, to see a young Man (who loved her so tenderly) dye for want of her
help, easily resolved to give him Ease. This Scene of Love was to be acted in a
Garden; where, under pretense of eating Cherries, Diana took John with her to
shake the Tree. I know very well (said she, with a Counterfeit Modesty) that
what I do here is contrary to my Duty, and a blemish to my Honor: But seeing
the necessity of losing you, or my self, I find the Consideration of my Life a
great deal too light to be balanced with yours: But I hope I shall have to do
with a Man of Honor, and Honesty, who will take care of my Reputation, and not
abuse me for that which Love forces me to in kindness to him. The Gallant, you
may imagine, failed not on this occasion to make use of the deepest Oaths, and
the highest Protestations of Love and Fidelity, to strengthen the Inclination,
and settle the mind of so kind a Mistress.

John, being so nearly related to the Curat, needed no other Recommendation to
gain liberty of Access to the Castle, and maintain awhile his Correspondence
and Familiarity with the Chambermaid, without Interruption: But by degrees,
notice was taken of a particular Kindness between them, though no body dreamt
of their being so intimate, as they really were. Among all the Family, Diana
made choyoe of the Lady of the Place, to be her only Confident: But, though she
had singled her out from a multitude of others, she daily Converst with, she
did not think fit to trust her with the Adventure of the Cherry-Tree; being so
Romantique, that she judged it not proper to be Communicated to any; but
especially, to her Mistress.

The Lady was Handsome, and very Inclinable: and to cover her Sins, had taken a
Husband advanced in Years; who, warned by some Visions concerning his Honor,
had taken a Resolution to quit the Town, and retire into the Country; in hopes,
by the benefit of that Air, to be cured of the Headache, that troubled him in
the Town. But let us do what we can, we shall all have our Fortunes; and he
that is born to have a kind Wife, is sure to go to Heaven, if Horns can help
him thither. The poor Lady confined to a Village, where she could scarce see
once in a Month a Man any way Tolerable, had no other Pleasure in her
Solitude, but to meditate sometimes on her good Actions past; and relate them
to Diana, whom she found a very good Girl, and capable of a Secret.

This Lady being a very experienced Lover, was the first that discovered the
Amor of the Chambermaid, and the Curat's Nephew, and was so far from opposing
it, as some proud ill-natured Mistress would have done, that she favored their
Intrigues, by taking frequent Walks into the Garden, and the Fields; and making
Diana partaker of that pleasure, gave her the opportunity of meeting John
Le-Brun almost every day, and took singular delight to see these Country-Lovers
Court and make Love; but made as if she knew nothing of the business, nor took
the least notice of it to Diana. But the good natured Maid, thinking her self
obliged by these favors from her Mistress, (to let her know something) she
took the occasion as they were sitting under a Tree, discoursing of Love, to
discover to her a Secret of mighty importance (wherein she prayed her advice)
that the Curat's Nephew had a great passion for her, and that she found her
self pretty well inclined, but apprehended some Consequences which perplexed her
mind, that she knew not what to resolve on. Her Mistress smiling, and with an
air of kindness, laying her Arm over her Neck, desired her to tell her truly
if she were gone no further. Diana blushed, not knowing what Answer to make.

The Mistress taking advantage of the Confusion of the Lover, told her she had
too good an opinion of John Le-Brun, to believe he had so long left her in a
Condition to doubt in this point; and that if she would confess the truth, she
must acknowledge, she asked Counsel too late about that particular, that she
need not hide it from her, being already assured she Loved him, and willing to
serve her in any thing for her advantage. So much Compleasance, and so
extraordinary Kindness from a Mistress, in whose power it was to do very much
for her, did so charm Diana, that it engaged her at the same time to speak a
little more freely of the affair: So that the Lady, who was very dextrous at
pumping out Secrets, made her confess that what at first she had termed a bare
inclination, was in truth a settled Passion. That if John Loved Diana, she
Loved him no less; and descending by degrees to matters of fact, they
discoursed of some favors she had not had the power to deny him.

The pretty Maid (in the end) ingeniously confessed they were come to some close
Familiarities of Love, but she would take care he should find it a hard matter
to proceed any further, unless he would Marry her.

The Mistress, who had never descended to those fondnesses of Love, but where
she designed to grant her Lover all he could wish, knew well enough what to
think of the business, yet was unwilling at that time to press that point any
further, but had the Curiosity to know the beginning and progress of the Amor,
and fully informed her self of the smallest trifles and fooleries which gave
her a very pleasant divertisement, till at last she perfectly learnt the whole
state of the affair, their Rendezvous and places of Assignation, to the very
Conclusion.

The easy Diana knew not what a person she had to deal with, and to whom she
had imparted her Secret. There is nothing whereof a Woman ought to be more
distrustful, than of another Woman, especially in matters of Love; there being
nothing in the World whereof a Woman is more jealous, than of the good Fortune
of another. This was not the first time, that the Mistress became Rival to her
Maid. The Lady was not only of a very susceptible Nature, but had already cast
her Eyes on the Illustrious John Le Brun; who, for Handsomness and Wit, was
(without Contradiction) the Flower of the Village. But the many Measures she
was to take, the hazard she was to run in trusting a Raw young Fellow, a mere
Novice in Love; and the perpetual Watch of her Husband kept over her Actions,
so startled her Reason, that till then, they had moderated (if not smothered)
the Transports of her Amorous Soul. But the Inclination this Gallant had
entertained for a Chambermaid, had highly fomented in the Heart of the
Mistress those Seeds of Rebellion, and Revolt from her Duty, long since
implanted there. And the Story she had newly heard of the state of their Amor,
made her absolutely resolve to make use of the occasion, for sharing with her
Maid in the Pleasure she had to see John Le Brun.

You may easily believe, the Lady designed not to engage in the Conquest of her
Chamber-Maids Gallant; but was very willing Diana should have the Honor of it,
allowing her Mistress a share in the use of it, to satisfy Nature, and no
more: And Nature is commonly content with the Use, not troubling her self about
the Property.

We have all our Infirmities; and those of this Temper are the more pardonable,
in that it is almost impossible to master them: and this passionate Lady was
not disposed to offer any Violence to her Inclinations. She thought of her
Pleasure, and the Joy that attends it, not troubling her self with scruples and
doubts; and had formed in her Mind a thousand Designs to obtain her Desires.

John was looked upon in the Castle, as Diana 's Servant; which gave the Lady a
fair occasion to laugh, to speak, to walk with him when she pleased, without
any suspicion, if Diana were in Company. But the old Gentleman, whether searing
the Amors of these two Lovers would set his Wife alonging, or that he was
jealous of all the World, as of her, began to dislike the great Familiarity and
Freedom John used in his House. He went to the Curate, and told him, It was
pity a young Man as his Nephew, who had so good Parts to make him useful in
the Church, should lose his time as he did: And that, being looked upon as
worthy to succeed him in his Benefice, and be one day the Pastor of his Flock,
should think of nothing but making of Love: That this proceeding did not edifye
at all: That he must begin betimes to implant in him a Contempt of the World,
and an Affection for Retyredness. In a word, that Prayer and Study ought to be
the principal Business of the Nephew of so honest a Gentleman as he was: That
he told him this as a Friend, and hoped his Advice would be well taken.

This Sermon being ended, the Curate gave his Worship humble Thanks for the
Favor he did him, and his Nephew; and when time served, both should
acknowledge it: But he knew well enough where his Worship was pinched. He had
not kept his Jealousy so close, but the Curate knew the Disease he was
troubled with; and might very well judge, That his Nephew (Young and Handsome as
he' was) could not spend his time so constantly in the Castle, without giveing
him some Umbrage. However, he forgot not to give his Nephew a Lecture when he
came home at Night; and to forbid him (on pain of his Displeasure) to go any
more to the Castle, for Reasons not to be made known at present; but received
from so good a hand, there was no cause to sear he that gave them could be
mistaken. John knew not what this meant; but meeting Diana on the Morrow
(having watched above an Hour for an opportunity to speak to him) she told him
the News, that cleared all doubts: acquainting him, That her Master had charged
her Mistress, and her, to see him no more, nor take him along with them to
walk; his Uncle having made it is Request, searing his Nephews hankering after
Women, might hinder him in his Vocation; and as for him, he was resolved it
should not be said, he was spoiled in his House.

John Le Brun was not a little astonished so see himself deprived in a moment,
not only of the sight and Conversation of his Mistress, but of the lovely
Company of his Lady; who had already discovered some good Inclinations, which
(cultivated with Care) promised him more Good than could be expected from the
Love of a Chambermaid. The Vanity of his Nature, and the good Opinion he had
of himself, made him apt to flatter himself on any occasion: and, as to this
Lady, he had certainly reason enough for it: For, the kindness she expressed for
his Person, accompanied with that obliging Behavior she seasoned it withal,
gave him ground enough to hope for some Favor. But then, when he thought
himself the happiest of Men, or (at least) in a fair way to be so; he received
the sad News, which blasted his Pretensions, and made all his Hopes vanish. You
might have expected to find him Irrecoverably swallowed up by Despair; and he
had certainly been so; had not the simple Diana bid him not trouble himself for
the matter; and told him, Her Mistress, and she, had thought of a way to see
him; if not by Day as formerly, it should be at Night: That she had for that
purpose, been that Morning betimes with one of her Friends, a Lock-Smith, and
carried him in Wax, the print of the two Keys, to the Back-gate of the Castle;
and that, before Night, she would give him an account of them, if he would but
take the pains to be at that Place about Nine in the Evening. The Spirits of
our afflicted Gallant were not a little raised by the hopes she gave him; and
you may believe, he promised faithfully not to fail the Agssination.

The poor Girl was in earnest, and thought her self extremely obliged to her
Mistress; who all this while, labored nothing more than to do her the worst
Office one Woman can do another in Love; which is, to rob her of her Lover. But
it was her Folly not to see, that the Concernment her Mistress expressed for
John's misfortune was too great, to be free from Suspicion. She had not made
such have to find the means to let him into her House by Night, but that she
was Particularly and Personally concerned. And it was apparent enough, that,
running an equal Risque in all Dangers with Diana, she did in Justice expect to
share in her Pleasures.

The Lock-Smith made ready the Keys the same day; and was paid so nobly, as to
oblige him to keep their Counsel. John was at the place of Rendezvous at the
Hour Diana had appointed him, who was as punctual as he; and told him, All was
well, and that she just came from trying the Keys; and that, at Eleven a
Clock, when the Old Gentleman was a bed: He had no more to do, but come to the
Back-gate, which she would then open for him.

This Gate opened to a back Stair to the Ladies Apartment, where the Gallant
might attend without any danger: At Eleven a Clock he stood Sentinel, as
appointed, and was introduced. John, who perhaps was a little cloyed with the
easy Possession of Diana, when he found her Mistress looked so kindly upon him;
yet, ravished with the opportunity, found the Fire within him kindled so
strongly at his being so near her in the Dark, with her Slippers under her
Arms; that he could not stay till he came into the Chamber, to let her know how
much he loved her; but put off his Shoes, to find some other Warmth for his
Feet.

The Lady, who expected them, growing impatient at their stay, would needs go
see what stopped their coming: She went to the Stair-head, without Shoes or
Light; and hearing nothing of them, had a mind to go down to the Gate. The two
Lovers were careful not to make a Noise, being not well assured it was she, or
else to conceal from her the Trade they then drove. They scarce breathed; so
that, the Lady, whom the spirit of Curiosity pusht on to her Ruin, in going
down Stairs, unfortunately made a false Step, and tumbled over them down
several Steps. And how little soever she was beholding to Love for the
Accident, she was certainly much obliged to Fortune, in that she escaped so
well from so dangerous a Fall. You may imagine, what a peck of Troubles John
and Diana were now in: The Noise her Mistress made in her Fall, was enough to
raise all the House, but that it was in a Lodging, a part from those of the
Servants: much more might it have awaked the good Man, where the greatest
Danger lay, but he had the good Quality to sleep very soundly; and, by good
Luck, heard nothing at all.

The first thing John did, was to get to the Gate for fear of misfortune; and,
almost at the bottom of the Stairs, he found the Unfortunate Lady; which, had
he had a Candle, would doubtless have been a very rare sight. Diana came to
help her up the Stairs, which she had so nimbly gone down. She had happily
saved her Face, which gave her some Comfort: but for the rest, there was not a
part of her Body but was sensible of her Fall.

The Gallant, judging they had business enough for that Night, to apply
Remedies for the Bruises, without further use of him; withdrew softly, and
went his way Home: He had News at his Rising, that the Lady was better; and
that she was not so ill, but she desired to see him again that Night. He came
the same Hour to the Gate; which being opened, he resolved not to lose time
with Diana on these unfortunate Stairs, for fear of another ill Accident, but
went strait, where the Lady expected him: She had told her Husband a fair story
of her Mis-adventure; and made that advantage of it, that she obtained leave to
lie alone for three or four Nights, in a Chamber near his. The good Man could
not have imagined, that his Wife, in the Condition she was in, could think of
Love: But this Passion takes away the sense of any other Affliction.

John Le Brun was Conducted to the Chamber, where he found the fair Lady
dressed in her Bed, like a Goddess: Some of the Servants were yet up; and Diana
was ordered to hold them in talk, till they went to their Chambers, for fear
they should come and hearken. Unless you will believe, the Mistress found out
this sleeveless Errand for Diana, that she the while might have the Liberty, to
speak a Word in Private to the Curate's Nephew. Well, John, (said she, with a
Smile, as soon as the Chambermaid was gone) you see what we do for you; We
expose our selves to be talked of: We give our selves trouble for you: We
almost kill our selves for you, and you (perhaps) haeve not the least Sense of
it. You should do me wrong, Madam, (answered the Crafty Nephew) to accuse me of
that: I was grievously troubled at the unhappy Accident befell you last Night:
It is, impossible any Man could be more concerned than I was: I swear to you, I
could not sleep a Wink all Night; and this Morning, as soon as 'twas day, I
burned with Impatience to hear News of you. Say what you please (Replied she)
I will not believe you; you are a Dissembler, and this is not the first day I
knew you such: But let that pass. Do you know (said she, letting fall her
Voice, as if she would have told him a Secret) that I have had a great Quarrel
for the Love of you. For the Love of me, Madam, (said he, much amazed at her
Discourse!) Yes (Replied she) for the Love of you: My Husband has been told,
that you were in Love with me; And further, that you were not hated. I, (said
John, with very great Humility) I Madam; should I, the Nephew of your Curate,
lift up my Eyes, and fix them on the Wife of his Lord? Ah Madam, if there were
cause, I could easily justify my self: I know too well the Respect I owe you,
Madam. -- Respect (Replied she) is nothing in this Case; Poor Shepherds have
been in Love with Queens, and Queens with Shepherds. You are Young, Handsome,
and Witty; it is too well known. I am not satisfied with a Husband I was forted
to Marry against my will: And the constant Resort you have for some time had to
our Family, was more than enough to raise a Jealousy in the Parties concerned,
you came upon design. But, Madam, (Replied the Gallant, charmed with this
obliging News) it is very well known, I came for Love of Diana. Diana (said
she) Alas poor innocent Soul! It Is easy to judge, a Youth such as you, if at
Liberty to make his Court where he pleased, would sooner address himself to me,
than to her. I thank Heaven (added she, blushing a little) you see, I want not
what may render me amiable; and what is such a Girl good for, but to serve for
a Color when I am in place?

John had by this time an eager desire to draw some advantage from this
pleasant Discourse: Till now he stood in the Chamber, like a dutiful Vassal, in
Presence of his Lords Wife, his Hat under his Arm, and at three or four Paces
distance from the Bed: But the kind Lady was pleased to make him draw nearer,
and sit upon the Bed, that (as she said) she might not be obliged to speak so
loud, for fear of awaking the good Man. The Door was shut, and no cause of Fear
on his side; but rather on Diana's, who might chance to be frighted at so much
Familiarity between John, and her Mistress; who, notwithstanding, never
troubled her self for it, knowing Diana could not return very quickly.

John having taken his place at the Beds-Feet, after twice or thrice bidding,
and absolute Commands reiterated for doing so: And who, think you (said she)
has done you this ill Office with my Husband? Alas Madam (answered he) how
should I know? There is no want of wicked People in the World, and I have
enough in the Village, that envy my Happiness. It would surprise you (said she)
to be told it is my Chambermaid. Who Diana (answered John, astonished to hear
it)? Ah Madam, it cannot be; I know her too well, to believe her capable of
such Treachery. Make not so much have (Replied the Lady) to take her part: You
have not, perhaps, more reason to defend her than I. Consider if ever I had
cause to suspect her: She was always my Confident; I trusted her with all my
Secrets: And though I knew you frequented my House for Love of her, I could not
but let her understand, I loved your Wit, and took pleasure in your
Conversation. I did more; and, perhaps, was guilty of too much Imprudence, when
I bid her assure you from me, that I had Kindness for you, and that you might
depend upon me as your Friend: That I desired very much to do for you, and
advance you: That you could not want the thing I would not furnish you with for
asking: And that I would have you speak to me freely. 'Had she been your
Friend, she would not have concealed from you the kind and advantageous
thoughts I had for you: But I see well enough, 'twas her Jealousy hindered her,
and made her Reveal the Secret to some one of the House; who, without doubt,
has told it my Husband. The Gallant, who clearly saw what this Discourse
tended to, answered, I assure you Madam, she never did me the favor to
acquaint me with these obliging Evidences of your Goodness; otherwise, I had
not been now to thank you for them: and now, methinks, I begin to believe what
you say. The Lady, Ravished with Joy that John was of her mind, pusht on her
Amorous Design; and made him absolutely believe Diana guilty of what she was
accused; and that the best way to revenge her, was, to make a Fool of her. I
know (said she) you love me: [John durst not say other-wise] and, though you
never told me so, I have perceived it by your Eyes: But to make our best of
this business, Diana must not know any thing I have told you; but use her as
formerly, and you shall find you cannot be unhappy: To prove what I say, (added
she, showing him a Purse taken from under her Pillow) here are fifty Pistols
for you: Assure your self, while you love me, and are discreet, you shall want
for nothing. What Heart of the Temper of John 's, could have resisted such a
Favor? Never did a Mistress in Romance acquit her self better: Ladies that
dare not rely on their Charms of Beauty for Conquest, if they make use of this
course, shall never want Lovers. The Gallant was so transported with the
Present received, that (forgetting the Respect due to the Lady) he embraced her
Knees a thousand times through the Bed-Cloaths. She, out of Modesty, would have
put him off; but it was, that he might apply himself elsewhere. The Gallant,
though naturally bold, durst not at first venture any farther: Yet he had the
boldness to steal a Kiss, which he took, finding her so nigh him, that she
seemed to offer it him. It Is enough (said she, with a languishing Voice);
However, do not think, though I give you the Liberty to see me by Night, to be
alone with me in my Chamber, and to sit on my Bed without Witness or Danger,
that I will grant you any more. John Le Brun was too Intelligent, not to
comprehend the Meaning of these Words; But Diana coming in, interrupted the
course of this sweet Conversation.

There past nothing more at that time worthy Relation: John retiring presently
after, so incensed against poor Diana, he had not the Patience to Caress her in
the least, taking leave at the Gate, whither she accompanied him to lock it.
But how could he longer Love a Chambermaid, which had given him at most, but
some Knots of Ribband, and two or three Cravats, or some other Trisles of
inconsiderable Value; when he had sound a Mistress, who, for her first
Complement, honored him with a Purse of fifty Pistols.

He had never been so Rich in his Life; nor could he take any rest that Night,
for thinking with what grace of Address she had made him that Present, and how
he should lay it out: All these Fancies vanished at the Approach of Day; and he
was no sooner up, but he wished with Impatience, that Night were come. His
Thoughts were wholly taken up with the Charms of the Lady: He could not
sufficiently admire, with what address she had made him understand she loved
him, and desired that he should love her again: But that which Charmed him
most, was her Grace in performing a Generous Action. He was ready to dye with
longing to see her again, as if all his Visits were to be paid with ready
Money. He knew very well to make use of Opportunity, which, at this Day, is the
best Science in the World, and the true use of Things. Night came at last, but
it was long to Eleven a Clock; and in Conjunctions of this kind, Moments are
tedious.

Diana, who knew not the reason he had entertained her so coldly the Night
before, waited with as much Impatience as he, to see him again: But he was so
cruel, that he made no more account of her this, than the former Night; nor
would be persuaded to stay a moment to hear her; and when she reproacht him for
it, he answered her with Slights. The Poor Girl was amazed at the Change, and
could not imagine any thing less than such a Perfidiousness, especially in her
Mistress.

John entered the Ladies Chamber, whom he found on a Bed of State, finer than
ever he had seen her. Poor Diana was sent again to amuse the People of the
House, though there was not the least need of it: But the truth is, they had no
need of her there, and were willing to amuse her. Never till then did she know
what Jealousy was, having loved in peace, and in a full Tranquillity; in
Confidence, her Gallant had loved her as faitfully: The Indifference of a
Lover, is an apparent Mark of Perfidiousness. The Distaste we have of one
Object, is commonly the Effect of Pleasure taken in another. Love is an
incurable Disease; and he that has been once in Love, will ever be so with one
thing or other.

The dejected Diana went musing with her self, what cause she had given her
Lover to use her thus: But the more she thought on what was past, the more she
found he had nothing to reproach her with, but too much Love; and that the
Change she observed in him, must be a pure Effect of his Inconstancy, which
inclined him another way. This put her upon examining who should be her Rival:
Is it (said she) the Stewards Daughter? No. Is it the Scrivenars Daughter? No.
Is it such a ones Niece? or such a ones Sister? No, no. [Thus she ran over all
the handsome Girls in the Village, without finding any just Ground of
Suspicion.] Did he Love any of those I am thinking of? Or had be some new
Inclination, where I cannot imagine; What had he to do here? And yet, What cause
can he have to use me, as he does these two days past? It Is but three days
since he swore to me, it were Death to him, to let him go to Bed without a
sight of me; And this Evening he runs away from me; he will not speak to me; he
will not so much as hear me: Whence comes this cruel proceeding? If he loves me
no longer, why comes he so punctually to the Gate? He waited there before the
time appointed; and as soon as he saw me, he thought no more of me. O Heavens,
methinks I see the beginning of all this disorder: He is in Love with my Lady.
I observe, she has of late more Care than ever of her Person, and Dress;
especially at Night, when he is to come; so much Dressing, so much Curling, so
much Patching, so much Powder, so many Scents, are not for nothing. I am sent
hither; What to do? Heavens! How innocent am I? My Love of him, and Confidence
in her, have blinded me quite.

These were stinging Reflections for a Girl in Love, to fancy her self not
only betrayed, but made a Fool. She needed no more to make her leave the worthy
Employment they had given her; and to go softly, to spy through the Keyhole,
the Posture of those she suspected: She sees her perfidious Lover, and her
honest Mistress so closely joined, she had reason to think them both of a
piece: What a sight was this for the poor Diana! She wished her self blind, and
was ready to die for Grief; and in this distress, fetched two or three deep
Sighs, which those within might easily have heard, but that they were busy
about somewhat else. This turned Diana's Grief into Despair; and now, nothing
but Revenge can give her Satisfaction; which she might soon obtain, by giving
the old Gentleman notice of what was a doing, and inviting him to see the
Comedy in Action: This she resolved upon; but had scarce given too Knocks at
his Chamber Door, but she relented into a tenderness, that moderated her Fury:
[An Irresolution to which Persons in Love are usually subject, amidst their
highest Transports.] She considered her Lover should be utterly undone, if the
Old Gentleman found him with his Wife; and that it would be a means to lose him
for her self, as well as for her Mistress: This Consideration prevailed over
her Resentment: She pittyed him, and thought it sufficient to go, and make them
ashamed, by reproaching them to their Faces, for their Infamous Treachery.

The good Man, who had half heard the last Knock, not knowing whether he had
heard, or only dreamt of a Noise; to be satisfied, goes to the Door; and
hearing some Body go back very softly, thought there were Thieves in the House.
He runs to his Sword, which had not been drawn since the Wars of Paris, where
he had served in Person: He takes his Captains Pike in his Hand, and puts his
Helmet on his Head; which carried before, a sufficient load of his Wives
putting on.

Diana in the mean-time, groping on the Wall; and considering how to take John
and her Mistress in the Act, that they might not have any color of Denial; met
a Man, whom she presently took for her Perfidious Lover. Are these your tricks
Iraytour (said she*) Can thou think such Falseness can escape unpunished? If
none else, Heaven will Revenge me. The Old Gentleman, in the Emotion he was in,
never minding on what side he had heard the Noise of the Thieves, Ran in his
Shirt without any Light, toward where he heard Diana's Voice; holding his Pike
at full length, and before him; and making a Noise with it enough to raise the
whole House: Who goes there, cried he, as loud as possible; which so frightened
Diana, that, quitting him she had laid hold on, she went to hid her self, for
fear her Masters Anger should all light upon her, if found with her Gallant.
Who is there, said he once more: No Person stirred. In the mean time he
brandished the Pike the one way, and the other, till at last he felt something
under it: Then did he double his Fury, and with a thundering Voice, Speak (said
he) who is there? or you dye. Ah Sir (answered the Wretch that was caught, with
a lamentable Tone) Pity your poor Curate, and do not kill him. No Curate,
Replied the Choleric old Man, who, in the trouble he was in, understood not
what was said, nor perceived that it was the Curate that spoke; but cried out,
Thou shall dye like a Robber as thou art: Confess quickly, that I may dispatch
thee: This he said, seconding every Word with a Blow.

John Le Brun, and the Lady, frightened with this bustle, thought it high time
to look about them: They knew not whether the Noise were raised about them, or
on some other occasion; But the Gallant, for more Surety, held it best to save
himself: They put out the Candle; and, opening the Door softly, he thought to
slip away through the Crowd in the Dark; but (unfortunately) fell foul on the
good Old Man, and laid him along on the ground, Pike, Helmet, and all. Then did
he cry out to purpose; Thieves, Thieves; Help, help* I am dead! All the People
of the House (having already heard part of the Noise he had made) ran to him
thick and threefold: His Lady too, having had Leisure enough to alter her
Dress (making as if she were in mighty have in her Nightgown); no sooner saw
the Light, but she came to know what the matter was: Amazed to see her Husband
guarded round with all his Domestics in Arms, from the Kitchen; which made
such a Clattering, that they understood not one another. But that which was
most pleasant to see, was. The Old Man (like a Statue) laid flat on the Ground;
his Helmet on his Head, his Pike in his Hand, a Belt over his Shoulder two
Inches thick, a Rapier at his Side four or five Foot long; and all this in his
Shirt only, which was an excellent Equipage, to draw a Pourtrait in ridicule
by. None of the Servants, but had a Months mind to Laugh; But the Lady Acted
her Part best: She cried, the wept, she afflicted her self for the unhappy
Accident besain her dear Husband, not knowing what Vision had appeared to him.
The rest did their Master the best Service they could; some taking off his
Helmet, others his Belt, others his Sword. The good Man took on grievously,
extremely concerned lest the Thieves should escape; and Commanding his Servants
to pursue them; telling them, there were (at least) half a dozen in the House,
and that had seen them, though all this while in the Dark. But his Wife having
long since represented him, and made him pass for a Man much subject to
Fancies, and Vagaries; his Servants, who knew what he affirmed was impossible,
could not look at one another without Laughing.

Just thus (said the Lady) when I fell the last Night, I thought there were
Spirits in the House. Death (answered the old Man, in a Rage) these were no
Spirits; witness my Pike, with which I have killed one, or (at least) missed
but little of killing him; for, he called for the Curate to take his
Confession. This Discourse set all the Folks a Laughing; which so vexed the Old
Man, that, handling his Pike again, he threatened to be Revenged of them all, as
so many Thieves within doors, holding Correspondence with those without, unless
they would pursue them. To satisfy him, they took upon them to make search for
them in the Castle: But whether it were that the Lady reserved her own Quarter
to be free from search, or employed them at distance, no notice was taken of;
the back-gate being the Place of Rendezvous.

Diana, at length appeared before her Master; and, though much out of Humor,
forgot not her Duty in making fast the Gate: This done, she went up to her
Ladies Chamber, where she lay: Here was Acted the Scene that discovered the
whole Plot. The Lady Laughed, and wondered Diana was so sad: And both being
laid, What (said the Lady) you are troubled I warrant you, that your Lover is
gone without seeing you? Fool, thou shall see him to Morrow: Would you have had
him stay till they had searched my Chamber? Ah Madam (answered Diana) I would
to God they had found him here. And why, (replied the Lady, much surprised at
the Answer) Why (said Diana) You know well enough; and that he came not hither
for my sake. The subtle Lady, fell a Laughing; and Embracing Diana, told her,
She now saw she loved John in good Earnest, since she was jealous of him, and
upon her account, whom of all the World, she had least cause to fear; but she
would pardon her unjust Suspicion. Diana unwilling to be altogether fooled,
replied, That her Suspicions were too well grounded: And seeing her Lady
continue Laughing at her, What Madam, said she, (with that Ardor and Vehemence
Truth usually inspires into those who maintain it) have not I seen you with
John in such and such Postures? Did not you tell him this? did not you tell him
that? -- Which the Lady hearing, How now Insolence (said she) are you a Spy on
my Actions? May not I do what I please in my Chamber for you? Who in the middle
of the Garden -- and pausing at that Word, she afterward proceeded, Witness
the Cherry-Tree. Diana grew paler, and more confounded than ever: But knowing
they were but equally matched one to one, she recovered her Courage; and with
as much heat as her Lady, gave her story for story; and reproached her with all
the Gallantries of her Life past, which she had the goodness to relate to her.
The Lady, not able to endure it, without a transport of Rage, beyond what is
allowed to Persons of Quality of her Sex, was not content to make use of her
Hands (finding Diana as good at that Sport as her self) but ran for a stick,
which she had in the Chamber. Diana perceiving it, thought it time to withdraw
into a place of Safety; and finding no other than the Bed, as she was going
under it, she sees a Man's Leg, and then another; and by degrees, the rest of
the Body, dressed after the old Fashion: What a fright was she in? Her Mistress
running after her, stumbled on the Feet of the Spirit, and fell to the Ground:
Thus was the Anger of these Female Combatants appeased on the sudden; and they
looked one on the other, to inquire who the Man should be; and how he came
thither: Have you ever seen two Enemies join Forces at the Appearance of a
Third, stronger than both? Just so did these Rivals agree in a Corner of the
Chamber, where they durst scarce breath; taking the sight of this Object, for
an Effect of Divine Justice: and believing it could be nothing else, but an
Evil Spirit, sent from the other World to put them in mind of their Sins. At
last, this Spirit spoke; and putting off an old Gray Hat he had upon his Head,
Madam (said he) you must pardon your poor Curate, unhappily exposed to the
Hazard both of Life, and Reputation; the Loss of both could not have been
prevented, if (by good Fortune) he had not found your Chamber Door open; where
he came to hide himself, when you were gone forth. The two Females, hearing the
Voice and Name of their good Friend, the Curate, recovered a little Courage,
but durst not yet adventure going nigh him; because Spirits are apt to Lie: And
they had reason to fear, this same had a mind to abuse them; it being not
propable, that Mr. Curate should be in their Chamber that time of Night, and in
such an Equipage: But finding him at length a very peaceable Spirit, they
ventured to go nigh him, and knew him. It was so surprising, and so pleasant a
sight to see him in a great Gray Wastcoat, and a Hat dressed like a Sow-Gelder,
that they could not forbear Laughing. It Is indeed a Laughing Business, said he,
(somewhat angry for the small Compassion they had for him); but you have your
share as well as I, in the Adventure: It Is true, I bear the Blows; But unless
you would have me discover all, do your Endeavor to help me out from hence,
that I may go Home. Mr. Curate (answered the Lady) what is written is written:
You have been Young as we are; and you know, you should do so to others, as you
would they should do to you. We have every one his part in what has happened
this Evening. I have too much to my share (said the Curate), and I feel it I am
sure. Therefore (said the Lady) let us keep one another Counsel: Diana shall
go open you the Gate; But let us know first what Misfortune brought you hither,
where you have so little Business. It Is true, Madam, (answered the Curate) I
might very well have let alone the Business I had here; but the too great
Affection I have for that Rogue, my Nephew, has brought me to the fine
Condition you see me in: For, three or four Nights last past, I observed he
went out of his Lodging at an unseasonable Hour, and returned very late: The
Care I have always had of his Education, and the Charitable Remonstrance I
lately had from my Lord your Husband, made me think my self obliged to follow
him this Night, to see where he went. I saw him enter the Castle, at the
Back-Gate; and intended to wait his Return, to ask him, What he had been doing?
But growing impatient at his stay so long, I took the Pains to get up hither by
the same Gate: And now I cannot but think it was by the Instigation of the
Devil: For, as I came groaping along the Rooms, I met Diana, who put me into a
bodily Fear, and mistook me for my Nephew: Presently after, came in my Lord,
your Husband, who frightened me to the purpose; For, not knowing whether to
fly, I threw my self like a simple Sott under his Pike, with which he thought
to kill me: At last, Madam, to conclude in a word, (said the Curate, Smiling
when he saw them Laugh) I came, I saw; but the Mischief is, I was overcome,
and soundly beaten.

The Curate had a pretty Faculty at Railing, which gave the Lady occasion to
show him some Kindness; and prayed him, He would not ill use his Nephew. As to
that, Madam, (answered he) I know what I have to do: I am willing for your sake
to forget what is past; but must entreat you to take order for the future, that
no Mischief come of it. Could my Nephew pay you his Respects without
Consequence, and that my Honor were not concerned as well Yours, I should give
him up to your dispose, to do with him what you pleased: But it is a wild Youth,
who, in the end, will Ruin Ton, and Me; and it is (absolutely) necessary to let
him go and Travel for some time, and learn to get his Living in another
Country. The Lady would press him no further, hoping the Affection he had for
his dear Nephew, would make him alter his Resolution.

The Curate in the mean time takes his leave; and, Diana having opened the Gate
for him, he went Home, where he found the Gallant in a very sweet Sleep: But
his good Uncle having awaked him, he was amazed to see him at that Hour in his
Chamber; and asked him, What he pleased to have? I come to tell you (answered
the Curate) That my Lord would fain speak with you. Speak with me (replied
John!) Yes, with you, (said the Curate) about some Froliques that have been
done this Night in the Castle, for which a Friend of yours had like to have
been well beaten. John was not a little surprised at the Discourse; but
however, he swore and protested, He knew nothing of the Matter; That it was
three Days since he had been in the Castle; and they did him wrong to charge
him with their Disorders. They have done you wrong indeed (replied the Curate)
but it was, in letting you escape as they did. Tell me, you Arch-Rogue, Went
not you into the Castle by the Back-Gate, at Eleven a Clock this Evening? You
think no body has seen you play your Pranks with the Lady; You came not out of
her Chamber at the Noise made by the old Lord, whom you thought to have
dispatched: All this, I know to be false; therefore, get you up, and clear your
self before him; It Is Hanging matter if you do it not. The unhappy Nephew was
sufficiently troubled; not able to defend himself from Conviction, where the
Proofs were so clear: He knew the Kindness his Uncle had in store for him,
throws himself at his Feet, confesses all, and begs his Pardon. There is but
one Remedy (said the Curate) you must put on your Clothes, and be gone
immediately for Paris, where they will teach you more Wit; for if you stay till
Day, it will be too late; there is a Warrant for Apprehending you.

John, who was very willing to be fairly quit of the business, and go Travel,
took this as a Favor, rather than a Banishment from his Uncle: He gets up,
makes up his Pack, takes a little Money, and gets into Paris; where he soon
made himself known. He resolved to set the best Side outward; takes a Boy,
changes his Name from Le Brun to Le Bell: And, having laid out part of the Money
he had from the Lady to put himself in Equipage, he visited the great Ones, and
went every Day into the best Companies; And had Wit and Impudence enough to
bring him off well; being not so Raw, as to be taken for a Country Squire.

He soon gained considerable Acquaintance of the one Sex, and the other: But he
was a little Knavishly given; and had in his Nature, an Inclination to
Cheating, he could never get rid of, which spoiled all.

He had many Adventures, both good and bad, Paris being a place proper for
that; But the Adventure of his Lodging, was the worst of all, and sent him
packing out of Town. You shall hear it in few Words:

After several Cheats he had Acted here and there, his Money growing low; and,
finding himself no longer in a condition to visit the Ladies, and keep the
Company he had done at first, he was forced (for maintaining his Gallantry) to
submit to make Love to his Landlady: She was a Woman not Unhandsome, and had
pleased other Men. He was in her Debt; and in what Respect soever he considered
the Conquest, he could not but think it of advantage. Women of her Character,
are quickly familiar; their Calling obliges them to allow Men some Liberties,
which make them believe, They will deny them nothing.

Mr. John Le Bell, who, after the good Fortune he had met with in the Village,
thought nothing so Impregnable, but it must yield to his Charms; found so much
Kindness from his Landlady, from the first Day he spoke to her of Love, that he
thought the Business done; and that she was deeply in Love with him; and that
it was not for his purpose to be ill-conditioned to her. His Chamber was near
that of his Landlords, and he could hear him go out to Market every Day, as
soon as 'twas Light, and leave his Wife in Bed, to take her Morning Rest: The
happy Monsieur Le Bell thought it the most favorable Occasion in the World: He
gets up one Morning, puts on his Nightgown; and, without farther Ceremony,
goes to his new Mistresses Chamber, and was at her Bedside before she awakt:
He slips boldly into Bed; what he did there, I know not, it is not written in
his Story; but certain it is, he was there above half an Hour with her, and no
Noise at all; without doubt, she took him for her Husband: But at last (having
known him I cannot tell how) finding her Mistake, she cried out withal her
Force. It was in truth a great piece of Folly, and our Gallant paid dearly for
it; For, the People of the House running in, armed Cap-a-pe, some with
Broaches, some with Forks, some with Knives, and other Arms from the
Kitchin-Magazin, enough to frighten a more dangerous Pallet, than the sieur of
John Le Bells; Scarce gave him time to take his Breeches, and his Hat, the
Blows flew so thick about his Ears: And this was that Jolly Combat, which he
published so much for his Honor wherever he went; and got him the Surname
of Monsieur du Joly Combat.

He was glad to get to the door without Stockings, or Wastcoat; but, by Good
Luck, he was not far from a Broakers, where, with the little Money remained, he
bought a few Clothes, to set him out as well*as an ill Suit could do, for a
second Adventure; and, at the same time, changed Quarters, for fear of new
Assaults.

Paris is large; and those who would hide themselves, may easily do it:
Monsieur Le Bell stood in need of such a Place; not only in regard of his
Landlord, but of those Persons of Quality he had had the Honor to be
acquainted with; being not then in a condition to maintain the Port he had
appeared in. However, he must live; and every Day will not furnish us with the
kind Lady of the Castle: But Folks sometimes meet with crossgrain'd Landladies.

By good Luck, there was hard by his new Lodging, a Bath-keeper, who wanted a
Boy: The Employment was somewhat mean; but those in Necessity, stand not much
upon Terms and Punctilos of Honor. He offers his Service, and is entertained:
And changing his Condition, would also change his Name, and calls himself,
Champagne.

And now John Le Brun, and John Le Bell, is become Champagne, a Bath-keepers
Boy: He was naturally Ingenious, and very fit for that Trade, and might have
done very well in it, but that he thought it beneath him: He did but wait the
Hour to bid his Master adieu; and as soon as the good occasion was offered him
of a Gentleman belonging to Court, that came to Bath himself at his Masters; he
took the pains to seize all his Clothes, leaving him his Rags in Exchange. You
may believe, that, being new rigged by this Shift, he made have out of his
Lodging, and traversed the Streets a pretty round Pace: He had not then formed
any Design. Cavaliers of his Order, commit themselves to Fortune, Espouse all
Adventures, and think every Country their own: But meeting, as he past along
with a Stage-Coach; and seeing a handsome Lady in it, he asked the Coachman,
What Place he was bound for? He told him, For Amyens. As Lucky as may be
(answered our Gallant) 'twas the very thing I looked for; and, without more
ado, steps into the Coach. Then did he begin at leisure, to examine the Prize
he had new taken; but found it not so Rich, as he had promised himself. The
Gentleman whose Clothes he had borrowed, was a Man of Estate; but had newly
lost all at Play, to Champagnes great Grief; who scarce found in his Pockets,
enough to carry him to Amyens: But the worst Luck now, the better another time.
The Lady in the Coach, was none of the least Beauties: There was but they two,
and he was in hopes, his good Mein might Charm her to bear the Charge of his
Journey, while they traveled together.

He set himself out, he played the Wagg, he talked of Love; and persuaded the
fair Lady (who was an Honest Picard) so far of his particular Merit, that she
believed what he pleased: But, as ill Luck would have it, she was a Person more
beholding to Nature than Fortune; and had the same Design upon him, he had
upon her: So that, having felt one another Pulses, they soon perceived, they
must Club for their Journey: Having found out this Secret, their Love grew
cold, and they parted at Amyens with a great deal of Indifference on either
side.

This Gallant, whom I dare no more call Champagne, Habited as he was, failed
not to Lodge at the best Inn in the Town, and to Eat with some Officers who
were all Persons of Quality; and among the rest, the Count De Brion.

The Dress he was in, became him huge well; and no Man but would have taken him
for a very honest Gentleman: But having neither Baggage, nor Servant, and no
more known in the Town, than at his Lodging; the Innkeeper, who had learnt not
to trust any Passenger three days after his Arrival, came to bid him Good
Morrow, and tell him, He was going to Market. The Cavalier presently understood
what the Complement meant; and beginning to Huff, asked, How much he wanted for
Provisions for his House? That if fifty Pistols would do, he should speak the
word, and have them within an Hour, down upon the Nail. In short, That he
should give himself no trouble; That he would just dress himself, and pay him
what he owed him. It was always his Maxim, to promise lustily, though he knew
not how to perform; especially, at this time, when he could go neither backward
nor forward to furnish himself.

The Count De Brion Lodged in a Chamber hard by him: He was a generous Person,
and one whom our Gallant had Courted above the rest, with design to make use
of him in case of necessity. He never scrupled to Complement him, and let him
know, he was a Gentleman ill used by Fortune; and had Recourse to him, as a
Person to whom he would choose to be obliged rather than any other. Count Brion
took pity of him; and having bid him not trouble himself for such a Trifle as
what he owed his Host, offered him a Place in his Troop; telling him, A young
Man as he was, should not lose the Occasion of this War to advance himself,
but endeavor to make his Fortune: As for him, he would serve him with all the
Credit he had; and assured him, he should never want as long as he saw him do
his Duty.

Mr. Champagne was no great Lover of War; He was not born under the Planet of
Mars: However, for Honor, or rather, for Necessity, he accepted (with much
Joy) the place offered him by the Count De Brion; and within two Days, went
along with him toward the place of Rendezvous, for the Kings's Army.

That Champagne, though Glorious as the rest for that great Monarch, proved
unfortunate for Count Brion, who was killed that Year. John Le Brun, as if he
had been unwilling to Serve longer in the War, after the Death of his Captain;
or rather, aweary of the Service, as too hard for him, thought of nothing more,
than how (handsomely) to run away: He was then in very ill Equipage; but Heaven
provided for him.

One who waited on Count Brion in his Chamber, and after his Death, had Listed
himself in the Troop; having some Clothes of his Masters, as he was going out
on a Party one Morning, delivered them to Monsieur Champagne, to keep for him.
Our Cavalier would not let slip the Occasion, but fastens his Portmantle behind
him; and, in a time, when it Rained as if Heaven and Earth would come together,
falls off from the Army, and gets into Valenciennes; where he was very
welcome, as all French Deserters are. From thence, he passes to Gaunt, where
he Sold his Horse to furnish himself with Money, to carry him to Brussels. He
goes into the Boat; And knowing of what Consequence it was to gain an Esteem in
the Place, by the Habit he should appear in at his Arrival, he took out of his
Portmantle one so very fit for him, as if it had been made for him; besides
clean Linen, he found there a Belt, Silk Stockings, and every thing he wanted,
save only a Hat; his own being not suitable to the Habit he wore, It was his
good Fortune, to find in the same Boat a Merchant, who furnished him with a
very fine Hat for some things he gave him in Exchange.

Our Cavalier once more new fitted, entered Brussels in Triumph, and as fine as
a Bridegroom; And, according to his Custom, took up a Lodging in one of the
best Inns in the City; having his Port-mantle carried after him, by a Boy he
met casually in the Street: He made his Entry into his Lodging, under the Title
of A discontented Officer of the French Army. He presently called a-loud for a
handsome Chamber: Then he began to enquire, Whether there were in the Town any
French Tailors to make him Clothes, and Drapers, and Hosiers, and Shoomakers?
He sent for some of all these Trades, and set them all to work, as well for
himself, as his worthy Valet; giving them order to have all ready in three
Days; that he would give them Content, and pay them with Intrest.

All the Discourse that Day in the Inn, was of the French Officer: He had
already gained the Reputation of a Person of Quality, that was come to spend
some time at Brussels. Besides, the Gallant had made it his Business, to
enquire of the Persons of Quality there; and to inform himself of those in
particular, who would give a Civil Reception to Persons of Merit and Birth like
himself; with such other Particulars, as are necessary to be known by them who
intend to visit the Great Ones. He had one of the best Rooms in the Inn; and
the Ordinary he Eat at, was a Patacoon a Meal, which was somewhat high for an
ordinary Officer.

But our Gallant made a Bustle after the rate of a thousand a year: But the
Maid going up at Suppertime to make his Bed, had the Curiosity, (or it may be a
design, to finger some Spare Utenfill or other for her use) to Ransack his
Portmantle, which she found open, and to see the fine things he had there: But
was very much Surprised, to find it only a poor Soldiers Wardrope, containing
only an old Gray close Coat Lined with blew, worn threadbare within and
without; a Greasy pair of Leather Breeches, a pair of Riding Stockings, all
botched up with white Thread; an old Leather belt, and a black Taffity Cravat,
with a Ribband of so extraordinary a Color, that none knew what to call it
then, though it had probably been formerly, a straw-Colour or scarlet. The Maid
found none of these rich Accoutrements for her turn; but was so Officious, to
bring her Master the News of the discovery she had made; who presently went up
to take a View of these Goods, and easily guest how matters stood with our
Officer; having before had to do with some Officers of the same kind; and
having dearly bought his experience, he had no mind to be Cheated any more. He
Let him sup quietly; but as he rose from Table, he took him aside, and prayed
him Civilly, To pay him for the two Meals he had eaten there, and to take
another Lodging more Convenient for him; telling him, he had expected that
Evening a person of quality, who had hired for a year the Chamber he had taken;
and that when he came, he could not deny it him; that he was much troubled at
it, but knew not how to help it. If that be all, (answered our Officer, without
standing on point of honor to be put out of his Chamber, to accomodate
another) we must Comply; have not you other rooms in the Inn? You are honest
people; And I should be sorry to Leave you; because I am to stay a pretty while
in this Town. I am obliged to you for the favor (replied the Host) but let it
be, if you please, at some other time when we are not so full. What (said he,
smiling) would you have me go seek a Lodging at this time of night, when I know
not as much as the Streets of the Town? It Is no matter Sir (answered the Host)
my Sheets are too fine, and I am not such an Ass to let them be Stolen. Your
sheets, (replied the Officer Knitting his brows,) What Is the meaning of that?
Whom do you take me to be? I take you, answered the Host somewhat loudly, to be
a discontented Officer, who may go to seek a Lodging elsewhere, with your
beggarly Wallet, and your Port mantle full of Rages. How now insolence, replied
the Officer, is this your course to Ransack my Boy's Clothes. The Host was so
provoked at his Calling him insolent, that he ran for a stick; at the same time
the Officer ran for a Fine Silver Sword, that was upon the Bed, and not only
stood upon his Guard, but fell upon his Landlord so briskly, that he wanted the
help of his Servants, who Coming in to his rescue, the Bustle increased. Never
did Monsieur Le Bell appear so Courageous, as on this occasion; but the reason
is, he was newly come from the Army. The Guests of the House ran in to see what
the matter was, but sound such a Confusion among the Men and the Maids, (crying
out for being hurt, or for fear of being so) they knew not what to make of it.
In the midst of this bustle, our discontented Officer, whom Fortune never
failed at a dead lift, took his opportunity, and got away with his Silver Sword
naked; having lost nothing in the skirmish, but his Hat, without any harm but a
few dry blows of no Great Consequence. This Jolly Combat was better than his
former, having come off here with honor, and a good Sword for a trophy: The
fear he was in of being pursued, made him take Shelter in a house, where he
Spyed the door standing half open; where, without more ado he boldly went in,
Hoping to find a way to pass further; or at least, a place of refuge from his
Enemy: There he could see but one little Staircase, which he got up softly;
and found in the Chamber, a very handsome Lady, sitting all alone, and leaning
on a Table, with a Book before her. The fair Lady was so surpised at his
unexpected Arrival, that she fell down half dead at his Feet: Ah Sir, (said
she) do what you please, only save my Life. This Action caused no less
Astonishment, than Pity, in our Hero: And letting fall his Sword to the
ground, like a Person disarmed, he took up the Lady in his Arms; and Embracing
her with a great deal of Respect, lift her up from the Ground* Your Life,
Madam, (said he) is too precious, to be in danger with a Man of Honor: Had any
one a Design upon it (added he, taking his Sword into his Hand) he should soon
find, I stand here in your Defense. But Madam, to put you out of the pain of
guessing the occasion of my being here (which I am very sensible, cannot but
surprise you, seeing me in your Chamher at this time of Night, with my Sword in
my Hand); give me leave to acquaint you, I am a French Officer, of Quality, as
you know well enough, that in France, they employ no other but Persons of
Merit: I was taken Prisoner the last Engagement; And, having this Evening found
some of my Guard asleep, after their Bellies full of Wine I had given them in
the Day, I seized their Officer's Sword; and, having forced my Way through the
midst of the rest, I saved my self, as you see. I have left them my Baggage, my
Money, and all that I had; which, though very considerable, you may easily
believe, I value not at all, when compared with my Liberty; which now, Madam,
is in your Hands: It is in your Power to save, or to ruin, me: For, in the
Effort I made to get out of their Hands, I know well enough, I have wounded two
or three; and I fear, I have left one dead on the place. The Lady being a
Person of Quality, and of a Generous Nature, would have been very glad to have
done a Gentleman a Kindness on such an occasion; but she was just taking her
Leave, and told him, It was not in her Power to do him any Service, but
Recommend him to a Gentleman, her very good Friend; whose Faithfulness he might
rely upon. Ah Madam, (answered our Officer) now you are leaving this Country,
give me leave to bear you Company: It will be the far surer Way for me, than to
go back again for France; and to stay here, were to run too great a Hazard of
being taken. If your Business require it (Replied the Lady) I should be very
glad of it: For, though I be of this Country; yet, perhaps, I may be in a
better Condition elsewhere, to serve you: But (added she, smiling) you know not
whither I am going. Go to what part of the World you please (answered our
Cavalier) it matters not at all; I shall send for what is necessary to put me
into Equipage. You do not know me (Replied the Lady); and, it may concern you
to consider, how you engage to Travel with a Lady, who (perhaps) may be
employed in some dangerous Business: For, in the Disorder you see me, you may
easily believe, that this is none of my House. Ah Madam! As for Danger (Replied
the Officer) I fear none but from your Eyes; As for any other, I have
sufficiently learnt at the Army, not to value my Life; and should esteem my
self Happy, to find an occasion to lose it in your Service. A Discourse so
Generous, and obliging for the Lady, produced abundance of Thanks; which the
Hero answered with as many Congees down to the Ground.

The Lady was Handsome and Witty, and had the Appearance of a Person of Quality;
well acquainted with the Great Ones, and bred up amongst them. Monsieur John Le
Bell our Officer, newly escaped out of Prison, thought her worth the looking
after; and looked upon her already, as his Mistress; or rather, one he resolved
to make a Fool of, by putting a Trick upon her. She was in a loose, but rich
Dress; which, with his finding her Door open, made him believe, She expected
some Bodies coming; of which, he made no very good Construction: But having
Complemented her a fresh, of the Necessity he was under, to use the Liberty he
had taken; he thought himself obliged, to entreat her, to permit him to
withdraw into some other Room of her Appartment, if his stay in her Chamber
were troublesome: She told him, No: That in truth, she expected a Visit from a
Gentleman, her Friend; to whom she had sent her Footboy, who carelessly left
the Door open; but that she believed, he would not come that Evening, having
stayed away so long: However, he might find time enough to go into another
Chamber: And so, she prayed him to take a Seat. I know not Madam (said the
Officer, to raise a Discourse) what a Person you took me for, when you begged
your Life of me on your Knees, as I entered your Chamber; but I will assure
you, No Action I ever met with, surprised me so much, I confess Sir, (answered
she) you put me into a terrible Fright, with that naked Sword in your Hand: I
took you for one I had reason to be afraid of; but you see, I soon altered my
Opinion: And to tell you the truth, You look not like an Assassin. An Assassin
Madam, (cried the Officer!) What Villain could harbor such Thoughts against so
Beautiful a Person? There-upon, he renewed his offers of Service, with greater
Protestations than before; telling her, with an Air of Bravery, That her
Enemies must be very strong, to do her any Out rage, while he should be so near
her. Then pressing her to tell him the truth of the matter, he received from
her the following Answer:

Though the Confidence you have in me, in your particular Concerns, had not
obliged me to impart Mine to you; yet they have made so much Noise in the
World, I could not think fit to conceal them from a Person, whom (besides the
Advantages of his Quality) I take for a Man of Honor, and Discretion. The
Officer having returned the Complement in a very Reverend Bow, she proceeded to
tell him; I am a Lady of this Town, and of a Family considerable enough, both
in the Court, and the Camp, to give me the Advantage of appearing in this Court
with some Splendour: But the ill Understanding between my Husband and Me, has
made me so unhappy, that there is no staying for me here. Marriage, which
serves for a Cloak to many others, has robbed me both of Honor and Estate. I
never Loved my Husband, which is a great piece of unhappinefs; and he has
Loved me too well, which proves a greater Mischief than the other. You cannot
but be sensible, what Swarms there are of troublesome Husbands in out time;
and, consequently, how great the number is of Discontented Wives: And, let it
not surprise you, to let you know, I am one of Them. I have been reputed
Handsome, and so many have told me so; that, though I had not been inclined to
believe it; yet the multitude of those who affirmed it, must needs have
persuaded me to think so: But what is Beauty good for but the Pleasure of being
Beloved? I should account her a Fool, that should tell me, She put it to better
use: gentle or simple, honest or kind-hearted, We are willing to please; And
there are ways to please the Severe and Morose, as well as the Airy and Free:
I have had Trial of both: But this pleased not my Husband. But what came I into
the World for? To live as in a Nunnery? He has done all in his Power to make
me leave Brussels, and go live in the Country: But missing of his Aim, he
reduced me out of pure Spite, into such a Condition, that it was not in my
Power to entertain a Gallant: But there is a Salve for every Sore: All the
Bustle he made, did but increase his Disgrace, and proclaim him to be that,
which every Wise Man should conceal to his Power. I confess, I lost a little
Reputation among those they call, The Virtuous Ladies; but those of the
contrary Title are so numerous, that for one that Condemns me, there are a
hundred to Excuse me: And perhaps, every Woman, that has a Husband like mine,
is excusable for all the little Follies she Commits. This very Day, a Gentleman
his Friend, sent me word, He had ordered two Soldiers of the Army (where he
has a considerable Command) to come hither, and Murder me: Judge you Sir, if
after this News, I had not reason to be afraid, when I saw you enter my
Chamber: Upon this Intelligence from my Friend, I took my Measures; and by his
Advice, left my own, to retire into this little House for some few Days, till
I can order my Affairs, and take my Leave of this Country. Just as she was
saying this, she heard a Noise at the Gate; which made her believe, the
Gentleman was come, as in truth he was: She made the Officer presently
withdraw; telling him, That one pair of Stairs higher, he should find a
Chamber open. He got up thither, and saw (though without a Candle) several
Clothes, and other things, lie on the Table and Stools there, which might serve
for a reasonable Prize: But being in hopes of better Fortune in time, this
could not tempt him. But he had the Curiosity to inform himself a little, what
Discourse there might pass between the good People below, who visited one
another at such an unseasonable Hour. He had no very good Opinion of the
Matter; and thought, if he could once discover the Secret, it would be enough
to render him necessary for the Lady: He went down, and stood close by the
Door, being more than half shut; where he heard the Gentleman speak to this
purpose; I have taken the Liberty, Madam, to send your Boy to one of my
Friends, to entreat him to lend me a Sword, having newly lost my own by a very
pleasant Adventure: There came (said he) this Mornning to our Inn, a Young
Frenchman; who made as if he were a Person of Quality, with a Lacquey at his
Heels, carrying a huge Port-mantle full of nothing but Rags: Our Host at the
first sight; believed him what he was willing to be taken for, and entertained
him accordingly: But in the Evening (by what Chance I know not) he discovered,
that this Honest Man, who pretended himself A Discontented Officer of the Army,
was but a Deserter; and civilly prayed him to go out of his House: The Officer
took it as an Affront: This occasioned high Words between them, and from Words
they fed to Blows: Our Host had a Cudgel in his Hand; and to my sorrow, the
Officer finding my Sword in the Room, laid hold upon it: We ran in to see what
the matter was; and as we were busy about parting them, the French Cavalier
went away with my Sword, and I came off with the Loss: Mine Host having seized
on his Hat, and his Baggage; though so inconsiderable, 'twill scarce pay his
Score. The Lady amazed at this Story, thinking the Discontented Officer, very
near akin to the Officer escaped out of Prison; asked the Gentleman, What kind
of Person the Frenchman was, and what Habit he had? which he described to be so
like the Man, and Habit, she had newly seen in her Chamber, that she doubted no
longer, but he was the very same: But whether out Prudence or Charity, she said
nothing of it, (being willing to save from further trouble a Wretch, who had
fled to her for Refuge; and fearing the bustle the Gentleman would make about
it, being very passionate; and hoping to help him to his Sword again; which,
though he should have lost, was no great matter to him) she did but Laugh
heartily at the Story.

But the Gallant, who had heard all this Discourse, did not think fit to slight
an Information of so much Importance: He presently gets up Stairs again; and
in a very short time, makes up his Pack, which he takes under his Arm, and
straightway goes down the Stairs; and being unwilling to leave any thing
behind, that was so justly his own, he slipped away with his naked Sword in his
Hand: But, just as he was opening the Street-Door, he meets the Lady's Boy
with a Sword in his hand; who, you may well think, might be surpised, to find
a Man like our Officer, coming in that Posture out of his Mistresses House: But
our Officers Wit was so ready, that he presently asked the Boy, If that were
not a Sword he carried to a Gentleman, who was there above Stayres? To which
the Boy having answered, It was: Friend (says the Officer) you have no more to
do but deliver it me; the Gentleman has found his Sword, I have it here in my
Hand, and am going for the Scabbard to his Landlord at the Inn: The Boy was
Young, and the Trick so neat, it might have caught an old One: He gave him the
Sword; and, at his new Friends Request, lent him his Hat till his Return from
the Inn, whither he was going for the Gentleman's Scabbard.

Monsieur Le Bell being thus got out of the Briars, the Boy gets up Stairs; The
Gentleman presently asked him for his Sword: The Boy answered, He had given it
the Man without a Hat, who had the other Sword in his Hand. What Man, (Replied
the Gentleman?) The same (said the Boy) that is gone to the Inn for your
Scabbard. The Gentleman knowing nothing of what the Boy meant, thought he was
in Drink: But the Lady, who presently apprehended the Matter, and that the
Discontented Officer had not been Content with one Sword; fell a Laughing so
heartily, that the Gentleman, not knowing the reason, was somewhat displeased;
and prayed her to tell him, (if she knew) What was become of his Sword? The
Lady, with much ado forbearing to Laugh, answered, The same Rogue that had
taken his First, had Cheated him of his Second, Sword. How, Madam, (Replied he)
the Frenchman? Yes, the very same, (said she) your Discontented Officer. But
why, Madam, d' you tell me so? How should you know it? You do but Raily: Let Us
hear what manner of Man this Man without a Hat was? The Boy Described him so
much to the Life, it could not be doubted, but he was the Discontented Officer:
The Gentleman more astonished than before, turns him to the Lady, and asks her,
How she came to know this very fine Gentleman? Sir (said she) Give me time to
breath, and I will tell you the Story: Then did she relate how he came to her
Chamber; and the Tale he had told her of his being escaped out of Prison, which
moved her to pity him; being not able (on so pressing an Occasion) to deny
Refuge to a Person of Quality, as he seemed to be: The Gentleman answered, All
this was well; but that she ought to have told him of his being at her Lodging;
that it had, at least, saved him one of his Swords; and that, having understood
so much of him, she might have concluded him a Rogue, that deserved not her
Favor: She excused her self with the Considerations we have mentioned; being a
Person of so tender a Soul, and truly good Natured, she could not find in her
heart to do the worst of Men any harm. Madam (Replied the Gentleman) were it
your case, would you be served so? Sir (says she) I fear I have lost more than
you; and that my Compleasance has (by this time) cost me very dear: For, when
you came in, I sent him up into a Chamber, where all my things lay at Six and
Sevens: But the best of it is, he had not any Light. The Gentleman fell a
Laughing at the Ladies Ingenuity, as if Thieves wanted Light to find out their
Booty; and told her, Such Peoples Eyes were in their Hands, and that their
Fingers were their Candle. They asked the Boy, If the Man he had given the
Sword to, carried any thing with him? Nothing (said the Boy) but a Bundle under
his Arm: This Alarmed the Lady; and the Gentleman had his turn of Laughing at
her. They went up to the Chamber, and found he had carried away in Clothes, and
other things, to the value of a hundred Pistols: The Lady was somewhat
comforted, thinking he could not be gone far for want of a Hat: But the Boy
presently told her, He had lent him his; which made them more Sport: So that in
truth, they had no more to do, but sit down by the Loss; having all had their
share (not excepting the Foot*boy) in suffering by the Cheats of the pretended
Officer.

Some Months after, this Lady (for whom Fortune had prepared new Adventures
with our Here) went for England; and soon after her Arrival there, visited a
Person of Quality, with whom she had Contracted a very intimate Acquaintance at
Brussels: She was received with Expressions of the highest Joy and Affection;
the Lady being extremely glad, at the Hopes of an Opportunity to pay her at
London, the Civilities and Kindnesses received from her in Flanders.

They past from Complement, to Discourse of their Friends; and from that, to
the News at Court. The Stranger having a Design to continue some time in
England, was very desirous to inform her self particularly, of the state of
Affairs, and have some Knowledge of the Country; and was very well satisfied,
she made her Address to a Lady very knowing in those Points; and one who failed
not to give her a Relation, both general and particular, of all the fine
Ladies, and their Gallants, in that Court. Her Discourse might have past for a
Chronicle in Epitome; containing, in short, The History of the Gallants of
either Sex: As well the Ladies, who (by their good Conduct) preserved their
Reputation, as those who had utterly forfeited and lost it: And of the
Gentlemen, as well those who were worthy the pains of being Loved, as those
who were looked upon, as the Scandal of Ladies. She proceeded yet further; and
being ancient Acquaintance, gave the strange Lady some Maxims, and Rules of
Conduct in that Court; which with a little Practice, should make her able to
give Instruction to others.

After this long Discourse, the Stranger, who knew that the Lady, her
Acquaintance, being a very beautiful Person, had always had her share of the
Gallantries in Fashion wherever she dwelt; asked her similing, Whether she
continued still, the course of her Conquests? She answered somewhat Coyly, That
she bore no part in the Comedies now Acted on the Stage of the World, but was
only a Spectator; not that she was become insensible, or that those who have
been in Love, can ever cease to be so: but to speak truth, whether it were the
weakness of her Fancy, or the goodness of her Judgment, she had no Inclination
(at least) for those of this Country: That she was for Strangers, and
especially the French, whom she most affected. You are not an English-Woman
then (Replied the Stranger.) Not by Inclination (answered she,) though Born in
the middle of England: Did you but know (added she) the Air, and the Grace,
the French have in Gallantry: but I need not tell it you, who come from a Court
entirely French. There is one here whom I see sometimes; He is in no small
Esteem among the Beauties. That may be the reason, Madam, (answered the
Stranger) you are not altogether Impartial, as to those of this Country. You
are my Friend (Replied she,) and I confess ingenuously, I have some Esteem for
him; but that is all: He is a Person of Quality; he has Wit; he is Handsome, and
visits me oftener than others; which is enough to gain an Esteem from me, who am
Naturally no Hater of the French. He might have got an Interest in a far
handsomer Lady; and I know those who Aspired to the Conquest of his Heart: But
his Stars, or perhaps some small Merit of mine, has made him yield to those
small Charms I carry with me. You shall see him here, it will not be long ere
he comes; you shall give me your Judgment of him. The French (answered the
Stranger) have certainly a good Meine, and are Witty; and to speak generally,
surpass all other Nations in Gallantry, and are their Masters therein: But to
tell you the truth, We are to take heed of them, especially in a strange
Country: You shall have a poor Farmer's Son, shall give himself the Title of
Marquess of the Place he was Born in: Another, who never was better qualified
than a Valet De Chamber, shall call himself by his Masters Name; the better to
Cheat some Shopkeeper or Tradesman: There is such a Swarm of such Gallants in
the World; that I believe in good Earnest, that People of Quality must for the
Future, carry with them Authentic Testimonials; or must be content to lie
under Suspicion of not being what they justly pretend to. I can tell you a
Story, Madam, what a Trick I was served some Months ago, for my willingness
to Pleasure a Frenchman of this Character: Then she gave her an account at
large, of all the Particulars concerning the pretended Officer at Brussels; at
which the Lady Laughed very heartily, and confessed it was a notable Cheat: But,
that Right must be done to Persons of Quality; and that there is a Difference
between those that are Men of Honor, and those who are not. The Person I speak
of (added she) carries in his Countenance, the Character of Honesty; and has
in all his Actions, an Air Remote, and altogether different from any thing of
Baseness and Meanness: That he may very well pass for a Pattern of Generosity
and Virtue. He came hither with a Person of Quality: In a word, It is the Count
Brion. Count Brion, Madam, (Replied the Stranger?) If I be not mistaken, I have
Read in the Gazett, He was Dead. Yes, the Elder Brother (answered the Lady) but
this is the Younger, who is come to a great Estate by the Death of his Brother.
And, to the Advantages of Fortune and Birth, has added that of the highest
Merit: Some matter of Honor, as I understand by others: A Duel fought much to
his Advantage, has been the Cause of his flying hither for Refuge. He is not
altogether unhappy, Madam, (answered the Flemmish Lady) since Banished his own,
he finds in this Country, some place in your Esteem; which cannot but be a very
pleasant Refuge. You are always obliging, Madam, (Replied the English Lady) I
have not Vanity enough, to flatter my self with an Opinion, of being able to
serve Count Brion in his Misfortunes. -- She had hardly done speaking when the
Count entered; who, having heard the last Words of the Ladies Discourse,
answered Smiling, If any thing can lessen the Misfortune you speak of, it must
certainly be the Honor of your Esteem. I cannot call my self unhappy, since
the Day I believed you have any Value for me. It Is true Sir, (Replied the Lady)
did your Happiness depend on that, you should have no great cause to complain
of it; for, I should be sure to do you Justice: This I averr in Presence of
this Lady; who, though a Stranger, is long since acquainted with the Sincerity
of my Heart. The Count, who had only a slight View of the Flemmish Lady in
passing by, finding by the Discourse that she was a Stranger, went up to her to
Salute her: But having fixed his Eye upon her, he was not a little astonished: He
easily knew her by her Countenance, and was at a stand; and twice or thrice
changed Color. He knew not what to say, and had scarce the Confidence to
Salute her. The Lady as much surprised as he, advanced not a step to do him
that Honor; and indeed, had scarce the Patience to endure it. The English
Lady, having observed all these different Actions, the Trouble of the one, and
Coldness of the other, knew not what to think of it; and seeing there passed
not a Word between them, she asked, If they knew one another? And, being no
less astonished than they, added, Were you not both my Friends, I know not what
I should think of this Business. I confess, Madam, (answered Count Brion,
endeavoring to Recover himself) this Lady is so exactly like a Person of
Quality, I formerly had the Honor to know, and be extremely obliged to, that I
could not see her without Remorse for my Ingratitude toward her; whereof I own
my self Guilty, and should think a thousand Lives (if I had them) well
bestowed, to Expiate my Offense. The Fault must have been Great (Replied the
English Lady) and I cannot believe you a Man capable of such a Crime. It Is
great indeed, Madam; And had I not hopes of Pardon from her Goodness, I should
dye for very Grief and Shame. And what say you to this, Madam, (answered the
English Lady, addressing her self to the Stranger?) Does this Matter concern
you? There must be some Cause for that Disorder and Trouble I observed in your
Countenance on this Occasion. Madam, (Replied the Stranger) the cause of my
Surprise is just like that of the Gentleman's; A Person very like him, behaved
himself toward me not so well as he ought; and I took him for the Man. There
is something Extraordinary in this Adventure (answered the English Lady;) and
you must excuse me, if I believe neither of you in what you have said: I am
very well assured, Madam, you came but Yester-day to Town, and that the Count
was never at Brussels: So that, I cannot comprehend where you could have seen
one another, but here. Pray clear this doubt, and tell me freely, What is the
business. The Gentleman (Replied the Stranger) can do it far better than I.
There are some things (said the Count) not fit to be spoken at all times; And
then rising up; I shall leave all (said he) to the Discretion and Generosity of
this Lady, and withdraw for the present; being not very well: With that,
taking Leave of the Ladies, he went his way.

If ever Person was in Pain, if ever Woman had the Curiosity to know any thing,
you may believe the English Lady, so affected on the present Occasion: For,
having really had, and as frankly owned, an Esteem for the Count, she was very
much concerned for him upon all Accounts; and, particularly, those where any
other of the Sex appeared any way concerned for him. Well, Madam, (said she, to
the Stranger) will not you tell me what the Meaning of this is? Shall I not
know the Adventure brought you acquainted with the Count? I never had Reserve
for you; Your time is come to requite my Freedom. The Lady refused a long
time, out of scruple to Ruin the Reputation of a Man, who might (perhaps) be a
Person of Quality, and forced by Necessity to do what he had done: But fearing
he was nothing less; and that her Friend might be abused by her good Opinion of
the Count, she made her first Promise not to speak of the business; and then
told her plainly, This was the Officer she had told her of, who had Escaped out
of Prison. Who, Count Brion, (answered the Lady, with a Tone and Action that
sufficiently declared her Surprise!) Is he the Honest Man who stole your
Clothes, and the two Swords from the Gentleman your Friend? Yes, Madam,
(answered she) the very same. It is not possible (Replied the English Lady),
nor shall you make me believe, though you make see it with my Eyes. What you
please (said the Stranger); but I assure you, I know him on no other Account:
And if you will take the Pains to examine and reflect on what he said to me,
you may guess whether this be true or not. Heavens! (cried she) is it possible,
that a Man of his Quality, should be reduced to the necessity of Acting such a
Cheat? He had reason to tell me, He had never been at Brussels. However, he is
still a Man of Birth, and of Parts; and I might have said, of Merit too, but
for this unhappy Adventure. 'Twas but a Trick of Youth (said the other) and so
may be pardoned: You know, Men are but Men; and France being at Wars with us,
he thought (perhaps) Robbing me was but Plundering the Enemy: But now, that he
is in a better Condition than formerly, he may make me amends, and express his
Sorrow for the Fact, by making me Restitution. Yes, Madam, (Replied the English
Lady) I will undertake he shall do it: For, besides the Generosity of his
Nature, he is a Person of Honor; and will not fail to appear so, on such an
Occasion as this: If such a thing should be known of him here, where he has the
Esteem and the Love of so many Persons of Quality, What would become of him? I
would not for the World it should come to their Ears: For, as he Visits me
ofner than any other, I must expect to have the greatest share in his Disgrace.
Let me beg of you, Madam, it may go no further. The Lady promised it; and
having other Visits to make, took her Leave to go to the Lodging of another
Lady, of her Acquaintance; Where, Entering the Chamber, she found her at some
Difference with another Person; who, upon her coming in, quitted the Room.

The Fair Flemming was received at this Visit, with the same Joy and Honors
she had found at the first: And having past the first Complements of Civility;
and observed before, that when she came in, the Lady was in business with her
who went forth, she thought her self obliged to make her Excuse for disturbing
them, and interrupting their Discourse. You may believe, Madam, by our Actions
you saw, that our Discourse was none of the Pleasantest; and I verily think,
you did both of us a Pleasure; For, had you not come in, we should have
certainly quarrelled: She was a French Lady, who came to demand Money of me,
for two pair of Embroydred Bodyce I had of a Frenchman, in Payment for Money I
won of him at Play, about two Months ago; She tells me, The Bodyce were her^,
and that she had only trusted the Frenchman with them, to Sell them for her. I
answered, I knew nothing of that, and that I had honestly bought them; and that
she was to look after payment from her Commissioner: The Stranger fell a
Laughing at the Title of Commissioner; and asked, Who that honest Gentleman
might be, who paid his Debts with other Peoples Goods; and to discharge what
he owed one Lady, borrowed the Bodyce of another? This (added she) is a new
piece of Gallantry, not very much in Mode among the Persons of Quality. Yes,
(Replied the English Lady) this Frenchman would pass here for a Gallant by
Profession; and calls himself, The Count De Brion: But I never looked upon him,
as other than a Valet De Chamber Travesty; having neither the Wit, nor the
Manners, nor the Sentiments, non Carriage, of a Person of Quality: Nor do I see
what Ground there is for that Esteem some Persons have for him here, unless it
be, for that he is a Stranger. He has apeared at Court, under the Auspice of a
French Lord; whose Favor alone, might gain a Man Credit: And that, I believe,
has Contributed most to the Honor a Man so little deserving, has received
there. But there are many who have changed their Opinion of him; and think with
me, that he is not the Man he pretends to be: Besides, there are a number of
People, who knows the House of Brion; and assure us, there was but one Son of
the Family, and that he dyed in the Army. It may be, Madam, (says the Flemmish
Lady) the Gentleman you speak of, may be some near Relation of the Counts. No,
no, (replied the other) he says, He is the Count Biron's own Brother and Heir,
and would pass for such at Court.

I was Yesterday with a Lady of my Acquaintance; and as we were talking of some
of his Cheating Tricks, he happened to come in; and told the Lady, That a
Duchess (he named) having seen the fair Diamond Pendants at her Ears, had a
great Desire to have such another pair made for her; and knowing he had the
Honor to be acquainted with her, had sent him on purpose to entreat her, to
lend her her Pendants for an Hour: The Lady presently cast her Eyes upon me,
and I Mine on her; both looking on one another, but in such a manner, that each
of us understood well enough, how Suspicious this Embassy appeared to the
other. My Friend having too much Wit to be catched in such Traps, excused her
self with saying, She was engaged that Afternoon to make some Visits of
Consequence, and could not then spare her Pendants, being at her Ears; but that
on the Morrow, she would return him his Visit, and afford him a sight of them:
This Day we shall know the Truth, it being not probable, that Lady would have
sent such a Person as he, on a Message of that Nature. But I entertain vou too
long, Madam, with this Subject; yet the Gentleman I speak of, being one who is
very much talked of, you may (perhaps) be glad to know him; and the Description
I have given you, is much to the Life.

The strange Lady thanked her for the Favor she did her; telling her, She took
so much Pleasure to hear her, that it might pass for a Kindness, to have a
further Account of what she knew of this Count; which, perhaps, she might
requite her for, by finding a time to Entertain her with Relations of a very
like Nature.

You shall not be long here (Replied she) but you will see him; and in a few
Days, you may expect a Visit from him; being indeed, the most Impudent of Men,
and one who intrudes into all Places, where Persons of Quality may be seen. He
is not Unhandsom; and, could we judge of Men's Birth by their Shapes, we might
believe him well Born: but this is not the first time, we have known the Man
handsomer than the Master: And as for me, I will never be persuaded he is any
other than a Serving-man: All his Actions are mean and base; his Words having
nothing in them, that carries the least Taste of a Noble and Elevated Wit: And
were it not for the Discourses he makes of his Person, which he boasts to the
Skies, on the account both of Gallantry and Bravery (which, I must tell you, he
maintains but very poorly by his Actions) it is the pittifullest Fellow for
Conversation, that ever I met with. His best Talent is Impudence: He calls
himself, the Friend or Relation of all the People of Quality in France. In a
word, He made two Gentlemen believe, he was with them at the Academy, though
neither of them could remember he had ever seen him before: But that which will
chiefly surprise you, is, The Impudence he expressed about a Letter he found on a
Ladies Table, of my Acquaintance (where I was at Play); He took it with him to
the Playhouse, to show it three or four Gentlemen; who verily believed, the
Letter was addressed to him: And the Person who had Written it, being very
considerable for Merit and Birth; the Gentlemen seeing he treated the Count De
Brion so obligingly, had a better Opinion of him than formerly: But it happned,
that one of these Gentlemen going from the Playhouse, went to the Lady to whom
the Letter belonged, being directed to her; and knowing the Familiarity between
her, and the Person who writ it, asked her, What Acquaintance the Count Brion
had with her Illustrious Friend?

Not any, I believe, (said she) and I think so the rather, for that he has
lately made use of my Intrest with him, to procure him a Letter from him in his
Favor, to a Minister of State, with whom (he said) he had Business of
Importance. I know not what to think of it (Replied the Gentleman,) but can
assure you, I just now saw a very obliging Letter he has written to the Count.
A Letter (answered the Lady!) You shall find it was mine he found on the Table,
and gives it out for his own.

It fell out accordingly; for the Letter to her was not to be found; and what
she told the Gentleman, put it out of doubt, that it was the same Letter. As
they were speaking of it, Count Brion comes in: The Lady was unwilling they
should say any thing to him, and to put him into such a Confusion at her
Lodging, as the Discovery of his Vanity must have certainly reduced him to; But
they brought it insensibly into Discourse by degrees: You might imagine, Madam,
the Count would have split on this Rock: I looked for no less: But his
Impudence brought him off. He maintained stoutly, that he had been long
acquainted with the Gentleman, and had received several Letters from him; and
told us a hundred Particulars of him: At last, he played his part so well, that
if he did not abuse us all, yet he left the one half of the Company donbtful,
whether what he said might not be true. The Lady seeing her self engaged, and
knowing what he said was absolutely false, pressed him more than the rest; but
he had the Dexterity to perplex her so much, that the Victory seemed to lean to
his side: Then falling into his Tone of Railery, he told her, She was very much
mistaken, if she thought that Gentleman Writ to none but to her: That she was
not the only Person received Letters from him; That there were above ten Ladies
in London, could show Letters from him as full of Gallantry, as any she could
produce; And he would engage to let her see above a dozen, if she would have
Patience to stay till the Morrow: So free was he of his Promises. The Lady I
believe, was seriously concerned at his Discourse; and the rest of the Company
knew not what to think of it: She would have Laid her Watch worth Threescore
Pounds Value, against Tenn Guinneyes, he would not perform what he undertook:
The Count Honestly told her, That in not Laying the Wager, he made her a
Present of her Watch; and that he would not put her to that Charge to find out
the Truth: That she need but to have Patience till the next Day, he promised
upon the Word of a Gentleman, as he was, to let her see several of those
Letters.

I know not whether the Lady stepped well that Night or not; but I have been
told, That when she was up, the Count Brion made her a Visit; and turning all
into Railery, complained of her for driving on the business so far before so
good Company; excusing himself, that he was obliged to do as he had done, to
save his Reputation: That he knew very well, she was the sole Person in
England, that the Gentleman had an Esteem for; And that he would give him an
Account, of the Perplexity he had put her in on his score; which was no small
Sign, she had no little Esteem for him.

This Lady, whether satisfied with this Acknowledgment, or slighting further
Satisfaction, said no more of the Business. He had the Fortune to meet many
Adventures of this sort; against which, his Impudence was proof, and saved him
out of all: The only one, I observed him out of Countenance in, was, That of
his Dancing at a Ball; where having come off well enough, he went to make his
boast to one of the Principal Lords at Court, that he had Danced alone at an
Entry at a Ballet, which he named: This Lord being an Excellent Dancer, and a
great Critique in that Art, engaged him to let him see that Entry. The Count
goes to the Musicians; who, having played several Airs, hit at last upon that
which the Count might have wished had never been found; being the Air for the
Entry he had named: They pressed him to Dance it; The Ladies joined their
Forces with the rest of the Company, to prevail with him; but all to no
purpose: And the Answer he made them, was, He would not give them Cause to
Laugh at him; but they took the Liberty to do it. A whole Day will be too
short, to tell you all I know of this Person; but he is by this time, pretty
well known to most, though all are not yet disabused; but his Credit stands
good. He came hither in a very wretched Condition; but quickly recovered the
Equipage of a very great Lord, at the Charges of three or four, whom he got
into his Snare: And as for his poor Creditors, he Entertains them with
Expectation of some Bills of Exchange (which have been long enough a coming) to
have arrived from Japan; but you shall see, at last, he will go fetch them himself.

The Ladies having ended their Discourse of Count Brion, spoke of other things;
till at last, the Stranger having other Visits to make, took her Leave; and was
scarce got down Stairs, but she found the Lady she had made her first Visit to,
Disputing Somewhat hotly with two Chair-men. The strange Lady took the Liberty
to ask her, What the matter was? The other made Answer, That Count Brion having
returned to her Lodging, had Lent her his Chair, and that the Chair-men would
make her pay for it; which was no usual thing: The Count in the mean-time comes
in; and enraged at the sight of the Abuse offered the Lady by the Chairmen, he
took up his Cane, and gave them three or four Blows: But he soon found as good
as he brought; for, the Chair-men thinking the Bastonado intolerable, returned
him Blows with Usury: Two to one was not so even a Match for Beating as
Carrying. The Ladies were much troubled, but knew not how to help him: But, by
good Fortune, a Gentleman came by, with another behind him, who parted the
Fray: The Man I last mentioned, was a Frenchman, who being newly arrived from
Paris; and having cast his Eye on Count Brion, came up to him to Salute him:

Ah Monsieur Champagne (says he) I am heartily glad to meet you here. Monsieur
Champagne (replied the Count?) What do you mean by that? Whom do you take me to
be? I mean (answered the other) that your Name is Champagne; and I take you for
a Bath-keeper's Boy I knew at Paris, and -- Friend (Replied the Count,
Interrupting him) you mistake your self, I am Count Brion. I do not mistake my
self (says the other), and by this very good Token, That you stole away the
Clothes of a Person of Quality, which I was forced to pay for:

He spoke this so loud, that all who stood by, heard him what he said. The
Count was glad to take him by the Hand, to draw him aside; telling him, He was
mistaken: The other as stiffly maintained, He was not; and threatened to have him
Arrested, if he would not pay him for the Clothes. But I am Count Brion
(answered he, much more troubled with this one Frenchman, than he was with the
two Porters. You may be what you please (says he) when you have paid me for
my Clothes; but till then Champagne, Champagne, and no Count Brion. While they
were engaged in this Fine Dialogue, the Gentleman who had parted the Count, and
the Chairmen when they fought, entertained himself in Discourse with the two
Ladies; but seeing a new Quarrel like to arise, he stepped aside, and asked them
what the matter was? Nothing (says the Count) but an Insolent Fellow loves to
hear himself talk, and will needs take me for I know not who: He is certainly
Drunk; and were it not for Respect to you, I should make him know who I am. The
Man was going to Answer; and had doubtless said worse than he had hitherto
done, but the Gentleman persuaded him to withdraw; and so, did the Count a
great Piece of Service. After this the Count sent in search of the Frenchman,
and did all in his Power to persuade him, He was not Champagne; and submitted
how-ever, to pay for the Clothes in Question: But all to no purpose.

This, with many other Reasons, made him resolve to leave London; having
Reigned there too long, to continue any longer. His Fortune was at the Height,
and he apprehended the Danger; that, if he endeavored to Climb any Higher, he
might chance to take the Way to Heaven in a String.

The Lady of Brussels, and the Man of Champagne, were the Evil Stars that
boded him a Storm of Bastonades. It is the Prudence of Man kind, to prevent
such Tempests. CHEATS, who have Wit, are very sensible how subject their Life
is to Dangers of that kind. He easily saw a Cloud of Misfortune gathering over
his Head, for his Insolence and Impudence at London; and that it was time to
withdraw: Every thing has its Season; and he, the better to know the proper
Hour for packing away, went to a Watch-maker; who, taken with his good Meine,
trusted him with two Gold-Watches; with the help of which, he took the Lucky
Moment so right for getting away, that neither Landlord, nor Draper, nor
Tailor; nor Tradesman whatever, nor any other Creditor (for he had of all
sorts) dreamt of his Journey; only the Chair-men had him in the Wind, being (as
the Story goes) told of it by his Footboy; who then were paid more than their
due. But to conclude his Cheats here, and that he might go out of England so as
he came in, that is, at other Men's Charges; when he came to Harwich, he went to
a Merchant, and told him, He had a Letter from one of his Friends, to desire
him, to procure him with all speed a Vessel for France; but that he had
unhappily lost it. The Merchant Seeing him a handsome Man, and in very good
Equipage, told him, A Letter was needless; and presently found him a Vessel,
bound for France, and agreed for six Pieces; and with very much Ceremony, saw
him Embarked.

The Gentleman gets into France; and having no desire it should be at his own
Charges, he found a way to differ with the Seamen; who having agreed with the
Merchant of Harwich for six Pieces, the Count would pay them but six Pistols:
which the Mariners being unwilling to accept of; he sent them with a Billet to
him, with whom they agreed; and so got out of their Clutches.

So much may suffice for the Acts of Count Brion: And now that he has changed
Country, he must also change Name: He gives him self the Title of The Baron of
Vachere; which, it is reported, was the same he past under in his Voyage for
England. The New Title was attended with New Adventures: But we must hasten to
find him at Paris; where his Planet having always had very ill Influence on
him, made him fall into the Hands of a Gentleman, with whom he past from Diepe
to Harwich; who finding himself somewhat concerned in the Insolences of this
pretended Count, caused him to be taken, and clapped up in Prison: He designed to
send him into England; but upon a Ladies Intercession, was content to see him
Condemned to the Galleys; where, it is said, he does Wonders.

A sorry End for the Hero of a Rom ance: It had been better for him to have
been a Country Curate: But who can resist his Fate? And who knows but worse
might have befallen him? Leading the Life he then led, he had reason to expect
to Hang one Day between Heaven and Earth; and has reason to think himself
happy, he is now out of Danger of cutting Capors at Tyburn.

THE END.

