The SECOND PART OF THE GREAT QUESTION CONCERNING THINGS INDIFFERENT IN
Religious Worship, Briefly Stated; And tendered to the Consideration of all
Conscientious and Sober men. By the same Author.

Mr. Hales in his Treatise of Schism. When either False or uncertain
Conclusions are obtruded for Truth, and Acts either unlawful, or ministering
just scruple, are required of us to be performed; in these Cases consent were
Conspiracy, and open Contestation is not Faction or Schism, but due Christian
Animosity. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian and Candid Reader.
IN the Business, not of Decent or Natural, but of Devised and Unnecessary
Ceremonies in the Worship of God, there are, Christian Reader, two Questions at
this day more hotly disputed then ever: The one is Whether they may lawfully be
Imposed? The other is, Whether when they are Imposed, they may lawfully be
observed? The first of these I have already handled; with what success and
satisfaction to others, becomes not me to determine. The Second is now the
Subject of this present Discourse; upon which indeed the whole stress of the
Controversy lies; and that because of the Opinion of many Conscientious and
sober men B. Morton. D. Burges. M. Sp. in., etc.
, who, though they are ready to acknowledge, that the Magistrate ought not to
clog the Worship of God with uncommanded Traditions and Inventions of his own,
yet they conceive, that when such things, as are not expressly forbidden by the
Word of God, are Imposed, they may and ought to be practiced, rather then by
the forbearance of them, men should be forced to quit the exercise of their
Ministry, which is so great a good, that they think it ought to be preserved,
though with the undergoing of some inconvenient Observances.

To those who either in their Writings do affirm, or by their practice do own
this persuasion, I desire to be very tender; but withal, I must take leave to
profess, that I am not as yet satisfied, either with the Assertion, or with the
Argument which is brought to back it. For the Question is not, Whether it be
convenient or Inconvenient, but whether it be lawful or unlawfulto comply or
not? And therefore it should first be enquired, quo jure, before we ask cui
bono? that is, in all things which concern our Practice; we should first be
satisfied, that the thing we do is lawful, before we state to our selves, that
we have a good end in doing it: For since the least evil may not be done to
obtain the greatest good, and since our Lord Christ has sufficient power to
propagate his Gospel without our sin; it is to be feared, that at the last day
he will not accept this as a sufficient answer; that we mingled his Worship
with the, otherwise unlawful, Commands of men, merely to maintain our Liberty
of preaching; since he can make our suffering for his Truth, to be as effectual
a means for the Conversion of others, as our open and free declaringit. As the
Apostle Paul confesses, that his Bonds did beget many to the Faith of Christ. I
wish therefore that too many do not indulge themselves a dangerous Latitude,
not so much to preserve their Ministry, as to retain their Maintenance, and so
to their sin of Compliance, aad a secret distrust of Gods Providence.

But what others may be induced to do, concerns not me at all, who have nothing
to do to judge another Conscience; but having my self been frequently?
importuned to conform, and that by persons whom I very much respect and honor,
I have adventured to publish my Reasons, why for the present I cannot think it
Lawful: Which is a work so liable to censure and misconstruction, that I should
never have undertaken it, but that I would make it appear, it is not humor,
but Conscience, that has guided me unto this resolution. And though it is
possible I may be suspected to favor the irregular Fancies of some, with whom
every slight and trivial difference is a sufficient ground of separation; yet I
can assure thee, Christian Reader, I do so much abhor the Practices and
Opinions of those men, that though I may forbear the usage of our Ceremonies,
yet no occasion shall make me forsake the Communion of our Church, whose
Doctrine, in the most material and disputable Points of it, I have already
asserted; and if I do not in all Particulars comply with her Discipline; it is
not because I would eclipse her splendour, or lessen her Authority; but because
I take some of the things Imposed to be of that Nature, as no Power how great
and lawful soever, can justify and warrant the use of them.

I shall conclude therefore, with what I find in the Oxford Reasons,
excellently argued against Imposing the Covevant: Thus have we, say they,
clearly and freely represented our present judgment, which, upon better
Information in any particular, we shall be ready to rectify. Only we desire,
it may be considered, that if any one fingle reason or scruple remain
unsatisfied (though we should receive satisfaction in all the rest) the
Conscience also would remain still unsatisfied; and in that case, it can
neither be reasonable for them to press us, who cannot satisfy us; nor lawful
for us, that cannot be satisfied, to submit unto the said Covenant, This
Passage, if in stead of the word Covenant, we read Ceremonies, contains as much
as I have to say: And I am not without hope, that those who were so scrupulous
of being Imposed upon then, will be as tender of Imposing now; since the
Ceremonies in question, are by many thought to be as contrary to the Law of
God, as they had reason to think the Covenant was to the Law of the Land.

Chapter Chapter Sept. 10. 1661. Edward Bagshaw.

THE SECOND PART Of the GREAT QUESTION Concerning INDIFFERENT THINGS IN
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP, etc.
Quest. Whether it be Lawful to submit unto the Use and Practice of things,
commonly supposed to be Indifferent, when they come to be Imposed and made
Necessary in Religious Worship?

FOR the righter Stating and clearer Understanding of this Question, I suppose
these two Things.

1. By Things commonly supposed to be Indifferent, I do not mean such things as
are purely, and in their own Nature Indifferent; such are the Time and Place of
Religious Worship. Nor, 2. Such things, as in their own nature, though
Indifferent, yet seem to have a greater Aspect and tendency unto that which is
Natural Decency and Order, then otherwise; as, to stand or kneel, at time of
Public Prayer, and the like: In both these Cases, though perhaps the
Magistrate does ill to interpose his Command, because things of a Religious
Concernment belong not properly and immediately to his Jurisdiction; yet I see
not why his Command should make us scruple or forbear the doing of them: For
whatever, either in it self, or in common estimation among sober men, is more
decent and comely, though it gains no strength from the Command Imposing it,
yet there can no reason be given, why it should lose any. Therefore by Things
Indifferent in the Question, I mean such things, as being considered at large,
and divested from all Circumstances, may perhaps be done or not done, and that
lawfully; yet pro hic and nunc, with reference to the power which imposes, and
to the end which continues them, it is questionable whether they be Indifferent
or not; such are, the Surplice in time of Public Prayer, Music in Churches,
Prescribed Forms of Prayer, the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the Sacrament,
Bowing at the Name of Jesus, and the like; which are not so purely Indifferent,
but that they offend the Weak, who doubt; and cause many fierce and vehement
Contentions, even amongst the Learned, who dispute, whether they be lawful or
not: And about these things alone, do I desire to be understood in my following
Discourse.

2. By Submitting, I do not mean, a being present at such time and place, where
these Rites are used, but actively concurring to, and personally doing them our
selves: For as Mr. Hales excellently observes, What if those to whom the
Execution of the Public Service is committed, do something either unseemly or
suspicious, or peradventure unlawful? What if the Garments they wear, be
censured, nay indeed be suspicious? What if Gesture or Adoration be used to the
Altars, as now we have learned to speak? What if the Homilist have preached, or
delivered any Doctrine for truth, of which we are not well persuaded? Yet for
all this, we may not separate, except we be constrained personally to bear a
part in them our selves. And therefore the Question does not so properly
concern the People, who, for ought I know, may be present where these
Ceremonies are used, 1 Kings. 19.
without being defiled by them, as Elijah was a looker on upon Baals Priests;
and the Apostle tells us, we may eat meat, 1 Con. 8.
and therefore hear the Word, though in an Idols Temple. But I chiefly mean the
Preachers and Ministers of the Word, upon whose Personal Practice all these
things are commanded, and this I hold utterly unlawful for them to submit unto.

First, Because the Magistrate has no power to impose things doubtful and
disputable upon the Practice of any in the Service of God;

1. That the Magistrate has no Power to impose things doubtful and disputable
in the Service of God.

2. That if he does impose, we cannot lawfully obey him.

The first Assertion is this; That the Magistrate has no Power to impose
things doubtful and disputable in the Service of God: And the Reason is clear,
because God has given him no such Commission: For since it is most Equal and
Reasonable, that God should be the sole Orderer of his own Worship, and if in
his Revealed Will (which the Magistrate is as much bound to obey, as the
meanest Christian) God has not authorized any to enforce upon the Practice of
others, things which are of a doubtful and disputable nature; then cannot the
Magistrate lawfully take to himself that power, because in so doing, he goes
beyond his Bounds, and exceeds those Limits, which God has set all that
profess Faith in him, viz. of not being wise and holy above what is written.
Besides, our Savior while he was upon Earth, though he had all Power committed
to him, as Mediator, yet he neither exercised himself, nor entrusted to his
Apostles such Power, that they should force or compel any to obey him, because
his Kingdom is not of this world, i. e. not to be acquired or enlarged by those
Arts and Policies which humane Princes use; but Converts only are his Subjects;
and those he alone owns for Members of his Church, whom Preaching and sound
Persuasion has won over to him. And therefore it is very incongruous for the
Magistrate, who pretends to act for Christ, to take more upon him then Christ
himself did, and by enforcing things dubious, make Religion a very uneasy and
unpleasant yoke, and thereby fright Conscientious and Sober men from the
Service of him, whose honor he would seem to promote; which is directly
contrary, both to the Nature of Religion, and to the Ends of Christian
Government.

Against this, in behalf of the Civil Magistrates Power, it is urged.

1. Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and other Kings of the Jews, are commended for
repairing and beautifying the Temple and Worship of God; and likewise David
made Musical Instruments, appointed the Courses of the Priests, prescribed
their Garments and manner of Service, none of which were provided for by the
Law of Moses; from whence it follows, that Christian Magistrates have still
the same power, which the Jewish Princes had; that is, to regulate and order
the outward Circumstances of Gods Worship, though over Substantials, and
Articles of Faith, it is acknowledged they have no Power at all.

But I Answer:

1. Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19.
That whatever the Jewish Princes did in regulating Gods Worship, they had a
particular and express Law, which did exact it from them; and which in all,
even the smallest Punctilio's and Circumstances, had so provided, that they
could not fail of knowing their Duty; whereas Christian Religion is in most
Particulars of lesser moment, more free and undetermined, and therefore there
is not the same parity of Reason, that the example of the Jewish Princes then,
should be obligatory to our Magistrates now, because the Law is altered, and
that accurateness in small things needs not so much be insisted on. For now the
Magistrate most consults Gods honor, and his own duty, if he leaves the
Christian Law as large as he found it; and does not urge, either little, or
much less doubtful things, because God, in not requiring them, shows, that the
pressing them, will not be a work pleasing or acceptable to him, because it
lays an Imputation upon his Wisdom and Holiness, as if he had not in his Word
sufficiently provided for his own Worship.

2. And more particularly, to that Instance of David, I Answer, That whatever
David did in regulating the Service of God, in appointing Musical Instruments,
Priests Garments. and the like, he did it not by his Authority, as King; but by
Gods Command, as a Prophet; as will appear from these Places of Scripture: One
is, 2 Chronicles. 8.14. Where it is said, that Solomon appointed according to the
Order of David his Father, the Courses of the Priests, to their Service, and
the Levites to their Charges, to praise and minister before the Priests, as the
duty of every day required: For so, says the Text, David the man of God
commanded. Where that Expression, The man of God (which is a Name given only to
Persons extraordinarily inspired, such (were the Prophets of old) sufficiently
shows in what capacity David ordered these things; not barely as a King, but as
a man of God, i. e. by God himself excited and inspired to do it. Again, when
Hezekiah restored the Purity of Gods Worship, which his Father Ahaz had
polluted, it is said, 2 Chronicles. 29.25.
that He set the Levites in the House of the Lord with Cymbals, with
Psalteries, and with Harps, according to the Commandment of David, and of Gad
the Kings Seer, and of Nathan the Prophet, For, says the Text, so was Gods
Commandment by the Prophets: Whence it plainly appears, that David did no more
in these Particulars, then what God himself had by his Prophets commanded. And
therefore when David gave to Solomon his Son the Pattern of Gods House, and of
all the Rooms and Apartments in it, it is said to be, the pattern of all that
he had by the spirit, among which things are reckoned, 1 Chronicles. 28.12. V. 19.
the Courses of the Priests and of the Levites, and for all the work of the
Service of the House of the Lord: Of which the Text says, All this, said
David, the Lord made me understand in Writing, by his hand upon me, even all
the works of this Pattern. From whence it evidently follows, that not the least
Circumstance which David then ordered, came from his own motion, or was
established barely by his Kingly Authority, but it did proceed from the
infallible Directions of Gods Spirit, and therefore Magistrates cannot urge his
Example, unless they will pretend at least to his Divine Assistance, and not
Regal, but Prophetical Authority.

Lastly, Since the Objecters allow that over Substantials, as for example, to
make or command Articles of Faith, Magistrates have no power; methinks it
demonstrably follows from their own Concessions, that over Circumstantials
they have much less: Since Substantials concern the Essence of Worship, and
therefore may seem to be a just ground for Imposition; upon which, the Apostles
found the Equity of their Canon, about forbidding things strangled, Blood and
Fornication, Acts 15.28.
because they were (...), things very necessary; but Circumstantials may very
well be omitted, without any prejudice either to Gods Worship, or to the
Magistrates Power; and the very needlesseness and superfluousness of them, may
seem justly enough, to make it unlawful to impose them: For if in general, the
Magistrate has nothing to do, whether I am a Christian or not, since as a man,
I have a Title to his Protection: then sure, when I acknowledge my self a
Christian, in what kind of Habit, Posture, or Words, I will worship God, the
Magistrate has much less to do, because Charity, Forbearance, Doing as he
would be done by, not to lay a stumbling Block before his Brother, and the
like, are as much Parts of the Christian Magistrates Duty, as Obedience to the
Magistrate in all lawful, and therefore not disputable things, is the duty of a
Christian Subject.

2. Isa. 49.23.
and in particular, that Kings should be Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing
Mothers to the Church; and therefore certainly they may employ their Authority
for the beautifying and adorning it in all such outward Circumstances of
Worship, as merely appertain to Decency and Order.

But I Answer:

1. There are indeed many Prophecies in Scripture, that Kings and Inferior
Magistrates shall submit to the Faith of Christ; yet it does not follow, that
therefore they are to take upon them to model and regulate any part of his
Worship. C. 7.18.
For as in the Opinion about the Reign of the Saints, it is clear from
Scripture, that a time will come when the Saints shall rule the world, as in
Daniel, The Saints of the Most High shall take the Kingdom, and possess the
Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever: Yet it does not follow, that
therefore they ought to take Arms, and by violence possess themselves of an
Earthly Kingdom, because this contradicts so many other places, wherein
Patience, Self-denial, and Waiting upon God, is enjoined them. So in this case,
there is a vast difference between a Magistrates becoming Christian, and his
meddling with Prescribing Forms of Christian Worship, which no Prophecy did ever
mention: Nay on the contrary, in stead of foretelling any such Imperious and
authoritative Rule of Princes, in Religious matters, the Scripture mentions
their lowly and humble deportment; as in David's Prophecy concerning the
Messiah: All Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him. And
in Isaiah, Kings shall see and arise; Princes also shall worship. Psalm. 72.11.
Isa.49 7.
Nay in that very place, where there is mention of Kings being Nursing Fathers,
it is added, they shall lie down to thee with their Face toward the earth,
they shall lick the dust of thy Feet: Which places do rather argue the
Magistrates awful Reverence of, and respectful submission to the Church of
Christ, then their exercising Authority over it. At least thus much may be
evinced, that, though Magistrates lose no power by becoming Christians, yet
they gain none, but in every thing are to act as Servants to the Law of Christ;
from which, as nothing may be taken, so to it nothing ought to be added; no,
though it may be patronized under the names of Decency and Order; which if we
make to signify, not Natural, but Devised and Fancied Order, it is that which
all Superstitions plead, to defend their unwarrantable Traditions and
Inventions by. And therefore to pursue the Simile a little farther, it were to
be wished, that Kings would so far prove Nursing-Fathers, as to use their
Christian Subjects in this particular, as Nurses do their Children, i. e. only
to put into their Mouths, that which the Apostle Peter calls (...), 1 Pet. 2.2.
Reasonable and sincere or unmingled Milk, i. e. only Gods Word in its Native
Purity, without being sowred by the Harshness of Impositions, or corrupted,
rather then sweetened, by the undue mixture of Humane Fancies and Imaginations.

2. The best way for Christian Magistrates to advance and beautify Religion,
is not by the Prodigality of their Purses, in stately Structures, Choice
Music, Curious Pictures, and the like, wherein Superstition will be sure to
outdo them; or by the Severity and Rigor of their Laws in small things, but
in the Piety of their Lives, and strictness of their Civil Government. For let
Magistrates once cleanse the Soil of Humane Nature, by making sharp and wholesome
Laws against Vice and Immorality, and then weed it, by impartial punishing of
Drunkenness, and other Disorders, which the Apostle calls Works of the Flesh;
then Religion will make its own way into men's hearts, and produce an outward
Composure in Service, suitable to its own inward Worth and Excellence: Whereas
the Magistrates meddling with Outward Forms, begets only a Face of Religion,
which is so much the more loathsome, in that it is used commonly as a Cover, to
hide many foul Enormities, which without that Mask, no sober Magistrate could
have the heart to tolerate. I conclude therefore since, 1. God never gave. 2.
Christ never exercised. 3. The Examples of the Jewish Princes, nor Scripture
Prophesies do warrant such an imposing Power, especially in things doubtful, as
some contend for, it follows, that the Civil Magistrate has no such power, and
ought not to take it upon him: Which was my first Assertion.

The Second Assertion was this, That if the Magistrate does impose things
doubtful, we cannot lawfully obey him: And the Reason is clear, from what is
already argued: For no man can lawfully do any thing in the Worship of God, but
what he is satisfied he might do, whether it were by men commanded or not;
therefore he that has no other warrant for his doing any thing, then the
Command of the Magistrate, when it is clear the Magistrate has no Power to
command him, must needs sin in what he does: And that,

1. Because thereby he visibly disowns, and detracts from Gods Sovereignty, who
is sole Lord of the Conscience, whose Honor is then given to another, when by
our submitting to them, we seem in fact at least, to acknowledge, that they
have Power to impose: For in the Church of Christ, by an Overt Act, to own and
countenance the Jurisdiction and Authority of another, this is to lessen
Christ's Legislative Power, and to make Two Heads of the Church, a Visible and
Invisible, or a Political and Spiritual one, which is a distinction that the
Scripture knows not; and only the Popish, that is the Antichristian Church
makes use of.

2. Because by obeying what is in it self doubtful, and in the Imposer
unlawful, we shall consent to, and approve the Magistrates sin, and so harden
him to continue more fierce and peremptory in it. Now if it be a Rule in
general, that we ought to reprove our Brother, and not to suffer sin upon him,
much less to consent, Lev. 19.
and to partake with him in it: How much more is it our duty, to prevent, so
far as we can, any sin in our Magistrate, (whose happiness we are bound in
especial manner to procure and pray for) and this must be done, by our modest
and humble, but yet resolute and constant refusing to obey his Impositions;
wherein we are so to proceed, as to evidence both by our Language, and Actions,
that it is not Peevishness or Petulancy, much less a disobedient and
contradicting humor, which puts us upon it, but merely Conscience of our Duty,
both to God and Him; namely, because the Magistrate, as to these matters, is
not in Gods stead, God not having committed unto Christian Magistrates, but
unto his Son, the Government of his Church, and that in the Outward Policy, as
well as in the Inward Purity of it: For where the inward Purity is not wrought,
there outward Conformity is not a serving God; but men, and proves a Service,
which as God requires not, so neither will he at all accept. And therefore
since even the highest Magistrates on earth are accountable to God, who hates
Oppression, under pretense of advancing Piety; this, as it ought to make all
Magistrates afraid how they meddle with imposing, without any warrant, so it
ought to make us wary too, lest by active submitting, we do abet and own their
sin, and so become Parties in the Transgression; There being but little
difference, in the sight of God, between him that commands a doubtful thing,
and him that does it, upon no better argument, then because another, who had no
power, commanded it: For in that, or in no case, God calls for Suffering, and
not for Submitting.

3. He that obeyes in such a case, must needs sin, because he cannot act in
Faith, i. e. in a sound and through, Persuasion, that it is lawful for him to
obey. For since no Conclusion can have in it greater certainty then the
Premises which infer it, I would fain know, how it is possible for him to have
any clear satisfaction, who thus argues.

1. The thing commanded, as for example, the Cross in Baptism, is in its own
nature very disputable, whether it be Lawful or not?

2. The Magistrate who commands it, has no power to do it, and therefore sins
in enjoining; must not then the Inference be, therefore I shall sin in obeying
him, since his Command, when he wants Power, can never make a doubtful thing
warrantable or safe to a doubting Conscience. From all which, it follows, that
if it be unlawful to command a thing doubtful in Religious Worship, it is
equally unlawful to obey it; which is the sum of my First Argument.

My Second Reason shall be taken from the Necessity and Nature of Christian
Liberty; If you be my Disciples, says our Savior, you shall know the Truth,
John 8.31. etc.
and the Truth shall set you free. And again, If the Son shall make you free,
you shall be free indeed. Gal. 3.1. V. 13. James 1.25. and 2.12.
So the Apostle Paul, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you
free. And again, Brethren, you have been called unto Liberty, So James calls the
Gospel the perfect Law of Liberty: and, so speak, says he, and so do, as those
that shall be judged by the Law of Liberty. All which places, with many others,
to the same purpose, do evince thus much, that it is not a thing merely
arbitrary, and at our pleasure, whether we will preserve our Christian Liberty
or not; but we are strictly commanded to do it: and the same obedience which we
owe to other Divine Precepts, we are obliged to pay unto this, because it is
dictated by the same Spirit. Now since this Liberty, as it is mentioned by our
Savior and his Apostles, is only to be exercised in things of Religious
Concernment (for as to Civil matters, no doubt, the strictest Obedience to the
Magistrates Command, is our Duty) it follows therefore, that when once things,
otherwise perhaps Indifferent, yet indeed Doubtful, come to be made necessary,
and forced upon our practice, we are then bound by a meek and Christian, but
yet magnanimous Refusal, to assert our Freedom, and not suffer our selves to be
entangled by a Yoke of Bondage, which is so much the more heavy and galling,
because it is confessedly needless, and has no holier end to ratify it, then
merely an undue will of the Imposer; which if we obey, 1 Cor. 7.23.
we then become Servants of men, and cowardly desert that Freedom which Christ
came to purchase for us: which is quite contrary both to the Command and
Practice of the Apostle Paul, who though he held Circumcision, in some cases to
be Indifferent, and accordingly used it; yet when once False Brethren came to
spy out their Liberty, Gal. 2.
and by their subtle Discourses sought to bring them into Bondage, Paul would
not yield to them in the least, but constantly opposed the Insinuations of
those crafty men (with whom no doubt, Arguments from Decency and Order were not
wanting) that so he might transmit the Truth, i. e. the Liberty of the Gospel
unto his Followers: And for his own, both Judgment and Practice, he gives this
General Rule, All things, i. e. which are not forbidden by God, are Lawful,
but, (...), i. e. I will not be domineered over by any, 1 Cor. 6.12.
or, I will not suffer any to exercise Authority over me, as that I should upon
his Imperious and unlawful Command, forbear the free use of that which the Lord
has left free unto me.

Against this it is Objected,

1. That Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, speaks only of Circumcision and
Jewish Ceremonies; and therefore the Liberty he mentions, must only be
understood in reference to them, which all acknowledge to be abolished, and
without sin, cannot be revived; but this does not concern other Christian
Rites, which are introduced, as by another power, so upon another Score, sc.
not as Parts of Religion, but as Circumstances of mere Decency and Order. But I
Answer.

1. Paul does not so confine his Discourse to Circumcision, but that in other
places he extends it to Meats and Drinks, to Observation of Days, and such
like, which are much more indifferent, then those now contested about:
Concerning which, the Apostles Assertion is, That he would not be brought into
bondage by any, but be left as free in the use or forbearance of them, as the
Laws of Charity would permit. And therefore whatever the Apostle says, though
properly and immediately it relates only to Jewish Customs, yet since his words
are general and indefinite, they must be understood equally to concern all
things, that are of a like, and much more those that are of a more doubtful
Nature.

2. Though the Apostle did speak only of Circumcision and other Legal Rites,
yet the very same Reason which served to take them away, may easily be
improved, to keep back any other from being either imposed or observed in their
room. For, 1. Since God himself was the immediate Author of all Mosaical
Ceremonies. And 2. Since they were afterward abolished, not because they were
sinful, but because they were unprofitable; not because they were inconsistent
with Salvation, but because they did not sufficiently promote it, as the
Apostle witnesses: There is, Heb. 7.18, 19.
says he, a disanulling of the Commandment going before, for the weakness and
unprofitablenesse thereof; for the Law, i. e. of Ceremonies, made nothing
perfect: Then it follows, that things, 1. Which have not the same Divine
warrant and Prescription. And 2. Which are equally, if not more unprofitable,
as to what concerns the Conscience, ought not to be introduced or practiced;
for else we should be very little Gainers, if being set free from Gods, we
might be made subject to man's Law, and if in stead of Divine, we might own and
practice Humane Impositions: This would not ease our Yoke, but only alter it,
nay make it much more insupportable then the Jewish Burden was: For they, in
what they did, obeyed a Righteous and Infallible God, and therefore were sure,
they could not err: But we must obey the Arbitrary Fancies of Unrighteous, and
Fallible men, concerning whose Authority in imposing, or the Usefulness of the
things which they impose, we can never be satisfied; since they seem, not only
to go beyond their bounds, but likewise by enjoining such poor things, to play
with, rather then to adorn Religion, and in stead of consulting Gods Honor, to
provide only Traps and Snares for their Conscientious and soberly dissenting
Brethren.

2. It is objected again, That the Church was not in the same condition in the
Apostle Paul's time, Paul bids them be free; but now the state of things is
altered: For Magistrates have taken upon them the care of Religion, unto whose
Injunctions we are to yield obedience, according to that of the Apostle, Let
every Soul be Subject to the Higher Powers.

I Answer, gratis, and without the least pretense of Proof, that the Christian
Magistrate has any thing to do to impose in things of Religion: For which, I
might bring many Sentences out of Tertullian, and especially Lactantius, who
affirm the same: but the thing is clear; For Civil Government is properly and
adequately concerned only in Civil things; but Religious matters belong only to
him that is Inspector and Lord of the Conscience; and therefore that Text, Let
every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, is in this debate impertinently
alleged; since it is evident, that the Apostle wrote it, with reference to
Nero, who was then Emperor, and certainly did very little trouble himself with
things of Religion, except it were to persecute it; and even then when the
Magistrate does so, I acknowledge that we are to be subject to, i. e. not to
resist him; Nay, further, it follows from the Text, that should our
Magistrates become, what they then were, Heathen and Infidels, yet in all Civil
Matters, we were bound to obey them; which I am ready to assert against all,
whether Papal or other Encroachments. But that the Magistrate either has power
to prescribe Religious Rites, or that if he does prescribe, we ought to submit
to him, neither that, nor any other Text of Scripture does evince, as I have
already demonstrated.

2. I deny, that any upon Earth, now has greater power to impose upon the
Church, then those had in the Apostle Paul's time. For I take it for granted,
that Peter was, if not the greatest, yet one of the greatest Persons, that ever
was since our Saviors time, and yet when he, by his suspicious and inconstant
carriage, gave occasion to the Gentiles, to think, Gal. 2.
that the Jewish Rites ought still to be continued, Paul openly reproves him,
in these words, Why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews? i. e.
Why do thou seem to lay a constraint upon them, and by the Authority of thy
example, induce them to believe, that those Ceremonies are still to be
practiced? From whence I infer, that if in one who was so great an Apostle,
Paul would not brook the least scruple of carriage, which might seem to abate
and lessen the extent of Christian Liberty, then it follows.

1. That no Magistrate can lawfully take upon him that power, since the
greatest Magistrate on Earth, in things appertaining to Divine Worship, is much
inferior to Peter, both for Knowledge and Authority.

2. That if the Magistrate does take upon himself that power, we are to be so
far from complying, as rather, by Paul's example, openly to reprove him; at
least we are to let him know, that we stand engaged to another Master, who has
commanded us to be free; and that it is not out of disobedience to the
Magistrate, but out of duty to God, if we peaceably assert and maintain our
Liberty.

3. The last objection is this, Freedom of Practice, but in the Freedom of
Judgment: And therefore many acknowledge, that if these doubtful things were so
imposed, as that thereby we should be obliged to think them necessary to
salvation, then it was our duty not to do them: But since they are merely
enjoined by the Magistrate, as things of Outward order, so long we may freely
do them, and still retain our Liberty of Conscience. And this is the Sum of
what many Learned men, both in their Writings and Discourses do affirm. But I
Answer:

1. That the Distinction is merely coined to serve a turn, the least
Foundation, either in Scripture or Reason. For, 1. It is not grounded on
Scripture, since all those places wherein we are commanded not to be the
Servants of men, to stand fast in our Liberty, and the like, do principally
respect the freedom of our Practice, in reference to the Imposer, whom we ought
not to submit unto. Neither, 2. Is there any color of Reason for it; for
Liberty of Judgment, without Liberty of Practice suitable to that Judgment, is
not only a vain and ludicrous, but a burdensome and vexatious thing; and
especially in the Service of God, while we always outwardly do that, which
inwardly we do not approve, is nothing else but direct Hypocrisy.

2. The Question is not, Whether any may impose upon our Judgments; which it is
evident none can; but whether our Practice, ought not to be left as free as our
Judgments, in those things which in reference to his own Worship, God himself
has not determined. The Distinction therefore which supposes, that our
Practice may be bound up, and yet our Liberty, which Christ and his Apostles
were so tender of, preserved, does not prove, but only begs the Question: And
like such kind of stuff, is merely so much dust thrown into our eyes, that we
might not read, and make use of our Royal Charter.

I conclude therefore, 1. Since Christian Liberty is entirely and indispensably
to be preserved, because the same Authority which forbids Murder, does command
that, and it is the Authority of our Law giver, which gives each Law its
Sanction. 2. Since Christian Liberty has place only in the use of Indifferent,
or forbearance of doubtful things (for things necessary are already enjoined by
God, whom we are to obey, whether the Magistrate do command them or not)
therefore it follows, 1. That whoever takes away the liberty of Practice from
us, directly contradicts so many places of Scripture, which do expressly enjoin
it: and then, 2. We cannot without dishonor to God, and violation of one of
the greatest outward Privileges that the Gospel does indulge us, consent to,
or by our Practice seem to approve of any thing which does so immediately
entrench upon our Christian Freedom: Which is my Second Argument.

The Third Argument shall be taken from the Nature of the things Imposed,
Indifferent; for then we need not, and I believe, few would scruple at the
practice of them) but, as I stated above, they are things very doubtful and
disputable, and therefore no Command can make them Lawful. For to instance only
in one of them, and that is, the Cross in Baptism, I may affirm of that, which
I find the Learned Hales asserting concerning Images. 1. It is a thing
acknowledged by all, that it is unnecessary. 2. By most, at least in this
Nation, it is suspected. 3. By many it is held utterly unlawful: Can then the
enjoining of such a thing, be ought else but Abuse? Or can the Refusal of (he
says, Communion, I say) Submission, be ought else but Duty?

I am not ignorant that many specious Arguments are brought for some of our
Ceremonies, as particularly, for Set Forms of Prayer, and for kneeling at the
Sacrament which, because they are obvious, I shall not insist upon: For
allowing, but not granting, the utmost of what is said, that to pray by a Book,
is a more rational and Composed way of Divine Worship, then to pray from the
strength of ones own Meditation, and the Assistance of Gods Spirit; who,
because of those Enlargements and quicknings he gives, is peculiarly styled the
Spirit of Prayer. 2. Granting that to kneel, is a more humble, and therefore a
more decent Posture, at the Sacrament, then to sit, as our Savior and his
Apostles did; (whose Example sure we may follow without sin) or at least, to
stand, which is a posture of Prayer, and therefore of Reverence, and less
subject to harden the Papists, who have so monstrously abused Kneeling, by
their Idolatry: But granting the Decency and Convenience of both, yet,

1. Since they are either Parts of, or Additions to Divine worship,
unwarrantably devised, and forcibly obtruded.

2. Since the Imposers do lay so much stresse upon them, that, it is evident,
though they call them Indifferent, yet they think them Necessary.

3. Since in these Forms of Prayers, there are those Mixtures, which make our
Liturgy, though not simply unlawful, yet highly questionable.

4. Since they are joined with some other Ceremonies, as the Cross in
Baptism, which are of a more doubtful Nature.

Lastly, Since many, as sober and as Pious Christians, as any are in our
Nation, are infinitely grieved at the use of them, and are upon the point of
forsaking our Assemblies, because of them. It follows hence,

1. That it does not at all become the Piety and Prudence of Christian
Governors to impose these things which grieve and disturb very many, and in
their own nature are grateful to very few? besides such who make use of their
Conformity, as the way to Preferment.

2. That no Conscientious Minister, so far as I yet see, can personally bear a
part in all these Ceremonies, because he cannot act in Faith, as doing that, 1.
Which God requires not. 2. Which his, perhaps weak, but yet Christian Brother,
takes offense at, and if the Apostle Paul says, he would never eat meat (which
is always lawful, and to some tempers necessary Food) rather then offend his
Brother, sure he would have forborne a Cross, or a Surplice much more.

If any Answer, as some do, that it is Scandalum acceptum and non datum, an
Offense only peevishly taken, but not justly given.

I answer, Scandalum datum, an Offense justly given: For he that upon any
pretense whatever, does consent, not only to quit his own Liberty, but likewise
in so doing, does violate and injure the Conscience of another; he gives just
occasion to have his action censured, as if he chose sin rather then
Affliction, since they are only Motives of Convenience, which seem to lie at
the bottom, and make him stoop to so mean a Bondage.

Some object, That it is true, by doing these things, we offend our Brother,

1. eatenus jus non habet, and therefore I should more scandalize, i. e. give
him a greater occasion of sinning, by submitting to, then by quiet disowning of
his Authority. For by submitting, I shall beget this Opinion in him, that he
does well to impose, which is undoubtedly sinful; whereas by disowning his
Authority, I only make my self liable to suffering, which every good Christian
ought at all times to be prepared for.

2. Our Savior has already taught us how little we are to care for the
offense which men take at that sober and just use which we make of our Liberty:
For when he refused to wash his hands before meat, (which by the way, was a
Rite much more innocent, then those I now dispute of) and gave this for his
ground, that it was a plant not of his Fathers planting; his Disciples seem to
importune him to condescend unto the Pharisees, who were his lawful Governors,
by urging, that they were offended at his Saying: But our Savior in stead of
assenting, cries out, let them alone, they are Blind Guides, with other words,
showing, that while they made use of their Authority, to press such needless
Toys, it was his duty to disobey them. Which carriage of our Savior is so
much the more remarkable, in that, when they came to demand Tribute-money,
though he alleged, that by his Birthright he was free from any such Tax, yet,
says he, rather then offend them, let us pay it; plainly implying, that in
Civil things, not to stand too nicely upon our terms, but for peace sake even
to part with some of our Right, is honest and commendable; but in Religious
things we must not yield a tittle, because in them, the honor of God is
immediately concerned: For, as being Lord of the Conscience, and sole Dictator
of what way he will be served in, he expects, we should upon all occasions,
openly assert his Right, and neither teach for Doctrine, nor solemnize for
Worship, the Commandments of men. For, that I may obviate an Exception of some,
who allege, that these things are not imposed as Doctrines: When a Ceremony
comes to be urged and pressed, beyond the bounds of a thing Indifferent, here
though no Doctrine be mentioned, yet there is a Doctrine couched under it, and
that is, this which I have been all this while speaking against, That the
Magistrate has power to impose in Religious Worship. So that when things
doubtful come upon that score to be obtruded, we must resolutely refuse to do
them, lest we should seem to own and assent unto the Doctrine. To conclude
therefore, Since the things in question, are so pressed, as if the Imposers
thought them necessary. 2. Since many of them are very disputable. 3. Since
most of them are very scandalous and offensive to our weaker Brethren, it
follows, that they are not in their own nature Indifferent, and therefore it
cannot be lawful to practice them. And so much for the Third Argument.

The Fourth and last Argument shall be taken from the Resemblance and
Correspondency which these things have to others, which we have already
renounced in the Popish worship; as likewise from the impossibility, that any
rational or sober account can be given why we dissent from those, if we assent
to these. For, I would fain know, wherein lies the true ground of our
separation from the Church of Rome, if not in this, because they obtrude such
conditions of Communion, which Gods Word does not warrant us to assent to? For
let men speak as much as they please against Images, Crucifixes, Praying to
Saints, or for the Dead, etc. at last it will be found, that the only firm and
solid Argument to overthrow all these things, is this, They are not written.
God has no where in his Word commanded such things, and therefore we may
safely reject them. But on the same score, the Cross, the Surplice, Bowing
Kneeling, and the rest, must be rejected too, as being equally uncommanded,:
For how can we satisfy any inquisitive man, why in Baptism, we have cast off
Oil, and retain the Cross? why in the other Sacrament, we retain Kneeling, and
refuse Adoration? Why we bow to the Name of Jesus, and yet are offended at a
Crucifix? In short, why we have pared away some Rites, either as Idolatrous, or
else as superfluous, and yet have retained others, that are equally scandalous,
equally indefensible? If we answer, that we did it, because every National
Church has power to judge of Ceremonies, and to impose upon her Subjects, as
few or as many as she thinks fit; Will it not inevitably follow, that our
Church may when she pleases, bring in all those exploded Rites upon us, and
when she does so, we are bound to submit unto her Authority? So that all the
advantage we have got by our Reformation (which at the beginning of it, was the
best and the most stupendous that ever the world saw) is only this, that we
have lopt off some Branches of Popery, but left the Root untouched; as owning
that Doctrine of Impositions, which may whenever the Magistrate pleases, bring
in the outward practice of that Religion again upon us. I do not speak this, as
if I did in the least imagine, that our Governors do so much as dream of any
such thing, but I argue merely as a rational man, and considering the nature of
things; for since every man then acts rationally, when he acts conformably to
the Principle he holds; therefore he that first mistakes things doubtful, for
things Indifferent, and then maintains, that the Magistrate has power to make
even things Doubtful, Necessary, when he imposes them; he leaves the Magistrate
free, to bring in as much of the Popish Worship, as he is pleased to think is
either decent or convenient.

Since then the Cross, the Surplice, etc. are all of the same Idolatrous
Nature and Original, with other parts of Romish Worship, which we have worthily
rejected, as being coined in the unlicensed Mint of men's Brain, without the
stamp of Divine Authority; it follows, that either we must not use them, or
else we must acknowledge, that if Oil for Infants, Holy Unction for the sick,
Exorcismes, etc. were enjoined, we could lawfully submit to them too, and so
never fix our selves a certain point of Religious Practice, but depend
altogether upon the Beck and Pleasure of our Magistrate.

Against this, I know not what can be objected, except as some affirm, that the
Pope is not Antichrist, so others will take upon them to prove that Popery is
not Idolatry. If any Protestant be of that mind, I hope he thinks of returning
speedily to their Communion, but till I understand, how Pictures may be made
and placed, if not as Objects, yet as Helps of Devotion; how Saints can first
be Canonized, and then prayed to, how the Bread can be confined to a place, and
yet adored as god, how the Virgin Mary besides being prayed to, can be
entreated to command her Son; till I say, I understand how these, and many more
such things can be done, and no Idolatry committed, I must take leave to
affirm, that if that Church be not Idolatrous, there never was, nor can be such
a thing as Idolatry in the World.

To conclude therefore, I will acknowledge, that using the Cross, though not in
Baptism, is very ancient, and mentioned more then once by Tertullian Apolog.
, that a peculiar Reverence to the Name of Jesus, is asserted by Origin Lib.
adv. Cells.
, that the Worship of Angels, or something very like it, is maintained by Justin
Martyr Apolog. 2.
Prayer for the Dead, as I remember, by Cyprian, I am sure by Tertullian Apolog.
, Purgatory by Arnobius, etc. But yet these Opinions, which in those Excellent
Writers (who were newly recovered out of Gentilisme) were very tolerable
Mistakes and Errors, did neither hurt them, nor the Church of Christ, till the
world was grown lazy enough to believe, and the Bishop of Rome had force enough
to impose them, as Necessary Doctrines. This is that which not only diffused,
but so far fixed the fatal Poison of Error, that the world can never expect to
be freed, till it pleases God to raise up some generous and truly Heroic
Prince, who may be convinced of the truth of Christian Religion, not by
hearsay from others, but by a through search and enquiry into the Causes of it
himself, and growing from thence assured, that nothing can more hinder the
Progress of the Gospel, then to disguise and alter its simplicity (for a
strange dress must needs render it suspected) will resolve to give it a free
and undisturbed Passage, and never draw his Sword, but when Malice and
Ignorance do join together, not only to oppose, but to persecute it; how will
Truth then, being unfettered and set free, from the Clogges of pretended
Decency, but indeed Antichristian Tyranny, run through this Nation, and chase
Error before it, as the Light does Darkness? This Great and Glorious work I
dare almost prophecy that his Majesty is reserved for, whose pious and
unequalled Declaration, has already indulged as much Liberty, as any
sober-minded Christian can pretend to: and which will then undoubtedly be made
a Law, when by our constant and cheerful Sufferings for this Doctrine of
Liberty, we have expiated and washed away those Scandals, which our many odious
and unparalled Abuses have cast upon it.

FINIS.

