TO THE MAYOR Aldermen, Majestrates and Officers of the Military Force in this
City of LONDON, and County of MIDDLESEX, for you to receive, and in patience to
consider.
MEN and Brethren, in the fear of the Lord I beseech you, every one of you to
walk humbly in the places wherein you are set, and also warn you that you
beware of pulling Innocent blood on your own heads, though some of you with the
Jews may not matter it, if our blood should be on you and your children, Yet
know this, if ye shed it or cause it to be shed, it will prove a burden heavy
for you to bear, even as the innocent blood of Jesus proved a burden heavy for
the Jews, though they in haste cried out, his blood be on us and our children.
I write unto you Magistrates that you may consider, though Naboth was put to
death by the commandment of Jesabel, yet Ahab leaving his seal so carelessly,
that his Wife could come at it, though Ahab himself lay upon his bed, yet the
blood of Naboth was laid to Ahab's charge; and withal know this, that we dare
not part with the Inheritance which the Lord gives us, though with Naboth we
should be stoned to death for it.

Therefore oh ye Magistrates, was not the late made Law against us, who in
scorn are called Quakers, enough, but do you now leave your seals so carelessly
that others may take them, and send Soldiers into our peaceable meetings to
abuse us by bruising some of our bodies, to the je^pardy of some of our lives.

Therefore oh ye Rulers know this, that ye ought to bear the Sword of Justice,
and not to bear it in vain, but to see that it be born for the punishment of
evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. And I write unto you
Officers of the Military Force, that you may consider, though Vriah was put in
the Front of the battle by Ioab, and slain by the ^word of the Children of
Ammon, yet his blood was laid to David's charge; Therefore know this, that if
the Soldiers whom you send, shed our blood, though the guilt will lie upon
them, yet it will also be laid to your charge: Therefore I warn you in the fear
of the Lord to take heed that ye bring not swift destruction upon your selves,
for we are a people that expect deliverance only from the Lord, for I deny all
that confidence that trusts in a carnal weapon, for our trust is only in the
Lord God, and how can we but Worship him who has delivered us out of so many
dangers, which has attended us; Yea though we should with Daniel be thrown
into the Lions Den, yet we must serve the Lord because we know that it is
better to serve him, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and some
of those great abuses I would lay before you which of late have been done unto
us, de^iring you to beware of abusing the Innocent, for surely my soul
believes hat the Lord will plead our cause and deliver us rom the hand of the
oppressor.

Upon the first day of this week we being peacably met together in the fear of
the Lord, waiting upon him to do his will in that measure of his Grace which he
has bestowed upon us, out of the great love that he has to the Sons of men,
There came in one like unto a man, but in the actions of Fury more like a bear
robbed of her whelps, passing through the body of the people, laying about him
with such a weapon, that merciful men would be loath to strike Dogs with, and
some Soldiers following him shuffing us to and fro as if we had been the most
contemptible of all creatures, throwing some out into the mire and dirt, one
being wounded, many receiving heavy blows, which may be to the hazard of their
lives, my self being a spectator of some of those things, not being ashamed of
the Gospel of Christ, because it is the power of God unto salvation to every
one that believes, And also consider how many of us have been put into nasty
prisons amongst noysom stinks, many of the harmless Servants of the Lord have
gone out of Newgate sick in the time of this late imprisonment, eight of which
have died, being taken away from the evil to come, nevertheless that will not
clear those that caused them to be put in prison; and now instead of carrying
us to prison to die there, Soldiers comes to our meetings to beat us and
bruise us, near murdering of some of us, none of you having any just thing
against us, but as concerning the Worship of our God; even as the Rulers of old
had against Daniel, and the Jews against Paul, But as it was ever so it is now,
The seed of the bond woman persecutes the seed of the free woman; But I commit
our cause to him that judges righteously, desiring with my soul, if it be the
Lords will, that the worst of our persecutors, even those that are posting head
long toward Damascus may meet with that voice in the way, which might make
them to know, it is hard for them to kick against the pricks. And having
written something of what has been done unto us, now I would desire to know,
how vice is beaten down; Have the Stage players liberty to Act their Plays, or
are they hindered? Have the Bear-baiters liberty to make a show of the Creatures
that were created for the use of man to be received with thanksgiving or are
they banished from the City? Are the Ballad-singers singing Ballads up and down
the Streets, or are they restrained? Are the Mountebancks, the Juglers, the
Morris-dancers suffered to Act their Tragedies, or are they not? Are the
Drunkards, Swearers and Liars lying in the Taverns and Alehouses in their
drunkenness, while sober people are kept in Goals? Is not this the time that
is spoken of, because of Iniquity the Land mourns?

And now oh ye Rulers come let us reason together, what have we done, or what
would you have us to do? Who have we wronged, or whom have we defrauded, whose
Ox or whose Ass have we taken? Have we raised any Rebellion against the King,
that we should be thus persecuted? Nay, nay, we abhor defraud and all such
things, we own true obedience, either Active or Passive, what we cannot for
Conscience sake toward God perform in Active Obedience, we are made willing to
suffer as the Lord shall enable us in Passive Obedience, till the Lord deliver
us, for our trust is not in the Arm of flesh, but in the Living God; But here
is the reason that we are persecuted because the Lord has called us to follow
him, because we dare not join with Wickedness, because we dare not run into the
same excess of riot as others do, and as we have done our selves in times past;
Therefore as it is written, we are killed all the day long, we are counted as
sheep for the slaughter: And now consider seriously with that of God in your
selves, and see what ye think it is that we thus suffer for, for if our hope
were only in this life we were of all men most miserable, for how has many of
us left our native Countries, some leaving their Wives and Children, and
travailed into strange lands, receiving when they have come there Imprisonment,
or Whipping, or Banishment, yea some has been put to death, and what has it
been for, but for the sake of that Life Immortal, which no man could take from
them; And what is it that we keep up our Meetings for, when some of us are
haled to Prison, some cruelly beaten, some in jeopardy of our lives? what is it
we war for, is it (...)an earthly Kingdom, is it earthly riches, honor or
preferment? Nay, nay, it is for that life Immortal, it is for that treasure
which will never corrupt, and the weapons of our warfare are not carnal;
Therefore take counsel of Gamaliel, that juditious Lawyer, and let us alone
least ye be found fighters against God, and also consider what Spirit that is
that persecutes, and how it differs from that spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures of Truth. Cain murdered his Brother Abell, and if I should declare,
through the Scriptures, and through the persecutions of the Christians unto
this day, I might make a large description of that spirit of Cain which has
been persecuting the true Abells in many Generations, and suppose that we were
Heretics, as it may be some of you may deem us to be; Yet consider that to
murder an Heretic, were the way to cast him into Hell; and see how this is
contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, where he says in meekness instructing those
that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledgeing of the Truth, 2. Tim. 2. chap. and in the 4th. chapter of the
same Epistle, it is said, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and
doctrine, (mark) with all long suffering. And many examples I might bring out
of the Scriptures to prove, that that spirit that seeks to destroy men's lives
is the spirit of Antichrist, not of Christ, who came to destroy sin and to save
the life; But if nothing will satisfy you but our blood, fill ye up the
measure of your Fathers, that ye may have blood to drink, and that we may fill
up that which is behind of the sufferings of our forefathers, and of the
sufferings of Christ in our flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church;
And now see what is it that ye thus pursue, what am I or what are we, are not
we the weakest of all men, that is to say of our selves, for we are made low in
our own thoughts, and contemptible in our own eyes, that the power of the Lord
alone may be exalted in us, for by the grace of God we are what we are, it is
not of our selves, it is the gift of God, and to him only I do commit our
cause, for we have none other to fight for us, but only the Lord, who alone by
the right arm of his power has made thousands willing this day, I do believe,
in England, rather to have their outward Tabernacles of flesh torn in pieces
then to yield to that will of man that is contrary to the righteous Law of God,
for we know that the utmost of your power is but to kill the body, and then you
can do no more; Therefore has the Lord brought us into the pure fear of him
that can both kill and cast into hell; and these things do I lay before you,
that ye may take heed of pulling innocent blood upon your own heads, for the
Lord has made me a plain man, and in plainness I write unto you, and I leave
what I have here written to that of God in you, and in all people to see
whether the Magistrates sword be not, be born in vain this day in England.

By one that is a true lover of all your souls, being known amongst men by the
name of Humphrey Brewester.
The 2d. of the 7th. month called September, 1662.
THE END.

