THE DECLARATION OF Francis Briber, Gent. Which he publicly made before the
Lord Bishop of WATERFORD, IN THE Cathedral-Church of WATERFORD, IN THE Kingdom
of Ireland, JUNE the 17th, 1688. Containing the REASONS for his Renouncing the
Roman-Catholic, and Embracing the Protestant Religion: Together with what the
Lord Bishop of Waterford Returned upon that Occasion.
READER,
THE following Paper came to me, well recommended, from a Person of
unquestionable Integrity, living in the Kingdom of Ireland. I am not ignorant,
to how little purpose it would be, in this inquisitive Age, to offer to the
Public any thing of this kind, which might be de^ected of Falsehood; and
therefore it is only delivered to you nakedly and sincerely, as it came to my
hands.


AS there ought to be nothing dearer to any man than his own Soul, nor any
thing more heeded by him on this side the Grave, than its eternal Salvation; so
I bless my GOD that he has for several Years touched my Heart with a sense of
this, as well as the Sins of my Life; which put me upon frequent and diligent
Inspection into the Articles of the Christian Religion, wherewith I was
seasoned from my Youth, according to the Doctrine and Communion of the Church
of Rome. The more I looked into the Doctrines of Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, Indulgences, and Worshipping of Images, the more Scruples
arose in my Mind, and the rather, because I could find no solid Foundation for
them in the SCRIPTURE, (which I thought could best inform me what I ought to
Believe for my Salvation, though those of my Sort in that Communion are not
allowed the use of them) nor yet in the Three CREEDS, in which I found all
allowed the Doctrines of Salvation to be summed up. I took several
opportunities to discourse of these Points, as well with those of the Clergy of
the Church of Rome, as with others whom I thought knowing in the Principles of
that Church, sincerely desiring to learn the Truth, for the eternal Welfare of
my Soul: But I found their Defenses of those Doctrines Unsatisfactory, and my
own Scruples against them to gather strength upon me. I then applied myself
privately to discourse them with some of the Clergy, and others, of the
Communion of the PROTESTANT CHURCH, and to look into some Books of those
Writers; and thereupon became confirmed in my Dis-believe of those Doctrines.
These and suchlike Thoughts, and Communications, begot in me a sense of Duty,
that I ought to join myself with the CHURCH of CHRIST, holding only the true
ancient Catholic Faith; which I am convinced the CHURCH of GOD, whereof Your
Lordship is one of the Spiritual Guides, does. But then the Censures and
Inconveniences, as to Worldly Respects, I saw I should expose myself unto,
retarded me. And when I discoursed at any time any such the least Inclinations,
I met with the Tears and Entreaties of many of my Relations to stop me, and the
Flouts and Menaces of others to deter me. But I bless GOD, who has at length
born me above all those Discouragements, and made my Salvation the love of
Truth, as it is in JESUS and the inward Peace of my CONSCIENCE (convinced of my
Errors and my Sins) dearer to me than all Secular Respects.

Wherefore, I Francis Briber, of Monevehogy, in Your Lordship's Diocese, Gent.
Do in the Presence of GOD, and before Men and Angels, this day Renounce any
further Communion with the Church of Rome, in her erroneous Doctrines and
Worship; and do pray to be Received by Your Lordship into the Communion of the
CHVRCH of GOD, in this Kingdom, Established by Law. And that I may receive Your
present Benedictions and future Prayers, for my further Illumination for Divine
Satisfaction and Heavenly Assistance in my Christian Course and future eternal
Salvation, by affixing hereunto my Hand and Seal this 17th Day of June, 1688.

Francis Briber.


Then the Lord Bishop of Waterford spoke as follows:

BRETHREN,
YOU have this day a signal Instance of the force of Heavenly Truth, and of the
power of Conscience, Illuminated by the Spirit of GOD in this Voluntary,
Cheerful, and Pious Access of this Gentleman to seek Admission into Our
Communion, when no Secular Inducements can be thought to have disposed him to
it. Let us Welcome him as the compassionate Father did the returning-Prodigal;
let us Embrace him with the Arms of Christian Affection; Give him the right
Hand of Fellowship, and be daily Suitors at the Throne of Grace for his further
Illumination and Confirmation in this FAITH. And be You careful, Sir, as You
have this day made a good Profession, so You stand fast in this Faith, to adorn
this Holy Profession with a Holy Conversation: For GOD is not to be Mocked, nor
the Communion of His CHVRCH, once thus solemnly entered into, Rejected and
Contemned. And that You may do so, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Three
Persons, and One GOD, receive You into His Favor, sanctify You with His
Spirit, strengthen You with His Grace, and at length receive You into His
Glory. Amen.


Imprimatur.

Julii 26o. 1688. H. Maurice.

LONDON: Printed for Randal Tailor, near Stationers Hall. 1688.


