I. SCRIPTURE LIGHT, THE MOST SURE LIGHT:

In compare with, 1. Revelations and Visions. 2. Natural, and Supernatural
Dreams. 3. Impressions with, and without the Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5.
Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial
Astrology.


Delivered in Three Sermons, on 2 Pet. 1.19.

II. CHRIST IN TRAVEL:

Wherein 1. The greatness of his Travel, both in Soul and Body. 2. The first,
and after Effects of his Death. 3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. His Satisfaction
therein.


Are opened and cleared, in Three Sermons, on Isai. 53.11.

III. A LIFTING UP for the DOWN-CAST:

In case of 1. Great Sins. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties. 4.
Want of Assurance. 5. Affliction. 6. Temptation. 7. Desertion. 8.
Vnserviceableness. 9. Discouragements from the Condition it self.


Delivered in Thirteen Sermons, on Psalm. 42.11.

Four several Sermons, concerning, 1. The Sin against the Holy Ghost. 2. Sins
of Infirmity. 3. The False Apostle, tried, and discovered. 4. The Good and
Means of Establishment.


Preached by William Bridge; sometimes Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridg;
and now Pastor of the Church of Christ in Great Yarmouth, in Norfolk.

Sine gratia sordet Natura. London: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and
are to be sold in his Shop, at the Sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near
the Royal Exchange. 1656.

To the Worshipful, Maurice Thompson, Esquire; George Thompson, Esquire;
William Thompson, Esquire, Sheriff of London; Robert Thompson, Esquire; SR John
Wittewrong, Knight; William Ofield Esquire; Samuel Champnes, Elias Roberts, and
William Hawkins, Esquires: With their Wives and Children, Grace and Peace.
Honored, and Beloved in our Lord Jesus.
IT is not want of respect that I seem thus to crowd your Names together, I owe
more than an Epistle to each of your Names, but because God has made you one,
though branched into several Habitations, I take the boldness to present this
work to you, as unto one Family: It is written of the Stork, Ciconiae mos est,
unum e pullis relinquere Domui qua nidulata est. Ludo Vives.
that she uses to leave one of her Young ones to the House where she made her
nest, and upon that account some of my labors do belong to your Family, where I
studied, and from whence I Preached them: some of you and yours have often
desired the Publishing of these Notes, and being Printed, whither should the
Press send them but to your Door? you are the Family with whom I have had the
honor to converse much whilst living; and now the Blossoms of the Grave are
upon me, I dedicate these Notes unto you, that by them I may live and speak
with you when my Head shall lie under the Clods: you are a Family whom the Lord
has blessed and raised not only to a great estate in the world, but to the
saving knowledge of his Son, our dear Savior, and whom should I serve and honor
but those whom God honors and blesses?

1. That Family is not far from blessing, which has Godly Children, Children
trained up and seasoned with the Grace of Christ from the Cradle; The Lord
blessed the House of Obed-edom, and wherein did that blessing consist? the
Scripture tells us. 1 Chronicles. 26. That some of his Children were Porters in the
House of God, others were mighty Men of Valor, able Men for strength and
service, and the reason is given ver 5. For the Lord blessed him, So that
Children useful and serviceable both in Church and State are a great blessing
unto a Family. (...) a (...) quia filius est aedificium patris.
The Hebrews say, that Children are the Fathers building, and indeed he builds
wisely that does lay the Foundations of his House in a Godly Seed. Lo,
Children (says the Psalmist) are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
Womb are his reward, as Arrows in the Hand of the mighty, so are Children of
the youth, blessed is the Man that has his Quiver full of them; Especially
where these Arrows are well headed and well hearted too. And upon this account
it is good for great Families to have good Servants: For, corrupt Servants do
debauch Children, and debauched Children do scatter Brimstone upon the House of
their Fathers.

2. Neither is that Family an unblessed Family which is strict in the
observation of the Sabbath or the Lords day; God has blessed that day that he
might bless them who do keep that day: hereby England has been blessed with
the power of godliness more than other Nations; My Sabbath, (says God) shall
be a sign between me and thee. Servasti diem Daminicam? Christianus sum
'intermittere non possum.
And in the Primitive times when a Christian was asked whether he had kept the
Lords day, his answer generally was, I am a Christian, I cannot neglect it; as
if the observation of the Lords day were the badg of a Christian: this is the
Girdle of al our Duties, and in respect of this Girdle I may say, Ungirt,
unblessed; the valleys of the week day are blessed by the upper springs of this
day; and as the Commandment does especially point at, and look wishly upon the
Master of the Family, (saying, Neither thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter,
etc.) So does the blessing also.

3. Blessed is that Family which does industriously seek to build the House of
God and the House of the Poor; David did but intend to build Gods House, and
the Lord promised him to build his House. The Egiptian Midwives spared the
Israelites Children, whereby the Poor Families and Houses of the Israelites
were built, And the Lord dealt well with the Midwives and made them Houses,
Exodus 1.20.

4. Neither is that Family far from blessing which is a friend to the Ministry.
Receiving, hiding, and refreshing the paynful, and faithful Ministers and
Preachers of the Gospel; The Lord give mercy (says Paul) to the House of
Onesiphorus, for he has refreshed me, Not once and no more, but, he has often
refreshed me: nor did he do this because I followed him and sought him out,
but, he sought me out very diligently and found me And in the day of my
greatest affliction he was not ashamed of me, for he was not ashamed of my
Chains, wherefore the Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy in that day;
and give mercy unto the House of Onesiphorus. 2 Timothy 1.16.17.18. He that
receives a Prophet (says our Savior) in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward, and what is the reward of a Prophet but to profit by the
Prophet, and to have a share in his Venture, and in all that good which he does
by his Ministry.

5. A praying Family also is a precious Family and blessed, Nisi Dominus
aedificaverit domum frustra laborat quisquis eam aedificat, Psalm. 127. Non enim
dicit, Dominus aedificat domum nomine scilicet laborante, sed ita, nisi Dominus
aedisica verit frustra laborat perinde ac si diceret, labor quidem opus est,
sed hujus conatum frustra sumi si solus erit, non enim laboris sedulitas sed
Dei benedictio rem faecundatet omnia perficit. Luther farrago Epistol.
especially where Prayer and pains, Religion and Righteousness, Frugallity and
Liberallity are in conjunction: some are much for payns taking, and Little for
Prayer; Others are much for Prayer, and little for pains taking; some are much
for Religion, and little for Righteousness; others are much for Righteous
dealings, and little for Religion; some are much for Frugallity, and little for
Liberallity; others are much for Liberallity, and little for Frugallity; but
blessed is that Family, where Prayer and pains, Religion and Righteousness,
Frugallity and liberality meet and dwell together under one Roof

Now those things I have seen amongst you: Only, as heretofore so now labor to
abound therein more and more, that you and your Family may be as the field
which the Lord blesses. And as God has raised you to an outward greatness in
the world, Nec quicquam in te mutaverit fortunae amplitudo nisi ut prodesse
tandundem posses et velles. Plin. Epist. ad Vespas.
so let your hearts be great for God, that what Pliny reported of Vespasian,
may be truly said of you; your abundance has changed nothing in you, but
this, that your power to do good is now made answerable to your will; counting
it greater mercy to lay out for God, than to lay up for your selves, for it may
be when you come to die, you will have more comfort in what you have laid out
for God, than in what you have laid up for your Children. And why should we not
give that to God by an act of our Faith which he gave to us by an act of his
Love?

And as for your Children, if I might not exceed the bounds of an Epistle, I
would say to them.

1. Children, O Children know your Fathers, and the God of your Fathers, Know
your parents, for that is the first Commandment with Promise, and you shall
honor your selves in honoring them. Camerar. oper. subcis. Centur. 1. cap. 66.
Its recorded of the Catanenses, that they made a Stately Monument of kingly
Magnificence, in, remembrance of two Sons, who took their Aged Parents upon
their Backs and carried them through the Fire when their Fathers House was al
in a Flame. And of all the Birds, the Stork has the Name for the good Bird, and
why? but because the younger of them do help and bear up the Elder, their weak
Parents; (...) pia avi^, cicon^s eximia inest pietas: etonim quantum temporis
impenderint foetibus educandis, tancum et ipsae a pullis suis invicem aluntur
Solinus, cap. 11. Schind. Parents senectute confectos humeris suis gestare
dicuntur. Avenar.
but though your Parent is to be honored, yet your God is more to be honored.
If you know God when you are young, God will know you when you are Old; remember
therefore your Creator in the days of your Youth: and your Creator will
remember you in the days of your Age.

2. Take heed of youthful sins, for the sweet sins of our Youth, do bite sore
in our Age.

3. Get an inward principle of Grace in your own Souls, For if you live on
your Parents Root, when your Parents die, your goodness will die too; and
therefore look well to the laying of your Foundation, which is not to be laid in
disputation but Humilation.

4. Be not unwilling, to bear the Yoke in the days of your Youth, For he that
can carry a calfe when he is Young, will carry an Ox when he is old: Affliction
gives you understanding, it is the School of Experience. Vituli triturantes
quotidir ligantur vituli mactandi quotidie in pascuis libere relinqountur.
August.
The Oxen that are for use, are kept tied up, when those that are fatted for
the Shambles are let loose into the Pastures to feed at their pleasure.

5. Be not too confident of what you can do or will do; Young Men are apt to be
too confident, as Old Men are apt to be too fearful; but the best Swimmers are
the soonest drowned, because of their confidence: wherefore in all thy ways
acknowledge the Lord, and lean not to thine own understanding. Pro. 3.

6. When you come to the great turns of your life, be sure that you make a
right choice, For every Man is as his choice is, if there be any Dirt on the
Hands, it will appear in the Knuckles, the turning places; and if there be Dirt
in your Lives, it will be found, and appear in your great turns.

7. Let your dwelling place be, where God dwells, and he dwells where his
Ordinances are, For there he records his Name; but though you live under
Ordinances in regard of your Station, yet live above them in regard of your
affection, passing through them unto Christ, and through Christ, into the
Bosom of the Father; it was not David's sling that killed Goliath, but the Name
of God in the use of the sling.

8. Seek not great things for your selves, in this world, For if your Garments
be too long, they will make you stumble, and one staff helps a Man in his
Journey, when many in his Hands at once hinder him; but labor to do great
things for God, Infima pars faelicitatis perfectae est terrena faelicitas.
Austin.
and God will do great things for you; Terrene or earthly Faelicity, is the
lowest Part of perfect Faelicity.

9. Be much in private Prayer, for the more you come to God, the more welcome
you are, his Customers have the best Pennyworths; and if God do much for you in
the Morning-duty, do much for him all the day after; A prece principium.
and if you have little from God in the morning, walk humbly all the day after.

10. Let your company be always such as you may get good from, or do good
unto; When you are alone, think of good things; and when you are in company,
speak of good things.

11. Keep the truth, and the truth will keep you.

12. And whatever mercy or blessing you receive, trace it to Heaven Gates, and
to Christ's Blood; For it flowed from Christ's Blood, and leads you to Heaven;
And the God of peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you all (Parents and Children) perfect in every good work to do his will,
working in you, that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be glory for ever and ever.

Your Servant in the Gospel of Christ. WILLIAM BRIDGE.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader.
THe following Sermons, on Psalm. 42. I have perused, and find that they are the
same which I Preached diverse years since, being then taken by a good Pen as
they fell in Preaching: They have been long buried in silence, and should have
rested in their Grave, had not the importunity of some, who heard them
Preached, raised them from that Death. Mine own Notes were not legible enough
for the Press; In answer therefore to their desires, I have corrected these;
some things I have altered, some things added, and some Repetitions (fit enough
for the Pulpit) I have filed off; what is wanting let thy goodness supply. I
have also joined with them, some other Sermons, of more doctrinal concernment
(these being mostly practical) that so thy mind, and Heart, may be at once
exercised, wherein I have rather applied my self to the Jnstructive part of
Preaching, than to Scholastical disputation. For, I know the Universities have
able and faithful Men, more fit for that work. Neither have I undertaken any
English Adversary; and if I have troaden upon any Man's Toes, I hope he will
excuse me, for I can say truly, Sir, I saw you not. And if any Man shall say to
me, as David's Brother Eliab spoke to him, 1 Samuel 17.29:
I know thy pride, and Malice of thine heart, that thou art come down to see
the battle: I might answer, as David did; Is there not a Cause? When strange
Opinions and Errors are daily Published, is there not a Cause, that every man,
who loves the truth, should bear his Testimony for it? In performance therefore
of mine own Duty, and for thine Establishment; I have spoaken something to many
truths, which are now questioned; Hold fast, what thou have, lest another take
thy Crown: And the Lord Jesus Christ and our God, even the Father, which has
loved us, and has given us everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through
Grace, Comfort thine heart, and Stablish thee in every word, and good work.

Thine in the Service of the Gospel. WILLIAM BRIDGE.

The Names of several Books Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, London, and
are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Printing-press in Corn-hil, near
the Exchange.
Nineteen several Books of Mr. William Bridge, Collected into two Volumns. Viz.
1 The Great Gospel Mystery of the Saints Comfort and Holiness, opened and
applied from Christ's Priestly Office. 2 Satan's Power to Tempt, and Christ's Love
to, and Care of His People under Temptation. 3 Thankfulness required in every
Condition. 4 Grace for Grace; or, the Overflowing of Christ's Fullness received
by all Saints. 5 The Spiritual Actings of Faith through Natural
Impossibilities. 6 Evangelical Repentance. 7 The Spiritual Life, and In-being
of Christ in all Believers. 8 The Woman of Canaan. 9 The Saints Hiding Place in
time of Gods Anger. 10 Christ's Coming is at our Midnight. 11 A Vindication of
Gospel Ordinances. 12 Grace and Love beyond Gifts. 13 Scripture Light, the most
sure Light: compared, with, 1. Revelations and Visions. 2. Natural and
Supernatural Dreams. 3. Impressions with and without Word. 4. Light and Law
within. 5. Divine Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7 Humane Reason. 8.
Judicial Astrology. Delivered in Sermons on 2 Pet. 1.19. 14 Christ in Travel:
Wherein, 1 The Travel of his soul. 2. The first and after effects of his Death.
3. His Assurance of Issue. 4. And His satisfaction therein. Are opened and
cleared in three Sermons, on Esaias, 53.11. 15 A Lifting up for the Cast-down, in
case of 1. Great sin. 2. Weakness of Grace. 3. Miscarriage of Duties. 4. Want
of Assurance. 5. Affliction. 6. Temptation. 7. Dissertion. Unserviceableness.
9. Discouragements from the Condition it self. Delivered in thirteen Sermons on
Psalm, 42.11. His Four Sermons concerning. 16 Sin against the Holy Ghost. 17
Sins of Infirmities. 18 The False Apostle tried and Discovered. 19 The Good and
means of Establishment.
Eleven Books of Mr. Jeremiah Buroughs lately published; also the Texts of
Scripture upon which they are grounded.
1 The Rare Jewel of Christian Contentment on Phil. 4.11. Wherein is showed, 1
What Contentment is, 2 It is an Holy Art and Mystery, 3 The Excellencies of it,
4 The Evil of the contrary sin of Murmuring, and the Aggravations of it. 2
Gospel Worship, on Levit. 10.3. Wherein is showed, 1 The right manner of the
Worship of God in general; and particularly; In Hearing the Word, Receiving the
Lords Supper, and Prayer. 3 Gospel Conversation, on Phil. 1.17. Wherein is
showed, 1 That the Conversations of Believers must be above what could be by
the Light of Nature, 2 Beyond those that lived under the Law, 3 And suitable to
what Truths the Gospel holds forth. To which is added, The Misery of those men
that have their Portion in this Life only, on Psalm. 17.14. 4 A Treatise of
Earthly Mindedness, Wherein is showed, 1 What Earthly mindedness is, 2 The
great Evil thereof, on Phil. 3. part of the 19. Verse. Also to the same Book is
joined, A Treatise of Heavenly Mindedness and Walking with God, on Genesis 5.24.
and on Phil. 3.20. 5 An Exposition, on the fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
Chapters of the Prophecy of Hosea. 6 An Exposition on the eighth, ninth, and
tenth Chapters of Hosea. 7 An Exposition on the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth Chapters of Hosea, being now complete. 8 The Evil of Evils, or the
exceeding Sinfulness of Sin, on Job, 36.21. 9 Precious Faith, on 2 Pet. 1.1. 10
Of Hope, on 1 John. 3.3. 11 Of Walking by Faith, on 2 Cor. 5.7.
Ten several Books, by Nich. Culpeper, Gent. Student in Physic and Astrology.
1 The Practice of Physic, containing seventeen several Books. Wherein is
plainly set forth, The Nature, Cause, Differences, and Several Sorts of Signs;
Together wtth the Cure of all Diseases in the Body of Man. Being chiefly a
Translation of The Works of that Learned and Renowned Doctor, Lazarus Riverius,
Now living; Councellor and Physician to the present King of France. Above
fifteen thousand of the said Books in Latin have been Sold in a very few Years,
having been eight times printed, though all the former Impressions wanted the
Nature, Causes, Signs, and Differences of the Diseases, and had only the
Medicines for the Cure of them; as plainly appears by the Authors Epistle. 2
The Anatomy of the Body of Man, Wherein is exactly described, the several parts
of the Body of Man, illustrated with very many larger Brass Plates than ever
was in English before. 3 A Translation of the New Dispensatory, made by the
College of Physicians of London. Whereunto is added, The Key to Galen 's Method
of Physic. 4 The English Physician Enlarged; being an Astrologo-Physical
Discourse of the vulgar Herbs of this Nation; wherein is showed how to cure a
man's self of most Diseases incident to Man's Body, with such things as grow in
England, and for three pence charge. Also in the same Book is showed, 1 The
time of gathering all Herbs, both: Vulgarly and Astrologically. 2 The way of
drying, and keeping them and their Juyces. 3 The way of making and keeping al
manner of useful Compounds, made of those Herbs. The way of mixing the
Medicines according to the Cause, and Mixture of the Disease, and the part of
the Body afflicted. 5 A Directory for Midwives, or a Guide for Women. Newly
enlarged by the Author in every sheet, and Illustrated with diverse new Plates.
6 Galen's Art of Physic, with a large Comment. 7 A New Method both of studying
and practicing Physic. 8 A Treatise of the Rickets, being a Disease common to
Children; wherein is showed, 1 The Essence, 2 The Causes, 3 The Signs, 4 The
Remedies of the Disease; Published in Latin by Dr. Glisson, Dr. Bates, and Dr.
Regemorter, translated into English. And corrected by N. Culpeper. 9
Medicaments for the Poor, Or Physic for the Common People. 10 Health for the
Rich and Poor, by Diet without Physic. A Godly and Fruitful Exposition, on the
first Epistle of Peter. By Mr. John Rogers, Minister of the Word of God at
Dedham in Essex. The Wonders of the Lodestone. By Samuel Ward of Ipswitch. An
Exposition on the Gospel of the Evangelist St. Matthew. By Mr. Ward. Clows
Chyrurgery. Marks of Salvation. Christians Engagement for the Gospel, by John
Goodwin. Great Church Ordinance of Baptism. Mr. Love's Ca^e, containing his
Petitions, Narrative, and Speech. Vox Pacifica, or a persuasive to peace. Dr.
Prestons Saints submission and Satan's Overthrow. Pious Man's Practice in
Parliament Time. Mr. Symsons Sermon at Westminster. Mr. Feaks Sermon before the
Lord Major. Mr. Phillips Treatise of Hell. -- of Christ's G^nealogy. Eaton on
the Oath of Allegiance and Covenant, showing that they oblidg not. A
Congregational Church is a Catholic Visible Church By Samuel Stone in New
England. A Treatise of Politic Powers, wherein seven Questions are Answered, 1
Whereof Power is made, and for what ordained. 2 Whether Kings and Governors
have an Absolute Power over the People. 3 Whether Kings and Governors be
subject to the Laws of God, or the Laws of their Country. 4 How far the People
are to obey their Governors. 5 Whether all the people have, be their Governors.
6 Whether it be Lawful to depose an evil Governor 7 What Confidence is to be
given to Princes. The Compassionate Samaritan. Dr. Sibbs on the Philippians.
The Best and Worst Magistrate. By Obadiah Sedgwick. The Craft and Cruelty of
the Churches Adversaries. By Matthew Newcomen. A Sacred Penegerick. By Stephen
Martial. Barriss^ Military Discipline. The Immortality of Man's Soul. The
Anatomist Anatomized. King Charles his Case, or an Appeal to all Rational Men
concerning his Trial. Mr. Ow^ns stedfastness of the Promises. A Vindication of
Free Grace; Endeavoring to prove, 1 That we are not elected as holy, but that
we should be holy; and that Election is not of kinds, but persons 2 That Christ
did not ^y his Death intend to save all men, and touching those whom he
intended to save, that he did not die for them only, If they would believe, but
that they might believe. 3 That we are not justified properly by our believing
in Christ but by our Christ, believing in him. 4, that which differenceth one
man from another, is not the improvement of a common ability restored through
Christ to all men in general, but a principle of Grace wrought by the Spirit of
God in the Elect. By John Pawson.
Six Sermons preached by Doctor Hill. Viz.
1 The Beauty and Sweetness of an Olive Branch of Peace, and Brotherly
Accommodation budding. 2 Truth and Love happily married in the Church of
Christ. 3 The Spring of strengthening Grace in the Rock of Ages Christ Jesus. 4
The strength of the Saints to make Jesus Christ their strength. 5 The Best and
Worst of Paul. 6 Gods eternal preparation for his Dying Saints. The Bishop of
Canterbury's Speech on the Scaffold. The King's Speech on the Sc^ffold. The
Magistrates Support and Burden. By Mr. John Cordel. The Discipline of the
Church in New England, by the Chu ches and Synod there. A Relation of the
Barbados. A Relation of the Repentance and Conversion of the Indians in New
England; By Mr. Eliot, and Mr. Mayhew. The Institutes of the Laws of England by
John Cowel, Octavo. A description of the Grand Signiors Seraglio; or the
Turkish Emperors Court. By John Greaves. Octavo. The reigning error Arraigned
at the Bar of scripture, and Reason. By Franscis Fulwood. Octavo. The state of
Future Life. By Thomas White. Twelves. The Royal and delightful Game of
Picquet, written in French, and now rendered into English. Octavo. De copore
Politico: or, The Elements of Law moral, and politic. By Thomas Hobbs of
Matnisbury The London Dispensatory in Latin in Folio. The London Dispensatory
in Latin in Twelves. These several Books of Physic and Chyrurgerie will
shortly be printed in English. Riverius Observations, with fifteen hundred and
seventie other Histories and Observations of other men. Riolanus Anatomy.
Bartholinus Anatomy. All the Works of Daniel Sennertus, except some few, not
proper for Translation. The Idea of Practical Physic, being a complete Body of
Physic. And Fernclius his Works. Francisci Tayleri, Capitula Patrum: Hebraice
and Latin edita. Una cum Annotationibus sensum locorum difficilium
Exprimentibus. Francisci Tayl^ri, Lamentationes Jeremiae vatis, Denuo e
fontibus Hebraicis translatae, cum Par^phrasi Chaldaica, Masora magna and
parva, and Commentariis Rabbi Shelomoh, Jarchi and Abe^, Ezrae, e Buxto^fii
Bibliis magnis excerptis. Eleven Books made in NEW ENGLAND, by Mr. Thomas
Hooker, And printed from his own Papers, written with his own hand; are now
Published in three Volums, two in Quarto and one in Octavo, Viz. The
Application of Redemption by the Effectual work of the word and Spirit of
Christ, for the bringing home of lost sinners unto God. The first Book on 1
Pet. 1.18, 19. The second on Math. 1.21. The third on Luke 1.17. The fourth on
2 Cor. 6.2. The fifth on Math. 20 5, 6, 7. The sixth on Revel. 3.17. The seventh
on Romans 8.7. The eight on Joh. 6.44. The Ninth on Isa. 57.15. The Tenth on Act.
2.37. The Last Viz. Christ's Prayer for Believers. On Joh. 17. Riolanus Anatomy
in which (with the Anatomy) is exactly described 1 The Diseases incident to
every Part of the Body of Man. 2. How the Diseases are Seated in each Part. 3.
The Cure of each Disease as its Seated in that Part. Mr. Buroughs, on 1 Cor.
5.7. and 18, 19, 29. And fifty nine Sermons on Matthew, 11. 28, 29, 30. Are
Printing.
SCRIPTURE LIGHT, The most Sure LIGHT.

Compared with 1. Revelations and Visions. 2. Natural, and Supernatural Dreams.
3. Impressions with, and without the Word. 4. Light and Law within. 5. Divine
Providence. 6. Christian Experience. 7. Humane Reason. 8. Judicial Astrology.


By William Bridge, Preacher of the Gospel at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

SCRIPTURE LIGHT, The most Sure LIGHT.
Sermon I.
2 PET. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts.


IN these words, ye have an Exhortation to a great Duty, Viz. Attention, or
taking heed to the Word of God, in dark, and dangerous Times, and Places. The
Duty is commanded, and commended; Ye do well that ye take heed, (...), ye do
well, or beautifully; this is your Christian Beauty, and Comeliness in the Eyes
of God. Now this Duty is urged, and amplified; urged by diverse Arguments; some
taken from the excellency of the Word it self. First, It is (...), a Word of
Prophecy, or a Prophetical Word, written by Divine Inspiration; the same that
is spoken of in verse 20. called Prophecy of Scripture. Secondly, It is (...),
a more sure Word: Some think the Comparative, is put for the Superlative; as
Acts, 25.10. (...), as thou very well (or best) know; But I take it rather to
be meant Comparatively; for the Word of God written, is surer than that Voice
which they heard in the Mount (whereof he spoke in the former Verse) More sure
is the Word written, than that Voice of Revelation; not ratione veritatis, not
in regard of the Truth uttered, for that Voice was as true as any word in the
Scripture; but more sure, ratione manifestationis, more certain, settled, and
established. Secondly: Some Arguments are taken from the usefulness of the Word
to us; for it is as a light shining in a dark place; and therefore it is good
for us to take heed thereunto: But how long must we take heed to it? even as
long as we live, and whilst we are in the dark especially, even till the day
dawn, and the Sun shine in his full strength and brightness in your hearts;
which is the Second thing, whereby this Duty is amplified.

Esai. 3.20. the Lord says, To the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no Light, or morning in
them. If therefore, any man do pretend Light, or the shining of the morning
Star in his Soul, so as to lay by the Word written, that Light is no true
Light; and so this Interpretation can be no true Interpretation of these words.
3. This Interpretation does suppose, that this morning Star did not shine in
the Apostles Time, and that then the Apostles, with the Saints of those Times,
had not this Light within them; for the Apostle says, We have a more sure
Word, and ye do well that ye take heed thereunto. All the Saints, and People of
God then, did walk by, and take heed unto the written Word; yet they had Light
within them. This Interpretation therefore, is contrary to the sense of ^he
Apostle here.

be more clear, you shall do well to take heed to the Prophets of the Old
Testament, who do al testify with us of Christ. But this will seem to argue,
That when Gospel Light, does more fully rise upon us, then we may lay by the
Prophets of the Old Testament.

Revel. 2.28. I will give him the morning star: and in Chap. 22.16. Christ does
appear to the Saints under that Title, saying, I am the bright morning star.)

Revel. 2.22. is not the same that is here used, and translated the Day Star.

Jerusalem, which shall come down from Heaven, has twelve Foundations, and in
them, the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, Revel. 21.14.

(...). Suid.
as Suidas says) does not shine in our hearts now, and that it has not shined
already, whereas it is said, Luke 1. concerning Christ's first coming, verse 78.
Whereby the Dayspring from on high, has visited us to give light to them that
sit in darkness, etc. And the Apostle Paul says; the day is far spent, and ye
are the Children of Light, and of the day. Surely therefore, the day had then
dawned in those Times; and therefore these words cannot only relate to the
glorious Times that are yet to come.



Until, is not to be taken exclusively; but as in other Scriptures, Psalm. 110.
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine Enemies thy footstool. Shall
Christ sit on Gods right hand no longer? Shall he not sit there for ever? Yea,
he shall sit there for ever, after al Enemies are subdued: But the words show
what Christ shall enjoy, and do, whilst the Enemies rage; he shall sit in power,
judging on the right hand of God; not that he shall not sit there when they are
subdued. So here, Ye do well (says the Apostle) that ye take heed to the Word,
till the day dawn, and the Day Star arise, and shine in your hearts; that is,
til ye have more clear Light; not that ye lay by the Word then, but because ye
are now in the dark; I Will tell you, says the Apostle, what ye shall do whilst ye
are in the dark, even take heed to the Word written. And so the Doctrine from
the whole Verse, is this:

For the opening, and prosecuting whereof, Four things will fall under your
Consideration.

1. That a good man may be in the dark, in a dark place, state, and condition.
2. Though he be in the dark, yet God has not left him without Scripture Light
to walk by. 3. This Scripture Light, is the most excellent, safe, and sure
Light. 4. It Is the Duty of all the Saints to take heed thereunto, and to walk
thereby, and that especially in their dark times, and places.
Esai. 50.10. does not the Church complain in the Lamentat. saying, He has set
me in dark places? Chap. 3.6. Was not David in the dark, when he said, The Lord
will lighten my darkness? 2 Samuel 22.29. Was not Job in the dark, when he said,
The Lord has set darkness in my paths? Job, 19.8. and when he said, I waited
for light, and there came darkness? Chap. 30.26. And was not Heman in the dark,
when he said, Thou have laid me in the lowest pit in darkness? Psalm. 88.6. Yea,
was not Christ himself in the dark, when the hour, and power of darkness came
upon him? Luke 22.53. Surely therefore, it is possible that a good man may be
in the dark, upon dark ground, and in a dark Condition; and it must needs be
so: For,

Job dwell in the Land of Vz? And when David thirsted after Ordinances, saying,
My soul thirsts after thee, O God, to see thy Power, and thy Glory, so as I
have seen thee in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.1, 2. was he not then in such a dark
corner as I now speak of? The Title of the Psalm tells us, that he was in the
Wilderness of Judah: and if ye look into 1 Samuel 26. ye shall find him
complaining thus: They have driven me out this day from abiding in the
Inheritance of the Lord, saying, Go serve other gods, verse 10. Such a dark
place, was Capernaum, and Galilee, by the way of the Sea, Galilee of the
Gentiles, where Matthew. 4.16. it is said, The People sat in darkness, and in the
shadow of death; yet here did Peter, and Andrew dwell, when our Savior called
them to follow him; there did James, and John dwell likewise: And as a wicked
man may live under the means, and the light shine on him, though he comprehends
it not; so it may be the lot, and portion of a good man, to live, and dwell, and
be in a Town, or Place, or Parish, where there is no Means, and no Light
shining.

for the dark places of the Earth, are full of the habitations of Couelty:
Persecuting Times, are dark Times. When do Beasts go forth to their Prey, but
in the night? And when are Thieves bold, but in the night? In times of
Persecution, the Enemies of Gods People are very bold, and those Beasts do go
forth to their Prey. Surely therefore, this Time is a dark time with the Saints.

Joseph, when Mary was first with Child; he did not know what to do in the
case, til the Angel of the Lord appeared to him. Thus it was with David often,
especially at Keilah, when he went down to Ach^sh; feigned himself mad,
changing his behavior; and at Ziklag, when his Wives and Goods were taken from
him, and his men thought of stoning him. John, 12.35. He that wa^keth in
darkness, knows not whither he goes (says our Savior) And when a man is in
such streights, as that he does not see his way, then he is in the dark indeed.

He that walks in darkness, stumbleth: and so much as I do take offense, and
am stumbled, so much I am in the dark. Now possibly a good man, may be much
offended, and stumbled; though he be not offended at the good Way of God, and
Power of Godliness, nor at all the Saints, yet he may be under much offense: All
you shall be offended (says our Savior to his Disciples) because of me. And if
a good man may be offended, then he may be in the dark, on a dark ground, and
in a dark Condition.

Nonnulla video non visa beato Augustino (says Luther) et rursum multa visuros
scio, quae ipse ego non video: I see many things (said he) that were not seen
to Austin; and those that come after me, shall see those things that I see not.
O! says Austin, There is such a depth in Scripture, that I do multo plura
nescire quam scire, that I am ignorant of more things than I know. Ye see how
it is in a Room where there are many Pictures; though ye see some of them
presently, yet others have a silken Curtain drawn before them, which ye see not
immediately. So here; though God do reveal much unto you, yet there is a silken
Curtain that is still drawn before some Truths, and therefore even a good man
may be much mistaken. The Lord has hid this thing from me, 2 Kings, 4.27.
said Elisha. And when David told Nathan that it was in his heart to build an
House unto God; Go (said Nathan to him) and do all that is in thine heart; for
the Lord is with thee: yet Nathan, though a Prophet, was mistaken, and in an
Error: for the same night, the Lord appeared to him, and told that this Work
was reserved for another, not for David. Possibly therefore a good man may
mistake, even in the things of God, and so be in the dark.

Paul, and Barnabas, that they forsook one another. I read of two good men
(whom Epiphanius makes mention of) that were Fellow Sufferers for the Christian
Faith; (...).
and being condemned, and sent to work in the Metal Mines, there fell so great
a difference between them, that they drew a partition wall between them in the
Mine, and would not hold communion each with other, in the Service of Christ,
for which they both suffered. Cyprian does impute the great Sufferings, and
Persecutions of the Primitive Times, unto the discord, Epist. 4. Lib. 4.
and dissension of brethren: Im^ vero nec venissent fratribus haec mala si in
umon fratern^tas esset animata, says he. Cupio ex hac vita mig^are ut
liberater ab imm^nibus et implacabilibus odiis Theologorum. Melanch. St.
igellius M^c. Adam.

Et vidi mare vitreum mixtum igni. Apoc. 15.2.

Quid autem aliud ignis designet, atque ferventes lites et contentiones
flagrantes odiis! ignem veni missurus in tertam inquit Christus, etc. Hujusmodi
ignis vagatur per totam Reformatam Ecclesiam quae vel abs. mit plurimos vel
molesta est reliquis dum restinguere nituntur. Brightm. in Apoc. 15. 404.


Ye have heard of the difference between Chrysostom, and Epiphanius; and of
that between Jerome, and Ruffinus; and of that between Ridley, and Hooper. In
Luthers time, the Contest was so hot, and great, and violent between him with
his Party, and Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, and others, that though they met
together with diverse Princes for Reconciliation, and they did at that Meeting
draw up several Articles of Faith, wherein they did all agree, and whereto they
did all subscribe; yet Luther would not call the Calvinists, Brethren. And in
these Days of ours, what scuffling is there between Brethren, fighting one
with another? Why? but because they are in the dark? If Brethren fight, and
scuffle one with another, who will not say they are in the dark?



storm, or the night of Temptation, he cannot see them; Why? not because they
are not in his heart, and life as before; but because he is in the dark.
Possibly therefore, a good man may be in the dark, upon a dark ground, and in a
dark condition. That Is the first thing.

whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, (says the Apostle) as unto a light
shining in a dark place. This Scripture Light he has always by him; To the
Law, and to the Testimonies, says the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 8. if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no Light in them: it is a
dark time, which ^he Prophet speaks of; For many shall stumble, and fall, and be
broken, and be shared, and be taken, verse 15. The Lord hides his face from
the house of Jacob, verse 17. Behold I, and the Children whom the Lord h^th
given me, are for signs and wonders in Israel, verse 18. And they shall look
unto the Earth, and behold trouble, and darkness, dimness of anguish, and they
shall be driven to darkness, verse 22. yet in this time they have the Law, and
the Testimony, that great Scripture Light to walk by.

But have not even wicked men, this Light also, of the Scripture, to walk by in
their darkness?



And though a wicked man does hear, and may read the Scripture, and know many
Truths which are therein contained; yet he does not know the greatness of them:
A man may know, and say, this is the Sun, and this is the light thereof; yet
not know the greatness of the Sun, and that it is abundantly bigger than the
Earth. So a wicked man may, and does know many Truths, but he does not see, and
know the greatness of Truths; for he prizeth other things of the World above
them. A good man knows the Truths of the Gospel, and he sees the greatness of
them, for he leaves all to follow them.

Duplex est cognitio rei disciplinaris et intuitiva, disciplinaris est per
audium et narrationem so^um intuitiva est illa quam ex te presenti et sensu
percepta manantem habemus illam infideles et impii multi assi quuntur in ipsis
fidei myste^is hanc v^o minime, (...). 2 Pet. 1.9.

Am^s. de Lumine Naturae et gratiae.


And though a wicked man may have his Eyes open to see man^ Truths of the
Scriptures; yet in seeing he does not see the same: for as a good man may know
Natural things in a Spiritual way; so he does know Spiritual things in a
Natural way. A good man sees the things themselves that are contained in the
Scripture; and therefore it is that the knowledge of Christ, is called Christ,
T^ll Christ be formed in you, says the Apostle; that is, til the knowledge of
Christ be formed: The thing is put for the knowledge of it, Why? Because in
knowing, the Saints know the things themselves. Wicked men know, and have the
notion of them: for there is a knowledge of things in the notion of them, which
wicked men may have: and there is a knowledge of the things themselves, which
the Saints, and People of God have.

But may not a good man's Eyes, quo ad hoc, as to this, or that Truth in
particular. When he is converted, and brought home to G^d, th^n are his eyes
said to be opened, then is he ^nointed with the Unction of the Holy One, and
does know al things necessary unto his Salvation: yet as Hagars eyes, though
open, were held them seeing the Fountain of Water that was by her, when she
said, I will not see the death of my Child; so a good man's ey^s may be open,
yet they may be held quo ad hoc, as to this, or that Truth, or way; but though
they be held, yet I say it is but quo ad hoc, not in regard of all.



feels more than he can speak: A knowing, learned man, it may be, can utter
more of the Scripture, than he feels; but a good man, feels more than he can
utter.



Matthew. 28. ye read that when Christ rose from the dead, the stone was rolled
away from the Sepulcher, and they that were about it, were in great fear: There
were keepers of the Sepulcher, whom the Jews had set to watch the same; and
there were the Godly women, waiting for the Resurrection: both were in fear,
and in great fear: But the Angel appears to Mary, and the good women, saying,
Fear not ye; ye seek Jesus, he is risen, he is not here, fear not ye: he did
not say so to the wicked Soldiers, that kept, and watched the Sepulcher; they
feared, and he left them in their fears, and in their dark Condition: but the
good women feared, and were in a dark Condition; but the Lord did not leave
them in it, but gave them Scripture Light to comfort them; he is risen, as he
said. So that a good man may be in the dark, yet God will not leave him in his
Darkness; but even then he has a Light, and a sure Light to walk by. And
that is the Second thing.



They will not come to the Light (says our Savior) lest their deeds be made
manifest. Now the Light of the Scripture, does manifest things unto us; it is
(by James) compared to a Looking-glass. When ye look upon a Looking-glass, ye
see three things; the Glass, your self, and all the other things, Persons,
Stools, or Pictures, that are in the Room. So in looking in the Scripture, this
great Looking-glass, ye see the Truths that are therein contained, concerning
God, and Christ; there is God seen especially, and Christ seen; there also you
see your self, and your own dirty face; there also you see the Creatures that
are in the room with you, and their emptiness, the emptiness of men, and of al
comforts, and Relations. This is that manifesting Light under Christ, that is
true Light indeed.

David prayed, Open thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy
Law: There is the Light of Christ, who is called a marvelous Light; and the
more ye look into the Scripture, and know, the more ye will admire: In other
Knowledges, the more ye know, the less ye admire; Amor noti, admiratio ignoti:
but in Scripture Knowledge, the more Light ye have, and the more ye know, the
more you will lift up your hands, and admire at your own Ignorance, and at Gods
Grace. It is a most admirable Light.

Vehemens sensiblle destruit sensorium: Your Eye is able to bear a moderate
Light; but if the Light be vehement, your sense is not able to bear it, but is
destroyed by it: not so with this Scripture Light, the stronger, and more
vehement it is, the more it does perfect the Eye of your Soul; it is not
destructive, but it is perfective Light. Upon which account, Austin prayed to
God, Sint sacrae Scripturae tuae deliciae meae in quibus nec fallere possum nec
fulli; O Lord (said he) let thy Holy Scriptures be my delights, by which, I can
neither deceive, nor be deceived. This is that safe, and sure Light indeed.

Stand in the old, and good way (says the Prophet) and ye shall find rest.
That way, is this Scripture way: if a man once depart from the Scripture, he
runs from one Error to another, and he rests not; but here is rest to be found.
This is that satisfying Light, which does bring unto rest.

The Law of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19. and it makes perfect, else it were
no Rule of Life: for as Austin speaks, the Regula must be Regulato suo
adaequata. Surely therefore it is sufficient, to administer help unto al
Conditions: It Is a Lanthorn to our seet; whatever ground our feet are on, or in
what dark place soever, this Light can find them out. What state can you be in,
but the Scripture will find a Commandment for your Rule, and a Promise for your
assistance and reward: It is able to reach unto al cond tions; for it is a full,
and sufficient Light.

Passimur apertis exercemur obscutis, illie fames pellitur hic fastidium.
Austin.
Paul's Epistles have their hard things to be understood, even in the Eyes of
Peter, Epist. 2. Chap. 3. Verse 16. Yet what Truth is in all the Scripture,
which is necessary to Salvation, but does he plain and clear? For this
Commandment which I command thee this day, is not hidden from thee, neither is
it afar off: It is not in Heaven, etc. Nor is it beyond the Sea, etc. But the
Word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may
do it, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13, 14. Romans 10.6. etc. Unto you it is given (says
Christ to his Disciples) to know the mysteries of the Kingdom. If the Gospel be
hid, it is hid unto them that perish; but we have the mind of Christ, 1 Cor.
2.16. Surely therefore this Light is a clear, and a shining Light.



Instance I. Answ. 1.
This Scripture Light, as you have seen, is a full Light, a Light which did ^hine
forth at once, in, and by Jesus Christ. Revelations and Visions, are more
particular; though God did sometimes speak in that way and manner, yet then he
spoke drop by drop, guttatim: but now he has in these last days, spoken his
full mind by his Son: These were but as the Apples which did fall from the Tree
of Wisdom; but in the Gospel, and Scripture, ye have the whol-Tree i^ self:
Look therefore what difference there is between the Tree, and some particular
Apple that does fall from it, so great a difference there is between th^s, and
those.

Luther, That when he had fasted, and prayed a whole day, and then had a Vision
of Christ, he cried out, and said, Avoid, avoid, thou confounded Devil, I know
no Picture of Christ, but the Scripture. Therein is Christ liv^ly pictured,
described, and set forth before our Eyes: It Is not so in Revelations, and
Visions.

Ditamus preterea quoniam non est humanitus regula generalis, vel ars dabilis
ad discernendum semper et infallibiliter quae verae sunt et quae falsae aut
illusotiae revelationes.

Gersom. Tract. de distinctione verarum et falsar. visionum. Tom. 1. 175, 176,
etc.


And who does not know that the Devil will speak an hundred Truths, that he may
crowd in one Lie amongst them? Or would ye know that it is a true Revelation,
and not an illusion, by the high things that should be revealed? What greater,
higher things, than the things of the Gospel? these are the mystery of the
Kingdom, called the deep things of God; and says the Apostle Paul, I fear,
lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your
minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. And how did
Satan beguile Eve, but by persuading her to high things, that she should be
like to God? And thus I fear, many are beguiled even at this day amongst us. Or
would ye know a Revelation of Gods from the delusion of Satan by the event, in
that some future thing is revealed to you, which does fall out accordingly? then
read what the Lord says in Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise among you, a Prophet, or
a Dreamer of Dreams, and gives thee a sign, Sancti autem viri inter illusiones
atque Revelationes ipsas visionu^ voces aut imagines quodam intimo sapore
discernunt ut scient vel quid a bono spiritu percipiant vel quid ab illusore
patiantur nam si erga haec men's caura non fuerit per deceptorem spiritum multis
se vanitatibus immergit, qui nonnunquam solet multa predicere, ut ad extremum
valeat animam ex una falsitate laqueare.

Gregor. Dialo. Lib. 4.


or a wonder, and the sign or wonder come to pass, saying, Let us go serve
other Gods, which thou have not known. Verse 2. Thou shall not hearken to the
words of that Prophet, for the Lord your God proves you, to know whether ye
love the Lord your God. God may suffer a Revelation to come to pass, and yet it
may not be from the Lord, but to prove you, whether you love him, and will
cleave unto him. Or will ye know a true Revelation, from a Delusion, by your
Taste, per saporem, which is said to be the way whereby they did know that thing
was of God? Then what an uncertainty will here be, that your whole Salvation shall
hang upon, and be ruled by your own Taste. But now the written Word of the Lord
is certain, sure, and steadfast; Heaven and Earth shall pass, but not one tittle
of the Word shall pass: the least apex, and tittle of it, is more established
than the Mountains.

Luthers days, that pretended unto great Discoveries, and Revelations; men of
great Parts, and of high Language; insomuch as Bucholcerus says of them,
Swenckfeldiani sunt ter miseri, nec se nec alios intelligunt, non se que non
intelligunt se dicere pugnantia non alios idque non tam naturali sua tarditate
ingeniorum quam eo quod tenentur irretiti suis quibusdam enthusiasticis laqueis
unde se extricari summam putant impietatem, dementabant multos magnifecis istis
verbis quae semper illis in ore Illuminatio, Revelatio, Deificatio hominis
interiotis et spiritualis, etc.

Scultet. Anual. an. 1525. page 269, 270.


That they neither understood themselves, nor others; nor others them; but were
always speaking of Revelations, Visions, Deifications, etc. As for other men
that kept close to the Scripture, they called them Vocabulists, Literalists,
Grammatists, and Creaturists. And so now it will be also, if men once do attend,
and take heed unto Visions, they will easily despise the Scriptures, and such as
do take heed thereto. Yea, 2. And if men do attend to these Visions, and
Revelations, how easily may they be drawn into Popery, and Superstition? How
did Mahomet set up his Alcoran, but by persuading the People to attend unto
Revelation? And how did the Papists so much prevail upon the Nations of the
World, but by their Visions, and Revelations? Search the Stories, and you shall
find, that both the Turkish Alcoran, and the Popish Religion, had their
Foundations here: And if Luther had hearkened to Revelations and Visions, and
not kept close to the Scripture, what had become of his Reformation? Nay, but
says he, Pactum feci cum Domino Deo meo, etc. I have made a Covenant with the
Lord my God, that he may not send me Visions, or Dreams, or Angels; Contentus
enim sum hoc dono, quod habeam Scripturam: I am content with this Gift, That I
have the Scripture, which does abundantly teach, and supply al those things
that are necessary for this Life, and for the future. Yea, 3. If a man do once
come to attend, and take heed unto Visions, and Revelations, how easily may he
slide, and depart into Atheism? for what difference is there between an
Atheist, or a Pagan Infidel, and a Christian, but only this, That the Christian
is for the Scripture, and does adhere to that, the other not? Take away the
Scripture from me, and there will be little difference between me, and an
Infidel. But now the more a man does attend unto Visions, the more his heart
and hands will be loosed from the Scripture Surely therefore, there is a danger
in this; but Scripture Light, is a sure, and a safe Light.

Why but (you will say) may not God speak by extraordinary Visions, and
Revelations, in these days of ours? Abraham; Go and offer up thy Son Isaac to
me: but is not that Commandment, Thou shall not kill, a more sure, and c^rtain
Rule for me to walk by? God may, if he will, say to a man as he once said to
Hosea; Go and take thee a Wise of Fornications: But is not that Commandment,
Thou shall not commit Adultery, a more sure, and certain Word and Rule, for me
to walk by? What God may do, I will not dispute: he may thus speak to men, if it
please him; yea, and if we may give credit unto known Histories, the Lord has
spoken in this way sometimes, to some of his Servants since the Apostles Time.
Cyprian tells us of Four Revelations, which the Lord gave him, before that
Persecution did come upon them. Mr. Fox in the Book of Martyrs, tells us of many
Visions, which one Gallus a French Martyr had; and of one which Mr. Philpot
had, Scultetus also, and Sleiden tells us, that God did reveal it to Luther,
That there should be no War in Germany whilst he lived. Yet there is a great
deal of difference between Faith in the Promise, and a Vision, or R^velation.
Possibly then, the Lord may speak in such a way as this is, to some of his
Servants. But now (that you may have a Loundary in this Matter.)

have an itching desire after Visions, and Revelations, it is ill: The Lord may
work a Miracle, and being wrought, I am bound to receive it; but I may not put
God upon the working of a Miracle. So here; if God will speak in this way to me,
he may; but I may not put him on it without Tempting of him; yea, I am to be so
far from desiring God to speak in this way of a Vision, as I am bound rather to
be backward to it. Revela jones caute recipiendas. Aluarez de vita spirituali
de discretione spirituum. Lib. 5. Cap. 4.
For as Alvarez observes well, If a Master be abroad in the night, and the
Servant be backward to open the door unto him, and to let him in, lest some
Thief should counterfeit his Voice; the Master will not take it il at the
Servants hands, that he made him stay so long before he did open the door, but
will rather commend that Servant. So says he; Though a man be backward to
receive these Revelations; yet knowing what Deceit there is abroad in the
World, Alter sanctorum Patrum dum sibi daemoni transfiguratus in Christum
diceret ego sum Christus personaliter te visitans qui dignus es, confestim
clausit oculos utraque manu vociferans, nolo hic Chris^^m videre satis est
ipsum in gloria si videro.

Gersom. de probatione spirituum.


God will not take it ill at his hands, but will commend him for it. An itching
desire after Visions, argues that a man is not content with the Scripture; and
is it not enough for us to see Christ in Heaven? Gersom tells us of an Ancient
Father, who (when the Devil did appear to him in the shape and Image of Christ,
saying, I am come in person to visit thee, for thou art worthy) did with both
his hands, shut his Eyes, saying, Nolo hic Christum videre, I will not see
Christ here, it is enough for me that I may see him in Heaven.

Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, do preach any other Gospel to you, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed, Gal. 1.8. which he
repeats again, and therefore good for us to mark again: I say now again, If any
man preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which ye have received; let him
be accursed, verse 9.

Heb. 2.4. we read indeed, That when Peter was at first to go and open a door
to the Gentiles, then the Lord did appear to him in way of a Vision; but after
that Truth was confirmed, That the Gentiles should be called, then God appeared
no more by Vision for the confirmation thereof. Now the Doctrines of the
Gospel, are al confirmed by Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and
therefore if any man have a Revelation to try, or confirm any Gospel Doctrine,
it is a delusion of Satan, not a Revelation of God.

Greenham (famous for resolving Cases o^ Conscience) being once asked (as his
Book tells us) Whet^^r there might now be Visions agreeable to the Word? He
said, there might be such extraordinary; but (says he) whosoever is moved with
them, and not with the Word, wherewith he is charged to be moved, and is not
drawn the more by the Vision to the true means; that man's Faith is suspicious.
And I pray, what is the reason why the Lord will not have us to believe the
Prophet in D^ut. 13. that does foretell such things ^s do come to pass? The
reason is, Because he seeks to turn you to oath r gods, whom ye have nor known;
and because he has spoken to t^^n you from the Lord your God, and from keeping
his Commandments. Do I therefore come unto you, and pretend Vision and
Revelations, that I may thereby turn a people from the good Ways and
O^d^^^nces of Christ? then I am a Deceiver: And if you receive me, o^ the
pretended Revelation, you are deceived also.

(...)


yet now the ^^d speaks nothing to us in this way, but what he w^l have
examined by the Word: for says the Apostle, If an Angel from H^aven, (...) any
other ^^^spel, than what I have preach^d unto (...) him be accursed. Surely
therefore, the (...) ^^velations are to come under the examin^^^ (...) Word,
and Gospel: And therefore (...) Revelation that refuses to be examined by (...)
it is a Thief, and a Robber, an Illusion o^ (...) Vagrant, and not sent by God.
And (...) ^^^ture be that only Lydius Lapis; that (...), whereby all our Gold
is to be tried; that Light, whereby we are to try al our Revelations, and
Visions; then this Scripture Light, is the more excellent Light in compare with
the other.

And thus now I have done with the first Thing, which does pretend to much
Light in these days of ours; namely, Visions, and Revelations. The Second
follows, viz. That of Dreams, and Voices.

SCRIPTURE LIGHT, The most Sure LIGHT: Compared with Dreams and Voices.
Sermon II.
2 PET. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts.




Eccles. 5.7. In the multitude of Dreams, Somnia ne cures nam f^llunt somnia
plures.
and many words (says Solomon) there are also diverse vanities; but fear thou
God: It seems then, that the fear of God does not consist with these. Here is a
check upon our attendance on the^e: But says the Apostle, Let the Word of God
dwell in you richly; there is no check on that.

Gregor. Moral. Lib. 1.

Somnia (...) graviter animos somniantum feriebant, quod divinitus inimissorum
somniorum est quasi proprium. Gerard in Genesis Cap. 40. p. 706.

Somnia Divinitus inspirata vehem^nter movent somniantem, habent impressiones
valde acres, quale fuit Pharaonis, in quo tanta fuit consternatio animi et
(...) ut sentiret esse Divinam quandam admonitionem.

Luther in Genesis 31.

Circa cognitionem humanae mentis duo oportet considerate scil.
representationem, rerum et judicium de rebus representatis si cui siat
Divinitus re^resentatio aliquarum rerum per sim^litudines imaginatias non est
talis censendus Propheta nisi illuminetur ejus men's ad judicandum.

Aquin. 22. Q. 173. Art. 2.


It Is an hard thing to know whether the Dream be Natural, or Supernatural. In
case it be Supernatural: Supernatural Dreams, are either Diabolical, from the
Devil: or Divine, from God: and it is an hard thing to know whether it be of
God, or from Satan. Some think, that if Dreams do greatly afflict and trouble
the mind with some sharp impression, then they are of God, Because (says
Pilates Wife) I have suffered many things this night in a Dream: and this Dream
of hers (say they) was of God. But others think rather, that it was from Satan,
who would have hundred the death of Christ, and so the great Work of Man's
Redemption. But if ye look into Job, 7. ye shall find that he says to God, Thou
skarest me with Dreams; yet it was Satan that did it: for as before, when Satan
by his Instruments, took all from Job, he says, The Lord has taken away; so
here, when Satan vexed and skared him with Dreams, he says to God
(acknowledging his Providence) Thou skarest me with Dreams; and yet I say it
was Satan: for he was put into Satan's hand, and whatever affliction he met
with, it was from Satan, and his Instruments: So that the trouble, and
suffering of the Dream, does not argue that it is from God. It is a very hard
thing to know whether it be of God, or from Satan: And in case that the Dream
be of God, yet it is an hard thing to know the meaning, and Interpretation of
it: for Pharaoh had a Dream; but al his Magitians could not interpret it; that
was a work for Joseph: And so though Nebuchadnezzar had a Dream, and that might
be o^ God; yet neither he, nor his wise men, could tell the Interpretation
thereof; that was a work for Daniel, the work of a Prophet. A wicked man may
have a Dream from God; but it requires the Spirit of no less than a Prophet, to
give the Interpretation thereof. But now, Are we at such Uncertainties in
reading the Word? Can none but a Prophet understand the Scripture? The Priests
and Levites gave the Sense of the Word to the People ordinarily; yet they were
no Prophets. The Word of the Lord, is a Light, and Lanthorn unto al our feet,
plain and easy to be understood, in all those things that are absolutely
necessary unto our Salvation.

Quest. But may not God speak unto us by a Dream now, if he will?



And if God should speak to me by a Dream, yet if I make that a sign of mine
own Godliness, or of Gods Love to me, then am I under a delusion; for even
wicked men have had their D^^^ms from God, Balaam, and Pharaoh, and
Nebuchadnezzar, and others. Do I therefore dream a strange Dream, and conclude
that therefore I am in Gods Love, because he thus speaks to me? then am I
deceived, What wise man is there in the World, that will, or dare lay, and
venture his Soul, and Salvation upon a Dream, or the Interpretation of it? But
you may, and must say, and venture your Souls and Salvation upon the Scripture.
Surely therefore the light of Dreams is not to be compared therewith.

But suppose that I have an immediate Voice; is not that to be compared with
the Scripture?

Luke, 16.31. they have Moses, and the Prophets, And if they hear not Moses,
an^ the Prophets; neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.
And if that Voice which you have, do come from Heaven; then either it is the
voice of an Angel, or of God himself: If it be the Voice of an Angel; then see
what the Apostle says of that in compare with the Word and Scripture, Gal.
1.8. Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that which we have preached unto ^ou, let him be accursed: And this is th^^
Gospel which we have now written in this Book of the Gala^ians. And if the
Voice which you have, do come from God hims^l^, then see what the Apostle says
here of that, in compare with the Scripture, verse 17. There came a Voice to
Christ, from the excellent Glory, saying, This is my beloved Son; and this
^^yce which came from Heaven, we heard, verse 19. And we have also a more sure
Word of Prophecy, which is the written Wo^^; for says he, no Prophecy of
Scripture, etc. So that ye see, this written Word of God, or the Scripture, is
beyond al Dreams, and immediate Voices. It may be some will say, But may not God
^peak by an immediate Voice to a Soul now? To which I answer: What God may do,
is one thing; and what he does in the way of a settled Ordinance, wherein we are
to wait on him, and expect from him, is another thing: ye read in Heb. 1.1, 2.
thus: God, who at sundry times, and in d^vers manners, spoke in time past by
the Prophets, has in these last days, spok^n by his Son: In time past, he
spoke by Visions, Dreams, and Voices. If there be such an Ordinance still,
wherein we are still to wait on God, why does the Apostle make this difference
between times past, and the present time of the Son? Nay, says Luther, but
there is such a sufficiency in the Scripture, That th^ugh some men should have
Visions, Dreams, and Voices, yet the Scripture is so full, that nec curo, nec
desidero, I neither care for, nor desire them. I read of a certain Woman, a
Religious Lady of the Emperesses ^ed-Chamber, whose Name was Gregoria, that
being much troubled about her Salvation, did write to Gregory, that she would
never cease importuning him til he had sent her word that he had received a
Revelation from Heaven, that she should be saved: To whom he returned this
Answer; Rem difficilem postulas, et inutilem; Thou desire an hard matter, and
unprofitable; hard for me to obtain, and unprofitable for thy self to have. And
so say I; If any should come to me, desiring to implore God for such a Voice,
or Dream, or Revelation; I must answer, Man or Woman, thou desire an hard
work for me to do, and a thing unprofitable for thy sel^ to have. Thou have the
Scriptures, go search the Scriptures, wait thou upon God therein; for in them
are the words of Eternal Life, they are a sure, and a safe Light, more sure,
safe, and certain, than al Revelations, Visions, Dreams, or immediate Voices.
And thus I have done with the Second Instance.



Aqua vitae, or strong Water, is good in a quothing, fainting fit; but it is
not good to make it our daily Drink. So here, In case the Soul be in a fainting
fit, it is good to have the Impression of some particular Word, or Scripture.
But this Impression is not daily Food; the Word of God written, is our
appointed Food, our daily Food, whether it come with Impression, or without
Impression; this is that Food, and Heritage, which under God, we must live
upon. Psalm. 119.111.





But is there no use then of Impressions, with, or without a Particular Word?
Is there no Light that does shine through them?





strengthen his heart, and hands much, as in that case of Joshua, Chap. 1.

But though God do speak much by Impressions sometimes, and there is much Light
and Comfort, rises in the Soul by them; Yet,

Fox, that blessed man, who wrote the Book of Martyrs, That he had so great,
and deep an Impression made upon his Soul, concerning the meaning of a
Scripture, that he thought he could not be deceived therein. He tells the Story
twice; once in the History of the Ten Persecutions of the Primitive Times; and
once in his Commentary on Rev. 13. The Scripture opened, and sensed to him, was
verse 5. of that Chapter; And he shall continue forty two months: Writing
(says he) the Story of the Ten Persecutions, I was so much affected therewith,
that I even expostulated with God, why he would suffer his People to suffer
such cruel things; and why he would not tell his Church, and Servants, when the
time of the end of their trouble should be: whereupon (says he) being in this
sad conflict in my own soul, I heard a Voice, says the English Relation, Nomen
illius qui responsum accepit non hic edo, nec opus est: fluctuanti in hunc
modum h^minis animo multumque secum cogitanti do his rebus, tandem ^f^licior
quaedam Divini (ut reo^) neminis gratia, quae arcano quodam admonitionis ^^bilo
velut respondens sine voce tamen at non sine vehementi cogitationis
impressione, subito in mentem eis suggerit vel increpat potius stulte numera
hos menses quemadmodum Daniel numerat suas hebdomadas per septenarium numerum
annorum, qui anni si rite supputentur faciunt 294. rem ipsam ita ut igesta est
vera, simplicique narratione adnotandum duxi, Deus mihi testis nec m^ntior nec
singo nec muto quicquam, nec postulo ut quisquam (...) fidem adhibeat nisi
velit qui non velit, ipse de sua tripode, adferat meliora, mea quidem ita fert
ratio ut credam Christum nec mortuum esse nec mutum, quorsum in Ecclesia
Templum Dei aut in Templo oraculum cum p^opitiatorio si nemo in caelis sit qui
in dubiis Scripturae locis vobis interpellantium respondeat.
but the Latin thus; Sine Voce tamen; only I did not hear a Voice, but had
vehementem cogitationis impressionem, a vehement impression of mind, which
whispered thus to me; O thou fool, count these Months by Sabbaths, as the Weeks
of Daniel, are counted by Sabbaths; which I did (says he) with the help of
some Godly Merchants, and found the Years to be two hundred ninety four, just
the time of the Ten Persecutions: doubtless therefore, this is the time of the
Beast, and herein I was fully satisfied. Yet this cannot be the true meaning of
that Text, as is confessed by all hands; for this Beast that is to continue
forty two Months, does receive his Power from the Dragon; therefore it is not
the time of the Dragon, but the red Dragon; that is, the Heathen, Roman
Emperor, did persecute the Woman, Rev. 12. standing before her, to devour the
man Child, the Seed of the Church, as soon as she was delivered, verse, 2, 3.
Yet this good and holy man thought, that that must needs be the meaning of the
forty two Months, because the Interpretation came to him with such an
impression. Possibly therefore, a good man may be much deceived by Impressions,
especially when they come with a particular word. But where do we find in all
the Scripture, That we are to judge of Doctrines by Impressions? No, but by the
written Word of God: that is the only Rule, whereby we must judge, comparing
Spiritual things, Foxus in Apoc. 13. p 216.
with Spiritual things, and one Scripture with another.

Cast thy self down (says he) he shall give his Angels charge over thee: this
was not according to the Scope of the Scripture. But if God set on a Scripture
with a deep Impression, it was always according to the true sense and scope of
the Scripture. For example: Nehemiah being at Prayer, as ye read, Chap. 1. God
gave him a word, with a sweet Impression, and it was according to the true
sense thereof. So Acts, 4. the Apostles were at Prayer, and God gave a word to
them out of Psalm. 2. and it was according to the true scope thereof. Where do
we find that ever God did set on a particular Word, but according to the true
meaning of it? Have I therefore an Impression with a Word? yet if the Word be
not set on my Soul, according to the true meaning and scope of it, then have I
cause to fear, that it is rather a delusion of Satan, than the Impression of
God.

Abraham a Word, that his Seed should be as the Stars; but he made a false
Application thereof, when he went unto Hagar for the fulfilling of that Word.
So the Lord gave a Word to Eliphaz, Job, 4.12. Now a thing was secretly brought
to me, and mine ear received a little thereof, fear came upon me, and
trembling, verse 14. Then a Spirit passed before my face, it stood still, but I
could not discern it: then I heard a Voice, saying, Shall mortal man be more
just than God, verse 15. Here was an Impression with a Word, and this was from
God; but he applies this to, and against Job, Chap. 5.1. the Impression was of
God, but the Application was his own. Possibly then a man may have an
Impression from God with a Word, yet the Application may be his own; but though
the Impression be never so ^ul, and deep, yet if the Application be beyond the
Impression, he is still in an Error. And therefore, seeing that it is an easy
thing, and usual, even for the Children of Abraham, to make Application beyond
the Impression, the safest, sure I way, is to keep clo^e to the written Word of
God, which is both the Judge of al our Doctrin^s, and the only Rule of al our
Practices; and therefore above, and beyond al Impressions, whether with, or
without a Word. And thus I have done with the Third Instance.



Cor. 13.9. Now we see through a Glass darkly: And lest any man should think,
that Paul spoke this only of some Babes in Christ, he speaks out yet more
expressly, putting himself into the number, ver. 12. Now I know in part; and
this in part, is set in opposition to what is perfect; for says he, verse 9.
We know in part, and prophecy in part; but when that which is perfect is come,
etc. verse 10. So that whatever Law, or Light, or Knowledge is within us now, is
imperfect; but the Word of God written, the Scripture, and the Light thereof,
is perfect; for says the Psalmist, The Law of the Lord, is perfect, Psalm. 19.

Tit. 1.9. Holding fast the faithful Word, that he may be able by sound
Doctrine, both to exhort, and convince gainsayers: How are gainsayers to be
convinced then? what by the Light, or Law within? No: but by sound Doctrine
fetched from the faithful Word.

Is there then, no use of the Law, and Light, and Spirit within us? does not
God speak, and direct thereby?

Solomon) is the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward rooms of the
Belly. When God does set up a Light or Candle in the Soul, he may thereby go
into all the inward Chambers of the Soul, discovering those heaps of sin that
are in the Soul.







Psalm. 119. For ever, O Lord, thy Word is settled in Heaven, verse 89. And says
Paul to Timothy, I charge thee, in the sight of God, that thou keep this
Commandment until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, Epist. 1. Chap. 6.
Ver. 14. Timothy does not live in person to the appearing of Christ; but those
that succeed him, do, and shall, unto whom this charge is made: And if ye look
into Chap. 3. ye find that Paul says to him; These things write I to thee,
that thou may know how thou ought to behave thy self in the House of God:
yet Timothy had a Light, and Law, and Spirit of God within him. So that though
a man have the Spirit, Light, and Law within him, he is yet to be ruled by the
Word of God written; the Scripture, and the Word written, is yet to be a Rule
unto him; and as many as walk according to this Rule, peace shall be upon them.

But if the Spirit that is in me, be the same Spirit with that which did write
the Scripture, what need I wait on, or be ruled by the Word without, or the
Scripture any longer?

not to take away the Scripture from you; it is not sent to be your Rule, but
to be your help to understand the Rule.

Because, although ye have the same Spirit which did write the Scripture, yet
you have not the same Inspiration of the Spirit. All Believers in Paul's time,
had the same Spirit that Paul had; but not the same Inspiration of the Spirit;
that is very diverse: 1 Cor. 12.11. the Apostle speaking of diversities of
Gifts: But (says he) all these works, that one, and the self same Spirit,
dividing to every one as it pleases him. So that though a man have the same
Spirit wherewith the Scripture was written, yet he may not have the same
Inspiration. But because People understand not this, therefore they think that
if they have the same Spirit, they may lay by the Scripture, as to their Rule.
But

viz. That the Law, Light, and Spirit within, is his Rule.



John, 1.4. he says, Try the Spirits, whether they be of God, or no. 2. That
Law, or Light, or Spirit within you, is Christ in you: but Christ in you, is to
be tried, and examined, 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, whether you be in the
Faith, prove your own Souls; know ye not that Christ is in you, unless ye be
Reprobates? And if Christ without us, Christ in the days of his Flesh, did
submit himself to the trial of the Scriptures; Search the Scriptures (says he)
for they testify of me; then surely the Spirit of Christ in us, will not refuse
the same: Christ in us, is not more privileged than Christ without us; but
Christ without, was tried by the Scriptures, therefore Christ within us much
more. And if all that Light, and Law, and Spirit within us, be to be tried by
the Scripture, then surely the Light of the Word written, is a more excellent
Light, than that Light which is within. And thus I have now done with the
Fourth Instance.







Is there then no use of our Experiences? Is there no Light therein?

Romans 5. Tribulation works Patience; Patience Experience; and Experience
Hope; verse 4, 5. Here is the Genealogy of Hope; but the next Parent of Hope,
is Experience. So the Poor has Hope, Job, 5.16. How so? He counts up many
Experiments, and when he has done, he concludes thus; So the poor has Hope;
it is Experience then which does work Hope.

Romans 15.4. Whatever things were written before time, were written for our
Learning, that we through Patience, and Comfort of the Scriptures, might have
Hope. So that the Scripture, and the Word of God written, is the first Ground
of our Faith, and Hope.

And though we have much Experience, yet if we do not trust in the Word of
Promise under Christ, over, and beyond al our Experience, we do evil.

And if al our Experience is to be reduced to the Word written, then the
Scripture is more excellent than al Experience; but all our Experience, is to
be reduced unto Scripture. Surely therefore the Scripture, or the Word of God
written, is more excellent than al Experience, and the Light thereof. And thus
I have done with the Fifth Instance.





Being delivered up by the determinate Counsel, and fore-knowledg of God, ye
have taken, and by wicked hands, ye have crucified him, Acts, 2.23. When Jonah
fled from God, there was then present, a Ship that was bound for Tarshish: here
was a Providence. And when Joseph's Brethren sold him into Egypt, there came by
certain Merchants, who did trade into Egypt: here was a Providence. Now if the
Providence of God, do thus extend to our very Sins, then we cannot make up our
Judgment, our Rule from a bare Providence: but you may make up your Judgment
and Rule from the Scripture, and the Word of God written.

Does not God speak by Providence? guide, and direct by Providence sometimes?

Mordecai had been faithful to him; the Providenti^l Eye of God, did guide the
King to do something for Mordecai. And when Abraham's Servant prayed, and the
Damsel came forth to meet him according to his Prayer, The Providence of God,
did lead, and guide to that Marriage of Isaac and Rebecca.





Morn. praefat. Lib. de vera relig. prefat. Lib. de Euch.

Ames. de traductione peccatoris ad vitam et de lum. not. et Grae. Dr. Vort. de
ratione humana de rebus fidei.

Alting. Loc. com. pars 1. Loc. 2 dg.

Tunc solum vere Deum cognoscimus quando ipsum esse credimus supra omne id quod
de Deo cogitari ab homine possibile est.

Aquin. contra Gent. Lib. 1. Cap. 5, 6.


yet if it be not enlightened with an higher Light of the Gospel, it cannot
reach unto the things of God as it should; it is Panis pauperum, the poor man's
Bread, compared by some to the Dough, which the Israelites brought out of
Egypt, which was prepared with much Labor, and then called Panis Pauperum,
Deuteronomy. 16.3. But the Word of God in the Scriptures, is compared to Manna, called
the Bread of Angels; for the Gospel did come down from Heaven in a special
manner; for though Reason be the Gift of God, yet it does proceed from God as
he is God, and General Ruler of the World: But the Gospel, and the Light
thereof, did proceed from the Father, by the Son, to the Church, Rev. 22.1. And
he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of
the Throne of God, and of the Lamb. John, 1.17, 18.

not his Original Sin, not his Sin of Unbelief, and against the Gospel; but the
Word of God, the Scripture Light can, and does.

P^al. 19.

Surgunt indocti (said a great Bishop, and learned man) et capiunt Calum et nos
cum omni Doctrina nostra trudimur in infernum. Poor men arise, and take the
Kingdom of Heaven by force, when we with all our Learning, are thrust into Hell.
Why so? The poor receive the Gospel; not many wise, not many Learned. Father, I
thank thee (says Christ) thou have revealed these things to Babes. It Is
Revelation-Light from the Gospel, that does bring to Heaven: mere Humane Reason
cannot do it.

Is there then no use of Reason, and of the Light thereof?

Dr. Voeti, p. 5, 6, 7. de ratione humana in rebus fidei.
Did not Christ himself make use of Reason to prove the Resurrection: There is
a Resurrection (says he) for God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living: If God be the God of Abraham, then Abraham must rise again; Rationis in
Theologia usus Alting. pars 1. loc. 209.
but he is the God of Abraham, for he is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. Here he makes use of Reason: so the Apostles after him. Surely
therefore, we are not so to adhere to the Letter of the Scripture, as to deny
the use of our Reason in finding out the true sense and meaning of the
Scripture; for then we must hold with the Papists, That the Bread in the Lords
Supper, is turned into the Body of Christ; for the Letter says, This is my
Body. Reason is of great use, even in the things of God: and well has he said,
Contra Rationem nemo sobrius; against Reason, no man is sober; against
Scripture, Conrra Rationem nemo sobrius, contra Scripturam nemo Christianus,
contra Ecclesiam nemo Pacificus.
no man is a Christian; and against the Church, no man is Peaceable. But,

(...). Just. Mar. Q 107.

Q^id Athenis et Hirofolymis? quid Academia et Ecclesia? quid Haereticis et
Christi^nis! nostra institutio de Po^ticu Salomonis. Tertul. de Prescript.

(...). etc. v^lde stulti sunt, qui rationibus m xime pe^mi^tunt quae non licet
invenire nisi per fidem, ex Philosophia res Divinas velle intelligere est
condens ferrum non forcipe sed digitis contrectare. Chrysostom. 1 Cor. Hom. 5.

Au^e^ Argumenta ubi fides queritur. Ambros. Lib. de fide Cap. 5.

Si quis potest intelligere Deo gratias agat, si non potest non immittat cornua
ad ventilandum, sed submittat caput ad venerandum. Anselm. Ep. de fide arvo.
Pap. Cap. 2.

Laudatu^ maria, quod rationem fide prevenit, et punitur Zacharias quod fidem
ratione tentavit. Bern. Epist. 109.

Rations precedentes minunt fidem subsequentes augent.

Dicimus nullam rationem humanam esse principium quo seu per quod aut ex quo
seu cur credamus aut fundamentum aut legem aut no^mam credendorum ex cunis
prescripto judecemus, etc. Dr. Voct. de ratione hum^na in rebus fidei, Disp.
Select. pars prima.

T^anseundum est e navicula rationis Verulam.

Apud A^istotelem argumentum est ratio rei dubiae faciens fidem sed Apud
Christum argumentum est fides faciens rationem. Altisodoren. prefat. sum.

Si quis idiota tali Philosopho qualis Aristot. aut Pyth^goras fuit de rerum
principiis obstreperet nonne audiret arrogans et insaniens at quanto major est
insania, ideo non credere Divinae Philosophiae quod multa non allequatu^
humanus intel^ectus. Erasmus in Symb. Catech.

T^ntum abest ut humana ratio fidei sit mensum ut ne Natu^ae quidem propter
ignoranti^m et pravitatem esse possit. Morn. prefat. Lib de vera Religione.


2. Though th re be a good use of Reason even in the thing of God yet Reason is
but a Drawer of Water, an Handmaid; and therefore ^f Hagar will p^^k above her
Mistress, the Scripture, she must be ^^^ned out of doors.

And ^ough you do make use of your Reason in the th ng of God; yet if you will
not yield unto Scripture Truth, and Gospel Truth, ^^l you can see Reason ^or
the thing believed, and how in a way of Humane Reason such a thing can be, then
you are in a great Error. For as Luther pe^ks, in the matter of the Gospel, we
must shut our Eyes, and go blindfold into the Commandments of God, The wisdom
of the World (says the Apo^^le) looks upon Gospel Truths as foolishness; and
as none know^ the things of a man, but the Spirit of man; so n n^ knows the
things of God, but by the Spirit of God therefore not by Humane Reason only.
The Sun is not seen, but by the Light of the Sun; nor Christ, but b^ the Light
of Christ. This l^^^^e first, ^^e^ the ^postle in this Text, though you do at^e
d to the word of Prophecy, yet you must have the Spirit of God, not Humane
Reason only: Why? For as it was written, so it must be understood; ^ut all
Prophecy of Scripture was written by the Inspiration of the Spirit, and did
not come from man. The Schoolmen speak well; Reasons before Faith, lessen, and
diminish it; after Faith, they strengthen it.

3. Though you do make use of Reason in the things of God, yet your very Reason
is to be mortified, crucified; Crucifigamus istam pestem, quare, says Luther;
we must crucify that Pest, and Plague, Why? Deus non vult, non esse quaristas,
vel rationistas: God would not have us that are Christians, to be Quarists, or
Whereforeists: naked, simple obedience, is best in the Eyes of God. With man
(says he) we must consider, Quid, what it is that is Commanded; but in our
Obedience to God, we must consider, Quis, who it is that commands: And this
is to be the Ground of our Faith, and Obedience; as we must renounce our Will,
so we must deny our Reason: But we must not deny the Scripture, nor crucify
the Scripture, nor renounce the Scripture. Surely therefore, the Light of the
Scripture, and the Word written, is beyond, and more excellent than al humane
Reason, and the Light thereof. And thus I have done with the Seventh Instance.



But is in Truth, a Work of Darkness; for where do we find in Scripture, that
God does command any of his People to attend upon Astrologers, or Star-gazers
(as the Word calls them) for any such things as these. We are forbidden to learn
the way of the Heathen, in fearing the Signs of Heaven; Jer. 10.2. and Deuteronomy.
18.9. Thou shall not learn to do after the abominations of those Nations:
Wherein? Verse 10. There shall not be found amongst you, any that makes his
Son to pass through the fire, or that uses Divination, or an Observer of
Times, or an Inchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Necromancer. The
Observation of Times, is one of these things: the e were the ways of the
Nations, these things were abomination to the Lord, these things cannot stand
with a perfect heart, verse 13. Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God.

Esai. 47. that he will bring evil upon his People, which they with all their
Astrologers, should not be able to foresee, and hide themselves from, verse 11.
Therefore shall evil come upon thee, and thou shall not know whence it rises:
No! but we will (might they say) go unto our Astrologers: Do so, says God,
verse 12. Stand now with thine Enchantments, and with the multitude of thy
Sorceries, if so be thou may be able to profit: and verse 13. Let now the
Astrologers, the Star-gazers, the Monthly Prognosticators, stand up and save
thee: Behold they shall be as stubble, verse 14. I^ A^^rologers, and
Star-gazers, can foretell the several Changes in States, and Commonwealths, and
what great things shall come to pass therein, and how they come to pass; then
why does God say here, that in spite of al them, thou shall not know whence
this evil comes? verse 11. Surely therefore, such things as these, are not to
be read in the Book of the Heavens.

But is there no Light of Knowledge to be had from the Stars? and do not the
Heavens teach and declare the Lords handywork? will ye condemn all Astronomy?

The Heavens declare the Glory of the Lord, and so do al th^^ ^^^^tures; yet
this ^eaching is not able to convert the Sou^ (...) therefore when the Psalmist
had said in Psalm. 19. The ^^avens declare, etc. he comes to show where the true
converting teaching is to be found, even in the Scriptures, verse 7. The Law of
the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. Secondly, I grant also, That the
Stars are for Signs: So the Word says, Genesis 1.14. Let there be Lights in the
Firmament, to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and for
seasons, and for days, and for years. But how for Signs? of the Weather: As
the Sun when it sets with a red Sky, foresheweth a fair day to follow,
Matthew. 16.2. Yea, and sometimes they import, and are signs of Gods Displeasure,
Luke, 21.25. Ordinarily they are for Signs to know when to sow, and plant, and
prune, and reap: And are Signs to sail by, for the Mariners at Sea. Yea,
Thirdly, I grant that the Stars have a great influence upon these Sublunary
things, even upon the Bodies of Men and Women.

Esai. 41.23. Show the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that
ye are gods. Those men therefore, that will undertake to show the things that
are to come hereafter, would be known to be gods. But though they would be gods
themselves, yet why should they not let God be God still? Qui fatum ponit, Deum
tollit; he that sets up a Fate, does destroy God; and if al things come to pass
by Influence of the Stars (else they cannot pretend to foreknowledg of them)
then al things must come to pass by a Fate. Yea, what does this practice
otherwise, than (as Austin observes well) make God the Author of all the Sin in
the World? Malti hoc dicunt, fatum mihi fecit, stellae me fecerunt, ita jam per
circuitum ad D^^m volunt perveni^e, per circu^tum v^lunt pe^venire ad Deum
accu^^^dum, qui nolunt de c^mpendio venire ad D^um plac^ndum, ^^dicunt fatum
mihi ^ecit, q id est fat^m? stellae mei c^^^^^ quid ^un^ stel^ae? certe isiae
qu^s (...) C lo pe^spicimus; et quis e^s feci^? D^us, qui eas ordinavit? Deus,
er^o vides q^^d volu^tii dicere. Deus fecit ut peccatem, ita ille injustus tu
justus, quod i^si ille f^cillet tu non peccass^s, toll istas excu^ationes in
peccatis memento illius Psalmi. Ne declines cor meum in verba maligna ad
excusanda peccata etc.

Ad haec magni viri sunt qui defendunt peccata sua, magni sunt qui numerant
s^dera. Et computant stellas et tempora et dicunt quis quando. Vel peccet vel
b^ne vivat et quando Mars facit homicidium et Venus adulterium magni Docti viri
videntur in hoc saculo sed quid ait Psalm. Ne declines cor etc. Austin in Psalm
31.

Omne Corporale signum vel est effectus ejus cujus est signu^ sicut fumus
significat ignem a quo c usatur vel est, cum non potest autem dici quod
dispositiones Caelestium Corporum et motus sint effectus futurorum et ventuum,
nec possunt reduci in aliquam super^orem rem communem quo sit corporalis etc.
Aquin. 22. Quest. 95. Art. 5.

Seductus enim ab inimico cum esset fidelis d u Mathematicus fuit, seductus,
seducens, deceptus, decipicus, illexit fefellit, multa mendacia locutus est,
contra Deum qui dedit hominibus potestatem faciendi quod bonum est et non
faciendi qu^d malum est, iste dicebat quod adulterium non faciebar propria
voluntas sed Venus justum non faciebat Deus sed Jovis et alia multa Sacrilega
non parva, quam multis eum putatis Christianis nummos abstulille (...) quam
multi ab eo emerunt mendaci^m etc Austin in Psalm. 71 post ^ract^tum cum
Mathematicus in populo monst^aretur.


For if these Astrologers can foretell future things, which depend on the Will
of man, and that by the Stars, then the Stars, and their Influence, must be the
cause thereof. For as Aquinas observes, If such a Constellation be a Sign of an
Event, then it must be the Effect of it, or the Cause of it; the Effect it
cannot be: And if the Influence of the Stars, be the Cause of al sinful
Actions, then God must be the cause of al sin, for he has made the Star, and
given it such an Influence. This does so clearly follow, that Austin (telling
the Story of a man's converting from this wicked Art) says, the man did confess
that whilst he practiced that Art, he with others held, that Adulterium non
faci^bat voluntas propria sed Venus; A man's own will was not the cause of
Adultery, but the S^ar Venus; a man's own will, was not the cause of Murder, but
the Star Mars. Thus, says h^, does this Art of Judicial Astrology, lay the Sin
of all the World upon God himself; and it must needs do so: for the Cause of the
causes, in things necessarily subordinate, must be the Cause of the caused: But
can our hearts bear the thoughts of such Blasphemies as these? or can we think
that a man can tell by the Stars, what shall come to pass hereafter, when the
Scripture says, Who can tell what a day will bring forth? And Eccles. 10.14. A
man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall be after him, who can tell?
Again, Chap. 8.7. For he knows not that which shall be; for who can tell him
when, or how it shall be? These Astrologers do indeed hit the matter sometimes,
and have foretold that which has come to pass, and where such a thing lost,
may be found again: But I Will tell you how; The Devil does assist them therein,
and as they erect their Scheam, he does suggest unto them, and leaves his
Impressions upon their hearts concerning the matter, it being easy for him to
make discovery of those things which pass through his own hands. Occulto
instinctu instinctu fieri Spiritu^m n^n bonorum Austin de civit. Dei, Lib. 5.
Cap 7

Sunt haec Astrorum indicia ex n^cti cum aemonibus et insti^ (...) ^^um (...)
i^si no, qu^m (...) m^ntes p^^in^t^^. Austin 2 Lib de Doctr. Christ ana.

E^ omne huju^modi art^s vel nugatori (...) vel noxi supe^stitionis ex q^adam
pesti^^ a socie tate hominum et daemonum. Ibid.

P ima caus^ ist^rum p^edictionam ^onn^nq^ m p^ovenit ex pacto et f^cie^^te
quam inivit Astrologus cum daemone vel ex occulto ejus inst^^u et instinctu
Pererius in G^^es Cap 1. v. 14. 15. Lib. 2. de Astrom^ntia.

C^lum est solum influens generale cujus ratio particula^izatur vel singular
zatur aut a D^o solo au^ a dispositione materiae, si autem objicitur quod
inveniuntu^ predicere multa vera respondetur, quod multo plura falsa et ideo
vera dicunt vel a casu, vel a multitudine to^um quo dicunt, vel ab observatione
eorum quae audiunt, aut fit ab mixtione operationis daemonum propter seducendos
tam predicentes quam fidem adhibentes in talibus, per damnabilem curiositatem
sciendi futura et ea quae pater solus habet in sua potestate.

Gerson pars prima Trilog. Astrolog Theolog. Prop. 11.


Now because they do not go prof^ss^ll to the Devil, they think that they have
n^t^^ng to do with ^h^ Devil; whereas the thing is wholly rom the Devil, and
not from the Stars: and i^ this Light then? or is the knowledge of this Mystery
to be called Light? No, it is darkness, and a work o^ darkness. But the Light
of the Sc^ipture i^ a pure Light, a clear Light, a Light without any darkness,
a Light which does come from God, and l^ad us unto God, not unto the Devil.
Surely therefore, this Light o^ S ripture, is the best Light, the most excellen
Ligh; more excellent than that of Revelations, and Unions; more excellent than
that of Dreams, and immediate Voices; more excellent than that of Impressions;
more excellent than that of the Law and Light within; more excellent than that
of Christian Experience, or that of Divine Providence, or that of Humane
Reason; more excellent than this pretended Light (but in truth darkness) of
Judicial Astrology. Surely therefore, it is the most excellent, safe, and sure
Light in the World. Shall we then forsake the Scripture, and cleave to pretended
Lights, and lying Vanities? No: but if the Scripture be the best Light, the
most safe, and sure Light, then it is the Duty of all the Saints to take heed
thereunto, and that especially in their dark Times and Seasons, which is the
Fourth General Thing propounded. And thus I have done with the Third General,
viz. That Scripture Light is the most safe, sure, and the best Light. The
Fourth follows.

SCRIPTURE LIGHT, The most Sure LIGHT.
Sermon III.
2 PET. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in your hearts.


AS Scripture Light, is the most excellent Light, the best, and most sure
Light, in compare with all other Lights, or whatever may pretend to Light; So it
is our Duty, the Duty of all the Saints, and People of God, The fourth General
Proposition
to take heed thereunto, and that especially in their dark times and places,
which is the Fourth thing propounded ^o your Consideration, and which does
necessarily fol^ow from the ^^ther For if the Scripture, or the written Word of
God, be our great, and most sure Light; then it is our Duty, the Duty of all the
Saints and People of God, to take heed thereunto especially in their dark times
and places. Yet further, ye shall do well that ye take heed thereunto, for the
Doctrine of the Gospel written, Is,

John 1. yet I do not find in all the New Testament, that he is called the Word
of God for the present; there is a time a coming when he shall be called King of
Kings, Lord of Lords, and the Word of God; but for the present he is called the
Word: And if the Doctrine preached, be not called the Word of God, why does our
Savior say, The Sower went forth to sow, and some ^ell in the high way, some on
stony ground, and some on thorny ground, and the Seed is the Word of God: Is
that Christ? what does Christ himself in person fall on the highway ground,
and stony ground? and is Christ divided? for the Seed is the Word of God, and
some of it fell on one ground, and some on another: does Christ himself fall
thus? No, but the Doctrine preached does, and therefore that is called the Word
of God: And if the Word written, be not called the Word of God, what does the
Apostle mean, when he says, Romans 9.6. Not as though the Word of God has taken
none effect? does he mean Christ thereby? No, but he speaks plainly the Word
of Promise, which is written in the Scriptures: Yea, the whole Scripture is so
full of this, that I need not turn to any particular place. The Scripture is
every where called the Word of God; and if the Word of God written, be the Word
of the Son, then we are to take heed thereunto; for says the Apostle, Heb. 2.
Therefore ought we to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have
heard; for if the Word spoken by Angels, were steadfast, how shall we escape if
we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the
Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? verse 1, 2, 3.

Scriptura est luserna pedibus, a qua non deflectendum. Ecclesiae sapientia,
cognitionis forma (...); cujus testimoniis omnia consumanda ex qua ^ri^ntur
demonst^ationes. Cui quae c^nsentiunt admittenda et quae non consentiunt
rejicienda. Ergo est vitae fidelque Regula.

Chami^rus, 1. Tom. de cano fidei Lib. 1. Cap. 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.


we are in special manner to take heed unto. But the Scripture, and the Word of
God written, is the only Rule of our Lives; for it is a Light unto our feet,
and a Lanthorn to our paths, Psalm. 119. It is the Wisdom of the Church, and
People of God, Deuteronomy. 4. It is that which we may not turn aside from, either to
the right hand, or to the left, Deuteronomy. 28. It is that whereby Doctrines are to
be rejected, or admitted, Acts, 17. It is that which nothing must be added to,
or taken from, Deuteronomy. 4. Rev. 22. It is that which we are all to have recourse
unto for Comfort and Direction, Es. 8. To the Law, and to the Testimony, if men
say not so, it is because there is no Light in them. Now if the Scripture, and
the Word of God written, be a Light unto our paths; the wisdom of the Church,
and People of God; if it be that whereby Doctrines are to be admitted, or
rejected; if that; from which we may not turn, either to the right, or to the
left; from which nothing may be taken, and to which nothing may be added; and
if it be that which we are to resort continually unto, for comfort and
direction; then it is the Rule, and only Rule of our Lives. But so it is, as al
these forementioned Scriptures do plainly prove; and therefore it is the Rule,
and the only Rule of our Lives.

Omne quod extra Dei verbum est, est Idolatria, omne quod fit in verbo est
verus cultus sicut omne quod fit sine fide est peccatum et omne quod fit in
fide est bonum opus: quod inter verbum et fidem est conjugium indissolubile.
Luther.
It Is the Rule and Measure of your Worship; for if you do not worship according
to the Appointments of God in his written Word, your Worship is but Idolatry
and Superstition: Superstitio est quicquid est supra Statutum. It Is the great
relief of your Souls in time of Temptation. Hereby Christ answered to all his
Temptations: It is written, and again it is written, and again it is written, and
Christ's Practice must be your Rule. It Is that which Sanctifies al your outward
Comforts, even amongst the Creatures; for says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.4. Every
Creature of God is good, if it be received with thanksgiving; Anima omnibus
rebus carere potest excepto verbo Dei, ego quidem sine verbo ne in Paradiso
optarim vivere at cum verbo etiam in Inferno facile est vivere.

Est verbum talis thesaurus qui tractando crescit et distribuendo servando
autem petir. Luther

Scriptura est Communis animarum officina. Basil.

Omnipotentis Epistola ad homines missa. Gregor.

(...) nutrimentum et cibus animae. Athanas.


for it is sanctified by the Word, and Prayer. I profess (says Luther) I
cannot live without the written Word of God; I can want any thing but the
Scripture, or the written Word of God: If I were in Hell, I could live with a
Promise; and though I were in Paradise, yet if I had not the Word with me, I
could not live there. O! says he, the Word is so great and deep a Treasure,
that it does increase by distributing; yea, it is even Genus generalissimum
omnium bonorum; that general good thing under God and Christ, that has
Influence into al good things. And shall the Word of God written, be such a
blessed Treasure, and shall we not take heed thereunto?

Revel. 20.12. And I saw the dead, both small and great, stand before God, and
the Books were opened, and another Book was opened. It seems then, that three
Books shall be opened at the great Day; one Book is the Book of Life; two other
there are, the Book of Gods Records; for a Book of Remembrance is written upon
all our Actions, Mal. 3. and the Book of the Scripture, or the Word of God; for
says our Savior, John, 12.48. The Word that I have spoken, the same shall judge
him in the last day. Now this Word that Christ has spoken, is written, and
therefore men shall be judged thereby: but if the Scripture, and the Word of God
written, be that Book whereby men shall be judged at the last; then surely it is
our Duty in special manner to take heed thereunto.

Heb. 2. If the Word spoken by Angels, was steadfast, and every transgression,
and disobedience, received a just recompense of reward; how shall we escape, if
we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by his
Son? What then? Therefore we ought to give the more heed to the things we have
heard, lest we let them slip; Why? For if we be unstedfast, yet the Word of God
is steadfast: The Word that God spoke by Moses, was steadfast, and established
upon them that disobeyed. So now, much more, says he, if you be not steadfast,
and established by the Word, it shall be established upon you, unto your
Destruction: O! what infinite reason is there then, that we should take heed
thereunto?

But the Text says, That we shall do well to take heed thereunto, til the day
dawn, and Day Star arise in our hearts: but the day has dawned on me, and the
day star has arisen in my heart; and therefore now, what need I take heed to
the Scripture, or the written Word any longer?

therefore would have the words to be read thus: Till the day star arise on
your hearts; and so think they are spoken of the Day of Judgment, concerning
which time, Paul says, 1 Cor. 4, 5. That Christ will bring to light, the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the Counsels of the heart.
(...) emphatice solet sumi pro (...) etiam donec et continuitatem significare
seu consecutionem non exceptionem vel exclusionem futuri temporis. Genebrad. in
Psalm. 109.
But as ye have heard in the Explication of the Text, the word Until, in
Scripture Phrase, is not always taken exclusively: for Example; David says,
Ps. 57.1. My soul trusts in thee, O God, and in the shadow of thy wings will
I trust, till this Calamity be over-past. What would David trust in God no
longer? Yes: but he would do it especially whilst that Calamity continued. So
Psalm. 123. he says, Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, till he have mercy
upon us: What would they wait on God no longer? Yes: but in their distress
especially. So Cant. 2.16, 17. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine, he
feeds among the Lillies, until the day break: What does Christ feed among the
Lillies no longer? will he not feed among the Lillies after the day break? Yes:
But the word Till, or Until, is not always to be taken exclusively. And I Will
give you but one Scripture for it, amongst many in the New Testament, Matthew.
12.20. A bruised Reed will he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not
quench, until he bring forth Judgment unto Victory: What will Christ break the
bruised Reed then? and quench the smoking Flax after he has brought Judgment
to Victory? No: but the word Until, in Scripture Phrase, is not always to be
taken exclusively. And so here in this Text, Ye do well, that ye take heed to
the word of Prophecy, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts: Hac enim particula (...) donec Scriptura atque adeo Lingua Hebraica
affirmat quod in dubitationem possit incidere. Genebrad. Ibid.
not, that then you should cease taking heed to the Word, but because you are
now in the dark; now, and now especially, ye are to take heed thereunto.

But why are the Saints, and People of God to take heed unto the Scripture, and
the written Word of God, especially in their dark times and seasons?

this great, and most sure Light; yea, though he be in the darkness of some
Error (for the greatest Errors lie nearest to the sweetest Truths) and though
he do not see that Truth for the present; yet if he do take heed unto the Word,
the sweetness of that Truth shall ouse through the Error, and preserve and keep
me from the Power of it. But if ye look into 2 Timothy 3. ye shall find the Apostle
does inform Timothy of very sad and dark times, that shall be in the latter
days, verse 1. In the last days, perilous times shall come. 1. He tells him
wherein the peril of these times shall consist. 2. He tells him the signs
thereof. 3. He comforts him under it. 4. He shows how he, and we may be kept
from the power of that darkness: In the last days, perilous times shall come;
for says he, Men shall be Lovers of themselves, covetous, Boasters, proud,
Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy, without Natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, having a form of Godliness, etc. ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. It seems
then that men may be thus wicked, yet may bear up to a form of Godliness. 2. He
tells Timothy the sign of these perilous times, and who these persons are, Such
as creep into Houses, and lead captive, silly women laden with diverse lusts,
verse 6. Who also shall resist the Truth in the Ministry, as Jannes and Jambres
withstood Moses, ver. 8. 3. He comforts him against the evil of these dark
Times, verse 9. But they shall proceed no further; for their folly, or madness,
shall be manifest to all men. 4. He directs him, and us by him, how to stand,
and hold fast, ver. 14. and that is two ways: First, by avoiding, and turning
away from these corrupt men, verse 5. From such turn away, speak not to them,
or with them; go not to them, but turn away from them. Secondly, By taking heed
to the Word of God preached and written, verse 14. But continue thou in the
things that thou have learned, and have been assured of, knowing of whom thou
have learned them, and that from a child thou have known the holy Scriptures,
which are able to make thee wise to Salvation. So that here the Apostle does
refer him, both to the Word preached and written; as if he should say, the only
way to be kept from seducers (verse 13. men of corrupt minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith) is to take heed unto the Scripture. And indeed, what is
the reason that so many in these days of ours are deceived, but because they
do not take heed unto this great, and most sure Light? This is that great, and
most excellent Light, which we are to take heed unto at al times, but
especially in our dark times, and places, and thus we shall be preserved.

But if this be such a preservative against the power of darkness, why then are
so many men in the dark? who does not run to Scripture? What Heretic is there,
or ever was, who did not plead, and lay claim to Scripture?

Theodoret observes of the Heretics in his time) will make use of those
Scriptures which seem to make for them; (...). Si videant petitis e Scripturae
demonstrationibus stultitiam suam constringi, tum Scripturae recusant et scopum
et usum; si quando vero putant sibi favere nudum aliquod effatum a genuina
recisum orationis serie ad suum propositum accommodant suis confirmandis.
Tecod. opus. contra varias Hereses quae sunt in 2. Tom. oper. Athanas.
but as for those Scriptures which are plainly against them, they reject, and
if close pressed, will deny the very Body of the Scripture as any Rule to them.

But it is one thing to cite Scripture, and another thing to take heed
thereunto. The Devil cited Scripture to our Savior Christ, but he did not take
heed unto it, as to his Rule of life. If we take heed thereto, then we shall be
kept, and preserved by it, even from the power of that darkness which we may
labor under. And thus now I have done with the Fourth General Thing propounded,
and have cleared the Doctrine.

Mary's time, did bless God for the English Translation; and how could that be
without Humane Learning? Then let us bless God for it, and not despise it.

viz. That Scripture Light is so great a Light, which al are to take heed unto;
then what a sad condition are those in, who do deny, and forsake the Scripture?
they are in the dark indeed. I confess a good man may be tempted, as to other
sins, so to this, To doubt of the Truth of the Scripture: But do I hear a man
that has been a Professor? one that has known God, and his Ways? one that is
under no Temptation? Do I hear such an one denying the Scripture, as any Rule
to him? Write that man Childless, write him Faithless, without Christ, and
without God in this World. Ah! poor soul, here is one whose Foundations are
plucked up, twice dead, plucked up by the roots. O! the sad condition of this
poor Creature, he has forsaken the Light, and now is under the power of
darkness: Whither should he go? for he has left the words of Eternal life; yet
Lord, how many have these times brought forth, that are come to this height of
wickedness? But beloved, I do not only hope, but am assured better things of
you: only hear the word of Exhortation, and that is,



What must we do, that we may take heed, and attend unto Scripture?





(...) etc. (...) in lego sine Scripturis non est litera a qua non pendent
magni montes Doctrinarum. Rabbim.
though the Letter of the Scripture alone, do not make up the Word; yet the
Letter, and sense together, do: and if ye destroy the Body, ye destroy the Man;
so if ye destroy the Letter of the Scripture, you do destroy the Scripture; and
if you deny the Letter, how is it possible that you should attain to the true
sense thereof, when the Sense lies wrapped up in the Letters, and the words
thereof?

But if I attend to the Letter in my Practice, then I shall be a Professor of
the Letter: and if a Preacher do attend to the Letter, then he shall be a
Minister of the Letter.

We are not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit, his meaning plainly
there is, not of the Law, but of the Gospel: for in that 2 Cor. 3. he calls the
Ministration of the Law, the Letter; and the whole Ministration of the Gospel,
the Spirit: Those therefore that preach, or walk according to the Ministration
of the Law, are Ministers, and Professors of the Letter: those that preach, or
walk according to the Ministration of the Gospel, are Ministers, and Professors
of the Spirit: And therefore those that depart from, and despise the
Ministration of the Gospel, do depart from, and do despite to the Spirit: It Is
one thing for a man to keep the Letter of the Scripture, so as not to deny the
same; another thing to keep to the Letter, only for the meaning of it: It Is one
thing to preach from the Letter; another thing to preach the Letter. Our Lord
and Savior Christ, when he expounded that Esai. 61. (as ye read Luke, 4.) did
not preach the Letter, yet he preached from the Letter. So now, we may preach
from the Letter of the Scripture, yet not preach the Letter, or be Ministers of
the Letter; and you may practice the Word from the Letter of the Scripture, and
yet not be Professors of the Letter, that is, of the Law, and the Ministration
of it.

How can we hold, and keep fast, the Letter of the Scripture, when there are so
many Greek Copies of the New Testament? and those diverse one from another?



Ezra stood up before the People in a Pulpit, and gave the sense of the
Scripture. Christ himself is said to expound: and 2 Pet. 1.20. No Scripture is
of any private Interpretation: The word (...), signifies, Exposition; it is the
same word that is used in Luke, 4. Christ stood up, and expounded. Now says
the Apostle, No Scripture is of any private Exposition; therefore it may be
expounded; and if not, why were Gifts given to men by the Ascension of Christ?
It Is a very dangerous thing to bear false witness against the Truth of Christ.
Now if a man do not take heed unto the true sense and meaning of the Scripture,
but will rigidly adhere to the Letter of the Scripture, he may quickly bear
false witness against the Truth. Mark, 14.56. it is said, that many did bear
false witness against Christ, but their witness agreed not together: But how
did they bear false witness? They testified that Christ said, I can destroy the
Temple of God, and build it again in three days, which our Savior Christ spoke
of his Body; they applied to the Temple of the Jews, and so they are said to
b^^r ^al e witness; Why? because they kept to his words only, and not to his
sense and meaning: So that we had need take heed how we report the words of
Christ; though we do adhere to his words, yet if we keep not to his meaning, we
shall be found false witnesses against him and his Truth. Search the Scriptures,
says our Savior; why search? even because the sense and meaning does lie deep.
And therefore it is not enough for us that we do adhere to the words, but we
must diligently enquire into the true sense, and the meaning of them.

But one Scripture has many Senses; a Literal Sense, and a Spiritual Sense; a
Literal Sense, and a Mystical: How shall we be able then, to find out the true
Sense, and the Meaning of it?

Excipiendus est Michael Medina.
That there is but one entire Sense of a Scripture, though diverse applications
of it. As for Example: The Old Testament says, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth
of the Ox, which the Apostle applies to the maintenance of the Ministers. The
Sense is but one in diverse parts, thus; as the mouth of the Ox is not to be
muzzled, so Ministry is to be maintained. There is but one whole sense of a
Scripture, though diverse parts and applications of it.

Apostle; If thy Brother offend thee, heap coals of fire upon his head. that is
not to be taken Literally, but Metaphorically. So when our Savior says, If
thine eye, or hand, or foot offend thee, pull it out, and cut it off; this is
not to be understood Literally, but Metaphorically.



Thou shall have no other god but me; and Thou shall love they Neighbor as thy
self; Faith in Christ, and love to our Neighbor: all the Fundamental Doctrines
of our Salvation, are laid down plainly, and literally.

This is my Body, in the Lords Supper; if these words be taken literally, it is
against common sen^e and reason; therefore you must bawk the literal sense, and
understand them otherwise. Again, the Lord commanded the Prophet to go naked;
if this be understood literally, it would be against common modesty. So when
our Savior says, If thine eye offend thee, pull it out; if thine hand offend
thee, cut it off: If this be understood Literally, it would fight with that
Commandment, Thou shall not kill: therefore the Literal sense is sometimes to
be bawked.

In interpretatione Scripturae sacrae illud apprime observandum est ne ulla vis
inferatur literali. August. de quivos. Disput. de sensu Scripturae.

Verborum sacrae Scripturae Germana intelligentia imprimis quaerenda et
instituenda, non quod tropo-logicam intelligentia^ condemnemus sed quod
spiritualis interpretatio sequi debet ordinem historiae, quod plerique
ignorantes, lymphati co in sacra Scriptura vagantur errore.

Hieronyn. in cap. 13. Es.


yet if the words be applied mystically, ye are not to make a force upon the
History; Mystery does not destroy the History. The History of the two women,
Hagar and Sarah, is by the Apostle applied to the two Testaments; yet this does
not destroy the History: For as words are the Substractum of the History; so
History is the Substractum of the Mystery. Some when they have attained to the
Mystical application, do deny the History; but remember, that though the words
of the Scripture be applied mystically, yet the Mystery is never to destroy the
History.

is nothing Mystical in one Scripture, Q^is autem non impudentissime nitatur
aliquid quod in Allegoria positum est, per se interpretari nisi et manifesta
habeat Testimonia quorum lumine illustrentur obscura. Austin. Epist 48. ad
Vincent. Donat.

Si animus est allegori^m t^^ere vide inprimis, ut interpretationis ejus quam
meditatis sententia a^ibi in Scripturis clare et absque tropo expresso
inveniatur atque detracto velamine analogiae fidei respondeat. Flac. Illyric.
pars altera Tract. 1. de ra^ione cognoscendi Scripturas Observe. 2*


but is Literally set down in another Scripture; let any man show me any Truth
set down Mystically in one place, but I will show it literally expressed in
another. Some would have all the Scripture to be understood mystically: But does
any man tell you this and that Scripture is not literally, but mystically to be
understood? then let him show you where the same Truth is set down literally in
another place, else you may not believe him: and if you walk by this Rule, and
Rules, you shall walk safely here, and in some good measure be helped to the
true sense and meanng of the Scripture in this case.

Obj. But suppose that a Scripture lie under Controversy: One lays claim to
it for his Opinion, and another lays claim to it for his Opinion, how shall I
be able to understand the true sense and meaning of it? Or suppose I be in the
dark, in a dark estate and condition, how shall I so take heed unto the
Scripture, that I may know, and understand the same?



Dod, once answered to a young man, enquiring of him what was the best
Commentary upon the Scripture, The Original, the Hebrew, and the Greek Text,
said he, is the best Commentary: So say I, the very Text in the Original does
con^^i^es put an end to the Controversy. As for Example: the Apostle says of
Women, They shall be saved by Childbearing; which some Books read thus; They
shall be saved by bearing of Children: whereupon a Controversy arises, whether
those following words, if they continue in the Faith, do relate to Children, or
to Women; whereas if men looked into the Original, they should find that the
word is but one in the singular, according to our Translation, (...) etc. ^er
filiorum g^^^ratio^ (...).

^.


they shall be saved by Childbearing, and therefore the following words must
relate unto Women: Therefore it is good to consult with the Original; and
though you cannot understand Hebrew, or Greek, yet you may consult with the
Original, and not pin your Faith upon another Learning: for i^ you ask three
or four, how such or such a verse should be ^^anslated, and they do al agree in
their Translation for the substance, you know that so it is in the Original,
not because such a man does say so, but because of their agreement, which could
not be, if it were not so in ^^^th.

Nulla est Objectio in lege, quae non habet solutionem in latere.

Turpe est de lege judicate tota lege^ ^^dum nspecta.

Q^is, s^^pus, imp^^lens, seeds, tempusque, locusque.

Et (...) haec septem Scriptu^^e attend^^^ Lector.

V^^ Exp icat in Gl^ss. Philog S^cr. Lib. 2. P. 2. de Scriptu^^^ sen^u emendo
page 503.


There is no Objection can arise upon t e Text, but there is an Answer in the
sides thereon: For example; the Papists urge that place o^ James, 2. for
justification by Works; whereas if we look diligently i^to the Coherence, and
the scope ther^of, we shall find that the Apostle ^peaks of the work of Faith in
oppo^ition to the Profession of Faith; for says he, ver. 14. W^^t will it
profit, my brethren* if a man say, he have fai h, and have (...)? will it save
him? If a brother or sister be naked, and in want, verse 15. and one of you
say, depart in peace, and be warmed and filled; if you give him not what is
good for the Body, what does it profit? Even so faith, if it have not works, is
dead. A man may say, he has Faith; but the Devils say, and believe there is
one God: Was not Abraham justified by Works when he offered Isaac? that Faith
that justified Abraham, was not a bare profession of Faith, but 'twas a working
Faith; the profession of Faith alone does not justify, but it is a Faith which
consists in a Work, it is a working Faith: this is the scope of the place then,
as appears by the Coherence. If a Scripture therefore, do lie under
Cont^^versie, take you the Bible, and look well unto the Scope, and the
Coherence of the Text controverted.

No Scripture is of private Interpretation; or rather thus, No Scripture is of
our own Exposition, (...): But holy men of God wrote it as they were inspired
by the Holy Ghost: Is the Scripture therefore doubtful in one place? then
compare it with another: stand not upon your own apprehen^ion; for it is not of
our own Exposition: it came not by the will of man, but diverse holy m^n wrote
it, as they were inspired with the Holy Ghost: And t^e^efore if one place be
doubtful, it is to be compared with another.

Romans 12. Or if any man prophecy, let it be according to the proportion, or
analogy of Faith: And what is that, but the Sum and Grounds of Religion? or the
Body of Divinity, which is delivered to us in the form of sound words,
whereunto we are delivered. Thus in case the Scripture li^ under any
Controversy, it will be good for you to observe these Rul^s.



Quo spiritu Scripturae factae sunt eo spiritu legendae, nunquam ingredieris in
sensum Pauli, nisi spiritum Pauli imbiberis.

Omnia dona a Deo Patre luminum.

Christi munus est aperire Scripturas, Luc. 24. Spiritus sanctus author simul
et Explicator Scripturae. John 16.


No man knows the Mind of Paul, but by the Spirit of Paul; nor the Mind of
Peter, but by the Spirit of Peter; no man knows the Mind of Christ, but by the
Spirit of Christ: stand therefore under Gospel Dispensations, where the Spirit
breaths. So says the Apostle, Received ye the Spirit by the Law, or by the
hea^ing of Faith? And seeing God has promised to give this Spirit unto them
that ask it, go unto God for the same.

Perfectio intellectualis operationis in homine consistit in quadam
abstractione a sensibilium phantasmatibus, et ideo quando intellectus hominis
magis fuerit liber ab Eujusmodi phantasmat. tanto potius considerare
intelligibilia poterit. Ergo.

Hebitudo sensus circa intelligentiam oritur ex gula caecitas menti^^ex
luxuria. Aquin. 22. Q. 15. A. 3.

Cum non faciunt quae intelligunt, non intelligent quae faciunt.


and a worldly mind cannot savor them. Ye see how it is in the Eclipse of the
Moon, when the Earth comes between the Sun and the Moon, then the Moon is
eclipsed, because the Earth keeps the light of the Sun from it. So if the
Earth, and the World come between you, and the Truth, there will be an eclipse,
and darkness upon al your Soul: Then shall ye know (says our Savior) of my
Doctrine, whether it be of God, if ye do what I command you. Those that will not
do what they know, shall not know what to do.

Conditio d^^ Intellectum.
study those Scriptures that do concern such Temptation; if you be in an
Affliction, study those Scriptures that do concern such Afflictions; if you be
in a Desertion, study those Scrip^ures which do concern such Desertions: and
whatever your Condition be, study those Scriptures which do concern your
Condition, and this will help you to understand the Scriptures.

Optimus Scripturae interpres hic est, qui sensum e Scriptura potins retulerit,
quam attulerit. Hilar.
Disposition, or Opinion. It Is a good speech of Hilary; He is the best
Interpreter of Scripture, that does rather bring his Sense from the Scripture,
than carry his Sense to the Scripture. We are very apt to interpret Scripture
according to our own opinion, or disposition. Interpretation ordinarily follows
disposition, or opinion: As when there was a great Controversy in the Popish
Church, betwixt the two Liturgies of Ambrose and Gregory; by common consent of
both Parties, it was agreed, that both the Mass Books should be laid on the
Altar, expecting the decision of the matter by Revelation: and the doors being
opened the next morning, Gregory's Mass Book was rent and torn in many pieces,
and scattered abroad in the place; but Ambroses lay whole, and open upon the
Altar, which some thought signified thus much; That Gregory's Mass Book should
be cancelled; others, as the Pope himself said, nay, but this renting and
scattering of the Leaves, signified the dispersing of it over all the Christian
World. Thus men interpret things, according to their own Dispositions and
Opinions, even when they come to Scripture also. Would you therefore see
clearly into the mind of God in the Scripture? then, as when you come to Christ
for Righteousness, ye come with naked shoulders; so when you come to the Truth
of Christ, take heed of your own Disposition, and Opinion: you must come to
Christ as a Prophet, as well as to Christ as a Priest, with naked shoulders.



for though the Meat be never so good, yet if the Stomach throw it up
presently, and do not keep it, it does the man no good. So in regard of the
Scripture: therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 2.1. We ought to take the more
earnest heed unto the things that we have heard, lest at any time we should let
them slip, or run out: We must keep what we have, we must keep what we know,
else we do not take heed to the Word.

Now that you may keep, and not forsake the Word,



Moses, when he saw two men fighting, one an Egyptian, and another an
Israelite, he killed the Egyptian; but when he saw two Hebrews fighting, now
says he, will I go and ^^concile them, for they are Brethren; why so, but
because he was a good man, and gracious? So also it is with a gracious hea t;
when he sees the Scripture fighting with an Egyptian, an Heathen Author, or
Apocryphal, he comes and kills ^he Heathen, he kills the Egyptian, or the
Apocripha: but when he sees two Scriptures at varyance (in view, though in
truth not) O says he, these are Brethren, and they may be reconciled, I Will
labor al I can to reconcile them: but when a man shall take every advantage of
^eeming difference in Scripture, to say, Do ye see what Contradictions there
are in this Bo^k, and not labor to reconcile them; what does this argue, but
that the corruption of a ma^s Nature, is boiled up to an unknown malice against
the Word of the Lord: take heed therefore of that.

Donatistae jactantes veram Ecclesi^m penes se solos esse qui habitabant
regionem meridionalem ad id confirmandum adducebant illud Canticorum, 1. v. 6.
Judica mihi (quem diligit anima mea) ubi pasc^s, ubi cubes in Meridi^ ne vaga^i
incipi^m post greges sodalium tuorum; si ^ta (inquit Aug. Epist. 48.)
exponendam putatis sacram Scripturam Aquilonares profecto Ecclesiae dicent se
solas (...) veras, adducent enim per se illud Ps. 47.3. Exult^ mons Sion
laetera Aquilonis civitas Regis magni, Deus in domibus ejus cognoscitur cum
su^cipiet eam, ergo in expositione Sacrarum Scripturarum ante omnia inveniendus
est sensus literalis eo namque constituto facilis ad mysticos sensus patebit
aditus clypeus Concionat. Verbi Dei per Ferdinand de Escalante Lib. 1. Cap. 17.
does arise from corrupt Principles, which have been bred up in the minds of
men, as sometimes men think that the Light and Law within them, is their Rule;
and therefore what need the Scripture as my Rule any longer? Sometimes men think
that all Scripture is to be expounded mystically, and so, first they make a
Nose of Wax of it; and then they cast it away. Sometimes men think that they are
to judge of Doctrines by Impressions, Visions, Voices, and Dreams, and so they
cast away the Scripture. Would ye therefore take heed unto the Word so as to
keep the same: Take heed of this ill Principle.

Luther has, Will any man play? let him play with his Wife, play with his
Children, play with his Money; but let him take heed how he plays with the
Scripture, by turning al into Mysticalness; for who is it that dares play with
the Thunder? Why? (says he) for it is the Voice of God: So is the Scripture,
it is the Voice of God. Would ye therefore, so take heed unto it, as to keep
it, and not deny the same? Then take heed of that corruption of Nature which
does boil up to malice; take heed of evil Principles about the Rule of your
life; and take heed of playing with the Scripture, and of living upon the
confines of that great sin of denying it, lest God in just Judgment, give you
up at last to the gross evil of it.





Timothy, 2 Epist. 4.3. That the times should come, wherein men will not endure
sound Doctrine, but after their own wills, shall heap up to themselves,
Teachers, having itching Ears, such as shall not be contented with the settled
Ministry of Gods Appointment, but shall after their own wills, heap up Teachers
to themselves; and this they shall do from the itch of the Ear: Well, but what
shall this itch in the Ear bring forth? verse 4. They shall turn away their Ears
from the Truth, and shall be turned unto F ables. Now therefore, that you may
keep, and hold fast the Word in the particular Doctrines, O! then take heed of
this itching Ear.



Mary's days, prized the written Word of God much: one gave a Cart-load of Hay
for one Leaf of the Bible in English: another being at Sea, and swimming for
his life on a Mast, and having al his Estate (which was five pound) in one
hand, and the Bible in the other, and being compelled to part with one, chose
rather for to keep the Bible, and throw away his five pound, all that he had.
These then did prize the written Word of God, and they did walk thereby.



forth, as in these days of ours? Surely therefore, these are dark times; and
if so, what cause have we al, to take heed unto the Word, which is as a Light
shining in a dark place. What I therefore say to one, I say to you al, and to my
own Soul; O! let us al take heed thereunto. And if any think, that he is not at
al in the dark, he is therefore in the dark, because he thinks he is not in the
dark: If any think these things concern not him, they do therefore the more
concern him than others, because he thinks they concern him not. Think
therefore on al these things, and the Lord give you a clear understanding in all
things.

CHRIST IN TRAVEL.

Wherein is showed, I. The Travel of Christ, or Christ in Travel. II. His
Assurance of Issue. III. The Contentment that he does, and shall find therein.


By William Bridge, Preacher of the Gospel at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

CHRIST IN TRAVEL.
Sermon I.
ISAIAH, 53.11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied.


IN this Chapter, we have a full Treatise of the Sufferings of Christ, wherein
the Prophet Isaiah speaks with such cleerness, as if he rather were an Apostle
after Christ, than a Prophet before him. Bernard tells us that there are three
things, which we are especially to mind, and behold in the Sufferings of
Christ, the Work, the Manner, and the Cause thereof: In the Cause, he was
Innocent; in the Manner, Patient; and in the Work, excellent, says he. But the
Prophet Isaiah, does insist on four things: 1. The greatness of Christ's
Sufferings, which he expresses in many Words, That he was despised, and
rejected of men, a man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Griefs; that we hid our
Faces from him, despised, and esteemed him not, ver. 3. that he was st^icken,
smitten, and afflicted of God, ver. 4. Wounded, and bruised, ver. 5. Oppressed,
afflicted, and brought as a Sheep to the slaughter, ver. 7. Imprisoned, and cut
off from the Land of the Living, ver. 8. bruised by his Father, and put to
grief, ver. 10. In travel of Soul, and numbered amongst Transgressors, ver. 11,
12* 2. The Cause of his Sufferings, which (a^ the Prophet (...)) ^a^ for our
sins; he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities,
verse ^. 3. The Manner of his Sufferings; He is brought a^ a Lamb to the
slaughter; and as a Sheep before the Shearers is dumb, so opened he not his
mouth, verse 7. 4. The Fruit, Issue, and Success of his Sufferings; For, he
shall see his Seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand,
verse 10. And he shall see the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied, verse 11.
So that these words do plainly hold forth the fruit and issue of our Lords
Sufferings, and the certainty thereof. The Sufferings were great; for they are
here called, a Travel, and the Travel of his Soul: the word (...), signifies a
toylsom, painful, and wearisom Labor; such a Labor (say some) as is used by
those that grind in a Mil; Mercerus.
such a Labor (say others) as Adam was to use in the sweat of his Brows, after
the Fall, Avenarius.
as a Curse of sin, unto which the Holy Ghost does here relate, because our
Savior in these Sufferings, was made a Curse for us; Forerius, Es. 53.
such a Labor, say others, so great, so painful, as women do endure in their
sore Travel, English Annotations.
and indeed the word signifies as much, and so it is used in Psalm. 7.14, Behold
he travelleth with iniquity, and has conceived mischief, alluding to the pains
of a Woman in Travel; and so it may be well translated in this place: for the
word Soul, is a Feminine term, as if the Holy Ghost, would decipher the
Sufferings of Christ, by the pangs of a Woman in Travel. Now this Travel is
also said to be the Travel of his Soul, not only because it was a great and
sore Travel, but because it did extend to his Soul. The word Soul, is indeed
sometimes used for ones Life, and sometimes for the Person of a Man: But then it
does not exclude the Soul, but include it rather. So here, he shall see the
travel of his Soul, that is, that travel which is not only in his Body, but his
Soul too. This he is promised to see; He shall see the Travel, that is, the
Fruit thereof: So Psalm. 128.2. Thou shall eat the Labor of thine hands, that
is, the Fruit of thy Labor, what thine hand has labored for* seeing does note
enjoyment, and the enjoyment of the thing desired: So Psalm. 54.7. Mine Eye has
seen its desire upon mine Enemy: the word Desire, is not in the Hebrew, but the
Original runs thus: Mine Eye has seen upon mine Enemies* We ad Desires,
because that is the Sense thereof: for Seeing, notes enjoyment of ones desires;
and therefore, in that the Prophet says, he shall see the Travel of his Soul,
and be satisfied; the meaning is, That Christ shall so enjoy the issue, and
fruit of his Sufferings, as he shall have full content and delight therein. And
so the Doctrine from the whole, is this:

He did not lay down his Life at a venture, nor suffer so many things at
uncertainties; but he had assurance of success: He shall see (says the Lord by
way of Promise, both to him and us) the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied.

For the opening, and clearing hereof, three great Arguments will fall under our
Consideration.

1. The Travel of Christ, or Christ in Travel. 2. His Assurance of Issue. 3.
The Contentment that he does, and shall find therein.
the Travel of Christ. His Sufferings were very painful, a Travel, and an hard
Labor. Acts, 2.24. it is said, that he was sometimes in the pains of Death: some
Books read it, in the pains of Hell; but the word rendered Pains, signifies the
Pains and Pangs of a Woman in Travel. Haec vox (...) et partum significat et
dolorem parturientem. Vict. Strigil. Perk. Gal. 4.
It is the same word that is used by Paul, Gal. 4. My little Children, with
whom I travel in Birth: and it signifies, not only the Travel of the Woman at
the Birth of the Child, but the painful bearing thereof before the Birth: these
Pains and Pangs did as it were fall on Christ in his Sufferings. So that in all
the Sufferings of Christ, ye may see Christ in Travel. He was in Travel for us,
and this Travel was an hard Labor. For

It was A sore Travel. A long, and a tedious Travel. And An helpless Travel.


Sore Travel, both in regard of his Soul, and Body.



Universal; for he suffered from al hands: Something he suffered from the Jews,
and something from the Gentiles: sometimes from Men, and sometimes from Women;
from, and by the hand of Magistrates, Kings, and Princes; from, and by the hand
of Priests; from, and by the hand of the Common People, and the Soldiers: Why
do the Heathen rage, and People imagine a vain thing? the Kings of the Earth
stood up, and the Rulers took Counsel against the Lord, and against his Christ,
Acts, 4.25, 26. He did not only suffer by the hand of strangers, but from his
own Friends and Familiars; according to that of the Psalmist, Thou have put
mine Acquaintance far from me: He that eats Bread with me, has lift up his
Heel against me, Psalm. 41.9. John, 13.18. Amongst his own Disciples, one
be^^aid him, another denied him, and they al forsook him. Thus were his
Sufferings great, and universal, in regard of the Persons by whom, and from
whom he suffered. Universal also they were (as Aquinas observes) in regard of
the things which he suffered: Will ye instance in his Goods? he is bereaved of
his Clothes, and they cast lots for his Garment. Will ye instance in his Name,
and Honor? he is crucified, the Death of the Cross was a shameful Death;
therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 12. He endured the Cross, and despised the
shame: Yea, he was not only crucified, but as matter of further shame, he was
crucified between two Thieves; and as if all this were not enough, they
reproached and jeered him; yea, and he was reproached by all, by Jews, Soldiers,
and the Thief on the Cross; the Jews spit in his Face, before he came to the
Cross, as if Christ's Face were the fowlest place for their Spit; and when he
was on the Cross, they jeeringly put a Reed into his hand, and said, Hail
Master, King of the Jews, with an Inscription on the Cross, This is the King of
the Jews. Or will ye instance in his Comforts? He was troubled, says the
Gospel, began to be afraid, and his Soul was heavy unto death. Thus were his
Sufferings great, and Universal in regard of the thing suffered: Universal also
they were in regard of the Parts, and Members of his Body, wherein he suffered:
For what Part was there, or Member of his precious Body, which suffered not?
his Hands pierced with Nails, and his Feet also; his Back whipped and scourged;
his Side run through with a Spear; and on his Head was a Crown of Thorns. Al
his Senses suffered also, and that at the same time; for in regard of his
Feeling, he was whipped, pierced, and wounded; in regard of his Taste, they gave
him Vinegar and Gal to drink; in regard of his Smell, they crucified him in a
filthy place, the place of dead men's Skuls, Golgotha; in regard of his Hearing,
he was wearied with the Blasphemies, and Derisions of the wicked; Aquin. sum.
par. 3. Q. 46. Art. 5.
and in regard of his Sight, he saw his Mother, and his Disciple whom he loved,
weeping. Thus were his Sufferings Universal, both in regard of the things that
he suffered, in regard of Persons from whom he suffered, and in regard of his
own Parts and Members, wherein he suffered: Surely therefore, his Suffering was
very great, it was Universal.

Dolor passionis Chrrsti fuit major omnibus doloribus. Aquin. part. 3. art. 6.
how could it be otherwise; for the more excellent, and worthy the Person is,
that does suffer vile things from those that are vile, the more afflictive is
his Affliction to him. Now Christ suffered vile things from the vile, and he
was the most excellent Person in the World, the Lord of Life, and of Glory, who
thought it no robbery to be equal with God. And the more healthful that any man
is, the more afflictive is his death to him: Sickness does sometimes benumb a
man, and takes away the sense of his sickness: but Christ suffered a painful,
cruel death in his full strength, and health, being more free from Sicknesses,
and Diseases, than any man: yea, the more sensitive the parts are, wherein a
man suffers, Optime complexionatus erat cum corpus ejus fuit formatum
miracuiose, operatione spiritus sancti. Aquin. ibid.
the more extreme is his pain: Now those that were crucified, were nailed to
the Cross by their Hands and Feet; which parts and places, are the quickest,
and fullest of sense, because there is a meeting of all the Ligaments and
Sinews; and to be racked in those parts where our sense dwells, what extreme
torment is it? Those that were crucified (though they had something to stay
their Feet) did hang by their hands: now to have the whole weight of ones Body
hanging thus on our pierced hands, and so to die by degrees, what extreme
torment must it needs be? Dum pais inferior in nobis patitur superior
compatitur, et dolorem quantum potest lenit, et tolerabilius sit; in Christo
autem qui dominus Naturae erat, ex voluntate sua fuit ista discontinuatio scil.
ut vires inferiores perfectissime et amarissime paterentur et parts superiores
intellectus scil. et voluntas to^a liter finirentur et nulla consolatio a
deitate vel ab intellectu saltem naturaliter redundabat illo tempore in partem
sensitivam, et tunc potentiae sensitivae soli dolori vacantes acer^imum dolorem
patiebantur ideo nullus homo tantum dolorem sensit in p^^nalitatibus sicut
Christus.

Abulens. in Epist. D. Hieron. ad Paulinum, Cap. 7. page* 41. Tom. 1. in Genesis


The less succor the inferior part of Man has from the Superior part of his
Will and Understanding, the more doleful is the pain in the Senses: Now when
Christ suffered, he did willingly suspend those Comforts from his Sense, which
by way of Sympathy might Naturally have flown in from his Understanding, or
supernaturally from the Love of God, and therefore his Sense being left alone
as it were, to conflict with those pains, they must be exceeding great, and
very dreadful, exceeding doleful, and extremely painful.

3. As the Sufferings of his Body were extreme, so they were long and
lingering; crucified Persons died a lingering Death, they were two or three
days a dying; indeed our Savior gave up the Ghost sooner: But he suffered from
the Cradle; and though he sweat drops of blood in the Garden only, yet he never
was fully out of that Agony til he gave up the Ghost; for a little before his
Death, he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Now if his
Sufferings were Universal; Extreme, and Lingering, then surely his Travel was a
sore Travel in regard of his Body.

Secondly: As for his Soul. His Travel was a sore Travel, in regard of that,
his Travel was a Soul-Travel. It is here in special manner called, the Travel
of his Soul; the Soul, and Life, and Spirit of his Sufferings, was in the
Sufferings of his Soul, there was the viol of the Wrath of God powered out, and
there especially. The Papists would persuade us that Christ did not suffer in
his Soul: Bellarmin de Christi anima. Cap. 8.

Socinus de Christo servatore, pars 2. pars 3.

Crellius contra Grotium. Cap. 1. p. 25.


of the same mind also are the Socinians, and others (not a little their
Friends fighting (though it may be ignorantly) with their Weapons and
Arguments) who are risen amongst us.

For the clearing therefore, of this profitable Truth (Christ suffering in his
Soul) I shall deliver my self in these Four Propositions: 1. That Christ did
truly suffer in his Soul. 2. That he did suffer in his Soul immediately. 3.
That he did suffer, and encounter with the Wrath of God. 4. That he did suffer,
and endure the very torments of Hell, in this Life.


it pleased the Father to bruise him, and has put him to grief, Perspicuum
est, sicut Corpus. flagellatum, ita animam vere doluisse, ne ex part veritas,
et ex part mendacium credatur in Christo. Hierom. in Esa. 53.
Isa. 53.10. And says Christ himself, My Soul is heavy unto Death; he was in a
great Agony, Luk, 22. insomuch as he sweat drops of Blood, verse 42. Now an
Agony signifies the sorrows of Combater^ entering the Lif^s with the sense of
their utmost dangers of Life. (...).
Matthew tells us, that he began to be very sorrowful; (...), (...).
to be berounded, or besieged with Sorrow: Chap. 26.36, 37. My Soul (says
Christ) is exceeding sorrowful, (...).

Timorem significat sive metum impendentis mali et vixaliter inveniri apud
bonos authors vereque Graecos.

Chamier, Cap. 16. Lib. 5. Tom. 2.

(...). Hesychius.

Nam scopus loci est explicare infirmitates a Christo susceptas: et quamvis
aliquando (...) cau^^m genitivo notat internam causam motus vel actionis quae
significatur verbo regente, nunquam tamen significat causam externe impellentem
ad actionem. Ames. Bellar. enervat.

(...).


even unto death. Mark tells us, that he was sore amazed; amazement notes an
universal Cessation of the Faculties of the Soul, from their several Functions;
he was afraid, and he was sore afraid: the Apostle says, that he was heard
(Heb. 5.) in the thing that he feared, ver. 7. The word (...) here used, does
sometimes signify Reverence, or Piety: but so it cannot be taken in this place;
for it is said, he was delivered, or heard, (...), from his Fear. But Amazement
is more than Fear. And Mark tells us, that he began to be sore amazed, Chap.
14.33. Yea, he was not only amazed, but he was very heavy; and he began to be
very heavy, so we read it: but the English word is too short, (...), he began
to be so affected with evil, as that he was as it were, disabled for the
minding of any thing else: the word is compounded of a privative, and (...),
People; as if he began to be out of the Body: (...) significat maximam
consternationem, adeo ut nulla admittatur consolatio.

Nicol. Arnold. Relig. Socinia, page 501.


it is the same word that is used in Phil. 2.26. And was full of heaviness. Now
if our Lord and Savior Christ was thus sorrowful, and exceeding sorrowful;
amazed, and sore amazed; heavy, and his Soul heavy even unto death; then
surely, he did truly suffer in his Soul. But it may be that Crellius, and the
Socinians, with their Friends, will tell us, that his Soul suffered only by way
of Sympathy, and fellow-feeling with his Body: Therefore,

immediately: for look where the Disobedience of the First Adam began, there
the Obedience of the Second Adam did begin also: Now the Disobedience of the
First Adam, was not only in his Body, in eating with his mouth, the forbidden
Fruit; but in his Soul likewise, and he did eat with his Body, because he did
affect with his Soul to be like God: there did his sin begin, viz. in the Pride
and Unbelief of his heart; and therefore the Obedience of the Second Adam was
not only to be performed with his Body, but with his Soul, and to begin there:
the Soul is not properly said to suffer, when the Body suffers, and by way of
sympathy; but when a grief is taken, or an affliction, Et sane nisi paenae
fuisset particeps anima corporibus tamen fuisset Redemptor. Calvin Institut.
Lib. 2. Cap. 16.
which does first arrest the mind and heart of men. Now Christ did truly suffer
in his Soul; for as his active Obedience was Spiritual in his Soul, as well as
Corporal in his Body; so was, and ought to be, his passive also: and if Christ's
Sorrow did not begin in his Soul, why is it said, that he troubled himself?
(...).
John 11.33. When he saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping, he groaned in the
Spirit, and was troubled; Quam pudenda fuisset haec mollities eousque torqueri
ob communis mortis formidinem ut sanguineo sudore diffluerit, neque posset
recreari nisi Angelorum conspectu quod illa precatio ter repetita, transeat
caelix etc. annon ex incredibili amaritudine animi profecta ostendit asperius
et majus arduum fuisse Christi certamen quam cum morte communi. Calvin ibid.
but according to the Original, and your Margent, he troubled himself; Why so,
but because this trouble of his did begin from within? and upon this account he
did sweat drops of Blood, when his Body was in good health, and free from every
sickness: the Body will not sweat, but when Nature is oppressed, when it is under
some outward burden, then it sweats: Christ was under no outward burden of
Disease; only death was now approaching, the fear of which alone, simply
considered, could not make him sweat drops of Blood; for says he, I have a
Baptism to be baptized with, and how am I streightened till it be accomplished.
Luke 12.50.
Surely there was some other evil, the apprehension whereof, did immediately
fall upon his Soul, which did run, and flow over into his Body. Christ did
suffer in his Soul immediately: That Is the Second Proposition.

the Wrath of God: I do not say, Neque tantum innuimus Deum fuisse unquam illi
adversarium vel iratum, quando enim dilecto filio in quo animus ejus acquievit
irasceretur sed hoc nos dicimus, Divinae severitatis gravitatem eum
sustinuisse, quoniam, manu Dei percussus et afflictus, omnia irati et punientis
Dei signa expertus est. Calvin ibid.
that the Father was wroth, or angry with his Person; some do here distinguish
of the wrath of God; sometimes it is taken for the hatred of Persons, so the
Reprobates are called Vessels of Wrath, Romans 9.22. Sometimes it is taken for the
execution of Corrective Justice; so God is said to be wroth with his own
People, Deuteronomy. 4.21. Sometimes it is taken for the execution of Vindicative
Justice, and in this sense (say they) God is said to be wroth with Christ. But
I rather choose to say that Christ is considered two ways. 1. Either in regard
of his own Person; or as he did stand for us, being our Surety. 2. There is a
difference between the affection of Gods Wrath, and the Dispensation of it.

Now Christ standing for us, and in our room, and stead, did suffer and
conflict with the Wrath of God: that is the Vindicative Dispensation of it: for
he was made a Curse for us, and a Curse is a Vindicative Dispensation of Wrath.
It may be the Socinians, and their Friends, will say that he was made a Curse
for us, because he died that cursed Death on the Cross for our good: but if ye
look into the words, ye shall find that he was made a Curse for us, so as that
there was a Translation of the Curse from us unto him, which Curse was due for
our Sin; for says the Apostle, Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every
one that hangs on a Tree: for it is written again, verse 10. Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things that are written the Book of the Law to
do them, verse 10. Which Curse, says the Apostle, Christ is made for us, we
being thereby redeemed from it, verse 13. Now is it possible that Christ should
thus be made a Curse for us, but he must suffer, and conflict with the Wrath of
God, which was due to us? and if he were smitten of the Father, then did he
bear the Dispensation of the Fathers Wrath, and Anger. Now it is said expressly
in Isaiah 53. It pleased the Father to bruise him, verse 10. He was smitten of
God, and afflicted, verse 4.

torments of Hell, whilst he was in this Life: Christus mortem gehennalem pro
nobis sustinuit.

Calvin in Matthew. 26. ver. 39. in cap. 27.46.

Institut. Lib. 2. 16.

Chamier Tom. 2. l. 5. Cap. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20.

Sib. Lubbertus contra Socinum lib. 1. c. 1.

Jon. Piscator contra vorstium notae ad Amic. duplicat. Sect. 1. 24.

Amos. Bellarm. enervat. Lib. 2. de Christo.

Maccovius de Mediator. Disp. 17.

Willet Synops. part 4. quest. 3.

Cartwright Harmon. page 985. 988.

Nico. Arnold. Relig. Socinian page 502.


I do not say with the Papists, that he descended into Hell, after his death;
nor that whilst he lived here, he was damned for us, that were Blasphemy; for a
man is said to be damned, that does for ever bear the weight of his own sins:
nor do I say, that Christ did bear all that misery of Hell, which we should have
born, and which the Reprobates do, and shall bear in Hell, for they lie
blaspheming, and despairing: But though Christ was in a great Agony, yet he did
not despair; for said he, My God, my God; and though God did forsake him, yet
that was not in regard of Union, as it is with the damned in Hell, but only in
regard of Vision; yet he did endure, and suffer for us, the very torments, and
misery of Hell: for there are two things concurrent to the misery of Hell; the
punishment of loss, and the punishment of Sense: now both these did our Savior
bear whilst he was in this Travel. The punishment of Loss: for he did lose, Est
genus paenarum quod patiuntur damnati in inferno, qui omni solatio carent,
quidam huic simile Redemptor noster sustinere dignatus est, qui omni a se
solatium et consolationis remedium in passione abdicavit. Medina in Thom. part
3. q. 46. a. 6.
and was for a time suspended from that sweet and comfortable Vision and
Fruition of God, therefore he cried out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? which cannot be understood of his outward Afflictions, as being left to the
violence of men, for says Paul, 2 Cor. 4.9. We are persecuted, but not
forsaken: they were left to the violence of men, and persecutors, yet they were
not forsaken; and therefore when Christ says, Why have thou forsaken me?
Videmus alios homines non tamen sine dolor et motu sed etiam cum magno gaudio
et laetitia mortem obire ex quo sequitur aut Christum qui est Dominus caeli et
terras, minus animi, minus roboris, minus fiduciae, minus fortudinis et minus
constantiae tabuisse quam gregarios homines aut sustinuisse mortem multo
acerbiorem et ho^^ihiliorem quam qu^mvis martyrum, sed illud dicere est impium:
sustinuit itaque aliud genus mortis quam alii homines et atrocius et sita fuit
illa atrocitas in sensu irae Dei in propossione execrationis Sib. Lubbert.
contra Socinum, Lib. 2. Cap. 1. p. 115.
he does not mean, so as to be left to the Persecution of men; for thus says
the Apostle, We may be, and yet not forsaken. And as he did bear the punishment
of Loss, so of Sense also, for he sweat drops of blood; not Blood only, but
drops of Blood, nor a few drops only, but many, insomuch as they fell to the
ground in so great a quantity as ran through his Clothes (as some conceive) to
the ground. Now can we imagine that he should be in this Agony, sweating these
drops of Blood, heavy in his Soul unto death, and to sore amazement, crying
out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, only from the fear of death?
what was our Savior more afraid of death, than the Martyrs? They went
triumphing, and some of them singing to their more cru^l death, and clapped
their hands in their flames; had they more Courage, Faith, or Resolution, than
our Savior? If it were only a Corporal Death* that Christ thus feared, then
they should suffer with more boldness and courage than our Savior: but come,
Gerard Harm.

Quod autem ad pios attinet, sciendum est long alia in arena versari quam
Christus nam rem habent cum morte et inferis devicti et profligatis Christus
autem cum illis jam vegetis et armatis ira divina luctatus est. Cartw. Harm. p.
985.


says Gerard, and I will tell you what is the Reason that our Savior was thus
afraid, and they so bold: Our Savior, says he, drunk of the Brook in the way;
but their drink was sweetened with his Death; Christ did conflict with Sin,
Satan, Death, and Hell; Enemies whose force was never broken before: but the
Martyrs only grappled with death; a broken Troop of Sorrows, that rallied
again, but was broken, and overcome before: Christ did sustain the Malediction,
and Curse of the Law. There was a Curse in his Death, but the Curse was taken
out of the death of Martyrs. (...) in mortibus suis. Esai. 53.9.
Christ did not only conflict with a temporal, but Eternal Death; but the
Martyrs knew that they were free from eternal Death; Christ bare al their sins:
But when they came to suffer, the sting of Death (which is sin) was taken out,
and upon this account, one of the Martyrs said, Christus dolebat ut ego esse
hilaris et laetus, ille habebat mea peccata et ego vere illius merita et
Justitiam. Essen. de Satis. Christi, p. 56.
when he came to suffer, Christ grieved at his Death, that I might rejoice in
mine; he had my sin on him, and I have his Righteousness, and Merits on me.
Yea, he did then endure the torments of Hell in his sufferings, that by our
sufferings we might go to Heaven.

But is it possible that one may endure the very torments of Hell in this Life?

Psalm. 84.46. And if ye look into the Parable of Dives and Lazarus, ye shall
find that Dives cries out to Abraham, to send one with a drop of water to cool
his Tongue. Why but says Austin, the body of Dives is not yet in Hell; what
fire therefore is this, that does so torment him? to which he answers, Quali^
lingua talis flamma; as the Eyes, wherewith he sees Abraham afar off, such is
the Fire; and as his Tongue, such is the Fire that he is tormented in, the fire
of the Wrath of God: this Fire of Gods Wrath, was our dear Savior scorched
with, whilst he was in his The day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the
death. Therefore death, evil, and the Wrath of God for sin, does proceed from
the Threatening it self. Now when this false upon man, he despairs, and
blasphemes, and lies under the Wrath of God for ever: yet despair, and eternal
blasphemy, is not the punishment of the Threatening it self, proceeding from
the Threat in it self considered, but proceeds from the disposition of Man,
upon whom the execution of the Curse falls: for no sin comes from Gods
Threatening in it self considered. Punishment properly, is satisfaction for
injury done, but sin is a continuing of the injury: Desperatio non est de
essentia paenae infernalis, paenae author est Deus, Diabolus et peccator
desperationis, paena est hominis passio desperatio est hominis actio.

Ames. Bellar. enervat. Lib. 2. de Christo, cap. 2.


Despair, Blasphemy, and death in sin is an action, the action of man; but
punishment is the passion and suffering of man: so that death in sin, despair,
and blasphemy, are not of the essence of the Punishment threatened; but the
wrath of God, death, and Gods withdrawing of himself from man, are of the
essence of the Punishment, proceeding from the Threatening in it self
considered. Now look what the Threatening in it self does produce, that Christ
suffered for us, but it will not therefore follow, that he should despair,
blaspheme, or die in sin, because these do proceed from the condition, and
disposition of our Persons, that the Curse of the Threatening falls upon: as ye
see it is with the beams of the Sun; if they fall on Wax, they soften that; but
if they fall on the Clay, they harden that: So the wrath of God, and his
withdrawance falling upon us, there does ensue, despair, blasphemy, and dying
in sin; but falling on Christ, it is not so; Why? because these do not proceed
from the threatening in it self considered. Now, I say, look what we should have
born as due to us from the threatening it self, that Christ did bear for us:
For says the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 53. Quod enim nos pro nostris debebamus
sceleribus sustinere ille pro nobis passus est, etc.

Ut quod propter imbecillitatem virium far non poteramus pro nobis ille
portaret. Hieron in Esai. cap. 53.

(...) quidam codices in plurali legunt (...) ut sit castigatio retributionum
nostrarum (uti illud plurale nomen usurpatur, Psalm. 69.23.) h. e. castigatio
quae peccatorum nostrorum est justa retributio seu quae justae retributionis ac
paenae loco ob peccata nostra-super nos venire debebat venit super eum scil.
Christum. Glass. philolog. sact. Lib. 3. tr. 1. p. 107. Disciplina
retributionis nostrae super eum, id est supplicium, quod nos retribuere ac
rependere debuimus pro peccatis nostris super eum imposuit Deus, id est
quicquid paenarum Deus a nobis exigere debuit pro peccatis, id ab innocente
Filio Pater exegit Sanctius in Esai. 53.5.


He has born our Griefs; that is, those griefs that were due to us from the
threatening in it self considered. But if we had perished, and gone to Hell our
selves, we should have suffered in our Souls, and in our Souls immediately, the
wrath of God, and the very torments of Hell, upon the account of the Threatening:
and therefore al these things did Christ suffer for us.

Arg. 2. Look what Christ delivered us from, that he endured for us; for he
delivered us by suffering, he delivered us from death, and he endured that; he
delivered us from Satan, and his Temptations, therefore he endured them; he
delivered us from the Law, therefore he was made under the Law; he delivered us
from sin, and he bare our sin; he delivered us from the wrath of God, therefore
he did conflict with that; and from the torments of Hell, therefore he did
suffer them.

Arg. 3. Our Lord and Savior Christ, did establish the Law by his Death. So
says the Apostle (speaking of Christ's death in his being made a propitiation
for sin) We do establish the Law, Romans 3.31. Look therefore, whatever the Law
did require of us, for whom he died, that has Christ done, and performed, and
suffered for us; but according to the Law, we were to suffer in our Souls, and
that immediately, yea, the wrath of God, with the torments of Hell, and
therefore herein: and thus has Christ suffered for us.

Genesis 2.17. Or God does dispense with the execution thereof; Or the Elect are
still to suffer it: But the Elect are not still to suffer it, and God does not,
will not, cannot by his ordinate Power, dispense with the execution of it, and
therefore Christ has suffered it for them: but the execution of that Law, did
extend to the Wrath of God, and Torments of Hell, upon Soul and Body; Certainly
therefore, our Lord and Savior Christ, has not only suffered in his Body, but
in his Soul too, and that immediately. Neither can the strength of these
Arguments and Reasons, be waved, by saying, That Christ did, or might satisfy
the Law, by enduring somewhat equivolent to the punishment due, according to the
Letter of it. For

As in case (the Law requiring an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth) that
a Jew did strike out his Brothers Tooth, and the Judge did order that his Eye
should be put out for it; though the Eye be equivalent to a Tooth, yet the Law
should not be satisfied with that Judgment: and in case that a man stole an Ox
from another, five Oxen being to be restored by the Law, if the Judge had given
the wronged person one Ox, every way as good as his own, yet the Law should not
have been satisfied: So that an equivalent may be paid or endured, yet the Law
not satisfied.

(The day that thou eatest thereof thou shall die the death) does threaten, is
death, and the Wrath of God, paena sensus, et paena damni. Now those that
oppose the Truth in hand, say that Christ did not bear the Wrath of God, nor
was forsaken by God, as to his Soul: And is an outward forsaking, being left to
the malice of men, equivalent to the Wrath of God.



long and tedious Travel; he was in the pains of this Travel from his Cradle,
to the last breath of his Cross; not only in his Death, Locus Esaiae dicitur
adimpleri (...) enim docet quid speres, u^i Lyranus; litera gesta docet; quid
credas, allegoria, moralis, quid agas; quid speres anagogia; cum enim mult^
miracula edere incipiebat Christus fieri potuisset ut vulgus ex^stimasset
Christum tamen excellentem et mirisicum esse chyrurgum, ad hoc precavendum.
Matthaeus hominum mentes elevare per (...) de Christo altius quid sperare
voluit.
but in his Life al along: Upon which account, Matthew does apply those words
of the Prophet Isaiah, Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sins
unto what Christ did, and suffered in his Life; for says the Gospel of
Matthew, Chap. 8.16. When evening was come, they brought unto him, many that
were possessed with Devils, and he cast out the spirits with his Word, and
healed all that were sick: Mark tells us, that all the City was gathered
together at the door, Chap. 1.32.33. So that he did cure, and heal them with
his own Trouble; according to that of John, 11.33. when Lazarus was dead,
Chemnit. harmon. sic Rupertus Ferus, Flaccius in glos. super 8. c. Matthew. 17.

Per sanationes corporis animae sanationem representavit.

(...) autem absolute significat onerose portare Apoc. 2.3. cum molestia
portare, Matthew. 20.12. Konick Disp. 25. loc. 83.


and he saw them weeping, he groaned, and he wept, and so he raised Lazarus:
well therefore, might the Evangelist apply that of Esai. to this occasion; for
he took away the Diseases of the People by his own suffering with them, and
cast out the Devils by his conflicting with them; and so though he did not come
into the extremity of this Travel, til the last, yet he had many pains and
pangs al along, whilst he lived: He wept, and he wept, and he wept again: three
times we read of his weeping; once at the raising of Lazarus, those were his
Regal Tears; once at his coming into Jerusalem, when he said, Thy House is left
to thee desolate, those were his Prophetical Tears; once at the last in his
Agony, when he prayed with cries and tears, Heb. 5. those were his Priestly
tears: his whole time was a weeping time, a sorrowful time; and therefore the
Apostle counts of his Sufferings from the time of his coming into the World,
Heb. 10. 5. Wherefore, when he comes into the World, he says, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, but a Body have thou prepared me. This Travel then,
was a long, and tedious Travel.

helpless Travel; helpless in regard of men, and they all forsook him, says
the Text. When a Woman is in Travel, Friends come, and Midwife comes, and
Helpers come: But when Christ was in Travel, even his very Friends forsook him,
yea, God himself did forsake him; no Friend, nor Midwife, nor Helper, but in
this matter he trod the Wine Press of his Fathers Wrath alone. O! what an hard
Labor was here! yet thus, thus in regard of his body, thus in regard of his
Soul, Christ was in Travel for us.

But suppose that Christ was in Travel, and thus in Travel for us, what then?

Moses saw the Bush burning that was not consumed, he said, I will stand still,
and behold this wonder. But behold a greater wonder is here, Christ bearing our
sins in the fire of the Wrath of God, and yet not consumed; shall we not then
stand still, and behold this wonder of Love?

in every Flower, which the Be can find and discern: but in the Hive, does the
several Honeys of the Creatures meet and dwell, that is the House thereof. So
there is a sweet taste of the several Attributes of God in all the Creatures; but
in Christ does his fullness dwell bodily; and in his suffering you may see the
Wisdom, Power, Justice, and Mercy of God in Conjunction, and so know God
indeed; which knowledge was more worth to Paul, than al other Knowledges, for
says he, I desire to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified.

When I am lift up (says he) I will draw all men after me; that is, when I am
lift up on the Cross; he does not say, when I am transfigured at Mount Tabor, I
will draw al to me; yet there was a drawing glory, which made Peter say, It is
good for us to be here. But his Love is the most drawing Object, and that was
glorious in suffering.





crucify the Lord afresh (says the Apostle) and put him to an open shame;
when Professors walk scandalously, they put Christ to an open shame, to a new
Suffering. But is this true, That Christ has suffered so great things for me,
and shall he now suffer by me? what! has he not suffered enough already? He
has suffered in his Body, in his Soul, the Wrath of God, the very Torments of
Hell, and is not this enough? God forbid that ever I should so walk, that Christ
should yet suffer by me, who has suffered such things for me.

Officina virtutum; whatever Grace, or Virtue you want, you may have in this
Shop, if you will come for it; Do thou want hatred of sin? here you may see it
in its own colors, and the reward thereof; for if God spared not his own Son,
but he endured the Wrath of God, and the very Torments of Hell, when sin was but
imputed to him. O! what an Hell, and flaming Fire shall those endure, who have
sin of their own, and must bear it themselves! And (says Gerard) would you see
the Torments of Hell, the true punishment of sin? Ito ad Montem Calvariae, Go to
Mount Calvary. Or do thou want Patience in thine Afflictions? behold the
Travel of Christ, as a Lamb, he opened not his mouth before the Shearer. Or
do thou want a tender, broken heart? truly his heart is hard indeed, which
the sight of these breakings of Christ, will not break.



will not see the death of the Child said Hagar) and she sat down over against
him, and lift up her voice, Genesis 21.16.
and wept) but to lay his own hands upon him, in reference to his Death, this
is a grief beyond al expression: yet this did God the Father do, for he bruised
his Son, he put him to grief, he smote him, and he laid on him the iniquities
of us al. Surely, if God the Father had not been infinitely willing to save
Sinners, he would never have done a thing so contrary to him: and if Christ
himself were not willing, he would never have suffered such hard things for
their Salvation. What is not a Woman willing to do for that Child, whom she
has had a sore Travel for? Now Christ's Travel was a sore Travel; surely
therefore, he is infinitely willing to save sinners, and if God the Father be
willing, and Christ be willing, then why should not every poor, doubting,
drooping Soul say, Lord, I believe, help thou mine unbelief; I once doubted of
thy Love, because I doubted of thy willingness to save such as I am, yea, often
have I put an If upon thy willingness, saying with the Leper, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean. But now I see thou art willing to save sinners;
why should I then doubt again?



Though a Woman forget her Child, yet will not I says the Lord. O! what
Comfort is this for all the Seed of Christ; Christ has had a sore travel for
you, therefore assure your selves, he will never forget you. And thus I have
done with the First Argument of this Doctrine, Christ in Travel.

CHRIST IN TRAVEL, AND His Assurance of Issue.
Sermon II.
ISAIAH, 53.11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied.


HAving spoken to the first Argument, Christ in Travel; we are now to proceed
to the Seccond, His Assurance of Issue; though he had an hard Labor of it in
the day of his Sufferings, yet he was sure and certain, that he should not
miscarry, many Women do miscarry in travel, few or none have Assurance that
they shall not miscarry; but before our Savior Christ fell in Travel, the Father
did assure him, that he should see his Seed, and be satisfied; accordingly he
has seen the Travel of his Soul, for says he; Heb. 2.13. Behold, I, and the
Children whom God has given me, and he shall yet see his Seed: he did not lay
down his Life at uncertainties, neither was it left in suspense whether he
should have Issue, or not, but was assured of it, and so he died for sinners.

For the opening and clearing whereof, we must enquire, 1. What this Issue is,
which Christ did travel for. 2. What Assurance he had of it.


Issue of Christ's Travel, which he traveled for, it is all that fruit and
effect of his Sufferings, which he did travel for. There are some immediate
next effects, and fruits of Christ's Death, and Sufferings, which I may call the
first Birth of the Death of Christ: There are other effects, which are more
remote, and I may call them the latter Birth of the Death and Sufferings of
Christ. But look whatever fruit or effect that is which Christ did travel for,
that he was assured of: The first he did see presently, and the latter he does,
and shall see daily.

What are those first, next, and immediate effects, and fruits of the Death of
Christ, which he presently saw?



1. Negatively.
God was in Christ, reconciling the World unto himself; but the world was not
actually reconciled at his Death; and therefore, say they, the first effect of
Christ's Death, was to make God reconcilable. But this cannot be the next, and
immediate effect of the Death of Christ; for God was reconcilable before Christ
died, and had not only a velleity, but a full will to show mercy to us; for John,
3. God so loved the World, that he sent his only begotten Son: Now if the Love
of God to Mankind were the cause of Christ's coming into the World, then he was
reconcilable before the Death of Christ.

The Wrath of God does abide on him. Now if the Wrath of God do abide upon a
man, so long as he abides under Unbelief, then is he not reconciled to God
actually, til he believes. 2. When a man is actually reconciled to God, then
he is justified; but we are justified by Faith, Romans 5.1. and therefore a man
is not actually reconciled til he does believe actually. 3. Those that are
without Christ, being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers
from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World,
cannot be actually reconciled to God; but so were the converted Ephesians
before their Convertion, Ephesians. 2.12. 4. The Apostle Paul says expressly, that
whilst the Corinthians were unrighteous, and wicked, they were not justified, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God; be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor Adulterers, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God;
and such were some of you: but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified, etc.
therefore they were not justified, and so not actually reconciled unto God
before their Conversion. 5. As Glorification follows our Justification, so our
Justification follows our Vocation, Romans 8.30. actual Reconciliation therefore,
and Justification, is not the next effect of Christ's Death.

But we are then discharged from our Sins, when they are charged on Christ, and
they were charged on Christ, when he died for them.

justified by Faith, ye have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans
5.1.

Salva Justitia, Christum merito mortis suae Deum Patrem universo generi humano
hactenus reconciliavit, ut Pater propter ipsius meritum Salva justitia et
veritate sua novum gratiae saedus cum peccatoribus inire et sancire potuerit ac
voluerit, Sententia Remonstrantium circa secundum Articul.

Act. Synod. 280. Armin. Perkins. oper. Arm. page 675.


or noti obstante Justitia Divina; God might have a power to show mercy to the
Children of Men, which he was willing to do, but was bound from it by his
Justice; and that by the Death of Christ, he was free to give unto man what Law
he pleased; which Liberty, or Power of God, say they, was the next effect of
Christ's Death.

But this cannot be, for then Christ died to redeem the Power of God, out of
the hand of his Justice; for that which is delivered by the Death of Christ, is
redeemed: but where do we find in Scripture, that Christ is said to redeem God;
or any thing of Gods? 2. This does suppose that God was willing to show mercy
to man, and to do that for man which he could not do; but that cannot be with
God* man may be willing to do that, which in Justice he cannot do, because his
will may be unjust, but Gods will cannot be unjust; and therefore he cannot will
that which he cannot do in Justice. 3. This makes void the death of Christ, Si
potestas et jus salvandi in Deo consideretur absolute Deus si voluisset
potuisset nos salvare citra satisfactionem Christi sed non voluit id facere.

Cornivus contra Molin. p. 436.

Deus potest de suo jure quantum vult dimittere instar. Regis creditoris,
Matthew. 18. nisi velimus Deo minus quam nobis licere Sorex Vorstianus. page 4, 5.


according to the Maintainers of this Opinion* for they say, That God could
pardon the sin of man, without the death of Christ; and therefore if Christ
died to procure such a power, and liberty to God, then he died for nothing, for
according to themselves, he had this power before. 4. This Opinion does
suppose, that there is a velleity, and voluntas in God; an half, and a full Will;
and if Gods Will may be imperfect, and perfect; then his Knowledge also, may be
Plena, et Semiplena, Perfect, and Imperfect; and so Imperfection will be charged
upon God. 5. The Apostle Paul tells us, Heb. 9. That Christ died as Mediator of
the New Covenant, therefore not to set God free to make what Covenant he
pleased with the Children of Men. Mirabilis ille status in quem homines
restitui dicunt per Christum neque est status gratiae Evangelicae quae non
fluit ex faedere gratiae neque potest esse status legis neque ullus alius
status in quo homines stare solent.

Ames. Antisynodal. de morte Christi. Cap. 4. p. 149.


6. What state shall redeemed man be in presently upon this account, not under
the Gospel, for God is left free by the Death of Christ, they say, to appoint
what Covenant he pleases, and not under the Law; for he was by Christ redeemed
from the Law. 7. If the Confirmation of the New Covenant, were the next Effect
of Christ's death (as appears by Heb. 9.14, 15.) then Christ did not die to
procure such a power, and liberty to God, that he might appoint what Covenant
he pleased. Surely therefore, this power or liberty in God is not an effect of
Christ's Death, much less the next effect of it.

Remonstrantes sic declaratio sent. circa 2. Artic. Acta Synod. 286.

Sociniani sic Crellius contra Grotium. p. 304.


is the forgiveness of original sin unto all the World; none, say they, are
damned only for original sin; this by the death of Christ, was immediately
forgiven to all the Children of Men.

But this cannot be; for then all the World should be actually reconciled unto
God, and justified; for according to their own Opinion, Justification, and
forgiveness of sin, are one and the same thing: but the Apostle tells us, that
whom God justifies, them he also glorifies, Romans 8. 2. Then also, there should
not only be an impetration of Redemption, and Grace for all; but an application
unto al, which they deny. 3. Then the Children of Heathens, and Pagans, should
be in a better state and condition, than the Godly, who live under the Gospel;
for according to their Opinion, the Godly living under the Gospel, may fall
away, and be damned; and so, though they be Godly, they have no assurance of
their Salvation: but if a Pagans Child die, he is sure to go to Heaven, because
his sin is pardoned, and he is justified. 4. The Apostle Paul tells us, 2 Cor.
7. That the Children of Believers, are clean and holy, and upon the account of
the Parents Faith: but if original Sin be pardoned to all the World, then the
Children of Infidels, and Unbeleevers also, are holy; and if so, why does the
Apostle tell us, that our Children are holy, upon the account of the Parents
Faith? 5. The Apostle Jude tells us, That the Sodomites endured the Vengeance of
Hell, surely there were some Children in the Town, and place: The Wages of sin
is Death, says the Apostle Paul; and Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even
upon them, that had not sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression. And
if the Wrath of God do abide upon al, til they do believe, then surely,
original sin is not forgiven unto all the World, by the Death of Christ.

viz. Whoever believes shall be saved, and whoever believes not, shall be
damned, is the next, and great effect of the Death of Christ.

Whoever believes, shall be saved; and whoever believes not, shall be damned;
but every Gospel Truth, is not a Decree of God. Christ is the Son of God, is a
Gospel Truth; The Lord will write his Law in your hearts, is a Gospel Truth, and
Promise; but this is not called Gods Decree. Electio est alicujus particularis
cum rejectione alterius, hoc sit^ante jacta mundi Fundamenta, ergo datur
aliquid plusquam Decretum generale. Ames. Antisin.
2. Such a General Decree does exclude, and deny Election of particular
Persons: The Scripture tells us plainly of the Election of particular Persons,
Ephesians. 1. Who has chosen us. Romans 8. Whom he has predestined, them he has
also called; the Foundation of God stands sure, he knows who are his: but
now, if there were such a General Decree as this, Whoever believes, shall be
saved, and whoever believes not, shall be damned, there would need no Election
of particular Persons; but only an Execution of that general Decree. Decreto
isto general Deus nihil magis velit uni quam alteri sed Romans 9. magis vult uni
quam alteri. Ames. Antisyn.
3. By that general Decree, God does will no more to one than to another; but
Romans 9. God does will (...) more to one, than to another; for Jacob beloved, and
Esau be hated. 4. If there were such a general Decree, Totum et integrum
predestinationis decretum. Act. Synod. page 48.
and none else (as some say) then the will of God should be undetermined as to
the Salvation of this or that particular Man until he believed, and so should
be determined by some act of Man: Ego autem stultus a scientia Dei et vanus
etc. postea vero videbar mihi videre a long gratia Dei omnia bona precedentem
tempore et natura; sicut anima in omnibus motibus primus motor. Bradward. de
causa Dei, Lib. 1. cap. 35. page 308.
But the will of God, as Bradwardin demonstrates, is the first Agent (Primum
liberum, primum agens et primum determinans) first free, the first Mover, and
the first Determiner; the serious consideration whereof was (as he professes)
the first beginning of his Conversion to the Grace of God from the error of
Pelagianism, and Manicheism.



Adam, now al are brought into a Covenant of Grace by the Second Adam.

Adam, and his Seed only; so the Covenant of Grace is made with the Second
Adam, and his seed only: But the whole World are not the Seed of Christ; for the
Lord promising him to see his Seed, does not promise him to see all the World.
2. The Apostle Paul tells us, That the Ephesians before their Conversion, were
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the Covenants of
Promise, being without hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. which
could not be, if all the World were taken into the Covenant of Grace by the
Death of Christ. 3. If God deal with all Mankind in a Covenant of Grace, then
al Mankind should certainly be saved: for, if whatever God requires on man's
part, God does by that Covenant, undertake that man shall perform: then al must
needs be saved, if the Covenant be made with all; but whatever by this Covenant
God requires on man's part, he undertakes to perform. Does God require that we
should act from an inward Principle of Grace? I will write my Law in your
hearts, says he. Does he require of us to know him? this he undertakes for us
by this Covenant; Ye shall all know me, from the greatest to the least, Heb. 8.
Does he require us, to fear him? I will put my fear into your hearts. Does he
require Faith, and Repentance at our hands? I will take away (says he) the
heart of stone, and give you an heart of flesh; and I will circumcize thine
heart, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Does he require Obedience at our hands? he undertakes for us
also, that we shall perform the same, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit into you,
and cause you to walk in my ways. So that if God should deal with all the World
of Mankind, according to the Covenant of Grace, then all the World should be
saved: but all the World are not saved, surely therefore, this is none of those
effects which our Lord and Savior Christ traveled for.



But this cannot be: for the thing is not true, viz. That al men have a
sufficiency of Grace by Christ, to believe on him: for if all the men of the
World have such a Power from Christ to believe on him, then, 1. The Jews had a
Power to abstain from their Unbelief, in putting Christ to death, and yet they
had this Power from the Death of Christ; and if so, then it was possible that
Christ should not have died by the hand of their Unbelief, and yet possible by
virtue of Christ's Death, for them to abstain from the putting him to death,
which is a Contradiction: Neither can it be said, that they had this Power
given them upon the foresight of Christ's Death; for the same foresight, did
foresee that Christ should be put to death by the hand of their Unbelief. 2.
If al men have such a Power to believe in Christ, then either they must have an
inward Principle of Grace and Faith; or they can act without an inward
Principle: but they have no inward Principle of Faith and Grace, for then they
should be Believers; for it is the inward habit, and principle, which
denominates the man, and not this, or that act, for a man is a Believer, though
he be asleep: Nor can any Creature put forth an act without an inward Principle
suitable to the Act; the Eye cannot act in seeing, without an inward Principle
of sight; nor the Ear hear, without an inward principle of hearing: the Herb
cannot grow, without an inward principle of growth; nor the Beast move, without
an inward principle of motion; nor any Creature act, without a precedent inward
principle: But all the men of the World, have not an inward principle of Faith
and Grace; and therefore all the men of the World have not a power to believe.
3. The Apostle Paul, tells us plainly, that a Natural man receives not the
things of God, neither can he, 1. Cor. 3.1^. but if he have a power to believe,
then he can receive them; for receiving is our believing, 1 John, 12. Neither
can it be said, that by the Natural man, we are to understand the weak
Christian; for if the weak Christian cannot receive the things of God, much
less the wicked, and the pure Natural man: nor does the Apostle speak of a
Natural Man, as he is merely considered in the state of Nature, abstracted from
al Gospel Grace, and the means of Grace; for then he should speak to no
particular case in the World, for (according to our Adversaries) there is no
man in the World, but has some Gospel Grace, or means of Grace. 4. Our Savior
Christ tells the Jews, John 10.26. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my
Sheep; it seems then, that all the world are not the Sheep of Christ; for says
he, ye are not of my Sheep; and the reason why some do believe, is because they
are of Christ's Sheep; and why others believe not, is because they are not of
his Sheep: Now if the reason why some believe, and others not, is because some
are of his Sheep, and others not; then all the world have not a power to
believe: for if all the world have a power to believe, then those that are not
of the Sheep may believe; and if those that are not of the Sheep, can believe,
why does our Savior give this as a Reason why they did not believe, because
they were not of his Sheep? 5. The Apostle Paul says, Romans 10.14. How shall
they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent: But now all the particular men in the world, have not heard of a crucified Christ, by the
preaching of the Gospel. And if it be said, Yes, but the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
do preach Christ, as the Apostle says in the same Chapter, Their sound, and
words, is gone forth into all the Earth. I answer, It Is true indeed, that the
Apostle does here allude to that 19. Psalm, where it is said, that the Voice of
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, is gone forth unto all the Earth; but the Apostle does
not contradict himself; for he says, How can they believe in him, of whom they
have not heard? and how can they hear without a Preacher, and a Preacher sent?
If men can hear of Christ, by the Preaching of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, then
they can hear of Christ, without the preaching of one sent, which he denies,
ver. 14, 15. And if the Sun, Moon, and Stars, do preach Christ crucified, then
is the Matter of the Gospel no Divine Revelation: And then why might not Adam
believe in Christ in the state of Innocence? the Sun, Moon, and Stars, preach
the same Doctrine now, that they preached then; and then, the same that they
preach now; if therefore, they do preach Christ crucified, now, then also they
preached him in the state of Innocence; and so Adam in the state of Innocence
had a power to believe on Christ, which the Maintainers of this Opinion deny:
Neither can it be said, That if al men have not a Power to believe, Quando homo
non potest, si volit, propter voluntatem impossibilitas non imputatur; si autem
non vult, propter impossibilitatem voluntas non excusatur.

Hugo de St. vict. L. 2. de Sacr. part. 14. Cap. 6.

Cornel. Jansen. August. lib. 3. de gratia Christi salvatoris.


then God should be unjust in punishing so many for Unbelief; for (besides
that, al had a Power in Adam) God does punish and damn men for their will, not
for their want of Power; for as Hugo observes well, when a man cannot, if he
will, for the will, the impossibility is not imputed, but if he will not; for
impossibility, the will is not excused.

Smalcius Cateches Racov. de officio Christi Regio.

Theses Francis. Davidis These. 5.


and Lord-ship over al things, especially a power to forgive sins, which he had
not before his Death; and that the next Effect of his Death, was the obtainment
of this Power, and Dominion.

But this cannot be; for if Christ had this Dominion, Power, and Lordship over
al, by virtue of the Hypostatical Union, then it was not meri ed by his Death;
but this he had by that mysterious Union, and therefore as soon as he was born,
the Angel said unto the Shepherds, For unto you, is born this day, in the City
of David, the Savior, which is Christ the Lord, Luke, 2.11. 2. Christ did not
merit for himself (as the Protestants speak against the Papists) for if Christ
should merit such a glory and Dominion for himself, then the Love of Christ (to
man) in his Death, would be much lessened; it is said indeed, Dio non causam sed
ordinem et consequentiam notat. Acts, 20.26. Heb. 3.7. 2 Pet. 1.10. sic Luc. 24
26. oportuit illum pati et sic intrare; sic sancti per multos tribulationes
debent regnum ing^odi quae tamen hujus non sunt Causae.

Quistorp. Annot. Bibl. in Psalm. 110.


that upon his Suffering (as a Consequent thereof, or by way of Declaration say
some) God gave him a Name above every Name, etc. Phil. 2. but that relates to
the former words also, Who thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet took
on him the form of a Servant, verse 7. which notes the Hypostatical Union. 3.
If Christ bought in this Power, and Dominion by his Death; then he purchased it
with his blood, but his blood i^ propitiatory, and satisfactory, not procuring
Lordship and Dominion. 4. The Power, Lordship, and Dominion, which Christ has,
is either Essential, or Dispensatory, and ^ediatorian: His Essential Power, and
Lordship was not merited by his Death, for he has that as he is God, and he
had it before his Incarnation; for Esaiah saw his Glory, and did see him, chap.
6. verse 5. For mine Eyes (says he) have seen the King; what King? Even the
Lord of Hosts, verse 5. the holy, holy, holy Lord of Hosts, which the
Evangelist John, does apply unto Christ, and tells us plainly, that this Lord
whom Esaiah saw, was Christ, Chap. 12.41. These things, said Isaiah, when he
saw his Glory, and spoke of him: His Mediatorian Power, and Lordship, could not
be merited by his death, for he was Mediator before he died, and therefore had
his Mediatorian Power before his Death. 5. We find him actually possessed of
this Power, and Lordship over al, before his death, witness his casting out of
Devils, commanding Winds and Seas, which obeyed him, and his answer to the
Owner of the Ass, which he sent for; Say the Lord, has need of him. And 6. As
for his Power to forgive sins (as if he would on purpose, obviate the Doctrine
of the Socinians) he does declare it in so many words, But that ye may know
that the Son of man has power on Earth to forgive sins, etc. Matthew. 9. Now if
he had this Power on Earth, then the obtainment of it was not the great, and
next Effect of his Death; no, nor any thing which his Soul traveled for in his
Death.

If these things, be not the next, and immediate Effects and Fruits of Christ's
Death, and Sufferings, what are? and what is that Issue of his Death, which he
did presently see, and was possessed of?

Adam destroyed, that the Second Adam did build up again, for his Seed: the
Second Adam, recovered, and gained that in a better Edition for his Seed, which
the first Adam lost from his Seed. Therefore,

Adam, by his Sin, and Disobedience, did break the Law of God, affront his
Justice, and provoked the Anger and Wrath of God, against his Posterity; so the
Second Adam did by his Obedience, and Death, satisfy the Law and Justice of
God, for all his Seed, whom he died for; which Satisfaction he did perform
immediately: For, 1. When he died, our sins were imputed to him, and laid, and
charged on him; for he was made sin for us, who knew no sin, 1 Cor. 5.21. that
is, the guilt of our sin was imputed to him: The meaning of the words, is not,
He was made a Sacrifice; for it is said, that he knew no sin. Now it cannot be
said, that he who knew no Sacrifice, was made a Sacrifice for us; indeed it
follows by Consequence, that he was made a Sacrifice for us, which he was on
the Cross; For he offered up himself once for all, says the Apostle, Heb.
9.26.28. which cannot be understood of his appearing in Heaven for us, for that
he ever lives so to appear for us, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession
for us, Heb. 7. and when he gave himself unto God for us, then he was made an
Offering, and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. But
when he died for us, then he is said to give himself for us, Gal. 2.20. Who
loved me, and gave himself for me; that is, who loved me, and died for me: yea,
the very same word that is used for the Sin Offering, Levit. 16. is attributed
unto Christ, Isai. 53.10. When he shall make his Soul an Offering for sin: The
word is, (...) a Sin-Offering. Now the Sins of the People were laid on the head
of the Sin-Offering, and Christ being our Sin-Offering, when he died on the
Cross, our sins were then laid on him, and imputed to him. 2. As our sins were
charged, and laid on him, so they were laid on him by the hand of the Father,
Isa 53. It pleased the Lord to bruise him, and he has put him to grief, verse
10. And the Lord has laid on him, the iniquities of us all. verse 6. The word
(...) does sometimes signify to pray, and intercede: but so it cannot be taken
here, for then the words should be read thus; He has made our Iniquities to
pray, or intercede on him, or by him, or with him; but there is no good sense
in that; neither can it be said, Verba Prophetae sunt (...) Secundum Socini
interpretationem orat pro illo 1. Christo, sed hoc absurdum, hac
interpretatione itaque rejecta, dicit Socinus, vertendum esse Jehova occurrit
per eum sive cum eo iniquitati omnium nostrum, sed neque haec interpretatio
consistere potest; nomini enim (...) nulla prepositio apposita est quae tale
quicquam innuat docendum enim esset, (...) ut autem ababsolute positum ita
accipiatur neque ratio suadet neque syntaxis patitur, nec simili exemplo
ostendi potest.

Sib. Lubbert. de Jes. Christo servatore contra Socin. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. p. 162.


that the word here signifies to obviate, as if the sense should run thus; He
has made him to obviate our sins, or our sins to be obviated by him (which is
that Interpretation which the Socinians do most adhere unto) for the word is in
Hiphil, noting an efficiency, and causality, without any Preposition before the
word (...) Sin; and therefore according to the Interpretation of the word, the
words must be translated thus; He has made our sins to obviate by him, or on
him, which is no sense: but rather than men will lose their own sense and
apprehension, they will make the Scripture to speak no sense: The true
Translation, and reading of the words is thus; He has made our sins to meet on
him, and so our sins were laid on Christ by the hand of the Father. 3. As the
Father laid, and did charge out sins on Christ on the Cross? so he laid them on
him by way of punishment, our sins being the meritorious cause of his
Sufferings, and his Sufferings being the Punishment of our sins; for what is a
Punishment, Paena vel supplicium est malum passionis quod infligitur propter
malum actionis.
but a just inflicting of some Natural evil, for some sinful evil: It is the
inflicting of the evil of Suffering for the sinful evil of Doing. Now when
Christ died on the Cross, He was wounded for our Transgressions, and bruised
for our iniquities, Isa. 53.5. And where do we read, either in Scripture, or
any Author, that a man is said to be scourged, wounded, or afflicted for a
fault, but it notes a punishment, and that such a fault is the meritorious
cause thereof? When God threatens to punish men for sin, he threatens them with
the bearing of their Sin. So Levit. 20.17. He shall bear his iniquity, is the
same with, he shall be killed, verse 16. and he shall be cut off, verse 18. So
Numb. 14.33. Your Children shall wander in the Wilderness, and shall bear your
whoredoms, that is, the punishment which is due to them. So Ezekiel. 18.20. The
Soul that sins, shall die, and the Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father;
that is, the Son shall not be punished for the Fathers sin. So that in Scripture
Language, to bear the sin of another, is to be punished for another: So the
Goat did bear the sins of the People, and Christ who was our Sin-Offering, did
bear our sins on the Cross, Isa. 53. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who himself bare our sins, in
his own Body on the Tree: Why so, but because he did bear the Punishment that
was due thereunto? 4. As he did then bear our sins on the Cross, so he accepted
thereof, and did willingly undergo this Task; for says he, Lo, I come to do
thy Will, thy Law is within my heart, I delight to do thy Will; Long a salute
mea verba delictorum meorum. Long hic Divinitus loquitur verba delictorum
meorum quia nostra peccata reputat sua, Hieron. in Ps. 21. et 41.5. Sana animam
quamvis peccaverim tibi; quamvis ego sum omnium maximus peccator imputative,
imo pecca^um 2 Cor. 5 ult. et Phrasi Hebraea peccaverim tibi, ratione officii,
quod sustinco Redemptor, non personae qua^do sum integer et peccatum nullum
feci, Tarnov. in Psalm. passional, p. 233. in Psalm. 41. quod igitur ad Deum
Patrem spectat, se non esse ratione officii innocentem fatetur, o Deus Pater
inquit qui ratione humanae naturae es Deus meus, Ps. 22. tu novisti stultitiam
meam hoc est peccatum. Christus peccator.

Tarnov. in Psalm. 69. p. 263.


which he speaks in reference to these sufferings, Heb. 10. Psalm 40.8. and
John, 10. he says, I lay down my life, no man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self, verse 17, 18. yea, and when our sins were thus charged on him,
he did accept of that Charge, and calls those sins his, Psalm. 40.12. Mine
iniquities have taken hold of me, so that I am not able to lookup: which words
are the words of Christ, as appears plainly, by the former Verses. And so
again, Psalm. 69.5. O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid
from thee: which Psalm, is a Psalm of Christ, who standing in our room and
stead, speaks thus, as being made sin for us. So that as the Father charged
our sins on him, so he did accept of that charge. 5. As he did willingly accept
of this great charge, bearing our sins for us. So when he died on the Cross, he
did stand in our room, and stead; not only dying for us, that is, for our
profit, good, and benefit; but for us, that is, in our room, and place, and
stead; for he laid down his Life for us, as a Ransom: Now when one dies for
another in way of Ransom, he does not only die for the benefit, and profit of
the Ransomed, but in the place, and room, and stead of the Ransomed. So did
Christ die for us, as himself speaks, Matthew. 20.28. Mark 10.45. The Son of
Man, (...).
came to give himself a Ransom for many: and if Christ did die for us, as only
for our profit, then why should Paul say, 1 Cor. 1.13. Was Paul crucified for
you, or were you baptized into the Name of Paul? It seems by this Speech, that
none can die for us in that sense that Christ died for us, but such as whose
Names we may be baptized into; but one man may die for another profit and
benefit (as the Martyrs have done) and yet the other may not be baptized into
his Name: and the Apostle Paul says in Romans 5. Christ died for the Ungodly,
verse 6. scarcely for a righteous man will one die; yet peradventure for a good
man, some will even dare to die, verse 7. Now Christ did so die for us, and in
that sense that he says, scarcely for a righteous man will one die; and in that
sense did Christ die for the ungodly, that he says, peradventure for a good
man, some will even dare to die: But when the Apostle speaks of a man's dying for
a righteous man, and for a good man, he does not mean, that one will scarce die
for the benefit, or profit of a righteous, or good man; but he speaks of dying
in their place and stead; and therefore when he speaks in the former Verse,
Nullus alius fult competentior modus, quia nullus morbus competentius curatur
quam per suum contrarium oportuit enim quod sicut purus homo voluit ascendere
ad excelsa Dei per superbi^m suam ita purus et verus Deus ascenderet usque ad
infima hominis scil. usque ad mortem Crucis. et sic per contrarium facta est
perfectio curationis humanae. Altissiod. in Sent. Lib. 3. Tract. 1. Cap. 8.

Sicut ergo Adam per furtum et rapinam factus est quasi dives, cum nihil
haberet; sic oportuit ut Deus fieret quasi pauper cum omnia haberet. Et videtur
justa compensatio per ad aequationem contrariorum complexorum, ut mois aeterna
ejus qui temporalis erat, morte temporali ejus qui aeternus erat, redimeretur.
Parisiens. de causis cur Deus homo, Cap. 7.


of Christ's dying for the Ungodly, he must needs mean for them, as in their
room and stead; else he had not spoken ad idem in verse 6. to what he had
spoken in verse 5. But the Apostle did certainly speak ad idem, and therefore
when our Lord and Savior Christ died for us, he did not only die for our good,
and profit, but in our room, place, and stead. And 6. As when he died for us,
he did give himself a Ransom for us; so that price and Ransom was most sit, and
suitable, being in it self sufficient to pay al our debt, a price beyond al
compute; for says the Apostle Peter, We are not redeemed with Silver and Gold,
but with the precious blood of Christ; as if he should say, with such a price
as is beyond al compute, in respect whereof, all the Silver and Gold in the
World, are of no value; a price in it self infinite, and of infinite value; not
only satisfying the debt by way of acceptance, but by that intrinsecal worth
and value that was in it self; for if Christ's Death and Obedience should only
satisfy God for our sin by way of Divine Acceptance, then it should satisfy
no more than the Blood of Bulls, and Goats might have done, for such Blood might
satisfy by way of Acceptance: Christi satisfactio non solum ex Divina
acceptatione sed ex proprio valor quam habebat ob dignitatem personae
satisfacientis aequalis fuit Divina offensae compensandae.

Aquinas 3. part. qu. 48. art. 2.

Altissiodorens. Lib. 3. Tract. 1. cap. 8.

Patisiens. lib. cur Deus homo.

Asturicens. de Christi gratia sect. 3. dub. 3.

Abulens. in Exodus cap. 37. q. 7. p. 277.

Anselm. cur Deus homo, lib. 2. c. 14.

Ruiz. de voluntate Dei disput. 53. s. 5.

Greg. de valent. de Christo mediatore, cap. 4, 5.

Bart. Medina in part. 3. Thom. 1. q. Art. 2. Conclus. 3.

Vasquez, disput. 5. cap. 2. in 3. part. Tho. Tom. 1.

Suarez. disput. 4. sect. 3. ubi ait conclusio haec certa est et contraria nee
probabilis nec pia nec fidei consentanea.

Quo spectat etiam illud Apostoli ad Hebr. impossible est sanguine taurorum
auferri peccata ubi ex antithesi apparet sermonem esse de aequali
satisfactione, nam per modum satisfactionis imperfectae adeoque ex acceptatione
Divina etiam sanguis hircorum et taurorum satisfacere poterat ad auferenda
peccata. Tannerus de incarnar. quest. 2. dub. 2. in 3. partem Tho. Tom. 4,
Chrysostom. hom. 10. in Epist. ad Roman. Cyprian de ascens. pretii magnitudo
superat negotium.


But the Scope of the Apostle in Chap. 9. of the Hebrews, is to show that the
Blood of Christ, is more efficacious in it self, than the blood of all the Bulls
and Goats; and therefore it was not satisfying in a way of Divine Acceptance
only, but in a way of intrinsecal worth and merit. Now, if the price that
Christ laid down for us, was in it self sufficient to satisfy, and this was
not wrested from him, but he did freely offer it up unto God for us, and he did
pay, and suffer all this in our room and stead, as a punishment due to us, and
inflicted on him by the hand of the Father, then God the Father must needs be
satisfied with this great payment; which indeed he was, as appears by that
entertainment which he gave unto Christ, when Christ came into Heaven, saying,
Sit thou on my right hand: Surely therefore, the Satisfaction of Divine Wrath,
and Justice, was an immediate effect of the Death of Christ, which he saw
presently.

Secondly: As he did satisfy the Law, and Divine Justice, for all his Seed; so
he did by his Death, sanctify, and set them apart for God, consecrating them,
even al those that he traveled with, to the use and Service of the Lord: for
as the first Adam did profane, debauch, and defile al his Seed, by his
Disobedience; so the Second Adam, did by his Obedience, consecrate, sanctify,
and set apart his Seed for God; for says the Apostle, Heb. 10.10. By the which
will, we are sanctified through the offering of the Body of Christ: and again,
verse 14. For by one Offering, he has perfected (that is, consecrated, says
Calvin) for ever, them that are sanctified. And says our Savior, Omnes prorsus
authors quos ego legerim interpretantur pro iis ego me in sacrificium offero,
et cum dicit, ut sint ipsi sanctificati in veritate, significat initiari
consecrarique sacrificio. Maldonat. in Joan. 17. Calvin in Heb. 10.
For this cause do I sanctify my self, that is (says Maldonate, according to
all the Authors that I have read) I do consecrate, and offer up my ^elf a
Sacrifice, that they also may be sanctified, or consecrated in Truth, and not
in Ceremony, as the People were by the Sacrifices of the old Testament, which
were but a shadow of the great, and true Sacrifice Christ on the Cross. And if
our Lord and Savior Christ, when he died on the Cross, was then offered unto
God, as our first Fruits; then all the crop, and lump, must be sanctified
thereby; but when he died, he was offered up unto God, as our first Fruits; and
therefore says the Apostle, Heb. 2.11. For both he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified, are of one, as the first Fruits, and the Crop, or Lump were
of one; plainly therefore, when Christ died for us, he did then sanctify, and
set apart al those whom he died for: and so the consecration, and
sanctification of his Seed, is another Fruit, and immediate Effect of his Death.

Adam by his Sin, and Disobedience, did bring Death, and Eternal Condemnation
upon al his Seed, Humilitas passionis Christi meruit nobis apertionem januae
quod per eam datum est sufficiens pretium redemptionis nostrae, quia tanta fuit
humilitas in redemptore, quanta fuit superbia in prevaricatore.

Altissiodor. Lib. 3. Tract. 1. c. 7.


and did cause the Gates of Paradise to be shut against him, and al his
Posterity: so the Second Adam, did by his Death, and Obedience, open the Gates
of Paradise, and Salvation, for all his Seed; and therefore when he was on the
Cross, he told the Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise; why did
he not rather say, This day shall thou be with me in the third Heavens? (for
our Paradise, is the third Heavens, as appears plainly by comparing the 2d and
3d Verses of the 12. Chapter of 2 Cor.) But because, as I conceive, he was
performing his Obedience on the Tree, as our Second Adam, and so opening
Heaven, and our Paradise, in opposition to that hurt and mischief the first
Adam did by his Disobedience in eating of the forbidden Tree; and if ye look
into Heb. 10.19, 20. ye shall find that the Apostle Paul says thus: Having
therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus
by a new, and living way, which he has consecrated for us, through the vail,
that is to say, his flesh. So that the opening of this way to Life for his
Seed, was the proper, and immediate Effect and Fruit of Christ's Death and
Sufferings.

Adam, Christ, did by his Death, and Obedience, merit the repair, and recovery
of the Image of God, (...)
for his Seed; which Purchase he did then obtain presently, and did see the
right thereunto, immediately settled upon his Seed, and Children, whom he died
for; for says the Apostle, Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood, be entered in once,
into the holy place, having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. So that before
he entered the holy place, he had obtained our Redemption: look therefore what
that is, which we in Scripture, are said to be redeemed from, that he obtained
presently for his Seed. Now we are not only said to be redeemed from the Wrath
to come, but from all Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. or from our vain Conversation, and
that by his blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Qiemadmodum non transit Adae damnatio nisi
per generationem incarnaliter ex eo generatos, sic non transit Christi gratia
et peccatoru^ remissio nisi per regenerationem spiritualiter per ipsum
regeneratos; sicut delictum Adae non nocet, nisi suis, in eo quod sui sunt; sic
nec gratia Christi prodest; nisi suis, in eo quod sui sunt. Parisiens. de
causis cur Deus homo, Cap. 9.
This purchase therefore, he obtained presently by his Death. Neither can it be
said, that then al his Seed should be immediately freed from their vain
Conversation; For as Parisiensis does observe well, As the sin of the first Adam
does not hurt his Seed, but in that they are his; so the Grace of the Second
Adam, does not actually profit his Seed, but in that they are his: But the Seed
of Adam are his, as they receive Flesh from him when they are born; so the Seed
of Christ are not his, but as they receive the Spirit from him, and when they
are born again; but though the Seed of Christ have not this Image actually
stamped on them, til they do believe, yet they have a right, both to Salvation,
and Sanctification, immediately settled on them by the Death of Christ, as a
Child may have a right to a Land, by the Purchase of his Father, before he
comes of Age, though he be not actually possessed of the Land til he do come of
Age: This Right therefore, and the Settlement of it upon the Seed of Christ, is
another fruit, and immediate Effect of his Death and Sufferings.

Nunc judicium est mundi nunc princeps hujus mundi e^icietur for as Joan. 12.
justitia Dei hoc efficere dehuit, ut ab eo pateretur Diabolus, quod ille inique
intulerat scil. ut ab eo ligaretur, quem inique ligaverat, seu ligari
procuraverat ab eo ejiciretur de mundo quem ipse et spiritualiter et
corporaliter injuste ejecer^t. Paris. cap. 9.
so he did spoil, and destroy the Power of Satan, which Satan had over al his
Seed: For as by the Sin, and Disobedience of the first Adam, Satan got a Power
over al his Posterity; so by the Death, and Obedience of the Second Adam, this
Power was broken in reference to the Seed of Christ; for says the Apostle,
Heb. 2.14. He also, himself took part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the power of Death, that is, the Devil: and again, Col.
2.15. And having spoiled Principalities, and Powers, Dicitur Diabolus duas
habuisse manus unam attrahentem qua trahebat omnes ad infetos quae amputata est
et ei, quantum ad bonos per passionem Christi; et manum flagellantem quae
debilitata est, quae vexat tamen bonos ad exercitium. Altissiod. Lib 3. Tract.
1, cap. 8.
he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it, that is, the Cross:
So that when Christ died on the Cross, he did then break, and rout the Forces
of Satan, insomuch as all the Forces that he can draw up together, against the
Seed of Christ, are but some rallied Troops: then was his Field-Army broken,
and Christ triumphed over them al upon the Cross. Surely therefore, this
breaking of the Power, and Force of Satan, is another Fruit, and immediate
Effect of the Death of Christ.

Adam by his Sin, and Disobedience, did defile al things, insomuch as al things
were to be unclean, and accursed to his Posterity; so the Second Adam, did by
his Death, and Obedience, sprinkle, cleanse, and sanctify al things to his
Seed; for says the Apostle, Heb. 9.19. When Moses had spoken every Precept to
the People, he took the blood of Calves, and Goats, and sprinkled both the
Book, and all the People: Moreover, he sprinkled with blood, both the
Tabernacle, and all the Vessels of the Ministry; and almost al things, are by
the Law, purged with blood; but the Heavenly things themselves, with better
Sacrifices than these, verse 21, 23. that is, with Christ's own Blood. And if
you ask, why the Law, Non quod prophanum in se quicquam haberet faedus, sed
quod nihil ta^ sanctum est quod non homines sua immunditi^ prophanent, nisi
Deus ipse facta omnium innovatione occurrent, omnes cultus vitiosi sunt ac
impuri nisi Christus sanguinis sui aspersione eo^ mundet.

Ubi Christus cum sanguine non apparet, nihil nobis esse cum Deo: sic neque
Doctrina ipsa nobis ac in nostrum usum efficaverit nisi sanguine dedicata.

Calvin Heb. 9.20, 21.


Tabernacle, and the Vessels of the Ministry, which were holy, should be thus
sprinkled with Blood? Calvin gives Two Reasons; namely, Because though these
things were in themselves holy, yet being used by man (in regard of that
pollution that is in him) they might be profaned; and though the Book, and
Word of the Lord be holy, yet it will not, it cannot be efficacious, and
profitable to us, Nisi Sanguine Christi dedicata, unless it be sprinkled by the
Blood of Christ. Now this sprinkling of the Vessels, Book, and al things; was
performed when the Sacrifice was offered, and when the Testament was dedicated;
but the new Testament was confirmed by the Death of Christ, his Blood being the
Blood of the New Testament, and he was sacrificed on the Cross; and therefore
though his Seed are sanctified with inherent Holiness when they do believe, yet
there was a sprinkling of al things, Ordinances, Afflictions, Dispensations,
and al Conditions to them, by the Death of Christ; so that this Sanctification,
or sprinkling of al things, in reference to his Seed, was another Fruit, and
immediate Effect of the Death of Christ.

Adam, did break the old Covenant by his Sin, and Disobedience; so the Second
Adam by his Death, and Obedience, did confirm the new; For (says the Apostle,
Heb. 9.16.) Where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be, the Death of
the Testator; for a Testament is of force, after men are dead, otherwise it is
of no strength at al, whilst the Testator lives, verse 17. And again, Gal.
3.15. Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be but a man's
Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereto; and
this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, etc.
ver. 17. So that the Covenant of Grace was confirmed by Christ in his Death:
Quest. Qui vero sanguis aut mors Christi nobis voluntatem Dei confirmavit?

Resp. Duplici ratione primum quod nos manifest de ingenti in nos Del
charitate certus reddiderit, idque adeo quod Deus volit nobis id donare, quod
in N. Foedere promittat, unde sanguis novi Faederis est dictus et ipse Christus
testis verus et fidelis.

Cateches. Racoviae de Prophetico Christi munere, cap. 8.

Socinus de Christo servatore pars prima; de justif. Synops. 2.

Volkillius de vera Religione Lib. 3. Cap. 18.

Crellius ad Librum Hug. Grot. respons. ad cap. 1. partic. 26.


Only the Question is, How this Covenant was confirmed by the death of Christ?
The Socinians say, That Christ's death did confirm the Covenant by way of
Testimony, or Declaration of the Truth of the Gospel; the Lord say they has
promised in the Gospel, that al those who repent and believe, shall be justified
and saved. Now Christ preaching this Truth, and dying in it, has confirmed
this Truth, and the Gospel; and therefore say they, Christ is called the true,
and the faithful Witness. 1. But though Christ by his death, did bear his
Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, yet where do we find in Scripture, that
his death did confirm the Covenant by way of Testimony? 2. Where does it appear
that the Covenant which he confirmed by his death, was this, If you repent, and
believe, you shall be saved, and justified? The thing is true, and a Gospel
Truth, but the Covenant which Christ confirmed, ye read of in Heb. 8. where the
Lord does promise both Faith, and Repentance also. 3. If the death of Christ
did confirm the Covenant by way of Testimony, testifying the Truth of the
Gospel; then the death of the Martyrs should confirm the Covenant, more than
the death of Christ: for the Socinians deny the Deity of Christ; and if Christ
were only Man, then the death of thousands (some dying more painful deaths than
Christ did) should give a greater Testimony to the Truth of the Gospel, and so
confirm the Covenant more than the death of Christ: but where do we find in all
the Scripture, that the death of the Martyrs is said to confirm the New
Covenant? Vide,

Essenii Triumph. Crucis, page 353. Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 1.

Sib. Lubbert. de Jesu Christo servatore contra F. Socinum Lib. 1. Cap. 3.

Nicol. A^nold. de morte Christi, Cap. 8.


The death of none, but of the Testator, can confirm the Testament; but Christ
only (and not the Martyrs) is the Testator, Heb. 9.17. 4. Then also the
Miracles that Christ wrought, and the Apostles preaching, with the Gifts that
Christ gave to them upon his Ascension, should confirm the Covenant; for says
the Apostle, Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?
which at the first, began to be preached by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us
by them that heard him; God also bearing them witness, both with signs and
wonders, and with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, verse 4. It
seems then, that the Truth of the Go^pel was confirmed to us by Miracles, and
the Apostles preaching; yet the Miracles, and preaching of the Apostles, are
not said in Scripture to confirm the Covenant, which yet might very well be
said, if Christ's Death should confirm it by way of Testimony. 5. If the Death
of Christ, does confirm the Covenant by way of Testimony, then the blood of
Bulls and Goats, might have confirmed the Covenant; for when God testified the
Truth of his Promise to Adam, Genesis 15. He said to him, Take thee an Heifer of
three years old, and a she Goat of three years old, and a Turtle Dove, and a
young Pidgeon; and he took them, and divided them in the midst, ver. 9, 10. But
the Apostle tells us plainly, Heb. 9. That the blood of Bulls and Goats could not
confirm the Covenant. 6. The Ordinance of the Lords Supper, does testify Gods
willingness to forgive sinners; That Cup is the New Testament in Christ's blood,
shed for many for the remission of sins: But though the Lords Supper be a Seal
of the Covenant, sealing to us, evidencing, testifying, and assuring us of Gods
Love b^ Christ; yet it is not a Seal of the Covenant, as Christ's blood was,
which did not only ^eal to us, but was a Seal of the Covenant it self, as it
lay between God the Father, and him. But if Christ's death, did only confirm the
Covenant by way of Testimony, then the Lords Supper might as well be said to
confirm the Covenant, which is no where affirmed in the Scripture. But 7. Look
how the Obedience of the first Adam, should have confirmed the Covenant, in
case he had stood; and look how he broke that Covenant by his Disobedience; so
did the Death, and Obedience of Christ, the Second Adam, confirm the new
Covenant. Now if the first Adam had stood and confirmed that Covenant, he had
confirmed it by performing the Condition of it; and he brake it by not
observing, and not doing the Condition of it: so the Second Adam, Christ, did
confirm the new Covenant by his Death, and in that, by his Obedience, he did
perform the Condition of the New Covenant for his Seed: Thus I say, he
confirmed the Covenant of Grace, even by performing the Condition of it; and
this confirmation of the Covenant, was the next, and most immediate Fruit, and
Effect of his Death. And thus you have seen both Negatively, and Affirmatively,
what are not, and what are, the next, and immediate Effects of the Death of
Christ.

Gal. 3.13. 1 These. 1.10. 2. Our Effectual Vocation, or Calling, 2 Timothy 1.9. 3.
Our Justification, and actual Reconciliation with God, Romans 5.1. Ephesians. 1.8. 4.
Our Sanctification, and holiness of Soul and Life, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Heb.
9.14. 1 John, 1.7. 5. Our Adoption, and al those Spiritual Privileges which
belong to the Sons of God, Gal. 4.4, 5. 6. Our Peace, Comfort, and Freedom from
Fears, 1. Luke 74.2. Heb. 14 And to name no more but this, 7. Our Salvation in
the World to come, Heb. 9.15. Al which, I call the more remote Effects of the
Death of Christ; which though he did not presently see the obtainment of, yet
he shall surely see them. And so I come to the Second thing propounded, to be
cleared and evidenced, Viz. The Assurance of his Issue, and the sight thereof.

Having therefore seen, what are the Fruits, and Effects of the Death of
Christ, How may it appear, that Christ shall certainly see the obtainment of
these last Effects? and what assurance had, or has he thereof?

of al those things which he traveled for.

Merita Christi sunt causae omnium auxiliorum et totius gratiae quae in Natura
lapsa conferuntur hominibus, et idem dicendum de omnibus dispositionibus, tam
proximis quam remotis justificantem gratiam antecedentibus, et de augmento
gratiae.

Meruit gratiam et gloriam.

Thom Aquin. quest. Q. 29. de gratia Ch^isti, art. 7. ad arg 8.

Scotus Lib. 3. did. 19 qu. unica.

Altissiod. Lib 3. Tract 1. quest 7.

A^uarez. de anxil. disput. 29 Conclus 1.

Molina de Lib art. 6. concord. qu. 23. ar. 4, 5 disp. 2 conclu.

Vasquez in 3 part. Thom. Tom. 1. disput 77. cap. 2. 3, 4.

Suarez. in 3. part. Thom. disput. 41. Sect. 2, 3.

Astunicens. de gratia Christi, q. 5. 2 conclus.

R^ph. Aversa pars prima, qu 23. sect 15.

Aureolus, Lib. 3. in sent. did. 20 q 1.

Roder. de Ariaga in part. 3. Thom. T^^. 6 477

Zumel. in 1 part. Thom. qu 23. art. 5.

B^nner, in 1 part. Thom. qu 23, art. 5.

T^nnerus disput. de incarnat. q. 6, dub 5. Tom 4.

T B Medina in 3. part. Tho. 9. q 19 art 4.

^^r^a^iens. in ^ qu. contra Gent. Lib. 4 Cap. 55.

Si q^is dix^^it eandem gratiam D^i ^e^ J^^um Christum Dominum nost^um propter
hoc ta^u^ nos acjuva^e ad no^ peccandum quod p^r ips^m nobis revelatur ^t
^pe^^tur intelligent^a m^nd^to^um^^^ sciamus quid appe^^re quid vitare
d^bean^us non autem per iliam nobis pr^sta^i ut quod f^ciendum cognov^timus
etiam facere diligamus atque valeanius anathema ^it; cum enim dicit Apostolus
scientia ^^slat charitas vero edificat valde impium est, u^c^edamus ad eam quae
inslat nos habere g^atiam Christi, ad eam quae edificat non habere, cum sit
utrumque donum Dei, et scire quae facere debeamus et diligere ut faciamus.

Council Milevitan 2. can. 4. Bin. Tom. 1.


For 1. He did not only merit Heaven and Salvation for those whom he died for;
but he merited Grace, Holiness, and Regeneration for them: for whatever God
gives in time, he gives upon the account of Christ's Merit; but in time, he does
give Grace and Holiness, for he does bless us with all spiritual blessings in
Christ. Now Grace and Holiness are Spiritual blessings, and therefore God does
bless us therewith in Christ. 2. Look what the Father promises, that he does
give out upon the account of Christ; for all the Promises are Yea, and Amen, in
Christ; Grace and Truth comes by Christ, and the fulfilling of the Promise, is
truth; but God the Father has promised Grace as well as Glory; I will write my
Law in your heart, I will take away the heart of stone, and give you an heart
of flesh, I will give you a new heart, says God. 3. Wha^ever Grace is derived
from Christ, and communicated by him to us, he merited for us; But of his
Fullness, we do al receive, even Grace for Grace. 4. We pray to God for the
Conversion, and Regeneration of sinners, and we beg this in the Name of Christ;
therefor Christ has merited, not only Glory, but Grace and Holine s. And 5.
The Apostle tells us expressly in 2 Timothy 1.9. That we are called with an holy
Calling, in, and by Jesus Christ; W^o has saved us, and called us with an holy
Ca^ling; not according to our Work^, but according to his own purpo e, and
Grace, whi^^ he has given us in Christ Je^us, before the Wo^ld began. As God
does work al Na^ural things by Second Cau^es, so he does work al Supernatural
things by Christ: By Christ ^e d^d make the old Creation, as he was the Ete^n^l
Son of God; and by Christ he makes the new Creation, as our Mediator. Now look
what the Father works by him, that did he merit for us; but our new Creation
is wrought by him, and theretore he did not only merit Heaven, and happiness,
but al our Grace and Holiness for us.

2. He did not only merit the impetration of our Redemption, but the
application of it also, the application of the means of Grace, and the
application of his own Merit; for his Death is made the Reason of this
application, Meritum Christi sufficienter operatur ut causa universalis salutis
humanae, sed oportet hanc causam applicari per scripturam et per fidem
formatum, et ideo requiritur aliquid aliud ad salutem nostram praeter meritum
Christi cujus tamen meritum Christi est causa.

Tho. Aquin. quest. 29. de gratia Christi, art. 7.


Esai. 53.11. By his knowledge shall my righteous Servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities: so again, Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood
of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered up himself, purge our
Consciences from dead Works, to serve the living God; and for this cause is he
the Mediator of the new Covenant. Now if Christ shall therefore justify many,
because he did bear their sins, then he did merit this application for all those
whom he died for. 2. If Christ did not merit this application, then there is
some Grace which is not from Christ, Haec applicatio est maximum Dei donu^ et
maxim necessaria ad salutem sed Christus meruit nobis omnia Dei dona et omnia
media necessaria ad salutem, ergo haec applicatio est ex meritis Christi.
Suarez. disput. 41. sect. 2.

Nemo propter solum peccatum originis damnatur.

Armin. contr. Perk. Arnold. Corvinus, contra Tilen. p. 391.


or this application is no Grace, but the application of Grace, and of Christ's
Merits, and Redemption, is Grace, and there is no Grace which we have, but is
al from Christ. 3. Our other Adversaries tell us, that no Child perishes, or is
damned only for Original sin, but that sin is taken off from al, by the Death
of Christ; therefore the death of Christ, and his Merits, are applied unto al
Infants; and if so, then he has merited the application of Redemption for all,
or else he did not die equally for all, as they say. 4. Look what God has
promised, that Christ has merited; but he has promised the application of
Christ's death and Merits, for says he, My Servant shall deal prudently, he shall
be exalted, so shall he sprinkle many Nations, Alias non perfectius meritum
Christi esset causa salutis p^aedestinatorum quam non p^aedestinatoru^, quia
quod attinet ad sufficientiam meriti, aequaliter respicit omnes homines sed
differentia est in ho^ quod quibusdam applicatur illud meritum quibusdam non,
ergo si haec applicatio non cadit sub merito Christi meritum Christi ^ qualiter
r^spice^et praedestinatos et non p aedestinatos. Zumel. quest. 23. art. 5
Isa. 52.15. And 5. If he did not merit the application as well as the
impetration of our Redemption, then he merited no more for those that are in
Heaven, than for those that are in Hell; no more for those that are saved, than
for those that are damned: For he merited the impetration of Redemption for all
the particular men of the World, say they. But he did merit more for the saved,
than for the damned; else those in Heaven have no more cau e to praise God, and
to be thankful unto Christ, than those that are in Hell. Surely therefore, our
Lord and Savior Christ, when he died, did not only merit the Impetration, but
the Application also, of our Redemption.

3. He did not only merit a sufficiency of Grace for us, but the efficacy of
Grace also: Hoc etiam salubriter profitemur et credimus quod in omni opere bono
nos non incipimus, et postea per Dei miserecordiam adjuvamur, sed ipse nobis
nullis praecedentibus meritis et fidem et amorem sui inspirat. Council.
Araufican. 2. can. 25.
For look what Grace the Father gives in time that the Son merited, for he
blesses with all spiritual blessings in him; but the Father does not only give
forth a sufficiency of Grace, but the efficacy of it; for says the Apostle, he
works in us, (...), the will, and the deed. 2. Look what Grace the Father
promises us, that Christ merited for us; but the Father promises not only a
sufficiency, but the efficacy of Grace, I will put my Spirit into you, and cause
you to walk in my ways, says God. 3. Christ is the Mediator of the new
Covenant, upon the account of his Death, Heb. 9.14, 15. therefore whatever
Grace is promised in the New Covenant, his Death is the meritorious cause of;
but the efficacy of Grace is promised in the new Covenant; I will write my Law
in your hearts, Heb. 8. 4. The Death and Obedience of Christ, is more
meritorious for us, than the Sin, and Disobedience of the first Adam, was
against us, Romans 5. But the Sin, and Disobedience of the first Adam, did not
only merit a sufficiency of evil, but the efficacy of evil upon our Nature; and
therefore the Death, and Obedience of the Second Adam, did merit the efficacy
of Grace for us. Alius non perfectius meritum Christi esset causa salutis
predestinatorum quam reproborum, quia quod attinet ad sufficientiam meriti
aequaliter respicit omnes tum reprobos quam predestinatos, etc.

Bannez. 1. part. Aqui. 23. q. art. 5.


And 5. If Christ did not merit the efficacy of Grace, he should merit no more
for those that are saved in Heaven, than for those that are damned in Hell; for
he merited a sufficiency of Grace, say the Adversaries, even for those that are
in Hell: but that is an ugly Assertion, even in the Eyes of moderate Papists.
But 6. Do we not pray for the Efficacy of Grace, and of Christ's Death? When
David said, Incline my heart to thy Law, and not unto Covetousness; when he
said, Open mine Eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law; did he only pray
for the sufficiency of Grace? No, but the efficacy of it; therefore we may, and
do still pray so, and that upon the account of Christ's Merits: Surely therefore,
Christ has not only merited the sufficiency, but the efficacy of Grace.

4. Cujus oppositum est erroneum maxim si n^g^tur Christum nobis meru^sse
fia^m.

Bannez. 1 p^re. q. 23. art. 5.

Zumel. 1. part. q. 23. art. 5.


He did not only merit some Blessings of the Covenant, but that which is
commonly called the Condition of the Covenant: He died to procure Faith and
Repentance, he did not only die to merit a power for us to believe, but by his
Death, he did also merit Faith and Repentance; for look what the Father works
in us by him, that he merited; but the Father works Faith and Repentance by
him; For he works in us, that which is wel-pleasing in his sight by Jesus
Christ, Heb. 13.21. Now Faith and Repentance, are wel-pleasing in his sight. 2.
Christ merited all that Grace which the Father has promised, for all the
Promises are Yea, and Amen in him; but the Father has promised, not only to
give us a power to believe, but to take away the heart of stone, that is,
actual resistance, and to give an heart of flesh; that is, a yielding he^rt,
and what is Faith, but a yielding unto God? And ye shall all know me, says God.
3. Christ merited for us, that which he works in us; but he works Faith in us,
for he is the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12. 4. We pray to God for
Faith, and Repentance; I believe, Lord, help my Unbelief; and Christ prayed for
Peter, that his Faith might not fail. Si quis sicut augmentum ita etiam initium
fidei, ipsum credulitatis offectum, quo in eum credimus, qui justificat impium
et regenerationem baptismatis perven^mus non per gratiae donum id est per
inspirationem spiritus sancti corrigentem voluntatem nost^am ab infidelitate ad
fidem ab impi^tate ad pietatem et naturaliter nobis in^sse dicit Apostolicis
dogmatibus adversarius approbatur. Council. Arausican. 2. Can. 5.

Qui orat et dicit ne nos inseras in tentationes, non utique id orat ut homo
sit, quo est natura, neque orat id ut habeat libe^um arbit^tum quod ^^m ^ccepit
cum crearetu^ ipsa natura neque orat remissionem peccatoru^ quia hoc sup^rius
dicitur demitte nobis d^bita nostra, neque orat ut accipiat mandatum s^d plane
orat ut faciat mandatum.

Council. Milevetan. Epist. Familiaris. B in

Et hoc a deo ipso datum est vobis ut non solum credendo credatis in ipsum
Christum. Fabr. Boderian.

Et hoc a Deo ipso datum est vobis ut non solum credendo credatis in Meschicho.
Quiodmanstad.


We also pray for the Faith and Conversion of Infidels, and that in the Name of
Christ, do we only pray, that God would give them, and us a power to believe?
that (it is said) we have already: we pray for Faith and Repentance, in the Name
of Christ, therefore Christ has merited Faith and Repentance. And, 5. The
Apostle tells us expressly, that the (...), the very work of Believing is given
us upon the account of Christ; Unto you it is given for Christ, not only to
believe on him, but to suffer for him, Phil. 1.29. Some would read these words
otherwise, being much pinched with the strength of them; but the old Siriack
Translation reads them thus, though Grotius either consulting with the Latin
Translation, or his own declined Judgment, makes these words, for Christ, to be
a Pleonatine; but Councel^, Fathers, and others, read them thus; Unto you it is
given for Christ, not only to believe on him, and so the words ought to be
read; for the (...), is to be read in the first clause of the verse, as it is
read in the last; but in the last part of the verse, it is read for to suffer
for Christ; what is that? is that in the behalf of Christ? No, but for his
sake. So therefore, the same words in the former part of the verse, are to be
read, for Christ, that is, for the sake of Christ, to you it is given to
believe for Christ's sake: Now look what the Father gives as an act of free
Grace, that he gives upon the account of Christ's Merit; for free Grace, and
Christ's Merits, (...) Versio Siriaca.

Council. A ausican. 2. can. 5. 25.

Milevitan. ad Innocent. in Epist. 95.

Austin. lih. de praedest. Storu^ cap. 2.

Ambros.

Anselm. comment.

Vide Justinian.

Velasquez. in Locum.

Vasquez. in 3. part. tom. 1. Q 19 art. 4 c. 2.


go together in the Language of Paul's Epistles; but the (...), the work of
Faith is given us as an act of free Grace; for says the Apostle, (...); and
look what the Father gives for Christ's sake, that Christ has merited; but as
the Father has given us (...), to suffer for him, that is, for his sake; so
says the Apostle, he has given us (...), for Christ, that is, for his sake to
believe. So that when Christ died for us, he did not only merit a power to
believe, and repent, but he did merit Faith and Repentance. Now if Christ did
merit al these things, then knowing that the Father is Faithful, in paying and
performing what the Son purchased, he must needs know, and be fully assured
that he should see, and enjoy al those effects of his Death, which he traveled
for, when he died.





But I fear that I am none of his Seed, that he did not die for me.

I lay down my Life for my Sheep, says he; a Sheep is an harmless Creature, it
can be hurt by any, but it can do hurt to none; it is a prey to al, but does
prey upon none. So are the Sheep of Christ, innocent, harmless, and without
horns, as the word is, be innocent as Doves, or without horns as Doves, Absque
cornibus, translatio Graci vocabuli a placidis animalibus sumpta videtur, quae
natura nullis cornibus armavit ad depellendam injuriam aut si armavit cornibus
ad id non utuntur. Luc. Brugens. in Matthew. 10. verse. 16.
(...); a Sheep is an useful, profitable Creature, nothing not useful in it;
the Flesh, the Wool, the very Dung thereof profitable. So are the Sheep of
Christ, and his Sheep hear his Voice, but know not the Voice of a Stranger; and
if you be in your Life harmless, profitable, hearing the Voice of Christ in the
Gospel, then are you his Sheep, and he did die for you. 2. If you can leave the
b^som of your sweet Relations, and suffer for Christ, then did he leave the
bosom of his Father, and suffer for you; for we love him, because he loved us
first, al our Grace, is but the reflection of his. 3. If he intercedes for you
in Heaven, then he died for you on Earth; now he ever lives to make
Intercession for all those that come unto God by him; you come unto God by him,
therefore he goes unto God for you, and therefore died for you. 4. He died to
reconcile God to us, and us unto God; if you be reconciled to God, and the
things of God, so as you do now love the Truths, Ways, and things of God,
which you once hated, then is God also reconciled to you. Now thus it is with
you; you can say, through Grace I do love those Truths, and Ways, and Things
of God, which I once hated; therefore you are reconciled to God, therefore he
is reconciled to you, and therefore Christ died for you. 5. If you can fulfill
the Law of Christ, then has Christ died for you; for those that he died for,
he satisfied, and fulfilled the Law for; and if you can fulfill his Law, you may
safely say he has obeyed, and fulfilled the Law for me: now the Law of Christ,
is to bear one another burdens; Bear ye one another burdens, says the
Apostle, and so fulfill the Law of Christ: this you do, and can do; therefore he
has fulfilled the Law for you, and so has died for you. 6. If you be the
Seed, and Children of Christ, then did he travel, and die for you; the Children
of Christ are such as are willing to be instructed by him, (...), to instruct,
comes from (...), a Child, because it is the property of a Child to be willing
to be instructed; a Child does obey his Father, without why's and wherefore's,
merely because the Father commands; his Command is the Child's Reason, for my
Father bid me, etc. the Child is contented with the Fathers carving, goes to
school about its business, and leaves its provision to the Father, living in
dependence on him. Now thus it is with you; you do depend on Christ, leave your
Condition to him, and obey, and do, because Christ, or God command^* and are
willing to be inst^ucted by him; Surely therefore you are the Seed of Christ,
and therefore Christ died for you, even for you in particular; and therefore
though the great effects of his Death, may yet be hidden from you, yet he shall
obtain al his ends upon you in your Justification, Sanctification, Consolation,
Salvation; for he has merited al these at the hand of the Father, and the
Father will surely give out what Christ has purchased, for he is Faithful;
wherefore comfort your selves in these things, O al ye Seed of the Lord.

CHRIST IN TRAVEL. AND The Contentment, which he does, and shall find in his
Assurance of Issue.
Sermon III.
ISAIAH, 53.11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied.


HAving spoken to the Second Branch of the Doctrine, viz. Chri ts Assurance of
Issue, and his ^ight thereof; the Third Branch now follows, which is,
Delectatio se habet in affectibus sicut quies naturalis in corporalibus est
enim aliqua convenientia seu connaturalitas. Aquin.


The Contentment, delight, and satisfaction which he does, and shall find
therein.

Satisfaction, or delight, is nothing else, but that Sabbath, or rest, which
the Soul finds in the Fruition of the thing desired; and as the thing is less,
or more desired; so the delight, and satisfaction in the Fruition of it, is
less or more: now Christ did very much desire to see the Fruit of his Travel; I
thirst, said he on the Cross, which is the strongest of desires: and what did
he thirst after, but the Salvation of Mankind, the Fruit and Issue of his
Travel? The Bread of the laboring man is sweet, says Solomon; and the word
(...) here used for the Travel of Christ, signifies such a toylsom labor, as
the poor man does exercise in the sweat of his Brows to get his daily Bread; it
is much contentment, and satisfaction which the thirsty man does find in his
Drink, or the hungry man does find in his Meat, or Bread. Now the word (...)
here used, and translated, Sa^isfied, is the same that is used in Psalm. 107.
The hungry he will satisfy with Bread; and is it not a great satisfaction,
delight, and contentment, which the Woman finds in the sight of her Child,
which she has had a sore travel for? Our Savior tells us, that she forgets her
Labor, and Travel, for joy that a Man-child is born into the world: Such a
Travel was that of Christ's Sufferings, and such contentment does, and will he
find in his issue; and therefore as Jacob said, These are the Chi^dren which
God has given me; so does Christ say, Behold, I and the Children, which God
has given me, Heb. 2. only ye know, that the delight and contentment, will be
proportionable to the Travel; Quanto majus erat periculum in prelio tanto majus
erit gaudium in triumpho. Austin.
the greater the Conflict is, and the sorrow of it, the greater will the Joy be
in the Conquest; and the lower Christ d d descend in his Sorrows and Travels,
the higher he will, and shall ascend in his delights and satis^actions. Now when
he ^uffered, he did conflict with the Wrath of God, and did endure the torments
of Hell: Surely therefore, as he did lie low in his Sufferings, so his heart
does, and shall arise to the highest contentment and satisfaction in the sight
and Fruition of the Fruit of his Travel.

But wherein does, or did Christ express this height, and greatness of
Contentment in the sight of his Issue?

with, namely, his Seed; or that which he traveled for, namely, the Fruit and
Effect of his Death.

with, his Seed.

Amasti me Domine plusquam te, quia mori volu^sti pro me.

Austin.


will a man suffer an ordinary death for another, whom he does not delight much
in? It Is an argument of the Martyrs delight in, and love to Christ, that they
suffered such hard things for him with delight: O! said one, suffering for
Christ; I am in Heaven already, before I come in Heaven; I have so much joy in
my Prison, that I have found a nest of Honey in the Lions Body: Some sung in
their Prison, and some clapped their hands in the flames; why? but to show
their delight and great contentment which they did find in Christ? and did
their cheerful suffering for Christ argue their satisfaction in him? and does
not Christ's cheerful suffering for them, argue his contentment in them? I
delight to do thy will, thy Law is within my heart: said he when he came to
this suffering work, yea, now this is my hour, The hour of the Son of man; and
again, when he went out to suffer, now (said he) is the Son of man glorified.
Surely he could never have born those sufferings with such delight, if he had
not great delight, and contentment in those whom he suffered for.

Humana Natura nunquam per se seorsim existebat neque h^buit in se rationem
personae atque adeo non potest propri^ dici assumpsisse divinam Naturam aut
personam, sicut Divina Natura et persona dicitur assumpsisse humanam, neque
potest humana Natura tam proprie dici deificata, quemadmodum divina Natura et
persona dicitur incarnata legimus enim Deum manifestatum fuisse et visibilem
factum suisse in carne, id est in humana natura, et eodem sensu legimus
sermonem factum esse carnem, 1 John 14. sed nusquam legimus carnem aut humanam
naturam esse invisibilem factum in Deo, aut carnem factum esse Deum.

Ames. Sciagraph. domin. 6.


that he does draw them into communion and fellowship with him in his royal
dignities? I do not say, that the Saints are by Christ Deified, Christed, or
that they are made Christ's like him; there are some Excellencies, and
Prerogatives of Christ, which are not communicated; for though we are made
partakers of the Divine Nature, yet our Nature was never manifested in the
Godhead, God was incarnate, and manifested in the Flesh; and so Christ is truly
called Man, for the Word was made Flesh, but Flesh was not made the Word, nor
was Flesh manifested in the Godhead; and therefore Man cannot be called God,
or Christ: but though the Seed of Christ are not drawn into this fellowship
with him, yet he has taken them into communion with him, in his blessed
unctions, therein they are called Partners, (...), Heb. 1. He has anointed him
with the Oil of Gladness above his Fellows, or Partners. Is he the anointed of
the Lord? so are they said to be anointed, Omnes qui vera fide in Christum
recumbunt participes fiunt suo modulo dignitatis Christi

Participes sunt aliquo functionis propheticae quate^^us spititum Christi
habent quo docentur de omnibus, 1 John, 2.27. functionis et dignitatis
sacerdotalis quatenus datur illis offerre sacrificia oblationes, et semetipsos
Deo, Romans 12. Regiae dignitatis fiunt participes in quantum Dominum habent per
Dei gratiam in seipsos. Ames. Sciag. p. 69.


Touch not mine anointed: Is he called a Prophet? so are they called Prophets,
and do my Prophets no harm, Psalm. 105. Is he called a King, and a Priest? so
are they called also, a royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2.9. Kings and Priests unto
God, Revel. 5.10. Is he called Hephribo, in whom I am delighted, Matthew. 3. ^r
my delight in him? so are they called Hephribah, in which I am delighted, or my
delight in her, Isa. 62 4. Now what greater argument of true delight and
contentment can there be, than thus to draw them into this Communion, and
Fellowship with himself?

Quod servus aliquis seu mancipium agere solet pro suo Domino, idem fecit
servator pro nobis hominibus, ut enim ille tota die laborat in commodum sui
Domini, ita ut quicquid lucretur id cedat suo Domino, sibi autem nihil preter
membra totumque corpus lassum et defatigatum reservat sic et Christus noster
ipse laboravit, ad nos autem merces laboris rediit hoc est pro nobis laboravit.

Granatens. compend. Catech. maj. lib. 3. de Red. mysterio.


to have communion with them in all their sufferings? Thus it is, they have
communion with him in his Comforts, and he has communion with them in their
Sorrows; once he bare the Curse of their sin for them, and now he bears the
Cross of their sin with them; they have Cedar Wood, and Gold and Silver from
him, he has dirty Cities from them, In all their afflictions, he was
afflicted, Isa. 63.9. and as a tender Wife is afflicted with her Husband, and
does run up and down for him; so does Christ also, and therefore if ye look
into Cant. 7.10. ye shall find, that when the Spouse says, I am my beloved's,
and his desire is toward me: it is the same word that is used for the Wife,
Genesis 3.16. And thy desire shall be toward thine Husband? Why so? not because
Christ shall be subject to the will of the Saints, as the will of the Wife is to
be subject to the will of the Husband; but because (the Word (...), coming from
the root (...), signifying to run up and down, to and fro, with solicitude and
carefulness) as the Wife does run up and down, looking to, and caring for her
sick Husband, being afflicted with him in all his afflictions: So Christ does
carefully tender, and is solicitous for the Saints good, his heart as it were,
running up and down for them, and being afflicted with them in all their
afflictions, she says here, and his desire, or his running up and down
affection, is toward me. Now what greater argument of delight, and contentment
can there be?

Prove. 8.31. I was by him, rejoicing in the Habitable Parts of his Earth, and
my delights were with the Sons of Men: When he came into the World, he came to,
and for them, Isa. 9. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given:
while he lived here, he lived for them, Behold thy King comes to thee, meekly
riding on an Ass: when he died, he died for them; The Just for the unjust; he
died for our sins: and when he rose again, he rose for them, who died for our
sins, says the Apostle, and rose again for our Justification: when he went to
Heaven, he went for them; I go to prepare a place for you (says he, John 14.)
when he ascended, he did ascend for them, that he might give Gifts unto men;
and when he appeared before the Father, he did appear for them, Heb. 9.24. and
now he continues in Heaven for them; Seeing he ever lives (says the Apostle)
to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7 there he negotiates for them still, and does
transact al their business; why should not we negotiate for him on Earth, who
does negotiate for us in Heaven? why should not we spend of al our time for
him, who has, and does spend of the days of his Eternity for us? But if
Christ do thus spend, and lay out himself, and day, and time, and eternity for
his Seed; then surely he does, and must needs take much contentment, and
satisfaction in them.

He that touches you, touches the Apple of mine Eye, Zach. 2. The Eye of man,
is the most tender part you know, and men are the most tender of that; but I
pray observe what kind of men they were that Christ was thus tender of: in
Deuteronomy. 32.10. it is said that God kept the People of Israel in the Wilderness, as
the Apple of his Eye: There they were in a low and sad condition, yet there was
the Love of their youth expressed in following God; but now these men were in
Babylon, and they were that part of the People of the Jews, which did stay
behind, when others were gone to re-build the Temple; and through Unbelief did
this part stay behind; therefore says the Prophet, verse 6. Come forth, and
flee from the Land of the North; yet concerning these, even these rebellious,
and unbeleeving Residue, does the Lord say, He that touches you, touches the
Apple of mine Eye, verse 8. Surely then, if Christ had ^uch tender care of
the^e, in reference to all that might touch, or hurt them, I may truly say in
regard of his Seed, he will not suffer a cold wind for to blow upon them: herein
is his delight, and love manifested.



have them wear in their Bosoms til he comes again, I mean the Lords Supper: Do
this as often as ye do it (says he) in remembrance of me. When a Man goes from a
place, and does leave his Friends, he bestows some token of Love upon his best
Friends; or if he die, he gives his choice, and beloved Friend a Token of
Remembrance; he does not so by those whom he loves not, but by such as he loves
much, and delights in: Thus did our Savior Christ, when he went away, and died,
he left a Crucifix, as I may so call it, this Ordinance of the Supper, to be
worn in the Bosom of all the Churches, as a Memorial, or Remembrance of him. The
Socinians, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Ex istis Pauli verbis
apparet graviter errasse illos qui existimarunt, verbum (ut vulgata et Erasmi
interpretatio habet) commemorationem, quod in Graeco est (...) mutari debere in
recordationem, neque enim dicit Paulus mortem Domini recordamini etc. Non est
igitur quod quis ex verbo illo colligat ernam Domini in eum finem institutum
fuisse ut nobis suggerat et in memoriam revocet mortem ipsius Domini, id quod
nulla alioqui sacratum litterarum authoritate, nullave ratione probari potest.

Faust. Socinus de usu et fine ^^nae Domini.


tell us that the word (...), Remembrance, should rather be translated
Celebration; do this in the Celebration of me, and that the word does signify
Celebration, and not Remembrance: but if ye look into Heb. 10.3. ye shall find
it is said, But in those Sacrifices, there is a remembrance again made of sin
every year: it is the same word that is used for the Lords Supper, and should
it be translated a Celebration there? should the words be read thus but in
these Sacrifices, there is a Celebration of sin every year? surely no: well then
is the word translated in the Institution of the Lords Supper, do this in
remembrance of me, and in that Christ has left such a remembrance for his
Seed; what does this argue, but that they should delight in him, as he does
delight in them?

Romans 8. that a^ he took their flesh upon him, and was made one with them, so
they should take of his Spirit, and be made one with him. Now can ^his, and al
these things be, without great contentment, and delight in them? Surely, the
delight and Satisfaction which Christ takes in his Seed, is exceeding great,
and very full. Prove. 8. he says, his delights (in the plural Number) are in
them; and Psalm. 16. he says, all his delight is in them.

But why, and upon what account does our Lord and Savior Christ, take such
delight and satisfaction in his Seed?



own, and men do naturally delight in their own. Now they are not his own only
as a man's Goods are his own, P^oprietas delectationis causa.
but they are his own, as his Wife is his own, and his own Body.

given him of the Father: a man loves, and delights much in that which is given
him by a most precious Friend: such is the Father; and says Christ, Thine they
were, and thou gave them to me.

related to him, with all the Relations of Love; they are his Brethren, He is
not ashamed to call them Brethren, Heb. 2. Unumquodque in quantu^ amatur
efficitur delectabile.

Aquin.


They are his Children, Behold I, and the Children whom God has given me,
says he, Heb. 2. They are his Spouse, Ephesians. 5. A man loves, and delights in
him that is related to him, but with one single Relation; but if one person
could be invested with all relations of Love, he would be much delighted in:
Thus it is with the Seed of Christ, when they believe (for so I speak of them
now) they are related to him with all the Relations of Love; If any man (says
Christ) hear my words, and do them, he is my Mother, and Brother, and Sister.

one with him, he with them, and they with him; one with the greatest oneness,
of mutual In-being; I in you, and you in me, says Christ.

like him too, and suitable to him: al delight arises from a conjunction of
suitables: Christ, Omnis delectatio oritur ex conjunctione convenientis cum
convenienti. Aquin.
and his believing Seed, are not only joined into one; but in this Union there
is a Conjunction of suitables, Christ suiting with them, and they with him
again, being of the same mind and affection: Does Christ say unto his Spouse,
Cant. 4.10. Thy Love is better than Wine? so does the Spouse say to him, Cant.
1.2. Thy Love is better than Wine: Does he say to his Spouse, Thou art all fair
my Love, there is no spot in thee? Cant. 4.7. so does she say of him, He is
altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16. Does he contemplate her Beauty? Cant. 4. so does
she contemplate his Beauty, Cant. 5. Only herein he does exceed, even as David
exceeded Jonathan; yet there is an answerableness of Affection between Christ,
and his Seed.

Da mihi filios quod si non, morior ego Genesis 30. motior, 1. e memoria mei plane
emorietur et onliterabitur, dum enim parents post se relinqunt filios in illis
quafi adhuc vivere et superesse viden ur, untle vulgo apud Hebraeos j^ctata est
sententia cui non sunt liberi perinde est ac si mortuus sit: et Hebraei dicunt
qui non habet filios non est aedificatus sed quasi d ssipatus.

Paulus Fag. in Chapter Paraphr. in Genesis 30.

Psalm. 72.17 (...) filiabitur nomen ejus, Ar. Montan.


and his Name is continued, and born up in the World unto al Generations; He
shall prolong his days, says I^aiah, 53.10. But how so? He shall see his Seed,
and so shall prolong his days: His Name shall continue for ever, says the
Psalm. 72.17. But how so? even by the continual filiation of his Seed, and Name.
Now if he do yet live in them, and they only do hear up his Name in the World;
then no wonder that our Lord and Savior Christ, does take so much delight,
contentment, and satisfaction in them: surely his delight in them, is beyond al
expression; for says he, Cant. 7.6. How fair, and how pleasant art thou, O
Love for delights?



Isa. 53.10. He shall see his Seed, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his Hands: a good man delights to see the work of God prosper in his hands;
and the greater the work is, and the more it prospers, the more delight he
has, and contentment; and when does the Work of God prosper in a man's hands,
but when it attaineth the ends, and due effects thereof: Now the work that
Christ under took, was the greatest work in the world, and it was God the
Fathers Work, insomuch as Christ is called his Servant; and says Christ, Lo, I
come to do thy Will: Whenever therefore, he sees the Travel of his Soul in the
saving effects thereof, then he sees the good pleasure of the Lord prospering
in his hands, and so his heart is at rest.



Travel, are the ends which he aimed at in his Travel; and therefore when he
sees the Travel of his Soul in the Effects thereof, he must needs be at rest in
his heart, and be fully satisfied.

But how may it appear that Christ shall certainly obtain all those Ends which
he traveled for, and aimed at?

I and my Father (says he) are one: they are one in Nature, and therefore
there is but one will between them. Finis a Deo destinatus semper attingitur.
Now God the Father cannot be frustrated of his Ends, for he is a simple being,
and a pure Act, nothing can come between his Executive Power, and his Will. The
Soul of Man, is a compounded Being, Dr. Preston, on the Attrib. the simplicity
of God.
his Faculties differing from his Essence, and his Acts differing from his
Faculties, and therefore somth ng can come between his Will, and the Execution
of it; but the Executive Power, and the Will of God being one, and his Will, and
Act being one, nothing can come between his Will, and his Act; and therefore
look whatever he wills, he shall certainly obtain, and cannot be frustrated of
his Ends.

Effects of Christ's Death, were the Ends of his dying, and the same things
which were the e^ds that he ai^ ed at in his Death, are the effects of his
Death: For example, Did he aim at the Remission of our sins by his Death?
Matthew. 26.28. Remission of sin, is the effect of his Death, Ephesians. 1.7. Did he
aim at the washi^g, and sanctifying of the Church by his Death? Ephesians. 5.25,
26. This clensing, washing, and sanctifying, as the Effect of his Death, 1 Cor.
6.11. The Ends and Effects of his Death are the same, why so? but to show that
he shall certainly obtain al those gracious ends, which he traveled for.

Ends, then he must needs see the same. Now the Ends of his Death and
Sufferings are many, he did not only die, and suffer, to deliver us from the
Wrath to come, and to reconcile us to God; but he di^d and suffered, to bring
us to God, and to deliver us from this present evil World, 1 Gal. 4 he died to
sanctify, wash, and cleanse those that he died for, Ephesians. 5.25 to destroy him
that had the power of death, the D^vil, Heb. 2. and to redeem us from all
Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. Now what can h^nder him from the obtainment of the^e his
Ends? Can the Devil? he came to destroy him: Can the World? He came to deliver
us from this present evil World: Can our Sin, or Unbelief, hinder him? he came
to cleanse us, and wash us, and to redeem us from al Iniquity; why then are not
those redeemed from al Iniquity that he died for? Will ye say, because they will
not, or because they do not believe? he came to redeem us from those
unbeleeving won'ts for that Unbeleef; and that will not is a Sin and Iniquity, and
he came to redeem us from al, not from some, but from all Iniquity. Surely
therefore, if he did die for all particular men, he should redeem them al from
al Iniquity, and so from their Unbelief.

But when the Apostle says, that Christ came to redeem us from all Iniquity,
by that US, we are to understand Believers only, and not all the particular men
in the World.

all Iniquity, and not others: But those that say Christ died for all, say also
that he died equally, with equal Intentions of Love and Mercy for all; and if he
did die to redeem al particular men from al Iniquity, why are not al particular
men redeemed from al Iniquity? Will it yet be said, because they will not? why,
that will not, is an Iniquity: Will it be said, Because of their Unbelief? why,
that Unbelief is an Iniquity, and a Soul-disease. Now if a Physician come to
cure al Diseases, and he does not cure the most because they have Diseases, is
this a good reason why he does not cure them? You send a Servant to wash, and
cleanse a pot from its filthiness, and he returns with it unwashed, unclensed,
and he tells you that he did not wash it, because there was filth in it; will you
take this for a good reason from him? Surely no. Now Christ came to wash us,
and cleanse us from al Iniquities, and will he not do it because of our Iniquity?
Surely this can be no reason; and seeing these are the Ends of his Death and
Sufferings, there is nothing that can hinder him from the obtainment of them:
Therefore he shall certainly see the Travel of his Soul in the obtainment of al
those Ends which he suffered for. Delectatio oritur ex adeptione boni
convenientis, et cognitione hujusmodi adeptionis. Aquin.
Now two things there are, which do give full contentment, and satisfaction to
the Soul; The obtainment of ones End, and The knowledge of that obtainment; for
though I have obtained my End, yet if I do not know that I have obtained it, I
have not satisfaction; but where fruition, and knowledge of that fruition do
meet, there is full contentment and satisfaction. Now Christ shall not only
obtain his Ends, but he shall know, and set the Travel of his Soul, and
therefore he shall have full delight, contentment, and satisfaction therein. And
so the main Doctrine is now cleared, in all the three Parts thereof.

Applicat.
and be satisfied, then here you may see the Reason why we cannot be satisfied
with that Doctrine of Universal Redemption: Quare cum talis fuerit satisfactio
Christi, ut ea posita liberum fuerit Deo obtinendae salutis eam conditionem
ponere quam vellet, ipse vero Deus posuerit conditionem fidei, sequitur,
quandoquidem salva justitia per eam Dei voluntatem fidei ad salutem necessitus
ponitur eorum respectum pro quibus Christus satisfecit; eandem justitiam non
l^di cum damnantur increduli licet pro ipsorum peccatis sit satisfactum.

Corvin. contra Molin. cap. 23. page 442.


How can we be satisfied with that which is dis-satisfying to the heart of
Christ? Now according to that Doctrine, Christ shall see men damned for those
very sins, that he has died, and satisfied for: Corvinus is not ashamed to
speak it out, and it, or worse, must needs follow from that Doctrine; for many
shall be damned, not only for their Unbelief, and sins against the Gospel, but
for their sins against the Law, Romans 2.12. 2 Cor. 6.9. Either then Christ
satisfied for these sins, when he died for them, or not; if not, then it seems
that men possibly may have their sins against the Law pardoned, which Christ
has not satisfied for; for the Maintainers of that Doctrine say, That it is
possible that al may be saved, and so have their sins pardoned; and if men's
sins may be pardoned, which Christ has not satisfied for, then is the
Satisfaction of Christ made void according to the Doctrine of the Socinians:
and if Christ did bear, and die, and satisfy for these very sins, which men
are damned for, then shall God punish the same sin twice, which even a just man
will not do; and then wherein does our great Gospel Sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross, exceed the Sacrifices of the old Testament? for the Apostle tells us,
Heb. 10.3. That in those Sacrifices, there was a remembrance again made of sins
every year; but here shall be a remembrance again of sins made, not every year,
but unto al Eternity: O! how unsatisfying is this to the heart of Christ, that
instead of seeing the Travel of his Soul, he shall see those damned that he died
for, yea, damned for those sins that he satisfied for? al which must needs
follow upon the Doctrine of universal Redemption: According to that Doctrine,
Christ may miss the ends of his Death and Sufferings; for he died not only for
the Salvation of those whom he died for, but for their Sanctification, Ephesians.
5.26. 1 Pet. 1.18. Tit. 2.14. but all the men of the World are not sanctified,
cleansed, and redeemed from their vain Conversation, and from al Iniquity.
Surely therefore, if he should die for all particular men, he should miss his
Ends; yea, according to that Doctrine, Christ may not obtain that which he has
merited and purchased; for he has not only merited Salvation, but Grace and
Holiness for those whom he died for, as has been proved already; if therefore,
he died for every particular man of the World, then all the men of the World
must be gracious, and holy, or Christ must never come into his purchase, nor
obtain what he has merited; and can that be satisfying to the he^rt of Christ?
Sciendum est ita Christum Dominum pro peccatis totius generis humani
satisfecisse, donaque omnia gratiae, quae illi post lapsum p^imorum parentum
conferuntur, infinitaque alia promeruisse, et nihilominus applicationem
effectuum suorum meritorum certis quibusdam legibus alligatam reliquerit.
Molina, lib. arb. Concord. qu. 23. art. 45. disp 2.

Talis ^uit satisfactio Christi ut ea posita liberum fuit Deo obtinendae
salutis eam conditionem ponere quam vellet, ipse vero Deus posuit conditionem
fidei. Arnol. Corvin. contra Molin^. Cap. 28. p. 442.

Impetravit Christus omnibus ^econciliationem et remissionem sed ea condition.
Remonst. Collat. Ha ^^^s. Art. 2.

Licet sati^factio Christi sit praestita ^eatus noster non statim aboletur nisi
prius fidei et poenitentiae conditionem impleamus. Conr. Vorsrtius, schol.
(...), ad 54.




Object. But our Lord and Savior Christ did die conditionally, and merited the
blessings of the New Covenant conditionally, to be given out upon condition of
Faith and Repentance, which are the Condition of the New Covenant; and
therefore though men do not obtain all the blessings of the C^venant, yet
Christ shall not lose his Ends, nor the thing purchased by his Death; because if
men do not perform the Condition, he never did intend they should have the
blessing, or the thing purcha^ed.

Answ. But did Christ merit Grace and Holiness cond^tionally? the Question now
is: not about Salvation, or Justification; but about our Sanctification. If you
speak of our Salvati^n in remission of Sin, you speak not to the matter in
hand; and if you speak of our Sanctification, what Condition can be performed
before that? 1. And if Christ did merit, and intend that our Holiness, and
Sanctification should be bestowed on us, upon condition of Faith and
Repentance; then a man may repent and believe* before he be Sanctified, and
before he have any true saving Grace and Holiness. 2. No Condition can be
performed before Grace and Holiness, but a work of Nature; and has Christ
^erited that Grace shall be bestowed upon a work of Nature? the Apostle speaks
directly contrary, 2 Timothy 1.9. Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our Works, but according to his own purpose and
Grace. And 3. If Christ's Merits were thus conditional; then the Will of God the
Father must be also conditional, for there is a correspondency between the
Merits of Christ, and the Will of the Father; the Father wills that to us, which
the Son has merited for us; and as the Son merited, so does the Father will the
bestowing of the blessing: but the Father does not will our Grace, Holiness, and
Sanctification upon condition; for the Maintainers of that Doctrine of
Universal Redemption, say, That Gods secret Will, and his revealed Will, are one
and the same, nothing different; if therefore, God does will our Sanctification,
and Holiness, upon Condition, then, when he commands us to believe, repent, and
obey, his Commandment must be Conditional: and when he commands us to forsake
our sins, his Command (for that is Gods Will) must be Conditional; and if those
Commandments be conditional, then they cannot be resisted, nor his Will
resisted, yea, then it will be no sin not to keep Gods Commandment; for if his
Commandment be to be observed upon Condition, then if I do not perform that
Condition, I do not transgress his Commandment; as if you command your Servant
to do a thing if he will; if he will not, he does not transgress your
Commandment: Surely therefore, the Will of God, and his Commandments are
absolute; such therefore is the Merit of Christ.



Being, the first Agent, and the first Mover; so he is the first Determiner,
and his Will cannot be determined by any thing without himself; for as himself
is the most perfect Being, than which, nothing can be imagined to be more
perfect; so his Will is the most perfect, than which, no will can be imagined to
be more perfect; but it is a greater perfection to be determined by it self,
than by another; and to determine man's will, is more perfect than to be
determined by m^ns will. Bradwardin observes well: A man, a King, Homo, R^x vel
alius publico Edicto promulgat, quod qui fecerit tale quid bonum vel malum,
recipiet hoc vel illud, mane^que ipse indifferens et indeterminatus in
voluntate sua, et per facta subditorum indifferentia ejus, determinatur. Non
sic autem Deus, ex se solo, nihil a posterior bus mendicando, semper aeque
determinate vult et non vult qua cunque.

Bradward. page 350.


or another, does decl^re by public Edict, That he which does such a good, or
evil, shall receive this, or that, and so he remains indifferent, and
indetermined in his will, until his indifferency be determined by some Fact of
his Subjects: N^n sic autem Deus: but it is not so with God, who of himself
only, begging nothing of following things, does equally, and determinately will,
or not will, what he wills, or not wills.

ex congruo; Si promissio non requirat ullam conditionem operis, tunc quidem
nullum inde orietur meritum ut si Rex egenti alicui promittat in singulos annos
certum nummorum numerum sine ulla condition, debebuntur egenti illi pecuniae
Regiae, sed absque ullo merito ejus; at si promissio contineat operis
conditionem, orietur inde meritum etiamsi opus illud alioqui non sit per se
aequale mercedi; vere enim qui opus illud fecerit, convenire poterit
promissorem ac dicere, se meruisse praemium ab illo promissum.
for what is Merit? Bellarmin is sufficiently able to tell us what Merit is; and
says he, Promises are of two sorts; either Absolute, or Conditional: Absolute,
as suppose a Prince does promise an hundred pound freely to a poor man upon no
Condition, if the Prince give it, the poor man does not merit at al: But then
there is another Promise that is Conditional; as if a man do promise to give
another an hundred pound for some work, now says he, though the Condition be
short in worth of the hundred pound; yet if he give it upon that Condition,
here is truly merit; for (says he) he does merit ex congruo, cui debetur, unto
whom the reward is due out of Grace. But no Protestant, unless tainted with
Popery, will say that Christ did merit for us, that we might merit at the hand
of God.

Numb. 18.15, 16. ye read of the Redemption of the Firstborn, and was there
any Condition of that Redemption, besides the payment of five Shekels? five
Shekels was the Ransom money, the (...), and the payment of that alone, was the
Condition of that Redemption, and the Privileges of that Redemption, were
obtained upon the payment thereof: Now if our Lord and Savior Christ, did lay
down his Life as a Ransom, a (...), then all the Privileges of our Redemption,
are to be given out upon his payment of this Ransom money: but to make another
Condition of our Redemption besides the payment of the (...), or Ransom money,
is directly contrary unto al those Redemptions in the old Testament, which were
Types of this; yea, contrary to the Nature of al Redemptions whatever.

the particular men of the World, Ex ore tuo etc. medicus venditat se remedium
habere adversus omnes aegritudines, quod aegris etiam omnibus communicare
vellet ut ejus beneficio sanentur, interim vero nullo modo significat nisi
paucissimis hujusmodi remedium ipsis paratum esse; similiter potens aliquis
Princeps pecuniam se parasse dicit redimendis omnibus captivis et liberationem
eorum ex animo desiderare, sed quamvis hoc prae se fert tamen certo apud se
decrevit sinere ut nulli captivi, paucis quibusdam exceptis, certiores unquam
fiant vel intentionis vel praeparationis hujus benignae; An gloriatio hujusmodi
medici vel Principis esset justa? nihilo magis consistere potest quod Christus
pro omnibus mortuus fuerit respectu voluntatis et intentionis divinae nisi
omnibus nota fiat haec tam propensa voluntas. Sic Remonstr. Collat. Hag. art.
2. arg. 5. p. 175. Brand.

Neque negatur simpliciter a Propheta, Deum gentibus Verbum suum annunciasse,
sed Propheta loquitur comparative, scil. dicit non taliter Deum fecisse omni
Nationi quam populo suo Israeli. Corvinus contra Tilen. page 99.

Falsa omnia et citra modestiam concepta, nam quod tribuitur Jacobo negatur
gentibus et tribuitur Jacobo quod Deus annunciavit ipsi verbum suum, ergo hoc
negatur gentibus; certe si dixisset non sic annunciasse verbum suum gentibus
quemadmodum Jacobo recte collegisset Corvinus; et spiritus sanctus hoc primu^
triburens Jacobo, quod scil. verbum ipsis curaret annunciari, mox subjicit, non
sic secisse gentibus, quae nullum alium sensum induere possunt, quam ut negent
verbum gentibus annunciari.

Twiss in Corvini defens. armin. contra Tilen. p. 66.


this Truth should have been published to them, that they shall have Salvation
by Christ, upon condition that they believe in him, and that if they do not,
then they shall be damned; but this Gospel, or Truth, was not always published
to all the particular men of the World; for says the Apostle concerning the
Gospel, Col. 1.26. Even the Mystery which has been hid from Ages, and from
Generations: And says the Psalm. He shows his Word unto Jacob; his Statutes,
and his Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for
his Judgments, they have not known them: He does not say, they have not known
them as Israel; but he says, The Lord has not dealt so with other Nations; as
for his Judgments, they have not known them: neither can it be said that God
was ready to have made known this Truth unto all the World, but did not, because
of their sin; for then it should have been declared to them that such Truths of
the Gospel should be made known to them, if they did not sin: but that has not
been declared to all the particular men of the World; and therefore Christ did
not die for all men thus conditionally.

Seventhly: If Christ did die and merit thus conditionally for all men; then all the particular men in the world, are under a Covenant of Grace; for those that
he died for, are to receive the Blessings of the new covenant upon the
performance of the Condition, says this Objection: But all the particular men
of the World are not under the Covenant of Grace; for the Apostle says of the
Ephesians before their Conversion, that they were strangers from the Covenants
of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. And God
will write his Laws in the hearts of all those that are under the Covenant of
Grace, Heb. 8. But all the particular men in the World, shall not have the Laws
of God written in their hearts; therefore the Covenant of Grace is not made
with them, and therefore Christ has not merited that the Blessings of the
Covenant shall be given out unto all the World upon Conditions.





Jer. 31. in Ezekiel. 36. in Heb. 8. but where do we find any Condition annexed to
it? And if God make no Conditions, why should we? Shall I hang my Pad-lock upon
Gods Door of Mercy?

Noah: Did he promise Noah that the World should be drowned no more upon
Conditions of our Faith or Obedience? No, but says the Lord, I will not again
curse the ground any more for man's sake, although the Imaginations of man's
heart be evil, Genesis 8.21. It may be you will translate the Hebrew (...),
because; but it comes al to one.

He will write his Laws in our hearts, there is Converting mercy promised; and
that we shall al know him, there is enlightening Mercy promised: both the Habit,
and the Act of Grace promised, and he gives this reason; For I will be merciful
to your unrighteousness; and your sin, and iniquity, I will remember no more,
Heb. 8.11, 12. Now if forgiving mercy be the reason of sanctifying Mercy, if
our forgivene^s be the cause of our holiness, then no act of our Grace or
Holiness, can be the Condition of our forgiveness, or of the Covenant.

I will put my Spirit into you, says God: but Faith and Repentance are not
before the In being, or Gift of the Spirit: Surely therefore, all the Blessings
of the Covenant, are not given out upon these Conditions.

Adam in Paradise; for, then the Condition was to be performed by our common
Person, who was strong, and free from al sin; but now we are weak, and full of
al sin, and therefore if the performance of the Condition lie upon our hands,
the terms of this Covenant will be worse, and harder for us, than the terms of
that Covenant of Works; neither can it be said, that if al men have a
sufficiency of Grace, and power to believe, that the performance of the
Condition of this Covenant, will be easier than of that; for who does not know
that it is an harder thing for one of us sinful Creatures to believe, than for
Adam to abstain from eating the forbidden Fruit? But surely the Covenant of
Grace, is easier, and sweeter than the Covenant of Works; and therefore the
Condition thereof, was performed by Christ our Second Adam, and there is now no
Condition of the Covenant to be performed by us: Yet it is our Duty to believe,
and repent, and obey, which we are commanded to do by the Gospel; but al our
Repentance, Faith, and Obedience, is a Fruit of that Covenant, not the
Condition of it: As in case Adam had stood, his Seed should have obeyed; yet
their Obedience should not have been the Condition, but the Fruit of the
Covenant; and as his Posterity could not have had Life, unless they had obeyed,
yet that their Obedience was not the Condition of that Covenant: So though we
cannot be justified unless we believe, nor be saved, unless we repent and obey;
yet our Repentance, Faith, and Obedience, is not the Condition, but the Fruit
of the Covenant: Christ, and Christ alone, our Second Adam, did perform the
Condition; as to us, the Covenant of Grace is free, absolute, and without al
Conditions.

Obj. But all Divines say, That Faith and Repentance, are the Condition of the
Covenants.

Ans. Not all: not so Luther, Duplices sunt promissiones Dei, legales quae
nituntur deorsum in nostris operibus, sicut illae, si feceritis, bona terrae
comedetis; aliae sunt promissiones gratiae, sicut Jer 31. scribam legem meam in
cordibus eorum; hae promissiones non nituntur deorsumsed simpliciter bonitate
et gratia Dei; quid ipse velit facere. Luther in Genesis 4. cap p. 88. Hos. 2.
Desponsabo te mihi in perpetuum: sine ulla interjecta vel penitentiae vel fidei
condition absolutissime ait desponsabo te etc. hujusmodi autem absolutissimae
promissiones ad solos veros et secundum spiritu^ Israelitas, i. e. Electos
pertinent, ergo haec est perfectissima et absolutissima Evangelica promissio.
Zanch. in Hos. 2. v. 21, 22.

Statuens Dei gratiam eo luculentiorem hominibus explicatam esse, quod suis non
foedus sed Testamentum dederit, quia faedus conditiones mutuas fuisset
habiturum, quas si altera pars non prestet, faedus est irritum, Testamentum
vero liberalitatis et gratiae citra ullam conditionem instrumentum est; ex quo
haeredes instituuntur citra contemplationem ullius officii quod ab ipsis
proficisci possit. Junius in Heb. 8.

Sic Amesius, Coron. de perseverant.

At ubi quaeso sacrarum literarum quoties nostra renovatio sanctificatio, ad
paenitentiam revocatio spiritui sancto attribuitur vel levissima mentio fit
conditionis. Jer. 31. hoc est faedus etc. etiam omnem voluntatem Dei esse
absolutam nullam autem conditionalem demonstravit variis argumentis. Tho.
Bradward. de causa Dei, Lib. 2.

Twiss. Vindiciae gratiae prefat. Sect. 8.


not so Zanchy, not so Junius, not so Dr. Ames, not so some of our own. And
those that do say so, say also, That Faith and Repentance are also promised in
the Covenant; which comes to the same in Effect, with what I now say: They mean
also, That Faith is that Grace whereby we are justified, and that we cannot be
saved without Faith and Repentance, which I grant: The manner of Expressing the
forementioned Promises of the new Covenant is absolute, so as God undertaketh
to perform them all, I will put my Law into your minds, I will be to them a God,
All shall know me; I will be merciful unto their sins: hereby it is manifest that
the Privileges of the New Covenant are absolutely promised to be performed on
Gods part: It is God that justifies, Romans 8.33. Sanctification is absolutely
promised, Ezekiel. 36.25. so the parts thereof: Mortification, Romans 6.14.
Vivification, Romans 8.11. Perseverance, 1 Cor. 1.8. Object. Is also the
condition of Faith and Repentance required by the new Covenant? Mark, 1.15.
Answ. He that requires the condition, promises also to work it in us.

Dr. Gonge, Heb. 8.

Naturae legum et conditionum prescriptarum omnino conveniens est ut voluntatas
judicis a condition postulata et prestita moveatur ad praemium.

Grevinchovius.


but they do not say, that there is any condition in the Will of God, moving, or
determining it; but a Condition in the thing willed. But the Remonstrants make
a Condition of the Covenant, in reference to the Will of God; which is the thing
I deny, and have disproved all this while. I grant there is a Conditional
Promise, but then God has promised that Condition in some other Scripture,
which they deny. I grant that we are justified upon our believing, but then God
has promised Faith too, which they deny. I grant a Condition may be rei
volitae of the thing willed, but nulla est conditio voluntatis Divinae; there
is no condition of the Divine Will, they affirm it. I grant that one benefit of
the Death of Christ, does follow another, and one may be the cause of the
other: but our Lord and Savior Christ, did not die conditionally, nor merit any
thing for us conditionally; those that he died for, he merited Grace and
Holiness for, to be given out to them without al conditions; and therefore if
he died for all men, he must needs lose his Purchase, a thing most unsatisfying
to the heart of Christ: yet this is the firstborn of that Doctrine of
Universal Redemption. Now therefore, as you desire to stand free from al those
Opinions that are unsavory to the heart of Christ, take heed of that Doctrine
of Universal Redemption. Yet further.

Use, 2.
Secondly: If Christ will certainly see the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied, then here you may see the reason why we cannot be satisfied with
that Opinion of the Saints Apostasy: this also is unsatisfying to the heart of
Christ: Can a man be satisfied in seeing, and feeling one of his own Members
torn from his Body? Can a man delight in seeing that Leg or Arm, which was once
the Member of his Body, burning in the fire? Surely Christ cannot; Christ's Love
is not like to ours; Non amat tanquam osurus: Those whom he loves once, he does
love to the end; once in Christ, and for ever in Christ; once loved by Christ,
and for ever loved by him: Whom God has called, them he has also justified;
and whom he has justified, them he has also glorified, Romans 8. This is the
Fathers Will (says Christ, John, 6.39.) that of all that he has given me, I
should lose none; and verse 37. he says, All that the Father gives me, shall
come unto me: It seems therefore, that there are some whom the Father has
given unto Christ, and that before they believe, their Faith being the Fruit
and Consequent of this Gift; therefore there is a particular Election of some,
and that Election is not upon a fore-fight of Faith, but a cause thereof. 2.
Our Savior tells us here, That all those that are given him, shall come to him;
that is, they shall believe: therefore it is not in our power to resist the
Grace of God, with an overcoming resistance: the converting Grace of God, is
irresistible. 3. He says here, That al those that are given him, shall come to
him; therefore al his Seed, and Children whom he traveled with, and died for,
shall come to him, and b^leeve on him; for those that the Father has given him,
are his Children, Heb. 2.13. But all the men of the World do not come to him;
therefore they are not his Seed and Children, therefore he never traveled with
them, therefore he did not die for all particular men. 4. Our Savior tells us
here plainly, that when men do come to him, he will lose none of them; but says
he, I will raise them up at the last day, verse 39. And lest any should doubt of
this Truth, he speaks yet more plainly; tells us that those who do come, are
such as believe on him, and then for more assurance, repeats the Promise, verse
40. saying, This is the Will of him which sent me, That every one that sees
the Son, and I believes on him, may have everlasting Life, and I will raise
him up at the last day. Surely therefore, that Doctrine of the Saints Apostasy,
is unsound, yea, all the four Doctrines of the Arminians, are by this one
Scripture, plainly refuted; but especially that of the Saints Apostasy: It is a
Doctrine not only uncomfortable to the Saints, but unsatisfying to the heart of
Christ; For he shall see the Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied: Seeing
therefore that he traveled for their Salvation, he shall see their
perseverance, and Salvation.



will you hate, despise, and scorn his Seed? Is he satisfied in seeing the
Travel of his Soul in the saving effects of his Death, justifying, sanctifying,
and comforting the Children of Men? and will you be displeased therewith? Will
you be pleased, and satisfied in your sins, and vain Conversation, when Christ
is satisfied in the Redemption of Men from their Iniquity, and vain
Conversation? The Conversion of a Sinner, is the Fruit of Christ's Travel,
wherein he rejoices, and is delighted with a great delight, and does it grieve
you to see a sinner turned from the evil of his ways? Take heed how you walk
contrary to Christ; for if you walk contrary to him, he will walk contrary unto
you; and either he will rejoice, and be satisfied in your Conversion, or he will
be satisfied in your Damnation: and if you do not convert, and turn unto God,
how can you think that you are the Seed of Christ, whom he has traveled with?
But,

Ahasuerus was taken with, and did delight much in Esther, and she improved his
Affection for the good of the Church; have you gotten the heart of Christ, the
affections of Christ, and will not you improve them for the good of the Church?
surely it is your Duty. And 4. Upon this account, why should you not labor to
excel in Virtue? his delights are in his Seed, and they are such, says the
Psalmist, as do excel in Virtue, Psalm. 16. Now therefore, that you may in some
measure answer the delights of Christ, O labor more and more to excel in Virtue.

What excellent things shall we (that are the visible Seed of Christ) do, that
we may answer the delights, contentments, and satisfactions which he does take
in us?

procure our Comfort; so, for us to neglect our own Comfort, to procure his
Glory, is excellent; in time of Temptation, to look upon Christ as our Gift;
and in time of presumption, to look upon him as our Example; to trust in Christ
as if we had no works, and yet to work as if we had no Christ; I mean, for a
man to be so obedient to the Commandment, as if he would be saved by the Law;
and yet to rest on the Promise, as if he would be saved by Grace; and in all our
Service to God in Christ, to walk by a Law without us, and yet by a Law within
us; by a Law without us, as our Rule; and by a Law within us, as our Principle.
These are excellent things in regard of Christ, and his Service.







Lion in Gods; of a sweet, and meek disposition, yet zealous, and active for
God; and in all our dealings with men, to deal with God through men; saying, if
they curse, or bless, God has bid them do it; and in case that any man offend
you, to be more ready to forgive, than he is to acknowledge his offense; that
your forgiveness may rather draw out his acknowledgment, than his
acknowledgment draw out your forgiveness: These are excellent things in regard
of our converse, or dealings with men.

par negotio, being like the Ant, or Pismire, that does rather abound in
Pectore, in the Breast, ubi animus est, where the mind lies, than in Ventre, in
the Belly, ubi stercus est, where the dung lies; and if your Estate be great,
to account your self Gods Steward, not his Treasurer; and if it be little, to
study rather how to give an account of your little, than to increase unto much.
These are excellent things in regard of your Callings and Estates.



Aaron. And in all Gods dealings, still to make a good, and candid
Interpretation, for that will argue your Love to God, which will argue his Love
to you; for that which ends in your Love to him, came from his Love to you.
These are excellent things in regard of Gods Works, and Dispensations.

mind the Truth of the Times, as he do not neglect the Power of Godliness; and
so to mind the Power of Godliness, as he do not neglect the Truth of the Times:
an excellent thing for a man so to mind new Truth, as not to lose old Truth;
and so to keep the old Truth, as not to neglect new Truths. And in all times to
stand free from the Monopoly of an Opinion; for it is the property of an Error,
to monopolize the man, and to engross his thoughts, words, and actions: but he
that places his Religion in one Opinion, has no Religion in Truth, though his
Opinion be true: Good therefore it is, to stand clear, and free from these
Monopolies. These are excellent things in regard of Truth and Error.



And thus I have done with this great Argument, Christ in Travel; the greatness
of his Travel, his Assurance of Issue, and his delight and satisfaction in the
sight thereof. Christ shall certainly see the Travel of his Soul, and be
satisfied; and if you do not yet see the issue of his Travel accomplished on
your Soul, yet stay, wait, and expect; for says the Text, He shall see the
Travel of his Soul, and be satisfied; and in due time you shall see it too, and
be satisfied. Wherefore wait on the Lord, and again I say, Wait on the Lord.

FINIS.
MR Bridge's New Works: viz. 1. Scripture Light. 2. Christ in Travel. 3. A
Lifting up for the Down-cast, etc.


THE GOOD MAN'S PEACE.
Sermon I.
PSALM, 42.11. Stepney, April, 16. 1648.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me?Hope
thou in God, for I will yet praise him, who is the health of my Countenance,
and my God.


IN these Words, ye read of the sad Discouragements of a gracious Spirit, with
those Remedies that he applied and used against them. The Discouragements are
expressed in Two Words, under Two Similitudes; Cast-down, Disquieted. As a man is
bowed or cast down, under the weight of some heavy burden; so art thou cast
down, O my soul, says David. And as the Sea in the time of a storm, is much
disquieted; so art thou also disquieted within me, O my Soul. The Remedies that
he uses against these Discouragements, are Two: Self-Reprehension, and
Self-Admoni ion. First, He does chide himself for his diffidence and distrust
in God. Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
me? He chides, and rebukes himself for it. Secondly, He does admonish and call
upon himself for to wait upon, and hope in God. Hope thou in God. Why? First,
Because I shall yet be delivered: For I shall yet praise him. Secondly, Because
Salvation belongs unto him alone: He is the health of my Countenance: Or, the
Salvation of my Countenance. Thirdly, Because he is in Covenant with me, and I
with him; He is my God: The health of my Countenance, and my God.

I begin with the former part of this Verse; wherein you may observe these
Three things.

First, That there is an inward Peace, and Quietude of Soul, which the Saints
and People of God, ordinarily are endued with. This is employed. Secondly, It is
possible that this Peace may be interrupted, so far, as Gods People may be much
discouraged, cast down, and disquieted. Thirdly, That the Saints and People of
God, have no reason for their Discouragements, what ever their Condition be.
Why art thou cast down? and why art thou thus disquieted within me? thou have
no reason for it.
The latter of these being the main, is that indeed which I specially aim at:
But because the two former will give the better rise unto this last, and they
are also profitable for us to consider, I shall take them in their order, and
speak only unto the first at this time; which is this:

Therefore David says here, Why art thou cast down, and why art thou
disquieted within me? It seems then that this was not his ordinary temper, his
Pulse did not always beat thus high in this way of Discouragement; but
ordinarily he had Peace and quiet within. So that I say, There is an inward
peace, and quietness of soul, which the Saints and people of God ordinarily are
endued withal. Ordinarily they are arrayed in white, so they are brought in.
Rev. 7.13.14. verses, What are these which are arrayed in white robes? (at the
13.) They are such as have washed their robes, and made them White in the blood
of the Lamb, verse 14. this book of the Revelat^on, does attend much unto the
Jewish customs, and among the Jews, they had their Mourning, and their
Rejoicing garment; the Mourning garment, was a black garment: and therefore
when a man is brought in, in a mourning way, he is brought in, in a black
garment as ye find in the next Psalm. the 43. and the 2. verse. why go ye in
mourning? the word (...) Signifies Black. Why go ye in Black, because of the
oppression of the enemy? So that the mourning garmen^ was the Black garment;
the Black garment, was the mourning garment. And the white garment, was the
Rejoicing g^^ment; therefore Eccles. 9.8. it is said, let thy garments be
always white and, let thy h ead lack no ointment. Upon which ^ccount the
nobles amongst the Hebrews were called (...) becan^ they were clothed with
white raiment. Eccles. Martinus de R^a. sing. S. Script. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
10.17. b^essed art thou, O land, when thy king is the son of nobles, Heb.
(...) the ^on of princes, or of those that are in white. I confess this phrase
does sometimes note the purity and holiness of the person, so Rev. 3.4. Thou
have a few names, even in Sardis, which have not defiled their garments, and
they shall walk with me in white, for they are worthy; but ordinarily it notes
the joy fullness and comfortableness of our state, so in: Rev. 7. the Saints are
brought in, in white, not only because of their purity and cleaneness but
because of their rejoicing. I say then ordinarily the Saints and people of God
go in white, they have a peace, and a rest within. Great peace, have they that
love thy law (says the Psalmist) and nothing shall offend them. Romans 2.10. But
glory, honor, and peace, to every man that works good, to the Jew first, and
also to the Gentile. Let him be what he will be, if he be godly, if he work that
which is good; Glory, Honor, and Peace, shall be upon him: not only an outward,
but an inward peace he shall have.

And indeed, how can it be otherwise? For the Saints and people of God, do walk
with God, they converse with God, they do acquaint themselves with God. Now if
ye look into Job, 22.21. ye shall find, that this acquaintance brings rest and
peace. Acquaint now thy self with him, and be at peace. The Saints and people
of God, are (as I may so speak) of Gods special acquaintance, and so they have
peace, for they do walk with God, and have communion with him. They have
communion with the Father; and he is the God of al consolation; they have
communion and fellowship with the Son; and he is the Prince of peace; they have
communion and fellowship with the Spirit, and he is the Comforter: they have
communion with the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit, in and by the Gospel;
and that is the word of peace, the Gospel of peace. How can it therefore be,
but that the Saints and people of God ordinarily should have peace within?

But to make out this more fully unto you. Consider I pray, How the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost (with whom the Saints and people of God have communion
and fellowship) are engaged for their peace.



his Prerogative. Kings and Princes will stand (ye know) for their Prerogatives.
And this is the great Perogative of God the Father, to give peace, inward
peace. I create the fruit of the lips, Isa. 57.19.
peace, peace. And he is called, ^he God of peace; the God of Consolation: not
the God o^ Indignation, not the God of War, but the God of Peace. This is the
great Prerogative of God the Father, to give peace unto his people.

of his Commandment. And therefore if ye look into Isay. 40.1.2. Ye shall find,
that he commands the Prophets and Ministers, to preach comfort, Comfort ye,
comfort ye my people, says your God: verse. 1. Speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her
iniquity is pardoned, for she has received of the Lords hand double for all her
sins. Suppose a man's Affliction, or Temptation, be very great or much; he has
commanded us to comfort, and comfort twice; Comfort ye, comfort ye: not once,
but twice, Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says the Lord. But there are
diverse comforters, that are indeed like Jobs comforters, like Jobs friends,
they speak hard words unto poor distressed souls. Well, says he therefore at
verse. 2. speak ye comfortably, so ye read it; but in the Hebrew, speak ye to
the heart, (...) speak soft and sweet words, speak to the heart of Jerusalem.
O! but my Temptation is so great, that I am not able to hear those that come to
comfort me. Mark what follows; Speak ye to the heart of Jerusalem, and cry unto
her, lift up thy voice and cry, if a poor soul be distressed, tempted, and
cannot hear easily; you that are Ministers, lift up your voice and cry: not
only speak to the heart, but cry; lift up your voice and cry unto her. Well,
but what are they to speak and cry? There are three things which will comfort a
poor distressed soul, and they are here to be spoken. Say, 1. That her warfare
is accomplished; Affliction and Temptation is at an end, it shall be no more. 2.
That her iniquity is pardoned. Her sin is forgiven fully and freely, 3. That
she has received at the Lords hand double for all her sins, God has no more
against her, no quarrel, no controversy, no further Punishment to inflict upon
her, she has sufficiently born the punishment of her iniquity. thus the Lord
has commanded Ministers for to preach peace, and to preach Comfort; And what
God has commanded us to speak, he has engaged himself to work. Thus I say,
the Father is engaged by virtue of his Commandment.

his promise. And therefore if ye look into Psalm. 29. ye shall see what the Lord
has promised. verse. 11. The Lord will give strength unto his people: the Lord
will bless his people with peace. Here is the promise, the Lord will bless his
people with peace. Yea, if ye look into Isa. 26. ye shall find there, that the
Lord has promised to keep the peace of his people for them, verse. 3. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee. So ye read the words,
but according to the Hebrew, ^hey ought to be read thus; (...)
Thou will keep peace, peace; twice peace. Thou will keep peace, peace, for him
whose mind is stayed on thee. So that the Lord is not only ing^ged to g^ve
peace unto his people, but he is by promise also engaged to keep their peace
for them

by Purchase. Christ has purchased peace for his people: and what Christ has
purchased for them, God the Father is engaged to give unto them. Read the
purchase in Ephesians. 2.13.14. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who were sometimes afar
off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who has made
both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between us. Having
abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments, for to make
in himself of twain, one new man, so making peace. verse. 16. And that he might
reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross, having slain the enmity
thereby; and came and preached peace unto you that were a far off, and to them
that were nigh. So that thus ye see its the purchase of Jesus Christ: this
inward peace and quietness of soul, it is Christ's purchase; and what Christ the
Son has purchased, God the Father is engaged to give.

Chastisements that they do meet withal. And therefore in Isa. 40. (which I
named before) The Lord commands us to comfort, and speak comfortably unto his
people, upon this account, For she has received of the Lords hand double for all her sins. Even because a fullness of Chastisement had been upon them. Thus I
say, God the Father, by virtue of his Prerogative, by virtue of his
Commandment, by virtue of his Promise, by virtue of Christ's Purchase, by
virtue of Chastisements that are laid upon his people, is engaged to give peace
unto his children.



Qualifications, and endowments that he received from God his Father, for this
end and purpose. The spirit of the Lord is upon me (says he) and he has
anointed me; Isa. 61.
Why? that I might comfort those that mourn. That is one end. But I pray look
into Isa. 50. and consider the 4. verse. The Lord God has given me the tongue
of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is
weary: he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the
learned. They are plainly the words of Christ, as will appear to you, if you
read but the following words, The Lord God has opened mine ear, and I was not
rebellious, neither turned I away the back; I gave my back to the smiters, and
my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame and
spit^^ng. So that these are the words of Christ. Well, what does Christ say
hear? He tells us, that he has received the tongue of the learned, to comfort
those that are distressed and troubled in conscience, for to help poor wearied
souls. Why does he say, the tongue of the learned? The Lord God has given me
the tongue of the learned. All men desire to hear the Learned: and it is the
greatest piece of learning in the world, to speak a word in due season by way
of comfort to those that are weary; this is the greatest piece of Ministerial
learning, and says Christ, he has given me the tongue of the learned. Well,
but al learned men have not Wisdom to speak in season. Mark what follows. He
has given me the tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word
in season to him that is weary. But has Jesus Christ such skill at this work,
in comforting those that are troubled? Yes! He wakeneth morning by morning. As
a Master is early up in the morning to teach his Scholars, So has God the
Father been teaching of Christ from al eternity this great skill, morning by
morning. He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the
learned. This is the piece of learning (says Christ) which I have been
learning morning by morning of my Father from eternity and this is that great
learning which he had attained unto. So that in regard of this endowment which
he has received from the Father, he is engaged to give peace unto his people,
for he has received the tongue of the learned for this end and purpose, that
he might speak a word in season to them that are weary.

own Disposition; his sweet, loving, and tender disposition. He is a Lion
(indeed) of the Tribe of Judah; but not that roaring Lion, seeking to devour.
He is a King (indeed) but he comes meekly, riding upon an Asses Colt. He does
not lift up his voice in the streets. When our Lord and Savior Christ left the
world, he says unto his Disciples, My Peace I give unto you; my Peace I leave
with you: Joh. 14.27.
not as the world gives Peace, but my Peace I give unto you. And as soon as ever
Christ rose from the dead again, and met with his Disciples, what does he say
unto them? When they were all met together, Peace be unto you. Joh. 20.19.
As it was his last words when he left them, so it is the first word that now
he uses when he sees them again. But, O Lord, we have sinned greatly since we
saw thee. Be it so, yet Peace be unto you. But, O Lord, here is Peter among us,
that has denied thee since thou saw us. Be it so, I know it very well, yet
Peace be unto you. Peace when he went away, and Peace when he came again: this
is his Language, and this is his disposition still. Thus he is engaged.

by Office to give Peace unto his People. Ye know the Apostle calls him our
great High Priest. It was the work of the High Priest in the Old Testament, to
bless the People; and when he did bless the People, What did he say? But, The
Lord bless ye, and give ye Peace. Now then, If Jesus Christ be our great
High Priest, and it be the Office of the High Priest to bless, and to give
Peace; then Christ by virtue of his Office also, is engaged to give Peace unto
his People. Take all these Three together; Christ the Second Person is engaged:
By his Endowments he received from the Father: By his own Disposition: By his
Office. And it appears plainly that there is a great engagement upon Jesus
Christ to give Peace unto his Servants.

the Holy Ghost is engaged to give peace unto them. For (as I may so speak with
Reverence) he is, as it were, the great Executor of Jesus Christ When Christ
died, he made his Will, and gave a Legacy to his Disciples, My Peace I give
unto you: and then he sent the Comforter, the Spirit from Heaven on purpose to
beget peace within their souls.

Yea, The Holy Ghost is not only this Executor, to see this Will of Christ
fulfilled; but he is, as it were, our Advocate. Indeed we have but one
Advocate, that is Christ: But I say, we have, as it were, two Advocates; One in
Heaven above, and one in our bosom. When a man sins, a godly man sins, Satan
accuses him in Heaven: And therefore says John, If any man sin, 1 John, 1.2.
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. But if a
godly man sin, Satan does also accuse him to himself. And therefore says the
Apostle, We have the Spirit within us, making intercession. John, 14.16 (...).
Et sic translat. Syriac.
And says our Savior Christ, I will send another Comforter: So ye read it; but
it is the same word that is translated, Advocate; I will send you another
Advocate. Yea, the Spirit of the Lord is our Witness also: For the Spirit shall
bear witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God. Now when the
Spirit bears witness with a man's spirit, that he is ^he child of God, then he
has peace and quiet. So that, if you consider al the^e Engagements; the Father
engaged, the Son engaged, the Holy Ghost engaged, for the peace and quiet of
Gods Children, Must you not needs conclude this Point and Doctrine, and say,
Sur^ly, there is an inward peace and quietness of soul, which ordina^ily Gods
People are endued withal?

But our Experience seems to speak the contrary: for ^here are many of Gods own
People, that have not Peace and Quiet within them; but are full of Doubts and
Fears about their everlasting condition.



But some never had Peace all their days; O! says one, I have been a long
while afflicted, troubled, two, four, six years, and never yet had Peace and
quiet within me: Either therefore this Doctrine is not true, or else I am not
Godly.



Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with God; Romans 5. And then there is an
Additional Peace, which arises from the sense of their Justification. Possibly
a Child of God may for a long time lose the latter, but the former he shall
never lose. As a Woman that has a great Jointure, goes abroad some Journey,
and meets with Thieves, and they take away all the money that she has about
her; but yet (says she) though they have taken away my spending Money, they
cannot take away my Jointure, I have not lost my Jointure. So now the Saints
sometimes, may lose their spending money, they may lose the peace that arises
from the sense of their Justification; but as for the Peace that arises and
issues from their Justification it self, the first Peace, that they shall never
lose. Peace is the Churches Jointure, and that Peace they shall never lose.





dolent et de dolor gaudent; they rejoice that they can grieve: they are
troubled for sin; and they have rest and quiet in this, That they can be
troubled for their sin: they have no Peace in their sin; but they have peace in
this, that they can have no peace in their sin. For say now unto them, are ye
troubled that ye are troubled; you are in some measure grieved for sin; and are
ye troubled that ye are grieved? No, will they say, I am glad that I am grieved
for sin; and the Lord knows, it is my trouble that I can be grieved no more; I
have quiet and peace in that I am troubled. Some have peace in the direct act,
and some have peace in the Reflex act, Some have it more at the first hand, and
some have it more at the second hand. But consider al these distinctions, and
you will find, that there is no godly man, but more or less in some of these
respects, he may be said to have peace within. But suppose it be so, What is
the issue of this Doctrine? what does it tend and lead unto?

Applic.
The issue is thus much. Then behold! what a blessed condition the Saints and
people of God are in? Is it not a bl^ssed thing to have peace within; to have
quiet, peace, and rest within? If ye have peace within; though ye want peace
without, you will be able to hear al your burdens, Pro. 18.14
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities. But a wounded spirit who can
bear? Some bear Agues and Fevers; some bear Stones, and Collicks, Rackings and
Tormentings; but a wounded spirit who can bear? O but the spirit of a man will
sustain his infirmities, if he have peace within; if he be Heart-whole, as they
say, if he have peace within then will he be able to bear al his burdens. Ye
see into what times we are now fallen; we cannot promise our selves peace for a
day together; suddenly a cloud may arise, in a night, and al our comforts laid
in the dark; How good a thing is it then, to have peace within, to have rest
and quiet within! If I have peace within, I can relieve my self here against al
calamity. What though I have trouble from my friends? yet I have peace within:
what though I am thus reproached? yet I have peace within; I am wet indeed, my
garment is wet; but I am not wet to the skin, I am dry within, Math. 5.4.
I have peace within. Blessed (says our savior) are those that mourn for they
shall be comforted. Are those blessed for the present that shall be comforted?
how blessed are those then that are comforted, and that have peace, and quiet
already.

This Doctrine looks wishly, both upon the ungodly, and upon the Godly. It
looked once so wishly upon a great man in Germany, that it was the beginning of
his conversion and turning to God: I mean Galeacius Carracciolus. He was a
Papist, a profane person; and coming occasionally to hear Peter Martyr preach,
he heard this expression or similitude, When ye see men at a distance skipping,
leaping and dancing, ye think the men are mad; but when ye draw near to them,
and hear what music they have then ye do not wonder; but ye rather wonder at
your selves that ye should wonder at them. So (said Peter Martyr) when ye look
upon the Godly at a distance, and see them ^unning after Ordinances, and
frequenting the means and rejoicing in the ways of God, you think the people
are mad, and ye say they are mad, but if you draw near to a Godly course, and
perceive what music these people have within, you say not they are mad, but
you rather wonder at your selves, that you should wonder at them. Hereupon the
Marquess hearing this similitude, was so stric^^e ^ withal, that he began to
look into his condition, and it was the first occasion of his conversion. I say
no more. You that are ungodly ye hear what music the Saints have within, peace
and quiet within, ordinarily, though here and there, there may be some
exception; yet ordinarily, that music they have within; O! who would not be
Godly.



I confess indeed, it is the Duty of al those that have rest, and peace, and
quiet within to be very thankful: but there is one thing that hinders my
thankfulness, that I cannot praise the Lord for the peace and quiet that I
have, and that is; I fear my peace is not right; for there are many that have a
counterfeit, and a false peace, and I fear that my peace is such, and therefore
I cannot praise the Lord, or be thankful for it.

First, I grant ye, there is a false and counterfeit peace, that wicked men
have; even an inward peace. And if ye look into Deuteronomy. 29.19. ye may read as
much. And it come to pass when he hears the words of this curse, that he
blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the
imagination of mine heart, to ad drunkenness to thirst. So that a man may be in
a most cursed way, adding drunkenness to thirst, and yet he may have peace, and
say in his heart, it shall go well with me. Questionless, there is a peace of
security; there is a peace and a rest of sleep, as well as of health. A man that
is wounded and full of aches and pains, feels them not when he is asleep: but
the reason why he does not feel them, is not because of his health, but because
he is asleep. So a man may be freed from the trouble of aches and pains
within, because he is asleep, as well as because he is in health. But there is
also a peace that is the fruit of the Holy Ghost; as ye read in Gal. 5. The
fruit of the spirit is Love, joy, peace. Questionless, there is a false and a
true peace. But shall I say, that al my money is counterfeit, because there is
counterfeit gold abroad?

But to help a little in this; I will speak something of the difference of true
and false peace; and yet very briefly, thus.

Phil. 4.7.
for says the Apostle, The peace of God that passes all understanding, keep,
or guard your minds and hearts. This saving peace, is a Guard unto al our
Graces. As fal^e peace is a guard to our sins; so true peace is a guard unto al
our Graces.

Being justified by faith, we have peace. Romans 15. The Lord give you peace in
believing, (says the Apostle) It comes in a way of Faith: true saving peace,
is wrought by faith. False peace, is such as is either born with us and was
never interrupted, being the offspring of nature only: or the Emanation of a
natural Conscience; or such as is wrought out by time, time working out ones
trouble.





I will hear what the Lord will say, Psalm. 85.8.
for he will speak peace; says the Psalmist. When God speaks peace, he speaks
it to a soul under or after temptation. When God speaks peace, he speaks it
with a strong hand: giving such peace, as no creature in the world is able to
give. When God speaks peace, it is a peace beyond al expression; The peace of
God that passes al understanding, it cannot be uttered. Now though a wicked
man have peace, and much peace and quiet within, yet God does not speak it; for
it was not spoken to him in or after temptation, it was not spoken by a strong
and unresistable hand; it is such a peace, as may be wrought by time, time
working off the trouble; or the pleasures and contentments of the world may
beget the like; it is not a peace that is beyond al expression, a peace beyond
al understanding, but a low peace, which you may easily express. But now as for
you that are Godly, that make this Objection, and have this fear and scruple in
your hearts; I will here appeal unto your own souls; you know and remember your
former trouble; now ye have peace, and ye have rest within, I appeal to you (I
say) whether yea or no, when ye were in that trouble, suppose I, or another
Minister, or ten others of your own choosing, suppose a hundred should have come
to you with one promise after another; had we been able to have spoken comfort
to you? O no, if the Lord had not spoken comfort to me, it had not been in the
power of all the Ministers in the world, to have spoken comfort unto my soul,
but the Lord certainly has done it. Yet I appeal to you; Are you not willing
to have your peace examined? are you not willing to have your peace, your
inward peace ^ryed? yes, withal my soul I would have my peace tried: and truly,
I could not hope that my peace were right, if I were not willing to have it
examined. Well, yet I appeal to you further; And do not you find that you have
peace, even then when you do see your sins? and the more you see your sins upon
the back of Christ, the more peace you have? yes; And do not you find this,
that your peace came in, in a way of Believing? from the sight of Christ?
laying hold on the Promise? by the prospect of free Grace? yes, I must needs
say so, Had I not had a promise to stay my soul upon; had I not had a view of
tree Grace; had I not seen the Lord Jesus, I had never had any peace in my poor
soul; but the Lord knows, that thus I attained my peace. Well then, be of good
comfort, Man or Woman, I tell thee from the Lord, thy peace and quiet is right.
I know what the danger is of sewing pillows under men's Elbows, and speaking
peace, where none ought to be spoken: but (I say) if it be thus with thy soul,
notwithstanding al thy sins and fears; from the Lord, I say unto thee, thy
peace is right; go in peace, and the God of peace tread down Satan under thy
feet.

But I fear that my peace, my inward peace is not right because it does not
last and continue.



But one thing yet troubles me, and makes me fear, that my peace and quiet it
not good, and that is because I came so lightly and slightly by it, I see how
it has been and it with others of the people of God; some that have been long
afflicted and wounded and have lien troubled a great while, and so they have
had peace: but as for me it is not so with me, I came lightly, and slightly by
my peace and quiet, and therefore I do even fear that the Lord never spak peace
yet unto my soul.

Zacheus; Christ comes unto his house, and the same day that he came, he said
to Zacheus, This day it Salvation come to thy house. He had assurance the first
day. But Paul is converted; and he lies troubled, and is three days blind.
Should Zacheus now say, Surely, I am not Converted, for I never lay three days
blind, nor was so much troubled as Paul was? No surely, no more may you say,
that your Peace is false because you have not such abundance of trouble as
others have; you are not to make another Measure, your Rule: God goes several
ways with his People, as well in regard of Peace, as in regard of Grace. This
therefore I say unto you; Look unto your Peace it self: Have you peace and
quietness of soul? Then bless and praise the Lord for that peace of yours: Yea,
do not only praise the Lord for your peace and quiet; but praise the Lord that
ye came so sweetly by it, in a way of Free Grace; and if for any thing you are
to be troubled, it is for this, That you should nickname the Grace of God, and
call it little, or false: Christ calls it free, and you call it false. O be
humbled for this, and praise the Lord for any measure of quiet and peace that
he has given unto thee.

But (will another say) All this does not come up to my case; for I have no
Peace, nor Quiet in my soul to be thankful for: Some there are that have Peace
and Quiet indeed, and they (no question) ought to be very thankful for it; but
my poor soul has been long afflicted, troubl^d, and I never yet had assurance
of Gods Love in Christ; I have not this Peace and Quiet within: What shall I
d^, that I may attain unto it? or what should a poor soul do, to get and attain
this Peace and Quiet within?

I will hear what the Lord will say, for he will speak Peace unto his People,
Psalm. 85.8. It is not in my power, or in the power of any poor Creature, to
speak Peace unto you; but it is the Lord only that must speak Peace unto thy
soul; and the Lord speaks Peace in the way of an Ordinance.

But what does the Lord say? what does the Lord speak from his Word in the way
of an Ordinance, that I who was never yet settled, may attain unto this inward
Peace and Quietude of soul?

Being justified by Faith, we have Peace, etc. Romans 5.1. The more you see the
free and infinite Love of God, the more will your heart be at rest and quiet
within you. And where shall you see the Love of God, but in the Death of
Christ? By seeing Christ on the Cross, you see Divine Love in triumph. All true
Peace within, arises from sight of Peace made without: Where shall you read of
that, but in Christ's Death? And therefore says the Prophet, The Chastisement
of our Peace was upon him. In Psalm. 41. ye have a Promise made of great
Blessing unto him that considers the Poor, Blessed is he that considers the
poor. Who is this poor? Tarnovius tells us, from the 10. verse, That it is
Christ in his Sufferings: for (as he observes) this Psalm, is a Psalm of
Christ, verse 9. Yea, mine own familiar friend in whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, has lift up his heel against me. They are the words of Christ,
and Christ speaks this Psalm; and this poor to be considered, is Christ in his
Sufferings: Says he, I will not here debate the truth of this Interpretation;
but if true, the Lord promised here a blessing to him that does wisely consider
the Death and Sufferings of Christ: And wherein does that blessing he and
consist? Pauper hic Christus est: et beatos istos predicat qui dolores et
cruciatus ipsius quos pro nobis sustinuit, grato et fideli animo recte
considerant. Tarnovius in Psalmum 41.
The Lord will deliver him in the time of trouble, (...): In the evil day, or
in the day of evil, says the Chaldee Paraphrase: In the day of vexation, says
Symmachus. Now the day of Temptation, Doubts, and great Fears, is an evil day,
and a day of vexation: This Day will God deliver him from, who does wisely
ponder on the death of Christ: Could we see the heart of Christ, we should
doubt no more, and in his death you may see his heart, in his Blood you may see
his heart. Ye know what the Prophet Isaiah says, Lord, will thou not ordain
Peace, who have wrought all our works for us? And where shall ye find that God
has wrought all our works for us, but in Christ's Grave and Death?

The Lord God has given me the Tongue of the Learned (says he) that I may
speak a word in due season to him that is weary. Go then to Christ, and press
this engagement, and say, Lord, thou have therefore received the Tongue of the
Learned, that thou may speak a word in due season to him that is weary. And
O Lord, I am one of those wearied souls; wearied with my Temptations, wearied
with inward trouble; now Lord speak a word in due season to this poor, wounded,
and wearied soul. Thus go to Christ.

He will give Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withold from him
that walks uprightly. Good men seek Peace for Grace sake; but wicked men, and
Hypocrites, seek Grace for Peace sake. When you do make your Addresses for
Peace, be sure you come to Christ in uprightness; and take heed that you do not
desire peace only for the Comfort of it, but as an help unto your Grace.

2. And when you go unto Christ for peace, Carry the Promise with you, go in
the way of the Promise. 3. Go and wait long on Christ, wait upon him only,
and k^ep his way. Some say they do wait on God, but they do not keep his way,
they throw up their Duty if they have not comfort presently: but in your
addresses to Christ, go and wait long on him; and in case that peace and
comfort does not come presently, lay by that great question a little, Whether
you be in Christ or no, whether you be the child of God or no. The great
trouble is this, O! I am afraid I am not the child of God, if I did but know
that I am the child of God, I should have peace. If peace and comfort therefore
do not come presently, lay that question aside a little, and in due time,
Christ will answer that question too, only now for the present wait on him, and
keep his way.

Oportet te saepe agere quod non vis et quod vis oportet relinquere.
and is not Humiliation a good means to get peace within? therefore in the
Third place. In all your Humiliation, carry Christ along with you. When you go
to mourn for sin, begin aloft with Christ: and do not always think to begin
below with sin, and so to come up to Christ; but begin aloft with Christ, and
so by your Humiliation, fall down upon sin. You say, O! but, I would be first
Humbled before I do go to Christ, but I pray tell me, Can ye be Humbled and not
see your sin? and where can ye have such a prospect of sin, as in the death of
Christ? is there any thing in the world, that can show you the misery,
ugliness, and damning nature of sin, as the death of Christ? If you begin with
Christ, then you will certainly come down to your sin and be Humbled for it; but
if you begin with sin you will not certainly come up to Christ. There is many a
poor soul that has said, I will be first humbled for my sin, and then I will go
to Christ; but he has stuck so long in the legal work that he has never come
at Christ. And if you be humbled before you do come to Christ, you will have no
great peace and comfort in your Humiliation: but if you first come to Christ,
and then carry Christ along with you to your Humiliation, then you will have
much comfort and peace therein, would you therefore be so Humbled as you may
have peace thereby; Be sure of this, that you carry Christ with you unto that
work, do not begin always with sin to go up to Christ, but rather begin at
Christ, and so fall down upon sin.

we have not yet resigned up our wills to the will of God? it is our own will that
troubles our peace; Propria voluntas turbat pacem.
get but your will Mortifyed into the will of God, and you will say, Lord, I would
fayn have peace; yet not my will, but thy will be done; I would have peace
presently, yet I have no will but thine; therefore Lord when thou will, and as
thou will, not my will, but thine own will be done. Thus do, and you are at rest
presently.



Lord begin to speak peace to any of your souls? now stir up your selves in a
way of believing; and then Christ will give you more.

Ye know how it was with Nathaniel: When Nathaniel believed upon what Christ
had spoken, says Christ unto him, Beleevest thou, because I said unto thee, I
saw thee under the Fig Tree? I will show thee greater things; thou shall see the
Angels of God ascending, and descending upon the son of man. So will the Lord
Christ say to a poor soul, I have spoken a word unto thee, and I gave thee a
little peace, and do thou believe because of the word I have spoken unto
thee? thou shall see greater things, and I will give thee abundance of peace.
Look into Isa. 48. verse. 18. and there you shall find the Lord speaking thus, O
that thou had hearkened to my Commandments, then had thy peace been as a
river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the Sea. When the Lord speaks, and
calls upon people to believe, if then they do hearken to him, then shall their
peace be like a river. And when does the Lord call in a special manner upon
people to believe? When he gives out a word, and when he gives them a little
peace, then he is calling upon them to believe, now return, and now believe,
says the Lord. Ye know how it was with Eliah; when they wanted rain, and had
wanted rain for a long time, Eliah sends his servant toward the Sea, to see if
he could perceive any rain coming, and Eliah falls down upon his face in prayer,
his servant goes, but no sign of rain, he goes again, and no sign of rain; and
the seventh time Eliah's servant perceives a cloud, of the bigness of an hand,
and he comes down unto his Master, and tells him, he had seen a cloud, the
bigness of a man's hand: Whereupon Eliah concludes and says, Come, let us up, I
hear the noise of many waters. So say I, you have been upon your face, and have
been much discouraged, yet if you have been at prayer, and a little refreshment
comes, though it be but the bigness of an hand: yet conclude and say, surely,
there is more rain a coming, Come, O my soul, Why art thou cast down? and why
art thou disquieted within me? hope in God, and wait on him, I hear abundance
of rain a coming. When our Savior Christ sometimes speaks peace, he does at the
first speak by a small word, and if that be improved, then he speaks more. Ye
know how it was with Mary; she was at the Sepulcher, and had been enquiring
after her Lord, and says she to the Angels, they have taken away my Lord: and
the Angels, talked ^o her and could not comfort her. But at last comes our
savior Christ, and he speaks to her and then she was comforted. But what does
he say to her? only one word, Mary, so when a man is in trouble, the Lord
comes sometimes and speaks but a word, he takes a promise it may be, and sets
on a word thereof upon the soul, and the heart answers Rabboni, my Lord. Does
the Lord therefore speak but one word unto thee, yet stir up thy self in
believing and hearken to him, for he will speak yet more fully and plainly,
only when he speaks listen, hearken diligently unto him and improve what he
says, so shall your peace be as a River and your righteousness as the Ocean.

And thus I have done with the first Argument.
TRUE PEACE MAY BE INTERRUPTED.
Sermon, II.
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, April, 23. 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


IT is possible that the Saints, and People of God, may be much discouraged,
and cast down: Though there be an inward Peace and quietness of Soul, which
they are ordinarily endued with, yet possibly this Peace may be interrupted,
and themselves much discouraged, and cast down.

Here are two words in the Text speak as much; Cast-down, Disquieted. And three
times in this Psalm, the Psalmist says, His Soul was cast down within him; yet
this David was a man of great Peace and Comfort ordinarily.

And as with David; so it was, is, and will be with other Saints. This is so
ordinary a case, that ^he Holy Ghost has provided a standing Psalm, or Prayer,
on purpose for such as are in this condi^^on: Psalm, 102. the Title, A Prayer;
or Psalm, of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his
complaint before the Lord. In Psalm. 119.25. he says, My belly cleaves to the
dust; and that is low indeed. And verse. 28. My soul melts for heaviness: I am
not only sad, and heavy, but my soul melts for heaviness. Canticles 5. The
Spouse says, Her heart was gone; or, my soul failed within me. And if we look
into Psalm, 143. we find (at the 4. verse.) that the Psalmist says, My Spirit
is overwhelmed, and my heart within me is desolate. What do all these
expressions, high, great and many, speak, but this Truth that is now before us?

For the more full clearing, and opening of it, I shall labor to show, First,
How far it is possible for a good man to be discouraged, or cast down?
Secondly, How it does come to pass that he is so discouraged? Thirdly, How
those Discouragements can stand with his Grace and goodness? Fourthly, How they
may be healed and cured?


How far the Discouragements of the Saints may reach? For (will some say.) I
know it is possible that the most gracious, holy man, may be much discouraged,
but not with such discouragments as mine are.

Psalm. 77. verse. 3. I remembered God, and was troubled. He does not say, I
remembered my sin, and was troubled, but God; Yea I was not only troubled, but
I did complain, and my spirit was overwhelmed within me. But when the promise
came, and mercy came, and comfort came, did he refuse that too? yes verse. 2. my
soul refuses to be comforted.

Psalm. 102. and see if your case may not be paralleld, verse. 4. My heart is
smitten and withered like grass, so that I forget to eat my bread. verse. 5. By
reason of the voice ^f my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin. verse. 6. I am
like a Pelican of the wilderness, and I am like an Owl of the des^rt. verse. 9.
I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping. verse. 10.
Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for thou have lifted me up, and
cast me down. verse. 11. My days are like a shadow that declineth: and I am
withered like grass. O! but I am not only so far discouraged, as to refuse
comfort for soul and body: but my soul refuses Duty, and casts off Duty too
for the present.

Jeremiah: yet if you look into Jer. 20.7.8. and 9. verses, you find it made
good. Indeed (says he) The word was as fire in my bones, and I could not
forbear: But for the time he did resolve to forbear preaching in the name of
God, which was his duty, which he had commission to do: for (says he) I will
not make mention of him; nor speak any more in his name. This Holy, Gracious
man, was under temptation, he was much discouraged, and thereupon he said so.
Yet (verse 13.) he says, Sing to the Lord, praise the Lord: for he has
delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evil doers. But then mark the
next words, Cursed be the day wherein I was born; let not the day wherein my
mother bare me, be blessed. Cursed be the man who brought tidings to my Father,
saying, A man child is born to thee. What a sudden change was here, even in the
best of the Saints, from incouragments, to discouragements. O! but I have not
only cursed the day of my birth (as Jeremie) and wished that I had never been
born; But I am weary of my life, and have sought after mine own death: and was
there ever any Godly, Gracious man, that was thus discouraged, and cast down?

Job? I was weary of my life: Job, 10.1. And in the 3. Job, pouring out his
complaint in regard of himself he says, verse. 20. Wherefore is light given to
him that is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul? verse. 21. Which long for
death, but it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures. Now ye
know, that those which dig for Gold and Silver, dig industriously, and
earnestly. Thus it is with me, says Job, I am so afflicted, and distressed;
and in such bitterness of soul, that I long for death, and dig for it as for
hid treasures.

O! what a mighty deep of discouragments, may the Saints, and people of God fall
into, and yet be Godly, Gracious.

But why does God suffer his own people, and dearest children, to be thus
discouraged, and their peace to be interrupted? I know (will some say) that al
our present joy, and comfort, is but a creature, and so may be ecclipsed; and
that Satan is near unto the best of Gods children, thrusting, and pushing them
forward into these discouragments, that they may be like unto himself who is a
discouraged Spirit: Answ.

Sic verus justitiae Sol nonnunquam oritur and ad nos accedit a liquando rursus
a nostro clima^e aberrat utrumque tamen benesicium nostrum est.

Frumentum in Terram jactum eget aliquo tempore ut congelatur and induretur
aliquo etiam ut molliatur neutrum illi obest. utrumque n^cessarium est unum ut
crescat alterum ut Radices agat. Granat.


but why will God suffer it to be so?

In General: It is for their good, for their good they have, and for their good
they do want their Peace and Comfort: The Star which led the wise men to
Christ, did not always go before them, but sometimes it appeared, sometimes it
was hidden from them; but both appearance and hiding was for their benefit: its
first appearance invited them to Christ, and its withdrawance made them more
diligent in seeking after him. So when Christ hid himself from his Mother Mary,
she sought him the more, and when she found him, she rejoiced the more: but
both his absence and his presence, her fear and her comfort, was for her good;
for his absence did increase and draw out her desires, and his presence did
increase and draw out her joys. When God is absent from us, then we have
testimonies of our Love to God (by our desires after him,) and when he is
present, then we have testimonies of his Love to us, by the shines of his
Countenance; so that whether God shines or not, whether we have comfort or not,
both is for our good. Thus in the General, but yet more Particularly.

Hosea, Hos. 11.4.
He draws us with the Cords of a man. Now it is man's disposition to come to God
at the second hand: So long as man can find a fullness in any Creature, he comes
not to God; but first he sees an emptiness in the Creature, Duty, and
Ordinance, and then he says, O what a fullness is in God himself, in Christ
himself! 1 Timothy 5.5.
The Widow that is desolate, trusts in God: though a Widow, yet if not
desolate (sometimes) she would not trust; and therefore God suffers a desolation
to come upon her Widdowhood. When David's men took up stones to have stoned him,
then (the Text says) He encouraged himself in the Lord his God: 1 Samuel 30.6.
So long as man has encouragement els-where, he does not encourage himself in
the Lord his God. This being man's Nature, and God having a design of Love upon
his own Children, he suffers a damp and discouragement to pass upon all their
Comforts; their Peace to be interrupted, their hearts disquieted, and their
souls discouraged, that so they may encourage themselves in God alone.

he, what an extraordinary mercy and blessing is it, that I should go down
again: Thus the interruption of an ordinary blessing, does raise it to an
extraordinary. So long as a man has his health and strength, though he be able
to travel forty, fifty, threescore miles a day, he is not much affected
therewith; but if he be sick a little, and at deaths door, and then begins to
recover, though he can but put forth his Hand, or stir his Leg, he blesses God,
and says, O Friends, I can stir my self in my bed, I can move my Hand, or my
Leg; what an extraordinary mercy and blessing is this! So in this caie, So long
as a man has inward Peace and quietness of soul, without interruption, he
looks upon it as a common mercy and blessing; but if his Peace be a little
interrupted, and his soul buffeted by Satan, and then he recovers his Peace, O
says he, what an extraordinary blessing and mercy is this! Now God will
sometimes raise the price of this Commodity from an ordinary, to an
extraordinary blessing, and therefore he does suffer his own Children, and
dearest Servants to be thus discouraged, and their peace to be interrupted.



Ignorandum non est consolationes spirituales esse infantium ci^um and lac.
dulce quo Deus nutrit suos and a mundi voluptatibus avocat ut harum volup^atum
inescati dulcedine alias omnes consolationes contemnant and amoris Divini
dulcedine capti omnem amorem mundi abjiciant,

Deus negat suis consolationes ut siant perfectiores, Granateus.


that he may train them up unto more perfection; Comfort is the Childrens Milk:
ye may observe therefore, that the weaker Christian has sometimes more lively,
sensible Comforts, than the stronger Christian has; Why? but because this
inward Joy, and Peace, and Comfort, is that Milk, and sweet Honey whereby they
are drawn off from the pleasures and sweetness of the world; and as these
Comforts do wean us from the worlds comforts, so we have need to be weaned
again from these weaners, which God does sometimes by restraining of them, and
so we grow up unto more perfection.

Fifthly, Sometimes again, God sees his Children do grow vain, and light, and
froathy, and wanton, and secure under their Peace and Comfort, and then he
withdraws himself, hides his face, and so they do lose their Comfort. This was
the case in Canticles, 5. where the Spouse says, My soul failed within me, at
verse 6. But why? I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself:
And why had he withdrawn himself? He comes and makes a tender of Love and
Mercy, verse 2. and she would none, verse 3. I have put off my Coat, how shall
I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? that is, I am now
laid to sleep; they are words that import security, and upon her security he
withdraws himself, and being withdrawn, her soul fails within her. And thus it
is many times with the Children of God in their particulars; the Lord sees that
they grow secure, vain, froathy, and wanton under their peace and comfort, then
he withdraws himself, and their peace fails.



But this is hard to say, Can ye foretell a man's Discouragements, even in the
time of his Comfort? who is there among all the Saints so comforted, concerning
whom you may say, surely this man will be much discouraged again?

Psalm. 143.4. Therefore my Spirit is overwhelmed within me, Why so? Verse 3.
Because the enemy prevailed: He measured Gods Love too much by these outward
things, and therefore when the Enemy broke in upon him, he thought God did not
love him, and so he was overwhelmed, thus in regard of all outward blessings.
See thou therefore a man who raises his persuasion of Gods Love from the
smiles of any Creature; say of such a man beforehand, O this poor soul ere
long, will be in the dark, and under some discouragements.

For when the strong man keeps the house, all is at Peace; but it is false
Peace: after a man is converted, he has Peace within, and it is true Peace;
God expects that a man should be humbled for his former false Peace, and
thankful for his present true Peace; Now when God sees one both unhumbled for
false Peace, and unthankful for his present true Peace, the Spirit of the Lord
is grieved, so it withdraws, and the soul is comfortless.

Perpetuum est quod habet causam perpetuantem, that is perpetual, which has a
perpetuating cause: Grace without is perpetual, Christ's own personal Obedience
in the merit of it, is perpetual; but the actings of Grace within us, are not
perpetual, or not perpetually obvious to sight, and therefore cannot
perpetually comfort. Indeed our Grace within, and obedience, is in some
respects a cause of our Peace: First, a Causa sine qua non, a cause without
which we can have no Comfort; for a godly man can have no comfort, if he have
no obedience. Secondly, A cause which does, removere prohibens, remove what
hinders our Comfort, namely, our sin. Thirdly, A Cause witnessing; for there
are three that bear witness, The Spirit, Water, and Blood; Water which is our
Sanctification, is one. Fourthly, A Cause confirming; for by our Obedience and
Sanctification, our Justification is confirmed, and the sense thereof; so that
Obedience is one cause, but not the only cause of our Peace, nor the principal:
When therefore you see the streams of a man's Comfort run in this Channel,
raising all his comfort only, or principally from his obedience, or acting of
Grace within, then you may say, though the stream be now full, stay but a
little, and ere long you will see it dried, and this man will be much
discouraged.

saying, Now I am a child of God, now I know that God loves me, that I have a
share in Christ: either this man raises his comfort from the Word it self, or
from the comings in of the Word; if from the Word it self, how can his comfort
die? if upupon the bare coming in of the Word, how can his Comfort live? For
when a Word comes not, then his Comforts fail. We read in Psalm. 16. That he
shall multiply sorrows that hasteneth after another: your Translation reads it
thus, Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another God; (...)
but the word God is not in the Hebrew. The whole Verse are the words of Christ,
what says he, at verse 2. O my soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art my
Lord, my Goodness, Holiness, or Righteousness, is not for thee, but for the
Saints that are in the Earth, and for the excellent in whom is all my delight:
But O Lord our Savior, what if we do not go to thy Goodness, Holiness, and
Righteousness, resting upon that alone? He answers, Their sorrows shall be
multiplied who hasten after another: And is not this to hasten after another,
when men rest upon the bare coming in of the Word, or the impressions on the
heart that are made thereby? Where do we read in all the Scripture (turn from
one end of the Bible to the other) and where do we read that Christ has
appointed any such way of Comfort as this, that a man should raise his Comforts
from pitching, or by an opening of the Book? If I pitch upon a Promise to day,
and so have comfort, may I not pitch upon a threatening to morrow, and so have
no comfort again? Where has Christ appointed any such way as this, that I
should measure Gods Love, or cast my everlasting condition by the coming in of
a particular word? Indeed God does sometimes by his Providence, upon the opening
of the Bible, cause our eye to fall upon some Promise, which is a Providential
Comfort, he does sometimes send a particular word to stay and bear up ones soul
in a particular distress or affliction, but not that I should measure his
everlasting Love, or cast my condition by the coming in of every word; this
therefore is to hasten after another, and how many sorrows are multiplied upon
the hearts of Gods People hereby? How many poor souls are there that walk in
this way? God our Father sees it, that the Plaster is not right laid, and so
he is fain to take it off, but all from a design of Love, to lay it right; and
for these reasons God suffers his own People to be much discouraged.

But how can all this stand with Grace? Can a man be thus comforted, and
discouraged? discouraged, and then comforted again? thus to and fro in his
comfort, yet in Christ, yet gracious, yet holy?

down, Revertere anima mea in requiem tuam, Psalm, 116.

observemus verbum revertendi quo admonemur, fieri quidem subinde, ut animus
piorum optata requie privatur et variis discriminibus inquietetur verum juxta
id accidere consolationis quod suo tempore conceditur illis Divinitus ut ad
quictem suam revertantur Muscul. in Psalm. 116.


yet in the Saints there is still a mixture of some Grace withal, some Grace
mixed with their discouragements. Take the Saints and people of God, and though
they be much discouraged and cast down, yet still they mourn after God, and
though they cannot wait so patiently as they would, yet they say in truth, if
they did but know that God would come at last, they would wait al their lives,
here is Grace; and though they cannot mourn for sins past, for which they are
most disquieted, yet they dare not put forth their hand willingly unto any sin
present. I have read of one that was so troubled and cast down, that he said
and thought, I find so little comfort in my soul, that I would willingly suffer
my body to live in burning fire until Christ's coming, so that I might but have
the assurance of Gods love and favor, and though I am persuaded I shall go to
hell, yet my hope is, that my pains here will be mitigated there, in all which
trouble (says my author) nothing in the world could persuade him to do any
thing willingly that was displeasing to God; this man was at the last
comforted, and then he would often say, the Devil took advantage of my sorrow
for evil things, to make me unthankful for good things. But I speak this to
show, that the Saints are never so discouraged, (...) Faeces a (...) custodivit
quia vina sua vi conservant.
but still there is a Grace that is mixed withal, they dare not sin. Yea and
though by their very discouragements, they do sin against the Gospel in
unbelief, yet by the same discouragements they are kept from their sins against
the law, these discouragements being as the lees that do keep the wines.

Yea and though they do rest too much upon their righteousness whereby their
feet sink into diverse sloughs yet it is because they would be the more obedient
to God their father, and in the midst of al their discouragement profess in
truth, I would give all the world for the presence of God, here is Grace, a
mixture of Grace withal, no marvel therefore, that these discouragements may be
in a Godly Gracious man.

But is there no evil in this to be thus fluctuating to and fro, comforted and
then discouraged, is there no evil in these discouragements?

wrong; when he comes at three or four turnings, there he stands whilst he
might ride a mile, and when he comes above in the field, and sees a shephard at
a distance from him, he rides up to him to inquire whether he be in his way or
not; yea and all the day long he is thinking of his way, whether he be right;
whereas if he knew his way, he might have many precious thoughts of God and of
the word. So in this case, while a man is doubting and fearing, and knows not
whether he be in the way to Heaven or no, how much precious time is lost?
thoughts of Christ lost? thankfulness for Mercy lost? of al hearts the
scripture says an unbeleeving heart is an evil heart, and when men's hearts are
discouraged and cast down, are they not unbeleeving? Who would not therefore
take heed of these discouragements, and of the interruption of their peace?

But suppose now that I have lost my comforts, times were heretofore when my
soul was full of joy, but now I am quite discouraged, what should a poor soul do
to recover his peace and comfort again that interrupted peace may be restored?



First, Have thou quite forgot the years of the right hand of the most high?
have thou lost al thy former experiences too? I know that usually when our
comforts fail, our former experiences fail, yet not always; for the Psalmist
says here, my soul is cast down, yet at the same time verse. 6. he says,
Therefore I will remember thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites,
from the hill Missar. So Psalm. 77 The Psalmist having said at the 7. verse. Will
the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? is his mercy clean
gone for ever? and does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to be
Gracious etc? he adds in the same breath, but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the most high. Ye know what the disciples said. Did not our
hearts glow within us while he opened the scriptures to us? Luke 24.32.
Beloved! you have no comfort now, well, but you remember at such a time, when
you were al alone in your chamber, and no soul was near you, how the Lord came
and opened the scriptures, the promise to your soul, wherewith your heart did
glow within you. Have you quite forgotten the openings of those scriptures to
you? (I speak not of the Glowings, for I suppose they are now gone) but are the
scriptures gone that were then opened to you? did not you say in your last
trouble and down-cast condition, if ever the Lord appear to me again, I will
never doubt of his mercy more? And did he not appear unto you and open the
promise unto your heart? and have you now forgotten these things? this is your
infirmity, why should you not remember the days, and times, and works, and
experiences of the right hand of the most high?



Some seek comfort in a way of reason, and think to reason out their
temptation, and to reason in their comfort, but as one says well; dispute not
with God lest you be confounded, dispute not with Satan lest you be deceived.

Some again tire themselves in duty, neglecting of their calling; the truth is,
prayer is a friend to comfort and more than ordinary time is to be used in
prayer for those that are troubled in conscience, but when men under
temptations, and without comforts throw up their callings, thinking that
nothing is to be done but prayer, by throwing aside their calling, they lay
themselves open to more temptations of Satan, they do so tire out their natural
spirits in duty, that they are flat and dead in duty, so their temptations are
the more increased, and their comforts more distanced. Wherefore consider, if
you would have comfort restored again, whether you do not use the means of
comfort in such a manner, as to set you at a further distance from it.

Francis Spira, that when he was in horror of conscience, he could not with
peace and quietness behold his wife and children, for, to get an estate for
them he denied the truth, and therefore when they came before him in his
trouble, he cried out in much horror, How terrible is the sight of these to me!
they had been comforts to him before, yet now he could not away with the sight
of them, O! thought he, for your sakes, and for your provision, I have denied
the truth and yielded to these superstitions, and therefore says he, How
terrible is the sight of these unto me? What peace or comfort had Judas in the
sight of his thirty pence? look what outward comfort a man strains his
conscience for, that will be death unto him to behold. We read of David that
when his men had ventured for the waters of Bethlehem, he would not drink of
it, but poured it out before the Lord, for (says he) why should I drink the
blood of these men? he did not sin in desiring of it, nor did he command his
men for to venture through the enemies quarters, for those Hebrew words (...)
quis dabit who will give me? are but words of wishing, who will give me to drink
of the waters of Bethlehem that is, O! that I had the waters of Bethlehem:
according to the hebrew language, but though he sinned not in his desires, yet
when he had the waters he poured them forth before the Lord, and said, God
forbid that I should drink the blood of these men; and will you drink the blood
of your own conscience? Time was heretofore when you had peace and comfort, and
by straining and stretching your conscience for your outward comfort; now you
have lost your inward, will you not then take that outward comfort, and pour it
forth before the Lord? and say, God forbid that I should drink the blood of
mine own peace and comfort, how can any of you have peace, while those stolen,
and unrestored goods lie by you?

But alas! al my comforts do lie prostrate at the feet of my fears, that now I
have no peace at al, What shall I do that my peace and comfort may be restored?



First, Look what you would do if you were to be justified, and do the same
now: if I were to be justified, (having a sight of my own sin and nature) I
would through Grace, come to the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and leave the
weight of my poor, guilty soul upon it; which act of faith would justify me,
and give me peace; for being justified by faith, says the Apostle, we have
peace with God.

And as faith does justify and give peace at the first, so the renewing of this
act of faith does renew our peace, and what is my justifying faith, but in time
of temptation to leave my self and condition upon Christ alone, saying, whether
Godly or ungodly, whether in Christ or not in Christ, now I do not dispute, but
leave my self upon Christ alone, this do again, and this will bring peace again.



I know you will say, O! but now in this condition I cannot be humbled.

But withal remember, that in this condition, that goes for humbling which does
not before, and God will take that for humiliation now, which he would not take
before. Psalm. 32. says David, I said I will confess my transgression unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Dixit non fecit, says Austin,
he said he would do it, but did not do it fully, yet thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin, God took his humiliation although it was very low. Why?
verse. 3.4. we find him under temptation, and in much discouragement, for (says
he) My bones waxed old with my roaring all the day long, day and night thy hand
was heavy upon me: my moisture is turned into the drought of Summer, yet how
ready was God to receive an acknowledgment, and a little humiliation from him,
at this time.

O! But what is all this to us? this was David's case. Nay says David, this is
not my case alone, for verse. 6. For this shall every one that is Godly, pray
unto thee, in a time when thou may be found: God will receive a little when
you are much discouraged. Either therefore God has withdrawn for your sin, or
not, if not, wait but a while, he will return again; if for your sin, labor more
and more to be humbled for it, for he will receive that measure of humiliation
now, which he will not do at another time.



But if I do read the scriptures, and read them much, I shall then meet with
some promise, possibly many, and now I cannot apply them being thus discouraged
as I am, I shall see the promises indeed, and say, there is such and such an old
friend of mine, but it is now mine enemy, the promise will not own me, and I
cannot apply it, and so it will do me no good.

When Moses saw his rod turned into a Serpent, he was afraid of it, and fled
from it, but when he put forth his hand and took it by the tail, it was a rod
in his hand again, as it was before; it may be you look upon such and such a
promise at a distance, and you say O! there is my enemy, now it will not help me,
it will sting me, it will undo me, but put forth your hand again to it, and it
will become a promise, a rod in your hand, as comfortable as ever it was before.

And does not the promise come to you? go you to it. Sometimes the promise does
come to us, sometimes we go to it, when the promise does come to you, you have
joy, when you go to it, you have peace, and this peace may last longer than the
other joy, but remember this as an everlasting rule, That, your very relying
upon the promise does make it yours.

But if I do read the scriptures much in this condition of my discouragement, I
shall not only meet with the promise, but with a threatening, and that will
discourage me more.



Yea, and God does therefore sometimes send the threatening, that it may lead
you to the promise. You know how God appeared to Elijah, first in a wind that
did shake the Mountains and Rocks, but God was not there, then in an
Earthquake, but God was not there, then in a fire, but God was not there, then
in a still voice, and there was God. So when God appears to a soul, sometimes he
does first send a threatening, and shakes the Rocks, and Mountains, and hard
hearts, and his converting Grace may not be there, but there is a still voice
behind, the voice of the promise, God is there, and all this shaking of the
threatening, is but to make way unto the still voice of the promise that is
behind.

but if I should read the scriptures much in this condition, I should meet with
many other things which concern not me, there are many histories in the
scripture which suites not with my condition, and so I should get no good or
comfort.

per modum divertentiae, by way of divertency, as you do those that are
grieved. If a friend have lost a husband, or wife, or child, you do not speak
of the lost person, and say O! what a sweet friend, or husband, or wife, or
child you have lost; but you speak of something else, and then afterward you
are able to speak of the person lost, but first you divert his mind from the
matter of his grief, and so you do cure his grief. Thus does Christ also when
he cures a poor, wounded, grieved soul, he does not always speak to the
subject matter of grief in hand, but leads the heart sometimes into the
consideration of other truths, and then afterward does speak unto the matter
that is now concerning, he cures by way of divertency.

Study therefore, O! study the scriptures much, for thus the Lord will pour wine
and oil into your bleeding wounds, and in due time you will say, as David did,
In the multitude of my thoughts, Psalm. 94.19 Quest.
O Lord, thy comforts have comforted my soul.

But suppose the Lord do restore to me the joy of my Salvation, that the bones
which I have broken may rejoice, suppose there be a return of peace and joy,
what shall I do then?



Egypt, which set the Israelites a murmuring: so there is a mixed company that
comes with your comforts. Every creature is born into the world with some
filth; when you have comfort, labor to find out and separate the dross and
filth, put away that mixed company: Rose leaves keep not long in the leaf,
distilled comforts keep the longest.





you have, spend it with the Saints. Do as Moses did, when Moses was in
Pharoahs Court, and in great preferment, standing in the presence of the King,
he went out to visit his brethren, and to comfort them under their burdens, I
will see (says he) how it fares with my brethren, under their Burdens. So do
you also, has the Lord spoken peace and comfort to your soul? and do you now
stand in the presence of the King of Kings, having his face shining on you,
with your comforts al restored unto you? now then go out unto your brethren,
and inquire who they are that labor under any burden, and with the same comfort
wherewith you have been comforted your selves, comfort others, knowing this for
certain, that the more you spend, the more you shall have, and the longer you
shall keep your comforts, yea, and this Christ expects, that what comforts we
have from him, we should spend for him.

And thus I have also done with the Second Argument.
SAINTS Should not be DISCOURAGED, Whatever their Condition be.
Sermon, III.
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, April. 30. 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


HAving spoken of the two first Doctrines, the third follows, which is this.

The Saints and people of God, have no David had as much cause and reason for
his discouragements here as any other, for he did want ordinances, yea he was
kept from the ordinances, therefore says he, verse. 1.2. As the heart pants
after the water brooks, so pants my soul after thee, O God, my soul
thirsts for God, for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God?
yea after he had known the sweetness of them he was deprived of them, verse. 4.
For I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God. And in
this condition he had many enemies, he was in the state of affliction and
persecution, his enemies reproached him, they reproached him in the matter of
his God, and that daily, verse. 3. and 10. While they continually say unto me,
where is thy God? As a sword in my bones mine enemies reproach me, while they
say daily unto me, where is thy God?

And he was now under great desertions: though the enemies did reproach him in
the matter of his God, yet if God had been present with him, he had been well
enough, but they said, where is now thy God? and his own heart said so too,
that God had left and forsaken him, (which was his failing) verse. 9. I will say
unto God my rock, why have thou forsaken me? yet for all this he says, why art
thou cast down, O my soul? As if he should say, Thine enemies do not only
reproach thee in the matter of thy God, but thine own heart, thou art now kept
from those precious ordinances which once thou did enjoy, yet why should
thou be disquieted, or cast down? there is no reason for it. So that the words
speak plainly this truth, A Godly, Gracious man has no true scripture-reason
for his discouragements whatever his condition be.

It was a sad condition that the prophet Habakkuk did present unto himself, yet
says he, Chap. 3. I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my
Salva^^^n. verse. 18. But O thou servant of God, thou art now under a
threatening, and not under a promise, which makes thy very belly to tremble,
and will thou, can thou now rejoice? yes says he, verse. 16. When I heard, my
belly trembled, my lips quivered at the voice, rottenness entered into my
bones, yet will I rejoice in the Lord etc.

But it may be thou think this threatening will never be fulfilled. Yes says
he, verse. the 17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit
be in the vines, the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the field shall yield no
meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no meat in the
stalls, yet will I rejoice in the Lord etc.

But a man may rejoice though he have no wine to drink, or olive to eat,
because these are but creatures which are for our refreshment; but will thou
rejoice (O Prophet) if thou want thy daily bread, and such creatures as are
for our daily nourishment?

Yes (says he) Although the field shall yield no meat, and the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there be no herd in the stall, yet will I rejoice in
the Lord. So that whatever a Godly man's condition be, he may rejoice, and there
is no true reason for his discouragement.

Indeed, there is no sin so unreasonable, but the sinner thinks he has reason
for it, and so the Saints and people of God may think, that they have reason
for their discouragements, hence it is that they have so many why's and
wherefores, Why have thou forsaken me? why go I mourning?

Yea, they may not only seem to have some reason, but in a way of nature, they
have reason for their discouragements: and therefore says David, When I saw
the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.
I said, I have cleansed my hands in vain, til I went into the house of the
Lord. So that, so long as he was in the house of nature, and natural reason, he
did see reason for his discouragement.

Yea, not only so, but take things asunder, and consider things by pieces, one
from another, abstracting the means from the end, and so the Saints may have a
true and real reason for their discouragements, for every affliction is
Grievous. If the husbandman look only upon the breaking up of his ground,
without respect to the harvest, he may well be discouraged, but take both
together, and so he will not: thus if the Saints consider their breakings apart
from their harvest, they may see cause for their discouragements: but if they
do consider their breaking up, and their harvest together, the means and the
end together, I say take altogether, and then, whatever their condition be,
they have no reason to be cast down, or be disquieted.

What is there in or for the Saints, that may be a sufficient bulwark against
al discouragements?

his exceeding joy: Psalm. 43. Satan may darken this light and joy for a time,
but he can never put it out, all the Saints and people of God are possessed of
this. (...). Justin Mar. 2. Apol.
It Is written of Antoninus the Emperor, one of the persecutors in the Primitive
times, that being environed, and compassed about by his enemies, (whereby he
and al his army in the field were like to be lost for water) he commanded the
Christians of his army to pray for rain; Whereby present relief came to him,
his army was preserved, and his enemies destroyed; whereupon he wrote a letter
to the Roman Senate in favor of the Christians, and gave this commendation of
them in it, that they were a people which were, Deo contenti, content with God,
quem circumferunt secum in pectore, whom they did always carry about with them
in their bosom: yea says he, in that same letter, It is very credible, that
although we think them wicked men, Deum pro munimento habere in conscientia,
that they have God in their conscience for their bulwark. Thus a Heathen, thus
an Enemy, thus he who was once a Persecutor confessed, and shall not we say as
much?

O! but say some, toll meum et toll Deum, take away that word My, and take
away the comfort of that word God; no God to me unless he be my God, and there
are many of Gods people that cannot say, God is my God, for they do want
Assurance; and therefore how can they have comfort in this?

Yes, If my very resting on God does make him mine, I may have comfort in him
too, now the Saints and people of God may always, and do rest on God, and
though Satan says by way of temptation, you have not believed, you have not
rested on God, yet they may say, O! but now I do rest on God, and so may
always have comfort in their propriety and interest in God.

I know thy works, Revel. 2.9.10.
and thy tribulation, and thy poverty, says Christ to the Church of Smyrna:
and this Christ speaks as a releeving comfort to that Church in a sad
condition; for says Christ, Satan shall cast some of you into prison ten days.
Yet be of good comfort Smyrna; I know thee and thy tribulation, and poverty;
whatever thy condition be, I do know thee in it: and it seems this is a general
cordial, for its given unto all the Churches, I know thy works, O Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, and Phyladelphia: it is spoken as a terror
indeed to Laodicea, for that which is most comfortable to the good, is most
terrible to the wicked, as the presence of God, the omniscience of God etc. But
to the Godly this is a great comfort; whatever my condition be, yet God my
Father knows it, and does know me in it.

John. 14. verse. 1. Let not your heart be troubled, says our Savior to his
disciples. As if he should say, I am now to die, to leave you al, to go to my
Father; and when I am gone, you will meet with many troubles, but I would not
have you discouraged, Let not your heart be troubled,

But now if thou dyest, we shall then lose thy presence, and what greater
trouble or affliction can there be, than the loss of thy presence? Well (says
Christ) yet I would not have you troubled at heart, Let not your heart be
troubled. But if we lose thee, O Lord, we shall lose all the ordinances, and
those many sweet opportunities of receiving good for our souls which we have
enjoyed by thy presence. Be it so, says our savior, yet I would not have you
troubled at the heart, Let not your heart be troubled. But Lord, if we lose
thee, we shall be as sheep scattered, some will deny thee, al will forsake thee,
and when the shepherd is smitten, we as sheep shall be al dispersed, and fall into
sad temptations, afflictions and desertions. Well, says he, however it be, yet
I would not have you troubled at the heart, let not your heart be troubled
however, this is Christ's mind, will, and pleasure concerning his disciples.

And if you say, how may it appear that God the father would have his people to
be of the same mind and disposition never to be discouraged?

It appears plainly, because God has provided promises of comfort, succor,
and relief, suitable to al conditions: I dare boldly challenge al men, to show
me any one condition, which God has not provided a promise of comfort, mercy,
and succor suitable unto it.

Yea, and if you look upon the promises, and mark them well, you shall find they
are so laid, worded, and molded, as that al discourag^^g objections may be
fully answered, and taken off as the rise. For example, suppose the Church of
God be under perse ution of enemies, Isa. 54.17. No weapon that is formed a^^
^i ^h^e shall prosper. But you will say, our enemies, O Lord, are ^any, they rise
up against us, and gather into bodies, and con^^^^rate against thy servants.
verse. 15. he takes off that thus, b^^^d they shall surely rather together, but
not by me, whosoever shall ga^her together against thee shall fall for thy sake.
But, O Lord, they have go ten instruments of death, and the whole power o^ the
Militia and Ammunition into their hands. Be it so, says the Lord, verse. 16.
Behold I have created the Smith that blows the coals in the fire, and tha^
brings forth an instrument for his work, and I have created the waster to
destroy: no weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. But, O Lord, they
have got authority on their side, and they rise against us in judgment: Mark
then what follows, verse. 17. And every tongue that shall rise against thee in
judgment, thou shall condemn. But this is a promise made unto the Jewish Church
only, and not to us. Not so, this is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
verse. 17. So that if you be the Servants of the Lord, this promise tells you it
is made to you. But we are in an unbeleeving condition, and are not able to lay
hold on this promise. Well, but says this promise, this is the heritage or the
servants of the Lord: Children shall have their inheritance, though for the
present they are not able to sue for it, it falls upon them in course. O! but
we may sin against the Lord, and cut our selves off from this promise, and this
inheritance, Mark then what follows, and their righteousness is of me, says
the Lord, not only this promise is of me, but the righteousness, whereby they
shall believe, and lay hold on it, and walk under it, is of me, says the Lord.
O! how Graciously is this promise laid, whereby al unbeleeving objections may
be taken off: so it is in all the promises, do but observe and mark them, they
are so molded, ordered, worded, as that every word of the promise does hold
forth a distinct answer unto your objections. Now if God have so laid his
promises, that al unbeleeving objections may be taken off as they rise, what
does this argue, but that God our Father would not have his people discouraged,
whatever their condition be? therefore they have no reason for it.

John lay some years in the bosom of Jesus Christ, whilst Christ lived, but,
then he had not the revelation given him; Christ dies, John is afflicted,
persecuted, driven into the Isle of Patmos, there an exile, and there Christ
appears to him, and gives him that blessed book of comfort, the book of the
revelation. We read of Jacob, that at one time especially he did so see the
Lord, that he called the name of the place, Peniel, for I have seen the Lord,
Genesis 32.30.
says he, and when was that? but when Churlish Laban, was on one side of him,
and his rough brother Esau, coming out against him in an hostile way on the
other side. Once he had a vision of a Ladder, the top whereof was in heaven,
and the foot on earth, Angels ascending and descending upon it; which in John,
1. Chap. Christ interprets to be himself. You shall see the Angels ascending and
descending upon the Son of man, but when had he this vision? not all the while
he was in his Fathers house, bu^ when he was fain to fly from the anger of his
brother, lay in the open field in the night, and had no pillow but an hard
stone to ly upon, then does Christ thus appear to him, and make such a
discovery and manifestation of himself, as he never had before. And when was it
that Mr. Robert Glover was so filled with heavenly joys, that he cried out, he
is come, he is come? ye read of him in the book of Martyrs, that for five years
together, he was worn out and consumed with fears and troubles; he could
neither eat nor sleep, he was so afflicted in his soul upon the apprehension of
some backsliding, he thought he must needs be thrown down to hell when he died,
yea he thought (says the story of him) that he could not more despair in hell,
yet after this long time of wrestling with this Temptation, it pleased God to
come in with comforts: But I say, when was this? why; then especially, when he
came within sight of the stake, then he cried out with clapping of his hands,
he is come, he is come. Thus does God (with whom are reserves of mercies)
reserve his sweetest consolations, for the time of our sowrest afflictions, and
does temper the one with the other in most fit proportion.

Yea, the Lord does not only give forth encouragement in time of
discouragement, and proportion his encouragements unto our discouragements, but
he does make your discouragements, occasional rises and bottoms, unto your
encouragements and comforts. The Lord caused a deep sleep to come upon Adam,
and then he took a Rib from his side, wherewith he made a help for him; so does
God cause a deep sleep to come upon you in your discouragements, out of which
he taks a Rib, and ^uilds up a help for you, making the discouragements of the
Saints, to contribute to their very encouragements. Hosea. 2.14. Behold, says
the Lord, I will allure her (that is the Church his people) and bring her into
the wilderness, and speak comfortably to her, and I will give her her vineyards
from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope. But a wildernessed
condition is a lost condition, and what comfort can one have in a lost
condition? True says God, ye cannot in, and by your selves, but there I will
speak friendly and comfortably to her, and of all the times that I choose to
preach Gospel to a poor soul, I choose to do it in a wildernessed and lost
condition. But though the Lord do speak comfortably to us, if we be in a
wilderness, a dry and barren place where no food, nor comfort is, how can we be
but discouraged? Nay (says the Lord) but I will give her her vinyards from
thence: But if we sin and murmur in the wilderness as the Israelites did, the
Lord will cut us off as he did them, and a wilderness is a place of trouble,
wherein we are apt to murmur, and be discouraged: Nay (says the Lord) but I
will give her her vinyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of
hope. The valley of Achor, was the valley of Perturbation, trouble, and of
great discouragement, when the men of Israel sled, and fell before the men of
Ai, for the sin of Achan, Joshua, 7. verse. the last; yet it was an inlet to
the Land of Canaan, to the Land of rest. Now says the Lord, look as it was
with them, though the Valley of Achor was a Valley of Trouble and Perturbation,
yet it was the door by which the Israelites came into the Land of Rest: So
shall it be with you, I will make your Troubles and Discouragements, the very
door of your Hope; the Valley of your Discouragements shall be the door, and an
inlet unto all your Rest and Comfort. God takes the same way with the Members,
as he went with the Head; Christ's Cross an inlet of Glory, his suffering time
was the Valley of Achor to his Disciples, and was it not a door of Hope unto
them, and unto all the Saints? This is Gods way; Discouragements bring
Encouragements; and the more Discouragements the Saints have, the more
Encouragements they shall have; yea, their Discouragements shall contribute to
their Encouragements, and be a door of Hope to them, Now if the Valley of Achor
shall by Promise be a door of Hope, why should we be discouraged whatsoever the
Valley of Achor be, whatever our condition be?

Paul's ^onver^ion, Behold he prays; as Speech is common unto all men, so
Prayer unto all Christians; God has none of his Children born dumb; as soon as
one of your children is born, it cries, and it sucks, and it ^l^eps: So with
every man that is born of God, as soo^ ^s ^e is both, he cries unto God in
Prayer, he sucks the breast of ^he Promi e, and he sleeps in the bosom of God
by Divine Contentment^, being dead unto all the world; it may be he cannot pray
as (...) would, but though he cannot pray as he would, not hear as h^ ^^uld,
nor perform any duty as he would, yet he prays, it may be said of him, behold
he prays; turn him where you will, and behold he prays; sick, yet behold he
prays; temp^ed, yet behold he prays; at home, or abroad, yet behold he
prayet^: and can he be miserable while he prays? Surely no: why then should
he be discouraged whatever his condition be?

Nichecula est, cito transibit; it is but a cloud, it will soon over: So may
they say concerning every matter of their discouragement; it is dark indeed,
but this darkness will over; there is a storm comes down upon us, but we shall
see Land again, the Shore again, it is but a cloud, but a cloud: And upon this
account, David comforted his own heart here, and checked his soul for his
immoderate dejection, Why a^t thou cast down? etc. Hope in God, For I shall yet
praise him; I shall be delivered, this cloud will ove^, it will not last, it is
but the darkness of a cloud.

But how shall it appear that it is ^ut a cloud, and the darkness of a cloud? I
think it is night, and dark night with my soul, yea, such a night as shall
never know morning* indeed if I did know that the matter of my discouragement
were but a cloudy darkness, then I would conclude and say, there is no reason
for this discouragement: but how shall I know whether this darkness be the
darkness of a cloud, or of the night?

Joseph, when the Lord said, That his Sheaf should be higher than all the
Sheaves of his B^^thren; yet presently after that there arose a darkness upon
him, but i^ was the darkness of a cloud, and not of the ^igh (...) why so?
Because he had a Promise first, which did sh^^ (...) ^^m. So David had a fair
Promise of the Kingdom, wh^^ (...) ^nointed by Samuel, yet a darkness presently
rose upon him; bu^ it was the darkness of a cloud only, and not of the (...);
Why? Because it was such a darkness as arose immediately after he ^hinings
forth of a Promise. And I pray you show me any ^cripture where you find that
ever any darkness arose presently after the breaking, shining forth of a
Promise, which was more than the darkness of a cloud, which vanished away? Or
when e do you find in all the Scripture, that ever any poor soul came into the
dark, immediately after the giving out of a Promise, but that soul did come to
the light again? Now as for the darkness that covers the Saints, it is usually
a darkness that comes after the giving, and shining out of a Promise; and
therefore that darkness is but the darkness of a cloud, and they may say, a
cloud, a cloud, and it will pass away.

Psalm, 84. the Psalmist faith, at verse 5. Blessed is the man whose strength
is in thee, and in whose hearts are the ways of them, who passing through the
Valley of Baca, dig up pits, the rain also fills the pits, they go from
strength to strength, till they appear before God in Zion. It is an allu^ion to
the practice of the Jews, when some of them went up to Jerusalem, their way lay
through the Valley of Baca, which was a very dry Valley, where no houses were,
where no Water was for their relief and refreshment; whereupon they dug up
pits, and to the rain fell, and they were refreshed, got strength, and went on
to Jerusalem, where they saw the Lord in his Ordinances: So says the Psalmist,
Blessed are they in whose heart the Law of God is. There are a Generation of
men in the world, that have the Law of God in their hearts, though they cannot
act and work toward God as they would; these sometimes are in a dry, and barren
condition, where no Water or Comfort is; yet if in this condition, they dig up
pits, go to prayer, wait upon God in Duty, though they find no Comfort
springing up in their Duty for the present, yet in due time, the rain of Gods
Blessing will fill those dry pits, and empty duties, whereby their Life shall
be like unto a Pool of Water, and they shall go from strength of Grace, to
strength of Grace, till they see the Lord. Know ye therefore, any man that is
in this Valley of Baca, where no Water is, yet if he can find in his heart to
dig up pits, to pray, read, hear, meditate, confer, and perform Duties, though
those duties be empty of Comfort for the present, yet the rain of Grace and
Mercy shall fall upon those Pits, and he shall go from strength to strength,
till he appears before the Lord in Glory. Now thus it is with the Saints,
though darkness, and a great darkness be upon them, yet in that dark condition
they are still digging up pits, and therefore this darkness is not the darkness
of the night, but the darkness of a cloud, and they may say, this is a cloudy
darkness, and it will over ere long.

David fled from Absolon, he was in a dark condition, for the Text says, He
went, and he wept, and he went barefoot; his own son persecutes him, drives
him from his Throne, a great consederacy was raised against him by wicked men,
with the child of his own bowels; here was darkness upon darkness, matter of
great discouragement, but it was a cloud, and no more.

You will say, How should David have known that it was but the darkness of a
cloud?

David prayed, The Lord turn the Counsels of Ahithophel into folly; and before
David had overcome Absolon, and was restored to his Kingdom, Ahithophel did
hang himself: David singled out Ahithophel to pray against, and the Lord heard
his prayer: that Judgment of Ahithophel was the return of David's Prayer; here
the cloud opened, and this Answer of his Prayer in the interim, was a Seal to
David of the full deliverance that came afterward, Deus uno Sigillo Sigillat
diversas materias.
for God seals diverse matters with the same Seal. So when a man is in the dark
by reason of some temptation, affliction, or desertion, which he cannot see the
end of; if in this interim, before the full deliverance comes, he has some
lesser deliverance, that lesser deliverance in the interim, is a Seal unto him
of the future deliverance, and he may say, here is a pledge of my full
deliverance, for here is the opening of the cloud. Now thus it is always with
the People of God; they never are in any affliction, temptation, or desertion,
but before their great deliverance comes, they have some special Providence,
some reviving in the midst of their trouble, some interim of light, some
openings of the cloud; and therefore in the midst of all they may say, surely
this my darkness, is not the darkness of a night, but of a cloud; I say, there
is no discouragement does befall the Saints, but the matter thereof is a cloud,
and they may say, it is but a cloud, it will pass over, and therefore why
should they be discouraged? Surely there is no reason for their discouragements
whatever their condition be.

If these things be so, Applic.
How heavily does this Doctrine fall in reproof upon some, I wish I might not
say, some of the Servants and People of God: A godly man has no true reason
for his discouragements whatever his condition is, although it be never so sad;
and some are always discouraged whatever their condition be, although it be
never so good; whatever falls out, the Saints should not be discouraged, no not
at any thing, and yet many are discouraged at every thing, and upon every
occasion. O! what unworthy walking is this, how contrary do you walk to God?
And do you know what it is to walk contrary to him? Has he not said, If you
walk contrary to me, I will walk contrary to you?

But I have reason to be discouraged, for I have no sense and feeling of Gods
Love.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yea, had not Christ the sense of
Gods Anger upon him when he did perform the greatest act of Obedience that ever
the Sun saw? yet did he then say, I am not the Child of God, because I want the
sense of Gods Love, because I am under the sense of Gods Anger? No, but with
the same breath that he said he was forsaken, he said, My God, my God; and at
the same time he called God Father, Father forgive them, etc. So may you do;
though God has forsaken you, though you want the sense of his Love, yea, and
are under the sense of Gods Anger; yet at the same time you may say, the Lord
is my Father, and you may go to him as your Father: and if ye can say, God is
my Father, have ye any reason for your Discouragements? Yet how often are Gods
own People discouraged and cast down? O! you that are the Disciples of Christ,
labor more and more to follow your Master; and as David here, so do you often
say, Why art thou cast down, O my soul?

Psalm 7. God is angry with the wicked every day: whatever the day be, God is
angry with them; though it be a day of Fasting and Prayer, yet then is God
angry with them; though it be a day of Praises, and of Thanksgiving, then is
God angry with them; when he sins most, and when he sins least, God is angry
with him, not one day goes over his head, but God is angry with him, and one
blow or another that Gods Anger reaches forth to him every day, he does not
always feel those blows, but God is smiting of him, and is angry with h^^^
every day, and therefore whatever his condition be, there is no reason for his
encouragement. Suppose a man were in Pri^on, committed for some great Offense,
and condemned to die under the di^pleasure of his Prince or State; and his
Servant should come unto him, saying, Sir, Be of good Comfort, your Wife is
well at home, you have very sweet children, an excellent Crop of Corn, your
Neighbors love you deerly, your Sheep and Cattle thrive, and al your Houses are
in good repair and order: would he not answer that Servant, and say, What Is all
this, so long as I am condemned to die? Thus it is with every wicked man, he is
under the displeasure of the great God, a condemned man, and God is angry with
him every day; and if his heart were open to be sensible of it, he would say,
you tell me of my Friends, and Goods, and Name, and Trade; but what is all this,
so long as I am a condemned person, and God is angry with me every day I rise?
but for the present he feels not his displeasure, is not sensible of it; yet
let him know that there is a day a coming, when he will find the Truth of this
matter, no reason for his encouragement whatever his condition be. And as Saul
once cried out, saying, God has forsaken me, and the Philistines are upon me;
so shall he cry out and say, God has forsaken my soul, temptations are now upon
me, my sins and guilt are upon me, God has forsaken me, and the Devils are now
upon me. But now, as for a godly, gracious man, though his condition be never
so sad, and his soul never so much cast down, yet he has no reason to be
discouraged, I say, whatever his condition be: what a glorious condition are
the Saints in, who would not be in love with this condition? who would not be
in Christ? who would not leave the ways of the wicked? who would not be Godly?
O! you that are ungodly labor to become Godly.





Abraham the friend of God, actively, passively: God was a friend to him, and
he a friend to God; So with all believers; Christ is their friend, Henceforth
call I you no more Servants, but friends, says Christ; and the Holy Ghost is
their friend, for it is the Spirit that comes and dwells in them, and manifests
himself to them: and we are said to grieve the spirit. As God is the worst
enemy, so he is the best friend, the truest friend, the most real friend in all
the world, therefore when you are cast down and discouraged, ye grieve him, you
grieve the Father, you grieve the Son, you grieve the Spirit, and do you know
what you do when you grieve the Lord? is it nothing to grieve such a friend?

That being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we might serve him
without fear. Luke, 1. And will you then go drooping, discouraged, bowed down
under your fears al your days?

Christ our passover is Sacrificed for us, therefore let us keep the feast,
that is, the Gospel feast, not with old leaven, and will no bread down with you,
but leavened bread? sour bread? the bread of mourning? will you thus keep your
passover, your christian feast? some of you have been doubting, fearing,
trembling; cast down, discouraged many years; and is it not yet time to bewail
your unbelief? to honor free Grace? what will you always grieve the Spirit, the
Father and Christ? always be frustrating of Christ's work? will ye always be
eating old leaven? is it not yet time to say, why art thou cast down, O my
soul, and why art thou disquieted within me? hope in him, for I shall yet praise
him, who is the health of my countenance, and my God.

I know indeed that I have no just and scripture reason for my discouragements,
but I see there is much reason against it, yet I am one of a troubled spirit, I
would fain have it otherwise, that at last I might glorify free Grace, what
should I do that I may bear up against al discouragements, that I may not be
discouraged whatever my condition be?



Adonai, which signifies so much, and in Isa. 26. we are commanded to trust in
the Lord, for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength, or the rock of ages.
And, says the Psalmist, my flesh fails, (...) Psalm. 73.26.
and my heart fails, but God is the rock of my heart for ever, so the Hebrew.
Lay your comforts upon your own condition, and you do but build on the sand,
which will be carried away with every wind, and storm, and tempest; but if upon
Christ himself, upon God himself, ye build upon the Rock, and though the
floods, and storms, and winds do rise and beat upon you, yet you shall not lose
your comforts, because they are built upon a rock.

Christus titulos ^ibi sumit, qui presenti rerum conditioni conve^iant, unde
varium suae gloriae radium in singuli^ Epistolis ad Ecclesias spargit, pro
va^ia fortuna, qua sunt Ecclesiae; quo docet, illud immensae, divinae
majestatis inprimis esse mente contemplandum; quod in rem preseniem maxim
conducat. Bright^n. in Apocal. 2. P. 43.
as he suteth with your condition, and as he is held forth in the Gospel, We
are very apt to have mis-thoughts of Christ, as Satan does transform himself
into an Angel of light, so he would transform Christ before you into an Angel
of darkness: But the scripture holds him forth under such Relations, as do make
him very amiable unto poor sinners. Are you accused by Satan, world, or your
own conscience? He is called your Advocate: Are you ignorant? He is called the
Prophet. Are you guilty of sin? He is called, A Priest, and high Priest: Are
you afflicted with many enemies, inward and outward? He is called, a King, and
King of Kings: Are you in streights? He is called your way; Are you hungry, or
thirsty? he is called, bread, and water of life: Are you afraid you shall fall
away, and be condemned at the last? He is our second Adam, a public person, in
whose death we dyed, and in whose satisfaction we satisfied; As there is no
Temptation or affliction, but some promise or other does especially suit there
withal; So there is no condition, but some Name, some Title, some Attribute of
Christ does especially suit with it: and as you do not look on Christ, but in
reference to your condition, so you are not to look upon your condition alone,
but with Christ's Attribute suitable thereunto; if you look upon Christ's
Attribute of love without your condition, you may presume; if on your condition
without Christ's Attribute of love, you may despair: think on both together and
you will not be discouraged.



Consideration thereof, with those sweet things which God has given and
prescribed to you. There is nothing terrible, but God has joined some
comfortable thing with it: the Name of God is terrible, he is called the great
and dreadful God; but to sweeten this, he is called the God of all
Consolations: Death is terrible, it is called the King of Terrors; but to
sweeten this, it is called a Sleep: The day of Judgment is terrible; but to
sweeten that, our present Advocate shall be our future Judge; yea, our best
Friend, and our dear Husband. Now if you abstract the terror of any Object from
the sweetness of it, no wonder if you be much discouraged. It is our Duty to
behold things as God presents them, and to take things as God does give them.
What God has joined together, no man may put asunder. If you consider the
sweetness of an Object or Condition, without the sowrness of it, then you may
grow too wanton: if you consider the terror of an Object or Condition, without
the sweetness of it, then you may be too fearful: But if you think on both
together, then you will fear, and believe; and believe, and fear, and so be
kept from Discouragement.

Condition sound ones Self? I dare boldly say, there is no tumult or immoderate
Discouragement in the soul, but has Self at the bottom. Could I leave my self,
and my Condition with God and Christ, and mind his Service, Glory, and Honor
more, God would take care of my Comfort: but when I mind my self, and my
condition so much, and his Service, Glory, and Honor so little, no wonder that
I am so much discouraged. Therefore labor more and more to mortify self-love,
and so shall you never be discouraged whatever your condition be.

up, because I saw it not, what an unwise man was I thus to loyter and sit
down! So it will be with you, you now lie down upon the Earth, and your belly
cleaves to the dust by reason of your Discouragements; but the Grace of God,
and the Love of Christ, is creeping up behind the dark cloud, and it will break
out at the last upon you, and shine into your face with the Golden beams of
mercy, it will prevent you, and be before you; and then you will say, O what a
fool was I to be thus discouraged, what an unworthy Creature I, to doubt thus
of Gods Love; I have sinned, I have sinned by all my unbeleef: now the Lord
pardon me all my doubtings, I am O Lord, ashamed of these my doubtings and
questionings of thy Love, pardon them O Lord unto my soul. This is that which
you must come to, you must at last be ashamed and repent of these your
unbeleefs, doubtings, and fears, and therefore whenever they press in upon
thee, say at the first unto thy self, Why should I buy my Repentance at so dear
a rate, by yielding unto these Discouragements? And for this very reason,
because that Discouragements are to be repented of, Therefore the Saints and
People of God have no reason to be discouraged whatever their Condition be.

And thus have I spoken to this Truth under a more General Consideration;
through Grace I shall labor to clear it further to you by Particulars.

A LIFTING UP, In case of GREAT SINS.
Sermon. IV
PSALM, 42.11. Stepney, May, 7. 1651.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


THE Doctrine or Observation that now we are pressing from these words, is
this: That the Saints and People of God, have no reason for their
Discouragements, whatever their condition be; no just, true, Scripture Reason,
for their Discouragements, whatever their Condition be.

It is clear by the Words, and proved the last day by some General
Considerations.



Now more Particularly, to make it out by diverse Instances. Nine things there
are, which usually are the Grounds and Occasions of the Discouragements of Gods
People.

1. Sometimes their Discouragements are drawn from their greater and grosser
sins. 2. Sometimes they do arise from the weakness of Grace. 3. Sometimes they
are taken from their failing in, and non-acceptance of Duty. 4. Sometimes they
are drawn from their want of Evidence for Heaven, and non-assurance of the Love
of God. 5. Sometimes they do come from their Temptations. 6. Sometimes from their
Desertions. 7. Sometimes from their Afflictions. 8. Sometimes from their
Unserviceableness. 9. Sometimes from their Condition it self.
Now if in all these Respects, the Saints and People of God have no reason to
be discouraged, then we may safely conclude; That a godly man should not be
discouraged whatever his condition be. I shall labor therefore, through the
Grace of Christ, to make out this great Truth unto you in all these Respects;
and begin with the First at this time.

Sometimes the Discouragements of the Saints and O says one, I am a man or
woman of a rebellious heart, I have so slight a Spirit, so unholy, and uneven
a conversation, that when I reflect upon my heart and life, I cannot but be
discouraged I know indeed, it is a great evil, for a man to labor under a ^ore
temptation, or a sad desertion; but were my heart good my life good, my
conversation good, I should not be discouraged; but as for me, I have
committed, and do commit such and ^uen great sins, have I not reason, and just
reason now to be discouraged*

Chrysostom had so great a sense of the evil of it, that when the Empress sent
him a threatening Message; Go tell her (said he) Nil nisi peccatum metuo, I
fear nothing but sin. And in some respects, the sins of the Godly are worse
than the sins of others, for they grieve the Spirit more, they dishonor Christ
more, they grieve the Saints more, they wound the Name of God more, they are
more against the Love, and Grace, and Favor of God, than other men's sins are.
And the Lord does see the sins of his own People, yea, so far he sees sin in
them, that he does chastise and afflict them for it; not only from their sin,
but for their sin; and therefore says the Apostle in 1 Cor. 11.30. (speaking
of the unworthy receiving of the Lords Supper) For this cause many are sick and
weak among you. And he does not speak only of Saints in Appearance, and in
Church Estate, but of such also as were Saints indeed, and therefore he says,
We are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned
with the world. He puts himself in, We are judged that we may not be condemned
with the world. (...). Revel. 3.19.
Our Savior Christ says, Revel. 3. As many a^ I love, I rebuke and chasten, be
zealous therefore, and repent, it seems then it was for sin committed, else why
should he say, Repent? and repent therefore? Repentance is for sin committed
already, and these were such as he loved too, whom he threatens thus to rebuke
and chastise; and does any Father rebuke, chastise, or correct his Child only
from sin, and not for sin? Was not Moses a gracious and an holy man? and yet
for his unbeleef and sin, he lost the Land of Canaan: Was not Sampson a good
man? and yet by his sin, he lost his Eyes, and his Life too: Was not David a
gracious and a holy man? and yet for his sin, the Lord said, The Sword should
never depart from his house, and yet Christ had made satisfaction for his sin
too, as well then, as for the Saints now. But now, though there be never so
much evil in the sins of Gods People, yet they have no reason, no just cause,
or Scripture reason to be cast down, and to be discouraged in that respect.

But how may this appear; That notwithstanding the sins of Gods own People do
grieve the Spirit of God, are a dishonor to Jesus Christ, and do wound the Name
of God, and the Profession of Christ so much; That yet the Saints have no
reason to be discouraged, or cast down?

There is no Condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus (says the
Apostle.) Christ was made sin for them; and if Christ be made sin for me, then
my sin shall never hurt me. Luther is bold here, Fateor me peccasse, sed
peccatum meum damnatum in Christo est, qui est peccatum damnans; est autem
peccatum illud damnans, fortius peccato damnato. Luther.
for (says he) Christ is made sin damning, our sin is sin damned: I confess
indeed (said he) that I have sinned, but sin damning is stronger than sin
damned, and Christ was made sin damning for me. The thing is true, though the
expression be strange; Christ was made sin for Saints, therefore their sin
shall not hurt them. It stands not with the Justice of God to exact the payment
of one debt twice. Now the Lord Jesus Christ has not only been arrested, but
in Goal for the debt of the Saints and People of God, and he has paid it to
the utmost farthing, he has paid it better than they could have paid it
themselves, if they had gone to Hell: for if a Godly man had gone to Hell, and
been damned for ever, he would have been always paying, but the debt would
never have been paid: Christ paid it all down for the present. And if you look
into Scripture, you will find, That the Lord does not condemn a man, no not a
wicked man, barely for the act of his former sin, but because he will not turn
from it. Psalm. 7.11. The Lord is angry with the wicked every day: verse 12. If
he turn not, he will whet his Sword; he has bent his bow, and made it ready;
he has prepared for him the Instruments of death, he ordains his Arrows
against the Persecutor: The Lord has prepared Instruments of Death against
every wicked man; but yet notwithstanding, though a man be never so wicked, if
he turn unto the Lord, God will not discharge those Instruments of Death upon
him, yea, though his sins have been never so great; but, says the Text, If he
turn not (not because he has sinned before only, but because he turns not from
his sin) he will whet his Sword; he has bent his Bow, and made it ready. Now
there is always in the Saints and People of God, a turning disposition,
although they do sin against God; there is always (I say) a turning
disposition in them, and therefore the Lord will not discharge the Instruments
of death upon them, surely then, they have no reason to be quite discouraged in
this respect.

God and them: their sins may cause a strangeness between God and them, but
shall never cause an Enmity; their sins may hide Gods Face from them, but shall
never turn Gods back upon them; those whom God Loves, he loves unto the end; I
am the Lord that changes not, says he. And as the Prophet Isaiah speaks, As
the Covenant that the Lord made with Noah, such is the Covenant that he makes
with his People. Now look into Genesis, Chap. 8. and you shall see what the
Covenant is, that the Lord made there with Noah, and with the World by Noah:
When Noah came out of the Ark, he built an Altar, and Sacrificed, verse 21. And
the Lord smelled a sweet savor, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not
again curse the Ground for man's sake; Why? For the Imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth. You would think this were a reason why God should curse
the Ground again; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; man
is wicked, therefore surely God will curse the Ground again: nay, says the
Lord, but though you that are poor Creatures think so, yet I that am the God of
all Grace, I make this Covenant with the World by Noah, That I will not curse
the Ground any more for man's sake; Because the Imagination of man's heart is
evil from his youth continually. Sensus enim et cogitatio humani cordis, etc.
Hierom.
I confess indeed the Hebrew, (...), signifies Quamvis, Although; as well as
Quoniam, Because: and it may be so translated; Although the Imagination of man's
heart is evil, etc. (Yet the Chaldee Paraphrase, ^eptuagint, Hierom, (...).
Sept.
and Montanus, render it, Because) But though it be so translated, yet that is
enough to make good the Truth and Doctrine which I urge from this Scripture.
Qaia cogitatio. Montanus.
The Covenant that the Lord makes with his People, is such a Covenant as the
Lord made with Noah; (...) Chaldee Par.
so says ^he Prophet Isaiah. What then? Therefore if God be in Covenant with a
man, he shall never lie under wrath again; for though the World sin, the World
shall never be drowned again; and so, though he do sin he shall never lie under
wrath again. Now as for the People of God, they are all in Covenant with God,
they are under this gracious Covenant, and therefore though the Mountains may
be removed, Gods Mercy shall never be removed from them; and though the great
Hills may be thrown into the Sea, the People of God, once in Covenant with God,
shall never be thrown into Hell: and tell me then, Have you that are the People
of God, any just cause or reason to be cast down, or to be discouraged?

to fall into any sin, but he intends to make that sin an inlet unto further
Grace and Comfort to them. This ye see in the first great Sin that ever was
committed by the Children of Men, the Fall of Adam, the Lord himself came and
preached the Gospel, preached Christ unto fallen Man; and surely when God
himself preached the Gospel, we are to think the man was converted: Now the
greatest Blessing that ever the World saw, was the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ; but how came that about? God suffers man to fall, and man's
Unrighteousness, must usher in Christ's Righteousness. The Scripture tells us,
that the Lord suffered Hezekiah to fall, that Hezekiah might know all that was
in his heart; he did not know his own heart before, and therefore the Lord let
him fall that he might know his own heart. But if you look into the Romans,
Chap. 11. you shall find in so many words, what I am now speaking, verse 32.
For God has concluded them all in unbeleef; Why? That he might have mercy upon
all. O! what a blessed design upon Unbeleef is here! Therefore God concludes
all under Unbeleef, that he might have mercy upon all: Sin gets not, but is a
loser by every fall of the Godly. And if ye look into the Scripture, ye shall
observe, That when the People of God fall, usually they fail in that Grace,
wherein they do most excel; and wherein they did most excel, therein they did
most miscarry. Abraham did most excel in Faith, and therein he did most
miscarry: Moses did most excel in Meekness, and therein he did most miscarry;
we read of no other sin concerning Moses, but his Anger: Job did most excel in
Patience, and therein he did most miscarry: Peter did most excel in Zeal, and
Resolution for Christ (Though all the World for sake thee, yet will not I) and
therein he did most miscarry: denying Christ at the voice of a Damzel. I say ye
shall observe this, That the Saints fell, and failed in that Grace wherein they
did most excel; and they did most excel, wherein they did most miscarry: what is
the Reason of this? but because the Lord by the overruling hand of his Grace,
did make their very miscarriages, in-lets and occasions to their further Grace
and Holiness. God has a great Revenue from the very infirmities of his People.
He does never suffer any of his People to fall into any sin, but he has a
design by that fall, to break the back of that sin they do fall into. Now then,
have the Saints and People of God, any reason to be discouraged in this
respect? By their sin they may be, and are often times suspended from their
Comforts, and use of their Privileges; but by their sin, they do not lose
their right thereunto. Ye know how it was with the Leper in the times of the
Old Testament, among the Jews; when he was carried out of the City or Town from
his own House, by reason of his uncleanness: Or now, if a man that has the
Plague, and be carried from his own House by reason thereof; the Leper then,
and the man that has the Plague, or the Pest now, may say, Though I be removed
from mine own House, and have not the use of my House, yet I have a right to my
House still; and though I cannot come to the use of my Land, yet I have a Right
to my Land still. So a Godly man may say as concerning his sin; This sin of
mine indeed, it is a Pest, and the Plague of my Soul, and a Leprosy; but though
by this Leprosy of mine, I am now suspended from the use of my Comforts, yea,
from the full use of my Interest in Jesus Christ; yet notwithstanding, I have
an Interest in Christ still, I have not lost my Interest, still I have Right to
Christ; although I cannot come to the use of him as I did before, yet I have
right unto Jesus Christ now, as I had before: And if all these things be so,
Why should a godly man be cast down, or discouraged in this respect? Surely he
ought not to be so.

But suppose a man's sins be such as never were pardoned before, and truly that
is my case, for I have sinned a great sin, and I do not read in all the Word of
God, any example that ever such a sin as mine was pardoned; Have I not reason
now to be quite discouraged, and cast down?

Adam? Adam sinned a great sin in our first Fall; the Lord himself came and
preached the Gospel to him, The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents
head. Should Adam have said, O! but there is no hope for me, for I have no
example or precedent of pardon? Adam could have no Example of any that was
pardoned before him, because he was the first man, and the first that sinned:
Should he have sat down, and been discouraged, because he could not find any
Example for the pardon of the like sin that he had committed? You know what our
Savior Christ said, Every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven; unless it be the
sin against the Holy Ghost, every sin, though it be boiled up to blasphemy. You
say you have no example for the pardon of such a sin as yours is; but does not
your sin come within the compass of these words, Every Sin, and Blasphemy?
Surely it does: Have ye any reason then to be discouraged under the power of
this Objection?

But suppose that a man have sinned greatly against his conscience, or against
his light, against his knowledge, has he not just cause or reason then to be
cast down, and to be quite discouraged?

among the Jews, there was a Sacrifice, not only for sin committed ignorantly,
but also for sin co^itted against light and against consc ence: and I appeal to
you who ever you are that make this objection, do you not think, that Peter,
when he denied his Lord and Master sinned against his conscience, against his
light, and against his knowledge? surely then there is no reason that a man
should be quite discouraged, no not in this respect.

But suppose that a man's sins be exceeding great, gross, and heinous, for I do
confess that possibly a Godly man may sin some sin against his light, and
against his conscience sometimes, but as for me, my sin is exceeding great,
gross, and heinous, and have I not just cause and reason now to be discouraged?

That his thoughts are not as our thoughts, but as the heavens are greater than
the earth, so are his thoughts in this respect beyond our thoughts. Has not
the Lord said, in Isa. 43. unto the people of the Jews, at verse. 22. But thou
have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O Israel
Verse. 23. Thou have not brought me the small cattle of thy burnt offering,
neither have thou honored me with thy Sacrifices. Verse. 24. Thou have bought me
no sweet cane with money, neither have thou filled me with the fat of thy
Sacrifice? but thou have made me to serve with thy sins, thou have wearied me
with thy iniquity, yet, verse. 25. I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy
transgression for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Here are sins,
and great sins* and if the Lord will therefore pardon sin because it is great,
unto his people, (...) quoniam grandis est. Hierom.
then surely they have no reason to be quite discouraged in this respect. Now
look what David says in Psalm. 25. verse. 11. For thy name sake, O Lord, pardon
mine iniquity for it is great, mark his argument, pardon mine iniquity, (...).
Septuag. (...) Chaldee Par.
for it is great, if David use this reason then may you also, and if this be a
reason why God should pardon sin, because it is great, then this cannot be a
reason, a just reason, why you should be discouraged.

But suppose that a man's sin be the sin of revolting, declining: for this is my
case, will some say, I have striven, and striven against my sin a long while,
and I return unto it again, times were heretofore, that I have been exceeding
forward, and ready unto what is good, but now, I am much declined, abated, and
even gone backward with revolting, and deep revolting, and I have layn long so,
even for many years; have I not reason, and just reason now to be discouraged
and cast down within my self?

Jer. 3.1. They say if a man put away his wife, and she go from him, and become
another man's, shall he return unto her again? shall not that land be greatly
polluted? but thou have played the Harlot with many lovers, yet return again
unto me; says the Lord. And verse. 12. return thou backsliding Israel, says
the Lord, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful,
says the Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever, and again verse. 14. Turn O
backsliding Children, for I am married unto you. and if ever the Lord Jesus
Christ did betroth himself unto any soul, he will never put that soul away
again, I hate putting away, says God. Men put away their wives among the
Jews, but says the Lord, I hate putting away. And Isae. 50. verse. 1. Thus
says the Lord where is the Bil of your mothers divorcement, whom I have pu^
away, or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Among the Jews,
the husband did put away his wife upon small occasions. As for adultery, you
know that was death, he did not put away his wife upon adultery, she was to die
for it, but the husbands put away their wives upon other occasions, and when
they put away their wives, they gave the wife a bil of divorce, that so upon al
occasions the woman might show thereby, that she was free from such a man. Now,
says the Lord, you that charge me, and complain that I have put you away, come
and show me the bil of divorce: Thus says the Lord, where is the bil? etc.
Poor soul, thou complainest that I have put thee away, come then and show me
the bil of divorce: let any one who complains that I have put him away and cast
him off, come and bring out his bil of divorce; This ye cannot do, men indeed
put away, but if ever the Lord Christ does match himself unto thee, he will
never put thee away again.

pray more against it, yet afterward watch more against it, we never see the
face of sin so ugly as in the glass of Gods free love, and do you not see the
free love of God more? possibly your affections might be higher at the first,
but is not conviction more clear and full; as affections dry up, so we grow more
settled in our judgment, and if your judgment be more settled, you are not
declined, though your affections be somewhat abated.

Bilney, a blessed Martyr, once said, hearing a Minister preach very terribly
against sin, and saying thus, Behold! thou old sinner, thou have layn rotting
in the grave of thy sin this threescore years, and do thou now think to go to
heaven in one year? do thou think to go forward to heaven more in one year,
than thou have gone backward to hell these threescore years. Ah! said Mr.
Bilney,: here is goodly preaching of repentance in the name of Christ; Had I
heard such doctrine preached heretofore, my poor soul had despaired for ever,
but, says he, the Lord Christ dyed for sinners, young sinners, and old
sinners, for one as well as the other, such as have layn long in sin, as well as
those that have layn but a little while in sin, if they will come home unto
Christ. And you know what our Savior says, if thy Brother transgress against
thee, forgive him. But Lord, he has transgressed against me once, and I have
forgiven him, yet, says our Savior, forgive him again. O! but Lord, I have
forgiven him again and again, and yet he returns to his fault again, then
forgive him again, says Christ. But Lord, how often shall I forgive my Brother?
Says our Savior, if he sin against thee Seaventy seven times, and says that
he does repent, do thou forgive so often; And now shall the Lord Jesus Christ
enjoin us to forgive our Brother, if he sin against us seventy seven times?
and will not the Lord Christ forgive much more, if a poor soul do turn unto him,
and say, Lord I repent me that I have sinned against thee? Will the Lord Christ
command me a poor sinner to forgive so many times, how often will the great God
forgive, what seaventy seven times? nay seven hundred times seven hundred.
And have ye any reason then to be discouraged in this respect? surely you have
not.

But suppose that a man have sinned fowly, greatly, and he cannot repent, or be
humbled enough; (for that is my case, I have sinned, I have sinned greatly, and
now after al, my heart is hard, and I cannot be humbled enough, O! I cannot
repent enough,) has he not just cause and reason for his discouragement now,
yea now to be quite discouraged?

from you by degrees? should you be so, or so much humbled for the present, it
may be it would be with you as it h^^h been with others, you would never think
of your sins afterward, but may be the Lord will have this work of humiliation
to stay long upon thy soul, and he will not give it you al at once. Some there
are, that when they come into a house, they pay a great in-come, and little
rent, others pay a little in-come, and a great rent, so it is with souls that
come to Christ, some at the first lay down a great humiliation, and they have
lesser of it afterward, some have less at the first, and have more afterward
by continuance in it, and what now if the Lord will lead thy soul in this latter
way? this latter way may be the better way if the Lord think fit.

Sepe negatur cum quae^itur, et conceditur cu^ non expectatur, ut ex eo constet
esse o pus divinae graciae. Bonavent.
Again. It may be that if you had so much, or so much humiliation now at the
first, you would think, that in, and by, and for your humiliation you should
have acceptance with God, and the remi^sion of your sin; if you be kept off
from this rock and danger, by your want of that degree of humiliation, which
you would have, and so be trained up to prize the Lords free Grace in giving
you humiliation, have you any cause to complayn?

Again. If you had so much, or so much humiliation for the present, i^ may be
then, you would have the less humility, a little humility, is as good as a
great deal of humiliation, as good being humble, as being humbled. Now because
thou art not humbled, therefore thy soul is kept humble, had thou many tears,
and abundance of tears, may be then thou would be proud, but the Lord does
deny thee tears, and thou art not humbled to the degrees of thy own desires,
and so the Lord keeps thee humble by the want of thy humiliation.

Again, It may be, that if you were humbled so, or so much at the present, or
at the first, you would have the less fear of your own heart. The more humbled,
it may be, the less after-fear, and the less humbled, the more after-fear, the
less humbled, sometimes, the more a man fears his own heart, and his own
condition. Gracious fear is as good as humiliation, and if that which you want
in humil^ation you have it made up in fear, have you any reason to be
discouraged? I know it is usual with Satan, to say unto the people of God at
their first coming on to Christ, that they are not humbled enough, and so keeps
them off from Mercy and Grace: But I pray tell me, Can ye ever be humbled
enough? Can there be any proportion between your sins, and your humiliation?
The Truth is, we should labor that our Humiliation be answerable to our sin;
but God is not pleased with grief for grief, God is not pleased with sorrow for
sorrow; the end of all our sorrow and grief is, to imbitter our sin to us, to
make us to prize Jesus Christ, to wean us from the delights and pleasures of
the Creature, to discover the deceitfulness and naughtiness of our own hearts.
In scripture phrase, and language or the new Testament, Repentance is called an
after-wisdom, an after-mind, (...), a bethinking of ones self, it is called a
conviction; now though you be not humbled unto the degree which you do desire,
yet notwithstanding, do you not bethink your self, are you not convinced of the
evil of your former way? has not the Lord now given you an after-wisdom? and
do not you say concerning your sin, O! if it were to do again, I would not do
it for all the world? Thus it is with the Servants and people of God, though
they cannot be humbled so much as they would be, yet notwithstanding, they are
thus far humbled, thus far grieved, that their sins are imbittered, and
themselves thereby weaned from the delights and pleasures of the world,
convinced of the evil of their sin, and what they want in humiliation they have
it in humility, the less humbled, the more they are kept humble, and what they
do want at the first, they have it afterward by degrees, soaking into their
souls. Have they then any reason to be discouraged, in these respects? surely
no.

But should not a Godly, Gracious man be fully grieved and humbled for his sin?

Lumbard, Gratian, and Comaestor, the three great pillars of the Roman Church
(for Lumbard wrote the sentences; and Gratian the Popish Decretals; and
Comaestor, Historiam Scholasticam) that when she lay on her death bed, and the
Priest came unto her, and called upon her for repentance of her whoredoms, Hos
tres Gratianum viz. Pet. Lumbardum, et Pet. Comaestorem fuisse Germanos ex
adulterio natos, quorum matter, cum in extremis peccatum suum confiteretur et
confessor redargueret crimen perpetrati adu^terii, quia valde grave esset et
ideo multum deberet dolor et penitentiam agere respondet illa; Pater, scio
quod adulterium peccatum magnum est, sed considerans quantum bonum secutum est,
cum isti silii mei sint lumina magna in Ecclesia, Ego non valeo paenitere. Cui
confessor hoc ex dono Dei est, ex te autem adulterium crimen magnum et de hoc
doleas etc. Decret. fol. 1. Gratiani vita.
(for these three, Lumbard, Gratian, and Comaestor, were her bastards, as the
very popish writers do record it) and he telling her that she must be greatly
afflicted, grieved, and humbled for her uncleanness, or else she could not be
saved, why? said she, I confess indeed, that whoredom and uncleanness is a
great sin, but considering what a great deal of good has come to the Church of
God by my sin, that three such great lights have been brought forth into the
world by my sin, Non valeo paenitentiam agere, I cannot, I will not repent. and
thus it is with many poor ignorant souls, when they see, how the Lord by his
overruling hand does work good unto them out of their sin, as some outward
blessings and mercys, they do not repent of their sin, but rather justify
themselves in their sins: but now take a Godly man, a gracious soul, and the
more that he sees the Lord working good out of his sin, the more he is humbled
for it; and upon that very ground, because God works good of it, therefore he
is humbled the more.

Yet further; it is observed, that though the Lord did ordinarily call David his
servant, yet when David had sinned that great sin, he sent the prophet to him
saying, Go say to David, he had lost the title of servant, now bare David, now
single David, now David without the title my servant. And so though God
ordinarily called the people of Israel his people, yet when they had committed
that great sin of Idolatry in the matter of the Golden Calfe, the Lord does not
call them his people, but he says to Moses, The people, not My people, but The
people, and Thy people Moses, now they had lost their old title. Thus, I say,
the sins of Gods own people do deprive them, and divest them of their spiritual
privileges, and can a gracious heart look upon this, and consider how he is
divested and disrobed of his spiritual privileges, and not mourn under it? Can
one friend grieve another friend, and not be grieved himself? The Saints by
their sins they grieve God, who is their best friend, and therefore certainly
they must needs be grieved, they must needs be humbled, or there is no Grace,
not grieved, not humbled, not Gracious. But now because they are grieved, and
humbled for sin committed, therefore they are not discouraged, I say, because
they are grieved, and because they are humbled for sin committed, therefore
they are not discouraged, for discouragement is a hinderance to humiliation,
and the more truly a man is humbled for sin committed, the less he is
discouraged, and the more a man is discouraged, the less he is truly humbled.

You will say then, but what is the difference between these? a man is to be
humbled, and not discouraged, not discouraged and yet to be humbled, what is
the difference between these two, being humbled, and being discouraged?



Cain was discouraged, but Cain was not humbled: how may that appear? Cain was
troubled about his condition Ah! says he, My punishment is greater than I can
bear. on the other side, the poor prodigal was humbled, but not discouraged:
how may that appear? his trouble was about his sin, and not about his
condition: I will return unto my Father, says he, and I will say unto him, I
have sinned against Heaven, and before thee, and I am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, make me as one of thy hired servants. David sometimes was both
discouraged and humbled, and then you find his repentance and humiliation to be
very brackish: but if you look into the Psalm. 51. you shall find David humbled,
but not discouraged, for it is a penitential Psalm, therefore humbled and not
discouraged, for still he did keep his Assurance, verse. 14. Deliver me from
blood-guiltiness O God, thou God of my Salvation. But what was his repentance,
his trouble about? It was about his sin, and not about his condition, read
verse. 23. and so on, Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from
my sin, for I acknowledge my transgression, and my sin is ever before me,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: Behold
I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me, still ye see his
eye is upon his sin, and not upon his condition only; So that I say, when a man
is truly humbled and grieved for sin, the object of his grief is sin, as a
dishonor done unto God: when a man is discouraged and not humbled, then his
trouble is al about his condition, and what will become of him.

will send the comforter, and he shall convince the world of sin, because there
is comfort always goes along with true humiliation, it is not an enemy but a
friend to our spiritual rejoicing; but discouragement is an enemy to spiritual
joy; A man that is discouraged, is grieved, and he is sad upon his grief, and
if ye tell him that he must rejoice in God, and call upon him to rejoice in God,
O! no, says he, it is not for me to rejoice, I am a man of another
disposition, joy does not belong to me, or to one in my condition: But now when
a man is truly humbled, the more he is humbled for Sin, the more he can rejoice
in God, but the more a man is discouraged, the less he rejoices in God.

the Banks, it does not break down the Dam: Sometimes you have a great fall of
Water, a great and mighty flood, and then the River over-flows the Banks, and
the Water bears down the Dam. So here; Duty is the Bank of Sorrow, Grief, and
Humiliation for Sin; I say, your Duties are the Banks of all your Godly Sorrow,
and when a man's Sorrow, or Grief, does arise to such an height, that it swells
over Duty, and a man says, I will pray no more, it is to no purpose; and I
will hear no more, for there is no hope for my soul; and I will examine my own
heart no more: when thus Sorrow swells over Duty, and breaks down the Dam of
Duty, then it is Discouragement, it is not Humiliation: be not mistaken, this
is not Humiliation, this is a plain Discouragement. There is a great difference
then between Discouragement and Humiliation: Many People indeed do call their
Discouragements, Humiliation; but the Lord knows, there is not a drop of
Humiliation in a flood of Discouragement: Would you therefore be humbled? O
then, be not discouraged; for the more you are discouraged, the less you will
be humbled; and the more humbled you are, the less discouraged you will be.

But if there be such a great difference between these, and if it be our Duty,
to be humbled for sin, but not to be discouraged; What should a man do to bear
up his heart to the work of Humiliation, and yet bear up against all
Discouragement? How shall I be so humbled as I may not be discouraged? or what
shall a man do that he may be humbled, and yet not be discouraged in his
Humiliation?



Promise of Assistance, a Promise of Acceptance, and a Promise of Reward. If
you look upon the Commandment it self without the Promise, then you will
despair; if you look upon the Promise without the Commandment, then you will
presume: But look upon Promise and Commandment, Commandment and Promise
together, then ye will be humbled, in case ye have sinned, but ye will not be
discouraged. The Lord you know has given two Eyes to man, and if a man should
put out one, and say, I can see well enough with the other, what need I have
two? he should sin greatly. So for the soul, the Lord has given two eyes, as I
may so speak; the eye of Conscience, which is to look upon Gods Commandment;
and the eye of Faith, which is to look upon Gods Promise: and if any man will
say; I will put out the eye of Faith, I can see well enough with the Eye of
Conscience upon Gods Commandment, he shall do ill, and very ill: and if a man
shall say, I will put out the Eye of Conscience, for I can see well enough with
the Eye of Faith, he shall do very ill. But whenever you find you have sinned
against any Commandment, presently say, Where is the Promise? I may not look
upon the Commandment without the Promise, nor the Promise without the
Commandment. Thus join both together, and you shall not be discouraged; yet be
humbled.



meddle too much with Gods Prerogative, and with Gods Peculiar. In Humiliation,
a man is to meddle with that which belongs to man: Some things there are that
are peculiar to God, and are his Prerogative. You see how it is with the Birds
of the Air; so long as the Birds fly up and down here in the Air, they do live
comfortably; but if the Birds do fly up to the Element of Fire, it will burn
their Wings, and they will fall down headlong. So here, so long as a man in
his Humiliation keeps within his own Compass and Element, he may walk
comfortably there; but if a man in Humiliation, will soar up unto Gods
Prerogative, certainly his Soul will fall down upon the Earth, and be much
discouraged. Now I pray, what is more the Prerogative and Peculiar of God than
this, To know who is a Reprobate, and who is not? When a man is humbled and
grieved about his Sin, and he finds that he has sinned much against God, and
thereupon he concludes himself to be a Reprobate, is not this ^o come upon Gods
Prerogative? The Scripture tells a man indeed, what he is for the present, That
a man for the present is a Drunkard, or a Swearer, or a Sabbath-breaker, or an
Adulterer; and therefore the Scripture tells him for the present, that he is in
the state of Nature, and under the wrath of God; but does the Scripture tell him
that he is a Reprobate, that he can never be converted and turned to God?
Surely this is Gods great Prerogative to know, his Secret which he reserves to
himself, and therefore when a man goes to be humbled before God, and concludes,
O! I am a Reprobate, and there is no hope for me, and I shall never be
converted; this is to soar too high into Gods Prerogative, and he will burn his
wings, and he will fall down into great Discouragement. Therefore in all your
Humiliation, take heed that you do not fall upon any thing that is the Peculiar
and Prerogative of God, for then you will not be humbled, but discouraged.

Luther said thus: When my heart is brisk and jolly, I present God unto my self
under the notion of his Greatness; but when my heart is low and fearing, then I
present God to me under the notion of his Goodness: One while I consider Christ
as my Example, another while as my Gift: when my heart is too high, then I
consider Christ as my Example; when my spirit is too low, I consider Christ as
my Gift. So do you also. I know you will say, I cannot sometimes present the Lord
unto my soul under the notion of a Father, because I have no assurance of his
Love. Yet you may consider the Lord as gracious in himself, as good in himself,
and loving in himself, and say, I have thus and thus Sinned against a gracious
God, and although thou have not assurance of Gods Love to thee in Particular,
yet if you can present God to your soul, under the Notion of his general
Goodness, as good in himself, you will never be discouraged, but be humbled.



And thus I have done with the First Instance.
A LIFTING UP, In case of WEAK GRACE.
Sermon. V
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? etc.


Sometimes the Discouragements of the Saints, do arise from the weakness of
their Graces.

O! says one, I am a poor, feeble, and a weak Creature; some are strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his Might; who do a great deal of Service for God in
their day: but as for me, I am a poor Babe in Christ (if a Babe) and so am able
to do little or nothing for God: Therefore I am thus discouraged and cast down,
have I not just cause and reason for it?

God is able to make all Grace to abound toward you, that ye always having
all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good Work, 2 Cor. 9.8. And
if God have recompensed your weakness with Wisdom, then surely you have no
cause to complain of your weakness: Admonemur nullam creaturam propter
parvitatem contemnendam esse, quando qui them quod illis in corporis mole deest,
aliis quibus a Deo ornantur dotibus compensa^i solet. Cartwr. in Pro.
sometimes weakness is recompensed with wisdom, for says Solomon, Pro. 30.24.
There be four things that are little upon the Earth: but they are exceeding
wise. The Ants, the Conies, the Locusts, and the Spider. Wherein does the
wisdom of the Ants consist? He tells you in verse. 25. The Ants are a people not
strong, yet they prepare their meat in Summer. In time of plenty they do lay up
for the time of want. Wherein does the wisdom of the Coneys consist? he tells
you in verse. 26. The Conies are a feeble folk, yet make they their houses in
the rocks: though they be weak in themselves, yet they dwell in strong places.
Wherein does the wisdom of the Locusts appear? he tells you in ver. 27. The
Locusts have no King, yet go they forth al of them by bands: though they be
weak alone, yet they do join together, and so are strong. But wherein does the
wisdom of the Spider consist? he tells you in verse. 28. The Spider takes hold
with her hands, and is in Kings Chambers: though the chamber of a King, is most
swept and cleansed, yet by the industry of her hands, she does take hold on the
beams thereof, and dwells on high out of danger. So that, although these
creatures are weak and feeble in themselves, yet by their wisdom, their
weakness is recompensed, and they save themselves from injury, and wrong, as
well as if they were stronger. Now shall the Ant, Cony, Locust, and Spider be
wise in their kind, and shall not a Christian be so? true saving Grace is the
best wisdom, every Godly man, is a wise man; and though he be but weak in
Grace, yet he has true wisdom: the wisdom of the Ants, to provide in Summer
against a rainy day: the wisdom of the Conyes, to build in the rock Christ: the
wisdom of the Locusts, to join with others: and the wisdom of the spider, to
take hold on those beams of the promises, which are in the chamber of our King
Christ* and if God have thus recompensed your weakness with this wisdom, why
should you then complain?

But is it then no disadvantage, for a man to be weak in Grace?



Heb. 12.12. Wherefore lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees.
Says the Apostle. Least that which is lame be turned out of the way. A weak
man is more apt to fall than a strong; and i^ he do fall, he is more unable to
rise again: A strong man fallen, is quickly up again; but the weak falls, and is
ready to fall again when he rises; so it is with a weak C^ristian, he stumbles
often, and is apt to fall, and if he have fallen, he is even ready to fall again
when he goes about to rise.

Canaan, It it not lawful to cast Childrens bread before dogs. She made an
advantage of those words, and thereby did gather in upon Christ, saying, True
Lord, but the dogs eat the crumbs that fall from the table. Thus she improved
that for her self, which seemed to be against her. Why? because she was strong
in faith, O woman (says our Savior) great is thy faith. But when the Angel of
the Lord appeared to Manoah. Judge: 13. he said to his wife, We shall surely die,
because we have seen the Lord. Thus he improved that against him, which did
make for him: (as his wife truly interpreted the thing verse. 23.) why so? but
because he was weak in faith. The strong fire burns the more, by the very water
that is cast upon it; but the weak fire is quenched, by the very fuel, wood, or
coal that is cast on it; so a weak Christian also, apt is to be quenched, even
by those very truths, and dispensations, whereby he should burn and blaze out
the more.

Psalm. 50.23.
because, there is much light, and Grace met in one person. He that offers
praise, Glorifyeth me, says God.



Paul. Abraham considered not his own body, but being strong in faith, was
pe^swaded that God was able, and so did give Glory unto God. Romans 4. A weak
faith cannot do so, for says the Apostle. verse. 13. And being not weak in
faith, he considered not his own body now dead, he staggered not at the promise
of God through unbelief, but was strong in faith, giving Glory to God. It
seems then, that it is the strong, and not the weak faith which does give
Glory to God: and would ye know wherein this strong faith, differs from the
weak faith, in regard of its operation? why, says the Apostle, The weak faith
staggers at the promise, which the strong faith does not; The weak faith does
attend too much unto second Causes, which the strong faith does not; The weak
faith judges by what it sees and feels within, but the strong does not, but by
the word without, and therefore it is strong faith which does give glory unto
God especially.

(...) 1 These. 5.14.
and his soul little. Now the greater things we do for God, the more we Glorify
him.





We that are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of the weak. Romans 15.1. And
again; Him that is weak in the faith receive you. Chap. 14.1. Children and
babes are fit to be carried in others arms, but are not able to carry others.
The weak Christian is apt to be offended with others; to censure and judge
others, and so to make burdens for others to bear. Romans 14.1.2. but the strong
Christian, is a bearing Christian, a carrying Christian, one that can displease
himself, that he may help another. Now the more serviceable and helpful a man
is to others, the more he Glorifies God; Thus the strong Christian is, but the
weak cannot in all these things give Glory to God as the strong Christian may;
Surely therefore, there are many disadvantages which a weak Christian lies
under, that the strong Christian does not.



Psalm. 6.2. Have mercy on me, O Lord, for I am weak. It is spoken of an
out-ward weakness: and i^ that which is less does incline God to mercy, then
much more that which is greater.



have truth of Grace, you have as great a share, and interest, in the
righteousness of Christ for your justification, as the strong Christian has.
You have as much of Christ imputed to you, as any other. It may be, you have
gathered less of this Manna, for your spending Sanctifycation; but if you be an
Israelite indeed, you have so much of this Manna, as that you have no lack; for
it is said of the Israelites, They gathered some more, some less; yet he that
gathered much, Exodus 16.18.
had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no lack: al which figured,
that equal proportion, (says Mr. Ainsworth) which al believers have in Christ,
the spiritual Manna.

Math. 5. and I pray, what are those persons whom the promises are especially
made unto, but such as are weak in Grace? Blessed are the poor in spirit.
Blessed are those that hunger and thirst after righteousness. Blessed are those
that mourn. He does not say, Blessed are those that are strong in Grace; or
Blessed are those that rejoice in God: or those that have full assurance of
their everlasting estate and condition; No, but as if his great work and
business were, to comfort, uphold, and strengthen the weak, these he begins
withal, and many Gracious, Rich, and blessed Promises he does make to them.
Yea, the Promises are so made to them, as (attended to) will give a full answer
unto al their fears: as for example. The Lord Promises, Math. 12. That he will
not break the bruised reed etc. Will the weak Christian say, O! but I am
exceeding weak, and very feeble: then our Savior says, He will not break the
bruised reed. And what more weak and feeble, than a bruised reed? an whole reed
is not v^ry strong at the best, but bruised it is weak indeed. Will the weak
Christian say, O! but my weakness is mingled with many sins; (...) Matthew. 7.5.
(...), Matthew. 9.38. (...) Matthew. 10.5.
so the fire in the smoking flax is mingled with smoke, yet says Christ, I
will not quench the smoking flax. Will the weak Christian say, O! but, though
God do not quench me, yet I shall be quenched; nay says Christ, But I will bring
forth judgment to victory, it lies on my hand to do it, and I will do it. Will
the weak Christian say O! but, I have much opposition in my way, how can
judgment come to victory? then Christ says, he will bring forth (...) Thurst
forth with violence, it is the same word that is used in other Scriptures,
noting a force: as if Christ should say, I will force this victory through al
opposition, that it shall meet withal. So that the Lord does not only give
several promises to those that are weak in Grace, but he does so lay them, as
he does help to apply them.

We have not such an High Priest (says the Apostle) as cannot be touched with
our infirmities. Three things there are, Heb. 4.15.
which do speak out the condescending Love of God to those that are weak in
Grace; 1. He accepts their Duties, though mingled with many weaknesses; and
their Services, though they grow upon a weak Stock, Revel. 3.8. Christus fidem
etiamsi infirmam fovet.
I know thy Works (says Christ to the Church of Philadelphia) for thou have a
little strength, and have kept my word, and have not denied my Name. 2. The
Lord does not over-drive those that are weak, but is contented to go their pace
with them, Esai. 40.11. He shall gather the Lambs in his Arms, and carry them
in his Bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. 3. He does
sometimes, yea, often times, yield unto their desires, going (as it were) after
them: Matthew. 9.18. There came a certain Ruler, and worshipped him, saying, My
Daughter is now dead, but come and lay thine hand on her; and Jesus arose and
followed him. The man had Faith, for he said, Only lay thine hand on her, and
she shall live: yet his Faith was weak, for he limited, and stinted Christ,
both to time and means; Come down and lay thine hand on her. In the 8. Chapter,
a Centurion comes to him, for the cure of his Servant, and he was strong in
Faith; for says Christ, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel.
Christ does prevent, and goes before him; for when he said, verse 6. My Servant
lies sick, Jesus said to him, I will come and heal him: Here Christ offered to
go; No Lord, says the Centurion, Speak the word only. But the Ruler desires
Christ to go with him, and he followed him; Christ prevents the strong and he
follows the weak; he commends the strong Centurion, and he condescendeth to
the weak Ruler. What then, though the weak Ruler be not commended as the strong
Centurion was, should he be discouraged? No: Because Christ's condescending
Love, was as fit for him, as his commending Favor was for the Centurion: Strong
Grace shall be more commended; but weak Grace shall be much encouraged by the
condescending Love of Christ.

Why? and Wherefore? upon the Discouragements of the weak, then they have no
true reason to be discouraged, in regard of their weakness. Now if ye look into
Matthew. 8.26. ye shall find, that our Savior says to his Disciples, Why are ye
doubtful, O ye of little faith? Ye read in verse 24. that there arose a great
tempest, insomuch that the Ship was covered with Water; was not here cause of
fear? yet sai^s Christ, Why are ye fea^ful? yea, it is said, that their Help
was asleep; Christ was their only help in the storm, and ver. 24. He was
asleep: had they not then cause to fear? yet says Christ, Why are ye fearful,
O ye of little faith? The like ye have in Matthew. 16.8. Jesus said, O ye of
little faith, why reason ye amongst your selves, because ye have brought no
Bread? Here is another Why? put upon their Discouragement. So again, Matthew.
14.31. when Peter began to sink, he cried out, and Christ said unto him, O thou
of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Here is another Why? or
Wherefore? put upon the discouragement of a weak Faith. Now why does our Savior
speak after this manner to them? Why do ye doubt? and why are ye fearful? Not
only to reprove their doubting and discouragement; but to show that there was
no reason for it: Though their outward discouragements were great, and their
Faith was but small, yet he tells them, that they had no reason for to be
discouraged, Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith? It seems then, by these
Why's, and Wherefore's, that though a man's Faith be small, and his outward
discouragements great, yet he has no just and true reason for to be
discouraged.

therefore I do fear, that the Kingdom of Heaven was never in my soul in truth.
Thus men would doubt, and be discouraged, if they should not sometimes find
their Grace to be small. And if so, then why should a man be discouraged,
because he does find it thus? Surely he has no just cause or reason for it.

O! But yet, it is an uncomfortable thing to be weak; strong Christians are
full of Comfort: they have assurance of Gods Love, and are full of joy: but the
weak are full of fears and doubts. This is my condition; I am most
uncomfortable, therefore I am thus d^scouraged; have I not cause and reason for
it?





But how shall I know that my little, is a Pledge and Earnest of more?



Romans 8.23. And not only they, but our selves also (says the Apostle) which
have the first fruits of the Spirit; even we our selves, groan within our
selve^, waiting for the Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our B^dy. He
proves, That the Romans had the first fruits, the Pledge and Earnest of more in
the Spirit, by their groaning and waiting: Do I therefore groan under the
present burden of my own weakness, waiting upon God for more, then have I the
fist-fruits of the spirit; and so that little which I have, is a Pledge and
earnest of more: and upon this account, though your Grace be weak, and small in
it self, yet considered as an Earnest, it is much: and is it not a comfortable
thing to have the Pledge and Earnest of Glory? Such is the Comfort of al those
that are weak in Grace, and therefore why should they be discouraged in regard
of their weakness?

O! but, I am not discouraged at my weakness, in regard of the
uncomfortableness of it, but in regard of the unserviceableness of it: for if I
were strong in Grace, I should be able to do more Service for God; then I
should be able to resist my Temptations, and to overcome the evil One: for the
Apostle John says, I write to you young men, because ye are strong, and have
overcome the evil One, But I have great Temptations, and but small strength to
resist them: I have a great deal of work to do for God, and have no strength to
do it with; therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not cause and reason now?

Edward the Sixth, That when the Emperor sent to him, desiring that his Sister
Mary (afterward Queen of England) might have liberty for the Mass in her
House; this young Prince did stand out against that Temptation, when all his
Counsel was for it, yea, when that good man, Bishop Cranmer, and that other
holy man, Bishop Ridley, did yield thereunto, and pressed the King to it,
insomuch as the King did break forth into tears, desiring them to be contented;
whereupon the Archbishop Cranmer, took his Schoolmaster, Mr. Cheek, by the
hand, and said, Ah! Mr. Cheek, you have such a Scholar that has more Divinity
in his little finger, than all we have in our whole Bodies. Here the weak stood,
and the strong did fall; the weak did resist Temptation, when the strong did
yield: for our strength lies in Christ without us, not in our selves within us.
And if ye look into the 2. and 3. Chapters of the Rev^lations, ye shall find,
That whereas all the Churches are charged with some sin or other, only the
Church of Philadelphia is charged with no sin at all, but commended for keeping
the word of Christ's Patience; and yet this Church, and no other, is said to
have a little strength. 2 Cor. 12.9.10.
And ye know what Paul says, When I am weak, then am I strong: most gladly
therefore will I rejoice in mine infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest
on me.

The Tongue (says James) is a little Member, and boasts great things; behold
how great a matter a little fire kindles, Chap. 3.5. Behold also the Ships
(says he, verse 4.) which though they be so great, yet are they turned about
with a very small helm: quod autem tam minuta et infirma animalia in rupibus
domicilia sibi exculpeut, confirmare nos debet, ut non dubitemus etiam infirmi
et imbellos quae difficilia sunt aggredi dummodo officii ratio id postulet.
Cartw. in Pro. 30. in verse. 14. quatuor parva sunt in Terra.
And shall not a little Grace do as much as a little Tongue, or as a little
fire, or as a little Helm? Surely, though Grace be little, yet it may be an
Helm unto all your life, a Rudder unto all your Practices. Ye see how fruitful
weak things are in Nature; the strongest persons have not always most
children, but the weaker: The Herring is a weak Fish in comparison of the
Whale, and what abundance are there? The Dove is a feeble Bird in regard of the
Eagle, and yet how fruitful is it? The Vine is a weak Tree in regard of the
Oak, and yet it is more fruitful. So in Grace; you may be weak in Grace, yet
you may be very fruitful: The Jailer was but weak in Grace as soon as he was
converted; nor Zacheus, nor the Thief on the Cross; yet what Clusters of Divine
Grapes did presently grow upon these Branches? And if you may be very fruitful
in good, though weak, why should you be discouraged in regard of your weakness?

O! but I am not discouraged at my Weakness, in regard of my unserviceableness,
or unfruitfulness only, but in regard of my own guiltiness; for I have made my
self weak in Grace by mine own sins; I have fallen into sin, and so have
weakened my self and Grace: my Grace is not only weak, but it is weakened, and
weakened by sin; therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not cause and reason
now?





Sampson; he was strong, and of great strength inward and outward; yet his
strength was taken away, and he became as one of us: How so? why, he had laid
his head in Dalilah's Lap, and so he lost his strength, and was weakened by it;
but it cost him dear, both his Eyes, and his Life too: And if you have so laid
your head in Dalilah's Lap, that your strength is abated, it may, and it is
likely it will cost you dear; yet this case is no other than what may befall one
recorded for a true Believer.

be annihilated, for it is the new Creation; and nothing created by God, can be
annihilated by us. Man is created by God; he may be killed by man, but he
cannot be annihilated, and brought to nothing: The Tree and Wood, may be burnt
to Ashes, but it cannot be annjhilated and brought to nothing, for it is part
of the Creation. Now your Grace was created by God also, if true, though small;
and therefore though it may be weakened by your sin, yet it cannot be
annihilated, and brought to nothing.

Revel. 3. ye shall find, That as there are many Promises made to the several
Churches; so there are Promises also made to the Church of Sardis; yet this
Church had fallen, and weakened her self; for says Christ to her, Verse 13.
Strengthen the things that remain, and are ready to die; I have not found thy
Works perfect: So that, though your Grace be weakened, and that by your own
sin, insomuch as all seems to be ready to die, yet there is a Promise belonging
to such a condition, and therefore no just cause or reason for Discouragement,
though much cause of Humiliation.

But I am not discouraged at the weakness of my Grace, because of mine own
guiltiness only, but because of its likeness, and similitude, unto common
Grace; I know that it is a contradiction, to say, That a little Grace is no
Grace at all; but my little, is so little, that I even fear that it is none in
truth: If the piece of Coin that I have, be little, yet if it be Gold, it is
well; but if it be little, and a Counter too, then what am I the better? Now so
it is, that I fear my little is but a Counter, and not true Grace indeed;
therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not cause and reason now?







What shall I do to be saved? says he; and again, Lord, what will thou have me
to do? False and common Grace is not so.



Heb. 6.1. It is the fault of a weak Christian, that he is always laying the
foundation, yet he is laying of the foundation; though it works weakly, yet it
works according to the proportion of its weakness; but the common, false Grace,
does not so.

Aelian de Animal.
they will prey upon what is killed by others; but the Lion, King of the Beasts,
is so proud, that he will not eat of that which is killed by another. So, men
that are strong in Parts, and Gifts, and have no Grace withal, will not eat of
that which they do not hunt down themselves; if they hunt it down, then they
will close therewith, else not. A strong-graced Christian will, and a
weak-faithed Christian will; but he that has Parts, and Gifts alone, cannot
relish that so well, which is brought to hand by another..

a man in all the world, Deo placet fides infirma modo, nobis non placet fidei
infirmitas Austin.
says he, that is more weak than I. Now ye know, that if a Lady, or Queen,
come to an House, she has a great Train attending upon her, and though ye see
her not, yet if you see her Train, you say, she is there still. Such a great
Queen is Grace; though a man have never so little of it, yet it brings a great
Train with it; and though you see it not, yet if you see the Train, will ye not
say, surely the Grace of God is here? Thus now it is with you that are weak in
Grace; these Seven things, and a far greater Train than these, you may see in
your lives, and therefore certainly, you have no just cause and reason for your
Discouragements in this respect.

O! but yet, this is not the thing that does pinch with me: I hope, through
mercy, the Root of the matter is in my soul, that this great Queen of Grace
has taken up her lodging in my heart; but yet I am exceeding weak in Grace,
and very feeble still: some are weak in Grace, because they are but new Plants,
new Converts, lately brought home to Christ, and are yet Babes in Christ, and
so they have excuse for their weakness: but I profess, that I have been
converted a great while, yet I am weak; I am an old man or woman, yet I am weak
in Grace; I am an old Professor, and yet am weak in Grace: therefore I am thus
disquieted, have I not just cause and reason now?









Some think they grow in Grace, because they have more understanding in their
Christian liberty, though they do walk more loosly; these are deceived in their
spiritual growth; but if I know my Christian liberty more fully, and now do
walk more strictly in my life, then do I grow in Grace indeed. Now is it not
thus with you? yes! through Grace, I am able to say, That I see my Christian
liberty, more than I did heretofore; and yet I am more strict in my life:
though I cannot yet pray as I would, and hear as I would, and perform duty as I
would; yet I do perform my duties with more exactness than formerly: and though
I have not so much affection, as I had in this or that work of God, yet now I
find, that I am more dilated, and my obedience is more extended, and extensive
unto Gods ways and Commandments than before; Then though you are still weak in
regard of others, yet you are grown stronger in regard of your former self, and
therefore certainly, you have no just cause or reason to be discouraged in this
regard.

But suppose, that I am yet but weak in Grace, and Temptations, or
discouragements press in upon me, in regard of the weakness of my Grace; what
shall I do, that I may be able to bear up my heart, against those
discouragements?

Isa. 42.1. Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine Elect in whom my soul
delights: I have put my spirit upon him etc. but why? verse. 3. A bruised Reed
shall he not break, and the smoking Flax, shall not he quench. This is my
Charge, says the Father, which I give to my Son: And upon this account he came
into the world, That those who have life, might have it in abundance; and for
this cause he did die for us. Romans 5.6. For when we were yet without strength,
in due time, or according to the time, that is, the time appointed by the
Father; Christ died for the ungodly.

Peter, Peter, said our Savior, Love thou me? then feed my sheep. And again,
Love thou me? then feed my lambs. And again, thirdly, Love thou me? feed my
lambs. Have a care of those that are weak in Grace. All the time that Christ
lived upon Earth, he went about doing good, healing al sicknesses, and
diseases, and condescending to the weaknesses of men. One comes to him, and
thought to have stolen her cure; yet Christ did bear with her. Another comes,
and puts an If upon his will, Lord, If thou will, thou can make me clean: And
he did bear with him. Another comes, and puts an If upon his power, Lord If
thou can do any thing, etc. Yet Christ did yield to him. And when he left the
world, then he charges his Apostles with the weak Saints, Feed my Lambs, and
again, Feed my Lambs.



Isa. 35.3. To strengthen the weak hands, and to confirm the feeble knees, and
to say to them that are of a fearful spirit, be strong, fear not. And if it be
our duty, to say, and speak thus, then it is your duty, to encourage your self
in the Lord, and to say to your self, be strong, O my soul, and fear not. Be
thankful for your little, and in due time you shall have much: labor also for
much, yet be content with little, even with little Grace, if God will have it so.

And thus I have done with the Second Instance.
A LIFTING UP In case of MISCARRIAGE OF DUTIES.
Sermon. VI
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, May, 14. 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


Sometimes the discouragements of the Saints and people of God, are drawn, From
their Duties, the failings, and successlessness of their Duties.

For, they reason thus: Through the Lords Grace and Mercy, I have been kept
from great and gross sins, yet if the Lord loved me indeed, he would draw my
heart near unto himself; but when I come to prayer, or duty, I find so much
deadness, dullness, and awkness of heart and spirit, that I fear the Lord will
never accept such a one as I am, nor such duties as mine are: when I go to
prayer, either prayer is altogether absent from me or I have no life therein;
if I go to hear the word, I am not attentive, but filled with distractions; and
whatever duty I perform, I want life, and love in it. O! my heart is like a
rock, or stone; and therefore I fear the Lord will not accept my duty, and the
rather, because I find, that I have been long at prayer, and I am never the
better, the Lord hears me not, the Lord regards me not: and have I not just
Reason, and Cause, to be discouraged now?

Chrysostom, it is more bitter than death, to be spoiled of Prayer: and
hereupon, (as he observes) Daniel chose rather, to run the hazard of his life,
than to lose his Prayer. Prayer is the souls Weapon; and is it not a grief, to
want a Weapon in our spiritual warfare? Prayer is the souls Ornament, the
excellent Garment of a Christian; and is it not an affliction, to be without
this Garment, and to be found naked? Prayer is the Christians Element; And as
the fish lives in the water, as in its Element, and dies when it is out, so a
Christian lives in prayer as in his Element, and his heart dies when he is out
of it. Prayer is the souls Provisioner; fetches in Provision for the soul, and
for all its Graces: The old bird, the Dam, goes abroad and fetches in meat for
the young ones, and they lie in the nest gaping, to receive the meat upon its
return; and if the old one be killed abroad, the young ones will die presently at
home. So here, Prayer goes abroad, and fetches in provision for all our Graces,
and they al lie gaping, to receive this provision from the mouth of Prayer; if
this be killed, how can those other Graces live? The truth is, The more
sweetness a Christian finds in any work, the greater is his affliction, if he
want that work; now what abundance of sweetness, does a Gracious soul find in
Prayer? therefore when a man is narrowed, or shut up in Prayer, it cannot but
be a great affliction to him. But though it be a matter of great affliction,
yet a good man, has no reason to be quite discouraged, yea, though he meet
with many failings therein, and cannot pray as he would, nor perform duty as he
should.

How may that appear?

Thus.

Magna-Charta, of al his spiritual Privilidges, and Immunities. Now, in this
great Charter, the Lord does proclaim this, That sincerity shall go for
perfection; That a little done for God, in the time of temptation, shall be
counted much. In this great Charter, the Lord does proclaim unto al his people,
That he does rather regard the bent of the heart, than the inlargment of the
heart: That he dorh rather regard the will to do, than the doing. In this great
Charter, the Covenant of free Grace, the Lord proclaims unto al his people,
That if they do fail in prayer, and other duties, (for I speak not of prayer
only, though I instance in that) He will not cast them off, but he will rather be
moved to pity them; for the Covenant that the Lord makes with his people, is as
the Covenant that a man makes with his wife, I will betroth thee unto me, for
ever, says the Lord. Hos. 2,
Now, a man will not put away his wife for every failing, neither will the Lord
put a way his people, nor cast them off (because he is betrothed to them)
though they do fail in duties. Again; in this great Charter, and Covenant of
Grace, the Lord does proclaim unto al his Children, That what they want in
performance, he will make up in indulgence. He proclaims this unto them, That he
will require no more, than he gives; he will give what he requires, and he will
accept what he gives. Now therefore, am I in that Covenant of Grace? and are
there many failings in all my duties? yet if this be true, That the Lord is more
moved by my failings to pity me, than to cast me off, then I have no reason for
to be discouraged: And thus it is with every child of God, he is in this
Covenant of Grace, and so the Privileges, and Immunities of all this great
Charter, belongs unto him.

of ours, quamvis odibilis, detestabilis, et execrabilis sit causa mea in ore
meo, nihilominus in ore tuo benedicto, in ore tuo sacratissimo et in labiis
tuis, quibus tanta gratia diffusa est, est favorabilis: Parisiens. de Rhetor.
Div. cap. 21.

Est et alia firmitas et confirmatio meae partis quod tu ipse advocatus es et
propitiatio qui es et Judex meus et propter h^c non est possibile ut patiaris
causam meam periclitari in manibus meis. Apud homines enim non est possibile ut
advocatus fidelis et justus permittat periclitari causam cujus patrocinium
suscepit ibid.


because it is mixed with his.

Thirdly, If our acceptance of duty, do not come in by the door of performance,
but by another door, and that door is Christ; then a Godly man, has no reason
to be discouraged, though there be many failings in his performance. Now, al
our acceptance of duty, comes in by Christ, because our Sacrifices, are mingled
with Christ's perfumes, Revel. 8. verse. 4. And the smoke of the incense which
came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God, out of the Angels
hand. Our prayers go unto God the Father, through the hand of Christ; did our
prayers go immediately out of our own hands into the Fathers hand, we might have
caus^ to fear, but it goes by the hand of Christ; Christ takes it, and has it
into the pre^ence of God the Father. As it is with your soul, or your body when
you die; through your body be crooked, or deformed, and your soul defiled, yet
when you die, Christ meets your soul, and invests it with Glory, and so brings
it into the presence of God the Father; so it is with your duty, your duty, it
may be, deform^d, defiled, or a crooked duty, but Christ meets your duty, and
he clothes it with his Glory, and so has it into the presence of God the
Father; and thus it is with all the Saints, and people of God; surely then,
though they have cause to be afflicted, by reason of their failing in duty, yet
they have no reason at al, why they should be discouraged.

But, I have no Parts or Gifts in duties, therefore I am thus discouraged: some
there are, that have great abilities in duty; they pray, and can pray, with
great abilities, they go to a sermon, and can bring away every word, and have a
great Gift in conference: but as for me, I am a poor creature, who want al
these Gifts; I have no utterance in conference, I have no abilities in prayer,
I have no memory for a Sermon, my memory is even as a sieve; good things run
out presently, I have no Gifts at al, a poor Seaman, or Tradesman I am, that
have no Parts, no Gifts in duty; and have not I just cause and reason now to be
discouraged?

Solomon, you know, built a great House, and it was a Glorious building, much
Gold and Silver in it* the second Temple was not so full of Gold, and Silver,
and yet it is said of the second Temple, That the Glory of it, was beyond the
Glory of the first; why? this reason is given, because, The desire of al
Nations should come into it. That is Christ; who is indeed, The desire of al
Nations; De facto, Gold and Silver is the desire of al Nations; but, De jure,
and by right, the Lord Jesus Christ, is the desire of al Nations; and because
that Christ, the desire of al Nations, should come into the Second Temple,
therefore the Glory of it, was beyond the Glory of the first. Now thy soul is
the Temple of the Holy Ghost; it may be, thou have not so much Gold, and
Silver, not such Golden Parts, and Golden Gifts, as another has, but if the
desir^ of al Nations, the Lord Jesus Christ, be come into thy soul, have thou
any reason to complain? Thus it is with every child of God, though he has not
those Parts, and Gifts, that another has* yet the Lord Jesus, the desire of al
Nations, is come into his Temple, into his soul; and therefore, he has no
reason to be discouraged.



All flesh is grass, and the flower th^reof, and it fades away. Parts and Gifts
are but flesh; and our wise God knows, the ^eat is never the worser, when these
flowers are wanting. Yea, if I had al Parts and al Gifts, that I were able to
preach and speak like an Angel; and that I were able to cast out Devils; yet
notwithstanding, if I have not Christ and Grace within, my Parts and Gifts,
will but sink me deeper into Hell. Two men (suppose) do fall into the River,
one man has bag^ of Gold about him, and the other none; he that has none,
makes a shift to swim, and get away; but he that has the bags of Gold about
him, sinks by his Gold, and he cries out as he sinks, O! take away these bags
of Gold, this Gold undoeth me, this Gold sinks me. So, these Golden Parts, and
Golden Gifts, if a man has not Grace withal, has not Christ within, shall but
sink him the deeper into Hell: These commend us not, I say, nor our Service
unto God, nor does the want thereof discommend us unto him.

Vbi deficit in uno, abundat in altero; Where Nature is deficient in one thing,
it is abundant in another thing. If a man wants his Eyes, he hears the better;
and the less he sees, the more he remembers: where Nature is wanting in one
thing, it is exceeding in another. And as Nature, so the God of Nature, and the
God of Grace too: It may be you do want a Head-memory, but has not the Lord
given you a Heart-memory, to remember the Sermon as you have occasion to use
it? Some have Parts and Gifts, and they want plainness and openness of heart
for God; some again have a plain heart, and they want Gifts and Parts. It is
said Jacob, That he prevailed with God in Prayer, and he was a plain man. Mark
how the Holy Ghost does put these two together, That, that man should be the
prevailing man with God in Prayer, who was the plain man; and that man that was
the plain man, should be the prevailing man in Prayer: a plain man, but
pr^vailing with God. Well then, though thou be but a plain person, and have
no Parts or Gifts, as others have, yet thou may prevail with God, and thy
Name may be called, Israel, prevailing with the Lord: When God denies one, he
gives another Mercy. Thus it is with all the Saints and People of God, and a
godly, gracious man, may say thus; Well, though I have not great Parts and
Gifts, yet blessed be the Lord, I have a plain and an open heart for God; and
if the Lord has done thus much for you, and recompensed you in another way,
have you any reason then to be discouraged for want of Parts and Gifts in
Duties? Certainly you have not.

O! but yet, this is not the matter of my Discouragement, I am not discouraged
for want of Parts or Gifts in Duty; but I want the Grace and the Holiness of
Duty, I want the Grace and the Holiness of Prayer; I go to Prayer and Duty, but
the Lord knows, wi^h a dull, dead, and a straightened heart: I think verily,
that there is not a more rockie, stony, flinty heart in the world than mine; I
offer my self to God sometimes in Prayer, but when I come at it, I am not able
to speak a word, my heart is so shut up and straightened: and have I not cause
and reason now to be discouraged? is not this matter of just discouragement?





Psalm, 77.3, 4. says the Plalmist there, I remembered God, and was troubled; I
complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed: Lord, (says he, at verse 4.) Thou
hold mine Eyes watching, I am so troubled that I cannot speak: I cannot
pray, I am so troubled I cannot speak. A Mother hears her child cry, and says
she, now does this Child cry for the Breast, yet the Child speaks not a word,
but the Mother knows the meaning of the child's crying, and the language of it:
And does a Mother know the language of her Child's crying? and does not God our
Father know the Language of his Child's cry, that cannot speak unto him? The
Beggar that follows you for an Alms, is a Beggar, though he be dumb and cannot
speak; and you say, send him away with some gift, for he follows us. So here,
though your heart be shut up in Duty, yet if you can follow God, he looks upon
you as a Beggar at the Throne of Grace, and in due time he will serve you, and
send you away with Comfort.

in forma Pauperis, every man sues in this Court in the form of a Beggar. If
thy heart then be straightened, if thy heart be hard, and if thy Spirit be dull
in duty, you may go to God, and open your sores, and wounds before him; you may
go and say, Lord, what an hard heart have I! and what a dull and straigh^ened
Spirit have I! This father becomes a Beggar, and you must come as a Beggar,
when you come before him; yet you must know, Etsi non sit possib le per ea
moveri immobilem et per omniaque immutabilem Deum, potentia enim mihi videatur
esse ad movendum ipsum recitantem vel meditantem ipsa ad moveadum inquam et
preparandum ad gratiam devotionis et^ gratitudinis et largitatis et
beneficentiae incogitabibis Dei.

Parisiens. Cap. 22. de Rhetor Div.


That neither your Poverty, nor your Riches; neither your straightenings in
Duty, nor your enlargements, do make any alteration in the Mind and Will of
God. Indeed, God seems to deal by us sometimes, as a Father does by his little
Child; he holds a piece of Gold or Silver in his hand, and says the Father, if
you can get this out of my hand, you shall have it; so the Child strives, and
pulls, and works, and then the Father opens his hand by degrees, first one
finger, then another, and then another, and at last his whole hand; and the
child thinks he has got the money by his own strength and labor, whereas the
Father intended to give it him, but in that way. So here, God intends to give
us a mercy in the way of Prayer, and he sets us a praying for it, and we think
we obtain it by the strength of our own prayer, as if we did move, and change
the will of God by our Duty: but all the enlargements in the world, make no
alteration in the will of God; he is immovable, unchangable, and the same for
ever: But he will give out his blessings in a way of prayer, therefore it is
our Duty to pray, yet we must not be discouraged though we cannot pray as we
would.

Luke, 1. we read so of Zacharias, a gracious and holy man, at the 67. verse,
it is said of him, that, He was filled with the Holy Ghost, and he prophesied.
Yet if you look into the former part of the Chapter, you shall find, that
before he was thus filled with the Holy Ghost, and Prophesied, he was dumb, and
stricken with dumbness; verse 20. says the Angel to him, And behold, thou
shall be dumb, and not able to speak: So he continued dumb, before he was
filled with the Holy Ghost, and prophesied. It may be here is a further Mystery
in this, quando oramus, non ideo oramus ut per hoc Divinam dispositionem
immutemus, sed ut impetremus id quod deus disposuit sanctorum oration nobis
impetrandum. Tostat. Mat. 6.
for Zachary was a Levitical, and a Legal Priest; and our Lord and Savior
Christ being to come into the world immediately, who knows but that Zachary was
thus stricken with dumbness, to show, that the Lord will silence all our Legal
Performances, before he will enlarge us with the enlargements of Christ, and of
the Gospel. This is Gods usual way with his People. it may be thou have gone on
in Duty in a Legal manner, and now thou art stricken with dumbness; yet if God
have a design to discover more of Christ to thy soul, and to enlarge thee with
the Enlargements of the Holy Ghost, have you any cause to complain?



Durum est quod tactui non cedit molle cedit; A hard thing does not yield to
the touch, but a soft thing does. Wax yields when it is touched, because it is
soft; and Wool yields when it is touched, because it is soft, but an hard thing
yields not. And upon this account, it is said of Pharaoh, That his heart was
hard, why? Because he did not yield to God, he had not a yielding disposition.
Now there is many a poor soul complains, that his heart is hard, and yet
notwithstanding, he has a yielding disposition to every Truth, a yielding
disposition to every Affliction, and Dispensation of God. Wherefore, do thou
complain, and say, O! my hear is very hard? yet if at this time thou have a
yielding disposition, to yield to every Truth of God, and to yield to every
touch of the Lords hand, know from the Lord, that here is a soft heart, be not
mistaken: but many are mistaken, and because they are mistaken herein, and it
is b^t a mistake, therefore they have no reason for to be discouraged.

But I do not only want enlargement, and softenings of heart in Duty, but I am
oppressed, and filled with distractions, my heart is not only dull, and dead,
and straightened, but I feel many positive evils: As the Leaves of a Tree, are
eaten up with Catterpillars; so I may say, my Duties are eaten up ^^th
distractions, I never go to Duty, but the Lord knows, a world of distractions
come in upon me, and have I not just cause and reason to be discouraged now?

Tantum temporis oras, quantum attendis; so much time you pray, as you do
attend in prayer: and upon this account, if the Lord should abstract all the
outgoings of our souls in Duty, and all our distractions from our prayers, O!
how little of prayer would be left many times. It were an incivility, you will
say, when a Petitioner has gotten the Kings Ear, for the poor Petitioner, then
to turn his back upon the King: and what an evil must it needs be, when a poor
soul has gotten the Ear of God, then to turn the back by way of distractions
upon the Lord, who comes down to hear his Prayer. We use to say, When the
Candle burns, the Mouse bites not, or the Mouse nibbles not; when the Candle
does not burn, then the Mouse eats the Candle; but when the Candle burns, the
M^use does not bite the same. And so long as a man's heart is warm, and inflamed
in prayer, he is freed from distractions; but when a man's heart is cold in
prayer, then comes these ill distractions. So that certainly, there is a great
deal of evil indeed in these distractions, Yet, there is no reason for
Discouragement. For,

Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, had Birds coming down upon his Sacrifice;
and what Child of Abraham is ther^, but has these foul Birds, unclean Birds of
distraction, one time or other coming down upon his Sacrifice?

non nocet, quod non placet: that which does not please, does not hurt. These
distractions in Duty do not please the Saints, they lie under them as a heavy
burden, they do not please them, therefore they shall not hurt them. You know
what the Psalmist says, If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear my Prayer. Psalm. 66.18.
Distraction in Prayer, is a great iniquity, if I regard this iniquity in my
prayer, the Lord will not hear my Prayer. But when may a man be said to regard
iniquity? You know, that if you regard a man thae comes to your house, you run
and meet him at the door, you bid him welcome, have him in, and set a stool for
him, and you give him entertainment: but if you bid the man be gone, saying, I
will have nothing to do with you, you are my burden, I pray be gone, then you
do not regard this man. Thus it is with the Saints and People of the Lord,
distractions press in upon their prayer and Duty; but do thou fetch a stool,
do thou give entertainment, and do thou bid welcome to these
distractions? No, the Lord knows, I bid them be gone, the Lord knows they are
my burden; then certainly, as that is true, If I regard Iniquity in my heart,
the Lord will not hear my Prayer; so on the contrary, if I do not regard
iniquity in my heart, the Lord will hear my prayer. A man does sometimes open a
door for one of worth, and others press and crowd in with him; and if the
Master say to his Servant, why did you let all these men in? he answers, Sir, I
did not open the door for these, but for another, and these did press and troud
in upon me, and I could not hinder; then is the Master satisfied, and the
Servant excused. So in this case it is, and that often, with the People of God;
Christ stands at their door and knocks, they run to meet with him in Prayer,
and by Prayer they open the door of their heart to him, but then distractions
press and crowd in upon them; yet they can say in truth, Lord, I never opened
my door for these, but do desire that these, and al these may be put out again;
What then, do you not think that God will be satisfied with this answer of
uprightness? Surely he will, and therefore, though these distractions do crowd
in upon you, here is matter of affliction, but not of Discouragement.

Lucida intervalla, and he will speak very good reason sometimes, his Father
loves to hear this Child speak, when he speaks reason; but all on a sudden the
Child is out; What then? does his Father hate him for that? No, but the bowels
of the man yerns, O! now my Child is out; then the Fathers heart does ache over
this Child whom he takes pleasure in. Thus it is between God and a poor soul,
God loves his Children dearly, Cant. 2.14.
he loves to hear them pray, Let me hear thy voice, and see thy face, says
Christ, for thy voice is sweet, and thy countenance is comely. God loves to
hear his Children pray, but every foot they are out; in, and then out again;
out, and then in again: But what then? is the Lord moved hereby to destroy his
Children? No, but now the heart of your Father aches, and now his bowels yern:
Shall there be bowels in the heart of an Earthly Father this way? and shall
there not be bowels in the heart of God our Heavenly Father this way? Surely
there is. Well therefore, though in regard of thy distractions, thou have cause
for ever to be humbled, ye certainly thou have no cause to be quite
discouraged.

O! but, This is not my case, For though I am troubled with many distractions,
for which I have cause to be humbled; and though my heart be dead and dull, and
hard in duty; and though I have no Parts and Gifts in Duty; yet this is not the
matter of my discouragement especially; but that which discourageth me
concerning Duty is this, I pray, and pray, and am never the nearer; I have been
praying thus long, thus many years, and am never the nearer: I have an
undutiful, disobedient child, and I have been praying thus long, and he is
never the better; I have been praying for the sense of Gods Love thus long, and
am never the nearer; I have been praying for such and such a spiri^ual mercy,
thus and thus l^ng, and am never the holier: God regards me not, for he answe^s
me not, and have I not just cause and reason for my discouragements now?



Cito semper audit, tardus aliquando respondet.
He heard Moses when he prayed, though he did not g^ant his prayer; and it is a
great mercy that God will receive my prayer, though I never do receive the
thing that I pray for; and I may yet say, Father, I thank thee that thou
hear me always.

the returns of those vapors in the day; but sometimes the Vapors fall in a dew
in the night, and you do not see the return thereof, but you go abroad in the
morning, and you find the dew upon the ground, although you did not see when
the dew fell. So here, your Prayers are drawn up by the heat of Gods Love in
Christ; some return upon you again in the day, visibly; some return in the
night, invisibly, when you see them not: there is a visible, and there is an
invisible return of Prayer. What more usual with Gods People, than to say, and
think, tha^ the Lord does not hear their Prayer, nor make return to them, when
indeed he does, and that visibly unto others also? Luke, 1. you read of
Zacharias and Elizabeth, that they were very righteous; verse 6. They were both
righteous before God. And Zacharias and Elizabeth, had no Children; but
Zacharias prayed for Children, for at verse 13. the Angel said unto him, Fear
not, Zacharias, for thy prayer is heard, and thy Wife Elizabeth shall bear a
Son, and thou shall call his name, John. The Lord heard his Prayer, and sent an
Angel to tell him his prayer was hea^d, but Zacha^ias doubted thereof, verse 18.
Zacharias said unto the Angel; Whereby shall I know this? for I am an old man,
and my Wife well stricken in years. Here he doubts, and it was his sin thus to
doubt, as you may see by verse 20. Behold thou shall be dumb, and not able to
speak, until the day that these things shall be performed, because thou
beleevest not my words. Here plainly now, was a return of prayer, yea, here was
a visible return of Prayer; and yet Zacharias (though a Godly, and a Holy man)
doub^ed whether the Lord had heard his Prayer or no. So that I say, this is no
new thing with Gods own People, and dearest Children, to say, and think,
sometimes, That the Lord does not answer their P^ayer, when the Lord indeed does
an^wer, and tha^ visibly too. But,

faith and patience, says the Lord, you are able to stay, I see your faith and
patience, and therefore I will serve the little ones first; but as for you, I
will serve you last. Thus it was with Abraham, after the Lord had made Abraham a
Promise of a Seed, he made him stay a great while, Why? Because he saw he had
faith to stay: So now, thou have not presently a return or answer to thy
prayer, Why? Because the Lord it may be sees thou have strength, faith, and
patience to stay. And is not this rather matter of encouragement, than
discouragement?



Yea, by this means you may remember how you delayed the Lord, he spoke often
to you, and it was long ere you heard him, shall we think it long ere he hear
us, when it was so long ere we heard him? it may be you have forgotten your
delays of God, but by this forbearance he does Graciously mind you thereof.

Yea by Gods forbearance to answer you, the Lord teaches you to forbear, Gods
forbearance does teach us forbearance: and is that nothing? let all this be
considered, and you will say indeed, here is more matter of encouragement, than
discouragement.



O! but, I fear that God does not only delay his answer, but that he denies my
prayer.

Ye ask and have not (says James) because ye ask amiss: Yet they were the
people of God. Abulensis observes, that God does sometimes grant a wicked man
his petition, and deny a Godly man his petition; that he may encourage wicked
men to pray, and teach good men, not to rest on their prayers.

quicquid placet tibi ut petatur a te procul-dubio plac^t et tibi ut et id
^rgiaris pet^^ti, pr^sertim^^ i^sum largiri, t^^i c^lat ad gloraim, pe^ a^^
v^ro expediat ad s^^^tem. Parist^ns. 346.
If the thing you ask of God be pleasing to him, and he does still bear up your
heart in praying, and depending on him it argues rather, that he delays than
denies. For, Psalm. 10.17. The preparing of your heart, and the inclining of his
ear, go together. and 1. John, 3. verse. 22. The Apostle says. And whatever
we ask we receive of him, because (as a sign thereof) we keep his
Commandments, and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.

O! but, there lies my grief, for I have not kept his Commandments, and God (I
fear) is displeased and angry with me.

Jonah keep his Commandments, when he ran to Tarshish? and was not God angry
with him, when he threw him into the Sea? yet even then he prayed, and the Lord
heard his prayer. And did not Christ seem to be displeased, and angry, with the
poor Canaanitish woman, when he said unto her, It is not meet, to take the
childrens bread, and call it before dogs?

O! but she did believe, but I fear God will never hear my prayer at al, because
there is so much unbelief in my prayer, as there was not in hers.

D^vid? I said in my have, I am cast out of thy sight, Psalm. 31.
nevertheless the Lord heard my prayer. What unbeleif was here! I said in m^
have, I am cast out of thy sight. Nevertheless the Lord heard his prayer.

O! but, I am affra^^ yet, that the Lord will never hear my prayer, or regard my
duty, because I am so Selfish in it; I come unto God in mine affliction, and my
affliction makes me go to prayer, my affliction does make me pray, I cry by
reason of my affliction, and this is selfish.

Omnis amor incipit a seipso.
al true love begins in self-love: the sweetest flower, grows on a dirty stalk.
And I pray, what think you yet of Jonah? The Lord heard me, says he, out of
hell, and yet I cried, says he, by reason of mine affliction.

O! but I fear the Lord will never hear my prayer, because I was no better
prepared, yea, not at al prepared thereunto.

Hezekiah? Hezekiah prayed, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.
The Lord show mercy to every one that is not prepared, according to the
preparation of the Sanctuary, and says the text, the Lord hearkened and hea ed
the people. Yea, God can rain without clouds, without preparations.

O! but yet, I am afraid the Lord will not hear my prayer, or regard my duty,
for I am a man or a w^man of great distempers, many passions, and frowardnesses
in my life and conversation.

Elijah? Elijah prayed that there might be no rain, and there was no rain ^or
three years and a half; and he prayed for rain, and there was rain: and ye
says the Apostle, He was a m^n ^f like passions as we are. Jam. 5.17.


O! but, I fear, I am afraid the Lord will not regard my prayer, or du y, for I
am such a one, or such a one, or such a one.

Cornelius, Acts, 10.31.
Cornelius, thy prayer is come up before me. Yet he did but begin to look
toward Christ. Are thou such a one as the Publican was? the Publican stood and
smote himself upon the breast, and he said, O Lord, be merciful unto me a
sinner. And our Savior says, Luke, 18.13, 14.
He went away justified, rather than his fellow. Or art thou such an one as the
poor Prodigal? he said to his Father, I am not worthy to be called ^hy Son,
make me as one of thine hired servants: and the Father heard him and
over-granted his petition. And if al these things be true, what is there, that
can justly discourage any poor drooping, doubting soul, in regard of duty; shall
his want of Parts and Gifts, or his abundance of distractions? etc. No: for
though a Godly man have but weak Parts or Gifts; Though his spirit and his
heart be dull, dead, and streightened; Though he labor under many distractions
in duty; Though the Lord hide his face, and deser an answer to his prayer;
Though the Lord seem to be angry; Though there be much unbeleif in his duty;
Though there be a great deal of selfishness; Though his heart be not prepared,
according to the preparation of the Sanctuary; Though he be a man of many
passions, and great distempers: yet notwithstanding all this, he has no just
cause or warrant to be discouraged, cause there is to be humbled under al these
things, but no just cause to be discouraged, and cast down.



abomin^tion to the Lord. And if you look (...) 8, you shall find, at Verse. 13.
That the (...) men thus, That when they do come to prayer, and to offer a
sacrifice to him, that then he will remember their iniquity. At verse. 12. I have
written to you the great things of my law, but they are accounted as a strange
thing, they Sa^^^fice flesh f^r the Sacrifices of my offering, but the Lord
accep^eth them not; now will I remember their iniquity. M^^k the word, Now, Now,
when? Now when they do come to prayer; now will I remember your iniquity, says
the Lord. I know, says the Lord, al your carriage in such and such a p^^ce, I
know your uncleanness, and your adulteries when you w^^e in the dark, when the
curtains were drawn about you, and the candle out; I know your carriage at such
a Tavern, and upon such an Ale bench, how you sat there, and sc^rned and
revi^^d my children; I know your opposing, scoffing* and jeering at tho e that
are Godly; I know all this, and now thou come to prayer, now Swearer, now
Adulterer, now Drunkard, now thou come to duty, now will I remember thine
iniquity. Is it not a sad thing, that the Lord should remember a man's sin at
the time when he comes to prayer? yet thus the Lord deals with the wicked. But
as for the Godly and Gracious man, it is not so with him; when he comes to
prayer, though he have many failings in duty, yet the Lord remembers his mercy,
then the Lord remembers his loving kindness, then the Lord remembers his
Covenant (for he is ever mindful of his Covenant.) O! what encouragement is
here then, for every man to become Godly, to get into Christ! and what
encouragement is here, for the Saints and people of God to come to duty! O!
you, that have but a little faith, have you any reason to be discouraged? will
you not at last say to your soul, why art thou cast down? O my soul, and why
are thou thus discouraged?

But, suppose that I have done foolishly, and have sinned in being discouraged
upon al occasions; suppose I have many failings in duty, and the Lord does not
answer my prayer presently: what shall I do, that I may bear up my heart against
this discouragement, either in regard of my own failing in duty, or in regard
of Gods not answering?

Paul was tempted and buffetted, he prayed thrice, For this, says he, I
besought the Lord thrice (that is often) and the Lord gave him no other answer
than this, 2 Cor. 12.8 9.
Paul, My Grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength shall be made perfect in
thy weakness. Whereupon Paul says, Now therefore will I Glory in mine
infirmities, that the power of the Lord may rest upon me. Have thou therefore
been at prayer? and have thou prayed thrice, or often? and have thou no answer
but this, My Grace is sufficient for thee? know that thou have a Paul's answer,
and therefore rather Glory in this, that the Lord should find thee faithful for
to wait upon him, than be discouraged; knowing, that the Lords strength shall be
perfected in thy weakness.

there was two things, The Sacrifice, and the Obedience in offering the
Sacrifice; and the more difficult it was for any poor Jew, by reason of
poverty, or the like, to offer this Sacrifice, the more and greater was his
Obedience in offering it, the more difficulty in offering, the greater the
Obedience offered. So also it is in our Gospel Sacrifices, and in all our
duties, there are two things in them, There is the Sacrifice, the duty, and
there is the Obedience in bringing the duty: and the more difficulty in
performing the duty, the greater is the Obedience to God in the performing of
it. Now is is not an hard thing, and very difficult, for a man to pray, and
continue praying, when his heart is hardened, and his spirit straightened?
especially, if he be sensible thereof? then he is ready to despond, and say, I
can pray no more: and is it not a very hard thing, for a man to pray, and
persevere in prayer, when he thinks that God does not regard his prayer? then
he is apt to say, why should I pray any longer, for God regards me not? yet now
if you do pray, and perform your duty, your obedience is the more obediential,
and the more acceptable: and if you would but think of this rule; Difficulty
does commend duty, and the less you have to sweeten your action, the more sweet
it is to God, I say, if you would but remember this, it would both encourage
you to duty, and keep you from discouragement in it.

Psalm. 55. Cast thy Gift upon the Lord, Heb. (...) Chaldee Par. (...) Septuag.
(...). Hierom. projice super Dominum charitatem tuam. Rab. Salv. Jar.
abbreviate dictus Rashi vel Rasi (...) (quod etiam pro dono usurpatur (...) 2 Samuel 11.8.) Bibl. Bomb.
and he will sustain thee, he will not suffer the righteous to be moved for ever:
You read it thus, Cast thy Burden upon the Lord: but in the Hebrew, it is thy
Gift, Cast thy Gift upon the Lord. That is, says Shindler, quicquid tibi dari
donarive expetis, Whatsoever thou do desire that God should give thee, cast
that upon the. Lord: thou come to prayer, and thou prayest for such a mercy,
or such a Gift, cast that on God, and leave it wholly to him. O! but, the mercy
I pray for is a necessary mercy. Be it so, yet it is to be cast on God. But it
is a spiritual Gift: I pray for pardon of sin, the sense of Gods love, growth
in Grace, consolation to my poor drooping soul. Be it so, yet thou must cast
this on God. Many there are, that can leave the event, and and success of these
outward things unto God, but to leave the event and success of prayer, and
their spiritual things unto God, this they cannot understand, and this they are
utterly unacquainted with: but whatever thy Gift be, cast it upon the Lord,
leave the success, and the event, of al your spiritual things upon God, what
then? And he will sustain thee, and thou shall not be moved for ever. Thou are
moved for the present and thy heart is moved, and thou art much discouraged,
yet do but try this way, leave the event to God, Go to prayer, go and perform
thy duty leaving the event of that unto God, and the Lord that has promised,
will certainly fulfill it, thou shall be sustained, and though thou art moved for
the present, thou shall not be moved forever.

And thus I have done with the Third Instance.
A LIFTING UP IN THE Want of Assurance.
Sermon VII
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, May, 21. 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


SOmetimes the discouragements of Gods people are drawn, From the want of their
Evidence for Heaven.

And thus they reason, or argue; I am a poor creature, who do want Assurance o^
the love of God, and of mine own Salvation; therefore I am thus discouraged:
indeed, if I had any evidence of an interest in Christ, I should never be
discouraged whatever my condition were; but alas! I want the Assurance of Gods
love, and of eternal life; should I now die, I do not know, whether I should go
to Heaven or Hell, and what would become of my soul to al eternity, O! I want
Assurance of my Salvation, and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not just
cause and reason for my discouragements now?



The truth is, a man that wants the Assurance of Gods love, and of his interest
in Christ, is neither fit to receive mercy from God, nor to make return of
love, and praise to God as he should: Not fit to receive mercy as he should,
for though he would have Christ come in, yet by unbelief he shuts the door
against him; and he makes an evil interpretation of mercies offered unto him;
if a mercy or blessing be tendered unto him, he says, this comes in judgment
to me, it is a blessing, indeed, in it self, but I fear it is a judgment to me:
Thus he makes an il interpretation of blessings and so unfit to receive. And he
is not fit to make returns of love to God again. Assurance returns praise. And
therefore says the text here, O! my soul, wait on God, hope in God, for I shall
yet praise him, why? for he is my God, praise grows upon assurance: and upon
this account, I say, he is neither fit to receive mercy, nor to make return of
praise as he should.

Yea further, He that wants Assurance of Gods love, converseth too much with
Satan; as he that has the Assurance of Gods love, does converse with Christ,
the spirit bearing witness to him, that he is the Child of God: So he that does
want Assurance, converseth with Satan, and Sacan, (though falsely) is still
bearing witness to his spirit, that he is not the child of God. and is it not a
misery to be in these converses with Satan? to be under his hellish droppings?
David, felt one pang of unbelief, and he cried out and said, It is too painful
for me, O! what a pain is it then, to lie bedridden of an unbeleeving heart? you
know, a chaste and a loving wife, counts it an affliction to her, to be followed
with the solicitations of an unworthy person, to suspect, and be jealous of her
husbands love; for says she, he does therefore follow me with these
solicitations, making me to suspect my husbands love, that so he may attain
his own filthy desires. So says a gracious soul, the Devil is always
following and tempting me, to suspect the Love of Christ; and he does therefore
do it, that he may attain his mind upon me; for the Devil knows well enough,
that the more I suspect Christ's Love, the more I shall embrace Satan's love. The
truth is (Beloved) this want of Assurance of Gods Love, or Interest in Christ,
is an inlet to many sins and miseries; for first a man doubts of his own
Salvation, and after he has continued doubting, then he rises up unto a full
conclusion, saying, now know I that Christ does not love me, I did but doubt
before, but now I know he does not love me. And after he is risen to this
conclusion, then shortly he rises higher, and he goes further thus: If Christ
does not love me now, he will never love me, and if I have not interest in
Christ now, after all the Preaching I have heard, and Ordinances enjoyed, if I
have not an Interest in Christ now, I shall never have it; and so the longer I
live, the more I aggravate my condemnation, therefore as good in Hell at first,
as at the last; and therefore now, I will even make a way my self. O! what a
black Chain is here? and the first link, is the want of Assurance. If you
should see a Child, ^ pretty Child, lie in the open streets, and none own it,
would it not make your Bowels yern within you? Come to the little one, and say,
Child, where is thy Father? I know not says the Child: Where Is thy Mother,
Child? I know not. Who is thy Father? what is thy Fathers name, Child? I know
not: Would it not make your heart ache to see such a little one in the streets?
But for a poor soul to lie in the street, as it were, and not know his Father,
whether God be his Father, or the Devil be his Father; for a soul to say, I do
not know my Father, whether God in Christ, be my Father, yea or no; this is
pitiful indeed. The word, Father, is a sweet word, for it sweetens all our
Duties; take the word Father, out of Prayer, and how sour is it? Surely
therefore it is a sad, and sore affliction, to want the Assurance of Gods Love
in Christ. But now, although it be a great evil, and a sore Affliction for to
want this Assurance, yet I say, the Saints and People of God, have no reason to
be cast down, or discouraged, although they do want the same.

How may that appear?

John, 3.18. you shall find our Savior speaking thus: He that believes on him,
is not condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he
has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God. But now, lest
any poor soul, that would fain believe, and cannot, should be afflicted, and
troubled at these words; therefore says our Savior Christ, in the following
words, I will tell you wherein lies the damnableness of Unbelief; verse 19. This
is the Condemnation (he speaks in relation to the words before) And this is the
Condemnation, That Light is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their deeds are evil. For every one that does evil, hates
the light; neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, or
discovered: This Light is Christ. Now therefore, Do thou hate the Light,
Christ? and therefore keep from it, lest thy deeds should be discovered? Or
rather on the contrary, Do thou not know there are evil deeds in thy life,
and much evil in thy heart? and do thou not therefore desire to come to
Christ, who is the true Light, that thy deeds may be discovered, and thy sin
amended? Then, though thou can not believe as thou would, and though thou
do want Assurance, and though thou have much Unbelief in thee, the Lord
Jesus Christ has spoken it, Thou shall never be ^^ndemned to all Eternity for
this want, but the Lord Christ will pardon this unto thee: and therefore
certainly, upon this account, Gods People have no reason for their
discouragement.



Heb. (...) festinavit, celeriter motus fuit, vel cum timore fugit.

Septuag. (...).

Chald: Paraph. (...) in fuga.

Hierom, in stupore meo. Vnde metuebatur suspicio firma fit certitudo. Bernard.

Apud Gersonem memini me legisse narra iunculam etc. resert ille se^ n^vi^fe
hominem pium pulsa tum et vexatum crebris dubitationibus etiam in fidei
articulo qui enim ad extremum in tantam lucem veritatis et certitudinis
introductus est ut nulla resderet vacillatio in ejus anima neque plus dubitaret
de ea re quam de vita sua, quinetiam addit hanc certitudinem non ex nova
alicujus ratione aut demonstratione ortum fuisse, sed ex captivatione
intellectus atque abmirabili quadam Dei illuminatione a mentibus aeternis.
Davenant. Colos. cap. 2. p. 160.

(...) nequaquam; duplex negatio fortius negat.

Fieri non potent ut been de fide scribat aut recte Scripta been intelligat,
qui non spiritum ejusdem urgentibus tribulationibus aliquando gustaverit.

Luther.


As for their own good: Thereby they do gain experience; thereby they come to
see the emptiness, and nothingness, of all their own righteousness. David
says, (ye know the Scripture) Psalm. 116. I said in my have, all men are Liars.
The words in the Hebrew, may be read, I said in my shaking; I said in my
shaking, all men are Liars. David was shaken by men, and then he saw that men
were Liars. So, when a man is shaken in his own righteousness, then he sees the
emptiness, and the lying disposition of it; and, I pray, when is a man's own
righteousness more shaken, than when he does want assurance of Gods Love?
Thereby also, a man comes to get more, and stronger assurance of Gods Love;
Certissimum est, quod certum est post incertitudinem; That is most certain,
that is certain after uncertainty: The shaken Tree grows the strongest. It is
observed of Thomas, that of all the Apostles, he cried out, and said, My Lord,
and My God. Two My's, not one My; My Lord, or My God: but two My's, My Lord,
and My God. Two My's, Why? Because he had had two No's before, Unless I may put
my finger into his side, I will not believe. So you read it; but in the
Original, there are two No's, I will not, not believe; a double Not. And as
there was two No's of Unbelief, so there is two My's of Faith. So far as a good
man is sunk in Unbelief, so far he will rise in Faith; so much as a man is
shaken by Unbelief, and in the want of Assurance, so much he will rise unto
Assurance, and be confirmed, and settled in it.

And as for Others: A man is never more fit to comfort, to relieve, to satisfy
others in their fears, than when he has been in fears, and doubting himself.
It is a good Speech that Maldonet has out of Bernard; Citius quidem ego qui
infirmus sum; I would rather believe doubting Thomas, than confident Peter: I
would rather believe poor doubting Thomas, than Peter that never doubted.
Thomas having once doubted, knew how to deal with a poor doubting soul. Thus, I
say, God does order the want of the Assurance of his Servants, unto their Own,
and Others good: and therefore no reason, that they should be cast down, and
quite discouraged, although they do want Assurance for the present.

Thirdly: If a man, a gracious man, may have comfort; yea, and live
comfortably, although he do want Assurance, then he has no reason to be quite
discouraged, in case he want it. Now, though it may seem a Paradox to you, yet
you shall find a Truth in it; I say, a man thae has no Assurance for the
present, may have Comfort; yea, he may live comfortably, if things be rightly
ordered. For, He that has no Assurance, may have Hope, and Hope is
comfortable; He that has no Assurance, may yet rely upon Jesus Christ, and
stay his soul upon Christ; and in all relyance, there is some comfort. He that
has no Assurance, may be justified, and being justified by faith, we have
peace with God. He that has no Assurance, may submit unto Gods Commandments;
and says the Psalmist, The entrance into thy Commandments, gives Light: and
so Comfort. In keeping thy Commandments, there is great reward: and so
Comfort. Citius quidem ego qui infirmus sum crediderim Thomae dubitanti et
pulpanti quam Petro audienti et credenti. Maldon in Nov. Test. p. 34.
It is a comfortable thing (says Solomon) to behold the Light: and in all
light, there is some Comfort. Now God is light, and the free Grace and Love of
God is light, which a man may behold, that has no Assurance, You do sometimes
take a great deal of Contentment in the reading of a Story; I do not mean a
Scripture Story, but in other Books, I say, a man sometimes takes a great deal
of contentment in reading of a Story, although it does not concern him; for,
says he, although this Story does not concern me, yet I take a complacency,
and contentment in the reading of it, because here I read of the Valor of such
a man; and of the Faithfulness of such a man to his friend; and of the
excellent Carriages and Virtues of men. Now (my Beloved) is there no excellency
in God himself to content the soul? Is there no Faithfulness in God? Is there
no Love and Mercy in God himself? Is not the Lord, the God of all Consolation,
and God of Mercy, without relation to my Condition? Is there not an Ocean of
Excellent Love and Grace in God himself? How many sweet Stories of Love and
Grace, may you read in this little Book of the Bible? Besides, a man that has
no Assurance, now and then may have some Promise thrown into his Soul, to
uphold him with. When Elijah was by the Brook, and could not enjoy the ordinary
meat of the Land, a Raven brought him meat: And when ever was any godly man in
such a condition, but he had one Raven or other to bring him Comfort? Sometimes
a Temptation is a Raven, God makes it so; sometimes a Desertion is a Raven;
sometimes Affliction; sometimes a Particular Word and Promise is thrown into his
soul; and is there no comfort there? I say, though a man do want Assurance for
the present, he may live comfortably. Surely therefore, a Godly man has no
reason for his discouragement, although for the present he does want Assurance.

But I do not only want this settled Assurance of Gods Love, and so the ordinary
food of the Land; but I have no Raven to bring me any Comfort: I mean, I have
no Promise, no particular Word, to bring in Comfort unto my soul, and to uphold
me in my dark condition: th^^gh I do want a settled Assurance, yet if I had a
particular Word, and Promise, to uphold my soul, until I had this Assurance, I
should not be discouraged; but I want this settled Assurance, and I have no
particular Word or Promise to uphold my soul with, until it come; and therefore
I am thus discouraged, have I not reason now?

not this latter, in as good a Condition as the other? Thus it is, I say, with
all the Servants of God, Having therefore these Promises, says the Apostle,
etc. 2. Cor. 7.1.

Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not commit adultery?
Does this word of Command belong to you? Yea surely, for the Command says,
Thou, and Thou, and Thou shall not, etc. and that word Thou, does include Me;
the word of Promise has its Thou, and Thee, and Thy also. Psalm. 37. Trust in
the Lord, and do good, so shall Thou dwell in the Land, and verily Thou shall
be fed, ver. 3. Delight Thy self in the Lord, and he shall give Thee the desire
of Thy heart, ver. 5. And if you put your self within the compass of the
Commandments, Thou, God will put you within the compass of the Promises, Thou.
3. If you may, and it be your Duty, to rest on the Promise, then it belongs to
you: now, you may rest on the Promise of Grace, and Holiness, for
Sanctification, and it is your Duty so to do; else it were no sin not to rest
on the Promise: but unbelief, and not resting on the Promise, is a sin: only ye
must know, that there is a great difference, between the Promise of
Consolation, and the Promise of Sanctification; to apply the Promise of
Comfort, without endeavor after Holiness, is presumption: but to apply the
Promise of Sanctification, that I may be more holy, is no presumption, but my
Duty; and if it be your Duty to apply, and rest on this Promise, then it
belongs to you.

O! but yet, When I go unto the Word, or the Scripture, I find, that Gods
Promise still runs upon some Condition; and I cannot perform that Condition, I
do not find that condition in my self: and therefore I fear, that I may not go
unto these Promises, and that I have no right to them.

Nehemiah, chap. 1, and there you will find, That the Jews being in Captivity,
Nehemiah goes unto God in prayer, and does press the Promise which God had made
unto the Jews by his Servant Moses; verse 8. Remember, I beseech thee, thy Word
that thou commandedst thy Servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will
scatter ye abroad among the Nations: but if ye turn unto me, and keep my
Commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast unto the utmost part
of the Earth, yet will I gather them from thence, and I will bring them unto
the place that I have chosen to set my Name there. Now these are thy Servants,
and thy People, whom thou have redeemed by thy great Power. The Jews in Babylon
were scattered according to the Word; but alas! they did not return unto the
Lord, and leave their sins, according to the Condition of the Promise; yet
notwithstanding, Nehemiah goes unto the Lord, and presses this Ptomise, and
the Lord heard him, and he had acceptance, as ye find in the following Chapter.

Chron. 6.37, 38. Joel, 2.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. But in another Promise,
Repentance is the thing promised, Ezekiel. 36.26. I will take away the heart of
stone, and give you an heart of flesh. In one Promise, Faith, and coming to
Christ is the Condition; Come unto me all ye that are weary, and. and I will
give you rest, Matthew. 11.28. But in another Promise, it is the thing promised;
John 6.37. All that the Father gives me, shall come unto me. In one Promise,
Obedience is the Condition of it; Esai. 1.19. If ye consent and obey, ye shall
eat the good of the Land: In another Promise, it is the thing promised; Ezekiel.
36. I will put my Spirit into you, and cause ye to walk in my ways. In one
Promise, Perseverance is the Condition; Matthew. 24. He that continues to the
end, shall be saved: But in another Promise, it is the thing promised; Psalm. 1.
His Leaf shall not wither: Ezekiel. 36. I will put my fear into your hearts, and
ye shall not depart from me. In one Scripture of the old Testament, the coming
of the deliverer is promised to the Jews, upon condition that they turn from
ungodliness, Esai. 59.20. The Redeemer shall come out of Zion, and unto them
that turn from ungodliness in Jacob. But in another Scripture in the New
Testament, turning Jacob from ungodliness is the thing promised; Romans 11.26.
There shall come out of Zion, the Deliverer, and turn ungodliness from Jacob.
Now if the Condition in one Promise, be the thing promised, in another Promise,
will ye fear that the Promise does not belong to you, because ye have not
performed the Condition?

Do this, and live: and Adam, the first man, stood as a common person for us
all, to perform the Condition of Doing: and if Adam had performed the
Condition, we all had performed the condition. Now, the Lord makes a new
Covenant of Grace with man, and the Lord Jesus Christ is a Second Adam, and he
stands as a Common Person, and if he perform the Condition, then all his Seed
do perform the Condition. Now the Lord Jesus Christ has performed the
Condition for all his Seed: although the first Adam did not perform the
Condition for his Seed, yet the Second Adam has performed the Condition of the
Promise, and of the Covenant, for his Seed to the full. Now if all these Three
things be true, namely, That a man may go to the Promise, the Conditional
Promise with acceptance, although he has not performed the Condition; That the
Condition of one Promise, is the thing promised, in another Promise; That the
Lord Jesus Christ, has performed the Condition of the Promise for you, better
than you can perform it: Have ye then, any reason to be discouraged, and to
keep off from the Promise, because you have not performed the Condition? But so
it is, That a Child of God may go to a Conditional Promise with acceptance,
although he has not performed the Condition; And the Condition of one Promise,
is the thing promised in another; And the Lord Jesus, our Second Adam, has
performed the Condition of all the Promises, for all his Seed: Surely
therefore, you have no reason to be discouraged in this respect.

But this is not my case; For, I do not only want Assurance of Gods Love, and
have no particular Promise; but instead of the Promise, I have a Threatening
set upon my soul: O! the bitter words of the Threatening, have soaked into my
heart. Time was heretofore ind^ed, that I had a Promise, I could say, I had a
Promise, and I rejoiced in it; but now, I have lost my Promise, and instead of
the Promise, a Threatening is come: O! I see! the smart, and the anger of the
Threatening; and have I not just cause and reason to be discouraged now?

No: For,

Is the Threatening therefore come? then is the Promise a coming; for the
Threatening is given forth in order to that.

Joshua: The Lord gave Joshua a gracious Promise; I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee: Be strong, be not dismayed, be not afraid, be of good courage,
for, I will not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Josh. 1. But the Children of
Israel were a little discomfited by the men of Ai, and see how Joshua lost the
sight of the Promise; in Josh. chap. 7. verse. 6, 7. Joshua rent his Clothes,
and fell to the Earth upon his face, before the Ark of the Lord, he and the
Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads, and said, Alas, O Lord God,
wherefore have thou at all brought this People over Jordan, to deliver us into
the hands of the Amorites, to destroy us? Would to God we had been content to
dwell on the other side Jordan. O! what Unbelief is here! what discouragement
is here! how had he lost the Promise! O! Lord, says he, what shall I say, when
Israel turns their backs before their Enemies! and O! what shall we say, when
Joshua turned his back upon the Promise! But so it was with Joshua here, he had
lost the sight of the Promise which once he had. And as for the Threatening;
you know how it was with David: having sinned greatly in the matter of Vriah,
the Lord threatens him, That the Sword should never depart from his House: And
the Threatening did take hold upon him, and David was under the stroke of the
Threatening: But was not Joshua Godly? and was not David Godly? So then, a
Godly man may possibly lose the sight of the Promise, and have a Threatening
set on his soul too.

Joshuah knew this so well, that he professes to the Lord, That therefore he
fled to Tarshish, because, says he, O Lord, I knew that thou art a merciful
God. As if he should say, I knew, O Lord, thou art so merciful a God, that
though thou have threatened Nineveh, yet thou will reverse thy Threatening. But
a Promise once given unto a soul, shall never be reversed or repealed. It may
rise up to an Oath (as sometimes it does) for, when God gives a Promise to a
soul, and opposition arises, if then God gives out the same Promise again, it
amounts to an Oath; As I live* says the Lord, I will never reverse this
Promise that I have made to thee. But a Promise once given, shall never be
reversed, or re^ealed: Gal. 3. you have the case that is now before you: Says
Paul, at verse 15. I speak after the manner of men; though it be but a man's
Covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth, or adds thereunto. Now
to Abraham, and his Seed, were the Promises made. And therefore (says the
Apostle) the Promise shall not be disanulled, although the Law came after the
Promise. But if the Promise that the Lord gave to Abraham, was not disanulled
by the Law, that came four hundred and thirty years after; verse 17. Wherefore
then serves the Law? Verse 19, he tells you, It was added because of
transgression. So now say you, If that the Promise that God has given
heretofore, be not disanulled, and made void, by the Threatening that follows
after, wherefore then was the Law, or the Threatening given unto my soul? It
was added because of transgression: God had some transgression of yours to
discover unto you, that you did not think of, and therefore the Threatening,
and the Law came after. But the Promise is quite out of sight, and I have lost
it. And did not the Jews also lose the sight of the Promise which was given to
Abraham? When the Lord gave the Law, and they stood quaking and trembling
before Mount Sinai, did not they then lose the sight of the Promise that was
given to Abraham? So say I, although thou have lost the sight of the Promise
that once thou had, and a threatening be come in the room of it, the Promise
that was once given thee (it may be four hundred and thirty days ago, or many
years ago) shall never be disanulled, or reversed: And the reason is this;
Because God does not repent in the matter of the Gospel. Ye read in Scripture,
that God is said sometimes to repent, It repented the Lord that he made man;
sometimes it is said, that the Lord does not repent, I am not a man that I
should repent: How are these two reconciled, God does repent, and God does not
repent? Thus to our present Purpose: God repents as to the matter of the
Threatening, but God never repents as to the matter of the Promise: God repents
as to the matter of the Threatening, and therefore says the Lord to Jeremiah,
I am weary of my repenting; I have threatened, and threatened, and I am weary
of threatening. Here God repented as to the matter of the threatening; but God
never repents as to the matter of the Promise. And therefore, says the
Apostle, in Romans 11. The Gifts and Calling of God, are without Repentance. And
the Promise is a great Gift. So then, as to the matter of the Promise, God does
never repent. Wherefore, poor soul, have thou a Promise given thee, may be five
years ago, may be ten years ago, may be twenty years ago, and have thou lost
the sight of this Promise? and instead of the Promise, is there a Threatening
come upon thy soul, that makes thy heart quake and tremble? I here tell thee
from the Lord, the Promise that was once given unto thee, though now thou have
lost the sight of it, shall never be repealed, or recalled. O! what matter of
encouragement is here! is here matter of discouragements? nay rather, here is
matter of great encouragement.

but yet this is not my case; I do not only want Assurance of Gods love; but I
have Assurance of Gods displeasure: I do not only want Assurance of my
Salvation, but I have Assurance of my damnation: I do not only want the
testimony of the spirit, bearing witness with my spirit, that I am the child of
God, but I have another testimony within my soul, bea^ing witness to me, that I
am a reprobate: and have I not cause to be discouraged?



Francis Spira, notorious for his despair; when his friends came to comfort
him, having spoke comfortable words unto him, That he said why go ye about to
comfort me? comfort belongs not to me, for I am a reprobate. O! said one of his
friends, do not say so, for none are able to say so, yes, said he, as the elect
of God, have a spirit within them, bearing witness, that they are the children
of God; so reprobates have another spirit, bearing witness with their spirits,
that they are not the children of God, but the children of Satan; and such a
spirit of reprobation have I. But my beloved, if there be such a spirit, or a
testimony of reprobation as this is, either it must be, from the spirit of God,
or from the spirit of Satan: if from the spirit of Satan, then he is a liar,
not to be believed; if it be from the spirit of God, how does it suit with the
word? for the spirit of God, is called the Comforter; can such a spirit of
reprobation come from the comforter? and if you have such a testimony as this
is, either you must have it from the word, or from the spirit of God alone,
without the word; if from the word, then from the threatening: for it is not
from the promise, nor from the command: if from the threatening, a threatening
may be repealed, a threatening, may be reversed, as you have heard, and if you
have it from the spirit of the Lord, how can it be, that the spirit should be
called a Comforter? surely therefore, if you have such a spirit of reprobation
in your bosom, it is from Satan, and he is a Liar. But (my beloved) I will in
this appeal to you, whether do you not think, that there is many a soul now in
heaven, that whilst he lived, said, I am sure to go to hell; you know that
ordinary Story of the woman, that took a glass in her hand, and throwing it on
the ground, said, As sure as this Glass breaks, I shall be damned: and the
Glass broak not. Well then, thy condition is not alone, others of Gods people
may be, and have been led in this way of temptation, and therefore no reason
why thou should be cast down, or discouraged.

But yet, this does not reach my case or condition, For, I do not only want the
Assurance of Gods love, and of mine own Salvation; but I have wanted Assurance,
this two, this four, this six, this eight, this ten years; and I have continued
so long, doubting in unbelief, and my heart is so hardened with it, that I am
afraid; I shall never be healed or saved: O! I have sat under such and such
precious Gospel-means, and if ever I should have Assurance of Gods love, I
should have had it before this: I have sat under many a comfortable Sermon,
and under the Gospel preached many years, and yet have no Assurance of my
Salvation, surely, if the Lord would ever have bestowed Assurance upon me, I
should have had it ere this, but still unbeleeving, and still I do want
Assurance, and my heart hardened under unbelief, and therefore I am thus
discouraged, have I not cause and reason now?

Isa. 46. you shall see, what a Gracious promise the Lord makes unto
hard-hearted sinners, An invitation and promis together, verse. 12. and 13.
hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness I bring near
my rightousness, it shall not be far off* and my Salvation, it shall not tarry,
O! but, I have no r^ghteousness, to lay my assurance upon, well, yet says the
Lord, never speak of thy righteousness, man, I will bring near my righteousness.
O! but, my heart is dead, and hard and stout. Then hearken unto me ye
stout-hearted, ^aith God, O! but, I am far off from righteou^ness. Be it so,
yet hearken to me ye stout-hearted that are far from righteousness, I will b^ing
near my righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my Salvation shall not tarry.



draw near with full Assurance of Faith, Assur^nce of Faith comforts, but the
^eliance of faith saves. It is po^^^ble, that a man or woman may have such an
Assurance, as that they never doubted of Gods love; Prima pars salutis est
nullam sperare salutem.

Ideo terret nos ira Dei ut ad fiduciam illius nos urgeat. Luther.


but ordinarily, a man never had assurance of his Salvation, that never doubted
of his Salvation. The first step to Salvation, is to see that there is no
Salvation, we must go to heaven, by hell gates, and he that is not troubled
sometimes with Satan, is possessed by him. I say, ordinarily, a man never had
Assurance of his Salvation, that never doubted of his Salvation; a man may have
true saving faith, that yet has no Assurance of his Salvation. This is the
first.

So that they were examples to all that believed. 1 These. 1.7. yet in Chap. 3.
verse. 10. The Apostle says, There was something lacking in their faith. Night
and day praying exceedingly, that we might see your face, and might perfect
that which is ^acking in your faith. Something was lacking in their faith, yet
they were examples of faith unto all the Churches.

am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: in another place, she says, I sought
him whom my soul loves, and I found him not: I opened to my beloved, and he
was gone, and my heart failed; I called and he answered not.

Rev. 3. ye read thus of the Churches of Laodicea, at verse. 16. So then,
because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will spew thee out of my
mouth, I would thou were cold or hot verse. 15. These were very wicked; had
these people any thoughts of mercy? or did they think their spiritual condition
was good? R^^d verse. 17. Because thou say I am rich, and increased with
goods, and have need of nothing: and know not that thou art wretched, and
miserable, and poor, and blind and naked. So that, I say, a wicked man, may
think his condition good, and yet it may be very naught. Yea daily experience
tells us, besides the Parable of the foolish Virgins, That he may die in these
persuasions. So, on the contrary, a man may think his condition naught, and go
fearing and trembling a long while, yea, even die under these fears, yet his
condition may be very good. (Consider it rightly) I know indeed, ordinarily,
God does come in with some comfort or other unto a child of God before he dies;
but I would be loath to say, and you will be loath to think, that certainly,
that man goes to hell, that doubts of his Salvation, or that dies doubting of
his Salvation. No, possibly a man may doubt, and fear, and doubt long, even die
doubting, without a settled assurance of Gods love; yet he may go to Heaven, and
be saved for ever. What then, though thou have stayed long, and have long
wanted Assurance, yet God has not led thee so far, as he has led some, and
thy condition is no other, than that which may befall the dear servants and
children of God.



For the Patient abiding of the meek, shall no^ be forgotten for ever: Psalm. 9.
As the way to have affliction continued, is to be discontented under it, so
the way to have it removed, is to be contented with it. There is a Faith of
Expectance, a Faith of Relyance, and the Faith of Assurance. The Faith of
Expectance, will rise up into a Faith of Reliance, and the Faith of Reliance, to
the Faith of Assurance, there is seldom a may-be Faith, but has a shal-be, and
it is at the bottom, if God would make it float.

David, so he dealt by Israel, so he will deal by thee.

Psalm. 84.11.
for ye know what the Psalmist says, The Losd will give Grace and Glory: and no
good thing will he withold from them that walk uprightly. If therefore (I say)
thy heart has been upright in the matter of thine assurance, the Lord will give
thee assurance, though for the present thou want it. Now I pray, when is a
man's heart upright in the matter of his Assurance, but when he does desire
Assurance of Gods love, and of his own Salvation, rather that he may praise,
and serve God the more, than for his own comfort. For this look in Psalm. 9. and
see how David reasons to this purpose. verse. 13. 14. Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that
liftest me up from the gates of death: That I may show forth al thy praise in
the gates of the daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in thy Salvation. Here are
three things observable, First, he was in a very low condition, at the gates of
death: From the gates of death, says he. Gates of death, that is, the power of
death: The gates of Hell shall not prevail, that is, the powers of Hell shall not
prevail; so here, the gates of death, that is, the powers of death. David was
under the power of death, at the gates of death, and now in this condition, he
prays unto the Lord for mercy, that the Lord would lift him up, but why does
he pray so? mark his end. At verse. 14. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, consider my
trouble, why? That I may show forth thy praise in the gates of the daughter of
Zion: O Lo^d, bring me from the gates of death, that I may praise thee in the
gates of the daughter of Zion, not for my own comfort, Lord, but that I may
prais^ thee. Well, but what inference does he make of this? see what follows in
the latter end of verse. 14. I will, or shall rejoice in thy Salvation, O Lord, my
heart has been upright in this petition, and now I know thou will grant my
prayer, I will, I shall, rejoice in thy Salvation.



Wait on God, or hope in God, for I shall yet praise him, why? for he is the
health of my countenance. but when is God said to be the health of our
countenance? when his smiles make us look cheerly, and his frowns make us look
sadly; if I look well when God smiles, though al relations frown; and do look
il, when God frowns, though al my relations smile; then is God the health of my
countenance. Now I appeal to you, (beloved) you that do want Assurance, has it
not been thus with you? Do ye not earnestly desire Assurance, yet are content
to stay, wait, and go without it, if God will have it so? Has not the Lord
shown wonders for thy soul, (when thou have been in a wildered condition) in
preserving, and keeping thee from doing evil to thy self? and have not you been
upright in the matter of your Assurance, saying thus; O Lord, give me Assurance
of thy love, not that I may have comfort only, but that I may be more fit to
serve thee? And have ye not praised the Lord in your sad condition for what you
have? And has not the Lord been the health of your countenance, so that when
the Lord has smiled upon you, then you have looked well; and when the Lord has
frowned upon you, then you have looked il? surely, you cannot but say, I must
not deny these things, I cannot be faithful to mine own soul, if I should deny
them, yea Lord, thou know, and my soul knows it, That thou have done
wonders for me, when I have been in a low, desert, and wildered condition. And
O Lord, thou know, I desire Assurance of thy love, not for my own comfort
only, but that I may be more sit to praise, and serve thee. And Lord, thou
know, I have praised thee in some measure for what I have Yea, Lord, thou
art the health of my countenance; when thou smilest upon me, then I look well,
and when thou frownest upon me, then I look ill: I may say in truth, the Lord
is the health of my countenance: well then, I say unto thee from the Lord, go in
peace, and be of good comfort, though thou do for the present want comfort,
and Assurance of thy Salvation, thou shall have it in due time. And if al these
things be true, O! you that are the people of the Lord, have you any reason to
be discouraged? certainly you have not, therefore why should you not check your
selves, as David here, and say, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art
thou disquieted within me?

Only by the way, Let no man mis-apply this Doctrine, saying, If we should not
be discouraged, although we do want Assurance, then I will neglect the getting
of my Assurance. Beloved! ye see into what times we are now fallen, times of
War, and Rumors of War, times of Blood, these are dying times; and is this a
time for any of you to want Assurance of Gods Love? When your Hay lies abroad
in the Summer, and you see a shower coming, you say, Cock up, Cock up: And I
would to God you might not see showers a coming, and yet your Evidences for
Heaven lie at random; Wherefore, in the Name of the Lord, Cock up, Cock up; and
you that have false Assurance (for you have heard that a man may think his
condition is good, when it is naught, yea, that he may die so too) look you
well into your condition, and consider your condition duly, this is no time to
have false Assurance: labor then, to get true Assurance; and you that have
Assurance, labor to grow up more and more into it, and the riches thereof.

But suppose for the present I do want Assurance; I confess indeed, I ought not
to be discouraged, although I do want Assurance, as I have heard; but it is an
hard thing to bear up ones heart against all discouragem^nts, in the want of
the Assurance of Gods Love: In Sola Christi morte totam siduciam tuam
constitue, huic morti te totum commit, hac morte te totum contege eique te
totum involve, si Dominus te voluerit judicare, dic Domine, mortem nostri Jesu
Christi objicio inter me et te et judicium tuum aliter tecum non contendo
ipsius meritum affero promerito meo quod habere debuissem et heu non habeo.
Anselm in Meditat.

Cavendum est in lucta cum Deo ne fragili fundamento innitaris quod ille facit
qui de meritis suis confidit, nam ut ille qui solis meritis suis innititur Deo
auxilio seipsum private, sic qui de seipso to^aliter diffidit et soli gratiae
innititur Dei adjutorium ad se trahit. Parisiensis in Lib. de Rhetor. Div.

Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae tutissimum est siduciam totam sola
Dei miserecordia reponere. Bellarm. Lib. 5. de Justif. cap. ^.


but suppose I do want it for the present, what shall I now do, that I may bear
up against Discouragements in this Condition?

Answ. Some few things by way of Direction here, and so I conclude this
Argument.

First therefore, Do thou want Assurance of Gods Love, and of thine own
Salvation? Labor more and more, for to put to Sea, I mean, to the Sea and Ocean
of Gods Love, and the deeps of Christ's Merit and Satisfaction. When you are at
Sea in a Storm, or stress of Weather, you desire Sea-room, and if ye have
Sea-room enough, ye think all is well: It may be, there are some Passengers in
the Vessel, or Ship, and they say, For the Love of God set us ashore, we are
not able to ride out this storm; O! set us upon some Land or other: But the
skilful Mariner says, Nay, but still keep to Sea, if ye come to the Shore we
are undone, we are all lost Creatures. So in this case; the time of the want of
your Assurance, is a storm-time, it is a time of great stress upon your soul;
and if ye skill not the Methods of Christ, you will say, O! now set me upon some
Duty, upon the Coast of mine own Righteousness, or mine own Holiness: but if
you have a skill in the way of the Gospel, you will rather cry out, and say, O!
Lord, keep my soul in the Ocean of thy free Love, Sea-room, Sea-room, and all
is well enough. Now there is Sea-room enough in the Ocean of Gods free Love, and
of Christ's Merits, and Satisfaction; but if you touch upon your own
Righteousness, you do but endanger your soul, and sink your own heart into more
despairing doubts and fears; stand off therefore now from your own Shore, and
keep to Sea, even that great Sea of Gods Love, and Christ's Merits.

Secondly: If you do want Assurance, Take heed that you do not hearken unto any
thing out of an Ordinance, contrary unto the comfort which the Lord speaks to
you in the time of an Ordinance. Ye come to an Ordinance, and there the Lord
begins to comfort you, so you go away, and ye are satisfied, and your souls are
refreshed; but then afterward, you sit down, and parley with Satan, and with
your own souls; and ye lose all again, and doubt again, turning Gods Wine into
your own Vinegar, and are unsatisfied again. But suppose that a Father should
give an Estate of Land unto his Child, and make it over to him with the best
Conveyance that the Law can provide; and then this Son having laid down his
Conveyance some where negligently, a cunning Lawyer (that he may get Money from
him) should come and write on the backside of this Conveyance, For such and
such Reasons, this Conveyance is naught: Should the Son do well thereupon to
say, my Father has done nothing for me, I have been deceived all this while,
my Father has given me nothing? Were this fair dealing with his Father? and if
he should run this course, should he ever have any Assurance of his Land firm
in his own thoughts? Now, so it is with you that are the People of God; the
Lord has given you a fair Inheritance; Heaven is your Inheritance, the fairest
and best Inheritance; the Lord has given it you under Hand and Seal, and
sometimes you think your Evidence is clear, and you lay it by, and Satan comes,
and scribbles on the back of it, and he says, it is naught; and you believe
it, and then you doubt again, and you are unsatisfied again: Is this fair
dealing with God? Surely no. Wherefore then, do thou want Assurance? The way
to get it, and the way not to be discouraged in the want of it, is this: Take
heed that ye never hearken to any thing, out of an Ordinance, contrary to the
Comfort which you have received in an Ordinance.



his heart dies not; but if the Physician says to him, Sir, you are in a great
and dangerous Fever, and I would wish you to settle your Estate, and look out
for comfort for your soul, for the truth is, you will never be recovered; then
his heart dies. So here, take a poor soul that wants Assurance, If he says,
there is hope that I may be assured, he is not discouraged: but if he says, I
have no Assurance, and I shall never have it, then he is quite discouraged; it
is this word, Never, that does discourage: O! I shall never be encouraged, and I
shall never have Assurance, and I shall never have the Testimony of Gods
Spirit. Take heed that you do not say, I shall never be Assured, that is a
Temptation; take heed of the word Never, in this case.

hope, through Grace, I am in some measure Obedient, and the less Assurance I
have, the more kindly God takes my Obedience at my hand: and therefore, why
should I be discouraged, or cast down? Think, and think often of this Rule; and
it will help you to be obedient, and bear up your hearts also in the want of
Assurance.

And thus I have done with the Fourth Instance.
A LIFTING UP In case of TEMPTATION.
Sermon VIII.
PSALM, 42.11. Stepney, May, 28. 1648.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


Instance 5.
SOmetimes the Discouragements of the Saints, are drawn, From their
Temptations.

And thus they Argue with themselves: I am a poor Creature, that has labored
under many Temptations, never any so tempted as I have been: These two, three,
four, five, six, or many years, that I have lain under these Temptations, and
no relief comes, no help comes; have I not reason then to be discouraged, and
cast down?

and more heavy is that Affliction to a gracious Spirit. Now, though God does
so overruled the Temptations of his People, that they receive good thereby, (as
appears afterward) yet the Temptation in it self, does indispose a man unto
what is good. The more a man is tempted unto what is evil, the more a man is
hindered from what is good: It is an Affliction to a gracious heart, to be
conflicting, fighting, and combating with a man; but in Temptations, we do
combat and conflict immediately with Satan, who is the Prince of the Air; with
Principalities, and Powers; with that evil One, who for his devouring Nature,
is called, a Lion; for his Cruelty, is called, a Dragon; and for his subtilty,
an old Serpent: and in every Temptation, a poor soul goes into the field with
Satan, and fights a Duel with him. Satan has (says Christ to Peter) desired
you; in which Duel, and Combat, a man does not miscarry for this present Life
barely; but if he miscarry, he miscarries to all Eternity, he dies, is killed,
and slain to all Eternity: O! what a mighty hazard does a poor soul ^un in
every Temptation! The Chaste, and good Woman, counts it an Affliction to her, so
long as she lives, if she be but once violenced; if a filthy person meet her in
the field, and violence her, though she do not consent unto him; she wrings her
hands, and says, I am undone for ever. Now, these Temptations, are the
Solicitations of an unclean Spirit, and what though a man do not consent unto
them, yet thereby his soul suffers violence; O! says a gracious soul, what
though I do not consent, yet what an infinite misery is it to be thus abused,
defiled, and violenced by these Temptations! The more any affliction does seize
on soul and body, the greater it is: it is Comfort in a Family, that the Wife
is well, when the Husband is sick; or that the Husband is well, when the Wife
is down: where both are down at once, it is a sad Family indeed. So, though the
Soul be afflicted, yet if the Body be well, although the Body be afflicted, yet
if the Spirit be well, it is some comfort; but where both are down, the
Condition is sad: and seldom does any great Temptation befall a man, but Soul
and Body are both down at once; though at first it falls upon the Spirit, yet
it descends into, and fires the Body. And therefore says Paul, I received a
Messenger of Satan, a thorn in my flesh, buffeting of me: As in the Comforts of
the Holy Ghost, though the Comforts be powered out upon the Soul and Spirit, yet
they run down upon the Body: So, in the troubles of Temptation, though they
seize first upon the inward man, yet they ^un upon the skirts of the outward
man also. And thus you find it with Job, Chap. 7.1. God had put Job into Satan's
hand, only with this reserve, See that thou spare his life. The Devil having
the power; first he loads him with outward Afflictions, and then with inward
Temptations; while he was under his outward Afflictions, how sweetly did he
carry it! Blessing the Lord, saying, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away,
blessed be his Name; but when the Volly of Temptations came, then see what a
sad Condition the good man was in, how he was all on fire, as if Job could not
be found in Job: while he was under these Afflictions, he rebuked his Wife, for
saying, Curse God, and die; but now being under Temptations himself, he wishes
to die, and curses the day of his Birth: In Job, 7.15. My Soul chooses
strangling, and death, rather than my life: but had this Temptation any
influence upon his Body too? It seems his heart, and soul, and spirit, was much
disquieted; for he says, Why have thou set me as a mark against thee? ver. 20.
But was his Body fired with it too? yes, verse 13, 14. When I said, my Bed
shall comsort me, my Couch shall ease my complaint; then thou skarest me with
Dreams, and terrifiest me with visions: As now we find by Experience, many poor
souls cannot sleep while they are under their Temptations; and if you will see
the Sum and up-shot of all, read what he says at verse 20. I am a burden to my
self: and so many now, Why should I live any longer? I am a burden to my
Family, I am a burden to mine Acquaintance, a burden to all my Friends, I am a
burden to my self; who knows the burden of a poor tempted soul, but he that
bears it? Heb. 11.37. Temptations are ranked among the greatest Afflictions;
They were stoned, sawn asunder, were tempted: and in Heb. 2. it is said of our
Savior, That himself suffered being tempted, yet he sinned not under his
Temptation. So that there is somewhat of a suffering in every Temptation,
although one be free from Sin. And in Revel. 12.12. it is said, Woe to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, and of the Sea, for the Devil is come down unto you,
having great wrath. And wherein is his wrath more seen, than in his
Temptations? O! what a sad, and woeful condition is it then, to lie under
Temptations! Yet, let me tell you, though there be some suffering in every
Temptation, and the least temptation is a great Affliction, yet the Saints and
People of God, have no reason to be discouraged or cast down, whatever their
Temptations be.

How may that appear?



First: If Satan do therefore tempt the People of God, that he may discourage
them; then have they no reason to be discouraged because they are tempted by
Satan; I say, if Satan's great design, end, and aim, in all the Temptations of
the Saints, be to discourage them; then they have no reason to be discouraged,
because they are tempted; for then they should gratify Satan, and give him his
end. Now, Satan does tempt that he may tempt; he tempts unto one sin, that he
may tempt unto another; he tempts a man to sin against the Law, that he may
make him sin against the Gospel; and what greater sin against the Gospel, than
unbeleeving discouragements? He knows, or thinks, such and such a person is
gone from his Kingdom, and he says, though I cannot hinder his Salvation, but
he will be saved do what I can, yet I will hinder his Comfort, and make him
draw heavily; and if I can but discourage him in his Duty, I shall in time make
him to cast it off. His great design is to discourage, and therefore whenever
any Godly man is tempted, he should say, well, through the Grace of Christ,
seeing Satan's design is to discourage, my design shall be to bear up my heart
and spirit against all discouragements.

Spain, or Italy, abroad, Quo gravior incumbit tentatio, eo solet indulgentius
agere cum suis Deus. Brightm. Apoc. 2.49.
exposed to great Temp^^tions; is not your pity most toward that Child that is
ab^o^d, and exposed to most Temptations? Your Love may be expressed to him that
is at home, as much anoth^^ (...) but your pitying love is most to him that is
abroad. As in the time of a Storm, great Rain, or Hail, if you have one Child
lie in you^ bo^om, or sitting upon your knee; and another that is abroad in the
op^n fields; though your love in one kind, may run out to him that is upon your
knee; yet, does not your pitying Love run ou^ more to him that is abroad in the
open fields? Thus it is with God; he has two sorts of Children; Some that are
exposed to more temptations, and some that are expos^d to less; though his
Grace, and Love, may run out more in one kind to them that are less tempted,
yet his pitying Love, runs out most unto those that are most tempted. And upon
this account you will find in Scripture, that when God saw any of his Children
were to go into any Sad Temptation, he did either immediately before, in, or
after, more than ordinarily reveal himself unto them; the more you are tempted
by Satan, the more you are pitied by God: it matters not whether your
Temptation be great, or small; if less, you have the less pity; if more, you
have the more pity: why then should you be discouraged, although your
temptations be never so great?

Adam all along; Christus non meruit sibi; Christ did not die for himself, nor
obey for himself; but he did die for us, and obey for us, and all his Seed were
in him* as in a common person; look whatever evils Christ did bear, those he
did bear for us, and we did bear in him, as in our Second Adam; and therefore,
when he was tempted, he stood as a common person in his Temptations, and in him
all the Saints and People of God, who are his Seed, were tempted, and in his
overcoming, they did overcome; for as when the first Adam was tempted, he being
a Common Person, we al were tempted in him; and when he yielded to Satan, we
did all yield in him; when he was overcome, we were overcome in him; and when
he did eat the forbidden fruit, all his Seed did eat in him; and every Child of
Adam may now say, I did then eat the forbidden Fruit: So when Christ was
tempted, all his Seed were tempted in him; and when he overcame, all his Seed
overcame in him. And therefore when you read the Story of Christ's Temptations,
ye are not barely to say, thus, and thus, Christ resisted for my Example; but
in his resisting, I did resist; in his overcoming, I did overcome: for, as I
did eat in the First Adams eating, and yield in the First Adams yielding; so I
did refuse, and resist, and overcome in Christ, the Second Adams refusing,
resisting, and overcoming: Thus with all the Saints, and People of God, who are
the Seed of the second Adam, Christ has not only overcome their Temptations
for them, but in Christ their second Adam, they have overcome Satan, and made a
spoil of Principalities and Powers: and therefore, why should they be
discouraged, whatever their Temptations be?

Tentatio dat intellectum; Temptation gives understanding; tempting times, are
teaching times.

Thereby they are more humbled; For this cause (says Paul) I received a
Messenger of Satan (he speaks it twice) that I might not be exalted.

Thereby they are the more occasioned to live in God, and depend on him. Watch
and pray (says our Savior) lest ye fall into Temptation: Watching does note
our diligence; Praying does note our dependence: And why Watch, and Pray? but,
lest ye enter into Temptation.

Thereby the Grace, and Power, and Might of God in Christ, is the more
discovered, and revealed to them; My Grace is sufficient for thee, says God to
Paul, in the time of his Temptation; a word which he had not heard before.

Thereby their Graces are more increased, as the Israelites were multiplied by
being oppressed. Vnus Christianus tentatus mill Christiani; O^e tempted
Christian, is worth a thousand, says Luther; for as the wind, and breath of
the Bellows (though contrary to the fire) blows up the fire, and increases the
flame thereof; So, though the breath of Temptation be contrary to Grace, yet
thereby Grace is more increased, and raised to a higher flame. When Satan
curses, God blesses; and when God blesses, he says, Increase, and multiply.

Thereby all the Saints are made to triumph over Satan: It is a Christians
Duty, not only to triumph over the World, but over Satan; therefore, says the
Apostle, The God of Peace tread down Satan under your Feet; those are words of
triumph: and Paul in the name of other Christians, triumphs over Principalities
and Powers; How shall a man triumph, if he never have Victory? and how shall he
have the Victory, if he never fights? Therefore God leads his People into the
Field, that they may sight; but in all this Fight, God stands by, Christ stands
by, Love stands by; and God has no design, but of Love, upon his Children in
their Temptations.

Yea, Upon this account our Savior says, That he does appoint unto his
Disciples a Kingdom, because they continued with him in his Temptations, Luke,
22. and shall his Disciples then lie down, and be discouraged, or complain,
because they are with him in his Temptations? Surely they have no cause, they
have no reason for their Discouragements, whatever their Temptations be.

But I have been tempted long, and long, and long assaulted; yet I have no
deliverance.

sin excepted, Heb. 4. Indeed Satan found nothing in him, no tinder to receive
the sparks of his Temptations; but do but abate the sin of his Temptations, and
then, in all points he was tempted as we are, even as much, and as long; for if
you look into Luke, cap. 4. ver. 2. you shall find that he was at one time
tempted forty days; and then when Satan left him, the Text tells us, He left
him for a season, for he was daily tempting of him; and though you have been
long assaulted, has not Satan left you for a season? have you not had some
intermissions, some revives, some breathing times? Job complained, that he was
not suffered to swallow his spittle, he had no breathing time, as he thought:
But though your Temptations have been long, and very long, yet you have had
revives, Satan has lest you for a season: And if that be true, That God has
such an overruling hand of Grace upon your Temptations; that your very
Temptations shall turn to your Good; that thereby you are more enlightened,
humbled, and your Grace increased; then the longer you are in this School, the
better Scholar you shall be; the more enlightened, and the more humbled, and
the more gracious; why should you then be discouraged, though your Temptations
be very long?

But I am tempted many times to doubt of my Child-ship, Whether I be the Child
of God or no.

If thou be the Son of God? wherein Satan labors to draw a cloud upon Christ's
Assurance, and to write an IF, upon his Child-ship, or Sonship. Do you think
to march through your Enemies Country to Heaven, and never be at a stand about
your Condition? Suppose a man should travel through a strange Country which
were very long, wherein he never was before, and wherein are many cross ways;
would you not wonder that ^e should ^ravel all the way, and never be at a stand
about (...), ^ever question his way, whether right, or wrong? If you be the
Child of God, you are now from home, and traveling (...) a strange Country;
and do you think it is possible, (...) ^ould it not be a wonder, that meeting
with so many cross wai^s, you should never be at a stand about your Condition,
or question your way, whether you be right or no? Give me leave to propound you
a Parable: Suppose two men, one goes very brave, fares deliciously, is very
merry, and full of money; yet has no Lands, no Calling, nothing left him, no
friends to maintain him, nor no honest way known to bring him in money, and yet
he is full of it: The other works hard, fares meanly, goes plainly, and he is
often complaining, I fear I shall want, and miscarry, yet he has a Calling, some
Land, good Friends, and some Money: Which of these two think you, does come
most honestly by his Money? Will you not all say, the latter? For, though he
has but little, yet he works, has a Lawful Calling, ways known for to bring
it in. But as for the other, though fine brave, and looks high, yet he has
nothing to bring it in; I sear he comes not well by it. So Spiritually: there
are two sorts of People in the world, One that is very confident of his
Salvation, and full of Comfort, yet he prays not in private, reads not,
meditates not, examineth not his own heart, takes no pains about his soul, but
is often spending, keeping ill company, will be sometimes drunk, swear, and be
unclean, yet he is very confident he shall go to Heaven: The other prays,
hears, reads, meditates, walks with all strictness in his life, and
conversation, yet he is always doubting, and fearing; but through Grace he
has some Comfort: Which of these two, think you, is in the best condition, and
comes most honestly by his Comfort? Will you not say, surely, the latter? for
though he fears, yet he is always doing, working Heavenward: The other,
though confident, and full of Comforts, has no good way for to bring them in,
and therefore surely his Evidence for Heaven is stolen, his Comforts are all
stolen: But as for the other, though he has but little Comfort, yet he comes
truly by it. Thus it may be with you; whilst others swaggering it, and braving
it out with their Comfort, and false Confidence, go to Hell, and perish
everlastingly. It is a sure Rule, That Gods Promise of Mercy, does suppose our
Misery; if he promise health, he supposes our sickness; if he promise Grace,
it supposes our sin. Now, though in the times of the old Testament, God
promised much outward Blessing, yet in the times of the new Testament, the
Mercy promised, is, To send the Comforter; the Spirit who shall bear witness
unto our Spirits, that we are the Children of God: often our Savior says; I
will send the Comfor^^* Why? but to show, that in the times of the Gospel, the
People of God shall labor under doubtings, and be full of fears about their
Spiritual estate; and therefore, though you do doubt of your Child-ship (which
is your evil) yet your state herein, is no other than what may be the state,
and condition of Gods own People in these Gospel times; why therefore should
you be discouraged in this respect?

But I do not only doubt of my Child-ship, I am not only tempted to doubt
whether I be the Child of God or no; but I labor under sad and searful
temptations, I am tempted to strange, and horrid things, such as I fear to
name; I am even tempted to make away my self; tempted with blasphemous
thoughts, to doubt whether there be a God or no; whether the Scripture be true;
and to say, that I have sinned against the holy Ghost; such, and such things I
am tempted to, as my very soul and flesh does tremble at; and have I not just
cause, and reason now, to be discouraged, and cast down?

Austin: Sibi auferendo presentem v^tam, abnegant futuram; Men by taking away
their present life, de^^ themselves their future life: But because (says Mr.
Perkins) (...) ^one this, whose lives have been counted honest, (...) ^ly;
therefore my Sentence is thus: I dare not (...) damned, because of their former
life; and I dare not say they are saved, because of their sinful death; yet for
the Temptation it self, I say, if it do not come to act; as there is no Duty
which a Godly man does perform, but a wicked man may do the same, yet remain
wicked; so, there is no Temptation which a wicked man may yield unto, but a
godly man may be tempted unto, yet remain godly: was not Christ himself tempted
by Satan, to throw himself down from the Pinnacle of the Temple? yet he did it
not: Only my Counsel and Advice from the Lord is; If any be troubled with such
a Temptation, be sure you reveal it, and discover it presently; and as for
those horrid, blasphemous suggestions which lie so heavy upon your souls, which
make your heart and flesh to tremble at the rising of them. Ye have read how it
was with the King of Moab, when he could not break through the Host of Israel,
nor make them cease from following the Victory, he presented unto their view, a
horrible Spectacle, sacrificing on the walls, his own dear Son, and Heir to the
Crown, that so the Israelites being not able to endure the view of that
inhumane sight, might give over the Victory. Thus does Satan do; when he cannot
drive a gracious soul out of the field, any other way, then he presents such
horrid, inhumane suggestions to him, that he may scare him from the good ways
of God: it is not in our power to hinder Satan from presenting these things to
our thoughts. When you come into wicked, ungodly, and profane Company, if they
will swear, and curse, and blaspheme, you cannot hinder them from speaking, nor
your self from hearing; you may sit down, and mourn, saying, O! what Blasphemy
is here! what Cursing is here! but do what you can, they will fill your Ears
with these things: Now Satan being a Spirit, he is able to present these
Blasphemies to your Spirits, and you cannot hinder it: you may cry out and say,
O! what Blasphemy is here! O! what a burden is this to my soul! But he can
present them to you whether you will or not: and did he not present these things
unto Christ himself? All these things will I give thee (says he) if thou will
fall down, and worship me; what greater Blasphemy can be imagined, than that
the God of Heaven and Earth (as Christ was) should worship Satan; yet hereunto
he did tempt our Lord and Savior: And if our God does so order the Temptations
of his Children, as that thereby they are kept from sin, have they any reason
to be discouraged now by these horrid Temptations? Many a man is kept from
other sins: Jerome, Luther, Magdeburgensis, and others, relate a Story of a
certain Martyr, That when the Enemies could not threaten him out of his
Religion; they sent a very handsome, fair, and beautiful Woman to entice him to
folly; and he finding himself to be moved, and his lust begin to work, did bite
off his Tongue, and spit it in her face, thinking that the pain thereof, would
keep him from that fleshly lust, Difficilius est pugnare cum libidine quam cum
cruce.
counting it more ease to combat with pain, than with lust, as Austin speaks,
and hereby he was preserved. I do not speak of this fact to commend it, but
only to show, that God does sometimes keep his Children from lust, by pain. Now
in these blasphemous suggestions, you find a great deal of pain, and if you
were not in these pains, you would be lusting after other evils: God sees what
filthy, vile, lusting hearts you have, and therefore suffers these pains for to
come upon you, and so you are kept from lust: Did you never know a man kept
from lust by these Temptations? yea, did you never know a man converted to God
by occasion of these Temptations? I have, and I think many, many poor souls
that have lived in an ignorant Condition a long time, then it pleased God to
suffer Satan to throw in these Temptations, these horrid Temptations, whereby
they were so amazed, and startled, that thereupon, they looking into their own
condition, were converted unto Jesus Christ. The more delights, and
complacencies a man takes in sin, the more sinful is the sin: the more a man's
flesh trembles, and his soul is burdened under Temptation, the less sinful.
Now, cannot you say in truth, Lord, though these be my greatest burdens, yet
they are my least delights? Yes: Well then, be of good Comfort, the Lord does
but hereby keep you from other sins, and therefore why should you be
discouraged whatever these Temptations be? As for the sin against the Holy
Ghost; He never sins against the Holy Ghost, that fears he has sinned against
the Holy Ghost.

But these are not my Temptations, I praise God, I am free from such: but I
have other great, and strong Temptations, and have no strength to resist them:
I am a poor weak person, a weak young man, or a weak young woman, and I fear I
shall yield unto my Temptations; and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I
not just cause and reason now?

Paul. Possibly a man may be weak in regard of years, and yet may be strong in
regard of Grace, and overcome his Temptations. In 1 John, 2.12, 13, 14. I write
unto you little Children, says the Apostle John. Children he does call them
all, for he was their Father in Christ; and at verse 13. I write unto you
Fathers (says he) because ye have known him that is from the Beginning: I
write unto you young Men, because you have overcome the wicked One: I write unto
you little Children, (says he) because you have known the Father: which
because it is matter of conce^nment, he repeats again at verse 14. I have
written unto you Fathers, because ye have known him that is from the Beginning:
I have written unto you young Men, because you are strong, and you have overcome
the wicked One. There are three sorts of Peo-in the world; some that are old,
and aged; some that are Children; some that are middle aged, and are called
young Men, or young Women. The Aged think that they have no need to learn, they
know as much as the Minister can tell them; therefore says the Apostle here, I
write unto you Fathers. Children think that they are not yet to learn, and they
have time enough before them; therefore says he, I write unto you Children.
Young persons think they should mind their Business, Trades, and Callings;
therefore says he, I write unto you young Men; and I pray mark what he speaks,
words suitable to all these conditions: Old men love Antiquities, and therefore
says he, I write unto you Fathers, because you have known him that is from the
Beginning: Children love to have the Fathers and Mothers Name in their Mouth;
and therefore says he, I write unto you Children, because ye have Known the
Father. Young men are strong, and are fit for fighting, and therefore says he,
I write unto you Young Men, because you have Overcome the Evil One: What evil
one is that, but Satan the Tempter? and of all others, young Men are here said
to overcome the evil One; of all Men, and Women, young Persons do overcome: This
time of young Men, is the overcoming time. And I pray tell me, was David an old
Man when he overcame Goliath? Nay, not thirty years old. Was Joseph an old Man,
when he refused, and overcame the Temptation of his Mistress? Was Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego, old persons when they resisted, and overcame the
Temptation of the King, choosing rather to go into the fiery Furnace than to
yield? Nay, but they are called the three Children; and has not God said, The
young Child shall play upon the hole of the Asp? What is the hole of the Asp, if
Temptation be not? And if you consider that Story of the Israelites Victory,
which God gave them against the Amalekites, ye shall find, that they never had
a more glorious Victory; so great, that they set up an Altar, and called the
name of it, Jehovah Nissi, The Lord my Shield. Yet if you look into Deuteronomy. you
will find, that the Amalekites fell upon them when they were weak, and weary, at
Rephidim, and in this weak, and weary time, they had this glorious Victory.
What therefore though you be weak, and weary, and now are in the Valley of
Rephidim; yet thou may overcome, and have so glorious a Victory, that thou
shall set up an Altar, and call the name of it, Jehovah Nissi; The Lord my
Shield.

O but, I have yielded, and been overcome already in my Temptation.

Praelio, in the Skirmish; and another thing to be overcome in Bello, in the
Battle; those that are overcome in the Skirmish, may overcome in the Battle:
and let me tell you this, That you are never quite overcome, so long as you
keep your weapon in you hand: when a man lies down before his Enemy, and gives
up his weapon, then he is overcome indeed; and when you lie down, and are
discouraged, and give all up, saying, I will pray no more, and hear no more,
and read no more, all is to no purpose; then are you overcome: but til that be,
though you be overcome in the Skirmish, you may overcome in the main Battle;
will you then lie down, and be discouraged? or is there any reason why a Godly
man should be discouraged? No. Surely if this be true, That a man is never
quite overcome till he lie down; then through Grace (every Godly man should
say) I will never give up my weapon: Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Still
wait on God.

But yet all this reaches not my Case, or Condition; for I fear, that
Temptations are not such Temptations as are incident unto Gods People; as my
sin, and spot, is not the spot of Gods People; so that my Temptations are not,
that they are not such as Gods own Children do meet withal; and I rather fear
it, because that since the time that I have set my face toward Heaven, I have
met with such Temptations, as I did never feel before: Surely therefore all is
not right with me; have I not cause then to be discouraged, and cast down?





of Satan with the Godly, and Ungodly.

Matthew. 26. our Savior tells the Disciples, at verse 21. that one of them should
betray him; whereupon, they were all of them astonished, and said every one,
one by one, Lord, is it I? These were good Disciples. Judas yet stirs not: But
at verse 25. it is said, Then Judas which betrayed him, Answered, and said,
Master, is it I? Then, When? Look to verse 24. and you shall read, that our
Savior speaks of the burden, and punishment of his sin; The Son of man goes, as
it is written of him; but woe unto that man, by whom the Son of man is betrayed;
it had been good for that man, if he had not been born. Then Judas answered, Is
it I, Lord? Then he startled. The true, and gracious Disciples of Christ,
startled at the sin, when Christ did but name the sin; but Then, not a word
from Judas: but when Christ speaks of the punishment, and burden of his sin,
then Judas startleth, and not a word from them: So that plainly, a gracious
soul startleth at the Evil of a Temptation, more than the Burden of it; a
wicked man, more at the burden, than at the Evil of it. This is the way of the
Godly, and Ungodly, in their Temptations.

And as for you poor, tempted, doubting Souls, that labor under sad
Temptations, and think it has not been with you, as with others; have you not
even found it thus? Can you not say of a Truth, Lord, My Soul has found it
thus? For after I have sinned, I have been tempted again, to doubt of my
Child-ship, and to sad despair; when I have been tempted to sin, and have
fallen into it, I have laid all upon my self, and said, it is no Temptation,
but this is my own corruption; yea Lord, thou know, my soul has been more
startled at the Evil of the Temptation, than at the Burden; as for the Burden
of my Temptation, I leave that to thee, take it off when thou will; but O that
my soul were freed from the evil of it: Then be of good Comfort, it is no
otherwise with you, than what may be with Gods dearest Children; your spot is
no other, than what may be the spot of Gods own People.

And whereas you say, I fear that al is not right, because I find such
Temptations now, since I have looked toward Heaven, which I did never feel
before.

Peter ever did deny Christ before he was converted to Jesus Christ? Did David
ever number the People whilst he was in the state of Nature? Do you read that
the Children of Israel wanted Water, and Bread, while they were in Egypt, or
that they met with so many Temptations there, as they did after God had
appeared mightily to them? Was not Christ tempted, after baptized, and heard a
voice from Heaven, saying, This is my well beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; Did he ever meet with such Temptations, before he was so declared to
be the beloved Son of God from Heaven?

Job, Jeremiah, and Moses, and al his Children: indeed he does not deal so by
the wicked, he measures them sometimes by one carriage, and they are cast
thereby, that even everlastingly they are cast thereby. Ananias, and Saphira,
lied but once to the Holy Ghost, that we read of, and Satan had a hand therein;
for says the Apostle, Why has Satan filled your heart, that you should lie
unto the Holy Ghost? yet they were cast thereby. It was but one Act that Saul
did when he spared Agag, and the Fatlings, yet he was cast thereby. It was but
one act that Adam did, and Eve did, when they did eat the forbidden Fruit, and
Satan tempted them to it, yet they were cast thereby, and al Mankind lost
thereby, Why? Because they were upon a Covenant of Works. So, when men are
under a Covenant of Works, if they miscarry but in one action, though tempted
thereto by Satan, yet God may cast them thereby. Now all the wicked still, are
under the Covenant of Works; and therefore though it be but one act wherein
they miscarry, and they be drawn thereunto by Satan, yet God sometimes does, and
justly may cast them thereby unto al Eternity. But as for the Saints and People
of God, they are not under a Covenant of Works, but of Grace, al of them are
so; and therefore God deals graciously with them, not measuring them by any one
carriage, under one Temptation; No, says the Lord, it is but the time of their
Temptation, I will not measure this man or woman, by what they are now; but as
they are, when they are cool, most themselves, and out of Temptation: O! what a
Gracious Privilege is this! Who would not labor to get into Christ, to become
Godly, to be in this Covenant of Grace! And as for you that are Godly, tell me
upon all this account; Have you any just cause, and reason for your
discouragements under your Temptations? Surely, No; whatever your Temptations
be, yet you have no reason for discouragement.

But, what then? What shall I do that I may bear up my heart against all
discouragements in this kind, that I may not be cast down, or discouraged by
reason of my Temptations? I confess indeed, that there is no reason why a godly
man should be discouraged in this respect; but yet it is a hard thing, to bear
up against all Discouragements in time of Temptation: What shall I do in this
case, that I may not be discouraged, whatever my Temptations be?



Anchors come home; yet I will wait on God.



Jesus Christ, to succor and relieve poor tempted souls; you can never be
discouraged under Temptation, so long as you think, how mightily Christ is
engaged to help those that are tempted* and engaged he is, many ways; Engaged
by his own Temptations; for h^ was therefore tempted, that he might be able
experimentally to succor those that are tempted: Engaged he is, by Promise; for
he has said, he will not quench the smoking flax, yea, though it has more
smoke than fire: Engaged he is, by his Interest in you, and his Name upon you:
Engaged he is, by his own Gracious Disposition; when he was upon Earth, he
cured those that were vexed by Satan: Art thou now tempted? thou art now vexed
by Satan; Christ is as gracious in Heaven, as he was on Earth: Engaged he is,
by Office; for says the Apostle, We have not such an High Priest, as cannot be
touched with our infirmities, but was in all points tempted as we are, that he
might succor those that are tempted; he is our great High Priest. When the
manslayer was pursued by the Avenger of Blood, if the manslayer fled unto a
City of Refuge, he was safe there; where he was to stay til the death of the
High Priest; and when the High Priest died, then he was set at liberty. The
Lord Jesus Christ is our High Priest; by whose Death we are set at liberty; and
by whose Life we are al preserved: it is his Office to succor poor tempted
souls, pursued by Avengers of blood: and if a good man be faithful in his
Office, much more will Christ, by whom al other men are faithful. Yea, God our
Father, has erected an Office for the succoring of poor tempted souls, and
Jesus Christ has this Office; whenever therefore you are tempted, and fear you
shall miscarry under your Temptation, then remember Christ, and say, O! but the
Lord Jesus is in Office, he is bound by Office to succor poor tempted souls;
and such a one am I; he is engaged by his own Temptation; he is engaged by
Promise; he is engaged by his Interest in me, and his Name upon me; he is
engaged by his own D^sposition; he is engaged by h^^ Office; and therefore
though I be tempted unto what is evil, yet, avoid Satan, for I shall be
delivered; I am tempted, but I shall be delivered, for the Lord Jesus Christ is
engaged for my deliverance: Do but think of Christ's Engagement, and you will
never be discouraged, whatever your Temptations be.

Cor. 1. Who comfort us in all our Tribulations. Are we in the dark? Christ
only can light the Candle.



1 Cor. 10.13.
but what is common to men. O! say you, never any one was troubled with such
Temptations as I am; but says the Apostle, say not so, For no Temptation has
overtaken you, but what is common to men. You think that your Temptation is
extraordinary, and the truth is, that is a second Temptation at the back of the
first; it is a Temptation to think, that my Temptation is extraordinary; yet
say you, O! my Condition is extraordinary, my Affliction extraordinary, and my
Temptation extraordinary; but says the Apostle, No Temptation has overtaken
you, but what is common etc. You think that you shall never be able to bear your
Temptation. O say you, I am a poor weak Creature, my Temptation is strong and
great; therefore I shall never be able to bear it. But says the Apostle, God is
faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able. Again,
you think that you shall never be rid of this Temptation; O say you, I have been
tempted thus and thus long, and no deliverance comes, nor no likelihood of
deliverance; surely therefore I shall never be delivered: But the Apostle says,
God is faithful, who will with the Temptation, make a way for escape. He will
give an outlet, open a door, and window, that this smoke may go out. It may be
you see not this door, it may be out of sight: so the door of the Ark was, in
the time of the Flood; but when the Ark was built, the door was built: So when
Satan built this Temptation, God did build a door in the sides thereof, and in
due time you shall see it. But may I be sure of that, you will say? Yes, as sure as
God is Faithful; for he has pawned his Faithfulness for the truth of this
Promise: But God is faithful, says the Apostle, who will with the Temptation,
make a way for escape. O! that men would mind the Promise more, and all the
words thereof: They are so hurried sometimes with the Temptation, that they
cannot hear the Promise. But is all this true? O! then attend the Promise; hear
what the Promise speaks.

Matthew; so the greatest Consolations, do sometimes follow the worst
Temptations. When did the Angels minister unto Christ, but when he had made a
good dispatch of Temptations? So it shall be with you also; for Christ was
tempted, that by his Example, and issue of Temptation, he might succor you
under your Temptation. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and what end the
Lord made with him, he had twice as much after the Temptation was over, as he
had before; and if you ride out this storm, assuredly the good Angels will come
and minister to you, and your Consolations shall be doubled unto what ye had
before: Wherefore my Brethren, take unto you, the whole Armor of God, that ye
may be able to withstand in this evil day, and having done al, to stand.

And so much for the Fifth Instance.
A LIFTING UP In case of DESERTION.
Sermon IX.
PSALM, 42.11. Stepney, June, 1648.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


Sometimes the Discouragements of the Saints are taken from their Deserti^tions,
spiritual Desertions.

And this was David's case here; for, says he, verse 10. As a Sword in my
bones, mine Enemies reproached me, while they say unto me, Where is thy God?
And verse 9. I will say unto God, My Rock, why have thou forgotten me? And this
is the ordinary case of Gods Children: O! says one, the Lord has forgotten
me, hid his face from me, and has forsaken my soul, and therefore I am thus
discouraged. I do not complain for want, or loss of outward Mercies, and
Blessings; yea, though all the world should forsake me, I should not be much
afflicted, if God, and Christ were present with me; but times were, when the
Candle of the Lord shined upon me, when I walked, as I tho^ght, in the light of
his Countenance: but now the Lord has hi^ his face from me, and has left, and
forsaken my soul; have I not just cause, and reason to be cast down now, and to
be much disqu^eted?

O Lord, Psalm. 6.1.
(says David) Correct me not in thine Anger, nor chasten me in thy hot
Displeasure. When God hides his face, and forsakes the soul, he seems to
correct in Anger, and in hot displeasure; herein a Christian does, as it were,
combat with God himself; he fights with men sometimes, and then he is more than
a Conqueror, because Christ fights with him, and in him; he fights with
Satan, Principalities, and Powers, and then he does overcome, because Christ is
with him: but O! says the soul, in this Desertion, God is mine Enemy; here I
must fight it out hand to hand with Divine Anger; and what shall I do now? how
is it possible that I should now escape? The truth is, this Affliction above al
others, seems to draw a Curtain over al our Comforts, and to put an end unto al
our Spiritual joy. What Birds sing in the Winter time? some may, but ordinarily
they do not: If you walk abroad in the Winter time, and hear no Birds sing, and
one say to you, What is the reason of this deep silence? two or three months
ago, when we walked in the Fields, every Wood had its several Music; how
sweetly did the Birds sing then! but now they are al silent, what is the
reason? You will easily answer, I, then indeed it was Summer time, then the Sun
shone upon them, and ^o they sang; ^ut now the warming, and enlivening beams of
the Sun are gone, ^hey sing no more. Beloved! the Light of Gods Countenance, is
o^r Spring, Desertion is our Winter; show me that Saint that is able to sing in
this Winter time: I confess, it is possible for a man to ^o it, and some there
are; Habakkuk was one that learned ^his song of Faith; but ^ow few are able to
sing, and rejoice, when God hides himself. No, says the soul, two or three
months ago, the Lord shined upon me, and then I could sing indeed; but now God,
and Christ is gone, and so al my songs are gone, and joys are gone; and I fear
I shall never see them again, or rejoice in Christ again. It is said of Mary,
That when she went to Christ's Sepulcher, she wept; and though the Angel came to
her, and said, Why weepest thou? yet she continued weeping: the presence of an
Angel could not comfort her, Why? O! says she, They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they have laid him. Would it not grieve a Prince, to be
dispossessed of, and to lose his Crown, to be made like an ordinary man? This
Presence of Christ, is the Crown of a Christian; and therefore, when God had
forsaken the Church* as we read in Lam. 5. she complained, verse 16. The Crown
is fal^en from my Head; Why? ver. 20. Wherefore do thou forget us for ev^r,
and forsake us so long a time? Ver. 22. Thou have utterly rejected us, thou art
very wroth against us. Take away the presence of Christ, and ye set a Christian
among the ordinary rank of men: and must he not needs be troubled, when his
Crown is thus taken from his Head? I have read of a Religious Woman, that
having born Nine Children, professed, That she had rather endure all the pains
of those Nine Travels at once, than endure the Misery of the loss of Gods
Presence. And indeed, this Affliction of Gods forsaking a man, is so great,
that if a man feel it not, I even fear it is, because he is forsaken indeed.
But now, though there be never so much Gal, and Wormwood in this Cup, yet the
Children of God have no reason to faint at the drinking of it; no just cause,
or reason, yet to faint, or be discouraged, or cast down.

How may that appear?

these be true, have they any reason to be much discouraged? For the first, ye
know what is said, Those whom he loves, John, 13.1.
he loves unto the end. As for the Second, ye know what he says also; I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Heb. 13.5. 1 Pet. 1.5.
We are kept by the Power of God unto Salvation. And as for the Third, has not
the Lord promised, Isay, 54. that he will return again with advantage? ver. 7.
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercy will I gather
thee: In a little wrath, I hid my face from thee, for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer,
ver. 8. Now ye know, that Friends are not much troubled at such a parting,
which is but for a time. It is said of the Church of Ephesus, That when Paul
^ook leave of them, they wept, Because he said they should see his face no
more. The Saints cannot say so in regard of Christ, though they see not his
face for the present, yet they cannot say, I shall see his face no more; for he
will return again, yea, and return with advantage: for though he forsakes for a
moment, yet with great mercy, and with everlasting kindness, will the Lord have
mercy on them: What then, though you be forsaken for a moment? have you any
just cause, and reason for your Discouragement?

they rejoiced with exceeding great joy; Did they not rejoice i^ the Star
before? Surely they did: But they rejoiced more, even with exceeding great joy,
when they had found the lost Star. And this is our Nature; we rejoice most in
the finding of lost mercies. Now the Lord Christ knows our Nature, and
therefore, that he may raise our joy, our praise, our thankfulness, for his
Presence, Face, and Manifestation of his Love, he does sometimes withdraw them.
So that in all his withdrawings, he has a Design of Love upon our souls; have
we any reason then to be much discouraged, though deserted?

Let him that walks in darkness; and sees no light, stay himself upon the Name
of the Lord. What then, though you have not so much light as you would have, to
refresh your selves by; yet if you have light enough to do your Fathers Work by
(and the greatest work of this Life is, to trust in God, and believe) have you
then any reason for your discouragements? Thus it is with all the Saints; though
they may be in the dark, and the Sun shines not out upon them, yet it is
always day with them and they have light enough, when it is darkest, to do
their Father^ work and business by; and therefore certainly, the Saints have no
reason to be cast down, and discouraged, although they be much forsaken
deserted, and in the dark.

But Jesus Christ has not only deserted, forsaken, and withdrawn himself from
me, in regard of Vision; but I fear also in regard of Union: not in regard of
comfortable feelings only; but in regard of strength and power: and therefore I
am afraid, and discouraged, and have I not cause for it?

therefore in the dark, therefore not able to judge of your own Grace, and
Christ's Strength in you; yet if you can judge in this Condition, and will deal
faithfully with your own souls; is there not as much of Christ's Strength, and
Grace in your Lives and Conversations, as when ye had that presence which ye
mourn after, excepting your enlargements in Duties? I confess indeed, that ^
Gracious man in time of Desertion, has not those enlargements, as he had when
Gods Face shined upon him; but setting aside your enlargements, what is there
in your Conversations wanting now, which you had then? and is the very want of
enlargement, a sufficient reason to say that Christ is gone, and has forsaken
me, not only in regard of Vision, but in regard of Union, Strength, and Grace?
We read in Cant. 5.5. That when Christ withdraws from the Spouse, there is some
Mirrh left upon the ringles of the door; the Spouse arises, follows after him,
and enquireth for him, saying, Did you see my beloved? She met with the
Watchmen, they smote her, and she was willing to bear their smiting, that she
might hear of Christ; she stands, and admireth at the beauty and excellency of
her Beloved; White, and ruddy, the fairest of ten thousand. Now in this
Desertion of yours, is there not some Mirrh upon the ringles of your heart? Do
you not still stand admiring Christ, and his Excellencies? Do you not enquire
after your Beloved? going to one, and to another, saying, Did you see him whom
my soul loves? Are you not willing that the Watchmen should smite you, so ye
may but meet with Christ again? And will ye say then, he is not only gone in
regard of Vision, but in regard of Union, Power, Strength, and Grace too?
Surely you have no reason for it.

But I am not only forsaken, and deserted, and want the Comfortable feelings,
and manifestations of Love which I once had, and do now desire to have; but I
do find the contrary tokens of Gods Displeasure, manifestations of his Anger:
were it only the withdrawings of Love, I might bear it; but Christ is angry,
God is angry, appears to be mine Enemy, and have I not reason now to be much
discouraged?

Isay, 57. and you shall (...) that God says, I was wroth, and smote him; he
did not only hide his face, but he was wroth; yea, he is not only wroth, but he
smote his People too, and yet the Promise is, I will restore comfort to him,
and to his mourners: Did not Job think, and say that God was angry with him,
and become his Enemy? and did not Job's Friends think that God loved them, and
was their Friend, and his Enemy? yet if you look into Job, 42. you find that
God was more pleased with Job, for he was fain to pray for them before they
could be accepted; and know ye not, that it is Christ's usual manner to
personate an Enemy, when he intends the most Friendship; to seem a stranger,
when he intends the most communion. It is said, that God was angry with Moses,
Exodus 4. yet even then he gave him such a Promise of mercy, as he had not
before, ver. 14, 15, 16. Ye know what David's choice was; Lord, let me fall into
thy hands, and not into the hands of men, for with thee is mercy: It is
sometimes a mercy to be immediately chastised by the hand of God our Father: God
might turn us over to the hands of men; but if God will take us into his own
hand, and chastise with his own hand immediately, there is love in it. If a
Prince should say to his Officers, My whole Kingdom is before you, do right, and
execute Justice, and Judgment; but as for such and such a Family, if they shall
commit any fault, I will chastise them immediately with mine own hand, you shall
not meddle with them, I will do it my self; would not this argue love? Thus it
is with the Saints in the time of Desertion, then God takes the soul into his
own hand; all Creatures, and Officers of his Anger, stand by, and meddle not:
in other Afflictions, God turns us over to his Officers; but in Desertion,
there he does correct immediately; and therefore though he strikes, yet there
is Love at the bottom, and the more Christ does sympathize with you in any
Affliction, the less cause you have to be discouraged. Christ is our
sympathizing High Priest in all our Afflictions; but the more we are like to him
in any Affliction, the more he does sympathize, and his heart let out the more
unto us: Jesus Christ was in Desertion himself, and not only forsaken, but for
our sakes, under the wrath and displeasure of God his Father; and therefore
when he sees a soul, not only deserted, but under anger, and displeasure of
God; then he says, O! there is a soul that is in my case, and so he does most
commiserate, and compassionate that person: have you then any reason to be
discouraged in this respect?

But this is not my case: For I am not only deserted, forsaken, under
manifestations of Christ's displeasure; but I have sinned, and drawn down this
Desertion upon my own soul; and therefore now it is, that I am thus
discouraged, and have I not reason for it?

Canticles: and it may be he does now withdraw from you, not for your sin; and
if there be but a may be of it, there is no reason for discouragement. But
suppose it be so; look I pray into Isay, 57. again, and see what the Lord has
promised to a poor soul in this condition, ver. 17. For the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth, and smote him; I hid me, and was wroth, and he went
on frowardly in the way of his heart. Will ye say, the Lord does not only hide
his f^ce from you, but he has smitten you? So here. Will ye say, O! but I have
sinned, and drawn this desertion upon my self? So here; For the iniquity of his
Covetousness I was wroth, and smote him. Will ye say, O! but I have sinned on
both sides of this Desertion? I have sinned before the Desertion came, which
sin was the cause of it? and I have sinned since? I have been deserted by my
frowardness, and peevish carriage? So here, For the iniquity of his
covetousness was I wroth, and hid me; there is sin on the one side: and he went
on frowardly in the way of his heart; there is sin on the other side of
Desertion: Here is sin on both sides; what then? is there any hope, or comfort,
or mercy for a heart in this condition? Yes, says the Lord, I will restore
comfort unto him, and to his mourners. O! but it is not comfort that my soul
desires; but I have a foul, filthy, unclean, wicked heart of mine own; O! that
my heart were healed: Is there any hope of healing mercy in this condition?
Yes, says the Lord in the Text; I have seen his ways, and will heal him. O!
but though I be healed, I shall sin again, and wander from God again: nay, says
the Lord, But I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and will lead him also.
But I see no means, or likelihood of all this; how can it be? Yes, very well;
for says the Lord, ver. 19. I create the fruit of the Lips; Peace, peace,
peace, to him that is afar off; and I will heal him again: O! what Comfort is
here? what an upholding Promise is here? Can you read it, or think of it, and
your heart sink before it?

This is but part of my condition; for I have sinned, Christ has forsaken me;
I have sinned, Christ has smote me, and he goes on smiting, goes on angry,
goes on displeased; I have been deserted a long while, in the dark a long
while; and I am so far from the light, that it does even grow darker and
darker, my condition being more sad, every day than other; every day I am more
deserted, and my condition worser; have I not reason to be cast down, and
discouraged now?

Egypt, a dark time; but was it not worst with them immediately before their
deliverance? Did not the Taskmasters then beat them? When was it worst with
David? ill at al times in the Wilderness; but was it not worst with him at
Ziklag, when he had lost his Wives, and his own men took up stones against him?
Psalm. 10. we read, that David says, Why stand thou afar off, O Lord, and
hidest thy self in the time of trouble? hiding is more, and wor^er than
standing afar off. When the Sun is going down, then it seems to be far off; but
when it is hidden, then it is set, and is further off: So says David; Lord,
thou art not only afar off, but even out of sight, quite out of sight, and art
hidden from me; his Desertion grew higher and higher: And if you look into
Psalm. 13. you find, that he speaks to the like purpose; How long will thou bide
thy face from me? how long will thou forget me (O Lord) for ever? As hiding, is
more than standing afar off; so it is worse than forgetting: For, as Musculus
observes well, forgetting is but Remissio amoris; a man that loves another, may
forget him, yet he may love him well; but hiding the face is, Irae testimonium,
the testimony of anger; and it is as if David should have said, Lord, thou
do not only restrain thy Love toward me, but thou do show tokens of thy
displeasure, and anger, and thy displeasure rises: So Psalm. 22. ver. 1. My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? I cry in the day time, but thou hear
not, ver. 2. How can this be? says Augustine; that God should forsake Christ
in his Sufferings (for these words are spoken of Christ) when God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself? Yes, very well (says he) for Christ was a
common Person, stood in our stead, and place, and so personating of us; he
says, Why have thou forsaken me? yea, and Lord, thou have not only forsaken
me, but my Desertion arises yet higher; for, I cry in the day time, and thou
hear not: But you may see this abundantly made out in Job, 30.20. I cry unto
thee, and thou do not bear me; I stand up, and thou regardest me not, thou
art become cruel to me; with thy strong hand thou opposest thy self against me:
Ver. 27. My bowels boiled, and rest not, the days of affliction prevented me:
I went mourning without the Sun; I am a brother to Dragons, and a companion to
Owls. And ver. 26. When I looked for good, then evil came unto me; and when I
waited for light, there came darkness. Thus you see that it may be the
condition of Gods own People, to be worser, and worser; and their condition
more and more dark in their own apprehensions; and therefore no reason why you
should be discouraged in this respect.

But my Desertions have been so long, that I fear it will never be otherwise
with me; God is now gone, Christ is now gone, Comfort gone, and I fear now that
Christ will never return again; and this is that which even sinks my soul: I
confess, the least desertion and forsaking, is a great evil: but though I were
under the greatest cloud in the world, I should bear it, if I did but think
that Christ would return again: but I find in Scripture, that there is a final
rejection mentioned, as well as a present desertion: the Saints, and People of
God, are it may be, deserted for a time; but they are never rejected: David was
deserted, but he was not rejected; Saul was rejected, finally rejected; and I
fear that I am not only deserted for the present, but finally rejected, that
God has even cast me off; and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not
cause and reason for it now?

[Never] upon their condition, as in this case of Spiritual Desertion. If a
godly, gracious man fall sick, he does not say presently, or conclude, I shall
never recover again; if he be persecuted by Enemies, he does not conclude
presently, that he shall never be delivered: but if God hide his Face at any
time, then comes out this [Never] I shall Never be delivered, I shall never be
restored to comfort again. So Psalm. 13. How long will thou hide thy face? what,
for ever! So Psalm. 77. Will the Lord cast off for ever? ver. 7. Will he be
favorable no more? is his mercy clean gone for ever? and does his Promise fail
for ever more? This is the proper place, and ground, where this unbeleeving
conclusion grows; when they are in this condition, they rise to a [Never;] O!
it will never be otherwise with me; Christ is gone, Mercy is gone, and I shall
never see the face of God again: This is usual, and most usual with the Saints
in this Condition.

Never. Psalm. 9.18. The needy shall not always be forgotten, the expectation
of the poor shall not fail for ever. So Psalm. 103. The Lord is merciful and
gracious, ver. 8. Slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy: he will not always
chide, neither will he keep his anger for ever. So I^ay 57. ver. 16. For I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth. God sees that in this
condition, his People are apt to write a Never upon their condition; and
therefore that he may condescend unto their Infirmities, when he comes to give
out a Promise, he does not barely promise Mercy; but he puts in the [Ever] into
his Promise, that he may take off our unbeleeving [Never.]



Now for the clearing of that, give me leave to propound several Questions to
you.

Saul was finally rejected, and the Text says, That an evil Spirit from the
Lord seized upon him; and what is the evil Spirit, but an envious Spirit? The
envious man in the Gospel, is the evil man; and this evil Spirit seized on Saul
as soon as God did forsake him; for an envious, malicious, persecuting Spirit
came upon him against David, and the Saints with him. So when God forsakes a
man finally, a persecuting Spirit enters him. When God forsakes his own
Children, Satan, that evil Spirit comes to them; for when God goes, Satan
comes: but there is much difference between a tempting Satan, and a persecuting
Satan: tempting Satan comes to the Saints, when they are deserted; but a
persecuting Satan does not enter into them. But did ye ever know, or read of
any finally rejected, but an evil, persecuting Spirit seized on them from the
Lord?

Ye have rejected me, says the Lord, and therefore I have rejected you.
Possibly a good man may want this sense of Gods Love; but then he has the
sense of his own sins: possibly he may want the feeling of his own perfection,
which is Divine Love; but then he has the feeling of his own imperfection. But
I say, Did you ever read in all the Word, of any man finally forsaken, that
could not find in his heart to forsake God, and the good Ways of God?

Saul indeed, That when he was forsaken, he cried out, and said, God has
forsaken me, the Philistims are upon me; God has forsaken me, but it is in
order to an outward evil; the Philistims are upon me. But the Saints, when they
are forsaken, are sensible of this evil, simply for it self, and think the time
long, and tedious, when they are so forsaken: O Lord, says David, how long
will thou hide thy face from me? what, for ever? But I say, Was ever man
forsaken, was ever man quite forsaken of God, that was sensible of this evil,
only, and simply for it self?

Romans, That when God gave up the Gentiles to their sins, they gave up
themselves unto al uncleanness, and were past feeling. The Saints and People of
God, on the contrary, in the time of their Desertion, are tender in the point
of sin, and they mourn after God: When was a man ever forsaken, whose heart was
in this frame?



Camicles does so begin, chap. 2. ver. 1. Let him kiss me with the kisses of
his mouth; even because that is the first, and the chiefest of the Saints
desires in this Life: but if Christ will not kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, says a gracious soul, yet I am willing to kiss his feet, as Mary did.
There is a time a coming, when he will kiss me with the kisses of his mouth for
ever; but for the present, if I can but kiss his feet here, I have hope to be
kissed by him in Heaven. Now I say, Did Christ ever forsake a man finally, who
did thus long after Christ himself? Can those that are forsaken, mourn after
his presence, as the best thing, and for his absence, as the greatest evil in all the world? I appeal to your own Souls, and Bosoms herein; whoever you are
that labor under this fear, that Christ is gone, and he will return no more;
suppose that God has hid his face from you, seems to forget you, and to be
angry with you; yet in the midst of all these darknesses, Do you find an evil
Spirit, an envious, malicious Spirit from the Lord, seizing upon you? Do you
find, that you can find in your heart to forsake God, and the good Ways of
God? Yea, rather, do you not find the contrary, though you want the sense of
Gods Love? Have you not the sense of your own sin? and when you want the sense
of your own perfection, have you not some sense of your own imperfection? Don't
you look upon this Desertion, as the greatest Affliction in all the world? Can
you not mourn after God, and his Presence? Does not Christ every foot, send in
one token of his Love, or another to visit your souls? And are you not willing
to kiss the feet of Jesus Christ? O yes! I must needs say; though I have fears
that Christ is gone, and will return no more; yet I praise the Lord, I do not
find an envious, malicious, persecuting Spirit in my soul unto the Saints, and
People of God. I don't find that my heart is willing to forsake Christ, and the
good ways of Christ: But I find that I can mourn for the absence of Christ
simply for it self, and look upon it as the greatest affliction in the world:
That I am ever willing to kiss the feet of Jesus Christ: And to be in the
lowest, and meanest Condition, so he would but return unto my soul again. Yea,
and I must needs say, That every foot I receive one token or other, one Promise
or another, to visit me in my condition. Then be of good comfort; though Christ
be absent, yet he will return again; and with great mercy, and with everlasting
kindness will he gather your souls unto himself again: and thus I say it shall be
with all the Saints. Surely therefore they have no reason for their
Discouragements, whatever their Desertions be. Why therefore should not every
one say, Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted
within me?

Upon all this account I see, I have not so much reason for my Discouragement:
but it is an hard thing to bear up ones heart from sinking in the time of
Desertion, when God hides his face: What shall I do then (and this may be the
condition of us all) that I may bear up my heart against this Discouragement,
even when I am most in the dark, and Christ hides his face from me, or forsakes
me?

this case do arise from hence. Some there are, that do walk by particular
Providence, Experiences, Words, Manifestations, and In-comes of Love; and when
they have them, then they are much refreshed; and if they want them, then they
are much discouraged, and say, Ah! Christ loves me not, and God is gone, will
return no more; Why? Because they measure Gods Eternal Love, by some present
Dispensation: But if Gods present Dispensations may seem to run cross to his
Eternal Purpose, why then should they be discouraged, and say, he is gone for
ever? Now so it is, he may hide his face, he may withdraw, and deny particular
Comforts, and Manifestations, yet love me eternally. O! that people would not
measure Gods Eternal Affection, by some present Dispensation, so should they
never be much discouraged.



poor souls judge themselves in this condition, and even judge themselves to be
under Judgment, why? but because they hearken more to one side, than to the
other: If Satan come, and tell them a story of Gods Displeasure, they will be
sure to hear that at large; but if Christ come and tell them a story of Gods
Love to sinners, that they hear not, or if they do, yet as a man that reads a
Book to confute it, is disputing against what he reads all along; so are they
also disputing against the words of the Gospel all along as they hear them;
saying in their hearts, O! but, this is not made to me; it is a good Promise,
but it belongs not to me, this is not my condition; and a hundred such [O!
buts.] But is this equal? How is it possible, but that a man should mis-judg,
and be much discouraged, when he hears thus? Wherefore, my Exhortation from the
Lord is, which I beseech you in his Name to receive; Never receive any Relation
from the Law, but be assured your Ears be as open for to hear the Gospel: Never
receive any Relation, or Story from Satan; but let your Ear be as open to hear
what Christ says. And why should not this Exhortation be received? Had I
entreated some great thing for Christ, would you not have done it? But now that
I only entreat you to carry things indifferently, to have an Ear open, as well
to Christ, as to Satan; will ye not yield to it? O! me thinks every gracious
soul should say, Well, through Grace, I will hearken more to Christ: I confess
indeed, I have heard what Satan has said; but when Comfort has come, I have
turned away mine Ear, and have not heard; or if I have heard, I have been
disputing against what I have heard, and making Objections all along: now the
Lord pardon this evil to me; through Grace, mine Ear shall be more open to
Christ, and less open to Satan. So do, and you will never be much discouraged,
whatever your Desertion be.

Luther, and to stand with a drawn Sword against me, then do I cast, and throw
my self into his Arms: and what better way than to venture upon God in this
case? and to say, Whether saved, or not saved; whether damned, or not damned;
whether Hypocrite, or not Hypocrite; I do cast my self upon God at a venture.
It is the Love, and Favor of Christ, that you mourn after, and are discouraged
for the want of; you cannot get a more ready, and compendious way to get this
Love, than when you are in the dark, to throw your selves into Christ's Arms at
a venture; this takes, and wins the heart of Christ over to you: what! will
this poor soul throw himself into my Arms (says Christ) now I do seem his
Enemy? well, then I will show my self to be his friend; and this is the proper
work of this Life: as for those sights and visions of God, they are the work of
Heaven; and though God give them sometimes; yet it argues more strength of Grace
for to be able to live without them. Suppose two men in your work; one that
must have his pay presently, his wages presently, yea, before he has done his
work: the other will not have his wages till his work be all done, and if ye
offer him money, no, says he, I will stay till all be done, and receive it in
a lump together: Which of these two, is the ablest man, or which the poorest
man? Will you not say, surely, he that cannot stay, is the poorest? and he that
can stay longest for his wages, is the ablest man? So it is here; God has two
sorts of Servants: one that does go by Visions, and Manifestations of Love, and
are not able for to live at all by Faith, but must have sights and visions, and
manifestations every day, or else they die, and murmur, or complain. And others
say, O! but these sights, and visions, are for Heaven; if God will have it so, I
am contented to stay til all my work be done: which of these two, is the
poorest, or the strongest? Will not ye say, surely, he that is able to stay, is
strongest? and he the poorest, and weakest, that is not able to stay, or to
live by Faith? O! therefore labor more and more to live by Faith; and when you
are in Desertion, say, Whether saved, or not saved; whether Hypocrite, or not
Hypocrite, I will stay, I will wait on God, and let him come when he pleases. If
you lay your self at Christ's feet, he will take you into his Arms.

But what need I say more? Is there not enough in the compass of your own
Experience, to answer unto al your fears in this respect? When you have been in
Desertion, have you not said that Christ is gone, and that he will never come
again? and yet has not Christ come again? Yea, and have you not said in the
day of your Desertion, If ever Christ do return again, I will never make such
unbeleeving Conclusions as I have done? and has not Christ returned after
this? Now then, when Satan comes, and suggests jealousies of Christ's Love unto
you, why are not you more peremptory? Why do you not say to him? this I have
heard before, Satan; thou told'st me this before, that Christ was gone, and
would never return again; but I have found it false, he did return, and
therefore through Grace, I will never believe these false reports of Christ;
Christ is faithful, I have always found him so; those whom he loves, he loves
to the end; and I know he loves me, Satan, for I love him; for my love, is but
the reflection of his love; I ^ould not love him, if he did not love me first,
and through Grace, I love him; I know he loves me, because he has changed me,
and is every foot sending some tokens of love; one Promise, or another to
uphold my heart; yea, I know Satan, that Christ does love me, because thou
tellest me that he hates me; and if he has loved me once, he will love me to
the end; and therefore though for the present he hides his face from me; yet I
shall see his face again. Thus gather in your Experiences, and plead with Satan,
or your own unbeleeving hearts, according unto all these Experiences; so shall
you be able to live in the time of this Desertion, and never be discouraged,
whatever your desertions be.

And so much for the Sixth Instance.
A LIFTING UP In case of AFFLICTION.
Sermon X.
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, June, 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


SOmetimes the Discouragements of the Saints, are drawn, Instance 7.
From their outward Afflictions, and Relations.

So it was here with David; for, says he, verse 3. My tears have been my meat,
day and night. Whereupon, ver. 5, 6. My Soul is cast down within me: Then, ver.
7, 8. All thy billows are gone over me: Ver. 10. As a Sword in my Bones, whilst
they reproach me daily: Then, ver. 11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and
why art thou disquieted within me? To the like purpose he speaks in the next
Psalm; Why go I mourning, because of the oppression of the Enemy? ver. 2. Then
ver. 5, 6. Why art thou cast down? So that hi^ ^^^ard Discouragements, did
arise very much from his outward Afflictions. And thus it is ordinarily with
the People of God; for faith one; Never was any so Afflicted as I have been,
and am: I confess, that National Calamities are very great; but besides
National Miseries, I have many, and many personal Afflictions; and therefore
now it is that I am thus discouraged, have I not reason for it?

No.

These are they that came out of great Tribulations, Rev. 7. And



Psalm. 143. Therefore my soul is overwhelmed within me, and my heart is
desolate; Why? Read verse 3. and ye shall find the reason; Because the Enemy
oppressed me. And was not J^shua thus exceedingly cast down, when a party of
his men fell before the men of Ai? See how he lies on the ground, Chap. 7. and
what Language he speaks; even the same, for substance, that murmuring Israel
had spoken: for they said, Would God we had stayed in Egypt: And says he,
Would God we had stayed on the other side Jordan: yet Joshua, a most gracious,
holy, blessed Servant of God. So that Gods own People, are apt to be much
discouraged, by reason of their Afflictions, and outward Sufferings. But now I
say, Let a man's Afflictions be never so great, yet if he be In Christ, and have
made his peace with God, he has no reason to be cast down, or discouraged,
whatever his Afflictions be: for says our Savior, In the World you shall have
trouble; but be of good Comfort, I have overcome the world: And the more a man
is discouraged under his Afflictions, the less able he is to bear it. So long
as a man's hand has skin upon it, he is able to put it into the sharpest
Vinegar, without smarting; but if the skin be off, it does smart exceedingly,
and he can hardly bear it. So long as a man's bones are knit together, and in
joint, he may stand under a great burden; but if the Shoulder Bone be out of
Joint, who can bear a burden? And what do al our Discouragements, but dis-joynt
the Soul, and put the Spirit on the Rack? Discouragements make Afflictions to
(...) longer: An impatient Patient, makes a cruel Physician: And the more the
Child cries under the Rod, the longer the Rod is continued: What reason
therefore, for our discouragements under Afflictions?

But this Truth will appear, if you consider, 1. What the Afflictions and
Sufferings of the Saints are. 2. Whence they proceed. 3. What accompanies them.
4. What follows upon them, and is wrought by them.

Paul's Inventory, 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollo,
or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things present, or things to
come: So that Death it self, the King of Terrors and Afflictions, is here
reckoned amongst the Goods and Chattels, which Christ has purchased for you,
and left unto you: and if Death be yours, then al Afflictions are yours; and
who will be afraid of that which is his own? 2. They are the Gift of God; To you
it is given, not only to believe, but to suffer, says the Apostle. It was the
Speech of a good man, now in Heaven, being once under great Afflictions; O
Lord, these Afflictions are thy Pearls, and I will wear them for thy sake. 3.
They are but seeeming Evils; They are real Trials, and seeming Evils. Therefore
the Apostle says, Every Affliction seems grievous; but considering altogether,
it is rather a Seeming, than a real grief: and therefore says he, 2 Cor. 6.9,
10. We are as unknown, and yet well known: as dying, and behold we he: as
chastened, and not killed: as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing: as poor, yet
making many rich: as having nothing, and yet possessing all things. In which
words, as Austin observes, he puts a tanqu^m, sicut AS, upon his Afflictions;
as if his Sufferings, were but as Afflictions, and not Afflictions. When a man
takes any Physic, he is sick withal, yet because it is but Physick-sickness,
you do not call it a sickness; it is as a sickness, but not a sickness. Now all
the Afflictions of the Saints, are but their Physic, prescribed and given them
by the hand of their Father; and therefore, though they be sick therewith, yet
it is but as a sickness, not so indeed, al things rightly weighed. When an
unskilful Eye looks upon the threshing of the Corn, he says, Why do they spoil
the Corn? But those that know better, say, The Flail does not hurt the Corn; if
the Cart-wheel should pass upon it, there would be spoil indeed, but the Flail
hurts not. Now there is no Affliction, or suffering, that a Godly man meets
with, but is Gods Flail: And if you look into Isay, 28. ye shall find, the Lord
promises, under a similitude, that his Cart-wheel shall not pass upon those
that are weak, ver. 27. For the Fitches are not threshed with a threshing
Instrument; neither is a Cart-wheel turned about upon the Cummin; the Fitches
are beaten out with a staff, and the Cummin with the Rod: God will always
proportion his Rod to our strength. But though mine Affliction be not greater
than I can bear, yet if it lie too long upon me (say some) I shall never be
able to bear it: Nay, says the Lord, ver. 28. Bread-Corn is bruised, because
he will not ever be threshing it. But what is this to us? Yes, it is a Parable,
for ver. 26. His God (speaking of the Plowman) does instruct him to
discretion, and does teach him. And if the Plowman have this discretion, much
more shall the Lord himself; for verse 29. This also comes forth from the Lord
of Hosts, who is wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working. I am Gods
Corn, said the Martyr; I must therefore pass under the Flail, through the Fan,
under the Mil-stone, into the Oven, before I can be bread for him. And if our
Chaff be severed from our Graces by this Flail, have we any reason to be
discouraged, because we are thus afflicted? The truth is, the day of Affliction
and Tribulation, is a godly man's Day of Judgment; it is at his Judgment Day, he
shall never be judged again, so as to be condemned at the Day of Judgment; Ye
are judged with the world (says the Apostle) that ye may not be condemned with
the world. And when the Godly man's Affliction-Day is, he may say, Now is my
Judgment-Day, and I shall never be judged again; why therefore should he be
discouraged, whatever his Afflictions be?

Heb. 12. ye shall find, both the thing proved, and the Inference: The thing is
proved, at ver. 6. For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, and scourges every
Son whom he receives: Which he illustrates by a similitude. Suppose a man have
two Sons; one a Bastard, and the other Legitimate; he will rather give
Education, and Correction to the Legitimate Son, and neglect the Bastard: and
says the Apostle, verse 8. If ye be without Chastisement, then are ye
Bastards, and not Sons. What then? verse 12. Wherefore, lift up the hands which
hang down, and the feeble knees: As if the Apostle should say, If all the
Sufferings, and Afflictions, and Chastisements of the Saints, do proceed from
Love, then have they no reason to hang down their hands, or heads. But so it
is, That all their Sufferings come from Love, and therefore no reason for their
Discouragements.

Thy Rod, and thy Staff comforts me. God never lays a Rod upon his Childrens
back, but he first puts a Staff into their hand to bear it; and the staff is as
big as the Rod: it matters not what your Afflictions be, great, or small, it is
al one, you shall be upheld; and upholding mercy, is sometimes better, Via
Crucis, via Lucis.
than a mercy that you are afflicted for the want of. But the Lord does not
only uphold his People under Sufferings, but he gives forth much Light
therewithal. The School of the Cross, is the School of Light. Affliction is our
Free School, where God teaches his Children, and learns them how to write,
both their Sins, and their Graces. Their sins: So long as Leaves are on the
Trees and Bushes, ye cannot see the Birds Nests: But in the Winter, when all the
Leaves are off, then ye see them plainly. And so long as men are in Prosperity,
and have their Leaves on, they do not see what Nests of sins, and lusts, are in
their hearts, and lives; but when all their Leaves are off, in the day of their
Afflictions, then they see them, and say, I did not think I had had such Nests
of sins, and lusts, in my soul, and life. Job, 36.7. He withdraws not his Eye
from the Righteous: Verse 8. And if he be bound in Fetters, and be holden in
Cords of Affliction, then he shows them their works, and their trangressions,
that they have exceeded. Yea, Affliction do not only discover their sins unto
them; but it is Gods Plaster, thereby he does heal the same: Before I was
afflicted, I went astray, says David. And Job, 36.10. He opens also their
Ear to Discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity. Yea, these
Afflictions, and Sufferings of the Saints, do not only discover, and heal their
sins; but do put them upon the exercise of Grace: In their Afflictions (says
God) they will seek me early. Yea, they do not only draw out their Graces; but
discover their Graces too, which possibly they did never take notice of before.
I have read of some foolish Youths, that sitting on the Water side, upon the
Bank, and mingling their Legs together in the Water, they did not know their
own Legs; but one standing by, and sm^^^g them on the knees with a staff, every
one then knew his own Legs, and pulled them up. And so it is many times; There
is such a likeness between Hypocrites common Graces, and the Graces of Gods
Children, that the Saints do not know their own Graces; O! says one, it is no
more than an Hypocrite may have: but then God smites them with some Affliction,
and so they feel, and see, and know their own Graces: and good reason for it;
for when God comes, he discovers all: and when is God more present with his
People, than when they are most afflicted? God uses to be at the back of
Affliction. There Heaven opened to Stephen. Afflictions are the rusty Lock
often times, which open the door into the Presence Chamber. When was Christ
with the three Children, but in the fiery Furnace? And ye have a standing
Promise for it; I will be with thee in the fire, and the water, says the Lord.
And says the Apostle, Then does the Spirit of the Lord, and of Glory, rest
upon his Children. Yea, and as they have most of God, when they are most
afflicted; so in time of their Sufferings, they have most Communion, and
Fellowship with Jesus Christ in his Sufferings. Therefore says the Apostle
Peter, Chap. 4. Ver. 13. But rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's
Sufferings. The word Partaker, is the same that is used in John; Truly our
fellowship is with the Father: and the same that is used in the Corinthians,
concerning the Lords Supper; The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the
Communion of the Body of Christ? You will al grant, that you have communion with
Christ at the Lords Supper; but the same word being used here, shows, That you
have Communion with Christ in his Sufferings also; especiall^, when you do
suffer for him: and the greater your Sufferings are, the more fellowship, and
communion you have with Christ in his Sufferings: Now then, if all this be true,
That a Christian has Experience of Supporting, and Upholding Grace; much
Light; his sin discovered, and healed: his Grace exercised, and manifested:
Gods Presence enjoyed; and made Partaker of the Sufferings of Christ, in, and
by his Afflictions; what reason has he to be discouraged, although he be much
afflicted? But so it is, That a Christian has never more Experience of Gods
Upholding, Sustaining Grace: his sin is never more discovered, and healed; his
Grace is never more exercised, and manifested: God is never more present with
him, than when he is most afflicted: and he is never more partaker of Christ's
sufferings, than in, and by his Sufferings: Surely therefore, he has no reason
for his Discouragements, whatever his Afflictions be.

They bring forth the quiet fruits of Righteousness, Triumph over Satan; for
now poor Job may say, Satan, thou said, I did not serve God for naught; but
now the contrary appears. Yea, They work out an exceeding, eternal weight of
Glory. And if you look into Phil. 2. where we are commanded, To work out our
Salvation, with fear, and trembling: you shall find, it is the same word that is
used here concerning Afflictions; that they work out an exceeding, eternal
weight of Glory. Now if al my Afflictions do bring me in the quiet fruit of
Righteousness; make me to triumph over Satan; and work out an exceeding weight
of Glory; have I any reason to be discouraged, although I be much afflicted?
Thus it is with all the Saints and People of God; though their Sufferings may
seem to be grievous for the present, yet they bring forth the quiet fruits of
Righteousness; thereby the Saints triumph over Satan; and these Sufferings work
out an exceeding, and eternal weight of Glory. Surely therefore, a Godly,
Gracious man, has no reason to be discouraged, whatever his Affliction be.

But my Affliction, is not an ordinary Affliction; my Sufferings, are not
ordinary Sufferings; for I have lost all my Comforts, and am stripped naked of
all my former Blessings, and Relations: I have been long afflicted, and many
Afflictions crowd, and press in upon me, like so many waves of the Sea: only
there is this difference, the waves come, and go; but my Afflictions come, and
stay; they come, and go not; they all stay upon me at once, and I see no end of
my Afflictions: the Floods are risen, O God, the Water Floods are risen, and do
cover my soul; yea, and these waters of Affliction are so deep, that I can feel
no bottom, see no end of them: have I not just cause and reason then to be much
discouraged?

Noah was drunk with his own Wine; and how many are there in the World, that
have been drunk, even with the Comforts of their own Relations? And if God your
Father see, that you have been, or would be drunk with your own Comforts; have
you any hurt, that he has taken them from you for a time? When a wise Father,
sees that his Child falls in love with his Maid, one that is much beneath him;
does his Father do him any wrong, that he removes her from him, or him out of
her sight? It may be the present Affection of the Child says, my Father deals
hardly by me: but will the Child's Reason say so afterward? No, but he will
rather say, at such a time I fell in love with my Fathers Servant, and if my
Father had not remomoved her out of my sight, I had been lost, and undone for
ever. Now all the Creatures are Servants to the Children of God, and it may be,
God your Father sees that you are fallen in love with them that are much
beneath you. Or, suppose that a Child be to travel some long Journey, and his
Father gives him a staff in his hand; when he is abroad in the Fields, some
Enemy meets him, and takes away his staff, and beats the Child therewithal; but
a Friend comes in, and takes away this staff from both, both from the Child,
and from the Enemy; does he do the Child any wrong, in taking away this staff
out of the hand of the Enemy? May be the Child will say, I pray Sir, give me
the staff again, for it is mine; true, says the friend, Child, this staff is
yours, but you have not strength enough to use it, and manage it against your
Enemy; he would wrest it out of your hand again, and beat you with it, and
therefore I will keep it from you both: does he therefore do the Child any wrong?
Thus it is here: The Lord gives a Creature-Comfort into the hands of his Child,
and God intends it for a staff (for Bread is the staff of Life:) but Satan
comes, and wresteth his staff out of his hand, and beats him therewithal: then
comes Jesus Christ, and takes it out of the hands of both; O! says the Child
of God, but I pray thee Lord, give me this Creature-Comfort, for it is my
Staff: true Child, says Christ, it is thy Staff, but thou have not strength to
weild it against Satan, he will abuse thee with it; therefore I will keep it from
thee, and in due time, thou shall have it again: Does Christ our Lord, and best
friend, do him any wrong in keeping it from him?

O! but my Afflictions are not ordinary, and usual, but new, and strange.

Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, as if some new thing had
befallen you. And what if God will carry you to Heaven by some back way, and let
you in at some back door; has not he promised to lead us in a way that we have
not known?

O! but I do not only want one mercy, but I do want another, and another;
Afflictions come thick, and I see no end, I feel no bottom.

David, the Type of Christ? Psalm. 40.1, 2. I waited patiently for the Lord, and
he inclined his Ear unto me, and heard my cry; he brought me out also of an
horrible pit; or as some read it, out of an unbottomed pit, out of the miry
Clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, and established my goings. Three things
here, that are most observable. 1. David was in such an Affliction, wherein he
did feel no bottom at the first, saw no end. 2. Though he felt no bottom at the
first, yet, at the last he did, and a Rock which God set his feet upon, and
established his goings. 3. Till he did find this Rock, he prayed, and waited
patiently, and he was not discouraged. What therefore though our Afflictions be
as thick as any mire, that therein you do stick so fast, as you cannot get out,
that you feel no bottom, see no end; yet if in this case you pray, and cry, and
wait patiently on the Lord, as David did; you shall be set upon a Rock in due
time, and your goings shall be also established. And whereas you say, That your
Afflictions are thick, and long, and hard; How long man! What! is your Bush
consumed? Do they not make you long more for Heaven? When the Apprentiship is
hard and tedious, the young man longs for the day of his Freedom. O! says he,
that I were in my Fathers House! O! that the time of my Freedom were come! So
here; Long and hard Afflictions, make us long more for Heaven. Now will ye
count that too long, which makes you long more for Heaven? And as for your
Relational Comforts; Did God ever take away the Comfort of an outward Relation,
and not make it up in the sweetness of Spiritual Relations?

But this is not all my case; for I do not only want such and such Comforts, I
do not barely want the Comforts, and the love of my Relations; but I feel the
anger, and the smart of them; for my own familiar friends, and acquaintance are
become mine Enemies; they reproach me, curse me, speak all manner of evil of me
without cause; and this they do since I set my face toward Heaven: Time was
heretofore, when they did love me dearly; but now they hate me, they persecute
me, and do all manner of evil to me; and is this nothing? is not this a just
cause, and reason for my Discouragement?

Totidem inimici, totidem paedagogi.
Has not our Lord and Savior Christ said, Our Enemies are those of our own
house, they shall ever revile you, and persecute you; but blessed are you, when
they do all this for my Name sake. And I pray tell me, Whether is it worser to
be persecuted, or to be a Persecutor? Your Friends persecute you, speak all
manner of evil, and do al manner of evil to you, even since you have looked
toward Christ; and for his sake ^hey do it, for his sake ye are persecuted,
opposed, maligned: but you might have been the Persecutor, and they the
persecuted; Which is worst? Will you not say, O! it is infinitely better to be
opposed for the way of God, than to oppose? and to be persecuted, than to
persecute? I would choose rather to be persecuted, than to be a Persecutor. God
might have left you to be a Persecutor, and your persecuting Friends might have
been persecuted by you; but now that God has so ordered it by his Providence
and Grace, that you are persecuted, and they persecutors, have you any reason
to complain, or to be discouraged? Know ye not that the world hates his own?
So long as the por stands empty, and there is no Honey in it, the Bees, and
stinging Wasps do not gather about it; but if once there be Honey in it, then
they flock about it: And so long as you were empty of what is good, and walked
on with an empty heart, no opposition was made unto you. But now these stinging
Bees and Wasps flock about you; what does this argue, but that you have gotten
some Honey, somewhat that savoreth of good, and of Christ, which you had not
before; why should you not therefore, rather praise God for what you have, than
be discouraged under your opposition?

This is not my case: For I praise God I do not meet with any opposition, or
persecution from my friends, nor do I need, for my very Affliction is an
opposition unto what is good, my Affliction does indispose me unto what is
good, and expose me unto what is evil, to temptations, and many sins; it keeps
me from Duty, from Ordinances, and Opportunities of doing, and receiving good;
and therefore I am thus discouraged under my Affliction, have I not cause, and
reason now?

Paul, that he was whipped up and down the streets like a Rogue, that he was
often imprisoned; and who would not think but that his reproaches and
imprisonments, should hinder him in the work of his Ministry? But he says,
That his Sufferings turned to the furtherance of the Gospel.



Psalm. 125.3. you find a Promise to this purpose; The Rod of the wicked shall
not rest on the Lot of the Righteous, lest the Righteous put forth their hand
to iniquity. As it is with a Master that sets his Servant to beat the dust out
of his Garment; though he cause the rod, or stick, to pass upon the Garment,
yet he will not suffer it to rest so long upon the Garment, as it shall be torn
thereby. Your Affliction is Gods Rod, and he suffers it to pass upon your
Garment; Why? That he may fetch out your dust therewith; but he will not suffer
this Rod to rest so long upon you, as to tear your Garment; Lest the Righteous
put forth their hand unto iniquity, says the Text.



This is not my fear, or cause of my discouragement; but I am under a great,
and sore Affliction; so, and so afflicted; and I fear I have brought my self
into this Affliction by my sin: had not my sin been the cause of my Affliction,
I should not be troubled; but O! my Affliction is great, and long, and I am
persuaded that my own sin, is the cause thereof; yea, and that which
aggravateth the matter is, I cannot find out what the sin is: if God would but
discover it to me, I should be more at quiet; but my sin is the cause of my
affliction; and I know not what the particular sin is, that has brought me
into this affliction: and have I not just cause and reason for my
discouragement now?

Jonah bring himself into his Affliction by his sin, and yet when did God more
fully appear to him, than when he was in the Whales Belly? Did not David bring
himself into his Affliction by his sin? he sinned in the matter of Vriah, and
the Lord said, The Sword shall never depart from thy House: and what was the
Sword of Absolon, but an Affliction which dropped out of that Threatening,
brought upon him by his sin: and yet when was David's heart in a better frame?
If (says he) the Lord have any pleasure in me, he will bring me back to the
Ark again; if not, let him do with me, what seems good in his Eyes. And when
did God more fully appear to David, than under this Affliction? for he prayed,
The Lord turn the Counsel of Achittophel into folly; and God heard him
presently. And if ye look into Deuteronomy. 4. you shall find a standing Promise made
for your Comfort in this matter; verse 25. If you shall corrupt your selves,
and make a graven Image, or the likeness of any thing, and shall do evil in the
sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger; I call Heaven, and Earth to witness
against you this day, That you shall soon utterly perish from the Land; ye shall
not prolong your days; the Lord will scatter you among the Nations, and you
shall be left few in number among the Heathen, and there you shall serve gods,
the work of men's hands. But if from thence, thou shall seek the Lord thy God,
thou shall find him; if thou seek him with all thine heart, and all thy soul.
1. Here was a great Affliction, to be driven out into another Country. 2. This
Affliction was caused by their great sins. 3. Yet the Promise is, That, if from
thence, from this valley, and bottom, they did seek the Lord, he would show
mercy to them: And all this in the times of the Law; and is not God as gracious
now in the times of the Gospel, as then in the times of the Law? And what
though you cannot find out what the particular sin is, it is good to search;
but sometimes it is better for a poor soul that it is not discovered: For if I
be under an affliction for some particular sin, and find it out, then I am once
humbled for it, and go no further: but if I find it not out, I search, and
search, and so am humbled continually for many sins; and therefore I say, it is
sometimes better that the particular sin is not discovered. Why then should a
godly, gracious soul be discouraged in this respect? Surely he has no reason
for it.

Yet there is one thing sticks with me in regard of personal Afflictions: I
fear that they do not come from Gods Love; were I certain that this Affliction
did proceed from Gods Love, then I should never be troubled; but I even see the
visible Characters of Gods displeasure, and anger, engraven upon my
Afflictions; and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not cause and reason
now?



his Sword is his Friend. So, if God be a Friend to a man, then, not only his
Love is his Friend, and his Mercy his Friend; but his Sword is his Friend, his
Anger is his Friend. Now, God is a Friend to all the Saints, and therefore his
very Anger, and Justice, is a Friend too. But,



Jobs Affliction was a blessing to him; Why? Because he blessed God under it;
The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be his Name, etc.



As many as he loves, he chastises; And blessed is the man whom thou
chastises, and teach out of thy Law: So that if Affliction, be a teaching
Affliction, then it does come from Love.



The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away? etc. I love the Lord never the
lesser for mine Affliction; and the Lord has taught me much in this mine
Affliction; I have gained more by my sickness, than by many a Sermon; yea, and
he has cut me in due time; for if I had not met with such an Affliction at
such a time, I did not know what evil I should have fallen into: and this I
must needs say; I have had more of Gods Presence in my Affliction, than ever I
had before. Well then, be of good Comfort, though your Affliction be very
grievous, yet it does come from Love. And thus it is with all the Saints and
People of God; and therefore, why should they be discouraged, whatever their
Affliction be?

But though a Christian have no reason to be discouraged in regard of his own
private Affliction, yet, has he not reason to be discouraged, when it goes ill
with the Public? And thus it is now with us; we see how it is with this poor
Nation, Troubles and Calamities from every Part, therefore I am thus
discouraged; and have I not cause to be cast down, and to be much disquieted
now?

England, had cause to be afflicted, troubled, and humbled, under the hand of
the Lord, and to run together in Prayer, surely they have reason now; yet says
the Scripture, Say to the Righteous in evil times, it shall go well with him:
Did ever any Calamity come down like a storm upon a Kingdom, but God did
provide some hiding for his own Children? Did he not provide an Ark for Noah in
the time of the Flood? and a Mountain for Lot, in the time of the fire of
Sodom? The worst that man can do, is but to kill his neighbor: Death is the
worst that can fall; and what is death, but an inlet to Eternal Life unto the
People of God? When the Saints in the Primitive Times, came to bear witness by
their deaths, unto the Truth of Christ, then they said, Now we begin to be
Christians indeed, now we begin to be like to Christ. There is a Threefold
Death: Spiritual Death in sin: Eternal Death for sin: And Temporal Death, which
came in by sin. If God spare me from the two former Deaths, the Spiritu^l
Death, and Eternal Death, and only inflict the Temporal Death; have I any cause
to complain? Thus it is with the Saints; though they die Temporally, yet they
are free from the Spiritual, and Eternal Death; and what Godly man may not say,
I could not live long in Nature, and shall I now bear witness unto the Truth
with this little spot of time that remains? Christ died for us, the Just for
the Unjust; and shall not I, that am unjust, be willing to die for the just? The
worst of all is Death; the worst of Death, is gain: When my Body is broken, may
I not say (if Godly) now a poor Pitcher is broken, and shall go no more to the
Well: now a poor Prisoner, my soul, is delivered, and I go home unto my Father.
But if you look into Rev. 7. you shall ^ind, what a glorious issue God does give
unto al his People in the times of public troubles, ver. 9. After this I
beheld, and so a great multitude, which no man could number, of all Nations,
Kindreds, and People, stood before the Throne, and before the Lamb clothed
with white Robes, and Palms in their hands. A Robe is a Garment of Majesty,
Palms are an Ensign of Victory; and says he, I saw them with Robes and Palm^.
The world looks upon my Servants as poor, and of low spirits; but says Christ,
I look upon them as under a royal, Princely Garment, in Robes, and of a
Princely spirit. And though the world look upon them as discomforted, yet says
Christ here, they shall overcome, for they have Palms in their hands: but who
are these? This Scripture tells, ver. 14. These are they which come out of great
Tribulations, and have washed their Robes, and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb: But why are they in white Robes, and their Robes washed? Because by
their Tribulations they are washed from filth. Affliction is Gods Soap; before
a godly man goes into Afflictions, his very Graces are mixed with sin; his
Faith is mixed, and dirtied with Unbelief, and doubtings; his Humility with
Pride; his Zeal with Luke-warmness: but now, by his Tribulation, his Garments,
and Robes are made white, and washed, and he shall be of a more royal spirit,
and be clothed with Robes: But though the Lord make use of my Tribulations,
thus to wash; yet I fear that by these public Calamities, I shall be driven
from Ordinances, the Temple, and Worship of God; nay, says he therefore at
verse 15. They are before the Throne of God, and serve him day and night in his
Temple. But what though we have the Ordinances, if Christ be not present with
them* He ads therefore, And he that sits on the Throne, shall dwell amongst us.
But though we have the presence of Jesus Christ, yet we may suffer much with
want: true, yet verse 16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more,
neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb which is in the
midst of the Throne, shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains
of Water. O! but yet we may be brought in the mean while into grievous streits,
and be in a sad, and mournful Condition. True, but there is a time a coming,
when all tears shall be wiped away from our Eyes; and therefore he ads this at
verse 17. And God shall wipe away all tears from their Eyes. How should tears
be wiped away hereafter, if they were not shed for the present? Though then you
do fear it now, and shed many tears, yet all shall be wiped away, and not one
left. O! what gracious dealing is here! Thus will Christ deal with his People
in troubleous times; and therefore though our condition in regard of the
Public, be exceeding sad, and very grievous, insomuch as we have all cause to
mourn, and weep; yet if you be in Christ, and have made your Peace with God,
you have no reason to be cast down. And thus it is with every godly man; surely
therefore, a godly, gracious man, has no reason for his discouragements,
whatever his Affliction be.

But what shall we do then, that we may not be discouraged whatever our
Affliction be, whether Public, or Private, National, or Personal? A good man
indeed has no reason to be discouraged under his Affliction, but it is a hard
thing to bear up against all discouragements under great Affliction; what shall
we do in this case?



Romans should die no more in their sins, Because Christ being risen from the
dead, died no more; and therefore, says he, though you fall into sins, yet you
shall die no more, because you are risen with Christ. So say I; though your
Afflictions be great, and seem to swallow up all your Comforts; yet your
Comforts shall not be buried in them; for if Godly, you are risen with Christ,
and have fellowship with him, and so die no more: When therefore Affliction
comes, rejoice in that you are made partakers of his Sufferings; and say,
Rejoice not over me, O mine Enemy; for though I fall, yet I shall rise again,
for by my Sufferings, I have fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings, and so
in his Resurrection, Comforts, and Glories.

them; Labor therefore to live by Faith above the World, to be a stranger to
the world, and be more acquainted with the way of Affliction.





what a great deal of gold his Father has given him, then he speaks well of
his Father, notwitstanding all the smart of his head. There is never an
Affliction, but is a bag of Gold given unto the People of God; though it seem a
Leathern Bag without, yet there is Gold within: so long as they stand poring
upon the Leathern Bag, or attend unto the smart of their Affliction, they are
not thankful, they do not praise the Lord, but are much discouraged; but if
they would look into the Bag, and tell their Gold, then they would have Comfort,
and not be discouraged. I tell you from the Lord, there is Gold within; look
into this Bag, the Bag of Affliction, tell over all your Gold which the Lord
has given you in this Affliction, and then you will be quiet. If a mercy be
taken from you, Consider the burden that is taken away too. If a misery come,
Consider the mercy that does come withal, labor ever, labor to see both
together, as well what is for you, as what is against you; then will you never
be much discouraged, although your Affliction be never so great.

And thus I have done with the Seventh Instance.
A LIFTING UP In case of Unserviceableness.
Sermon XI.
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? etc.


SOmetimes the Discouragements of the Saints, do arise, From their Employments,
Work, and Service.

Either they are not called forth to work for God, as they do desire; or they
do want abilities, and skill to work; or they have no success in their work. O!
says one, I am a poor, unuseful, and unserviceable Creature: God has done
much for me, but I do nothing for God: others are used, and employed for God;
but as for me, I am cast by as an useless Vessel, in whom God has no pleasure;
and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not just cause and reason now?

Luther; Political Sweat; Ecclesiastical Sweat; and Domestical Sweat: A man may
sweat at Family Work; and it is a great betrushment, to be betrusted with the
Work of a Family: and this Work you are betrusted with.

So, ye being one Body, are many Members, says the Apostle; and all Members
have not the same Office. Look therefore, as the Station is, which ye have in
the Body of Christ, such is the Work that ye are betrusted with.

quasi Angelus sibi munus consolandi miseros tanquam gloriosius percipiat,
munus autem objurgandi impios tanquam minus nobile, hominibus remittat. Cajetan.

Ac si Angeli proniores essent ad laborantem consolandum quam ad gratulandum
triumphanti.

Mendoza in 1 Samuel Cap. 1. Sect. 6.


as in a work most suitable to them: For, when the Lord would stir up, and
provoke the Children of Israel to repent, he sent a Prophet to them; Judges, 6.
ver. 7.8. But when he would comfort, strengthen, and encourage Gideon, he does
not employ that Prophet therein, but he sends an Angel to him, saying, ver. 12.
The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of Valor. And if ye look into the Story
of the New Testament, ye shall find, That when Christ was on Mount Thabor, in
his Transfiguration, then the Angels are not said to attend upon him; but when
he was sweating in the Garden, then the Angels came and comforted, and
ministered to him; Why? Because this is Angelical work, to comfort, relieve, and
support others in the time of distress. Now, are you not trusted with this
Work? How many poor, drooping, tempted, and deserted souls are there, whom you
may go and administer to? And is this no Work at all?

But there is a Generation Work, a Work of special employment, which God does
trust others with; as for me, I have none of this Work to do; I am a poor,
useless, and unserviceable person, one that God does not use at all; and
therefore I am thus discouraged: for is it not a very great mercy, to be used,
and employed for God in the world?

Moses his Commendation, That he was the Servant of God; Moses, the Servant of
the Lord, is dead. And in this Title, David gloried more, than that he was King
of Israel, Psalm. 18. A Psalm of David, the Servant of the Lord: He does not
say, A Psalm of David, the King of Israel. Thus Paul, Peter, James, and Jude,
do Entitle their Epistles: Paul, a Servant of Christ; and Peter, a Servant of
Christ; and James, a Servant of Christ; and Jude, a Servant of Christ. Yea, and
Christ himself does glory in this Title of Gods Servant: and the Father glories
in Christ upon this account: Matthew. 12.13. Zach. 3.8.
Behold my Se^vant, whom I have chosen. My Servant the Branch. So that a great
Privilege it is, to be Gods Servant, used, and employed for him.

Honor est in honorante. Those that stand before, and wait on Kings and
Princes, honor themselves in honoring their Masters. So, in honoring God, a man
honors himself; yea, and thereby God does put h^nor on him: for what is honor?
but Testimonium* de alicujus excellentia, Testifying of another Excellency;
and the more I testify of any Excellency in a man, the more I honor him. Now,
when God does betrust a man with his Work, he testifies of an excellency in
him: The Lord has counted me faithful, and put me into his Work, says Paul:
yea, the greatest greatness in this world, is to wait upon the great God:
Therefore, faith our Savior of John the Baptist, Am^ngst them that are born of
women, there has not risen a greater than he, Matthew. 11.11. And if ye look
into Genesis 1. ye shall find, That the Moon is c^lled one of the two great Lights,
ver. 16. And God made two great Lights, the greater to rule the day, and the
lesser to rule the night. But though the Moon is said to be lesser than the
Sun, yet it is said, to be one of the two great Lights: And why so? are there
not other Stars greater than the Moon? Yes: but because the Moon is the most
influential, and serviceable to the world, therefore it is said, to be greater
than others. So that in ^ods account, the more service we do in the world, the
greater we are, and the more honorable in Gods Eyes.

Homines nihil agendo male discunt agere. otium est vivi hominis sepultura. Sen.
when we are least at work for God, then is Satan most at work about us. By
doing nothing, men learn to do evil: yea, Idleness is the burying of a living
man.

Esaias, 58.18. That if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry, etc. The Lord shall
guide thee continually; and they that shall be of thee, shall build the old wast
places: thou shall raise up the Foundations of many Generations, and thou shall
be called the Repairer of the Breaches, the Restorer of Paths to dwell in. Here
is Employment, and Betrustment promised.

Rahab, to say, the Spies were gone, when she had hid them in the top of her
house: yet the Lord pardoned this failing to her; Why? Because she believed,
and was useful, and serviceable unto Gods great design in that her day. And if
ye look into Numb. (...) ye shall find, That though Aaron and Miriam, were both
engaged in the same sin and evil, of envying and murmuring against Moses, yet
the Lord spa^ed Aaron, when he struck Miriam with a Leprosy. But why (says
Abulensis) was not Aaron smitten with the Leprosy as well as Miriam? what,
because he was not so deeply in the Transgression as she was? No; for verse 1.
it is said, Then spoke Aaron and Miriam; not as if she were put on by him: Or
because that Aaron confessed his sin, as she did not? No, for so did Miriam
also, for she was a good woman: Or because that God owed Aaron a punishment
till afterward? (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 3. ad Collos.
No, for that appears not by the Text; but he was the High Priest, and if he
had been smitten with Leprosy, it would have brought his Ministry under some
contempt, the Work of the Lord would have ceased for a time also, and though he
failed in this thing, yet he was otherwise, a very useful and serviceable man;
and God would show his aptness and readiness to pardon such, rather than others.

Caleb and Joshua: Of all men in Scripture, it is said of Caleb, that he
followed the Lord fully; and this Character God himself did set upon him, Numb.
15.24. But my Servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and has
followed me fully, etc. But why did God own, and dignifie Caleb thus? Even
because he was faithful in that Work, Service, and Employment which God did
call him to.

Abel, Who being dead, yet speaks; but how does he speak now? The Apostle
tells us, Heb. 11. by Faith, By which (...), It relates unto (...), Faith. Well,
but what cast of Faith did he do? He offered a more excellent Sacrifice than
his Elder Brother, which was the work and Service of his day: So that the
Serviceable man, is the only man who does speak when h^ is dead. Surely
therefore, it is a very great Privilege, and Mercy, to be used, and employed for
God in his Work and Service. Yet if God will not use me, why should I be
discouraged, or complain? Is not God free? and may not he employ whom he
pleases? Shall the poor Potsheard say unto him, why do thou lay me by? What
if God will cross hands, and lay his right hand on another head, and his left
hand on mine? Shall I think to direct and order the hands of Gods Providence,
as Joseph would have altered Jacobs? I^ not his Work his own? and may not he
put it out unto whom he please? and if I complain thereof, is not this my
pride? Proud men scorn their own employment, and envy at others. It Is a mercy
indeed to be employed for God; yet if God will not trust me with his Service,
as I desire, why should I be discouraged? Yet I may be Gods Servant. For,

Numb. 4. and frequently in the old Testament called, The Service of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation. So in the new Testament also, Romans 15.31. That
my Service may be accepted. In the second sense, it is used, Romans 12.1. Which
is your reasonable Service: So also, Revel. 2.19. I know thy work, Charity, and
Service. This latter Service, is the saving Service, that Service, whereby in
special manner we are called Gods Servants: and in that respect we may be
serviceable to God, though not in the former.

Moses one way, in giving out the Law; and h^ employed Ezra another way, in
restoring of the Law: Both were employed, but their Employments were very
different. In 1 Samuel 30. we read, that when David fought against the
Amalek^tes, to recover his Wives, and substance, some of his men stayed and
tarri^d by the Stuff, to preserve that; and says David, verse 24. As his part
is, that goes down to the Battle; so shall his part be, that tarryeth by the
Stuff, they shall part alike. Now it may be, you are one of those that stay by
Christ's Stuff, being employed in some lower and meaner Service; Christ has a
care of you; and though you stay at home, yet you, even you shall have part in
the Spoil, as well as those whose work and employment is more honorable.

Joseph, but he first laid him by; God did make use of Moses, but he first laid
him by; God did make use of David, but did he not first lay him by? Quidam
eundem putant. Emman. Sa. Alp. Salmeron, in Acts, 1.

Vide Transl. Syriac. in Acts 15.22.


And if Barnabas, the Companion of Paul, were the same person with Barsabas (as
some do verily believe (though the Syriack Translation is plainly against it)
because the Name of both was Joses, or Joseph, as appears by comparing Acts,
1.23. with Acts, 4.36. And because this Joses, was not called Barnabas from the
beginning, but named Barnabas by the Apostles, Acts, 4.46.) If, I say, Barnabas
were the same with Barsabas, then it appears plainly, that God does not always
lay a man by, to use him no more; for what abundance of service Barnabas did,
the Book of the Acts does declare; yet he was first laid by in the choice that
was between him and Matthew, for the lot fell on Matthew; yet Barnabas is sent
out afterward by the Church, Acts, 11.22. and by God himself, Acts, 13.2. and
much Service he did do for God: So that though God do lay me by for the
present, yet he may use me afterward.

Matthew. 7. they say at the last day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy
Name, cast out Devils in thy Name, and done many wonderful works in thy Name?
Works, and great works, and many, and wonderful, they did, and all in the Name
of Christ; yet he will say to them, Depart from me, for I never knew you; or I
know you not. Yea, did not our Savior Christ say concerning Judas, I have
chosen twelve, and one of you is a Devil? A Devil, yet an Apostle; what greater
Work, Service, or Employment, than the Work of an Apostle? yet possibly a man
may be an Apostle in regard of Employment, and a very Devil in regard of Life.
On the other side, how many good and gracious men are there in the world, who
were never used, or called forth unto any special Service, such as are now in
Heaven, and shall be so unto al Eternity? What then, though you be not employed,
or used as others are; yet surely you have no just cause or reason to be
discouraged in this respect.

Service of another, as well as in his own, becau e he rejoices in the work it
self, and ^ec^use God is honored. You would have Gods Cart to be driven through
your Gate, Why? is it not because you may have some Toll thereby? Paul said,
However, Christ is preached, and therefore I rejoice; and if Christ's work be
done, whose hands ^oever the work comes through, why should you not rejoice?
And if it be, our Duty to rejoice, then surely you have no Scripture ground and
reason for your Discouragement in this regard.

But I am not discouraged, because I do want Employment, or Service; I have
more work lies upon my Shop-board, than I can turn my hand unto: but I have a
great deal of work to do, and I have no skill to do it: O! I want Abilities, I
want Sufficiencies, I do want Endowments; therefore I am thus discouraged, and
have I not cause and reason now?

G^deon did a great Work for God in his Generation, yet says he, Judge. 6.15. O
my Lord, wherewith shall I save Israel? behold my Family is poor in Manasseth,
and I am least in my Fathers House: As if he should say, if this great work be
done, it must be done by some strong and potent Family, or Person; but as for
me, I am the least in my Fathers House, and my Fathers House is the least in
Manasseh; yet says the Lord to him, I will be with thee, and thou shall smite
Midian as one man. I have read in Scripture, that the People have been too
many, and the means too strong for God to work by; but I never read that it was
too small, or weak for God to work by: God says, Who has despised the day of
small things? And if he will not have us to despise the day of his small things,
surely he will not despise the day of our small things. Did not the weakness of
the Apostles, overcome the strength of all the world? Who does not see what
weighty Buildings God has sometimes laid upon our Laths? He is able to make as
great a hole with his Needle, as with our Bodkin.

Not by might, nor by strength, but by the Spirit of the Lord, says Zachariah.
And if ye look upon that great Service of the re-building of the Temple, when
they came out of Babylon, ye shall find, That so long as they went forth in the
strength of outward Powers, the Command of Cyrus, and the like, they were much
hindered, and the Enemies then caused the Work of the Lord to cease; but when
the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Haggai, Zechariah, Zerubbabel, and others to
build, then they went on, and prospered; Why? Because they went forth in the
strength of the Spirit of the Lord; not in the strength of man's Command, or of
their own Abilities.

Receive ye the Holy Ghost; yea, and though he did thus breath upon them when
he left them, yet they did not then receive in so great a measure of the
Spirit, as afterward; for they were still to wait for the Promise, that is,
the Spirit, Acts, 1. so that though God will carry on his own Work by his own
Strength, and by his own Spirit, yet the assistance thereof, is not always
alike; sometimes it is more, and sometimes it is less; even where it falls in
truth and power.

Dabitur in hora, it shall be given in that hour, it shall not ^^e cold and
stale by you; but when you come to use it, then it shall be given out unto you,
more or less, but sufficient. Before Moses came to his work, he complained of
want of Abilities, his stammering Tongue, and want of El^quence, etc. but when
he was warm at his work, and was engaged in it, then we read of no such
Complaints: Gods Call, is our Wall and Strength. Go in this thy might, says God
to Gideon; and what Might was that? the verse tells you, it was the might of his
Call; for says the Lord in the next words, Have not I sent thee? Judges, 6.14.
Our Might then, is in Gods Call, not in our own Abilities; and a little warm
assistance, is better than much cold and stale ability.

But I fear the Lord has not called me to this Work, but that I am an Intruder
into the Work of the Lord, because I do want Abilities.

Saul; God did first call him, and then he gave him another Spirit; he had not
that other ruling Spirit, before he was called to rule, but after. So the
Apostles were first called to their Office, and then Christ did furnish them
with Abilities, Who has made us able, or meet Ministers, not of the Letter,
etc. When were they made meet, or able? what! before they were called! No, but
afterward. Gods Call is not like to man's, man's Call does always presuppose
abilities, Gods Call does sometimes bring them.

A large, and effectual door is opened, says Paul. God has a door, which when
he calls a man to work, he does then open to him: this Door is kept by certain
Porters, whom God has appointed to keep the same, and if they judge, that you
have abilities, then are you to rest, and acquiesce therein; for though I am to
judge of mine own Grace, and not another; yet others are to judge of my Gifts and
Abilities, and not my self. Some will judge o^ their own Gifts, and of others
Graces; this is evil, but in reference to work, and external Service, others
are to judge of mine Abilities, and not my self; as I am to judge of mine
internal Grace, and not another. Accordingly, Luther counseled Spalatinus, who
having many sad thoughts of leaving his Ministry: This is, says Luther to him,
a Diabolical Temptation, and you know not now, why you are afflicted with it;
we which are Spectators, know it better, therefore you ought rather to trust
us, than your self, who in the Lord, before the Lord, yea, the Lord by us, does
exhort you to go on in your Work, unto which he has called you. So say I now
to you, you doubt of your Call, because you do want abilities; but do those
Porters judge you able, who are set to judge? then are you in this case, rather
to rest in their Judgment, than in your own. Now Gods Porters have judged you
meet for his Work, and have opened the door of Opportunity to you; and
therefore you have no reason to be thus discouraged in this respect; only
remember this, That the weaker your Legs are, the faster you must hold on the
hand of free Grace.

O! but I fear that I am not called to this Work, but that I am an Intruder,
because I meet with so many difficulties in my way.

Nulla Virtus sine lapide; there is no virtue, but has some stone or other
that is rouled upon it: As Christ himself had a stone rouled on him, so every
Work of Christ, and Truth of Christ, and way of Christ, has one stone or other
that is rouled upon it. Yet ye must know, that there is a Pearl lying under
that Stone, and the heavier the stone is, the more precious is the Pearl; the
harder the Nut, and Shell is to crack, the sweeter is the Kernel; Nisi ipse
elevasset lapidem non inventa fui^^^ s^b eo haec margarita. H^b. Proverb.
and in due time Christ will send his Angel to roll away the stone from your
Work, and his Service, and that before you are aware: When the Women said (as
being at a stand, and not knowing what to do) Who shall roll away the stone?
Then did the Angel come, and rouled it away for them, before they were aware of
it. Peter had the Brazen Gates opened for him, when he came to them; they did
not stand open before, but when he came at them, then did they open to him: And
if you go on in your way, and work which God does lead you to, the Brazen Gates
which are now shut against you, shall then open to you; if, I say, you go on in
your work in way of Faith, as following the Conduct of the Lord.

Moses went to bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt, had not he a clear
Call for that? yet what abundance of difficulties did he meet with in his way
to ^t? And when the Jews came out of Babylon, did they not meet with many
Difficulties? Some at their coming out? some in their way? some at the building
of the Temple? yet had they not a Call, and a clear Call thereunto? Without al
doubt they had Surely then, you may have a Call, and a clear Call to your Work
and Service, yet you may meet with many difficul^ies in your way, and therefore
have no reason to be discouraged in this respect.

But I am not troubled, afflicted, or discouraged in regard of my Call; for I
am persuaded that God has called me to his work and Service: But I am most
unserviceable, I do not do that work and Service which I am called unto; I lie
like a dry log, or chip, in the family and place where I live: O! I am most
unserviceable, and therefore I am thus discouraged.

Onesimus before converted, was unprofitable; but being converted, now
profitable, says the Apostle. A good man in Scripture, is compared to those
things that are most profitable: Is the wicked compared to the green Bay Tree,
which does bring forth no Fruit? the g^dly is compared to the Olive Tree, which
is all profitable, the Fruit profitable, the Leaves, Bark, and the Tree
profitable: Is a wicked man compared to the Goat? a good man is compared to the
Sheep, and what is in a Sheep not profitable? its Flesh is profitable, its Wool
profitable, its Skin is profitable, yea, its very dung is profitable: and such
a Sheep was Paul, nothing in Paul not profitable and serviceable: will ye
instance in his Jewish and Natural Privileges? he makes use of them, Phil. 3.
to advance the righteousness and knowledge of Christ, yea, All these (says he)
I count as dung and dross in regard of Christ. Will ye instance in his
Conversion to Christ? he does make use of that to convert others, and to
establish others, Acts, 17.28. (...). Aratus.

1 Cor. 15.33. (...). Menander.

1 Tit. 12. (...). Epimenides.


by frequent telling the story of it to others. Will ye instance in his Parts,
Gifts, and Learning? he makes use of his Hebrew sometimes, sometimes of his
knowledge in the Heathen Poets, sometimes of his knowledge in the Roman Customs.
Will ye instance in his friendship, acquaintance, and interest in men? that he
makes use of wi^h Philemon, from Christ, in the case of Onesimus. Will ye
instance in his Afflictions? he does make use of them to persuade his People to
their Duty; I Paul, a Prisoner of Christ, do beseech you, etc. Will ye instance
in his Temptations? he does make use of them, and tells the Corinths, how he was
buffered by Satan. Will ye instance in his Sins? he does improve them also for
the Advancement of Gods Grace, I was a Blasphemer, etc. says he, but I
obtained mercy. Thus ye see there was nothing in Paul not profitable, he was
all over serviceable, and profitable; and if ye be one of these Sheep, you will
be serviceable and profitable in your Place and Condition, more or less. I
remember the Speech of a Martyr when he came to die, and to be burnt for
Christ, O! said he, Thus long have I grown in the Orchard of Christ, and have
born some Fruit, though not much, yet some; and now that I grow old, and dry,
and can bear Fruit no longer, shall I be taken and thrown into the Chimney to
make a fire for the warming of others: what a great mercy and blessing is this?
Ye know what Solomon says, Whatever thou find in thine hand to do, do it
with all thy might: and what Jeremiah says, Cursed is he that does the Work of
the Lord negligently. Art thou therefore, unprofitable, unserviceable? then
have you cause to be humbled. Yet even in this respect, you are not to be cast
down, or discouraged. For, Either you are unserviceable, because you want
abil^^^es, or because ye want will, and heart thereunto: If you say yo^^ ^t
Abilities, I have spoken to that already: If you say you are unwilling, and do
want heart thereunto, then why do you thus complain? He that complains of his
own unserviceableness, is no^ unwilling to serve the Lord: But you complain,
and say, O! I am most unserviceable, therefore you are willing, and have an
heart to serve; and if you can speak in truth with Samuel, and say, Speak Lord,
for thy Servant is ready to obey, then you are not unwilling to serve the Lord.
Now cannot you say thus in truth? Yes, through Grace, I am able to say, Speak
Lord, for thy Servant is ready to obey. Surely then you are not unwilling, this
your unserviceableness does not arise only from your unwillingnes, and want of
heart; and therefore you have no just reason to be discouraged in this respect.

But this is not the matter which does pinch with me; for according to my poor
Abilities, I have labored, and have been truly willing to serve the Lord in my
Generation; but I labor, work, and take pains, and all in vain; I labor, and
have no success in my labor; I work, and have no success in work; I serve, and
have no success in my Service; and therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not
cause and reason now?

Unless the Seed dies, it abides alone. Should the Husbandman complain in this
time, that he has no success in his sowing? If the Devil do oppose by the
World without, and assault you with Temptations within, it argues that there is
good success, though you know it not. Now, don't the World oppose you? and
don't the Devil assault you with Temptations, discouraging you for want of
success? Yes that he does; then there is some good success, though for the
present it be hidden from your Eyes. This is a certain sign, said Luther to
Spalatinus, That your Work is neither ungrateful to God, nor unprofitable to
the Church, in that you are troubled with these Temptations; for if it were
unpleasing to God, you would rather long after it, as they do that run before
they be sent. Whereas Satan, when he finds such as are truly sent by God, and
pleasing to him, he makes them a weary of their work, by these, and the like
Temptations.

Noah, an hundred and twenty years he preached to the old World, and not one
soul was saved, but his ow^^ ^ily, eight persons in the Ark. Did not Jeremiah
also toil in his day and night? and what did he catch? Read what he says, Jer.
6.29. The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the fire the Founder
melts in vain; for the wicked are not plucked away* Reprobate Silver shall
men call them. Yea, does not Christ himself say, Cogitent sibi hanc causam cum
Christo communem esse. Calvin.
Esai. 49. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught? And do
you think to fare better in this case than Noah, Jeremiah, Christ himself? I
confess the want of success in our work, is a great Temptation, even one of the
greatest Temptations; yet if God will have me lay out my strength in vain, why
should I be discouraged? The good Physician does not lose his Fee, though the
Patient die, nor shall you lose your Reward* though ye have no success.

Yet this is not the thing which does trouble me; for I acknowledge that I have
been entrusted with many Services, and God has called me to them; I have been
willing thereunto, and have had some good success, but when I look into the
Scripture, I find that some have been employed in way of Judgment, as
Nebuchadnezzar; others in way of Mercy, as Nehemiah, etc. Some again have been
employed in way of mercy to others, as Cyrus, and Judas, but not in Love and
Mercy to themselves: Others have been employed in way of Mercy to themselves,
and others too, as Paul, and Peter, etc. Now I fear, that either I have been
employed in away of Judgment, or that I have not been employed in a way of Love
and Mercy to my self, but for others; and therefore I am thus discouraged and
cast down, have I not just cause and reason now?





Isaiah, in the Name of the Lord, Cap. 10.6. I will send him against an
Hypocritical Nation, howbeit he means not so; neither does his heart think
so: But it is in his heart to destroy Nations, not a few. The Lord employed
Peter to open a door to the Gentiles in the Conversion of Cornelius, and though
he knew not Gods design at the first, yet he did fully know it afterward; for
says he, and the rest, Now has God also to the Gentiles, granted Repentance
unto Life.

John the Baptist, I indeed baptize you with Water; but there is one comes
after me, he shall baptize with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, whose
shoo-latchet I am unworthy to unloose. But though the Employment of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, was good and honorable, yet they had low thoughts thereof,
and high thoughts of their own actings, Numb. 16.3. for said they to Moses, and
Aaron, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy: as if
they should say, we are as good as you: Why so? even because they were not
employed in Mercy to their own souls, but for others good.

Ezra, though the Enemy lay in his way to Judea, yet he would not ask a Convoy
of the King; for says he, I was ashamed to require of the King a Band of
Soldiers, Ezra, 8.
and Hors-men, to help us against the Enemy in the way, because we had spoken
to the King, saying, the hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek
him, and his wrath is against all them that forsake him. Now Ezra was a good
man, a man that God did call forth to this Employment, not only out of Love to
others, but to himself; and thus did he act for God, being more careful of Gods
Name in the work, than of their own safety.

Joshua, Chap. 1.) this he looks much upon, and goes forth in the strength of,
and so as he uses his Gift in his work, he does grow in grace thereby; but the
other does not.

Moses in a great Work, but where do you read of any great Estate that he got
for himself? We read of Joshua, That when he had brought the Children of Israel
into Canaan, and divided the Land by Lot to them, then when he had served
others, in the last place he did serve himself, and that in no great matter.
What did Nehemiah get by his Service? not as the former Governors did, Why?
Because he feared the Lord. So then, if a man be employed in way of Love and
Mercy to himself, he does not make his Employment a shooing-horn to his own
Preferment: It Is enough for me, my Masters work is done, says he; neither does
God use to pay them al their wages here, whom he employes in mercy to
themselves. But as the Merchant, if he have to deal with a stranger for a less
Commodity, he paies him down presently; but if with a friend for some great
priced Commodity, he takes time, and does not pay down his money presently. So,
if God have to do with a stranger, as Nebuchadnezzar, he will pay him wages
presently; but if God deals with a friend, whom he employes in mercy to
himself, then he does put off his full payment til afterward.

He lifts not up his voice in the street: and as the Angels in Ezekiel. 1. His
hands are under his wings; he has four hands to work with, but they are not
seen, they are under his wings: Let your Light so shine before men (says
Christ) that they may see your good works, not your selves, and glorify your
Father, not your selves. As it is with the Fisher, so with him; he shows the
bait, but hides himself; he holds forth the word of Truth, but not himself;
though he have four hands to work with, yet they are all under his wings,
hidden; but says Jehu, Come and see my zeal for the Lord of Hosts. This is
another difference.

S^ul, he could not be conte^^ (...) should use David. But when God told Eli,
that he (...), and his House by, he answered, Good is the Word of (...) Lord;
for he was a good man, and one whom God had ^sed (...) Love and Mercy to
himself, and so when God had done wi^h him, he was con^ent there^^th.

Caleb did his own work by half^, and the Work of God ^ully; for he was used in
Mercy to himself and others. Jehu did the Work of the Lord by halfs, and his
own work fully; for though he was u^ed in Mercy to some, and Judgment to
others, yet not in Love to himself.

Jehu on the one hand, and Nehemiah on the other hand. How is it therefore with
thee? Have thou a skill at pulling down what is man's, and no skill, nor heart, to
set up what is Gods? Have thou been employed, and used in Gods Service, and
have you done your own work fully, and Gods work by halfs? Art thou not
contented to be laid by, and that God should use another? Do thou make a
noise in the work, and thy hands not under thy wings? Have thou made a goodly
outward Bargain of the Lords Work? and his Service as a shooing-horn to thine
own ends? Have thou not grown in Experience, Faith, and Holiness by this work?
but in Pride rather? Have thou not been very tender of the Name of God in thy
Service? nor been acquainted with Gods Design? nor thine heart drawn out the
more to love the Lord? Then surely God has not used or employed thee in Love
and Mercy to thine own soul: But if thine heart have been drawn out with Love
to God by thy very Service, and Employments, and thou have been in some measure
acquainted with Gods Design in that Service, and have been very tender of the
Name of God, and more willing to hazard thy self, than to defile his Name, and
have grown in Grace by the exercise of thy Gifts, and have made no Bargain of
the Lords Service, but have had thy hands under thy wings, and have not done
Gods Work by halfs, and now after all, art contented that God shall lay thee
by, and make use of others; then surely the Lord has used and employed thee in
a way of Love and Mercy to thine own Soul; and therefore why should thou be
discouraged in this respect? Certainly you have no just cause, or true reason
for it.

But suppose that the Lord either shall not use me in his Service, or if he do,
that difficulties and oppositions press in upon me, or that I meet with no
success in my work according to my desire, what shall I do, that I may be able
to bear up my heart against all discouragements in this kind?





a desire to commit the same: so some shall be paid for that work and service
for God, which they never did perform, because they were willing to have done
the same. Now, is it not a great mercy to be paid for that work which I never
did? Such is the Privilege of al those that are not called to Service, and yet
are willing to it.









Polycrates, King, or rather Tyrant of Samos, prospered so abundantly in all
that he undertook, Amasis the King of Egypt, his Friend, and Confederate, wrote
thus to him: (...) etc. Herodotus.
That thou do well, and prosper, is no small joy to me; but I must tell thee
plainly, That these great, and overflowing Successes, do not please me, who
know full well the Nature of the gods, how envious they are: It Is my wish
concerning my self, and the like I wish for all my Friends; sometimes to
prosper, and sometimes to miscarry; and in this Vicissitude rather to pass my
life, than without any alteration to prosper; for I never yet could hear of any
who having thus prospered long, did not at the last, end in universal
destruction. Which he imputed to the envy of their gods; for their gods were
Devils; and indeed, what is the Reason that the successful men in any kind are
the most envied by the world; but because the Devil (who is the envious one)
does provoke thereunto. Yet always so it is, Fractus honos oneris, fructus
honoris onus.
That success does raise envy: Have thou therefore been at work, and have had
no success, then shall you be the more free from envy.



Proprie autem dici non potest quod Christus frustra laboravit ne quidem
respectu Judaeorum tum quod Christus omnium conversionem vere non intendit sed
tantum eorum quos efficaciter convertere voluit qui principaliter sunt electi
tum quod opus predicationis Christi apud eos qui non erant convertendi, us^m
suum tamen habuit vel quod erat futurum hoc illis in testimonium in dic judicii
vel quod ad consolationem nostram id fecit ut videlicet predicatores non nimium
dolerent et animum abjicerent si semen ab illis projectum aliquando viderent in
animis audientium non fructificare. Estius in Loc.

Sensus igitur hoc loco sic esse poterit; consumpsi frustra vires etc. quasi
dicat; non est quod quisquam existimet id circo me frustra laborasse, quod non
missus venerim, aut aliter atque oporteret rem tractarim in aliquove
deliquerim, conditio (sic enim significat (...)) studia et actiones omnes me
(sic significat (...)) imo omnia mea a Deo meo a patre omnium Deo disposi^a et
ordinata fuere. Forerius in Esai. c^p. 49.


But in this case, Why should not that comfort and support us, which did comfort
and support Christ himself? Esai. 49.2. ye read of his Call to his Work; The
Lord has called me from the Womb, from the bowels of my Mother he has ment^on
of my Name: Here Is his clear Call to work, ver. 2. ye have his Divine
assistance, And he has made my mouth like a sharp Sword, in the shadow of his
hand has he hid me, and made me a polished shaft in his quiver. Then verse 4.
ye have his want of success expressed in many words: Then said I, I have
labored in vain: Is that all? No: I have spent my strength for naught: But is
that all? No: And in vain, again. Then at verse 6. God the Father comforts him
against this di^couragement; And he said, It is a light thing that (...)
should be my Se^vant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob: I have given thee for a
light to the Gentiles. Though thou have little success in this work amongst the
Jews, thou shall have great success in a greater. But wherein does Christ
comfort himself in this case of no success in his work amongst the Jews? That
ye have in verse 4. Surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my
God. Whatever Judgment men do make, it matters not much, for my Judgment is
with the Lord, and my Work with my God. I have done the work which God gave me
to do, and therein I have approved my self unto God; and therefore though I
have labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught, yet I have Comfort in
my work, for my Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work with my God; I have not
lost my Labor, for my Work is with God. And thus may you also comfort your self
in the want of success; true, I have labored in vain as to others, but not in
vain to my self; I have lost my labor as to others, but not as to my God; for
my reward is with God, and though I have spent my strength for naught in regard
of men, yet my work is with my God; and in all this work I have approved my self
unto him; and therefore whatever the success be, yet will not I be discouraged*
for my Judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God.

And thus I have done with this Eighth Instance, whereby it does appear that a
good man has no reason, or cause to be discouraged in regard of his Work, or
Service, however it may fare with him therein.

A LIFTING UP In case of Discouragements DRAWN From the Condition it self.
Sermon XII.
PSALM, 42.11. Stepney, June 18. 1648.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? etc.


SOmetimes the Discouragements of Gods People are drawn, from their Condition,
the Condition it self.

O! says one, My Condition is exceeding sad, both for Soul, and Body; there is
no Condition that is like to mine: my Affliction, and my Condition, are
twisted, and woven in together; my Affliction, Misery, and my Calamity, are
seated in my very Condition: they do not only grow upon my Condition, but are
in the Condition it self, and therefore I am thus discouraged; have I not
cause, and reason for it?

Cum been sit malis, et male bonis; when it goes well with those that are bad,
and ill with those that are good, I am strongly solicited to believe there is
no God, said the Heathen: but we have learned better Divinity than this. A man's
Condition may be very bad, and yet the man himself may be very good, and God
may be good to him. Yea,

Dives, and Lazarus? Jacob was driven out of his Fathers house, and lodged in
the open fields in the night, whilst wicked Esau, profane Esau, staid at home,
and lay in his warm bed: ye do not read that ever Esau did serve so hard a
Service in Labans house, as Jacob did, nor are ye able to parallel Esau's
misery with Jacob's; yet says the Lord, Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I
hated. So that it is possible for a good and godly man's Condition, in regard of
the world, to be worser than the condition of the wicked. Yea,

Paul? do you read that ever Paul before his Conversion was put into the
stocks? that he was whipped up and down the streets like a Rogue? that he was
imprisoned? that he was stoned by his Countrymen? But after his Conversion, he
was so used. In the beginning of that 19. Chapter of the Acts, he breaths out
threatenings against the Saints, and goes out to kill the People of God; but no
sooner is Paul converted, but the Jews sought to kill him: So that I say,
poss^bly a gracious man's Condition, in regard of outward may be worser, at
least for a time, than it was before he was converted, and drawn to God.

But now, Take a godly man's Condition, and though it be never so sad, yet there
is no reason why he should be discouraged, or cast down because of his
Condition, in it self considered. For,

Psalm. 16. see what David says of Christ, and Christ of the Saints, at verse
6. My lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place; yea, I have a fair
Heritage, or a goodly Heritage; Why? (verse 5.) The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup. Three Things are most considerable here. First,
These words are plainly spoken of our Lord and Savior Christ, and of his great
Sufferings, as appears by verse 10. For thou will not leave my soul in Hell,
neither will thou suffer thine holy One to see Corruption. Men, and Brethren
(says the Apostle in Acts, 2.29.) Let me speak unto you of the Patriark David,
that he is both dead and buried, and his Sepulcher is with us unto this day;
therefore being a Prophet, and God had sworn unto him, that of the fruit of his
Loins according to the Flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne; he
seeing this before, spoke of the resurrection of Christ. At verse 27. of the 2d
chapter, ye have the same words that you have here in Psalm. 16. Thou will not
leave my soul in Hell; neither will thou suffer thine Holy One to see
corruption. So that plainly, the words of the Psalm are spoken of Christ, and
of his great Sufferings. But now in the Second place; Though his Sufferings
were very great and many, yet says he, My lines are fallen unto me in a
pleasant place, and I have a goodly Heritage; But why so? The Reason is (in the
Third place) in verse 5. The Lord is the portion of my Inheritance, and of my
Cup; the Lord, my Father, says he, has drawn out my lines for me, he has
measured out my condition, and the Lord himself is my portion, and the portion
of mine Inheritance. Thus now, may every godly man say; My lines are fallen
unto me in a pleasant place, yea, I have a goodly Heritage; Why? for the Lord
is the Portion of mine Inheritance, and of my Cup; Surely, therefore he has no
reason to be discouraged, whatever his Condition be. Again,

Man lives not by Bread, but by every Word of God; so say I, Man lives not upon
his Condition, but upon Gods Call into his Condition; and if God call a man into
a Condition, he will maintain him in it: therefore you find those two go
together, in Psalm. 16. Thou maintainest my Lot; at the latter end of verse 5.
And my lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place. And thus it was with the
Children of Israel, when they went through the red Sea; it is said, The Waters
stood like a wall on each side of them: ye never read before, of a wall of
water, and yet then the waters were as a wall unto them; a strange kind of Wall
made of Waters; but says the Text, The Waters were as a Wall, stood as a Wall
on each side of them. Beloved, Gods Call, is our Wall; which will bear off, and
bear up ones heart under troubles, and discouragements. O! ^aith a gracious
soul, what abundance of opposition do I meet withal in my Condition; but yet
the Lord has called me into this Condition, and therefore I am quiet, I am
contented, I am satisfied; I confess I did not think to have met with so much
Affliction in my Condition as now I do; but God has called me into it, and
therefore I have Comfort. Thus it is with all the Saints, they are led by Gods
Call into their Condition, and they can show their Patent, they can say, here
is my Call. Now, if a man do not live upon the Condition it self, but upon Gods
Call into his Condition; and God does call his People into whatsoever condition
they are; then they have no reason to be discouraged by reason of their
Condition. Again,

Solomon says; Shall a living man complain? is not a living Dog, better than a
dead Lion? Some Mercy still that is mixed with Misery, and Jesus Christ has
paid the Reckoning; godly men have nothing to pay, not any thing to pay.
Suppose you were invited to a great Feast, and some of the Dishes were not so
well dressed or cooked up, as you desire; would you find fault? would you
complain? No; Why? Because this feast does cost me nothing: the Master of the
Feast may find fault, but I am a Guest, and it cost me nothing, and therefore I
have no reason to complain. Beloved, the Lord Jesus Christ, is the great Master
of the Feast, and of all the Comforts which you have, and he has paid all your
reckoning, there is nothing for you to pay; and if you bring in your Prayers,
your Tears, your Obedience, as matter of Payment, they will not be taken; ^o,
says Christ, I have paid al my self, witness these empty Purses, these empty
Veins of mine; as for you, O my Friends, ye are welcome, but you have nothing to
pay, not a penny, not a fa^thing. I say, there is no condition that a godly man
can fall into, but there is some mercy that is mixed withal, and Christ has
paid the reckoning for the mercy too; surely then, the People or God have no
reason to be discouraged by reason of their condition.

But (will some say) I am in a poor, low, mean, base, and despised condition,
and therefore I am thus disquieted; as for those that are in a prosperous
estate and condition, they may well bear up their heads, and be of good
comfort: Rich men indeed, and those that are in a prosperous condition, have
many opportunities of serving God, publicly, and privately, which a poor man
has not; they have time to frequent the Ordinances in the week, to converse
much with God in private, whilst the poor man is fain to be at work for his
living, and glad he can get his living too; there is no man knows the misery of
a poor condition, but those that are in it: and such is my condition and,
therefore I am thus discouraged; have I not cause and reason for it?

Numbers, 4. you shall find, That every opportunity of Service carries a burden
with it; and therefore the Service of the Levites, is often, and in many verses
of the Chapter, called a burden: I will name but one, which is the last;
According to the Commandment of the Lord, they were numbered by the hand of
Moses, every one according to his Service, and according to his Burden:
Service, and Burden, do here go together; Burden, and Service; Service, and
Burden. And now poor soul, is it a burden to you, that you are freed from a
burden? has not our Lord and Savior Christ said, and do you not find it in
Experience, That the poor receive the Gospel? is not a living Sprig of a Tree,
better than a dead Arm? The poor Hen (you know) so long as she lives, is upon
the Dunghill, and there she is scraping, and picking up her living; but when she
is dead, then she is brought unto the Masters Table. The Hawk on the contrary,
while he is living, is carried upon the Fist, and upon the Arm, and has good
flesh, and provision made for him, and a house to sit in; but when the Hawk
dies, then he is thrown out unto the Dunghill. So in this case; so long as a
poor, godly man is living here, it may be he is upon the Dunghill, and picking
up his living, a little, and a little; but when he dies, then he is brought
into his Masters presence. But the rich, ungodly man, when he dies (though
while he lived, he had great provision) yet then he is thrown out unto the
Dunghill, and comes no more into his Masters Presence. O! you that are godly,
though in a low condition, would you then change your condition with the
wicked? The lower your Condition is, the higher is your Obedience; if you
submit unto the work of your Condition, this is Angelical Obedience: for the
Angels, though in order of Nature, they are above Men, yet at the Command of
God, they are ministering Spirits unto Men, attend, and look to Men, that are
much below them in Nature: and the lower the work is, that they do in tending
Men, the higher is their Obedience to God. So say I; The lower the work of your
Condition is, the higher, and more Angelical, Luc. 6. Vae vobis divitibus
quoniam accepistis hic consolationem vestram: non simpliciter dicit Christus
quoniam consolationem recipitis in hac vita sed addit Vestram quasi ista sit
ipsorum portio, ultra quam nihil illis boni sit expectandum amplius unde in
Graeco pulchre positum est (...). Musculus in Matthew. ^. p. 67. Non est simplex
verbum (...) ^ed compositum (...) significat antein (...) non tamen simplic ter
recip^re ^t ha^e^e, fed portionem solat^i sui jam accepisse et jam habere, ^t
^o^tea m^llam aliam et ^^hil ampl^^^ vel petere possit* vel expectare de^ent.
Chapter m^it. (...). cap. ^0. p. ^., 2.
is your Obedience in submitting unto your Cond^tion, and to the work thereof.
Luther said; A poor woman knitting of a pair of stockens in a way of Faith,
does a greater work, than Alexander did in conquering the World. It was the
Speech of a good man that is now in Heaven; The more Riches, the more Debts:
for if a man be not in Christ, al his present Riches will be future Debts; he
will wish, O! that I had had less of them, O! that I had had never a penny. And
I pray tell me, who have most Promises in Scripture? the Poor, or the Rich? the
Oppressed, or the Oppressor? the High, or the Low? He that is most exercised,
has the most Promises; and a low Condition, is an excellent Commentary upon
those Promises. When the Sun shines, ye see not the Stars; but in the night,
the Stars appear. So, whilst Prosperity shines upon us, we do not see the
Promises; but when the night comes, Adversity comes, a dark and low Condition
comes, then we see those Promises which we saw not before. But suppose that a
Father has two Children, and to one he gives a brave Garment, saying unto him;
Child, take, and wear this Garment; but there is all thy Portion, I shall give
thee no more. The other he gives a mean Garment to; but says he, Child, be
contented, it is nor thy Portion; thy Brothers Garment is his Portion; but
though thy Garment be mean, it is not thy Portion, I have a good Inheritance
for thee: Will not this latter Child be contented? will he be discouraged think
you, because he has not so brave a Garment as the other has? Why, take a
wicked man, and though he have a braver Garment, yet it is all his Portion, his
Portion is in this Life, there is all thou shall have, says God, there is thy
Portion. But now, as for a godly man, though he have a mean Garment, yet it is
not his portion. O! you that are godly, will you then be discouraged, because
you have not so brave, and fine a Garment as another has? Consider, that the
Lord himself is your Portion.

O! but I praise the Lord, I am not in a poor, and low, and base Condition, my
Condition is full enough; but I am in an unsettled Condition, I am never
settled in my Condition, sometimes in one Condition, and sometimes in another;
could I be but set led, though I had the lesser, I should be contented; but my
Condition is never settled, and therefore I am thus disquieted, and discouraged,
have I not some reason now?

(...) Stetit, constitit, constitutus s^^.
Verily (says the Psalmist) the best estate of every man, (or, every man in
his best estate) is altogether vanity; so you read it: But in the Hebrew it is,
Every man standing, Omnis homo stans, as Montanus gives it, every man in his
most settled Estate, so the word signifies; Verily every man in his most settled
estate, is altogether vanity.

Sensibile positum juxta sensorium nulla sit sensatio.
That if a sensible Object be laid close to the Organ of Sense, there will be no
sensation; as if a Book be held close unto your eye, you will not be able to
read a letter; but hold it at a convenient distance, and then you may read it
al. So here; so long as a man is in a condition, and that is held close unto
him, he does not see his own carriage therein, but at a distance he does;
wherefore the Lord does remove him to some distance from his former condition,
and so he sees, and observes what he was, and did therein. It is an easy
thing for a man to sing when the Psalm is set, a Child can do it; but it
requires some skill to begin, it requires some singing skill to turn readily from
one tune to another; but when the Psalm is begun, every one can go on then. A
poor weak Horse can go on in the Road, so long as he keeps the same way; but
when he comes to turn out of that way into another, then he stumbles; it
requires some strength in a Horse to go readily over the Cart-wracks, to go
readily from one way into another, this requires strength. So every poor, weak
man, may go on in the same way, and in the same condition, this requires no
great store of strength; but to carry the sameness of heart toward God in
variety of Conditions, this argues strength, this requires skill: What therefore
if the Lord will lead you from one condition to another, and so draw out your
skill, and strength, and has no design but of Love upon you, will you then be
discouraged? Thus it is with all the Saints; surely therefore they have no
reason to be cast down in this respect.

O! but I am not so much troubled about my outward Condition, as about the
condition of my Soul, the Lord knows my Souls Condition is very sad; for
sometimes I am under the Ordinances, and sometimes not; sometimes I can stir out
to an Ordinance, but sometimes oppositions keep me at home; I am not under a
settled Ordinance; and when I am under the Ordinance, I get little good thereby;
I hear, and I do not remember, my heart is hard, and dead, and dull, and it is
little that I profit, and therefore I am thus discouraged; have I not cause,
and reason now?

Canaan, where there was ordinary food, then Manna ceased; but when ordinary
food could not be had, as in the Wilderness, then they had Manna, Bread that
was baked in the Clouds, then they had Angels Food immediately from God; and
immediate Mercies that come immediately out of the hand of God, are the
sweetest Mercies. God does always give some opportunities of good unto his
People; either of doing good, or receiving good; and the less opportunity they
have of receiving good, usually the more opportunity they have of doing good:
what though your hand be empty of receiving opportunities? yet if your hand be
full of doing opportunities, have you any cause to be discouraged? God knows
how to give the comfort of an Ordinance in the want of an Ordinance. When Jonah
was in the Whales belly, he prayed; and in his prayer, he looked toward the
Temple, though he was absent from it, and the Lord heard his prayer. And
Beloved, if the Lord do remember your carriage, labor of Love, Longings,
Groanings, Mournings after the Ordinances, as much when you want them, as he
remembers your enlargements under them; then you have no reason to be
discouraged in this respect. Now look into Psalm. 132. and you shall see how
David presses the Lord to remember him, verse 1. Lord, remember David, and all
his afflictions; he was in great Afflictions, and he desired the Lord to
remember him; but under what Notion would he have the Lord remember him? why
says he, remember him? How he swear unto the Lord (verse 2.) and vowed unto
the mighty God of Jacob; surely I will not come into the Tabernacle of my
House, nor go up into my Bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to
mine eyelids, until I have found out a place for the Lord, an Habitation for
the mighty God of Jacob. He wanted the Ordinance, and his heart was restless
after it; and now he desires the Lord to remember him for this. So that I say,
God will in a special manner remember your carriage; labor of Love, longings,
and groanings after Ordinances when you want them. O! but though the Lord do
remember us in due time; yet what shall we do in the mean time? Mark what
follows; at verse 6. Lo, we heard of it at Ephrata, we found it in the fields
of the woods; What is that? Lo, we heard of it at Ephrata; we heard of it, that
is, we heard of the Ark (which he had spoken of before) and the Habitation of
the mighty God of Jacob. We heard of it at Ephrata; as if he should say, it was
commonly reported, and thought, that the Lord would settle his Ark, and his
House, and Habitation at Ephrata, at Bethlehem, a plentiful place; but now we
have found it in the fields of the Wood. Now we find that the Lord will settle
his House, and his Ark at Jerusalem, which is compassed about with Hills full
of Woods; in the Fields of the Forest have we found it. Beloved, our eye is
all upon Ephrata, upon Bethlebem, upon the plentiful place; but the Lord does
so order things in his Goodness, that when he brings his People into the Woods,
the Fields, the Forest, there they find his Ark, his Presence, and his
Habitation in the midst of it. And what godly man is there, whom God has
called at any time from the Ordinance, but he may say thus; Lo, we heard of it
at Ephrata, but we have found it in the Fields of the Woods; and if you do not
find the Presence of God, and the Ark of God, and his Habitation at Ephrata;
yet if ye find him in the Fields of the Woods, in the barren Forests; have you
any cause to complain? No surely you have not. O! but I am in a plentiful place
for the present, I am at Ephrata; I am not in the barren Fields, I am under
plentiful and precious Ordinances; but I do not remember, I hear, and I
remember not.





barrenness. A good man may be less fruitful than another, or th^^ he was
formerly, yet he may be fruitful; and it may be thus with you. But suppose you
cannot profit under the means, and be indeed unfruitful; yet there is a great
deal of difference between the unfruitfulness of the good Tree, and the
barrenness of the barren fig tree. 1. Though a good man be unfruitful, yet he
is very sensible of his unfruitfulness, O! (says he) there is not a more
barren, vile, wretched, unprofitable heart in all the world than mine: it is not
so with the barren soul. 2. Though a good man may be too unfruitful, yet he does
not cumber the ground; the barren fig tree does, Luke, 13. that is, he does eat
out the heart of the soil from others, and does hinder others; he is a cumber
to the place and family where he grow and lives: the good man is not so, but
though he is unprofitable in his own eyes, yet in truth he is profitable to the
souls of others. 3. Though a goo^ (...) does not profit so much as he should
and would, yet he is (...) that any means should be used with him for his
profit and growth, even to be dug about, and dunged: And I will dig about
it, Luke, 13.
and dung it. Upon which words, says Bernard; Non refugit faeditatem medii,
qui expectat facunditatem animae: Dung is a means unsavory, and he that desires
the growth of his Grace, will not refuse the foulness of the means, that means
which to flesh and blood is unsavory. 4. Though a good man may be very
unfruitful, yet God will not cut him down, he will prune him, and cut him in such
a time as he may grow thereby, but he will not cut him down. But the barren
Fig Tree, he will cut it down; cut it down, says the owner, why should it
cumber the ground any longer? But however it be, Art thou unfruitful,
unprofitable under the means? then have you cause to be humbled: Humble your
self therefore before the Lord your God, yet be you not di^couraged.

O! but yet this is not my case only; for I do not barely complain of my
unprofitableness under the Means, and Ordinances (though that is much) but I
fear that my Spiritual condition is not right; and if my spiritual condition be
not good and right, after I have lived thus long under such searching means,
and Ministry, I fear it will never be right: I do not read in all the Scripture
that ever an Hypocrite was converted; Publicans and sinners I read of, but I do
not read of an Hypocrite converted; and having lived under the means of Grace
thus long, if now my c ndition be unsound, then I am an Hypocrite, and indeed
this I fear, and therefore I am thus discouraged; have I not cause and reason
for it?

this. When our Lord and Savior Christ rose from the dead, the stone was rouled
and removed away: and when the Lord Christ does raise up a poor soul, he will
roll away the stone, though it be as heavy as death, though it be as heavy as
Hypocrisy, though the stone be as heavy as Hell it self; yea, Christ will roll
away the stone though it has lien long upon you. And I pray, what think you of
Paul? was not Paul an Hypocrite before his Conversion? Woe to you Scribes and
Pharisees, Hypocrites, says our Savior; and says Paul concerning himself,
concerning the Law, I was a Pharisee: our Savior says, that the Scribes and
Pharisees were Hypocrites; and Paul says concerning himself, he wa^ a
Pharisee, and yet he converted. There is one Hypocrite then converted, and you
may read of orhers.

John Bradford, that being in Prison, and writing to a friend, he Subscribes
his Letter thus; Yours in Christ, a m^st unprofitable, ha^d-hearred, mi erable
sinner: And another Letter he subscribes thus; Yours in Christ, a very pa nted
Hypocrite, John Bradford. Some here are, that think their souls are sincere and
yet they are most unsound: Some again think they are un^ound, and yet they are
most sincere.

Zacheus, before he was converted he was a gr^^ Oppressor, and a covetous man;
but being o^ce converted, says he, Lord, behold, the half of my goods I give
unto the poor; and if I have wron^ed any man, I'^e restore fourfold; here he
walks contrary to himself. So the Jailer, before he was converted, he
imprisoned the Apostles, and whipped them till the blood ran down upon their
backs; but being converted, he has them into his hou^e, sets meat before them,
and washes th^i^ wounds; he walks contrary to his own former self. So Paul,
before he was converted, he persecuted the Saints, and the Gospel; after
converted, then he did preach the Gospel, which before he persecuted: thus he
walked contrary to his former self. I have read, or heard of a young man that
was given much to jeering, and scoffing; and his Mother being godly, he would
frequently jeer, and scoff at his own Mother; it pleased God at the last to
work savingly upon him, and then he would never come into the presence of his
Mother, but he would fall down upon his knees, not in the morning, and evening
for a blessing; but whenever he came into the presence of his Mother, he would
fall down in a reverential way upon his knees, til she bid him stand up. I do
not commend the action, but I speak this to show, That when a man is converted,
and turned to God, then he will walk contrary to himself. Now, whoever you be
that make this Objection, Have you not found it thus in your own souls? I
appeal unto you, Cannot you say thus? Indeed it is little I enjoy of God here;
but the Lord knows, I do long, and mourn for the presence of God i^ Christ, as
the best thing in all the world; and I am much in the examination of mine own
heart in private, when no eye does see me; and I do desire those things most
that are the most Spiritual, and the most savory, those my soul closes most
with; and I do not desire Grace for Comfort, but I desire Comfort for Grace:
and Ah Lord, thou know I have gone up and down fearing for many years
together, that I have been an Hypocrite; I have sat down weeping, and said, O!
I am an Hypocrite, I am an Hypocrite, Hypocrisy has been my burden indeed.
And Lord, thou know, I do now walk contrary to my former self; before the
Lord was pleased to work upon me, so, and so, and so I lived; but now, through
Grace, I do walk contrary to my former self: Then Soul, be of good comfort; for
though there may be many failings, for which you should be humbled, yet do not
say that thou art an Hypocrite; thy condition is, or may be, very good:
wherefore go in Peace, and the Lord comfort thee.

5.
O! but (will some say) this is not my case yet; for I do not only fear that my
condition is unsound, but I am afraid that I am concluded under it, and it will
never be otherwise; for there are but some few Elect, and chosen ones that
shall ^e saved to all eternity, it may be one of a hundred, or one of a
thousand; and things are now cast in time according to Gods Decree before time.
Indeed, if this were true, That Christ died for all, for all particular men,
and that Christ intends to save every particular man, as the Doctrine of some
is, then I should have hope; but I have heard that this Doctrine is not true,
and that Christ did not die for all men, with intention to save every
particular man, and therefore seeing that few are under Election, one of an
hundred, or two of a thousand; I fear that I am none of them; and therefore I
am thus discouraged, have I not cause and reason now?



Non qui futuri eramus sed u^ essemus, nempe certum est, nempe manifestum est,
ideo quippe tales eramus futuri quos elegit ipse predestinans ut per gratiam
ejus tales essemus. Austin, L. Predestin. Cap. 8.
whom God has chosen to Grace and eternal Glory, before the Foundation of the
World was laid; for the Apostle Paul says expressly, Ephesians. 1.3. That we are
chosen in Christ before the Foundation of the World; he does not say, blessed
be God, who has decreed to choose us, but who has chosen us; nor does he say,
who has chosen All, but US, where some ar^ chosen, others are left; nor does
he say, who has chosen us upon foresight of our Faith or Holiness, but that we
may be holy, Holiness being the fruit of Election; and if ye look into Matthew.
25. ye shall find that those who stand at Christ's right hand at the day of
Judgment, unto whom he says, Come ye blessed inherit the Kingdom, are such for
whom the Kingdom was prepared before the Foundation of the World.



Bains, God only knows his Collectively; no Man or Creature does in this sense
know who are Gods.

Characters of the Seal upon the Wax, you know the Seal has been set upon it,
though you did not see when it was done. Of this mind was that blessed Martyr,
Mr. John Bradford (with whom Mr. Fox does join, Vol. 3. p. 354. Acts Monum.
in his Annotations upon Mr. Bradfords Faith.) Thus do I wade (says he) in
Predestination, in such sort as God has opened; I begin with Creation, from
thence I come to Redemption, so to Justification, and so to Election: De
Electione judicandum est a posteriori.
We must judge of Election by that which comes after, that is, by our Faith,
and belief in Christ; not the Faith is the Efficient Cause of our Election, but
the Effect rather, and the Cause certificatory, or the cau e of our
Certification, whereby we are brought to the knowledge of our Election; and to
this purpose does the Apostle exhort us to make our Calling and Election sure;
Give all diligence (says he) to make your Calling and Election sure: I^ seems
then, 1. Tha^ t^ere are some who are E^^cted. 2. That a man may know, and ^e
assured of his own E^ection. 3. That the way to know this, is not to begin a
loft, but to begin below with our Vocation; and therefore the Apostle puts
Election last, saying, not make your Election, and your Vocation sure; but make
your Call^ng and your El^ction sure.

he bare the sins of many, Esai. 53. not of all, but of many: and so whilst
Christ lived, preaching only to the Jews, and commanding his Disciples not to
go into the way of the Gentiles, it is said, He gave himself a ransom for many;
not for all, but for many: but when the Apostles preached to the Gentiles, then
it is said indeed, and not before, That Christ died for all, Why? Because they
held forth Christ to the Gentile, as well as to the Jew: And therefore if ye
look into 1 Timothy 2. you shall find, That whereas the Apostle had said, verse 4.
Who would have all men to be saved; and ver. 5.6. For there is one Mediator who
gave himself a ransom for all: He explains this, in regard of the Gentiles,
verse 7. Whereunto I am ordained, a Preacher, and an Apostle; a Teacher of the
Gentiles: and thus it is a reason why they should pray for all, even for the
Heathen Magistrates, ver. 1. And to the same purpose does the Apostle John
speak, Epist. 1. Chap. 2. Ver, ^. And he (speaking of Christ) is the
Propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but for the whole world; not
for the sins of the whole World, as o^r Translation gives it: But as the Greek,
Trem. et Bod. et non pro nostris tantum sed etiam pro totius mundi; nequaquam
hanc' interpretationem fert phrasis; verto ergo et non pro nobis tantum sed
etiam pro toto mundo, sic et Arabs, etc. porro usitatum est Hebrais totum
mundum dicere pro certa universitate quorundum de quibus in subjecta materia
agitur etc. Ludov. de dien. In Joan. 1.2.
and the ancient Syriack renders it, for the whole world: but why, and how is
Christ the Propitiation for the whole World? What, is Christ the Propitiation
for every particular man in the World? No, but the whole World is opposed to the
Jews, unto whom he wrote; for to the believing scattered Jews did he now write,
as appears by the Title of this Epistle, called an Epistle General; which
Title, only those Epistles of James, Jude, and Peter have; which were written
to the scattered Jews, 1 Pet. 1. 1 James, 1.1. So that in this sense it is
true, Christ died for all, that is, for the Jew and Gentile; but that he died
for every particular man in the world, with intention to save him, is no where
to be found in the Scripture.

As for the comfortableness of that Doctrine of Universal Redemption, whereas
it is said, That it is Conducible to the comfort of such as are afflicted and
troubled in Spirit. If this Doctrine of Universal Redemption, be indeed an
Enemy to the comfort of a poor, doubting, afflicted soul, Joannes qui natione
Judaeus erat ne existimaretur docuisse pro Judaeis tantum Christum
propitiationem esse quando dixit est propitiatio pro peccatis nostris, adjecit,
pro totius etiam mundi peccatis ut etiam Gentes significare^. Cyrill. L. 11.
Cap. 19.
then you have no reason to be discouraged in regard of this Objection, or of
your own Condition in this respect.

Now to clear that, take these Four or Five Arguments:

Arg. 1. That Doctrine which does enervate, or make void the Satisfaction of
Christ for actual sins, cannot be a friend, but a great enemy to the faith and
comfort of a poor, doubting, and afflicted soul; for he is especially troubled
for his actual sins; and the great comfort that he has, lies in this, That
Christ has satisfied for them. Now, what says the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, to the Satisfaction of Christ for actual sins? It plainly tells us,
that a man may be, and thousands are damned for those very sins which Christ
has satisfied for, and it must needs ^ay so; for if Christ died for all the
particular men in the world, then all the particular men in the world may be
saved; and if they may be saved, then Christ did bear their actual sins on the
Cross, or else a man's sins may be pardoned, which Christ did not bear on the
Cross; and if Christ did bear the actual sins of all the Particular men in the
world, then those that are damned, must be damned for those very sins which
Christ did bear, and satisfy for, or else they are not damned for them: But
men are not only damned for their final unbelief, but for sins against the Law;
for the Law is made for the ungodly: and Romans 2.12. As many as have sinned
without Law, shall also perish without Law. And because of these things (says
the Apostle, speaking of actual sins against the Law) the wrath of God comes
upon the Children of disobedience. Now if men be damned for their actual sins
against the Law, and Christ have born them on the Cross, and satisfied for
them, then men are damned for those very sins which Christ has satisfied for;
and if so, then what is this but to enervate, and make void the satisfaction of
Christ? If you pay a debt, and afterward be thrown into prison for the same
debt, does not the imprisonment make void the satisfaction of your payment. Yet
thus now it is, according to the Principles of this Doctrine of Universal
Redemption: surely therefore that Doctrine is no friend, but a great enemy to
the faith and comfort of a poor, doubting, and afflicted foul.

Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? Ver. 34. Who
is he that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather, that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us: Who
shall separate us from the Love of God? etc. So that our comfort is not only
laid on the Death of Christ, nor on the Intercession of Christ alone, but upon
the connection of these two together: And indeed, what comfort would the Jews
have in the bare Sacrifice, if the High Priest did not take the Blood thereof,
and carry it into the Holy Place, sprinkling the Mercy-Seat for them, whom the
Sacrifice was offered for? But according to this Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, the Intercession of Christ is parted from his Death; for though it
tell you that Christ died for all, yet it tells you, that he does not intercede
for all; and it must needs say so, for Christ said, Father, I thank thee that
thou hear me always; therefore if Christ should pray for the conversion of
all the particular men in the world, then all the particular men in the world
should be converted, and so saved; but all are not saved, or converted,
therefore this Doctrine must needs divide between the Intercession, and the
Death of Christ, and so pull down that great Pillar of our Christian Comfort,
which stands in the Conjunction of Christ's Death, and Intercession.

Romans, 9. ye shall find, that when the Apostle would set out the free Grace of
God, saying, Whom he will, he shows mercy to; and who^ he will, he hardens; he
first shows that Jacob and Esau were alike, alike in regard of their Parentage,
for both were of Isaac and Rebecca; alike in regard of their Work, For the
Children being not yet born, and having done neither good or evil, etc. yet God
did love the one, and hate the other, showing mercy to the one, and not to the
other, Why? Because God will have mercy on whom he will have mercy, and will
have compassion on whom he will have compassion, ver. 15. So that it is the
work of Free Grace to show mercy to some, and not to others, who are alike
unworthy. So again, Ephesians. 2. the Apostle proving, that by Grace we are saved;
first he shows, that the Ephesians by Nature, were as unworthy as any other,
being al by Nature, the children of wrath, ver. 1.2. ye^ those Ephesians did
obtain mercy, and not others, Why? Because by Grace they were saved: So that
Free Grace, is that distinguishing Mercy of God, whereby he does show mercy to
some, and not to others, who are alike miserable, and unworthy. But now this
Doctrine of Universal Redemption, tells us, That as Christ died for all, so he
does give a sufficiency of Grace unto all, and therefore that which
distinguishes one man from another, must be the free Will of man, and not the
free Grace of God; for, Commune quae tenus, commune non distinguit; That which
is common, as common, cannot distinguish. As suppose now, that a Father does
bestow an equal Sum of Money upon two Children, to purchase House or Land with;
one does purchase, and the other not: the reason why the one purchases, and the
other not, is, Because the one wills it, and the other not; indeed he that
purchases, does it by his Fathers help, assistance, and Money; but what reason
is there why he does make a Purchase, and the other not, but because he wills
it, and the other not? So, if God give a sufficiency of Grace unto all; that
one man does believe, you will say, is by the Grace of God; but the reason why one
believes, and the other not, is only the Will of Man, that this man wills it,
and the other not. Now where Free Will has the casting Vote, there the Free
Grace of God does not reign: but according to the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, Free Will is that which does make the difference between man and
man, it is that which has the casting Voice; surely therefore, it is no
friend, but a real enemy to the free Grace of God, and so an enemy to the
comfort of a poor doubting soul.

Doctrine, a godly man cannot have assurance of his perseverance in Grace; for
I can have no assurance of any Mercy, without Gods Promise: but this Doctrine
will tell you, That God has no where promised to any man, that he shall certainly
persevere in Grace: Surely therefore it is no friend to our assurance of
Salvation, and therefore is a real Enemy to the Faith and Comfort of a poor,
doubting soul.

Qui vult finem, vult media ad finem: If God do will this condition, viz. The
Faith and Repentance of all the men in the World; then say we, he does will
this, either absolutely, or conditionally; if absolutely, then it must needs
come to pass, that all men should repent and believe, which they do not:
Conditionally therefore, say the maintainers of this Doctrine, and what
condition is there precedent to Faith and Repentance, but Nature, and the work
thereof? yea, what Grace or Mercy is there in the Gospel, but they do tie it up
unto our conditions? Will ye instance in the Purchase and Benefits of the Death
of Christ? these, say they, are to be given out upon condition. Will ye
instance in the Grace of the new Covenant? all that, say they, is to be given
out, and is promised upon condition: There is no absolute Promise of Grace, say
they, in all the Scripture. Now look what that Doctrine is, which does make all
Grace conditional, that must needs be very obstructive to the hope, and
comfort, of a poor, doubting soul. Such is this Doctrine of Universal
Redemption; surely therefore it can be no true friend, but is a real enemy to
the consolation of a poor, doubting, and afflicted soul.

But if Christ did not die for all, and every particular man, how can I
conclude, that he did die for me? Can I raise a Conclusion of Faith, unless the
Proposition be universal?



Shall be of Mercy for its bottom; so a May be of Mercy, is a sufficient
ground, and bottom, for the Faith of Relyance. Jonathan and his Armor-bearer,
had but a may be of Mercy, when they went against their Enemies; It may be the
Lord will work for us, 1 Samuel 14.6. yet they relied on God. Now, though Christ
did not die for all particular men, yet if he died for sinners indefinitly,
there is a may be of Mercy for me. But so it is, that Christ did die for
sinners indefinitely, though not for sinners universally; and therefore there
is a sufficient ground for me to believe, and rely on him.

Whoever comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Now if my Assurance be
raised from the Act of Relyance, then the first ground and bottom of the
conclusion of my Faith, is not this General Proposition, Christ died for all;
but this Indefinite Proposition, Christ died for sinners: And if the conclusion
of Faith must arise from a General Proposition, then take it thus; Whoever
comes to Christ, and relieth on him, shall be saved: or thus; Christ died for
all those that do come to him, and rely on him: But I come to him, and rely on
him, therefore Christ died for me, and I shall be saved by him. So that thus
now, ye see the want of that General Proposition, Christ died for all men, is
no hindrance to the Conclusion, or Assurance of our Faith; and therefore you
have no reason to be discouraged in reference to this Objection.

Yet there is one thing more that sticks with me, even that old Objection which
I cannot be rid of: When I look into my Condition, the Condition of my Soul, or
Body, I find my condition is such as never any ones condition was; I have
conversed with many a godly man, and woman, but I do not find, that ever he, or
she, was in such a condition as I am; and I have read the Scripture, but I do
not find there, that ever any godly man was in such a condition as I am: could
I be but persuaded, that ever any gracious man was in the like condition, I
should have hope, and comfort; but I am persuaded, that never any godly soul
was in such a condition as I am; therefore I am thus discouraged, have I not
cause, and reason now?

Lam. 1.1, 2. Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow; if there be any condition like unto my
condition: and it seems, that such were the thoughts of Gods People, whom Peter
did write unto, in 1 Pet. 4.12. Beloved (says he) think it not strange
concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as though some strange thing
happened unto you: you will think that no bodies condition is like unto yours,
some strange thing is happened unto you. And so in the 5. chap. and 9. verse,
of that Epistle; Whom resist steadfast in the faith, knowing that the same
afflictions are accomplished in your Brethren that are in the world: you think
that you meet with such afflictions, as never were in the World before; be not
deceived (says he.)

Behold I work a new thing? Is not the Name of Christ wonderful? and are
wonders wrought ordinarily? If your condition be as never any bodies condition
was; then have you an opportunity of glorifying God more than ever any man or
woman had; then you have an opportunity of glorifying God, either in doing, or
in suffering, more than ever any man or woman had. And then, O! what Grace is
here! what Mercy is here! what Love is here to overcome thy soul withal! that
thou should have such an opportunity, as never man or woman had before! And
therefore, what I said unto you often, I must now conclude with: Gods People
have no reason for their Discouragements, whatever their condition be.

Thus I have now done with this Last Instance, and with all the Instances. Give
me leave to speak something by way of Application, in reference to the whole, and
so I will shut up this Exercise.

Applic.
If all these things be so, if this be true, That the Children of God have no
reason for their Discouragements, whatever their Condition be: Then, what a
mighty necessity, is there upon us all, to look into our Conditions, and to
consider whether we be in Christ, or no? whether we be Godly, yea, or nay?
whether we have made our Peace with God, I, or not? and whether we have Faith,
I, or no? All men have not Faith (says the Apostle) Indeed all men say they
have Faith; and should I go from Seat to Seat, and from Bosom to Bosom, and
knock at every Breast in the Congregation, asking, Whether does Faith dwell here
or no? Unless it were some few troubled ones, afflicted in Conscience, every
one of you would say, I do believe, I praise God I do believe, I have Faith
here within: But all men have not Faith, and few there be that do believe.
Children, young men, and women, Faith is not a thing that is born with you; it
is a harder thing to believe, than to keep the ten Commandments: when once you
come to know what it is to believe, you will say, O! it is a harder thing to
believe, than to do any thing; I do not know any thing in all the world, that is
so hard as to believe: But if you do believe, be in Christ, are godly, and have
made your Peace with God, blessed are you of the Lord, nothing shall offend you,
nothing shall discourage you. But if not godly, if not in Christ, if not
believing, every thing shall offend thee, and discourage thee, and thou have no
reason to be encouraged, whatever thy condition be. Shall we not then, my
beloved, all of us, as in the presence of the Lord, seriously look into our
condition, and consider, whether we be in Christ, I, or not?

But suppose I be in Christ, or I be not in Christ; believe, or not believe;
what then? If yet you do not believe, if yet you be not in Christ, if yet you
be not Godly; this Doctrine does here from the Lord hold forth an invitation to
you, to come unto Jesus Christ: for if a man be in Christ, and be Godly, then
he has no reason to be discouraged, whatever his condition be. If a man be not
Godly, he has no reason to be encouraged, whatever his condition be. On the
one hand, there lies al Encouragements: On the other hand, there lies all
Discouragements. Now therefore, in the Name of the Lord, do I here this
morning, lay before this Congregation, Life, and Death; Encouragement on the
one hand, and Discouragement on the other hand; and if there be an Adulterer, a
Swearer, a Lying Child, or a Stealing Servant; if there be ever a poor Wanton,
a Sabbath-breaker, an Opposer of God here: I beseech you in the Lord, come unto
Jesus Christ, by all these Encouragements that I have been speaking of, by all
the Mercies of the new Covenant, and by the Salvation of thine own soul: man,
or woman, I beseech you come unto Jesus Christ. O! that men, and women, would
give no rest unto themselves, til they have made their Peace with God, and til
they have gotten into Jesus Christ.

And in case that you be in Christ, and that you do believe, that you be godly,
and have made your Peace with God. Then see that ye walk up unto all these
Encouragements, see that you walk in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost. O! you
that are Godly (if these things be as you have heard) Why hang you down your
heads? why are you cast down, and disquieted? why do you not walk in the
comforts of this Truth declared, and in the strength of these Encouragements?
You see what a venture we have run to speak comfort to you that want comfort.
You have heard in several Exercises, That a godly man has no reason for his
Discouragements, whatever his condition be: Not in regard of sin: Not in regard
of Failings, and successlessness in Duties: Not in regard of want of Assurance:
Not in regard of Temptation: Not in regard of Affliction: Not in regard of
Desertion: And now, not in regard of his Condition, in it self considered. Now
after all this, I appeal to you, you that are without comfort, Do you not
think, that there are some wicked men in this Congregation, that have presumed,
when they have heard these things preached, and have said, These things belong
to me; and so have endangered their own souls by presumption, comforting
themselves when they should not be comforted? I appeal to you, Whether you do
not think, That there are some wicked men in the Congregation, that have thus
endangered their souls by mis-application of these Consolations? And if so,
that there has been this hazard run, and all to comfort you; then, will you
now refuse this comfort? O! you that have refused comfort all this while,
receive it in the Lord; and you that were never comforted before, now comfort
your selves, and walk in the comforts of the Holy Ghost. And you that have gone
up and down fearing, trembling, doubting, and much discouraged; yet now at the
last say: Why art thou cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within
me? Hope in God, wait on God, trust in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is
the health of my Countenance, and my God. How you should so hope, and wait, and
trust in God, as to bear up your hearts against all discouragements, I shall
yet speak to, in the next Exercise.

So much for the Ninth and Last Instance.
THE CURE OF Discouragements, BY FAITH IN Jesus Christ.
Sermon XIII.
PSALM, 42.11. Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? Stepney, June 25. 1648.
and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope in God; or, wait thou, or, trust
thou in God.


YOU have heard of the Saints Discouragements, and the unreasonableness of
them: there is no just cause, or reason for their Discouragements. Would you
now hear of some means against them? The Psalmist says in these words, Hope
thou in God, or trust thou in God, or wait thou on God. And so the Doctrine
plainly, is this:

Hoping, Trusting, Waiting on God, is the special, if not the only means,
appointed against all Discouragements. I had verily fainted, unless I had
believed (says David) to see the goodness of the Lord in the Land of the
Living: I had fainted, unless I had believed. Faith bears up the heart against
all Discouragements.

For your more clear understanding of this Truth, and our better proceeding, I
shall labor, First: To show you what it is to Hope, Trust in God, or to Wait on
him.

Secondly: That Faith does quiet ones heart in the times of Discouragements.

Thirdly: That it is the Duty of all the Saints, and People of God, when
Discouragements do arise, then, and then especially to trust in God, and to
exercise their Faith.

Fourthly: What there is in Faith that can bear up the heart against all
Discouragements, and how Faith does it.

First: If ye ask, What it is to Hope in God, to Trust in God, and to VVait on
him?

Isa. 26.3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee,
because he trusts in thee. So the Spouse in the Canticles, is found leaning
upon her Beloved, and so we are commanded to trust; not (...) only; but (...),
on him that raises Christ from the dead, which notes a siducial repose: Romans
4.^3.
so that Trusting in God, is to stay upon him. And then I say, it is the
Relyance, or the stayance of the soul upon God in Christ; and so I take it to
be meant here: for the word here translated [God] Hope, or Trust [in God] is in
the plural number, Elohim; and so when the Prophet in Isa. 26. does exhort unto
Trusting in the Lord; he gives this reason, at verse 4. For in the Lord
Jehovah, is everlasting strength; so you read it: but according to the Hebrew,
thus; Trust in the Lord for ever, for in Jehovah jah is everlasting strength.
For in Jehovah jah: Jah, is an abridgment, or an abreviation of Jehovah, noting
the Son of God; and so when Jesus Christ comes in the latter end of the world,
to sit upon his glorious Throne, the converting Jew shall praise him under that
name, singing (as you read in Revel. 19.) Halelujah; praise the Jah: which if
you compare with Psalm, 68. you shall find, is to be understood of Christ, at
verse 4. Sing unto God, sing praises to his Name; extol him that rides upon the
Heavens, by his Name Jah; rejoice before him, extol him that rides upon the
Heavens, by his Name Jah; and they shall sing Hallelujah. Now if you look into
the 18. verse of that Psalm, you shall find the reason why this Jah, is to be
praised: for says the Psalm, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led
Captivity captive, thou have received Gifts for men: Which words, Ephesians. 4. are
applied to Christ: But unto every one of us, is given according to the measure
of the Gift of Christ: verse 8. Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on
high, he led Captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men. So that when the
Prophet does exhort us to trust in Jehovah Jah, he exhorts us to trust in the
Lord, in Christ; and therefore I say, both according to the old, and new
Testament, Faith is the repose, or recumbency of the soul upon God in Christ.

But yet, that is not all: A man that does repose upon God in Christ, trusting
in him, does trust unto him for some good thing that lies out of sight; and
therefore the Apostle says, That Faith is the Evidence of things not seen,
Heb. 11. where he gives diverse Instances of Abraham, Sarah, Moses, and others,
who all did repose upon God for somewhat that lay out of view; and this indeed
is only worthy of the name of Faith. I will trust a man that is most unworthy,
I will trust a Thief, I will trust a Liar, so far as I can see him. But as
Parisiensis says well, this is Fides Deo digna, Faith worthy of God, to repose
on God for somewhat that lies out of sight, and out of view: and when a man does
thus stay himself upon God in Christ, for somewhat that lies out of sight, then
he is said to trust in God; and when a man does continue thus, then he is said
for to wait on God. This is the First. But then,

Secondly: How may it appear that Faith, and the exercise thereof, will quiet
the soul, suppress, or allay Discouragements? Hannah, when she had received a
word from God, She went away (says the Text) and looked no more sorrowful, her
heart was quieted; Why? she had a word from God; and though before she was a
woman of a sorrowful Spirit, yet having received a word from God, and believing
that word, her heart was quiet. Prove. 16.3. Commit thy Works unto the Lord,
there is Faith; and thy thoughts shall be established, there is Quietude. And
if you look again into Isa. 26. you shall find that the Scripture is most
expres^ for this, verse 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is
staid on thee, because he trusts in thee: Mark the words. First, The Lord
does here engage himself to give peace unto those that do stay upon him, that
have this Faith of Relyance, though they have not yet attained to the Faith of
Assurance, to be able to say, I know my sin is pardoned, and that Christ is
mine, yet, if they can but stay themselves upon God, the Lord does hereby
engage himself to give peace unto them: yea, he does no^ only engage himself to
give peace unto such a soul as stays himself upon God, but double Peace: you
read it in your English, perfect Peace; thou will keep him in perfect Peace:
but in the Hebrew it is, Peace, Peace; thou will keep him in double Peace, he
shall have Peace, and Peace; not Peace, and Doubting; not Peace, and no Peace:
but if he stay himself upon the Lord, he shall have Peace, Peace; he shall have
double Peace. Yea, the Lord does not only engage to give Peace unto such a
soul, but to keep him in Peace; Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, or in
Peace, Peace; and all upon this account, Because he trusts in thee; not
because he prayed, not because he humbled himself (though that is his Duty, and
he does thereby placere Deo, though not placare Deum) but because he trusts
in thee, because he stays himself upon thee. And ye know, that if ye have a
business depending at Law, though for the present you be much troubled about
it; yet, if you have a Friend, a Lawyer that is able, faithful, and willing to
look to it; if you can but leave your business with him, it does very much
quiet your heart; the very leaving your business with him, does quiet your
mind. So here. If a man can but leave his business, and his Cause, and his
Things with God; then he is at rest, and he may say, Return unto thy rest, O my
soul, as David did; which is done by Faith. And to clear this a little, Three
or Four things there are that do ordinarily cause disquietude, or
discouragement. First, The darkness that is in the Understanding; for when a
man is in the dark, especially if he be alone, he is very apt to be skared, and
to be disquieted. Secondly, Inordinate, and unruly Affections, and Passions,
especially that of Fear, whereby the soul is benighted. Thirdly, Guilt of
Conscience: Though there be much water that does beat upon the Ship at Sea, yet
it sinketh not; but when there is a leak, a hole in the Ship, then the Ship
sinketh, and the water does become its grave: So, though there be many troubles
that beat upon a man, yet his heart does not sink; but when there is a leak in
his Conscience, when there is a hole there, when a man has a guilty
Conscience, then he sinketh, and his heart fails him. And Fourthly, The
apprehension of Gods Greatness, with our distance from him. Now Faith cures all
this; for in opposition to the first, of Darkness, Faith brings Light into the
soul, and shows a man his Way, and his Warrant for what he does. Secondly, It
does pare, and take off those inordinate, and unruly affections, and passions
that are in the soul; and therefore in Psalm 37. at ver. 1. and 7. you shall
find that fretting and trusting are set in opposition: Fret not thy self
because of the evil Doer, verse 3. but trust in the Lord. And again verse 7.
Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him; fret not thy self because of him
who prospers in his way. Thirdly, It does heal the Conscience, and purify
that, therefore says the Apostle, Let us draw near with assurance of Faith,
having our Consciences sprinkled, etc. Heb. 10. Fourthly, It does also bring
the soul near to God; the great work of faith is to bring God and the soul
together. So you have it in Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness, and access
with confidence, by the faith of him: Faith gives a man access unto God, and
brings him near unto God. But a man may come near unto God, and yet he may
fear, and tremble, as the Jews d^d at Mount Sinai; true, but says the Apostle,
By this Faith we have boldness, and access. The word is, (...), a freedom of
speech; a man by Faith may come into the presence of God with open mouth, and
speak all his mind unto God. Yea, Faith does not only thus bring a man into the
pre^ence of God with open mouth, freedom of speech, and boldness; but it brings
him into the presence of God with open face, and uncovered: We all with open
face (says the Apostle, speaking to Believers in the times of the Gospel) We
all with open face behold, as in a Glass, the Mirror of the Lord: with open,
and uncovered face. There are Three Vails, or Coverings that we read of in the
old Testament, that were thrown upon faces. 1. There is the Vail of Obscurity,
and that was upon the face of Moses. 2. The Vail, and the Covering of Guilt,
and so Haman^ face was covered, a cloth thrown over his face, and his face was
covered. 3. And there is the Vail of Abashment, or shame; and so it i^ said of
the Angels, that they cover their faces in the presence of God. Now to show
with what boldness a Christian, and a Believer, comes into the presence of God
by Christ through Faith, as if all Vails were taken off; says the Apostle, We
come with open face; and we all with open face behold, as in a Glass, the
Mirror of the Lord. And upon this account, a Believer may now come with more
boldness into the presence of God, than Adam in the state of Innocence: for
though Adam in the state of Innocence had no Vail, or Covering of Guilt thrown
over his face; yet there was a great distance between God and him. But now,
since the Fall, since Christ's time, God is come into our Nature, manifested in
the Flesh; and so God is come near to us, and by Faith we do draw near to God:
no wonder therefore, that the Apostle says, That by Faith we have boldness,
and access with Confidence. Faith tells a man, that God is come near to him, and
he is come near to God; and therefore Faith certainly, is the great Remedy, and
means against all discouragements that can arise.

Thirdly: How may it appear, that when Discouragements do arise, it is the Duty
of every Christian to exercise Faith, and then especially? David said; At what
time I am afraid, I trust in thee: And the Scripture is most express for this,
Isa. 50.10. Who is amongst you, that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice
of his Servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light? Let him trust in
the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. First, It is possible for one that
is the Servant of God to be in darkness, and in such a dark condition, where no
light, nor no comfort is. Secondly, When he is in this dark Condition, and
discouragements do arise (the Commandment is most express) then he is to trust
in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God. So also our Savior Christ
commands his Disciples, John, 14.1. Let not your hearts be troubled, you
believe in God, believe also in me. There was a great Cloud arising upon
Christ's Disciples, Christ to be taken from them by Death; the Shepherd to be
stricken, and the Sheep scattered: Now the only means against trouble that
Christ prescribes, is this; Ye believe in God, believe also in me; and he gives
many Arguments to press thereunto, in this 14. Chapter. This time, was the time
of Christ's own trouble; Christ was now to die, and to bear the sin of many, and
to lie under the sense of his Fathers wrath, and displeasure; whereupon he
says, that his heart was heavy unto death; but though it was the time of his
own trouble, yet he addresseth himself to comfort his Disciples against their
trouble; and the only means and remedy that he does prescribe, is this; Ye
believe in God, believe also in me? So that I say, when Discouragements do
arise, it is the Duty of all Christ's Disciples, then, and then especially, for
to trust in God by Christ: for I pray, what is Faith made for? but for such a
time as this is? every Grace is to be exercised in its season. If a man have
sinned, then he is to repent, that is the season for his Repentance: If a man
have received any mercy from God, then he is to be thankful; that is the season
of Thankfulness: If another poor Christian be in want, then he is to exercise
his Charity; that is the season of that Grace of Charity: If Gods Face do shine
upon a man, then he is to rejoice; that is the season of Spiritual Joy: If a
man be given to wantonness, and have a beautiful Object laid before him, then
he is to exercise Chastity; and that is a season for it: So, when
Discouragements do arise, then he is to exercise Faith; and that is the season,
the proper time and season for it: For it is not only our Duty to bring forth
Fruit, but we must bring forth Fruit in its season: Psalm, 1.2.
Now this is the proper season for Faith to work in, when all a man's Comforts
are out of sight: and therefore when Discouragements do arise, then, and then
especially, the Saints, and the People of God, are to exercise their Faith.

Fourthly: But what power has Faith to suppress, now when Faith comes, it
opens a man's Eyes to see things that are invisible; it is the Evidence of
things not seen: By Faith, Moses saw him that was invisible. And therefore when
the Apostle Peter does direct his People for to see things past, present, and
to come, he exhorts them to a work of Faith, Epist. 1. ver. 9. He that l^cks
these things, is blind; one of those things is Faith, as you read in verse 5.
Give all diligence, ^ad to your Faith, etc. then, He that lacks these things,
is blind, at verse 9. But suppose a man do want Faith; wherein is he blind?
Why, says the Apostle, He cannot see things afar off, he cannot see into the
other world, he cannot see unto the end of a Temptation, or Affliction, or to
the end of a Desertion. Well, but though he cannot see things that are to come,
yet he may see things that are past: Nay, says he, if a man wants the
Assurance of Gods Love (and that is an Act of Faith) he ha^h forgotten that he
was purged from his old sins: Wherefore the rather (says he at ver^e 10.)
Brethren, give all diligence to make your Calling and Ele^tion sure. If you
would see things past, present, and to come, then grow in Faith, and Assurance
of Gods Love, and so says he, shall you be able to see things that are afar
off. Could a man but see what would be the end, and issue of his Affliction, he
would be quiet under it. It is in regard of our Affliction, as it is in regard
of your Salt, or Sea Water: Take the Water as it is in the Sea, and so it is
salt, and brackish; but drawn up by the Sun into the Clouds, it becomes sweet,
and falls down into sweet Rain. So, take an Affl^ction in it self, and it is
salt, and brackish; but drawn up by Divine Love, then it is sweet; and if a
soul can but taste the Love of God in it, and see what a loving end the Lord will
make; he will then find it is very sweet, and say, I could not have been without
this Affliction; I do not know how any one twig of this rod could have been
spared. Now, it is only Faith that shows a man the end, and the issue of all his
troubles. It stands upon the high Tower of the Threatening, and Promise, seeing
over al Mountains, and Difficulties; it sees into the other World; it sees
through Death, and beyond Death; it sees through Affliction, and beyond
Affliction; it sees through Temptation, and beyond Temptation; it sees
through Desertion, and beyond Desertion; it sees through Gods Anger, and
beyond his Anger: I say, it sees things past, present, and to come. Now, if a
man had such a power as he were able to fetch in all his former experiences, to
see things present as they are; and to see all the events, and issues of things
to come, would he not be quiet, notwithstanding all that might arise for the
present? Thus Faith is able to show a man things past, present, and to come;
and to show him greater matter of comfort, than the matter of his troubles is;
and in so doing it must needs quiet the soul.

Let him stay himself upon the Name of God, Isa. 50. Now there is that in Gods
Name that does Answer unto all our Fears and wants. For Example, Exodus 34. the
Lord descended in the Clouds, at verse 5. and stood with Moses there, and
proclaimed the Name of the Lord, ver. 6. The Lord, the Lord: Jehovah, Jehovah:
that is, one that gives a being unto things that are not. Will you say, O! that
it were thus, or thus with me? but as Rachel mourned for her Children, and
could not be comforted, because they were not: so do I mourn after Prayers,
because they are not; and after Duties; because they are not; and after
Humiliations, because they are not. Well, says the Lord, be of good comfort,
for my Name is Jehovah, who do give a Being to things that are not; and this he
repeateth, The Lord, the Lord; or Jehovah, Jehovah. Well, but though the Lord
do give a Being to things that are not, this does not comfort me; for though, I
praise the Lord, I can say, my Prayers are, and my Duties are; yet the Lord
knows they are very weak, and my Temptations are very strong, and my Lusts
mighty, and therefore I am thus discouraged. Yet be of good comfort; for says
the Lord, my Name is EL; that is, the strong, or the mighty God: and therefore
though thou be never so weak, and thy Duties weak, yet I will carry on the
work of my Grace in thee; and though thy Temptations be never so strong, and
thy Lusts strong, yet I am stronger, for my Name is EL, the mighty God. O! but
though God be strong, and able to help me; yet I fear that God is not willing
to help me; I know God is able, and that God is strong enough, but I fear the
Lord is not willing, and therefore I am thus discouraged: yet be of good
comfort, says the Lord, for my Name is Merciful, (that is the next word) The
Lord, the Lord; the Mighty God: and as my Name is the Mighty God, and therefore
am able to help thee; so my Name is Merciful, and therefore am willing to help
thee. But though the Lord be willing to help me, yet I am a poor, unworthy
Creature, and I have nothing at al to move God to help me* Yet be of good
comfort; for says the Lord then, my Name is Gracious; I do not show Mercy
because you are good, but because I am good; nor do I stand upon your desert,
but I show mercy out of free Love; my Name is Gracious. O! but I have been
sinning, I have been sinning a long time, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty
years: had I come in at s^^^^, I might have had mercy; but I have been sinning
long, and therefore I fear there is no mercy for me. Yet says the Lord, be
(...) good comfort, for my Name is Long-suffering (that is the no^^) Gracious,
and Long-suffering; slow to Anger, or Long-suffering. O! but I have sinned
exceedingly, I have sinned abundantly; so many Sins as I am never able to
reckon up, and to humble my self for; I have broken al my Promises with God,
and all the Vows that I have made unto him; and therefore I am thus discouraged.
Yet says he, be of good Comfort, for I am abundant in Goodness, and Truth: Art
thou abundant in sin? I am abundant in Goodness: And have thou broken Faith
with me? yet I am abundant in Goodness, and in Truth also. O! but though the
Lord be thus unto his own chosen Ones, such as David, Abraham, or Moses, yet I
fear the Lord will not be so to me. Yes, says the Lord, at verse 7. Keeping
mercy for thousands: I have not spent al my mercy upon David, or upon Abraham,
or upon Paul, or upon Peter; but I keep mercy for thousands. O! but yet my sins
do recoyl, I am the greatest Sinner in the world, for I have sinned al kinds of
sin, I have sinned al sorts of sins, and therefore I fear there (...) no hope
for me. Yet says the Lord, be not discouraged, for I keep mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; even all sorts and al kinds of
sins; the Sin of Nature, and the Sin of Life; the Sin of Weakness, and the Sin
of Presumption; the Sin of Ignorance, and the Sin against Knowledge: these says
the Lord I forgive, even al sorts, and al kinds of Sins, and this is my Name
for ever. O! but I am afraid to lay hold upon this Promise, for I think this is
a Doctrine of Liberty. Say not so, says the Lord, at the next verse, I will by
no means clear the guilty: But if there be ever a poor, drooping, fearing,
trembling soul, that desires to know my Name, Lo, says the Lord, here is my
Name, whereby I will be known for ever: The Lord, Jehovah, that gives a Being to
things that are not; The Mighty God; The Merciful God; The Gracious God;
Abundant in Goodness, and in Truth; Reserving Mercy for thousands; Forgiving
iniquity, transgression, and sin; and this is my Name for ever. Now Faith
comes, and closes with this Name of God, leading the Soul into this rich
Wardrop, and so does quiet the heart against all Discouragements.

Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego; they put themselves under Gods Commandment:
The Lord commanded, and said, Thou shall not make to thy self, any graven
Image: Well, but the King commands them to fall down before his Image: No, say
they, we will not stir, we will not bow: but says the King, I will make you bow,
or I will heat the Furnace seven times hotter for you: Well, be it so, say they;
as for that, we are not solicitous, we will do the work that God has set us to
do; we will put our selves under Gods Command; we know that our God is able to
deliver us; and whether he will deliver us, or no, we will leave that to him, let
him answer to the inconveniences, and mischiefs that follow upon his Work; for
says the Text, They trusted in the Lord. And so you know it was with Noah;
Noah was commanded to build an Ark, for says the Lord, yet an hundred and
twenty years, and the whole world shall be destroyed, and therefore Noah, build
thou an Ark for thy self, and thy family; which Noah did, and put himself under
this Command. But now the world, the old world might speak thus (as certainly
the language of their Conversation was) Noah, Do thou think that thou art the
only man in all the world that God loves? Do thou think Noah, that God loves
thee, one man, more than all the men or the world? and thy one Family, more than
all the Families in the world beside? And if thou do believe what thou
preachest, That the World shall be destroyed by Water, in an hundred and twenty
years, why do thou marry, and bege^ Ch^ldren, as thou have done since thou
have preached this Doctrine? And Noah, if thou do make an Ark, or a Ship, who
shall be the Pilate? who shall be the M^^riner, the S^^ler? As for thy self, thou
have been a Preacher, and do thou think that thou, and thy few Sons, are able
to guide, and g^vern so great a Vessel? If it be as thou preache^t, That the
^easts, the wild Beasts of the Field shall come unto this Ark; the Lion, and the
Bear, and the Tiger, will they not tear thee to pieces? And if all the Beasts of
the field, two by two, shall come into the Ark, Noah, will there not be such a
stench in the Ark with their dung, as will poison thee? shall thou be ever able
to live, think thou? Well, for all this, Noah goes on, and he built the Ark,
and leaves God that ^et him on work, to answer to al these Objections, and to
all those Inconveniences that might come by the doing the thing which God
commands: And so does Faith always; Faith puts a man under the Commandment of
God, and leaves God to answer to those O^jections, and inconveniences that may
come thereby. Now when a man can do thus, must he not needs be quiet?



reason that the Promise sticks not upon many souls, but because it is laid on
with the cold and chil hand of Unbelief? Now the hand of Faith, is a warm hand.



The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, says Faith: I was dumb, and opened
not my mouth, for thou Lord have done it, says Faith.

La^imer to his fellow Prisoners, when he went to the Stake) though we pass
through he fire to day, yet we shall light such a Candle in England, as shall
never be put out again. He saw both sides of the Dispensation, why? but because
he believed.

I will give you a door of Hope in the Valley of Achor. And the Lord shall judge
his People, and repent toward his Servants, when he sees that their power is
gone, and none shut up, or left. Deuteronomy. 32.36.

Psalm. 37.40. For the Lord shall save them, because they trust in him: So Esai.
26.3. Thou will keep them in perfect peace, because they trust in thee. Now
when a man can do al these things, will he not be quiet, and free from
Discouragements? Surely he will. Faith can, and will do these, and al these
things: certainly therefore, Faith, and Faith alone, is that Grace which will
bear up the heart against al Discouragements.

Applic.
Now if Faith be such an help against al discouragements; Then in case that
Discouragements do arise, you see what to do: Exercise your Faith; Trust in the
Lord, trust in the Lord for ever; for in Jehovah Jah, is everlasting strength;
he is the Rock of Ages, trust in him. O! ye People of the Lord, trust in the
Lord for ever, pour out your hearts before him; W^^t, Hope, Trust in the Lord.

But will every Faith, quiet a man's heart against Discouragements? suppress,
and allay our Discouragements?

is an Operative, working Faith, and there is a Workless Faith. Says the
Apostle, Thou say thou have Faith, show me thy Faith by thy Works. The more
precious a thing is, the more Counterfeits there are of it. And what is more
precious than Faith? therefore there is a counterfeit Faith, and a counterfeit
Faith will not quiet ones heart, suppress, and allay ones fears: yea, true
saving Faith will not do it neither in the habit; it is only that Faith can do
it which God rewards: God does not reward the habit of Grace, but the act of
Grace; he rewards men according to their works, and not according to their
habits. Yea, strong and grown Faith will not do it always. A man may have
assurance of Gods Love, and yet he may be discouraged. You say indeed, if I had
but the assurance of Gods Love in Christ, and did know that God were mine, and
that I had an interest in Jesus Chr^^t, I would never be discouraged. But be
not deceived, when David spoke the words of the Text, he had assurance, for he
says, I shall ye^ praise him, who is the health of my Countenance, and my God,
and yet he was discouraged; for he says, Why art thou cast down, O my soul?
and why art thou disquieted within me? So then it is not every Faith, nor
always true Faith, nor always grown Faith, can do it.

But how then should a man so exercise his Faith, as he may bear up his heart
against all Discouragements, in case that Discouragements do arise?

Lament. 3. that as soon as the Church had reproved her self for her Unbelief,
how presently the gathers Hope; says she at verse 17. Thou have removed my
soul far from peace, I forgot prosperity, and I did, my strength, and my hope
is perished from the Lord. Now she hu^bles her self for it: Remembering mine
affliction, and my misery; the wormwood, and the g^l; my soul has them still
in remembrance, and is humbled in me: this I recall to min^, thereforh have I
hope: I humbled my self for my former Unbelief, and dispairing thoughts, and
words; and therefore have I hope. Some think they do well to doubt: O! says
one, if I should not thus fear and doubt, I should grow secure: But a man may
be tutus, though he be not Securus: Safety speaks opposition to Danger,
Security to Watchfulness; yea, there is an holy Security which we are to labor
alter, and the more we are freed from these doubting fears, the more we attain
unto that Security. Would you therefore, so exercise your Faith, as that you
may not labor under sad Discouragements? take heed that you do not please your
self in your doubting, but be humbled for your Unbelief.

Ye believe in God, believe also in me, says our Savior: God out of Christ, is
a consuming fire, and there is no coming at him; so he is a dreadful God, and we
tremble at his presence, not rely on him. Now we are very apt to go unto him
alone, and to trust in a naked God; for there is much of old Adam in us still:
the Vessel keeps that savor long, wherewith it was first seasoned. And at the
first, Adam went unto God immediately, and trusted unto him immediately. But
now says Luther, give me a God clothed with Flesh, God manifested in the
Flesh, is the Object of our Faith. Take heed of a Natural Faith, for that will
end in Discouragement.

David says in the 62. Psalm, at the 5th verse, My soul, wait thou ONLY upon
God, for my expectation is from him: and then see what the issue is, at verse
6. He ONLY is my Rock, and my Salvation, he is my Defense, I shall not be
moved: He had said at verse 2. thus; He only is my Rock, and my Salvation; he
is my Defense, I shall not be [greatly] moved: But when he had digested this
matter a little further, and more fully, he leaves out the word [greatly] and
says, I shall not be moved. Wherefore, would you ^o trust in the Lord as you
may not be moved? trust in the Lord Alone; although you have nothing to be
bound with, or for the Lord.

Psalm. 37.3. Trust in the Lord, and do good; he does not say, do good, and go
as far as you can, and when you can no further, then trust in the Lord: No, but
says he, Trust in the Lord, and do good. But if you think to do good, and to
go as far as you can, and then to trust; such a trust as this, will end in
discouragement; and therefore I say, trust in the Lord first, before you do
work at all.

Yea, and Amen in Christ: Christ therefore is first, and if a man does trust in
the Promise first, and so go unto Christ afterward; then when he wants a
particular Word, or a Promise, he will not trust in Christ, but be quite
discouraged. But when a man does trust in the Lord Christ first, and in
particular Promises afterward; then, though a particular Promise does not
shine forth, yet his Faith lives, and he is not di^couraged; wherefore, venture
upon Jesus Christ first, and then upon the Promise, as given unto thee by the
hand of Christ.

Abraham's case; the Lord gave Abraham a Promise, but Abraham saw the contrary
to the thing promised; yet Abraham did not dispute the Promise, he did not
stagger at the Promise, and say, Surely the Lord has not given me this
Promise, it ^^s but a delusion, and I was deceived: No, but Abraham still be^^s
up to the Promise, and does not dispute, or stagger at the same. So must you do
likewise; if ever the Lord give out a Promise to you, hold it, keep it, never
let it go, although you do see the contrary.

O! but this is hard work indeed; and if I should do so, I fear that I should
presume, and that I should tempt the Lord; What! trust in the Lord when there
is no means in view! yea, when I see the contrary unto the thing promised? I
would do it, but I fear I should presume, and tempt the Lord.

tempted the Lord, and limited the Holy One of Israel: and when you limit God,
and say, I shall never receive this Mercy, for now I do see the contrary; Is not
this rather for to tempt the Lord? Properly, and according to Scripture Phrase,
to tempt the Lord, is to put God upon a trial for the satisfying of ones lust;
and therefore if you look into Psalm. 78. you shall find that these two go
together, at verse 18. They tempted God in their heart, by asking meat for
their Lust: To put God upon a work for the satisfying of ones Lust, is indeed
to tempt the Lord: Every putting God upon a trial, is not a tempting God; but
to put God upon a trial for the satisfying of ones lust, this is to tempt the
Lord: And therefore it is said, the wicked Jews came to our Savior Christ,
tempting him, and saying, Show us a sign. Gideon desired a sign, and yet he did
not tempt the Lord, Why? Because he did not desire a sign to satisfy his Lust,
but to strengthen his Faith. But now these Jews came, and desired a sign to
satisfy their Lust; and therefore says our Savior Christ unto them; Ye
wicked, and Adulterous Generation: How comes the word [Adulterous] in there?
Why look as it is with a woman that is n^ught, filthy, and unworthy; her
Husband sending a Message to her, and warning her to take heed of such Company;
when the Messenger comes, I doubt says she, whether you come from my Husband,
or no; and what sign have you, that you come from my Husband? she knows that he
comes from her Husband, but because she may go on in her sin, she asks a
sign; How may I know that you come from my Husband? So it was with these wicked
Jews, they asked a sign that so they might go on in their sins; whereupon our
Savior says, Ye wicked, and Adulterous Generation. But now, when a poor,
doub^ing, fearing, trembling soul, shall desire to believe, and would fain have
some token from the Lord to strengthen his Faith, he is not Adulterous then,
nor does he tempt the Lord, nor presume: for is it presumption for a man to
keep the Sabbath day? No, Why? Because it is commanded. Is it presumption for a
Child to obey his Parents? No; Why? Because it is commanded. So it is commanded
for a soul to believe, when al comforts are out of sight, and when he sees
nothing but what is contrary to the thing promised. Presumption properly, is
the taking of a thing before it is given, or offered. But in this case, the
Promise is given, and therefore no presumption for to hold it fast. There is a
Twofold Pre^umption which you read of in Scripture: One whereby men do rest
upon their own Work^ for Salvation without Christ: So the Jews did, and therein
they presumed of mercy before it was given unto them. Another, whereby men do
as they think, or in their way, rest on Christ for Salvation, and yet live
without Works, and Ob^dience: and therein they pre^^me also, because they take
mercy ^hen it is not given them. E^^ if I r^^l on the Promise, or on Christ,
that I may be made the more holy, doing what I can to be fruitful in every good
work, yet resting upon Christ for all; this is no presumption; Why? Because I do
not take mercy before it is offered: and though I hold the Promise fast, when I
see nothing, but what is contrary to the thing promised, yet this is no
presumption; Why? Because I do what is commanded: For says the Apostle, Let
them that suffer according to the Will of God, comm^^ the keeping of their
souls to him in well doing, as unto a Faithful Creator. Now Creation-Work, is
out of nothing, it is light out of darkness. Yet thus are we commanded to
commit our souls unto God; and therefore though al fail, and we see nothing of
the Mercy promised, it is no presumption then, to hold and keep fast the Promise.

But suppose the Lord has given me a Promise, and now after the Promise given,
I see nothing of the mercy promised, and that all my Comforts are out of sight;
how shall I be able to bear up my heart against all Discouragements,
notwithstanding I see nothing but what is contrary to the thing promised, and
to the mercy desired?

therefore be of good Comfort, O my soul.

Look unto me (^aith he) from all the ends of the Earth, and be saved.

Abraham, That he considered not the weakness of his own Body: and this was
imputed unto him for believing, that he considered not what might invade his
Faith: And so this shall be imputed unto you for Faith, if when these Obj^ctions
shall come in upon you, you turn your Eye from them (unto Jesus Christ) and do
not consider them.

Faith is the Evidence of th^n ^s not seen; and therefore if your Faith be not
seen, you must believe that you do believe; thou ^ust believe sometimes that
thou have Faith. As there is a feeling in Prayer, so Faith ha^h it is feeling
too; and therefore i^ you cannot see your Faith, you must believe, that you do
believe. And whether you have Assurance, or have not Assurance, consider these
few things as some Helps to your Faith in this case.

Abraham, so with Joseph, so with David, and many others.





denying another. Has the Lord therefore given thee a Promise, and do thou
see nothing but what is contrary to the thing promised? Now know, and remember,
That we have by not having; God does give by denying, and fulfils some Promises
by not fulfilling others.

John, 13. And he knowing that his hour was coming, and that was the hour of
darkness: Once in John 2.4. when his Mother came unto him for Wine, he said,
Woman, my hour is not yet come: But afterward, when their own Wine was done,
and their pots were filled with Water; then he turns their Water into Wine,
then Christ's hour was come. So now, when al our Bottles are dry, when there is
no Wine of Comfort in our own Bottles, then is Christ's hour; and when the hour
of darkness is upon our Condition, then is Christ's hour: And if thou would
but say so unto thine own soul; Soul, Christ's time and hour, is an hour of
darkness; Christ's time, is a time when there is no Wine in our own Bottles. Now
thus it is with me; I have no Wine left in my own Bottles, my Bottles are al
dry, and empty, and there is an hour of darkness upon my Condition, therefore
this time is the time for Christ to help me. This would cause you to wait on
God, and exercise Faith in the lowest Condition, even when you see nothing but
the contrary unto your desires, and the Lords Promises.

Children of Israel, they sinned greatly in the Wilderness, so much that the
Lord kept them out of the Land of Canaan, and many of their Carcasses fell in
the Wilderness; what was the reason? the Text tells us, they did not believe.
Wherein was their Unbelief? They did not trust God for meat in the Wilderness:
why, but that had been a miracle to have Meat in the Wilderness; true, yet this
was their Unbelief, That they did not trust God for Meat in the Wilderness.
Again, they sinned, and did not trust God for Water: why, but it was a miracle
for them to have Water in that place, where no Water was naturally; true, yet
because the Lord had led them in a way of miracles before, they sinned now in
that they did not trust God for miracles; and it was as great a sin that they
did not trust God for Miracles, being led in a way of Miracles, as that they
did not trust God for ordinary mercies, when the Lord led them in ways of
ordinary mercies. So I say to you; If God lead you in a way of ordinaries, then
must you trust God for ordinaries; but if ordinary means cannot be had, and God
have led you in a way of extraordinaries, it is then a sin in you to tie God to
ordinaries. Are you therefore in an extraordinary case and streit? know that it
is no sin now, to trust God for extraordinary mercy, help, and relief.

You say now, O! but my heart is not humbled; O! but I am a great sinner, and
should I venture upon Jesus Christ? But will thy heart be more humbled by
keeping from Christ? and shall thou be a less sinner by keeping from him? No
certainly; but the longer you stay from Christ, the harder work it will be to
venture upon Christ at the last. Wherefore, if there be ever a poor, drooping,
doubting, fearing, trembling heart in all this Congregation, know, That I do
here in the Name of the Lord, call out to you, and say, O soul, man or woman,
Venture, venture, venture upon Christ now; for you must come to this venturing
Work at the last, and if ever, it is true here, better at the first, than at
the last. Must you not venture upon Christ at the last? and if at last, why not
now? Thus ply, and follow your own souls with these three Questions. And



He waited in the days of Noah, for the Repentance of the old World, and he
waited long, 1 Pet. 3.20. a long while also has he waited for your repentance;
and if he had not waited long, what had become of you? Yea, and he has not
only waited, but he does still, and will wait to show Mercy, Esai. 30.18. he
waits to show mercy on them that wait for his Mercy. Now shall God wait for
us, and for our Repentance? and shall not we wait for him, and his Grace?

Henry the Emperor of Germany, That when he came to speak with the Pope, the
Pope made him, and his Wife, and eldest Son, stand waiting three days in the
cold Winter season, at his Palace Gates, before he would speak with the
Emperor. Will ye instance in your Inferiors, and such as are beneath you? must
you not wait even for them that do wait on you? your Servants, if you bid them
do a thing, you must wait til it be done; and if you bid them come, you must
wait til they come. Or will ye instance in other Creatures? Do you not wait on
the Sun for Light? on the Water for Coolness? on the Fire for heat? Now if we
wait on the Creatures, all the Creatures, is it not reasonable that we wait on
the Creator? Yet further, Do ye not sometimes wait on the Lusts of men? yea, ye
have sometimes waited on your own Lusts, The Adulterer waits for the
twy-light, says Job. And h^w often have you waited for an opportunity of
sinning? Now will ye wait on Men, your Inferiors, other Creatures, yea, on the
Wills and Lusts of Men? and will you not wait on the Grace of God?

King^, 6. last. the King said, It is a vain thing to wait on God any longer:
And if ye look into the next Chapter, at verse 1. ye shall find that deliverance
came in the next words: No sooner had the King said, It Is a vain thing to wait
on God any longer, but the Prophet in the next words says, To morrow about
this time, shall a measure of sine flower be sold for a shekel, and two
measures of barley for a shekel in the Gates of Samaria, Chap. 7. verse 1. So
that deliverance does sometimes come when men give over waiting: And if
deliverance do thus come to you, what shame and grief will this be to you? how
will you befool your self, and say, O! what a fool was I that I could not wait a
little longer? I have given over waiting, and lo, now deliverance is come, and
I have no comfort in it.

Saul, 1 Samuel 28.6. That he enquired of the Lord, who answered him not; and so
he sought unto a woman that had a Familiar Spirit, ver. 7. yet 1 Chronicles. 10.14.
it is said, That he enquired not of the Lord: He enquired, and he enquired not;
how does this agree? Well, for though he did enquire of the Lord, yet because he
did not wait upon God therein, but gave over waiting, his enquiring in
Scripture Phrase is said to be no e^quiring; Prayer without wai^ing, in
Scripture Phrase, is no Prayer. Look when a man does give over waiting, then d
th he lo e al his labor; his former Prayer is nothing, his former Duty nothing:
it shall not once be remembered, or imputed to him.

the patient abiding of the meek, shall not be forgotten for ever, Psalm. 9.18.
God will come and visit you in due time, He that does come, will come, and will
not tarry: yea, and your very waiting (that I may speak with reverence) will
make him come the sooner. It Is not so with men; if you expect a friend, you do
go forth to meet him; but it is not your expecting, waiting, that will make him
come. But so it is with God; your very expecting of him, and waiting for him,
will make him come; and therefore the holy men in Scripture, use this Argument
with God for mercy: Let me not be ashamed, for I have waited on thee; yea, and
if God do come, he will come with a recompense, and pay you al your
forbearance-Money, Es. 35. yea, and when he does come, you shall be able to
triumph in his appearing, and say, Lo this is our God, we have waited for him:
if you have not waited, you cannot triumph in his appearance; but if you wait,
you shall say when he comes, Lo this is my God, and I have waited for him; yea,
the Lord will not only come, bu^ he will come with a blessing, for Blessed are
all those that wait on him; yea, he will not only bless you upon your waiting,
but he will strengthen you therein, Esai. 40. Those that wait on the Lord, shall
renew their strength. O! what a blessed thing is it then for to wait on God,
who would not hope, trust, wait on the Lord? Is there any thing to be gotten by
your sad Discouragements, O ye of little Faith? Are you able to alter one hair
of your Condition by all your thoughtfulness? Is it not much better now, for to
wait on God? Why then do you not call your own heart aside, and say, Come O my
soul, Why have thou limited the Holy One of Israel thus long? Why have thou
dishonored Christ thus long by thy vain fears? Why art thou cast down, O my
soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Hope, trust, wait on God; for he
is the health of my Countenance, and my God.

And thus now I have done with this great Argument: ye have had the Patience to
hear it, Isa. 35.4.
the Lord give you Grace to practice it. I conclude all with the words of my
Commission: Ye that are of a fearful spirit, be strong, fear not: behold, your
God will come, even God with a recompense, he will come and save you.

OF THE SIN Against the HOLY GHOST.

Wherein is showed, I. What this Sin against the Holy Ghost is. II. How, and in
what respect this Sin against the Holy Ghost, is above all other Sins, the
Unpardonable Sin.


By William Bridge, of Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

OF THE SIN Against the HOLY GHOST.
Matthew, 12.31, 32. Preached At Stepney, December. 29. 1650.
Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin, and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men; but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto
men. And whosoever speaks a word against the Son of man, shall be forgiven:
but whosoever speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven
him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.


HERE are two great Arguments laid before you in these words.

First, The largeness of Gods heart, in forgiving sins unto the Children of
men, Every sin: All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men.

Secondly: You have here the unpardonableness of the Sin against the Holy
Ghost: But the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven unto men.

I would rather choose to speak unto the former Argument; but if I should do so
at the first, possibly some poor soul would say, Though Gods heart be very
large in forgiving sins, yet there is one sin that shall never be forgiven, the
Sin against the Holy Ghost; and I fear I have committed that.

That I may therefore take away this Obstruction, and make your way plain and
easy to the forgiving mercy of the Lord, I shall at this tim^ ^eak unto the
last of these two Arguments; But the blasphe^^^ ^^ainst the Holy Ghost, shall
not be forgiven. Whosoever spea^^^ against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be
forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come.

For the opening of which words, two Questions must be answered.

The First is, Whether these Jews, that our Savior spoke these words unto, did
then sin against the Holy Ghost? Mark, ye shall find that our Lord and Savior
spoke this, because of some words that they had spoken against him: he had cast
out Devils, and they said, He ^ast out Devils by the Prince of Devils, verse
22. Whereupon our Savior reasoned with them, and at last he says, (...) verse
^8. Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the Sons of men, and
blasphemies. Verse 29. But he that shall blaspheme against the holy Ghost, shall
never be forgiven: And the reason of this speech is given at verse 30. Because
they said he has an unclean Spirit. And indeed, if these men did not sin the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, our Lord and Savior Christ should tell us that there
is an unpardonable Sin, and not tell us what it is; for unless it be in this
Scripture, you shall not find, either in the Gospel, or in the Epistles, That
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, is any where mentioned in express words. Now
our Lord and Savior would not tell us that there is an unpardonable Sin, and not
tell us what it is: but he says expressly, That whoever does blaspheme, or
speak against the holy Ghost, shall never be forgiven: And he charge those
Jews, that they blasphemed, and spoke against the Spirit of God, or that work
which was done by the Spirit; and therefore without doubt, they did then sin
the unpardonable Sin, the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

But Secondly: Why is it here said, That he that sins this Sin, shall never
be forgiven, either in this world, or in the world to come? is there any
forgiving of sins in the world to come? Chrysostom says, As men are punished
in this world, and in the world to come; so they are pardoned in this world,
and in the world to come: Pardoned in this world, when any temporal Affliction
for sin is removed. So I also understand that Parable in Matthew. 18. at the
latter end; and pardoned in this life, when a man is justified, Romans 4.
pardoned and forgiven in the world to come: So says the Apostle in Acts, 3.19.
That your sins may be blotted out in the day of refreshing: Which day of
refreshing, compared with the Speech which you have in Heb. 2. speaking of the
World to come, shows that the day of Refreshing is the time of the World to
come; but it is an usual phrase with Scripture, noting the eternity of misery:
and therefore if you look again into Mark 3. you shall find, That whereas here
in Matthew, the words run thus; Shall not be forgiven, either in this World, or
in the World to come; Mark has it thus, He shall never be forgiven; that Never
being the Explication of this, not in this World, nor in the World to come.

The Words being thus far opened, the Doctrine then, will presently be this:
That the Sin against the Holy Ghost,

For the opening of this great Truth, which I shall the rather desire you to
hearken unto, because as it lies out of the ordinary Road, so it makes your way
clear to the laying hold of the former words of Gods Mercy. I say, for the
opening of this Truth, we must enquire into two Things.

First: What this Sin against the Holy Ghost is; for people are very ignorant
of it.

Secondly: How, and in what respect, this Sin against the Holy Ghost, is above
all other sins, the Unpardonable Sin.

First: If you ask, What this Sin is?

I Answer both Negatively, and Affirmatively.

and yet not sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost. (...). Chrysostom. in Math. 12.
For as Chrysostom observes, in his time there were diverse Heretics that did
deny the Personality, and the Deity of the Holy Ghost, and yet afterward
repented, and were received into the bosom of the Church. And ye do not find
that these Pharisees (who are here charged with this sin) did either deny the
Personality; or the Deity of the Holy Ghost. So that plainly then, the Sin
against the Holy Ghost, does not consist in this, The mere, and bare denying of
the Personality, or the Deity of the Holy Ghost.

Acts, 7. you find that Stephen speaking of the Jews, says at verse 51. Ye
stiff necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ear, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost; yet they did not sin this Sin against the Holy Ghost, Why? for Stephen
prays for them, at the last verse; Lord, lay not this sin to their charge. But
now says the Apostle John, in 1 John, 5.16. There is a sin unto Death, I do
not say that ye shall pray for it. Had they in Stephens account, sinned this
Sin unto Death, he would not have prayed for them; but he did pray for them. So
that this Sin against the Holy Ghost, does not consist in every opposition unto
the Work of the Holy Ghost, as it is distinct from the Father and the Son.

once professed; or else because he does rebel against Truth revealed, and the
Will of God manifested, and will go no further. I will express it thus: Five or
six men go a great Journey, suppose to Wales, or into the North, to Scotland;
when they come about the middle of the way, two or three of them say, these
ways are dirty, and longer than we intended, and therefore we will go no
further; but say the other, Let the way be as dirty, and as long as it may be,
we will go on, and on they go: Which of these men do depart one from the other?
do those that go on depart from them that stay? No; those that will go no
further depart, they are the forsakers. So in the way to Heaven, Professors let
out together, and some find the way long, further than they thought of, we will
go no further say they, and we will have no more Light; but say the other, God
willing we will on, and on they go: Which of these two sorts are the Apostates?
Those that will go no further: they think not so, but the Lord knows the truth,
that those that will go no further, are they that leave and forsake the other. I
will give you one Scripture for it, it is in Numbers, 14. there were certain
Spies went into the Land of Canaan, and they brought an il report upon the good
Land, And the Children of Israel murmured against Moses, verse 2. whereupon
Moses speaks unto them, and says at verse 9. Only rebel not against the Lord:
the words in the Septuagint (which Greek the new Testament follows) are, Only
be not Apostates against the Lord. So that in Septuagintal Language, those that
rebel against Light revealed, and will go no further, are called Apostates. Now
indeed this kind of Apostasy, always goes with the Sin against the Holy Ghost,
but not the former always; for we do not find that the Pharisees were guilty
of the former, for they did not profess the Gospel: So that the Essence of this
sin, does not consist in Apostatizing, or backsliding from the Profession of
the Gospel, and the Power thereof.

Altissiodorensis Lib. 2. Tract. 30. in Sentent. Desperatissimos convertit
Deus. August. Sic homo potest penitere de finali impenitentia. Altissiodorensis
ibid.
is not the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for by final Unbelief, and Impenitency,
they either understand, that Impenitency and Unbelief which a man lives and
dies in, or that which he purposes to continue in to the last. The latter
cannot be the Sin against the Holy Ghost; for many have purposed to continue in
their Unbelief to their death, and yet have been converted and pardoned. And
the first cannot be the Sin against the Holy Ghost; For, 1. The Jews (whom
Christ spoke unto) did then commit this Sin, and yet they had not continued in
it to their death. 2. Final Unbelief is rather a Sin against the Son: but the
Sin against the Holy Ghost is distinguished from that. 3. Our Savior says,
Those that commit this sin, shall not be forgiven in this world, nor in the
world to come: Not in this world. If therefore, final Unbelief, or Impenitency,
be this sin, then Christ should threaten, that he that dies in his sin, shall
not be forgiven whilst he lives. 4. If a man sin against the Father, or Son,
and die impenitently in that sin, he shall not be forgiven, either in this Life,
or in the Life to come: but herein the Sin against the Holy Ghost, is worser
than the Sins against the Father, or the Son, and therefore it cannot consist
therein. 1 John, ^.16.
5. The Apostle says, There is a sin unto death, I say not that you pray for
it: Does he say, that we must not pray for a man, and for the forgiveness of
his sin, when he is dead? 6. It is that sin for which there lies no remission,
but a man may sin such a sin whilst he lives: for if any man sin wilfully,
there remains no sacrifice for sin; and wilfully a man may sin before his
Death. 7. It is such a sin as a man may know anoth^r man is guilty of whilst he
lives; for says the Apostle, There is a sin unto death, I say not that you
pray for it: but final Unbelief, and Impenitency, is not known til death. 8.
Our Savior says, He that speaks a word against the Holy Ghost, shall not be
forgiven: but a word may be spoken against the Spirit, long before a man dies,
and therefore surely this sin against the Holy Ghost, does not consist in final
impenitency, and unbelief; final unbelief, and ^mpenitency, is not this Sin
against the Holy Ghost. 9. For then al wicked men living under the Gospel, and
dying impenitently, should sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost, Blasphemia in
spiritum sanctum ca ^se vid^^^ qua quis destin^ta malitia contra proprium animi
sui sensum spirit^ sancti gratiam et virtutem? deique gloriam oppugnat. Luc.
Brugen. in Math. 12. (...). Chrysostom. in Math. 12.
which is false.

You will say then, What is this Sin against the Holy Ghost, and wherein does it
consist?

Secondly: Affirmatively. It is that wilful sinning against God, whereby a man
does maliciously oppose and bla^pheme the proper, and peculiar work of the Holy
Ghost, and that after he has been convinced thereof by the Holy Ghost.

1. I say, It is a wilful sinning against God; and so the Apostle speaks,
saying, If any man sin wilfully, after he has received the knowledge of the
Truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sin, Heb. 10.26. So that the sin for
which there is no sacrifice, and of which there is no remission, is a wilful
Sin. Now a man is said to sin Wittingly, Willingly, and Wilfully; Wittingly, in
opposition to Ignorance; Willingly, in opposition to Force, and Constraint;
Wilfully, in opposition to Light, Knowledge, and Reason, and so he that sins
against the Holy Ghost, does sin; for says the Apostle, If any man sin
wilfully after he has received the knowledge of the Truth, or after the
acknowledgment, (...), etc.

2. He that commits this Sin, does also oppose, and blaspheme the proper and
peculiar Work of the Holy Ghost; for it is called here, Dicere verbum contra
spiritum sanctum est verbis impugnare Deum sanctificantem. Cajet. in Math. 12.
vide sixth. Senens. in locum.
a blasphemy, and a blaspheming of the Spirit, as distinct from the Father and
the Son: Now the Work of the Father, is to Create, the Work of the Son to
Redeem, the Work of the Holy Ghost to Sanctify; and therefore he that sins
this Sin, does oppose and blaspheme Holiness, and Goodness; and so these Jews
did: for when our Savior Christ did cast out the Devil, that unclean Spirit,
they said, he did it by the power of the Devil, calling the work done, a work
of the Devil, and did oppose him therein. Yet this is not all, For,

3. It is that Sin, whereby a man does maliciously oppose, Peccatum in spiritum
sanctum dicitur illud quod ex certa malitia sit quod solent distingui tria
genera peccatorum, peccatum in patrem ex infirmitate humana, peccatum in filium
ex ignorantia, quod patri app^opriatur potentia filio sapientia, peccatum in
spiritum sanctum, ex malitia quia bonitas attribuitur spiritui sancto.
Altissidorens. Lib. 2. Tract. 30. in Sent. Scot. in Sent. Lib. 2. Quest. 2.
and blaspheme; and so the word (...), Heb. 10.26. is used by the Septuagint,
Exodus 21.13, 14. And thus did those Pharisees ^in, for the Evangelist tells us,
That when Christ saw their thoughts, verse 25. He said unto them, etc. So that
it was not a bare opposing, or blaspheming; but a malicious opposing and
blaspheming this great Work of the Holy Ghost, which made them so deeply guilty.

Quest. But how can a man sin, ex malitia, or maliciously, seeing that,
voluntas semper fertur in bonum, and omnis peccans est ignorans. Now if the
Will be always carried out upon what is good, and every man that sins, does
sin ignorantly, how can any man be said to sin maliciously, or ex malitia?

Answ. Yes very well: for although the Will be always carried out upon that
which is good; yet that good, is either morally Good, called, Bonum honestum,
honest Good; or Naturally Good, called, Bonum utile, or Jucundum, profitable,
or delightful Good. Now the Will is not always carried out upon that which is
honestly good in appearance; for Voluntas est Appetitus universalis, the Will
is an universal Appetite: And if the Will should be always carried out upon
that which is honestly good in appearance, then (as Suarez reasons well) every
Thief and Adulterer, should be an Heretic, which no man will say. And if the
Will may be carried out sometimes upon that which is pleasantly, or
delightfully, or Naturally good; then it may hate that which is Morally, and
Spiritually, and Honestly Good; for, Amor Odii causa, Love is the cause of
Hatred; the Will does naturally hate that which ^s contrary to the thing loved;
and if the Will may hate that which is honestly, and spiritually good, then it
may oppose, and blaspheme the same, and that out of hatred and malice; for
every man speaks evil of, and opposes what he hates.

ex malitia, Because the Will is always carried out upon what is good; then
the Devils, and damned in Hell, do not sin maliciously, or ex malitia; for they
have Wills in Hell, as well as men on Earth; but I presume it will not be said
that the Devils, and damned in Hell, do not sin maliciously; for then if they
sin upon some mistake, and ex ignorantia, ^on existimo absolute necessarium ad
operandum malum per voluntatem ut praecedat d^f^ctus erroris in judicio
int^llectus vel speculativo vel practico. Suar. Metaphys. disp. de necess et
Conting. Eff. 1. Sect. 7.

Prima Propositio.

Cum perfecta scientia et consideratione vel habituali vel naturali potest esse
peccatum et defectus in voluntate, est communis sententia et certa de fide.

Secunda Propositio.

Non est necesse praecedere in intellectu aliquem errorem speculationum qui fit
quasi origo ad peccandum.

Tertia Propositio.

Ad peccandum non est necessarium ut praecedat inconsideratio speculativa
tanquam origo peccandi.

Quarta Propositio.

Etiam ad peccandum non est necessarius error practicus qui peccatum antecedat
et sit quasi origo ejus.

Quinta Propositio.

Moraliter loquendo semper in omni peccato occurrit aliqua inconsideratio
practica vel pravitatis objecti vel actus licet si absolutam volunta^is
potentiam consideremus neque iste defectus intellectus simpliciter videtur
necessarius ad peccandum.

Sexta Propositio.

Licet cum actu peccati semper sit conjunctus ille defectus intellectu^ non
tamen ille est prima origo peccandi sed potius illa reducitur in defectum
voluntatis.

Septima Propositio.

Voluntatem posse peccare est defectus quidam naturalis ipsius voluntatis.

Suarez. de Causis propriis et interior peccatorum Disputat. 5. Sect. 1.


they should have some excuse for their Sin.

3. Though every man that sins, does sin ignorantly, yet he does not sin ex
ignorantia, out of ignorance; Ignorance is sometimes the cause of the Sin, and
so the man sins out of Ignorance: sometimes Ignorance is the Companion, and
Consequent of the Sin, and then he sins ignorantly. Now it is granted, That
every man that sins, does sin ignorantly, there is always a darkness, and
obscuration of the mind, which goes along with every sin; but every man that
sins, does not sin ex ignorantia, out of ignorance: I say, it is not true, that
every Sin does arise from some precedent error, or ignorance in the
Understanding, as the cause thereof: For then,

1. Why should the Holy Ghost make so great, and vast a difference between him
that sins ignorantly, and him that sins presumptuously? Numb. 15. If any sinned
through ignorance, there was a Sacrifice for him, ver. 27, 28. but if any man
sinned presumptuously, there was no Sacrifice for him, ver. 30, 31. Now if
every Sin do arise ex ignorantia, from some precedent error, and ignorance in
the Understanding, as the cause thereof; then presumptuous sins also should
arise from this cause, and so there would be no such distinction between them,
as the Holy Ghost makes.

Quod aliquis ignoret illud quod scire debet contingit tripliciter: Vno ex
impotentia qua scire non potesi: Alio ex nescientia qua quis nescit quod scire
debet: Alto ex voluntate quando quis renuit scire quod debet, illa ignorantia
est peccatum mortale, quod est effectus voluntatis, quod est in potestate
voluntatis ignorare vel non ignorare. Holcot. de imputabilitate peccati.
2. If every Sin in the Will, should arise from some error, or ignorance in the
Understanding; then the Will should be always carried out upon Bonum Honestum,
Honest Good, at least in appearance; but the Will is an universal Appetite, and
the wills of the Devils, and damned in Hell, are not carried out upon that which
is apparently honest.

3. If every Sin should suppose such a precedent error, and ignorance in the
Understanding, then the will cannot fall off from, or resilire from the ultimate
dictate of the understanding, but must necessarily, and continually follow the
same; and so the liberty will be formally (and not radicately) in the
Understanding, and not in the Will; then the Will cannot move, and apply the
Understanding to consider a thing, nor be the cause of Ignorance in the
Understanding; yea, then there shall be no sin in the Will, because it follows
the Understanding, as God has set a Law upon it to do; but where Grace is,
there is Sin also.

4. Vtrum voluntas creata possit pecca^e ex malitia volendo aliquid non
ostensum sibi s^^^ ratione boni very, boni simpliciter vel boni apparentis et
secundum quid, etc.

Sin non potest tunc videtur quod volunt^^ creata non possit tendere in
objectum fu^ ali^ua ratione sub qua non possit tendere volunt^^ Divina,
voluntas enim divina potesi t^^der^ in omne bonum substractum illi deformitati.

Scotus, Lib. 2. Sent. Did. 44 Quest. 2.


If the Will does always presuppose such an error, and ignorance in the
Understanding, and does necessarily follow such an act of the Understanding,
presenting some Truth, or honest Good, either real, or apparent, then the
created, and desiled Will of Man, cannot tend unto any Object upon any reason,
upon which the Divine Will of God cannot tend unto its Object; for the Divine
Will can tend, and be carried out upon any good, being abstracted from al
deformity: and although the created Will be carried out, and tend unto that
which is apparently good, and the Divine Will is always carried out upon that
which is really good, yet the reason why the created Will is carried out upon
that which is apparently good, is because it appears to be real, and so the
Divine Will, shall be carried out upon its Object, upon no other reason than the
created Will of man, yea, than the wills of Devils, and the damned in Hell, which
I suppose none will affirm. Secundum omnes theologos aliquid est peccat^^^ ex
malitia. Ocham. Lib. 3. in Sent. Q^est. 12.


5. It is confessed by all, That there is a Sin of Malice, and a Sin of
Ignorance. Now if there be a Sin of Malice (as Ocham reasons) then he that sins
out of malice, Q^id est peccatum ex malitia? est communis sententia patrum et
Theolegorum. Suarez de pecca. ex pass. ignor. malitia Disput. 4. Sect. 1.

Peccatum ex malitia communiter dici peccatum ex certa scientia. Vasquez 12.
Tom. 1. Q 78. act.

Tunc quaero an peccans ex malitia habet notitiam tam universalem quam
particularem aut tam universalem, si primo habetur propositum, quod habens
notitiam tam universalem quam particularem potest ex malitia facere contra
utramque, si ducenti ita peccans ex ignorantia habet notitiam universalem stout
peccans ex malitia, quis peccans ex ignorantia scit tales majores, omne justum
est faciendum, omne bonum est faciendum quod Deo placet, etc. sed ignorant
minores puta hoc est justum, hoc est Deo placitum etc. si ergo peccans ex
ignorantia non tunc plus sciret aequalem scientiam haberet peccans ex malitia
et ignorantia.

Ocham in Sent. Lib. 3. Q. 12.


has either an universal, or particular knowledge, or both; if both, then as he
says, habetur propositum, viz. every Sin does not presuppose an error, or
ignorance in the Understanding. If he that sins out of malice, has an
universal knowledge only, then he that sins ignorantly shall have equal knowledge
with him that does sin maliciously; for he that sins ignorantly has an
universal knowledge, that every just thing is to be done, and that every good
thing that pleases God is to be done; but he that sins out of ignorance, has
not equal knowledge with him that sins out of malice; and therefore he that sins
out of malice, must have both an universal, and particular knowledge; and if so,
then every Sin does not presuppose an error, and ignorance in the
Understanding, as the Cause thereof. But,

4. Suppose that some ignorance in the Understanding, Quo ex malitia? an
eousque amentiae profilire queant homines ut Dei gloriam oppugnare scientes et
volentes non dubitent? Resp. audaciam istam prodire quidem ex cordis caecitate
sed in qua malitia exsuperet, ut clarum est hoc loco de Pharisaeis.

Lucas Brugensis in Math. 12.


be the remote cause of the Sin, yet malice may be the next, and chief cause.
As for example: Suppose that a man has taken up some prejudice against
another, through a mistake and error; yet now he hates him, and out of hatred
kills him; shall not this murderer be said to kill him out of malice, because the
malice was founded upon a mistake, or error? Yes surely: But why is he said to
kill him out of malice? Because malice was the next cause of this murder. So
that though ignorance be the remote cause of a Sin, yet malice may be the next
cause thereof; and being so, he shall be said truly to sin ex malitia, though
with some precedent ignorance, as the remote cause thereof.

5. Yet if you ask, how it can be, that the Will should be always carried out
upon what is good, and yet a man sin maliciously? Plainly thus: From what has
been said, the Will of Man is an universal Appetite, willing that which is
Naturally good, as well as ^^e which is Honestly good: If it be carried out upon
that which i^ naturally good, it will hate all that spiritual g o^ which is con^^
to the obtainment of it, and the man will oppose, and blaspheme what the will
hates. Now because the hatred and malice of the will, is the cause of that
blasphemy and oppo^ition, the man is truly said to oppose and blaspheme out of
malice, though the will be carried ou^ upon that which is naturally good at the
same time; which was the case of these Pharisees: For they sought their own
Honor and Greatness; Christ and the Truth opposing, they did hate him, and the
Truth; and because they hated him, the Truth, and that Light which reproved
their Sins, they did oppose and blaspheme, and that out of malice, and so the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, is a malicious Sin, or that Sin whereby a man does
oppose and blaspheme the proper and peculiar Work of the Spirit out of malice.
Yet this is not all. But,

6. It is that Sin against God, whereby a man does maliciously oppose and
blaspheme the peculiar Work of the Holy Ghost, after he has been convinced
thereof by the Holy Ghost; for possibly a man may oppose and blaspheme, even
maliciously, the Work of the Holy Ghost, and yet not be convinced of it by the
Holy Ghost, Tunc aliquis maxim peccat in spiritum sanctum quando contra
divinitatis opera stupenda ordinata ad nostram salutem a liquis convitia jactat
cum proposico perseverandi in illo peccato usque ad mortem, adjecti^ procul spe
et timore Dei Domini. Bannes, 22. Q. 14. Art. 1.
but otherwise; but those that sin this Sin, are such as are enlightened, and
made partakers of the Holy Ghost in the Gifts and common Graces of it, Heb. 6.
And so these Pharisees were convinced, by the Spirit which did work that great
Work before them; and yet after such a convincement wrought by the Spirit, they
did maliciously oppose and blaspheme this Work of the Spirit. So that I say,
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, is that wilful sinning against God, whereby a
man does maliciously oppose and blaspheme the proper and peculiar Work of the
Holy Ghost, and that after he has been convinced there of by the Holy Ghost. Or
if you will, thus: It is that deliberate sinning against God, whereby men do
oppose the Work of God, which their own Conscience and Conviction tells them, is
wrought by the Spirit and Finger of God, in order to man's Salvation, yet out of
malice do blaspheme the same.

But why is this Sin, above all other Sins, Unpardonable? are not the Sins
against the Holy Ghost; Peccatum dicitur irremissibile septem de causis, vide
Altissi^dorens. Lib. 2. Tract. 30. in Sent.
for ( Zanchy does well observe) if this Sin were only impardon, because it is
hardly pardoned, then a m^n might pray for tho^^ ^at in this Sin: but the
Apostle says, There is a Sin unto (...), I do not say that ye shall pray for
it, 1 John, 5.16. The^^ore the impardonableness of it, does not lie here.

2. Neither is it impardonable only in regard of event, Because in event it
shall never be pardoned; for th^re are many Sins which in event shall never be
pardoned, which yet are not the Sins against the Holy Ghost. There is many a
wicked man that goes to Hell, whose Sins in event are not pardoned, and yet he
did never sin against the Holy Ghost: So that this Sin is not impardonable only
in regard of event.

3. Neither is it impardonable, because it is so great as does exceed the Power
and Mercy of God; for Gods Mercy and Power, in forgiving sins, is like himself,
Infinite. If that be a good Argument that David uses, Forgive my sin, for it
is wondrous great; then the greatness of the Sin, cannot be the only reason of
the impardonableness of it: There is nothing greater than that which is
infinite, Nunquam remittetur, quod intellige regulatiter, nam nec Divina
potentia, nec Divina miserecordia alligata est ad non remittendum, spiritua
blasphemiam, sed secundum reg^larem cursum eveniet non remissio quod comitem
semper habet obstinationem.

Cajetan. in Matthew. 12.

Dupliciter dicitur peccatum irremissibile, dicitur uno quod nunquam
remittetur, alio dicitur irremissibile quod remitti non potest et sic non
sequitur iste est similiter impenitens ergo habet peccatum irremissibile.

Holcot. de imputabilitate peccati.


but Gods Mercy is Infinite.

4. Neither is it impardonable, because it is against the means of Pardon; for
then the Sin against the free Love of the Father, and the Sin against the Son,
should be impardonable.

5. Neither is it impardonable, because a man does not repent thereof; for then
al Sins unrepented of, should be Sins against the Holy Ghost: It is true, That
those who commit this Sin, cannot repent, as the Apostle speaks, It is
impossible that they should be renewed to repentance, Heb. 6. because God does
give them up to impenitency: but we do not find in Scripture, that their not
repenting is made the reason of the impardonableness of this Sin.

But the Sin is impardonable, because there is no Sacrifice laid out by Gods
Appointment for it; If any man sin wilfully, there remains no more Sacrifice,
Heb. 10. and without blood and Sacrifice, there is no remission: He that sinned
ignorantly, Numb. 15. was pardoned; Why? Because there was a Sacrifice laid out
for him; but if any man sinned (...) with an high hand, he was to bear his own
sin; Why? Because there was no Sacrifice laid out for him: But why was there no
Sacrifice for that Sin? Not because the man did not repent after it; but
because that in the committing of that Sin, he did despise the Commandment of
God. So now, God has declared, That every Sin, and Blasphemy against the
Father and Son, may be forgiven; but if men come to that height of Sin, as
maliciously to oppose, and blaspheme that very way and work of Gods Spirit,
which they have been convinced of by the Spirit, then there shall be no
Sacrifice for that, and so no remission, and pardon.

And thus now ye have seen, what the Sin against the Holy Ghost is; in what
respects it is not, and in what respects it is unpardonable; and so the
Doctrine cleared and proved, That the Sin against the Holy Ghost, is the
impardonable Sin, which shall never be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in
the world to come.

The Application follows:

Matthew. 28. In whose Name we are to baptize; he who has a Name, and in whose
Name, something is to be done, must needs be a Person: And I pray you, what is
proper and peculiar to a Person? is not Understanding, Willing, and Speaking?
these are al given to the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.11. 1 Cor. 12.11. and Romans 8.26.27.
Acts, 13.2. Acts, 20.23. But I need go no further than this Text: here the
Spirit is joined with the Son, and the Sin against the Holy Spirit, is made the
impardonable Sin: surely therefore he is verily and truly God, as the Father is.

John, 5.16, therefore we may know what this Sin is, and we, may know that
another has committed the same; for how can we forbear prayer for him, if we
do not know and understand what this Sin is; the not knowing what this Sin is,
makes many men fall into it, before they are aware. When the Laws of a Nation
are written in an unknown Tongue, the People break them before they are aware,
because they do not know them. So the not knowing what this Sin is, makes many
a poor soul to fall into it; yea, the not knowing what this Sin is, breeds many
scruples, doubts, and fears, in new Converts; O! says one, I have sinned that
great Sin against the Holy Ghost; and I, says another, have sinned the
impardonable Sin; and why, but because the man does not know what this Sin is?
O! what a necessity therefore is thereupon us al, to know, and understand what
this Sin is, and wherein it does consist.

what Mercy, and what Grace is it, that the Lord has kept us from this great
Sin? that though ye have fallen into great and heinous sins, and the Lord has
suffered you to fall into such sins that you may be humbled; yet that the Lord
should keep you from this Sin, this unpardonable Sin, for which there is no
Sacrifice, nor no remission, O! what Mercy, and what Grace is this!

But I am afraid I have sinned this Sin, and the truth is, I have often feared
it; and my reason was, and is, Because my sins are so great, so exceeding
great.

Adam sin against Light, when he eat the forbidden Fruit? Did he not sin
against his Knowledge, and against Conscience; yet he sinned not against the Holy
Ghost (though he brought all the World under Condemnation by his Sin) for the
Lord himself came and preached mercy to him, The Seed of the Woman shall break
the Serpents head. And I pray did not Jonah (when he run away from God) sin
against his Light? and did he not sin against his Conviction? and against his
Knowledge? yet he did not sin against the Holy Ghost: for the Lord pardoned him,
and wonderfully delivered him. Possibly this therefore may be, and yet not a
Sin against the Holy Ghost. It is true indeed, that those who sin against the
Holy Ghost, do sin against their Light, Knowledge, and Conscience; but whoever
sins against Light and Knowledge (though he sins greatly) does not sin against
the Holy Ghost.

But I fear that I have sinned this Sin, for I have fallen foully into gross
sins.

David sin so? were they not great, and gross, and foul sins that David fell
into, such as one of your civil, moral men would abhor? yet he did not sin
against the Holy Ghost; for the Lord pardoned him, and Nathan said from the
Lord, The Lord has forgiven thee.

O! But yet I fear that I have sinned this great Sin; for I am much declined, I
have lost my former acquaintance, and communion with God; I have lost my former
heat and affections to good, and in Duty; and I fear upon this account that I
have sinned this great Sin.

Ephesus lose her first Love? yet this Church of Ephesus, did not sin the Sin
against the Holy Ghost; Why? For the Lord says unto her, Repent, and do thy
first Works: she could not have repented thus, if she had sinned this Sin.

O! but yet I fear that I have sinned this great Sin, because that I have
sinned directly against the Spirit; I have quenched, I have grieved, I have
resisted the Spirit; the Spirit of the Lord has come and fallen upon my heart
in preaching, and I resisted, and grieved it; the Spirit of the Lord has
fallen upon my heart in Prayer, and I have grieved that; therefore I fear I
have sinned this great Sin, that shall never be pardoned.

Acts, 7. resisted the Holy Ghost; yet they did not sin the Sin against the
Holy Ghost; for then Stephen would not have prayed for them. And indeed
Beloved, if every resisting of the breathings of the Spirit, and grieving of
the Holy Ghost, were the unpardonable Sin, what godly man would be free? A
godly man is more properly said to grieve the Spirit, than a wicked man. If an
Enemy strike you, you are angry; if your Friend strike you, ye are grieved: If
a wicked man strike at God, he is angry with him; if a godly man strike at God,
God is angry, and his Spirit is grieved, because he is a Friend. Grieve not the
Spirit of God, whereby ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption: So that thus
far, possibly a man may go, and yet not sin this Unpardonable Sin.

But I am afraid that I have sinned this great Sin, the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, because I have not owned, but denied the Truth: the Work of the Spirit,
is to enlighten, and to lead into Truth, and I have not owned, but denied the
Truth rather; therefore I fear that I have sinned this great Sin against the
Holy Ghost.

Godteschalchus, worthy to be written in Letters of Gold: Timeo veritatem
negare quia metuo a veritate negari.
I am afraid (said he) to deny the Truth, lest I should be for ever denied by
the Truth, that is Christ. But I pray, did not Peter deny the Truth when he
denied Christ? and did he not do it again, and again? and did he not do it
openly with Scandal? and did he not do it after Admonition? and did he not do
it with Cursing, and Swearing? and yet he did not sin against the Holy Ghost;
for the Lord pardoned, and took him into his bosom, and made him a blessed
Instrument in the Church. Thus far yet a man may go possibly, and yet not sin
this Sin.

O! But I am afraid yet, that I have sinned it; for I have been an Opposer of
Goodness, I have been an Opposer of the People of God, and I have been a
blasphemer; therefore I fear I have sinned this Sin.

Paul an Opposer, and Blasphemer of the Saints, and Ways of God? and yet he
did not sin against the Holy Ghost; for I did it ignorantly, says he; I was a
Blasphemer, and a Persecutor; but I obtained mercy, for I did it ignorantly.

O! But I have sinned, and I have done it maliciously; and therefore I fear I
have sinned this same dreadful Sin.

Peccatum ex malitia quandoque dicitur peccatum ex habitu, puta quando ex malo
habitu, quis est intemperatus vel gulosus et sic non loquimur in proposito,
alio modo dicitur quod procedit ex passione tamen deliberate et scienter puta
si quis invideat etc. nec sic loquimu^ in proposito; sed vocatur peccatum ex
malitia proprie quando movetur quis non ex habitu nec passione nec ignorantia
sed ex mera liberate voluntatis Sc. quod sic placet et hoc modo dicitur
peccatum in spiritum sanctum. Aureol. in Lib. 2. Sent. Did. 43. Art. 1.
A man may be said to sin ex malitia, or maliciously, three ways, says
Aureolus: Either because he sins from some evil habit, and so al wicked men
sin; yet they do not al sin against the Holy Ghost: Or, because a man sins out
of anger, passion, or evil will against another; so Paul sinned when he
persecuted the Church of God, he was carried out with a malicious spirit
against the Saints and People of God; yet he did not sin against the Holy
Ghost. Or else because a man is moved to sin, not out of any evil habit,
passion, or ignorance; but merely from the liberty of his own will, because it
pleases him, and because he does hate that which his own Conviction tells him
is right and good. Now have you sinned thus? Surely no; for then you would not
be troubled about it, but be well pleased with it.

Obj. 8. O! But yet I fear I have sinned this great Sin, for I have forsaken
God, and God has forsaken me; God is gone, Christ is gone, and Mercy is gone:
O! what freedom once I had; but now God is departed from me, God has forsaken
me; and I fear it is upon this account, Because I have sinned this great Sin.

Ans. But does not David say, How long, O Lord, will thou forget me, forsake
me? And our Savior himself says, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
There is a gradual forsaking, and there is a total. As with a man that goes
from his house; possibly he go^s a Voyage, or is from home a quarter, half a
year, or a year; but he does not leave his House, for his Wi^e, his Children,
and Goods are there still: But another man goes aw^y from his House, the House
is let, and he carries away al his Goods: this is a total departure, the other
gradual. So now it is with the Lord; he does sometimes forsake his own Childr^n
for a time; but he does not pull down his Hangings, or carry away his Goods; he
does not go away, but returns again; this is gradual. But there is a total
forsaking of a man, and then he giv^s him up to his Sin. Now this is not the
burden that you lie under; for if God had thus forsaken you, you would be given
up to your Sins, and you would give up your selves unto ^l Uncleanness.

O! But I am afraid yet, that I am under the worst forsaking, and that
therefore I have sinned this great Sin; for I do lie despairing, saying, God is
gone, and Mercy gone, I am in the dark, O! I despair, I despair, and upon this
account I fear I have sinned this great Sin, the Sin against the Holy Ghost.

Heman said, I remember God, and am troubled; O Lord (says he) all thy waves
are gone over my head; the waves of thy wrath are gone over my head, and yet a
Penman of Scripture. Aretius tells us of a certain man in his time; It is no
feigned story, says he, but I saw the man with my own Eyes, one that had been
a most vile, and desperate Sinner, a Drunkard, a Swearer, a Wanton, a Gamester,
and so he continued to his gray hairs; but at the last, it pleased God to set
his Sins in order before him, and the man was so troubled in Conscience, that
he threw himself down upon the ground, calling unto Satan to take him away,
provoking Satan to take him away; Devil, take thy own, I am thy own, take thy
own: whereupon (says Aretius) prayer was made for him; Christians prayed, they
fasted, and prayed, they prayed night and day; and it pleased God at last, this
poor man revived, converted to God, lived a godly life, and died comfortably:
So that it is not an easy thing (says he) to pronounce what the Sin against
the Holy Ghost is. But now, whosoever you are, that have labored under this
fear (as indeed this fear I know has oppressed many) give me leave to ask you
four or five short Questions.

The First is: Whether can thou not find in thy heart, to forgive men that do
trespass against thee? Do not you find a disposition in your own heart to
forgive others? Yes, I praise the Lord that I do. Now if you can find in your
heart to forgive others, I am sure God can find in his heart to forgive you;
and therefore you have not sinned this great sin, which is unpardonable.

Secondly: Whether, I or no, have you ever opposed the ways of God, the People
of God, and that out of malice? No: I confess I have opposed them, but the Lord
knows I did it ignorantly, it was not out of malice; then remember the
description of this Sin.

Thirdly: Whether I or no, do not you desire to be humbled for every Sin,
though it be never so small? Yes, for though I know, that my greatest
Humiliation cannot, placare Deum, make an atonement for my Sin; yet I know
that the least Humiliation in truth does, placere Deo, please God, and it is my
Duty to be humbled for every sin; for the least sin is a great evil; and he
that commands Humiliation for the one, commands it for the other also; and
through Grace I desire to be humbled for every sin: why, then you cannot have
sinned against the Holy Ghost; for it is impossible that they that sin this Sin,
should be renewed to Repentance.

Fourthly: Whether, I, or no, do not you desire above all things, the
breathings of the Spirit of God upon your heart? Yes: O! that God would come
and breath upon my poor soul in Duty. But those that sin against the Holy
Ghost, do despite to the Spirit of Grace, Hebrews, 10.

Fifthly: Where do you find in all the Bible, That those that sin this Sin
against the Holy Ghost, are afraid that they have sinned it? those that sin
against the Holy Ghost, are never afraid that they have sinned against the Holy
Ghost. This alone satisfied Mistress Drake, a Woman much troubled in
Conscience, she was afraid she had sinned against the Holy Ghost; Mr. Dod, of
blessed Memory, came to her, and told her, That therefore she had not sinned
the Sin against the Holy Ghost, Because she feared she had sinned it; for those
that sin the Sin against the Holy Ghost, are never afraid that they have sinned
it; and she acknowledged, it did satisfy her, and she was thereupon comforted.
Now therefore, where is the man or woman that has labored under such a fear as
this? O! I have sinned this unpardonable Sin! Art thou one that fear thou
have sinned it? I tell thee from the Lord, thou art free from it; and thou may
go home, and say thus: Though I have sinned much, for which the Lord humble me,
yet I bless God I am kept from this great Sin: And O! my beloved, what a mercy
is it, That among all the sins that we have committed, That yet we should be
kept from this great Sin? The greater the evil is, the greater is the mercy to
be kept from it. Now I pray, What is the misery of this Sin? Is it not a great
misery to be past Prayer, to be thrown out of the Prayers of the Saints? For
such a one pray not, says the Apostle. Is it not a great misery for a man to
be beyond the line of Mercy? a man that has sinned this Sin against the Holy
Ghost, is worser Spiritually, than a man that is sick of the Plague outwardly;
for if a man be sick of the Plague, ye pray for him, and say, Lord, have mercy
upon him; but if a man have sinned this Sin, he is past Prayer, and past
Pardon, he is past Sacrifice; the truth is, this man is in the Devils case: The
Devil, you know, is reserved in Chains unto the great Day, and he cannot get
out: So, if a man has sinned this Sin, though he live ten years, twenty years,
or thirty years, he is reserved in Chains, and he shall never be pardoned, he is
upon the Devils ground. O! what a misery is it to commit this Sin! O! what a
mercy is it then to be kept from it! Now here is Hope for the greatest Sinner
in the Congregation upon this account: says our Savior, All manner of sin and
blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men, except the blasphemy against the Holy
Ghost. Have thou therefore been a great Sinner? Have thou been a Drunkard? Have
thou been a Wanton? Have thou been a Swearer? Have thou been an Opposer of the
People of the Lord? and has the Lord kept thee from this great transgression?
Man or Woman, here is Hope yet. Who would not then turn to God? Come Drunkard,
Swearer, Wanton, here is yet hope for thy soul; who would not come in to Christ?

And O! What Comfort is here for Believers that are in Christ? If thou be in
Christ, and a Believer, thou can not sin this Sin: that look as it is with a
man that has sinned this Sin, he cannot be pardoned; so if a man be the Child
of God, a Believer in Christ, he cannot sin this Sin; for he that is born of
God sins not, neither can he, for the Seed of God abides in him. O! you that
are Believers, comfort your selves with this Truth. Here is Comfort for all the
People of the Lord, from this Doctrine.

that in order to our salvation? and yet how do men speak against them, and
blaspheme? I will not say that these men do it out of malice, and therefore I do
not charge this Sin against the Holy Ghost upon them; But beloved in the Lord,
this is certain, That in knowing Times, Times when God is doing great things by
his own Finger, then is this Sin stirring most. The Times of Christ, and of the
Apostles, were Times of great Light, when God wrought by his own Finger, then
was this Sin committed. Now in these Times, there is much breaking forth of
Light, and great things done by the very Finger of God; therefore I say, there
is great danger if men do now blaspheme; wherefore I say again, take heed to
your souls, you that are Professors, look to your steps in these days of ours.

We grant indeed that this Sin against the Holy Ghost, is the unpardonable Sin,
and woe be to them that do fall into it, and it cannot be committed but by a
knowing man; but what shall we do that we may be kept from this great
Transgression? that whatsoever sin we do fall into, yet we may be kept from
this great Evil, and this unpardonable Sin?

David did; says David, O Lord, keep back thy Servant from presumptuous sins,
so shall I be free from the great transgression: It seems then, that
presumptuous sinning, makes way to this great Transgression. When is a man said
to sin presumptuously? When a man sins upon this score, That God will show mercy
to him, saying, I know, indeed, it is not good for me to go to such a wicked
Company, it is a sin so to do; but I will venture, and repent afterward, for
God will show mercy. To venture upon a sin, presuming that God will show mercy,
and that a man shall repent afterward, is presumption, and presumptuous
sinning, makes way to this great Transgression; therefore would you be kept
from this great Transgression? go to God with David, and say, O Lord, keep back
thy Servant from presumptuous sins, so shall I be free from the great
transgression.



Timor innocentiae custos, Fear is the Guard of Innocence: If you always fear
to commit it, you shall never commit the same.





Hinc discimus quantopere nobis ab odio fratrum c^ ^ndum est, quandoquidem eo
sit, ut quandoque odio hominis in ipsam Dei v^ritatem feramur precipites.
Cartw. Harm. ^ag. 357.
or in any Way of God, take heed (as for thy life) that thou do never speak
evil, or blaspheme that way of God, wherein thou have sound the Spirit of God
breathing: This Sin is always accompanied with invidentia fratrum, with the
envy of the Saints, and therefore some have thought the Sin against the Holy
Ghost did consist in it, in the envying of the Saints; but though that be not
it, yet that accompanies it. Can thou not find thy own heart rise to those
heights of Graces that others do, take heed you never envy the Saints, lest you
fall from envying those that are good, to oppose Goodness it self, which is the
proper Work of the Holy Ghost.

If any man sin wilfully after he has received the knowledge of the Truth,
there remains no more Sacrifice for sin; therefore as you desire to be kept
from this great Transgression, does your Affections decline? take heed your
Judgment do not alter: Does your Judgment alter? take heed that your Will be not
perverse; O! take heed of al Declinings, and the step^ thereof.

more as you see the day approaching, and what I say to you, I say to al, and
to mine own soul, Let us breath after the Spirit, and walk in the Spirit, For
there is no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after
the Flesh, but after the Spirit. O! let us pray to God for his keeping Grace,
it is he alone that keeps us; and the Lord keep al our souls from this great
Transgression.

OF THE SIN OF INFIRMITY.

Wherein is showed (besides other things) I. That a man may possibly fall into
the same Sin again and again, yet be a true Disciple. II. That this Sin, may be
but a Sin of Infirmity. III. That being so, Christ will not leave him in it,
but will come again, and not cast him off.


By William Bridge, Preacher of the Gospel at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

OF THE SIN OF INFIRMITY.
Matthew, 26.43. Preached At Stepney,
And he came and found them asleep again, for their eyes were heavy.


IN the Verses next precedent, and consequent, you may see the difference
between the true, and the false Disciple; both sinned, but they differ in their
sin, and in the issue of it. The true Disciple sleeps, when he should have
prayed; and he slept again, and again, that was his sin; for our Savior
commanded them to watch and pray: but Christ wakened them, and would not leave
them sleeping; he came to them with his wakening mercy, and they were awakened,
that was the issue of their sin. But the false Disciple Judas, was awake, and
he watched unto what was evil: the good Disciple slept unto what was good, and
the false Disciple watched unto what was evil; that was his sin: For while
Christ yet spoke (ver. 17.) Lo Judas, one of the Twelve, came, and with him a
great multitude, with Swords and Staves, from the chief Priests and Elders of
the People. Now he that betrayed him, gave them a sign, saying, Whomsoever I
shall kiss, that same is he, hold him fast: and forthwith he came to Jesus, and
said, Hail Master, and kissed him: This was his Sin, wherein our Savior leaves
him, and does not awaken him, but suffered him to go on, leading him forth with
the Workers of iniquity: That was the issue of his Sin.

In this 43. verse, you have the true Disciples Sin, and his Lords Grace; his
dealing by Christ, and Christ's dealing by him.



For their Eyes were heavy* this sin therefore was a Sin of Infirmity, a Sin of
Weakness; and so our Savior calls it, verse 41. for says he, The Spirit indeed
is willing, but the flesh is weak.

He found them asleep again: Christ had wakened them before, and commanded them
to pray; but they slept again, and again: thus did they deal by Christ.

Judas; but he came to them again, and as they slept again, so Christ came
again; his waking Grace and Mercy, was as high as their slumbring Sin; they sin
again, and he comes again: So that the Doctrine from the whole verse is this:

For the opening, and clearing whereof, Three things will fall under our
Consideration.

1. That a man may possibly fall into the same sin again, and again, yet be a
true Disciple. 2. That this Sin, may be but a Sin of Infirmity. 3. That being
so, Christ will not leave him in it, but will come again, and not cast him off.
First: It is possible that a good man may fall into the same sin again, and
again. I confess it is an Evil thing so to do, and a great Evil: In some
respects it may be worser to fall into the same sin, than to fall into others;
for this may more wast ones Peace, and destroy the Assurance of Gods Love, sins
against Light, do the most darken. Now when we have repented, Lavamini mundi
estote, Esa. 1. Lavatur et mundus est, qui et preterrita plangit, et iterum non
admittit; lavatur et non est mundus, qui plangit quod gessit, nec descrit, sed
post lachrimas stenda, haec quae sleverat, repetit. August. Ser 66. de tempore.
and then fall into that very sin which they repented of, they do sin against
Light; yea, it is a kind of repenting of ones Repentance; for as when a man
has gone on i^ a sinful way, and does return unto God, he does then repent of
his sin; so when a man has gone on in a good way, and does return to his sin,
then he does as it were repent of his Repentance: when God pardons a man, he
says, Go, and sin no more: do I therefore return unto the same sin? then am I
most unthankful, dis-ingenuous, and disobedient; yea, it is exceedingly
displeasing unto the Lord, for a man to fall into the same sin again, and again;
ye shall observe therefore, That although the Lord pardoned the Children of
Israel that great sin of Idolatry in the matter of the Golden Calf, yet in
reference to the Land of Promise, he did not pardon their Unbelief and
murmuring; for they entered not into Canaan; Why? Because of their Unbelief,
says the Apostle. Now if you look into Numb. 14.19. you shall find that Moses
prayed, Pardon I beseech thee, O Lord, the iniquity of this People, according
to the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have forgiven this People from
Egypt, even till now: And the Lord said, I have pardoned, according to thy
word; But as truly as I live, all the Earth shall be filled with the Glory of
the Lord. At ver. 22. Because all these men which have seen my Glory, and my
Miracles which I did in Egypt, and in the Wilderness, and have tempted me now
these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice, surely they shall not see
the Land, which I swear to give unto their Fathers. Though I pardon them, says
God, they shall never come into Canaan, the Land of Rest that I have promised;
Why? Because they have sinned these ten times, murmuring again, and again, and
again; so that it is exceedingly displeasing unto the Lord, for a man to fall
into the same sin again, and again. But yet I say, it is possible that a good
man, and true Disciple of Christ, may fall into the same sin, again, and again:
It was a sin for them thus to sleep, when our Savior had commanded them to
watch and pray; but they slept again, and again. Look I pray you it to Job 19.
and see what Job says concerning his friends; These ten times (says b^ at
verse 3.) have ye reproached me, yet are ye not ashamed. It is an evil thing to
reproach a man, it is worser to reproach a godly man, it is yet worser to
reproach a godly man under Affliction, and to afflict the afflicted; but to
reproach a man ten times, this is evil indeed: yet says Job, These ten times
have ye reproached me; and yet Job's Friends were godly. Possibly then, a good
man may fall into the same sin again, and again, ten times, that is very often.
And you know how it was with Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; you read in
Genesis, 12. that when he was driven by reason of Famine, into Egypt, he
desired his Wife Sarah to say, that she was his Sister; which indeed was no
lie, but his sin of Unbelief, and very evil; for thereby he put his Wife upon a
great Temptation; he was reproved for it, as you read in the Chapter: yet if
you look into the 20. Chapter, you shall find, that he was at the same work
again, And Abraham journeyed toward the South Country; and Abraham said (at
ver. 2.) of Sarah his Wife, she is my Sister. And so also if you look into 2.
Chron. 19. you shall find it was thus with that good King Jehosaphat, complying
too much with the King of Israel, for which he is reproved, at verse 2. And
Jehu went out to meet him, and said to King Jehosaphat, should thou help the
ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from
before the Lord: yet if you look into the 20. Chapter, you shall find, that he
falls into the same sin again: And Eliazar prophesied against Jehosaphat,
saying, (at the last verse) Because thou have joined thy self with Ahaziah, the
Lord has broken thy works; and the Ships were broken, that they were not able
to go to Tarshish. Jehosaphat a good man, yet he falls into the same sin again:
So that I shall not need to spend longer time in this, it is too apparent,
Possibly a good man, a true Disciple of Christ, may fall into the same Sin
again, and again. That is the First.

Secondly: Though a man do fall into the same Sin, again, and again, yet it may
be but an Infirmity For the opening, and clearing of this, we must consider
what a Sin of Infirmity is, and what is the true notion of it: which being
cleared, the Truth proposed will Naturally fall into your bosom. Properly
therefore, a Sin of Infirmity, is that sin, which does rather arise from want
of strength to resist, than from will to commit; else it should be wickedness,
and not weakness.

The Spirit is willing, but the Flesh is weak and Romans 6.19. I speak after the
manner of men, because of the infirmity, or weakness of your flesh. And
therefore,



Paul speaks, in Romans 7.19. The good that I would, I do not; but the evil which
I would not, that I do: and why so? he gives the reason at verse 21. I find
then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me; and verse 23. I
find a Law in my Members, fighting against the Law of my Mind, and leading me
captive, etc. Or else it does arise from some present distemper, and that
either in the Mind and Judgment, and then it is called an Error, Who knows
the Errors of his Life? Psalm. 19. Heb. 3.2.
Or else this distemper does arise from some present passion, fear, or the
like, whereby a man is hurried into evil, and then he is said to be overtaken,
Gal. 6.1. So that when a man is alive unto God, and does commit a Sin for want
of strength to resist, then he is said to sin out of infirmity.

First: Therefore if you ask, The sins whereinto the godly falls, are not
presumptuous, but are ordinarily of weakness, and infirmity. Perkins Cases,
Book 1. Chap. 2.
Whether every Sin that a godly man does commit, be a Sin of infirmity? I
answer, No. Because there are some Sins that a godly man does commit, which he
has strength to avoid. Sometimes the word Infirmity is taken largely, for all
Sin: which Jesus Christ our High Priest, does sympathize with us in. So Heb, 4.
Peccatum ex infirmitate est, cujus est determinata causa instigans, ita ut sine
tali causa non sieret. Corduba, Lib. 2. Quest. 8.

Ut peccatum sit ex infirmitate, ita debere fieri ex passione ut ipsa sit
sufficiens causa qua ablata, tale peccatum non sequeretur. Vasquez in 12. Co.
1. Q. 77. Art. 3.


We have not such an High Priest who cannot be touched with our infirmities:
And thus all the Sins of the Godly, may be, and are Sins of Infirmity. But
properly and strictly, an Infirmity is that Sin which a man is taken captive
by, against his will, Romans 7. that is, against the general bent, and frame of
his heart, which he has not present strength to resist. So Romans 15.1. Ye which
are strong, ought to bear the infirmities of those that are weak. And thus
every Sin that a Godly man commits, is not a Sin of Infirmity.

Secondly: If you ask, Whether any Sin that a wicked man does commit, be a Sin
of Infirmity? I answer, Infirmity cannot properly be said to be in them, in
whom sin has firmity and strength, and where there is no power of grace at all
Perk. Cases, Book, 1. Chap. 2.
No: Because he has no spiritual Life, and infirmity is in one that has life;
and therefore a wicked man being dead, his Sin that he commits, cannot be
called a Sin of Infirmity.

Thirdly? If you ask, Whether any great, gross, foul, s^^ndalous Sin, be, or
can be a Sin of Infirmity? I answer, No: Because it is a sickness (as Austin
well observes) and not a weakness, for, says he, there is a great deal of
difference between Aegrotus, and Infirmus: If a man have some distemper and
ailment in his Body, and yet he bea^s up to his meat, and to his work, he is
not sick, but he has an infirmity, this is weakness: but if a man have a
distemper and illness in his Body, whereby he is driven both from meat, and
work, and does lie by it, then it is not an infirmity, but a sickness. So
Spiritually, Sicut corpori noxium est escam corporalem non posse percipere, ita
animae periculosum e^ spiritales delitias fastidite. August.
If a man have a failing, and yet through the Grace of God he bears up to meat
and work, it is an infirmity; but if he sin, and thereby be driven both from
meat and work, through the commission of some gross sin, this is a sickness,
this is no weakness or infirmity. So then properly, the Sin of Infirmity, is
that Sin which is committed by one that is spiritually alive unto God, and
which does arise from want of strength to resist, and not from will to commit.
And thus you see briefly, what the Nature of this Sin of Infirmity is.

But yet this does not come near enough: When may a man he said to sin a Sin of
Infirmity? and how shall I know whether any sin be of that Rate of sins, or no?
For if the Lord will not cast a man off for a sin of infirmity, it concerns me
to consider what kind of sins my sins are: There are some sins that God does
reject men for; as in the case of Saul, God rejected him for his sin; when may
a man therefore be said to sin out of infirmity?





On the left hand, Men think that their Sins are Infirmities, when indeed they
are not, and that upon a four-sold account, Because their Sin is but small in
bulk; or because that they are tempted, and drawn into their Sin by others; and
because they do strive against their sin; and because they are troubled after
it.

1. I think, will some say, that my sin is a Sin of Infirmity, Minuta peccata si
negligantur, occidunt minutae sunt guttae quae flumina implent, minuta sunt
grana arenae, sed si multa arena imponatur, premit atque opprimit; hoc facit
sentina neglecta, quod facit fluctus irruens, Paulatim per sentinam intrat sed
diu intrando et non ex hauriendo mergit navim August. Tom. 6. Tract. 13. in
Joan. 3.

Ne putemus parvum esse has culpas quae sunt plures, aren^iae parvae sunt sed
tot possunt esse ut obruant citius quam saxum ingens, infirma res est una
locusta sed quae plaga major agris quam multitudo illarum. Eusebius. Nieremberg.
de adoratione, Lib. 2. Cap. 13.

Cum Deus tantus sit nihil est parvum quod ei displicet aut quod ei placet
quicquid est bonum statim est magnum quicquid malum statim hic non est parvum.

Non est parvum quod censetur minimum cum in minimis stet perfectio.

E^ubesse te vinci a parvis nam ab hosse exili et pumilione sterni tur pissimum
et ignavi signum. Id. Cap. 14.


because it is but small. But if you look into 1 Samuel 15. you may read, that
Saul's Sin for which the Lord rejected him, was of no great outward bulk; for he
spared the Fatlings that he might sacrifice thereby; and though he spared the
King Agag, it was neither murder that he committed, nor adultery, nor
drunkenness; yet says the Lord unto him, Thy sin is as the sin of Witchraft: A
great many small sins, may make as great a bulk as one gross sin; yea, possibly
there may be much sinfulness and evil in committing of a small sin; for as
amongst men, it is the greatest incivility to break with another for a small
matter; so with God, to break with God for a small thing, is a great
unworthiness, and ingratitude. Thus did Adam in eating the forbidden fruit; the
smalness of the thing to be done, aggravated his sin; and the smaller the thing
is, the more unworthiness it is to break with God in so little; a small leak
neglected may sink the Ship, as well as the most boisterous, and greatest wave;
and much skill may be seen in a small work; a little watch etc. So your skill in
sinning, may be seen in a small sin; his sin is never small, that thinks it small:
And if this be true, That there is no sin that a wicked man commits, which is a
Sin of Infirmity, because he is dead; then a man may commit a sin that is but
small in the bulk, and yet no Sin of Infirmity.

2. But I think my sin is a Sin of Infirmity, because I am tempted to it, and
because I am drawn on by others. But I pray, was not Adam tempted unto the
eating of the forbidden Fruit by Eve? And was not was Eve tempted by Satan? And
will you call that a Sin of Infirmity that condemned all the World, as Adams Sin
did? And I pray you, was not Aaron put upon making of the Golden Calf by the
People? and will you call that Sin of Idolatry, a Sin of Infirmity? Possibly a
man may be tempted, drawn unto Sin by others, and put upon it by others, and
yet the Sin may be no Sin of Infirmity.

3. But I think my Sin is a Sin of Infirmity, because I do strive against it.
And I pray, did not Pilate strive against the crucifying of Christ? he would
have delivered him from the Jews, calls for a basin of Water, and washed his
hands, saying, I am free from the blood of this man, used means, and did strive
against it, and yet the Sin of Pilate no Sin of Infirmity: Possibly therefore a
man may strive against his Sin, and yet the Sin be no Sin of Infirmity.

4. But my Sin is a Sin of Infirmity, because I am troubled after it. And was
not Esau troubled after he had sold his Birthright for a mess of pottage? did
he not seek it with tears? And when Judas had betrayed his Master, and our
Savior, it is said that he repented of what he had done, and was troubled.
Surely then, though the Sin that I commit, may be lesser in bulk than another
Sin, and small comparatively, and though I be drawn into it by others, and
though I do strive against it, and though I am troubled after it, yet it may be
no Sin of Infirmity. Yet, good Lord, how many poor souls are there that deceive
themselves, and think that their sins are but Sins of Infirmity; and thus are
mistaken on the left hand.



First: Because they Sin knowingly.

Secondly: Because they fall into the same Sin again, and again, and do lie
therein.

Thirdly: Because they fall into the Sin after Admonition.

O! (says one) I fear my Sin is no Sin of Infirmity, for I sin knowingly, and
with deliberation; I sin against my knowledge, and against my Conscience, and
therefore my Sin, can be no Sin of Infirmity.

Adrian. sic definit peccatum ex infirmitate, est actus vel omissio culpabilis
sine deliberatione propter passionis impetum facta: hac tamen definitione non
complectitur omne peccatum ex infirmitate; nam potest peccatum ex infirmitate
accidere cum deliberatione imo vero ut sit peccatum debet esse aliqua
deliberatio. Vasquez. 12. Q. 77. A. 3.

Utrum sit possibile quod aliquis sciens ex infirmitate peccet.

Dicendum quod communiter ab omnibus ponitur aliqua peccata ex infirmitate
committi quae a peccatis ex ignorantia non distinguerentur nisi contingeret
aliquem scientem ex infirmitate peccare.

Tho. Aquinas Quest Disputat. de causa peccati, At. 9. p. 96.


But for Answer hereunto, you must know, it is one thing for a man to sin
knowingly, and another thing for a man to sin out of knowledge, or against his
knowledge. As in case the of Ignorance; it is one thing for a man to sin
ignoranter, and another thing to sin ex ignorantia. A man sins ignorantly when
ignorance is the companion of his Sin only: A man sins out of ignorance, when
ignorance is the only cause of his Sin, and not the companion only. As for
example: Suppose a man be in fight, in a great Battle, and he kill another; he
kills him because he did not know him, if he had known him in the Battle, he
would not have killed him; here his ignorance is not the companion only, but
the cause of it: So that it is one thing to sin ignorantly, and another thing
to sin out of ignorance. A man sins ignorantly, when ignorance is the companion
of his fact: A man sins out of ignorance, when ignorance is the cause of it. So
a man sins knowingly, when knowledge is the companion of his fact: but a man
sins out of knowledge, or he sins against knowledge, when knowledge is the cause
thereof; as when a man does use his knowledge to make distinctions and shifts
for his sin, whereby he is emboldened to it, and continues in it: Knowledge is
sometimes only a companion of sin; as when a man knows that the first risings of
Sin are evil; this knowledge is no cause of them, but merely a companion:
Sometimes knowledge is the cause of Sin; as when a man does know that his way is
naught, and he does deliberately consult and devise excuses and lies to hide
the same; here his knowledge is the cause of those Sinful excuses, and the man
does not only Sin knowingly, and with knowledge, but out of knowledge, and
against his knowledge; and this cannot stand with infirmity, but the former may:
for the Disciple knew that it was evil for them to sleep; yet their Sin was a
Sin of Infirmity.

O! but I fear that my Sin is no Sin of Infirmity, because I fall into it again,
and again, and do lie in it.

The whole world lies in wickedness; Why? Because a wicked man's heart is as a
Lake, or standing Pool, which keeps all that dirt which is thrown into it. Now
if you do thus keep, and lie in your Sin, why do you so complain? this your
complaining argues that there is some purging out, and therefore you do not lie
in Sin.

O! but I fear my Sin cannot be a Sin of Infirmity, because I fall into it,
after I have been admonished of the evil of it.



But if there be such mistakes, how shall we then know, whether our Sins be
Sins of Infirmity?

David, that he turned not aside to the right hand, or to the left, save only
in the matter of Vriah: It seems then, that in this matter he did turn aside;
but why is it said that he turned aside here, and not in other things? did he
not Sin at other times? Yes, very often: but there is a difference between
missing ones way, and turning aside out of ones way; a man may ignorantly miss
his way, or unadvisedly; but he that turns aside out of his way, does it
voluntarily, and deliberately: and so did David here in this case, and not in
others; this act was a foul fact, which he was able, and had strength to avoid,
committed with much deliberation, and therefore it was no Sin of Infirmity. So
that if a man's Sin committed, be a gross, foul, scandalous Sin, committed with
deliberation, and consultation, this is no Sin of Infirmity.

Samuel was raised up (whether it was true Samuel, or false, I will not now
debate) when he was raised up by the Witch of Endor, in 1 Samuel 28. the only Sin
that Samuel lays to the charge of Saul, is this (at verse 18.) That he obeyed
not the Voice of the Lord, in executing his fierce wrath upon Amalek; Because
thou obeyed'st not the voice of the Lord, nor executed'st his fierce wrath upon
Amalek (says Samuel) therefore has the Lord done this thing unto thee this
day. Moreover, the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the hands of the
Philistims. If you read this story, you shall find, that this only Sin, Samuel
does instance in; Saul had committed other Sins, Saul had persecuted David, and
out of malice, and had committed great Sins, why does Samuel instance in this
Sin above al other Sins? but because this Sin was the Ring-leading Sin unto all the Sins that Saul did commit; and therefore this is charged upon him
especially, as a great and a heinous Sin. And you see how it is amongst men; if
there be a rebellion, or insurrection, they take the Ringleader, and hang up
him; for say they, this is the great Transgressor, for he is the Ringleader.
So amongst Sins, the great Sin, is the Ringleader; and therefore if your Sin
be a Ringleader unto other soul Sins, it is not a Sin of Infirmity. That Is the
Second.

Sins of Presumption, and Sins of Infirmity, are set in opposition one to the
other, in Numbers, 15. and Psalm, 19. Now I pray, when does a man sin out of
Presumption, but when he sins because God is merciful? when he sins,
because his Sin can, and may stand with Grace? when he sins, because the Sin
is but an infirmity? when he sins, because he shall repent afterward? Now
this is ordinary. I have read of a certain young man, who being admonished of
the evil of his way and course, and pressed to leave his wickedness, by the
consideration of Judgment, Eternity, and Death a coming, that he said, Why tell
ye me of these things? I will do well enough; for when Death comes, I will speak
but three words, and will help al; and so he went on in the way of his Sin: but
in the end, coming to a Bridge on Hors-back, to go over a deep Water, the Horse
stumbling, and he laboring to recover his Horse, could not, but at last he let
go the Bridle, and gave up himself, and Horse to the Waters, and was heard to
say these three words; Devil take all. Here was three words indeed, Diabolus
capiat omnia.
and an Example for all men who think to repent with a three-word Repentance at
last (viz. Lord have mercy) to take heed by. Miserere mei Deus.
Such is the end of Presumption; and when a man does therefore sin the rather,
because God is merciful, or because the Sin is but a Sin of Infirmity, or
because he hopes to repent afterward, or because his Sin may, and can stand
with Grace, this is a Sin of Presumption, and is no Sin of Infirmity: Sins of
Presumption, are no Sins of Infirmity.

Potest autem dici infirmitas in anima ad similitudinem infirmitatis corporis,
dicitur autem corpus esse infirmum, quando debilitatur vel impeditur in
executione propriae operationis propter aliquam inordinationem partium corporis
ita Scil. quod humores et membra hominis non subdantur virtuti regitivae et
motivae corporis, unde et membrum dicitur infirmum esse, quando non potest
perficere operationem membri sani: unde et infirmitas animae dicitur quando
impeditur anima in propria operatione propter inordinationem partium ipsius,
parts autem corporis dicuntur esse inordinatae, qu^ndo non sequuntur ordinem
naturae ita et parts animae dic^ntur esse inordinata quando non subduntur
ordini rationis, etc. Tho. Aquin. 12. Quest. 77 Art. 3.
then it is no Sin of Infirmity; for when Sin reigns, Grace does not: therefore
says the Apostle, Romans 6. Let not Sin have dominion over you; for ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace; and when Sin reigns, it is in its full strength.
Now a Sin of Infirmity, is not therefore called infirmity, because (as the
Schoolmen would) it does make a man infirm, by impeding, and hindering the
vital operations of the Soul; for then al Sins, and especially the greatest,
should be Sins of Infirmity: But it is said to be a Sin of Infirmity, because
it does arise from weakness, the strength thereof being taken out, and
mortified; and therefore a reigning Sin can be no Sin of Infirmity. Now Sin
reigns in a man,

1. When it has the command of his Duties, his Spiritual Duties. When a Master
commands a Servant from his Meat, it argues that he rules over him; and if you
see a man rise from his Meat at the command of another, you say, surely this
man is the others Servant, for he was at Dinner, or Supper, and the other did
but speak, or come by him, and he took his Hat, and Cloak, and left all his
Meat, and followed him. So, when a man shall sit down to Duty, and he shall
ordinarily he commanded from his Duty by his Sin, what does this argue, but
that his Sin is his Master, and does rule, and reign over him.

Illicitae delectationi si resistamus, si non consentiamus, si membra velut
arma non ministremus non regnat peccatum in nostra mortali corpore peccatum
enim ante regnum perdidit et sic periit, in hac ergo vita, quantum ad sanctos
attinet regnum perdit, in alia perit. August. de verbis Apost. Ser. 66.
2. When Men do yield the Members of their Bodies, as weapons of unrighteousness
unto Sin, then Sin reigns in them; Let not sin reign in your mortal Body (says
the Apostle) that ye should obey it in the lusts thereof, neither yield ye your
members as weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, Romans 6.12, 13.

3. Sin reigns, when it usually rises by opposition: It Is with Sin, as with
Grace; when Grace is in power, it rises by opposition, I will yet be more
vile, says David; and when the believing blind man, was commanded to hold his
peace, he cried so much the more, Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me:
Manifestum igitur est quod credere improbabilia, fortitudinis est, atque
vigoris nostri intellectus, sicut amare damnosa, molesta et ignominiosa
fortitudinis est et vigoris nostri affectus.

Parisiens. de fide p. 2.


herein the Power of Godliness, is distinguished from the Form. Godliness in
Power, rises by opposition, but the Form does not; but the Power of Faith does,
the Power of Love does, and the Power of Repentance does: even as a little
fire, is quenched with water; but if the fire be strong, it flames and burns
out the more by that dish of water which ye do cast upon it. So in regard of
Sin; where it is in power, it will not be quenched by opposition, but it flames
out the more: witness that powerful malice of the Jews against Christ, who when
they were but a little checked by Pilate, they cried out so much the more,
Crucify him, Crucify him. Does thy Sin therefore ordinarily rise by
opposition? this argues that it is Sin in power, that it reigns in thee, that
it is no Sin of Infirmity; for a reigning, full breathed Sin, is no Sin of
Infirmity. Thus Negatively.

But how shall we know then Affirmatively, whether our Sin be a Sin of
Infirmity?

John does allude unto three Ages; I write unto you Fathers (says he) I write
unto you young men, and I write unto you Babes. There are the grown Children of
God, and there are Babes; Babes are weak, and full of weaknesses: and if your
Sin be such as does arise merely from want of Age and time in Grace; then it
must needs be a Sin of a Babe, and so a Sin of Infirmity.

Romans 6. Let not sin have dominion over you, for ye are under Grace: Those that
are under Grace, have their Sin at an under: and if the Sin be committed by all
the Saints, then it does rather arise from want of strength to resist, than
from will to commit: Is thy sin therefore no other than what is incident unto
all Gods People? then surely it is no other than a Sin of Infirmity.

Haec peccata quae accidunt ratione operationis sensitivi prevenientis
rationem, dici peccata ex Infirmitate, nam infirmitas humanae voluntatis
contracta ex peccato originali magna ex part consistit in rebellione
appetitus, hoc est in illa potestate quam habet operandi ante usum rationis ex
sola apprehensione sensus. Caspens. Cursus Theolog. Tract. de peccat, Disp. 5.
Sect. 4.

Ego sum in carne, ego sum in mente, sed magis ego sum in mente quam in carne,
et quia men's regit ego sum in regente. August. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 5.


for then it does arise from want of strength to resist, and not from will to
commit: This was the case of Paul, Romans 7. when evil was present with him,
being against the general bent and frame of his soul; for says he, I delight
in the Law of God after the inward man, and yet the thing that I would not do,
that do I: Can you therefore say with Paul, It is no more I that do it? etc.
for my delight is otherwise, and the general bent and frame of my heart is
otherwise; then may you also say, this is mine Infirmity.

Gal 6. that this Sin of Infirmity is our burden; for having said in verse 1.
If any one be overtaken, you that are spiritual restore him, etc. he then gives
the reason of it at ver. 6. Bear ye one another burden: it seems then, that
this Sin of Infirmity, is a burden unto him that commits it. Now a man may be
burdened with Sin upon a twofold account: Either because he is, or shall be
burdened with it, in regard of pain, and punishment: or because it is the
luggage and burden of his Grace and Duty. In the first sense, All men may be
burdened with Sin, even the most wicked man: Cain was so burdened, when he
cried out, and said, My sin, or burden, is greater than I can bear. In the
second sense, Only those are burdened with Sin, that are Godly. Do thou
therefore groan under the burden of this evil, though it be no gross and
scandalous Sin, and that because it is a burden to your Grace and Duties,
surely it is no other than a Sin of Infirmity.

David, 1 Chronicles. 21.8. And David said unto God, I have sinned greatly, because
I have done this thing, I have done very foolishly; yet the Devil provoked him
to it, and it was originally his Temptation: for verse 1. it is said, And Satan
stood up against Israel, and provoked David to number the People. David does
not lay the fault upon the Devil, but upon himself; he did not say, I was thus
and thus tempted by Satan; No, but I, even I have sinned, and done foolishly:
Temptation will hardly acknowledge it self to be a Temptation; and so Infirmity
will hardly acknowledge it self to be Infirmity; but the person in whom it is,
does fear worse, saying, this my sin is great, and I fear it is no infirmity:
Wicked men excuse their sin by infirmity, because it is no infirmity; but a
good man fears it is worse than infirmity. And therefore is thy sin, no gross,
and foul sin, and yet art thou afraid, that it is worse than infirmity? this
does rather argue, that it is no other than a sin of Infirmity.

Gal. 6.1. is a sin of infirmity, and the man that commits it, is said to be
over-taken. Now when a man is upon his journey traveling, and is over-taken by
another person, his inward inclination and disposition was not to meet the
other: So when a man is over-taken by Sin, it argues that his sin does proceed
from some outward cause; and when it does proceed from some outward cause, then
he is truly said to be over-taken with it. It Is true, the worst of men say they
are over-taken, when they sin: O! says the Drunkard, I confess I was drunk at
such a time, and in such a place, but I was drawn into it; my inward
disposition was otherwise, but I was so and so over-taken. But if men were only
over-taken, and surprised by their Sin, then why are they angry with those who
keep them from their sin? why are they in their own Element, and never more at
home than in the way of their sin? and why do they so heartily will that which
is the cause of their sin? It may be they do not will the Effect, namely,
Drunkenness; but do they not will that which is the cause thereof? He that is
over-taken with a sin, is unexpectedly surprised with the cause thereof; and
therefore if it be not a gross, and scandalous sin, it is a Sin of Infirmity.

David, when he was going against the House of Nabal in a great Passion;
Abigail came forth to meet him, and having admonished him of his Duty, he did
not only forbear the evil intended, but he blessed God for her, and her words,
who kept him that day from shedding innocent blood. Tell an honest man that he
is out of his way, and direct him into it, and he will thank you for it: Tell a
Thief that he is out of his way, and he will laugh at you. So, tell a wicked man
that he is out of his way, and he will despise you for it: Tell a good man that
he is out of his way, and he will bless God for it, and for you; Why? Because he
has but missed his way. Can thou therefore, take an Admonition kindly when
thou art out of thy way? This argues that thy Sin is one of those Infirmities,
which Christ, our great High Priest will forgive, Who can have compassion on the
ignorant, and on them that are out of the way; for that he also was compassed
with infirmities, Heb. 5.2.

Moses was angry, but his anger did discover his Zeal: Job was somewhat
impatient, but his impatience did discover his Innocence, and his great
goodness: Abraham failed in saying, Sarah was his Sister; but there was a Faith
which this Unbeleef grew upon: The Woman that came behind Christ, touching the
hem of his Garment, came fearing and trembling, discovering her Unbelief; yet
she discovered her Faith therewithal: The Disciples failed, when they said,
Lord, save us, carest thou not that we perish? yet they discovered their Faith
too. Infirmity sometimes is an Excrescence which does grow out of Duty, and upon
Duty. Do thou therefore fail in thy Duty, or exercise of thy Grace? and does
thy Duty go on, and thy Grace go on? Though thy Failing may be thy burden, yet
it being but an Excrescence, and Discoverer of thy Grace, it is no other than a
Sin of Infirmity.

hand of Gods Grace, Mirabilis Deus in consiliis super filiis hominum, multos
per peccata sanat a peccatis, sicut venenum pellitur a veneno. Luther.

Non solum mala passiva, quae nobis irrogantur, in bonum cedunt, sed etiam
activa, hoc est, mala quae nos ipsi facimus; quorsum hoc inquis? quia homo pius
cum videt lapsum suum, pudefit, et confunditur, sic lapsus ille principio
operatur humilitatem, deinde invocationem ardentem, ac malum illud quod in
carne reliquum est ceu calcar est quod nos excitat, ut nobis ipsis irascamur,
nos damnemus et clamemus cum Paulo. Infelix ego, quis me liberabit a corpore
hujus peccati, sic crescit fides occasion vitiorum, etc.

Luther, Com. 2. Genesis fol. 151. in Cap. 20.


they will make you more gracious another way. Ye know how it is with a young
Tradesman, who has but a small Stock; he keeps his Shop diligently, and will
not spend as others do: if you ask him the reason, saying, such and such men
are of your Trade, and they will spend their shilling with us, and their time
with us; why will not you do as they? He answers presently, True, they do so,
and they may do so, their Estate will bear it; but as for me, my Stock is small,
very little, therefore I may not do as they do; but I must be diligent, and a
good Husband; I am but a young Beginner, and have little skill in the Trade,
therefore it behooves me to be diligent: his very weakness is the cause of his
diligence. So here: the more infirmities that a gracious soul labors under, the
more diligent he will be; and if you ask him, Why do you take so much pains in
following the means, and the like? He answers, Alas! I am a poor, weak
Creature; such and such an one there is, that has an excellent memory, all
that ever he reads, or hears, is his own; but my memory is naught, my head and
heart is naught, and therefore by the Grace of God, I will take the more pains
in following after Christ: Thus his very infirmity is a provocation unto al his
diligence. The Gibeonites served the Israelites, and were hewers of wood, and
drawers of water for them; Why? but because the Gibeonites were at an under? So
now, if your very sins be drawers of water, servants, and handmaids to your
Graces, it argues that your sins are at an under; and being so, they are weak,
and but sins of infirmity, if they be not gross, foul, and scandalous Sins.

Datus est mihi stimulus carnis, ne extollar inquit Paulus, o venenum quod non
curatur nisi veneno; caput caedebatur ne caput extolleretur o Antidotum quasi
quod de serpente conficitur et propterea theriacum dicitur.

August. de verbis Apost. Sermon. 3.


If one have an infirmity in his speech, he will not be so forward to speak as
others are; but being conscious of his own infirmity, he is always low, and
afraid to speak: So spiritually. There are two sorts of sins that men do
commit; some are foul, gross, and scandalous sins; other are weaknesses, and
infirmities: those that fall into great, and gross sins, will be much troubled,
much trouble and sorrow they do meet with presently, in case they repent: but
those that l^e under a constant infirmity, are constantly kept low and humble
thereby. Do you therefore complain of your sin? and would you know of what sort
of sins it is? Why, if it be not a gross, and scandalous sin, and thy heart be
kept constantly low thereby, then without doubt, it is no other than this sin
of infirmity: For though God could have wholly delivered his People from the
filth of Sin, as well as from the guilt of it, and as well from lesser sins, as
from great and scandalous; yet he has left these infirmities and weaknesses in
the hearts and lives of his People, that they may be constantly humbled in
themselves, and prize Christ the more. And if this be the manner of an
infirmity, then surely a good man, a true Disciple of Christ, may possibly fall
into the same Sin again and again, and yet the sin be but a sin of Infirmity.
Which was the Second thing proposed, to be cleared by us.

But suppose that my sin be no other than a Sin of Infirmity, what then?



Is there no evil then in this Sin of Infirmity?

When Christ shall sit as a Refiner, and Purifier of Silver, he shall purify
the Sons of Levi as Gold and Silver, and then shall the Offerings of Judah, and
Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, Malach. 3.3.4. O! what an evil thing
therefore is it, for a man to be unrefined: Is it not an evil thing to be
burdensome unto others? By your sin, though it be but an infirmity, you may be a
burden to others; for the Apostle speaking of Infirmities, Gal. 6.1.6.
says, Bear ye one another burden; And ye that are strong, ought to bear the
Infirmities of the weak, Romans 14.1. And although Christ will not cast you off
for a Sin of Infirmity, yet you may provoke him thereby, to chide you, and to
be angry with you: the unbelief of the Disciples, was but their infirmity, yet
Christ did upbraid them because of their unbelief: The Remisness, and loss of
first Love in the Church of Ephesus, is by Christ, called, a Somewhat;
Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee: and yet Christ threatens her, that he
will for this somewhat, come against her quickly, and remove her Candle-stick, if
she did not repent; and Revel. 2.16. the Lord Christ threatens the Church of
Smyrna, that unless she repented, he would come unto her quickly: yet he says
not to her, I have many things, but a few things against thee; or if you will
(for the word is (...)) I have some small or little things against thee: So that
although your sin be not of so great a bulk as others, yet you may provoke
Christ thereby, and he may be angry, and chide you for it: Thus here he did
chide the Disciples, yet their sin was but a Sin of Infirmity. Surely therefore
there is evil, and much evil in the Sin, though it be but a Sin of Infirmity.

Thirdly: Though there be much evil in this Sin, Christ will not cast you off
for it. For, Solomon) much more is it for the honor of Christ to pass by the
infirmities of his People.

Hos. 2.
and that Covenant is a Conjugal Covenant; but what Husband will put away his
Wife, for her infirmities? That Covenant is a Paternal Covenant, and what
Father will thrust his Child out of doors for his infirmities? A Child, though
deformed, is more pleasing to the Father, because the Child is his own, than
another beautiful Child that is not his own: Yea, that Covenant, is a Covenant
of Grace; now in the Covenant of Works, the least sin breaks the Covenant, but
in the Covenant of Grace, the greatest sin does not break the Covenant between
God and the soul; in the Covenant of Works, the least sin provokes God to
hatred; in the Covenant of Grace, the greatest sin provokes, and moves God to
pity. If a Master should turn away his Servant for every failing and weakness,
who would serve him? But God has many Servants in the world, who do serve him
with cheerfulness; surely therefore he does not, and he will not cast men off
for their Infirmities.

Luther) What man will cut off his Nose, because there is filth in it? Nemo
nasum ideo abjicit quod impuro phlegmate abundat, et quasi cloaca cerebri, ita
etiam i^firmi temporis infirmitatis sunt pa^s Regni Christi qui non ideo
abjici^ndi sed so vendi sanandi et erigendi sunt Luther.
yea, though the Nose be the sink of the Brain, yet because it is a Member, a
man will not cut it off. And will Christ cut off one of his Members, because
there is filth in him, or some weakness and infirmity in him? No surely. What
Woman will cast away the Mortar, because it favors of the Onions, or Garlic
which has be^n beaten in i^? What Father will knock his Child on the Head,
b^cau^e a Wart grows on his Forehead. These Infirmiti^s in the Saints and
People of God, are their Wa^ts, Ego non possum excusare Patres ut multi faciunt
nec volo, imo libenter audio lapsus et infirmitates sanctorum non quod laudem,
etc. sicut non excuso Apostolos fugientes a Christo, Petrum negantem et alias
eorum infirmitates, stultitias et ineptias, nec scribuntur ista propter duros
superbos et obstinatos sed ut ratio Regni Christi ostendatur qui in grege suo
pusillo habet pauperes et infirmas conscientias; est Rex fortium pariter et
infirmorum, etc. in Genesis 26.

Scio ego me saepe multa stulte et temere admodum egisse adeo ut cogitatem cur
Deus, vocavit me ad predicandum etc. in Cap. 27. Genesis Luth.


which grow in the Face of their Conversation: the blessed Martyrs themselves
had these Warts: Hierom of Prague had a great Wart upon him, Cranmer another,
Jewel another; yea (if ye look into that little Book of Chronicles, I mean the
11. Chapter of the Hebrews) what Saint is there mentioned upon Record, but had
one Wart or another? Had not Abraham his Wart, in saying, that Sarah was his
Sister? Had not Sarah hers, in laughing? Had not Jacob, Isaac, and Joseph
theirs? Moses, Rahab, Sampson, Jepthah, and David theirs? Luther had his, and
our Reformers theirs; yet God owned, used, and honored them. Surely therefore,
though there be much evil in a Sin of Infirmity, especially if a man fall into
it again and again; yet Christ will not leave a man, or cast him off for it.

But Solomon tells us, that the back-slider in heart shall be satisfied with his
own ways.

does groan under his Relapses. Possibly a man may fall into the same sin again
and again, yet he may be no back-slider, nor called a back-slider in Scripture
Language.

Jacob; he deceived his Brother Esau, and he deceived his Father Isaac;
afte^wards he was deceived by Laban, and by his Children; as he d^ceived his
own Father, so was he deceived by his Father in Law; and as he deceived his
Brother, so was he deceived by his Children, in the reports of Joseph's death:
here was he satisfied in a way of sorrow with his own ways; he deceived
others, and was deceived by others; he had enough of it. But though a good man
may be thus satisfied with his own ways, yet he is never satisfied with them,
so as to be given up to them. Possibly he may fall into them again and again,
yet says the Lord, Esai. 57.17. For the iniquity of his covetousness, was I
wroth, and smote him; I hid my face, and was wroth: What then? And he went on
frowardly, turning aside again, (so the Hebrew) in the way of his heart. But
says the Lord, I have seen his ways, and will heal him, and will lead him
also, and restore comforts to him, and his mourners: So that though a good man
may have enough of his sin, in regard of sorrow that may come thereby: yet he
shall never be satisfied with his own ways, or sins, so as to be given up to
them: Christ will not cast him off; if he sleep, Christ will waken him; and if he
sleep again, Christ will wake him again; Christ will not leave him in it, nor
cast him off for it.

Applicat.
If these things be true, then what necessity is upon us, and what great cause
have we to examine our selves, and to consider seriously, what sort of sins,
those sins are, which we labor under. We do al sin, that is most cert^in; but
there is a great difference between sin and sin: There is a sin unto death, and
there is a sin, not unto death: there is a sin which may stand with Grace, and
there is a sin which cannot stand with Grace: there is the spot of the Godly,
and there is the spot of the Wicked: there is a gross sin, a reigning sin; and
there is a sin of infirmity: there is a sin, for which God will leave, and cast
off the sinner, witness Judas's sin, the sin of the false Disciple: and there
is a sin for which God will not cast one off; witness the sin of these true
Disciples: O! then what cause have we to make it out to our own souls, whether
our sins be sins of infirmity, or not!

But it seems that all the sins of the Godly, are not sins of Infirmity, and
God will not cast off a Godly man for any sin: What advantage therefore, has
this sin of Infirmity, above other sins? or what disadvantage do the other sins
of the Godly labor under, which this sin of infirmity does not?

Hezekiah, and the People, were not prepared according to the preparation of
the Sanctuary, that was his, and their weakness; but he prayed, and the Lord
heard his prayer: So David said in his have, I am cast out of thy sight; this
was his infirmity, yet he prayed withal; and says he, N^vertheless thou
heard'st the voice of my supplication. But if a man, a good man, do fall into a
foul, gross, and scandalous sin, though the Lord pardon it to him afterward,
yet it will suspend his present communion with God.



Who knows the errors of his Life? says David: Lord, cleanse thou me from my
secret faults.

Because of this (says the Lord to David) the Sword shall never depart from
thine house. But now if the sin be only a sin of Infirmity, my Family shall
never be scourged for that.

what says the World? I, this man has exceeding good Gifts indeed, but do ye
see how he lives? A scandalous Life soils and spoils his Gifts, and does make
them unuseful. But now if my sin be only a Sin of infirmity, it shall never soil
my Gifts, so as to make them unuseful, and unprofitable unto others. Surely
then, there is a great, and a vast difference between this Sin of Infirmity,
and another Sin; and therefore why should we not labor to make it out with
cleerness to our own souls, what kind of sins our sins are? Every man almost,
thinks that his Sin is a Sin of Infirmity: Come to the Drunkard, Swearer,
Adulterer, Opposer, and these will tell you, that their Sins, are but Sins of
Infirmity; they will rail at, and oppose the People of God, and yet their sins
are but Sins of Infirmity; Swear, and swear daily, yet their sins are but Sins
of Infirmity; go to the Tap-house, Playhouse, Whore-house, and yet their Sins
but Sins of Infirmity: the vilest of men think their Sins are only Infirmities.
But is there such a great difference between Sins and Sins? this, and the other
Sins? Then why should we not look wishly into our condition? consider our
ways, and labor to make it out with cleerness to our own souls, whether our
Sins, be Sins of Infirmity, or not?

But suppose that upon due search and examination, I find that my Sin is no
other than a sin of Infirmity, which will not cast me off, although through my
weakness, I do fall into it again, and again, what then?



Deletur iniquita^ manet infirmitas. August.

Sed

Quare Deus talia peccata sinit fieri a suis, cur sic impingere eos permittit?
respondetur ex effectis, ideo ita permittit Deus ut occasionem accipiat
multarum bonarum rerum non enim labantur sancti ut pereunt, sed ut copiose eis
Deus benefaciat, ut lapsus principio operetur humilitatem, deinde invocationem
ut nos excitet ut nobis ipsis irascamur et nos damnemus, ut majori studio
caveamus. Luth. in Genesis cap. 20.


will I observe what Gods design is, in suffering and leaving such Infirmities
in me, and will labor what I can and may, to promote and advance that design:
God could have freed me from all Sin, these Infirmities as well as the greater;
but God has some great designs in leaving of these Infirmities, as that I may
be always humbled, that I may be always upon the work of mortification, that
Jesus Christ may be the more sweet and precious to me, that I may live in
continual dependence on him, that I may not gather up the assurance of my
Salvation only from my Sanctification, but from the free Grace of God, and his
absolute Promise, that I may be weary of my present state, and groan after
Heaven, where no imperfections are; and that I may learn to pity others, and
therefore through Grace, I will do what I can to help on these Designs.











infirmity: Will the Lord pardon my Sin, because it is but an Infirmity, and
shall I commit Sin upon that ground, because it is but an infirmity? then shall I
walk contrary to God, then shall I turn the Grace of God into wantonness.
Surely therefore, I will never Sin upon that account, because it is but a Sin
of infirmity. Thus ye see what we are to do, and what gracious Resolutions we
are to take up from the consideration of this great Truth.

But though the Lord will not cast us off for our Sins of Infirmity; yet there
is much evil in this sin, especially if we fall into it again and again; What
shall we therefore do that we may not fall into this same Sin so often?





Watch and pray: as if watching with prayer, an^ prayer with watchfulness, were
the only, or chief means to keep us from falling i^to the same Sin again and
again. And indeed, it is not all our habitual strength that can keep us from
falling; for then Adam in the state of Innocence, would have been kept from
falling; nor is it want of Temptation that can secure us from falling, for then
the Angels in Heaven should not have fallen, for they had no Temptation there;
but we are kept by continual dependence upon God in Christ: it is not therefore
enough to watch, but we must watch in Prayer; neither is it enough to pray, but
we must pray with watchfulness. What I say therefore to one, I say to you al,
and to mine own soul, Let us watch and pray, and pray and watch, that we enter
not into this Temptation.

THE FALSE APOSTLE, TRIED, AND DISCOVERED.

By William Bridge, Preacher of the Gospel at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

THE False Apostle, TRIED. AND DISCOVERED.
REVEL. 2.2. And have tried them which say they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them Liars.


IT is not only the Opinion of Mr. Brightman, In ^oa^^^^ Apocal. septe^
Eccles^s scribitur per qua^ un^ Catholica designatur. Greg. Hom. 15. i^ Ezekiel.

Joa^nes seribit ad sep^am Ecclesias, in quibus etiam universas Ecclesias
septenario numero intelligimus commendari Austin Epist. 106. extra septo^^
Ecclesias quicquid fo^is est alicnum est. optat. Milevi. a^. Lib. 1.


but of very ancient Writers, That these Seven Epistles, written to the Seven
Churches of Asia, do contain the State and Condition of the whole Church of God,
unto the coming of Christ. This First Epistle is written to languishing
Ephesus, holding forth the State of the Church, presently after Christ, and his
Apostles, and is a good Looking-glass for all those which begin now to
languish, and to lose their first Love. Something our Savior does commend in
this Church; and something he reproves them for: He commends them for what was
good; and rebukes them for what was evil. Some will commend what is good in
their Friends, but will not take notice of what is evil: Some will take notice of
what is evil in others, but will not commend what is good. This is not according
unto Christ's proceeding; the commendation of Good, is a good Introduction to
the reprehension of what is evil.

Now our Sa^ior Christ, does commend this Church (both Officers, and People)
for many things. 1. For their Labor. 2. For their Patience. 3. For their Zeal:
I know thy Works (says he) and thy Labor, and thy Patience. Labor, and
Patience go together: Those that will l^bo^ in the Work of God, must be patient,
they shall surely meet with opposition; and therefore Patience must accompany
our Labors. Yet this Patience don't exclude Zeal; but says Christ here, I know
thy Labor, and thy Patience, and thy Zeal: thou can not bear them that are
evil. Possibly then, a man may be patient, and yet cannot bear, or endure those
that are evil. Now this Zeal, and severe dealing with those that were evil^ is
de^cribed two ways: First, By the Persons which they did deal withal: those
were false Teachers, ver. 2. and 6. Secondly, By the exercise of their Zeal,
and Severity; which did consist in two things: The discovery of those false
Teachers; and the hatred of their Deeds. The hatred of their Deeds, ye have at
ver. 6. This thou have, that thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans. The
discovery of these false Teachers, ye have in these words; And thou have tried
them, etc.

Ephesus found them out, and are commended for it by our Savior Christ. And so
the Doctrine from this part of the Verse, is, That it is a matter of great
commendation in the eyes of Jesus Christ, to try and discover false Teachers,
or false Apostles.

Christ does not only commend this Church for their Zeal herein, but has left
their Commendation upon Scriptural Record, as a good Example for all the
Churches of Christ. And therefore I say, the discovery of false Teachers, and
false Apostles, is still a matter of great Commendation in the eyes of Christ.

It is that which we are all commanded to do, 1 John, 4.1. Believe not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits, whether they are of God; because many false
Prophets are gone into the world.

But for the clearing of this Truth; it will appear, if you consider,

John, 2.7. Many Deceivers are entered into the world, etc. 2 Timothy 3.13. But
evil men, and Seducers, shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being
deceived: And deceitful Workers, 2. Cor. 11.13.6. For such are false Apostles,
deceitful Workers. Now a man loves not to be deceived in any thing, no not in a
small matter: If I had spent, or given away much more, it would never have
grieved me, you say; but I cannot endure to be cheated, and deceived. And if a
man cannot endure to be deceived in lesser things, what an evil thing is it
then, to be deceived in the matters of his Soul? Such are the things, that
these false Teachers do deceive men in; yea, they will, and do subvert men's
Faith, and spoil them of the very Fundamentals of their Religion. Therefore
says the Apostle, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any man spoil, or make a prey of you.
Is it not a sad thing for a man to lose his Faith for a Fable? First they will
take away your Faith, and then they will lay a Fable in the room of the Faith;
For their highest Speculations and Notions, are but Fables. Ye may observe
therefore, that when the Apostle Paul does dehort from their Doctrine, he says
still, Take heed, and beware of Fables. Those are many, and of diverse sorts:
First there are old Wives Stories and Fables; such are the Doctrines, and
Speculations of false Teachers: therefore 1 Timothy 4.1. the Apostle having said,
That in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and speaking of the Doctrines of those Seducers in the
following Verses, he says, ver. 7. But refuse thou profane, and old wives
fables: for such in the Eyes of God, are the Doctrines of these Seducers.
Secondly, There are Jewish Fables also, whereof the Talmud is now full; and such
are al those Doctrines, and Commandments of men, which are beside the
Scripture, the Doctrines of false Teachers: and therefore says the Apostle, 1
Tit. 14. (having spoken of Seducers in the former verses, whose mouths must be
stopped) Not giving heed to Jewish Fables, and Commandments of men. Thirdly,
There are also the Fables of Heathen Poets, the Figments and Devices of men's
own Brains: and such are the Doctrines and Speculations of al false Teachers;
and therefore says the Apostle, 2. Pet. 1.16. We have not followed cunning and
devised Fables; but we have a more sure word of Prophecy, at verse 19. So that
look what even Doctrine is not according to the Scripture, is but a Fable in
the Eyes of God. Now is it not an evil thing to lose my Faith for a Fable? Such
Fables do these false Teachers bring; they steal away your Faith, and lay a
Fable in the room thereof; yea, they will, and do beguile men of their Reward;
^hey beguile them of their Faith; they beguile them of their Souls, and they
beguile them of their Reward: therefore says the Apostle Paul, Let no man
beguile you of your Reward, Col. 2.18. Yea, they will not only beguile you of
your Reward, but they will bring you into pernicious ways; which if you follow,
the way of Truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. in which Scripture, the
Apostle Peter tells us, That as false Prophets did arise in the times of the old
Testament, so false Teachers should arise in the times of the new Testament. 2.
He tells us, That the ways of these false Teachers, are pernicious ways. 3.
That they shall infect many; for he says, Many shall follow them. 4. That by
reason of them, the ways of Truth shall be evil spoken of. Surely then, this
sort of People, are a very dangerous and mischievous People, Induti speciem
ovium, id est ^ mentientes ovin^m fra^disque^ nesciam simplicitatem, vestimenta
igitur ovium sunt ea^ omnia, quae sunt proprie ovium, hujusmodi vestimenta sunt
perpetua verbi Dei et Evangelii inclamatio, denfissima. Scripturarum ^^citatio,
mansuetudo, blandiloquium sanctimoniae species etc. Luc. Brugens. in Math. 7.15.

Vestes ovium sunt; 1 sophisticus verbi pretextus Matthew. 4. 2 nomen Ecclesiae
Jer. 7. 3 hypocrisis in vita Col. 2. 4 ficti Enthusiasmi Col. 2. ^5 Miracula, 2
These. 2. 6 Excellentia dona, Matthew. 7. 7 Fortitudo in suppliciis. 8 (...).
blanditiae et promi^^iones. Strigel. in Mat. 7. p. 64. Aug. Lib confess. 6.
cap. 9.


and therefore a commendable thing in the eyes of Christ to make discovery of
them. But,

Arg. 2. Secondly: Though they be a dangerous, and mischievous People, yet it
is an hard thing to discover them: For they walk in the dark, and transform
themselves into Ministers of Light; they creep, and they privily creep into
Houses, says the Apostle; and they will come to you, says our Savior, in
Sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7. That is, Look whatever Garb the true Prophet was,
or is found in, that will they be found in also. Did the true Prophets of the
old Testament go in a plain, or rough Garment, or a Garment of Hair, 2 Kings,
1.8. Matthew. 3.4. So did the false Prophets also, Zech. 13.4. wear a rough
Garment, or a Garment of Hair (as the Hebrew) to deceive. Did the true Prophets
sometimes quake, shake, and tremble; so did the wicked Diviners also. And so now
in the times of the new Testament: Do the true Teachers of the Gospel, press,
or make use of Scripture? so do false Teachers also. Did the true Apostles
preach Christ? so did the false Apostles also; Some preach Christ out of envy,
Phil. 1.15, 16. Did the true Apostles and Prophets declare the deep things of
God? 1 Cor. 2.10. so did the false Prophets also, Revel. 2.24. The depths of
Satan as they speak. Look what that is, which the true Preachers do, that will
fal^^ T^^chers in appearance do. On a time, says Austin in his Confessions,
the House where I lived, was broken up in the night by Thieves; and the men of
the House perceiving that the House was beset with Thieves, and making a noise,
the Thieves run away, and left their Crows of Iron, and Instruments whereby
they did break up the House: then my Friend Alipius, coming to the House, and
^^ding those Instruments, and Tools lying on the ground, he took the Crow of
Iron unto his hand; and when the men of the H^use came out, and ^aw the Crow of
Iron (...) hi^ hand; they took hold of him, and thought that he was the Thief.
So says another, the Heretics of the Times will take the same Instruments to
destroy the House of God, as we do to build the same: The same Crow of Iron,
the same Scripture that is in the hand of Alipius, a Friend, is made use of by
a Heretic, one that is a Thief, who comes to make a prey of your Faith: He
that comes not in by the door, is fur et latro, a Thief, and a Robber; not
apertus hostis, an open or professed Enemy; but a secret Thief, and a Robber,
whose coming is unknown, and of whom you can less be aware: and you know, the
more crafty and subtle they are in their Practices, the more hardly they will be
discerned. Now false Teachers, who come in Sheeps clothing, are a subtle, and
crafty Generation; for as Satan at the first, beguiled Adam by beginning with
Eve, the weaker Vessel; so do these People also, creep into Houses, leading
silly women captive, laden with diverse Lusts; there they begin, even with the
weaker Vessel, as Satan at the first did; and as Satan beguiled Eve, by telling
her that she should be like unto God himself, and so drew her from the
appointment of God: so do false Teachers now tell poor souls, That if they will
follow their Doctrines, they shall be like to God, yea, be God, and Christ, and
so draw them from the Appointments of Christ; and therefore says the Apostle;
I fear, lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty;
so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor.
11.3. Now if ^t be so hard a thing to discover these False Teachers, and they
be (...) dangerous, and mischievous a People; then surely it is a matter of
great commendation to make discovery of them.

Tim. 3.9. But they shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made
manifest to all men. Thereby also, ye shall preserve those who are not declined;
and thereby you shall be serviceable unto Christ in the great Work which he has
to do, and is doing in these latter Times. One part of his Work, is to discover
those that are unsound, Revel. 2. Then shall all the Churches know that I am he
that searches the heart and reins, ver. 24. But did not the Churches know that
before? Yea, but then (that is, in the latter times) they shall have experience
of it; for then I will discover Jezabel, and al her false Prophets; so that this
discovery of fal^e Teachers, is part of Christ's own Work in the latter days,
and the more you labor therein, the more serviceable you are unto Christ:
Surely therefore, it is a matter of great Commendation in the Eyes of Christ,
to try, find out, and discover false Teachers, and false Apostles.

If it be so commendable in the eyes of Christ, to discover these persons; then
it is lawful for us, though weak, to go to the Meetings of these false Teachers,
or to receive them into our Houses, and to speak with them; else how shall I
try and discover them?

Rome, to try, and find out the Deceits of the Papists; or that you must go
into Turkey, to try, and find out the false Doctrine of the Turks: you may try,
and discover Papists, and Turks; yet it does not follow, that you must read
over their Books, and Alcaron. The Apostle says, Mark those which cause
division, and avoid them: False Teachers shall arise in the last days (says
he) and from such turn away. And the Apostle John says, If any come to you not
with this Doctrine, receive him not into your House, nor bid him God speed,
lest you be partaker of their evil Deeds. Look whatever mischief they shall do
abroad by their False Doctrines, all that shall you partake in, if you receive
them into your Houses, or countenance them by bidding them God speed. He that
receives a true Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive that Prophets
Reward; he shall profit by that Prophet, and shall have a share in all the good
which he does: So he that receives a false Prophet, shall receive a false
Prophets Reward; he shall be poisoned by him, and shall partake in his evil Deeds.

But how then shall I try all things?

Despise not prophesyings, prove all things; that is, try those things which ye
hear in the Church by way of Prophecy, but he does not say, That you must run
out to every meeting of suspected Persons, to try al things there; but keep
your place in the Church, and try al things; otherwise it being a Commandment,
al men should be bound to read Popish Books, Socinian Books, and the Turkish
Alcaron: And if you should go to these Meetings, do you think that is the way
to try al things? Do ye not know, that it is the ordinary way of al false
Teachers to hold out Truth at the first? will they not preach an hundred Truths
first, that they may make way to one Error? and if so, how can you try them by
going to a Meeting or two? But keep your station in the Church of God, despise
not, turn not your back on prophesyings, and so try all things. If you be
convinced of the Truth and Way of God by the Scripture, you will easily find out
a false Doctrine; for Rectum est index sui et obliqui; Truth known, will
discover Error. But where do you find in Scripture, That Trying is the end of
Hearing? that we are to hear, that we may try? I must therefore go to hear,
that I may learn and profit by my hearing; and if you go to these Meetings,
that you may learn and profit, are you not in a fair way to be deceived by
them? The Members of the Church of Ephesus here, did not run from the Church
for this discovery; for says the Apostle, Acts, 20.30. And of your own selves,
shall men arise, speaking perverse things: which when it came to pass, the
Ephesians did discover them, says our Text, for which they were thus highly
commended of Christ.

Now if this be so commendable in the eyes of Christ, Applicat.
then why should we not al take some pains herein, and be found doing this Work
of our Generation? Do ye think that there are no False Teachers, and False
Apostles, and False Prophets, in these days of ours? Read what is said in
Zechar. 13.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. First, the Prophet tells us, that in the days
immediately before the Calling of the Jews, there shall be unclean Spirits in
the Land, verse 2. and False Prophets, verse 3. Secondly, He tells us, That when
the Jews shall be called, in that day, verse 1. there shall be so great a Zeal
amongst them, against these False Prophets, that their Parents, and such as are
near to them, shall be the first that shall punish them, verse 3. His Father and
Mother that begat them, shall say, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies;
and yet these are high Gospel Times. Thirdly, He tells us here, That this
Correction shall be a means to reduce them; for upon that it is said, verse 4.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prophet shall be ashamed, etc.
But the thing that I bring this Scripture for, is to show you, that there shall
be such People as these, immediately before the Call of the Jews, and that is
in these days of ours. Only observe how the Prophet does here describe them:
1. He tells you that they shall be such as were originally Husbandmen; for upon
their Reducement, he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an Husbandman. 2. He tells
you here, That they shall be such as shall wear a rough, hair, or plain Garment
to deceive, ver. 4. 3. He tells you, That they shall come in the Name of the
Lord, and say, they are not sent by men, but by God immediately, verse 3. 4.
That yet these men shall be acted by the very Spirit of the Devil; for says the
Lord, I will cause the false Prophet, and the unclean Spirit, to pass out of
the Land; that is, such as do work and act by the inspiration of the Devil,
having the fierce and unclean Spirit of the Devil: These are the men that shall
arise in these days of ours. Do you think then, that we are free from false
Teachers now? or do you think that it is not incumbent upon al? only upon
Officers, to try and discover them? Here the whole Church are commended for it.
Or do you think that it is nothing to be commended by Christ? Those that he
commends now, he will commend before the Father, and all the Angels, and Saints
another day; his commendation shall never make you proud, as the applause of man
may do. O! what an excellent thing then is it, to make discovery of these False
Apostles, and false Teachers: Why should we not al, more or less, according to
our Places, l^bor to be found in this Work, in these days of ours?

How shall we find out, and discover them? for if we may not go to their
Me^tings, Very Doctoris lana est V^catio, vel Au^horitas, sana Doctrina; v^ta
probata, sed hac lana non omnes eodem modo utuntur imo multi abutuntur, Ferus
in Mat. 7. p. 255.
and they be such a crafty, deceiving people, what shall we do, and how shall
we try, a True Teacher, from a False Teacher? or a True Apostle, from a False
Apostle?

Answ. All Teachers are to be tried Three ways. By Their Call. Their Doctrine.
Their Fruits, or Liv^^.


ad opus, to a particular Work: or he is called ad Munus, to an Office. If he
be called to a Work only, then his preaching is called Prophecy: And so some
are called to Preach; for else how should we know whether men be sit for
Office, if they may not preach before they be in Office? Now if men be so
called to preach, then they must, 1. Preach according to the proportion, and
Analogy of Faith, Romans 12.6. 2. If they be so called to preach, they must have
a gift to profit others publicly; for all Prophecy is for Exhortation,
Edification, and Comfort, 1 Cor. 14.3. 3. And if they be so called to preach,
they must submit what they speak to the Judgment of others: The Officer speaks
with Authority; but another speaks with Submission, and let the rest judge, 1
Cor. 14.29. So that, if any man will take upon him to preach and teach as a
gifted man, if he have not a Gift to profit others in public; a Gift be ^ond a
Family Gift; and if he do not speak according to the proportion of Faith, and
do not submit what he speaks to the Judgment of others, he is a False
Prophet, and no true Teacher in this kind.

Secondly: But if a man be called to Office; then his Office, is either
Extraordinary, or Ordinary.

things to come, and they do come to pass; or he is an Evangelist, whose Office
was to accompany, and minister unto the Apostles: When the Apostles therefore
ceased, then the Evangelists ceased; for sublato subjecto tollitur adjunctum.
Or he is an Apostle who has seen the Lord, and is immediately sent by him,
whose Commission extends unto all the World, who is infallible in regard of
Doctrine delivered, having the Gifts of Tongues given him; not by Industry, but
by Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and does work Miracles. And therefore if any
man say, that he is an Apostle, and yet has not seen the Lord Christ, nor has
these Gifts of Tongues, nor can work Miracles; then he is a false Apostle, and
a false Teacher in that kind.

Tim. 3. Tit. 1. 2. He must be qualified, and gifted for the work of preaching,
being apt to teach, anointed with the Unction of the Holy One; not that he must
necessarily have the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost: for when the
Apostle Paul sets down the due qualifications of a Minister, 1 Timothy 3. there is
not one word of that. 3. Being gifted, and duly qualified, he must be chosen,
or desired by the Church, Acts, 14.23. 4. Then having consented, he must be
separated to the Work of the Ministry. And therefore if any man say, that he is
a Teacher in Office, ordinarily called, and yet be profane, scandalous, or
vicious, or ignorant, being not fitly qualified; or is not desired, or chosen
by the Church, and separated to the Work of the Ministry, he is a false Teacher
in this kind.

But whether a man's Call be Ordinary, or Extraordinary; whether he be called, ad
Opus, to a Work, or ad Munus, to an Office, he must make out his Call to others;
it is not enough to say, I am sent of God, I tell thee I am sent of God: The
Apostles themselves made out their Call to others: Do ye require a proof of my
Ministry, or Apostleship? says the Apostle Paul; then thus and thus. So that
though a man do pretend that he is sent of God, and that he has seen the Lord;
yet if he be not able to give an account thereof unto others, he is surely a
False Apostle, and a False Teacher. Thus may you try, and discover men by their
Call.

Doctrine. Teachers may, and must be tried by their Doctrine. 1 John, 4.1.
Particular Doctrines whereby men may be tried, are many: I will name some
briefly, because I intend this Work no further than to this one Exercise.
First, therefore,

Romans 9.6. 2 Cor. 4.2. They told us that the Scriptures are a sufficient Rule,
and able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.14.16, 17. That they are the
only Rule and Judge of al Doctrines, whereby we are to try the same, according
to that of the Prophet Esai. To the Law, and to the Testimony; if any one walk
not according to this Rule, there is no Light in him, Chap. 8. That these
Scriptures may be expounded, 2 Pet. 1.20. The Apostles never did deny the
Original, saying, I deny the Hebrew, or I deny the Greek; but often cited the
Original Hebrew; yea, the Septuagintal Greek, This was the true Apostles
Doctrine in regard of the Scripture.

John, 5.20.

And for the Body of Christ: The true Apostles tell us, That he did not only
rise from the dead, but his Body ascended, and that he is man still, 2 Timothy 2.5.
There is one Mediator, the man Jesus Christ.

Moses, because this was to continue, 2 Cor. 3. they did not destroy, but erect
these Ordinances, by Commission from Christ, As I have ordained in all the
Churches, says Paul. And more particularly, 1. They did not deny the Ministry,
not the Being of a settled Ministry, Romans 12.7. though by the hand of Man, Tit.
1. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should ordain Elders in
every City: nor the maintenance; the settled maintenance of Ministers, 1 Cor.
9.14. Even so has the Lord ordained, that those that preach the Gospel, should
live on the Gospel. 2. As they did not deny the Ministry, so they did not deny
Water Baptism: but they rather called for Water Baptism, because Cornelius had
received the Spirit, Acts, 10.47. They did not lay a necessity upon the
Disciples, to be plunged into the River, or Water; for the Jailer, and
Cornelius, were baptized in their Houses: Nor did they ever forbid Infant
Baptism, but tell us that Children of Believers, are Holy, 2 Cor. 7. 3. As the
true Apostles did not deny Water Baptism, so they did not cry down the Lords
Supper, but tell us plainly, That thereby we hold forth the Lords Death til he
come. 4. As they did contend for the Supper, so they commanded singing: First,
That the whole Church should sing; for the whole Church of Ephesus, and the whole
Church of Colosse, are commanded to sing, Ephesians. 5. 18. Collos. 3.16. Secondly,
That the whole Church should sing the Psalms of David; for by those Titles,
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, the P^alms of David are distinguished.
Thirdly, That this singing should be performed with an audible voice, and not
in the heart only; for faith the Apostle in the same Scriptures, Speaking and
singing with Grace in your hearts. Affirmabant autem h^nc fu^^se summam vel
culpae suae vel erroris quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem convenire
carmenque Christo quasi Deo dic^re secum invicem. Plin. Epist. ad Trajan.

Vel communi voce dicere Magde^urgens. Hist. Cant. 2, C. 6.


Fourthly, That these Psalms, or Hymns, or Spiritual Songs, should be sung by
many together; not by one alone, but by the whole Church; for the Evangelist
tells us, that Christ, and his Disciples, sung an Hymn, and so went out after
Supper: If only one sang, and the rest consented, then that one was Christ, or
some one of the Disciples; Christ it was not, for if he had sung an Hymn, it
would have been said, that he sung, and the Hymn would have been set down; as
it is said, he prayed, and his Prayer recorded, John, 17. Nor was it one of the
Disciples, for as yet the Holy Ghost was not fallen upon them, to Gift them
with Spiritual Gifts; neither can it be said, that the word, (...), should be
translated, Praised; and when they had praised, etc. For when it is to be so
translated, then it is joined with an Accusative Case, as Heb. 2.12. but they
al sang, audibly, and together. Thus the true Apostles of Christ, were for, and
not against the Ordinances of Christ.

Romans 4.



Poterat enim Apostolus dicere, si dixeri mus, quod non habemus peccatum, nos
ipsos extollimus, et humilitas in nobis non est, sed cum ait nos ipsos
decipimus et veritas in nobis non est satis ostendit eum qui sic dixerit non
verum loqui sed falsum. Council. Milevit. Cau. 6.
but the contrary; saying, If any man say, he has no sin, he deceives himself,
and there is no truth in him; 1 John 1.8. he does not say, and there is no
humility in him, though it be pride to say so; but there is no truth in him.
And again, the Apostle James, In many things we offend all, Jam. 3.2. And
again, We see and know but in part, 1 Cor. 13.9. they acknowledge indeed a
perfection of Uprightness: But the true Apostles never placed any Perfection in
Monastical Virginity, Nunc been vivitur si sine crimine sine peccato autem si
quis vivere se existimet non id agit, ut peccatum non habebat, sed ut veniam
non accipiat. Austin.
or abstaining from Meats, Cuffs, Points, and Laces. But says the Apostle,
Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary Humility, and
in being subject to Ordinances: as ^ouch not, taste not, handle not: Which all
perish in the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of men. Which things
indeed have a show of wisdom, in Will Worship, and humility, and neglecting of
the Body: Ver. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

Call no man your Father; neither be ye called Masters: But Master (he tells us
at verse 8.) is al one with Rabbi: Now these Rabbis were their Sect-Masters,
who were the Masters of their Faith; and such a Father and Master, no man ought
to be: but otherwise the Apostle says, Children obey your Parents; honor thy
Father: and Servants, be subject to your Masters. And did not Paul the Apostle,
call himself, a wise Master Builder? Acts, 26.25. Paul calls Festus, most
noble Festus; and Agrippa, King Agrippa. And Chap. 27. he says to them that
were in the Ship with him, Sirs, I perceive this Voyage will be dangerous: and
again, verse 21. He stood forth in the midst, and said, Sirs: and yet again,
ver. 25. Wherefore, Sirs; or excellent men, be of good comfort, etc.

Cor. 15. yea, they tell us, That Christ did not only rise, but ascend with his
Body; and that our Bodies, shall remain Bodies in Heaven, as Christ's does, Phil.
3.20. Who shall change our vile Bodies, that they may be like to his glorious
Body.

Go ye cursed into everlasting torment, prepared for the Devil, and his Angels:
and come ye blessed, inherit the Kingdom of the Father, prepared for you before
the Foundation of the World.

These were the Doctrines of the Apostles, and the true Teachers of the Gospel.
Does any man therefore say, I now come unto you from God, and God has sent me?
And does he say, there is no other Heaven, nor Hell, than what is in this Life?
Or does he preach against the Resurrection, and Ascension of our Bodies? Or
does he preach against respect unto Magistrates, and Civil Relations? Or does
he tell you of a Light within al men, which is able to bring them to Salvation?
Does he preach Perfection, saying, That Man may be perfect, and without sin in
this Life? Or does he tell you of Justification by somewhat within you? Or does
he cry down, degrade, and vilify the Ordinances of Christ, Ministry, Water
Baptism, Lords Supper, and Singing? Or does he deny the Deity of Christ on
Earth? or the Humanity of Christ in Heaven? Or does he preach down the
Scripture, by telling you, that the Light and Spirit within you, is your Rule?
Surely this Person is a false Apostle, and a false Teacher. Thus you may try a
man by his Doctrine.

Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps clothing; Matthew. 7.15,
16.
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves: ye shall know them by their Fruits: As
ye know a Tree, not by the Leaves, but by the Fruit; so says he, ye shall know
these men, not by their first Profession, but by their after Works, and Ways,
and Fruits.

But if they go in Sheeps clothing, how shall I know they are Wolves?



Tim. 3.3. Without Natural affection, truce breakers, false Accusers,
incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good: Of this sort are they
(ver. 6.) which creep into houses, and lead silly women captive, etc.

Janes and Jambres resisted Moses; and are continually barking at, and speaking
evil of the true Ministers of the Gospel, and Shepherds of the Sheep. It Is
recorded of Philip of Macedon, when he laid siege to Athens, that he sent word
into the City, That if they would send out ten of their Orators, he would be at
peace with them; whereupon Demosthenes rose up in the Senate, and said, If the
Wolves come to the Fold, and tell the Sheep, that they will be at Peace with
them, if they will send away al their Dogs, and Shepherds, will the Sheep do it?
No, the great design of the Wolf, is to part the Sheep from the Shepherd.
Those therefore that come in Sheeps clothing, and cry out against the true
Ministry of Christ, are no true Sheep, but Wolves.

(...). Matthew, 7, 1^, qui venient ex scipsis legitime n^n missi, de quibus Jer.
23, 21, currebant et non mittebam Luc. Brugens. in Math. 7.15.
3. The Wolf though he be in Sheeps clothing, does tear and rend the Sheep; he
comes not in by the door; and when he is come in, then he does devour the poor
Sheep: And so it is with false Teachers, they come not in by the door of a
Lawful Call, and they bite, and devour, and destroy the Faith of some.

Quest. But our Savior says, That we may know them by their Fruits; What are
those Fruits, and how shall we know them thereby?

Pseudo-Prophetae quo modo probari possint: Certissima autem demonstratio haec
est, si deliquerit et contemnat voluptates corporales, imprimis vero sensum
illum qui nobis est opprobrio et dedecori et si abominentur omnem libidinem et
scortationem; an ignoras enim, qua ratione Zedekias filius Maasijae et Achab
filius Kolijae de propetia gloriati fuerint, multos homines ad se pertraxerint,
verbaque Prophetiae ab aliis instinctus divini afflatu prolata sub suo titulo
ventitarint, et tamen in voluptatibus suis venereis perrexerint, ita ut
sociorum et discipuloru^ suorum uxores stupraverint. Donec a Deo retecti et a
Rege Babyloniae, meritissima poena igne combusti fuerint. Jerem. 29.22, 23.
Rab. Mois Majemon. More Nevochim pars 2. cap. 40.
So are False Teachers many times, 2 Pet. 2. There shall be false Teachers
amongst you, ver. 1. These do walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness,
verse 10. (see the Epistle of Jude) God does often give men up to fleshly sins
for their vile errors.

2. If you find that they are given to lying, then you may know that they are
not of God: Truth does not need our Lies to maintain it with: but the Doctrine
of Lies, is often maintained with the Practice of Lying: And have found them
liars, says our Text here.

3. If you find that the height of their Religion is to maintain some Opinion,
and that does consist in some voluntary Humility, and keeping under the Body,
then are they not of God, Col. 2.18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25, 26.

4. If you find that their Doctrine, tends to draw men away from the Ordinances
of God, then though they pretend to be Prophets, yet they are but false
Prophets, Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise among you a Prophet, and he gives a sign,
and it come to pass, thou shall not hearken to him, verse 3. And he shall be put
to death, verse 5. Why? Because he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord
your God.

5. If you find that in Truth he falls short of him, whom he would seem to be,
and yet in show goes beyond him, then he is a Deceiver. As for Example: If a
man say, that he is an Apostle, but pretends to do more than ever any Apostle
did, as to judge infallibly in all things, whereas the Apostle says sometime,
This say I, not the Lord; yet in truth falls short of what an Apostle did, who
spoke with Tongues, and did work miracles; surely this man is a false Apostle:
It Is the way of an Hypocrite to imitate the Godly, and in outward things he will
go beyond many a Godly man, yet does fall short of the weakest Saint. Now though
every Hypocrite is not an Heretic, yet every Heretic is an Hypocrite.

6. If you find that his great Work and Business is, to destroy the Churches of
Christ; then he is not of God, but by this Fruit, you may know him to be a
False Teacher: The Apostles went up and down confirming the Churches, not
destroying them. But now says Luther, December Annis laboratur antequam
Ecclesiola recte et Pie instituta paratur, et ubi parata est, irrepit aliquis
fanaticus et quidem idiota, qui nihil novit quam contumeliose loqui, contra
sinceros verbi Doctores, is uno momento evertit omnia. Luther.
After we have taken much pains, even for ten years together, to gather and
settle a Church; then comes some Fanatic Person, and he destroies more in one
moment, than we could build in ten years: But says the Apostle, Mark those
which cause division, much more those that cause destruction, and avoid them.

7. If they will not hear us, says the Apostle John, they are not of God, 1
John, 4.6. We are of God; he that knows God, hears us; he that is not of
God, hears not us. Hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of
Error. Does a man then forsake the Assemblies of the Saints (as the manner of
some is) and teach men so to do? he shall be called least in the Kingdom of
Heaven; he is a False Teacher, and by this Fruit you may know him; yea, and by all these Fruits you may know False Teachers: You may know them by their Call;
you may know them by their Doctrines; and you may know them by their Fruits,
and their Practices. And thus you see how those that are False Apostles, or
False Teachers, may be tried, and discovered. And is it a commendable thing in
the Eyes of Christ, to make discovery of them? Now then, as you desire that you
may fall under the Commendation of Christ here, or hereafter; let it be your
work and business in these times to make this Discovery. Only know,

Ephesus.

He that has an Ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. And
if this Work do belong unto all the Church, what an evil thing is it for those
that are Members of a Church, to be beguiled with False Teachers; shall they be
beguiled by them, that should discover them? This is directly contrary to their
Duty. It is your Duty, and it is al your Duty, to make this discovery.
Therefore yet more practically.

First: Go to God for Wisdom, and the Spirit of Discerning; it is Christ alone
that does see men's fruit under al their Leaves: beg this Discerning Spirit
therefore at the hands of Christ.

Secondly: Take heed that you do not lie in any Sin, or Error; for all Sin and
Error blinds: How shall you see the Error of another, if you be blinded with
your own Sin, and Error?

Thirdly: In case any thing does arise, which has difficulty in it, consult
with others; for ye are not alone: And says David, I will enquire in thine
holy Temple.

Fourthly: Be sure that you keep to the Scripture, and take heed that you do
not judge of Doctrines by impressions: Let the Light within you be your
Principle, enabling you unto what is good; but let it not be your Rule to judge
of Doctrines; that is the Word alone.

Fifthly: Take heed that you have not too great a charity toward, and Opinion
of, those that are suspected to be false Teachers. Ye shall know them by their
Fruits, says Christ: And lest you should think that they may be good, Plerique
enim hominum ita impostorum liberalitate sascinantur ut quicquid proponunt
monstruosae Doctrinae tamen pro bonis habeant. Quibus Christus respondet, non
modo hujusmodi homines bonos non esse, sed ne esse quidem posse. Cartw. Harm.
p. 271.
I tell you, nay, says Christ in the next words; for a corrupt Tree cannot
bring forth good Fruit: No man others Grapes off Thorns, or Figs off Thistles;
(...) evil men, and Seducers, says the Apostle: If ^ducers, you are to look
upon them as evil me^ (...) well as on Drunkards, Swearers, and Profane ^sons;
which because some have not done, they (...) been deceived, instead of making
this Discovery (...)

Sixthly: And if you would be sure to make (...) right Judgment in this great
Discovery, then (...) your time, Si quis ex foliis et floribus judicium formare
velit, non expectata fructuum maturitate plane hallucinetur, sic etiam qui de
initiis quibusdam judicium sibi fingant etc. tandem enim eorum amentia omnibus
innotescet. 2 Timothy 3. Cartw. Harm. p. 270.
and wait long before you close wi^^ any of their Opinions; for says Christ,
Ye (...) know them by their Fruit. Now the Fruit of a (...) is not presently
seen; an ill Tree in Winter, may seem to be as good as the best: Stay therefore
your time, and you shall know them by their Fruit, and so be able to make this
Discovery, which is so pleasing to, and commendable in the Eyes of Jesus
Christ. Attendite a falsis Prophetis, diligenter cavete non dixit aspicite, sed
attendite, quod aspicere est ad illud quod palam videtur, attendere autem est
cum sollicitudine inquitere.

Abulens. in Mat. 7. p. 2^^.




It may be, some will think, and say, This does not concern, or reach my
Condition; I am troubled with, and labor under such or such a Temptation; and
in all this, nothing has been spoken unto that Temptation. But remember that
our Lord and Savior Christ, has not said to some, but to al, Beware of false
Prophets; not Behold, but Beware; we behold what is open, and beware of what is
hidden: and both Christ and his Apostles, tell us, That in the last days, there
shall arise false Christ's, false Prophets, false Apostles, and false Brethren;
insomuch, as if it were possible, they should deceive the very Elect: and is
this nothing then unto your Condition? It may be it is your Temptation that you
do not take heed, and beware enough. I date boldly say, he is under a
Temptation, that thinks these things do not reach him, or concern his
Condition: And what is the reason that many poor souls are so misled in these
days of ours, but because they have not been prepared, and underlaid with
Knowledge for to make resistance; al their work and business has been about
some particular Temptation, striving against some Temptation; if they have
heard any thing about that, well; if not, then they think the matter concerns
not them: and so not being grounded in the Faith, when Deceivers come, they are
taken Captive by them. But I know you al desire to be commended by Christ at
that great Day, when he shall say, Well done, good and faithful Servant. And
this discovery of false Teachers, is a matter of great Commendation in his Eyes
now, and what he commends now, he will commend then: wherefore up and be doing.
It may be this may be some pains and labor to you; but Christ says, I know thy
Works, and thy Labor. It may be it may cost you much trouble and sorrow; but he
says also, I know thy Labor, and thy Patience. It may be some may think you
are too busy, and severe in the Work of this Discovery; but he has said I
know thy Works, and thy Labor, and thy Patience, and that thou can not bear
them which are evil, and have tried them which say, they are Apostles, and are
not, and have found them Liars: Wherefore let us comfort and encourage one
another with these words.

THE GOOD, AND MEANS OF ESTABLISHMENT.

Wherein is showed (besides other things) I. That it is a great Mercy for a
Nation, and State to be settled. II. A Mercy, and great Blessing for a Church to
be settled. III. A great Blessing, and Mercy for a Particular Soul to be settled
in the Good Ways of God.


By William Bridge, Preacher of the Gospel at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

THE Good and Means OF ESTABLISHMENT.
1 PET. 5.10. Preached At Stepney, January, 6. 1655.
But the God of all Grace, who has called us unto his eternal Glory, by Christ
Jesus, after that ye have suffered a while, make you perfect, stablish,
strengthen, settle you.


SOme think these words are spoken in the way of a Promise from God:
Promissionem ad ungit Apostolus, Salmeron, Grotius, Gerardus, Vicinus, Tho.
Aquinus.

Ad precationem se convertir Apostolus, Calvin, Beza, Piscator, H. Illicitus,
Estius, Gomarus, Aretius. (...).


others think they are spoken in the way of a desire and Prayer to God. They
are a Promise (say some) because they are brought in to comfort and relieve
these dispersed Saints against the Temptations of Satan, and opposition of the
World; which the Apostle had mentioned in the former Verses, 8, 9. as also
because those words, Perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, are found in
some Books in the Future Tense of the Indicative Mood, to be read thus; Shall
perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you: But I find the Copies ordinarily
to give them in the Optative. Beza tells us, Omnes nostri codices (tribus tamen
exceptis) Scripta haec habent optandi modo.

Beza in loc.

In nonnullis quidem exemplaribus Graecis verba sunt indicativi modi
temporisque futuri, quem^dmodum in Latinis, verum ea minus probatae sunt fidei.

Estius in loc.


that al our Books (excepting three) do read these Words in the Optative Mood:
And Estius (though the vulgar Latin renders them in the Future Tense of the
Indicative) says that al such Copies are of less Credit, and that although the
words should be in the Future Tense, it comes al to the same reckoning; for as
much as the Hebrews (whom the New Testament follows much) do ordinarily put
Futures for Optatives, as well as for Preceptives: So Numb. 20.17. we translate
the words thus; Let us, I pray thee, pass through thy Country; (...). Septuag.

(...).

Septuag. Ibo nunc. Montan.


and yet the word in the Hebrew, is in the Future Tense, We will pass through,
etc. So Jer. 40.15. we read, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will smite Ishmael;
and yet the word in the Hebrew is, I will go, and smite Ishmael. So that
according to the Hebrew, the Future is ordinarily put for the optative in a way
of desire and Petition. But the words here used, are in the Optative Mood, and
therefore, by that Argument, (...).
we cannot conclude these words to be spoken in the way of a Promise. It Is true
indeed, That they contain matter of much comfort and relief for those that
suffer under the temptations of Satan, or oppositions of the World; but so they
do also, though they be spoken in a way of Prayer: And it is usual with the
Apostles to conclude their Epistles with a short Prayer, Postquam: satis
incubuit in monitiones nunc se ad precationem convertit, nam frustra in nerem
fundetur Doctrina nisi Deus per Spiritum suum operetur.

Calvin in Loc.


and that Prayer with a Doxology: And so does the Apostle here; The God of all
Grace, who has called you, etc. perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle you;
to whom be Glory for ever, and ever; a Promise is not so concluded, but a
Prayer is. I conceive therefore, that these words are spoken in way of a
Prayer; wherein ye have, 1 The Mercy, and the Blessing prayed for. 2 The
Arguments ensuring it.


1 As for the Mercy, and Blessing prayed for; it is expressed in four words;
Perfect, Stablish, Strengthen, Quod pluribus verbis rem unam designat Petrus,
nempe fidelium confirmationem, hoc ideo facit ut sciamus rarae esse
difficultatis cursum nostrum persequi et proinde singulari Dei gratia opus esse.

Calvin in Loc.


and Settle you. Some think they are Synonimous, all intending the same thing,
the confirmation and perseverance of those disper^ed Christian-Jews. But though
they may aim at the same general thing, yet there are several particulars under
that general, which the words seem to point at. The first word, which we render
Perfect, should (I think) be translated otherwise: It is the same word that is
used, Matthew. 4.21. Mark, 1.19. Significat ergo Apostolus telam bonorum operum
quam teximus facile ac cito ^n hac vita rumpi nisi accedat Dei (...). Gerard.
for mending of their Nets; and the same that is used, Gal. 6.1. You that are
Spiritual, RESTORE such an one with the Spirit of Meekness; and it signifies
such a restoring as is of unjoynted Members. Now these Christians being
scattered, the Apostle prays, Significat enim (...), membra in corpore luxata
reponere. Ibid.

Beza compingat Erasm. instauret.


that God would please to joint them again. Thus the God of al Grace, after you
have suffered, and been shattered, bring you into order, restore, and repair
you. But suppose that God restore, and mend us, yet we may fall again. True, but
I do not only pray for you (says Peter) that ye may be restored and mended;
but that you may be confirmed, so as ye may not fall away, The God of all Grace
stablish you also. The word signifies to fasten, (...) significat figere,
firmiter statuere, Septuag. utuntur pro (...) stare fecit: quod alibi exponunt
pro (...), alibi pro (...), alibi pro (...).

(...), significat roborare (...) valeo, opponitur (...).

(...), fundare.


and confirm, and establish: So Romans 1.11. 1 These. 3.1, 2. But though we be so
confirmed by the Grace of God, that we cannot fall away, yet we may be weak, and
labor under great Infirmity: True, But I have prayed for you, that you may be
strengthened also. But though we be strong, and confirmed, so as we shall never
fall quite away from Grace; yet we may be unsettled: True, but I have not only
prayed against your Apostasy, but against your unsettlement; The God of all
Grace, restore, stablish, strengthen, and settle you, even as the Foundation of
the House is settled. So that he does not only pray for these Saints, that they
may be restored, and put into joint in opposition to their scattering; but for
confirmation, in opposition to Apostasy; and for settlement in opposition to al
unstedfastness; and for strength of Grace, in opposition unto weakness, the
cause and ground of all unsetledness. Now these Graces he does assure them of,
by diverse Arguments. 1. Some drawn from the Nature of God, he is the God of al
Grace; not of Grace only, as the Syriack reads the words, omitting the word
All; but he is the God of All Grace: and therefore though you have need of much
Grace, yet you need not be discouraged; for the God whom you deal with, is a
God of al Grace; and under this Title have I prayed unto him for you. It Is good
closing with God in Prayer, by that Title and Attribute which is most suitable
to our Condition. 2. Other Arguments are drawn from the precedent Work of God
upon them; Who has called you unto his eternal Glory. Now the Gifts, and
Calling of God, are without Repentance; Whom he has called, them he has also
glorified; and therefore seeing he has called you, Emphaticum quoque illud
quod in Graeco textu haec verba (...), conjunguntur cum sequentibus (...):
ostendit enim Apostolus ex eodem gratiae sonte et primam ad gloriam Coelestem
vocationem et ultimam hujus beneficii consummationem provenire. Gerard.
you may be assured that he will confirm, strengthen, and settle you: Gods
Calling-Grace, does assure us of his Confirming-Grace; he that has called you
unto eternal Glory. Even He, ((...), is Emphatical, and omitted in the English
to be read thus; The God of all Grace, who has called you, etc.) he himself
establish you, etc. But our sufferings do still abound; for we are a dispersed
People. Be it so; yet your Sufferings are but a Modicum, a little, (...), both
in regard of measure and time: and after you have thus suffered, a little, and
a little while, the God of al Grace will restore, stablish, strengthen, and
settle you. This have I prayed for you. So that the Doctrine from the Verse, is
this:

It is a great Mercy, and Blessing, to be outwardly settled. The Apostle speaks
here, in reference to that opposition and hatred which they met with from the
world in scattering them, as a People, and as a Church; for says he, verse 9.
Be steadfast in the Faith, knowing that the same Afflictions are accomplished in
your Brethren that are in the world: As also in reference to those Temptations
of Satan which they labored under; for says he, verse 5. Your Adversary the
Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. So that I
say, 1 It is a great Mercy, for a Nation, and State to be settled.

2 A Mercy, and great Blessing, for a Church to be settled.

3 A great Blessing, and Mercy, for a Particular Soul to be settled in the good
Ways of God.



Jer. 24.6. For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them
again to this land, and I will build them, and not pull them down, and I will
plant them, and not pluck them up. So chap. 32. verse 37. And I will cause them
to dwell safely; yea, verse 41. I will rejoice over them, to do them good; and I
will plant them in this Land assuredly, with my whole heart, and with my whole
soul. This also was that Mercy which the Lord Promised to David, 2 Samuel 7.16.
But thine House, and thy Kingdom shall be established for ever before thee, and
thy Throne shall be established for ever. And if ye look into 2 Chronicles. 9.8. ye
shall find, that this establishing of a Nation or Kingdom, is both a sign, and a
fruit of Gods Love; Blessed be the Lord thy God (said the Queen of Sheba to
Solomon) which delights in thee, to set thee on his Throne, to be King for
the Lord thy God; because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever,
therefore made he thee King over them, etc. On the other side; when God is
angry with a People, then he pours a Spirit of Giddiness, and Perverseness on
them, that they run to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are as the
Leaf shaken with every wind, 1 Kings, 14.15. The Lord threatens Israel to smite
them, as a reed is shaken in the water, because they had made them Groves,
provoking the Lord to anger. A great Judgment then it is, to be shaken like a
reed in the Water. This also is a Fruit of Gods Anger; and when a People are in
this posture, it argues that God has smitten them in his Anger. But when may a
People be said to be thus smitten, as a Reed shaken in the Water? Even then
when they are driven to and fro with every wind, when they are easily moved,
and put by their Station, Sicut solet moveri arundo in aqua Scilicet quia
arundines faciliter moventur in aqua quocunque vento impellente, aut levi
aquarum decursu, ita Israel incideret in magnas calamitates et Deus faceret
cum tam passibilem ut a quocunque insurgente contra eum posset percuti.
Abulens. in Loc.
so that any one that rises up against them, may afflict them, and lay them
low. And if this unsettled, shaking Condition, be a great Judgment upon a
Nation, or People; then surely the contrary is a great Mercy, it is a great
Blessing indeed for any Kingdom or Nation to be in a settled Estate and
Condition.

Acts, 9.31.

Esai. 2.2. It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of the
Lords House shall be established in the top of the Mountains: What is more
settled on Earth than a Mountain? The House of the Lord, shall be as a Mountain
upon the Mountains in the last days; great shall be the glory of the latter
Days. As the Sins and Apostacies of the latter Days, shall be the greatest
Sins and Apostacies; so the Glory of the Churches, shall be the greatest in the
last days: And the Establishment of the Churches, is not only promised, but
promised as part of the Glory of the latter Times.

(...).
F^rst they took a great deal of pains to convert, and bring men home to God;
being converted, the Apostles then formed them into several Churches; and
Churches being planted, then their great work and business was, to Establish
them, Acts, 14.21. And when they had preached the Gospel to that City, or had
Gospellized that City, and had taught many, or had Discipled many, or those
that were sit and worthy; they returned again to Lystra, to Iconium, and
Antioch, confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the Faith, etc.

Peter shuts up his Epistle with this Prayer for the dispersed Christian-Jews;
so the Apostle Paul does close up his Epistle to the Corinths, with the same
desire and Prayer for them; 2 Cor. 13. And this also we wish, even your
perfection, verse 9. (...). And Romans 16.25. he concludes thus; Now to him that
is of power to establish you, etc. (...), where the Apostle Paul uses two of
these four words that are used by Peter. The closing wish does always fall upon
some precious mercy.

Whose House ye are (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) if you hold fast the
Confidence of your rejoicing, steadfast to the end. An House is settled, fixed,
and established; a Tent is removable, but an House is not so: unworthy are
those of the Name of the House of God, that are unsettled in the Truth: These
things write I unto thee (says Paul to Timothy) that thou may know how to
behave thy self in the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, the
Pillar and Ground of Truth. Yea, every Member of a Church, should be a Pillar
in the House of God. So the Lord promises to the Church of Philadelphia.
Surely therefore, it is matter of great Importance for a Church and people of
God, to be settled, and established.

It Is a good thing (says the Apostle) that the heart be established with
Grace, not with Meats, which have not profited them that have been exercised
therein. Possibly a man's heart may be comforted, and strength^ned with Meats,
Psalm. 104.15. it is said, And Wine that makes glad the heart of man, and Bread
which strengthens man's heart. Where the same word is used by the Septuagint,
that is here used in the Text. (...) Septuag.
But the Apostle Paul does relate to the Ceremonial Law: for the Jews converted
to Christ, Judaei ad Christum conversi sup^^stitiosius inhaerebant observationi
legalium ceremoniarum cumprimis discri^^ini ciborum a Moyse prescripto illis
haec sententia est opposita. Gerrard in loc.
were too superstitiously addicted to the observation of Legal Ceremonies,
especially those which concerned Meats, and difference of Meats, Romans 14.2.
Col. 2.16. and to those is this Speech opposed; It is good that the heart be
established with Grace: as if he should say, some think to find Establishment
in the observation of Meats, and Doctrines for the Jewish Ceremonies, but the
best Establishment, is in the Doctrine of the Gospel, Quidam in genere
intelligunt interna et Spiritualia Dei dona quibus homines sanctificantur;
quidam doctrinam Christianam side susceptam. Gratiam Christianismi, ut sit
sensus firmitatem et stabilimentum cordis quaerendum esse in gratia Dei quam N.
T. mediator Christus attulit, non in observatione ciborum quam Moses tradidit.
Ibid.
and the Grace of God revealed in the Gospel. Some think that by Grace here, we
are to understand Holiness, and those Spiritual Gifts whereby men are
Sanctified. But having said in the former words, Be not carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines: these words se^m to comply, and correspond better
with them, if by Grace we understand the Doctrine of the New Testament; from
which the Galatians are said to fall (Ye are fallen from Grace) when they
returned to the Law: But in both respects, it is a good or beautiful thing,
that the heart be established with Grace. For:

Psalm. 1. But as for the Ungodly, it is not so with them, They are as the
Chaff, that brings forth no Fruit, whom the wind drives to and fro. And the
Truth is, an unsettled man, is neither fit to receive good, nor to do good. So
long as the Vessel is moved up and down, ye cannot pour the Liquor into it; and
who can write exactly when his arm is jogged? Can any man walk exactly in a
crowd, which one while carries him this way, and another while that way? No
surely: Neither can an unsettled, unestablished heart walk exactly with the Lord
his God.

David, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed; and what then? then says
he, I will sing, and give praise; but not til then: and what is the reason that
many pass ^o many years of their lives in doubtings and fears, never praising
God for any love, or Mercy to them? but because they are unsettled in their
Spiritual Estate and Condition.



Jehosaphat upon that account, that he passed by, and winked at al his
Infirmities, even because his heart was fixed and established, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
the Prophet reproves him for joining with the Ungodly; Nevertheless (says he)
there are good things found in thee, in that thou have taken away the Groves
out of the Land, and have prepared thine heart: So ye read it: but I think
rather, And have fixed, established, or set thine heart to seek God. On the
contrary, it is said of Rehoboam, though he did many good things, That he did
evil in the sight of the Lord, because he prepared not; or, because he fixed
not, established not, (...) in Niphal (...) Paratus, s^mus stabilis qui nec
everti nec impediri qucat in Pirl. et Hiphil. paravit preparavit sinnavit
confirmavit, stabilivit, includit firmitatem et certitudinem. Shindlerg.
set not his heart to seek God, 2 Chronicles. 12.14. it is the same word which we
translate, Establish, in other Scriptures, as Psalm. 40.2. He has set my feet
upon a Rock, and established my goings; and it notes, such a fixation and
settlement, whereby a man does so continue in his way and course that he will
not be put out of it. This Rehoboam wanted; for he was (...), a soft hearted
man naturally: and though he did many things that were right and good, yet he
was led by the Counsel of his young men, and his heart was not set and fixed to
seek the Lord: but Jehosaphat was of a steadfast Spirit, and would not be put
out of his way, and therefore though he did some things amiss, yet the Lord
commends him, and accepts of him: So that, although a man do many good things;
yet if his heart be not fixed, and established, the Lord will pass by, and not
regard the same: But though a man do commit great evils, yet if his heart be
set to seek the Lord, God will pardon and pass by all his Fail^ngs. O! Cur quaeso
in tanta multitudine valo^um, ne naum quidem vitreum reperitu^? di^^s quod cum
facile frang^tur est symbolum inconstantiae, quam Deus. vult a suo templo
exulare. Ita est, sed ulterius addo, quod vitrum quam expe^s est coloris
prop^ii, tam facile refert alicno^, quibuscunque enim liquoribus imbuitur
statim concolor efficitur, sub hoc igitur typo voluit Deus a suo obsequio
arcere eos omnes qui non servant unam vivendi rationem, sed in divers^ studia
seruntur, et nunc hos nunc illos mores imitantur.

Mendoza. in Reg. 1. Cap. 1. page 300.


what a blessed f^an^e of heart, is this fixed Spirit! Surely it is that Grace
wherein God is much delighted: An unsettled Soul God cares not for, nor for any
Work or Service that is done by him. We read of hundreds, and thousands of
Vessels of Gold, Silver, and Brass that were in the Temple, but not of one
Crystal Glass, or Vessel; why so, says one, but because that is of a brittle,
fragile, and uncertain Nature? which, as it has no color of its own, so its
apt to receive the color of any Liquor. So i^ an unsettled man, and unconstant,
whom God cares not for in his Temple, and Service: Who cares for the Service of
a Fool? or regards the Prayers, Desires, or P^titions of a Fool? If a Fool
knock earnestly at your door, you say to your Servant, Go not to the door, it
is the Fool that knocks; and if a Fool com and speak to you, you regard not
what he says. Now an unconstant, unsettled Soul, is a foolish Soul. It is the
property of a Fool to be always a beginning; he begins a good work, and then
he leaves it off; then he begins another, and he leaves off that; Stultus
semper incipit vivere, the Fool does always begin to live: And the same word
in the Hebrew (and Scripture Phrase) that signifies an Unconstant man,
signifies a Fool: (...) stultus, insipiens, varius, mobilis, levis, inconstans.
and if ye look into Eccles. 5. ye shall find, that the Sacrifice of Fools, is
called so upon account of Unconstancy, (...)
and Unsetledness; for (says Solomon) When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer
not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in Fools; pay that which thou have
vowed, ver. 4. And therefore, if an unsettled man pray and knock at Gods door,
he will say; Let him alone, regard him not, it is that unsettled Fool, that
unconstant Fool, who is off and on, to and fro in my Service. God has no
pleasure in Fools, and an unsettled, unestablished soul, is a Fool in Scripture
Language; surely therefore he is so in the eyes of God. But if a man be fixed
and established, the Lord delights in him, Ut venti in autumno arbores non
tollunt, sed folia secum in auras ferunt sic tristia, leves tamen mentes movent
fortes et in pietate firmas non evertunt Origin. Homil. 13. in Numb. Maximum
malae mentis indicium sluctuatio. Sen.
and in all those Works and Services that are done by him. Establishing Grace is
a great Mercy.

5. And it is also the Character of a good and gracious person, whereby he is
distinguished from the ungodly of the World. A good man lives and dwells at
the sign of a settled Conversation; he is planted by the Rivers of Water, Psalm.
1. the wicked are as the Chaff that are driven to and fro, not settled, not
planted. It is true indeed, that a moral, civil man, may be naturally of a
fixed Spirit, serious, staid, and settled in his Moralities; but though he be
settled in what is Morally good, yet he is also settled upon his Lees, in what is
Spiritually evil; settled in prejudice against the Saints, and against the Power
of Godliness; settled in his neglect of the Sabbath, etc. and though he be of a
fixed Spirit and temper Naturally, yet that fixation does not arise to any
high, or great matter. It Is an easy thing to cast up the Account truly, Virtus
est circa difficile bonum, sed in parvis ope^ibus constantem esse non est
difficile. Aquin.
where the Sum is small: Morality is a small Sum. When did ye hear of a Boat cast
away in the River, the narrow Waters? It Is the Ship that puts to Sea, that does
make the Shipwreck: small Boats seldom miscarry in the narrow Waters. Now the
Civil, Moral man, does trade in the narrow Waters, and he boasts that he does
not miscarry: some make Shipwreck of Faith, and a good Conscience, but as for
me, says he, I walk constantly, evenly, and these many years have made no
Shipwreck of my Profession, as others have done: But I pray, what is the
reason? He never put to Sea, he never yet did lanch forth into the great Ocean
of the Gospel; he trades in the narrow Waters of his own Righteousness, and
therein he is exact and constant. But now, take a godly, gracio^s man, and he
does abound in the work of the Lord, and ye^ (...) ^^shed in it; according to
that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren, be ye
steadfast, unmovable, always a^ounding in the Work of the Lord; Why? For as
much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Surely therefore it
is a great Mercy, and blessing, to be settled in the Truth, and established in
the good Ways of God; a Mercy for a Nation, a Mercy for a Church, a Mercy for
a Particular Person to be thus established: And therefore,

It is a great Blessing, and worthy of all our Prayers, to be settled, and
established in the good Ways of God.

Man in his best estate, or according to the Hebrew Expression, Man in his most
consistent, and settled estate, is altogether vanity. Man at the best, is a
poor, wavering, and unsettled Creature: yea, says the Scripture, God saw no
stability in his Angels; and therefore if we do naturally labor under such
instability, we have al need to pray, and to pray much for this Grace of
Establishment.

Romans 16.25. Now to him that is of power to establish you, etc. 2. He is
willing to do it, 2 These. 3.3. But the Lord is Faithful, who will establish
you, and keep you from evil. 3. He is engaged to do it: for he has promised to
do it, as has be^n proved already, and it is his Prerogative, 2 Cor. 1.21. Now
he which establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God. As
for a Land, or Nation, it is the Lord alone that does settle it; He loses the
Girdles of Princes, and makes them to wander or stagger like a drunken man,
Job, 12.25. Again, He girdeth their Loyn^ with a Girdle, verse 18. He speaks
the word, and it stands fast, who said to Solomon, and so to all the Princes
of the Earth; If thou will walk before me in integrity of heart, and in
uprightness to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and wilt keep my
Statute ^and my Judgments, then I will establish the Throne of thy (...) as
upon Israel for ever, 1 Kings, 9.4, 5. As for a Church, it is ^e alone who does
settle, and establish it, Psalm. 87.^^ ^^^^^d of Zion, it shall be said, this
and that man was born in her, and the Highest himself shall establish her. And
as for a ^^^icu^^ person. ^t is God alone that does settle him, both in h^^
^^^w^rd, and Spiritual Condition: In his outward Condition, Pr^^. 15.25. The
Lord ^^ll destroy the House of the proud, ^ut he will est^bl^sh the ^^rder of
the Widow. And in his Sp^^iua^ Est^^ and Condition, 2 These. 2.17. Now our Lord
Jesus Christ h^^^elf, and God our Father, comfort your heart (says the
Apostle) and establ^sh you in every good word and Work; and Psalm. 90.17. the
Psalmist does address himself unto God for this, saying, Establish thou the
Work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it. And
if it be so great a Blessing to be thus settled, and established, if we have so
great need of establishing Grace, and it belongs unto God alone to work it,
then surely it is not only a matter worthy of our Prayer, but our Duty also; to
say, and pray with the Psalmist, Stab^ish thou, O Lord the work of our hands
upon us; yea, the work of our hands, establish thou it. And thus you have the
Doctrine cleared in the Parts thereof.

If it be so great a Mercy, and Blessing, to be settled, fixed, Applicat.
and established in the Truth, and good Ways of God, then what cause have al
those that me now established, to praise the Lord, and say, I was a poor,
unsettled person, but through Grace, I am now settled: The more unto l^d the
Times are, and men in the Times, the greater is the Mercy to be truly fixed,
and established. Has the Lord therefore settled your heart in these unsettled
Times? O! then give thanks unto the Lord, and say, My heart is fixed, O God, my
heart is fixed, I will sing, and give praise.

O! but I cannot find this fixation of spirit in my soul, nor that stedfastness
in my life, as I desire; and therefore I cannot praise the Lord as I should.



Ephraim, whose Righteousness, is like the morning dew, fading and vanishing:
And both these are as the Picture, or Map in the Frame, which you may carry
from one Room to another; hang it in this room, and it suits well with it; carry
it into another Room, hang it up there, and it suits well with that; and
whatever Room you hang it in, it can comply therewith: whereas, if it be in no
Frame, only glewed, or plaistered to the wall, ye cannot remove it without
tearing of it. So in this ease; Take a good, and gracious, fixed Soul, and you
may sooner tear him, than remove him from the Truth, or the good Ways of
Christ: but an unsettled person, is for every Room, and for every Company; carry
him into one Company, and he can comply with it; carry him into a second,
third, or fourth, he can comply with all; Why? but because his heart is unfixed,
not established? But woe unto him, for he is upon the Road to Apostasy;
Instability is the high way to Apostasy. O! the sad condition of those that are
not established.

What shall we do then, that we may be established? It is a Mercy, and great
Blessing for a Nation, Church, and Particular person to be s^tled; What shall
we do, that in all these respects we may be established?

Esai. 33.23. The Tacklings are loosed, says the Proph^t; they could not well
strengthen their Mast, they could not spr^^d their S^^l: and Deuteronomy. 28.9. it is
said, The Lord shall c^m^^^^ ^e B^^ssing upon thee in thy Storehouses, and in
all that th us^^^t ^^a^^ hand unto, and he shall bless thee in the Land which
the Lo^d thy God gives thee, verse 8. Yea, The L^^^d sh^^ (...) and. if thou
shall keep the Commandem^nt, o^ he Lord (...) walk in his Ways, v. 9. And all
the people of the Earth s^^^ be afraid of thee, verse 10. And if ye look in^o
the Book of the Kings, and Chronicles, ye shall observe that in the latter Days
of he Kingdoms of Israel, and Judah, before the^^ Ca^^^^ty, these Kingdoms were
unsettled, only upon this account, ^^cause Rel^^^^ was not settled; as Religion
was settled, so the Land was se^l d; and as Religion was uns^tled, so was the
Land uns^ ^ed. Men think that the Settlement of Religion, is to be in after
Work: F^^st, say they, let us look to our being, the Settlement of the Land;
and then lo^k to our Well-Being, the Se^^^ent of Religion: But if we con^ult
with God in the Scriptures, we sh^^ find that a Professing Nation, shall never
be settled, ti^ Religion be settled; and as that waver^, so shall the State waver
also. Would you therefore have a Land settled? pray for the Settlement o^
Religion in the first place.

settled? While the Children of Israel had a good Judge, the People served the
Lord; but when Joshua was dead, And the Elders who had seen all the great Works
of the Lord, they forsook the Lord, and the anger of the Lord, was hot against
Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of their Enemies, Judge. 2.7, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15. Then God raised up other Judges, and the Lord was with the
Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their Enemies, verse 18. But when
that Judge was dead, they returned, and corrupted themselves, and so the Anger
of the Lord was hot against them again, verse. 19.20. Then God raised up
Othniel, and he judged Israel, and the Spirit of the Lord came on him, and the
Lord delivered their Enemies into his hand, Chap. 3. and so the Land had rest
fotty years, ver. 10, 11. But when Othniel died, the Children of Israel, did
evil again, and so the Lord delivered them into the hands of their Enemies,
ver. 12, 13, 14. then God raised up Ehud, and he judged Israel, and subdued
their Enemies, verse 30. But when Ehud was dead, the Children of Israel did
that which was evil in the sight of the Lord again, Chap. 4.1. and the Lord
sold them into the hand of Jabin, King of Canaan. Then they cried unto the
Lord, and he raised up Deborah, and Barak, who destroyed their Enemies, praised
God, and settled Religion, and the Land had rest forty years, Chap. 5.31. Thus
unsettled was the Land, whilst there was no succession of Godly Magistrates.
Would ye therefore have your Land settled? pray for a continuation, and
succession of Godly Magistrates, and that care may be now taken for this thing:
Thus shall your Land and State be established.



Ahaz, If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established, Esai. 7.9. So
that, if Princes, Governors, and Rulers, will trust in their own strengh, or in
their Confederacies with other Nations, they and their Land cannot be settled:
But if in all their deal^ngs with the Nations, they rule, and act in a way of
Faith toward God, then shall the Land be established. And therefore let them,
and all the People, remember the good Counsel of that good King Jehosaphat, 2
C^ron 20.20. Believe in the Lord your God, so shall you be established; believe
his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

Acts, 14.21. They returned to Lystra, and to Iconium, and Antioch, confirming
the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue in the Faith, and
that we must through much tribulation, enter into the Kingdom of God:

That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and fro, and carried about
with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14. What is more uncertain
than a weathercock that is carried about with every wind? If you forsake the
Ministry, and those Officers which Christ has given to his Church, this will be
your state and condition, says the Apostle here. Now, when Pride, or
Covetousness gets into Churches, then, though they have some of Christ's
Officers amongst them, yet they will not be for all: for, say they, we are not
able to maintain more than one; and says that one, if another be chosen, I
must have less, and rule less. O! that Churches therefore, would take heed of
these great Sins, Pride, and Covetousness; which will always keep them in an
unsettled Condition.

Because thou have kept the word of my Patience, I will keep thee from the hour
of Temptation, which shall come upon all the world; and him that overcomes,
will I make a P^ll^r in the Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, Rev.
3.10.12. He that overcomes, is the same that keeps the word of C^^ris^
Patience: What is that? In all times: there is some Truth, which is the trying,
suffering Truth. In Luthers Time, the Doctrine of Justi^^^^^ion by Faith alone,
was the Word of Gods Patience; (...) Queen Mary's Time that Truth which opposed
^ran^u^stantiation, was the Word of Gods Patience; in Athanasius his time, the
D^^^ (...) of Christ's Deity, was the Word of Christ's Patience. Ther^ is always
some Truth or other, the profession, and owning whereof, says, here is the
Patience of the Saints. Now if the Churches keep that word, and overcome in the
keeping of it, the Lord Christ will make every Member of them, as a Pillar in
the Temple of God, that shall go no more out.

Antioch could not untie, they sent to the Church, and Apostles at Jerusalem;
Acts, 15.16.
who having settled the Matter, they sent the result and Decrees, unto other
Churches concerned, whereby they had Peace and Establishment.

Esai. 62.6. Ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and give him
no rest, till he establish, and make Jerusalem a praise in the Earth. Such a
time as this, there is a coming; we are commanded to pray, and to pray
earnestly for it; and the Lord has not only promised the Mercy, but to give
hearts to pray for it: for says he, I have set Watchmen upon thy walls, O
Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace, day nor night, wherefore let us
give him no rest: So shall the Churches have rest, and be established.

that so many are unsettled, break, and decay, in the Trade of their souls?
Surely, 1. Either it is because they do want primitive breakings; for the stony
Ground comes to nothing at the last, though it has much joy at the first,
because it wants depth of Earth. The stick that is thrust into the Earth, is
more easily pulled up, than the Plant which is rooted in the Earth. So are al
those who have no root in themselves. 2. Or because they take up great
Resolutions, without answerable pre-deliberations; whereas we know that the
Needle must play about the Polar Point, before it comes to stand and s^ttle; he
that would hit the mark, must take his level, before he parts with his Arrow.
And if men resolve, before they have fully considered, they will ere long, be
unresolved again. 3. Or because men do not walk by a settled Rule: ^e can never
be settled, that does not walk by a settled Rule: A man's own thoughts, and
apprehensions, are unsettled things; the Hebrew word for Thoughts, (...)
cogitationes quae in cord sunt, sicut ramus in arbore hinc inde diffusus.
comes from a Root which signifies to move, as the tops of Trees, because as
the tops of the Trees waver, and are in continual motion, so are our Thoughts
and Apprehensions. But the Word of the Lord is settled as the Heavens, Psalm.
119. Thy Word is for ever settled in Heaven. So long as I want the Divine
Counsel of the Word, my heart is like a Vagrant, that is most unstable, said
Bernard; for whilst I am not subject to God, I am contrary to my self. 4. Or
because they are divided in their own hearts: a double minded man, is unstable
in all his Ways, says the Apostle; and when men have an heart, and an heart,
(...) an heart for the World, yet a good mind to Christ; how is it possible but
they should be most unsettled? 5. Or because they are too confident of their own
strength and Judgment: whereas the only way to be firm and steadfast, is to be
sensible of ones own Infirmity. We read of a twofold Confidence in Peter; a
Confidence in Christ, and a Confidence in his own strength: when he was
confident in Christ (saying, Master, if it be thou, command that I come unto
thee) he did not miscarry; but when he was confident in his own strength
(saying, Lord, though all men forsake thee, yet will not I) then he sell, and
fell foully. Hold thou me up (said the Psalmist) and I shall be safe, Psalm.
119.119.
and I will have respect unto thy Statutes continually. But if men lean to
their own Understanding, are confident of their own strength, and think that
they are able to deal with all gainsayers, and so will try al things, God leaves
them to their own Opinions, and they scrabble upon the door, and do change
their behavior. 6. Or because men do forsake the Ministry, which Christ has
given to the Churches for their Edification, Perfection, and Establishment,
Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13, 14.7. Or because they have too fair an Opinion of those
that are erroneous, thinking that they may be Godly, though they be never so
unsound in their Judgments, whereby they are drawn into Society, and Communion
with them, and so fall from their own stedfastness; whereas the Apost e ^els us
of the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17.
and that men may be wicked upon the account of their errors in Judgment,
James, 5.19, 20. B^^thren, if any of you do err from the Truth, and one convert
him; let him know that he which converte^h a sinner from the E^ror of his way,
shall save a Soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins: And our Lord
and Savior Christ calling upon us to beware of Fal^e Prophets, Matthew. 7 15.
tells us, That they are corrupt Trees, and cannot bring forth good Fruit, verse
16, 17, 18. As if he should say, if you would take heed, and beware of them,
you must know them, and not think that they are good men; for if you think that
they may be good, notwithstanding their Errors in Doctrine, you will be misled
by them, and removed from your stedfastness. 8. Or because that men do not
improve their Christian Communion for the Life and Power of Godliness; but for
Light only, and Discoursing Notions: whereas the Apostle Paul, writing to
Timothy, says, Keep that which is committed to thy trust, avoiding oppositions
of Science, falsely so called; which some professing, have erred concerning the
Faith, 1 Timothy 6.20, 21. And what is the reason, that not only some, but many
have now erred concerning the Faith, and have fallen from their stedfastness?
but because they have been thus affected? 9. Or because they have not been
built on the Rock Christ; but on some Sandy, and washy Foundation: whereas the
Psalmist says, He set my feet on a Rock, and established my goings, Psalm.
40.2. but if men be upon the Sand, they must needs fall, and great will be their
fall, as their Profession is great. 10. Sometimes men live high, and profess
beyond that Stock of Grace which they have: But if you would be kept and
established, observe what the causes, and reasons are, of the Instability, and
Apostasy of others, and take heed thereof.

But what shall I do, that I may be more settled in regard of my Judgment? and
that I may be established in the present Truth?

Psalm. 106. it is sa^d of the Israel^tes, That when they saw the Egyptians
drowned in the Sea, They sang the Praises of God, and believed his Words, verse
12. yet they so^n forgot his Works, verse 13. And why so? but because they had
no clear Understanding in them, verse 7. Our Fathers understood not thy wonders
in Egypt: And this Apostle Peter, does join the un-learned, and un-stable man
together, 2 Pet. 3. Which they that are unlearned, and unstable, wrest to their
own destruction, verse. 16. Some would have it read thus: Graecum (...) proprie
signific^t indociles qui nolunt rectius inst^ui et informari, qui monstratae ex
verbo Dei Coelesti veritati locum dare renuunt.

Gerard in Loc.


Which those that are unteachable, and do refuse. But unlearned, suits well
enough with the Original, (...): For what is the Reason that men are so
unstable, but because they are not grounded, and studied, in the Body of
Divinity? They take up some Truths by hearsay, and Education; and not being
studied in them, they are soon removed from them: Study therefore, and get a
clear, and distinct knowledge in the great Mysteries, and Truths of the Gospel.

Cum improbarem illam novatorum sententiam, qua docebant non justificari nos a
Deo nisi justitia aliens videremque illius sententiae Authors in dicto illo B.
Pauli Fides credentis reputatur ipsi in justitiam vocem fidei non p^oprie
accipere sed per Catalepim aut Metonymiam ita Scil. ut per fidem non ipsa fides
sed objectum fidei. Christus scil. vel obedientia. Christi significaretur;
ostendi non tamen id^^ Scripturis esse alienum sed etiam nervos Religionis, hoc
est studium bonorum operum ea sententia succidi suscepi ergo adversus Sibrand.
Lubbertum, acerrimum novae illius arrogantis et prophanae Opinionis Patronum
grave certamen hic ergo primus fuit me^ ad fidem Catholicam Conversionis gradus.

Petri Bertii Ora^io qua rationem reddit cur Romano Catholicam fidem amplexus
sit. ^. page 19.


and falling from Grace. If a man hold that he may be a Saint to day, and none
to morrow; a Saint, the third day again, and none the fourth day; must not he
needs be unsettled in his Judgment? It Is commonly known, that Bertius wrote a
Book de Apostasia San^^orum, of the Apostasy of the Saints; and as well known,
that being then a Protestant, he after fell away unto Popery: and when he came
to France, and made a Renounciation of his former Faith, and showed the Reasons
of his Conversion to the Popish Faith, he tells us in his printed Oration, That
Primus Conversionis gradus, The first step to his Popish Conversion was, The
knowledge of, and contending for, that Doctrine, that Faith, as an Act
justifies; and that the (...) Credere, is imputed to us for our Justification
in the sight of God. And well might that Principle have such an influence upon
him, being brought forth by his former unsetling Principles. Unsetling
Principles, will make an unsettled Judgment; and an unsettled Judgment, will bring
forth an unsettled Life, and Practice. Take heed therefore of unsetling
Principles.

We have a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye shall do well, that you
take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, says the Apostle, 1 Pet.
1.19. Where do ye find in all the Scripture, that God has put Heart-Impressions
into the Chair, to be Judge of Doctrines? If I judge of a Doctrine by an
impression made upon my soul, the Devil knows how to fetch me off quickly from
the Truth: What Settlement, or Establishment of Soul can there be, whilst men
will make their Light within them, the Rule of their Judging Doctrines? The Word
of God without, is my Rule; the Light within, is my Help to understand that
Rule: But if I judge of Doctrines by Impressions of the Word on my heart, I can
never be settled; therefore take heed of that.

And he that overcomes, I will make him (says Christ) a Pillar in the Temple
of God, and he shall go no more out, Rev. 3.12. Ye know how it is with the Be:
so long as it is fair, and Sun-shining weather, it is abroad in the Fields; but
if the winds be high, and rough, it does then keep its Hive. Now, as Solomon
says, Learn of the Pismire; so say I, Learn of the Be. Are the winds high,
and rough? Keep your Hive; and your Hive, or rather Gods House, will keep you.

Luke 12.1. Beware of the Leaven of the Pharisees, which is Hypocrisy. 2. The
Leaven of il Company, and Society, 1 Cor. 5. A little Leaven, leaveneth the
whole Lump. 3. The Leaven of false Doctrine, Matthew. 16.6.11, 12. Gal. 6.8, 9.
This Persuasion, is not of him that calls you; a little Leaven, leaveneth the
whole Lump, verse 9. Possibly al these three Leavens may be in such a Meeting:
but the two last are certainly. And can you think to be under the power of
these Leavens, and to come away unleavened? It argues unsetledness to go to
such a Meeting; and by your going, you will be more settled in your unsetledness:
As men are confirmed in that Grace which they bring to Gods Ordinances; so they
will be confirmed in that Sin, which they carry to the Devils Ordinances: Who
can come freely off from the Devils ground? Will men tempt God, and think to
prosper? And what is it to tempt God, but to put him upon an unnecessary
Protection, and Preservation of us? Take heed therefore, how you come at such
Meetings, lest you leaving God, he do leave you.

Truth, is to walk therein; As ye have therefore received Christ (says the
Apostle) so walk in him, rooted and built up in him, and established in the
Faith, 2 Col. 6.7.

Prove. 16.3. Commit thy Works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established: It is he that hangs weights on the wings of the wind, who has
founded the Earth on nothing; and therefore though your thoughts be as ^leeting
and uncertain as the wind; yet he can hang weights upon them, he can make you
solid, staid, sober, who do now stagger to and fro like a Drunken man. And if
you put your Judgment into Christ's hand, he will keep it for you; for faithful
is he who has called you, who will also establish your hearts in the Truth
received.

But what shall I do, that I may be more settled in my Life, and established in
the good Ways of God? for I want Settlement in my Ways and Practices.



Prove. 4.26. Ponder the path of thy feet, and let all thy Ways be established.
Young men generally, are more unsettled, than Ancient men: and what is the
reason of it, but because Ancient men are the more serious, and ponderous? young
men are the less serious, and so the more unsettled. Labor therefore to be more
serious, for the more you think of the greatness of God, and the great things
of your everlasting Estate and Condition, the more serious you will be.

Perpetuum est quod habet causam perpetuantem.
but your Condition is uncertain, although it be never so firm and good;
therefore live not upon your Condition I say, but on the God of your Condition.

Et dabo eis cor unum. 1. Mihi soli deserviens non idolis, nunc enim divisum
quando habent cor quo et me et idola colunt sic interpretatur R David eodemque
sensu vertit Chald. Paraph. Alii cor unum, 1. Simplex vocari putant quasi dicat
faciam ut me simplici ac since^o ^nimo colant: alii unum id est amicum atque
consentiens quod in Christianis sactum fuisse scribit, Lucas Act 4.
multitudinis autem credentiam erat cor unum et anima una. Septu^g. videntur pro
(...) legisse (...) alterum, ve^terunt enim (...) et dabo illis cor alterum 1.
Novum qui sensus magnopere mihi placet, id enim videtur dicere voluisse cum
dixit unum et cum dixit spiritum novum, confirmat hanc interpretationem, Ezekiel.
36.25 hanc eandem repetens sententiam non dixit dabo vobis cor unum, sed dabo
vobis cor novum et spiritum novum quanquam, Jer. cap. 32 39. cor unum et viam
unam dixit quid autem vocet cor alterum et spiritum alterum declarat statim cum
dicit aufetam cor lapideum de carne little et dabo eis cor carneum.

Maldonat. in Ezekiel. 11. cap. 19.


and a mind; The doubleminded man, is unstable in all his ways, says the
Apostle. Now a man may h^ve a mind, and a mind, thus; when his Con^cie^ce runs
one way, and his Affection anoth^r way. So it was with Herod, his Conscience
told him, that John was a just, and an holy man, and a p^werful Preacher;
therefore his mind was to deliver him; but his affection was to gratify the
Damsel which begged John's head, and so his mind was to kill him. Pilate also had
a mind, and a mind; the mind of his Con^cience was to deliver Christ; but the
mind of his Affection, was to gratify, and pl^^e the Jews. Zedekiah had a
mind, and a mind; the mind of his Conscience was ^o spare J^^emiah; but the
mind of his Affection was to gratify hi^ Nobl s: And between these two ^^nds,
how unconstant was he? So now, if the Mind of your Conscience lie one way, and
the mind of your Affection ^e another way, you will be wrung like Paul's Ship,
between two streams; one while you will be a Servant unto your Affection,
another while a Servan^ to your Conscience, and so between both, you will never
be settled: take heed therefore of this divided heart; the Lord has promised to
give us one heart, Ezekiel. 11. oneness in regard of God, that we shall be one with
him; oneness in regard of men, that we shall be one wi^h them; oneness in regard
of our selves, that we shall not be divided in our own souls: Therefore pray
unto him for this Oneness, and he will fulfill this his Promise.

for ye fight not with flesh and blood, says the Apostle, but with a more
crafty, powerful enemy: and therefore, if any place lie open, he will be sure
to find it out. You know how it was with Ahab; A man drew a bow, and shot an
Arrow at a venture, and wounded him between the Joints of the Harness. Now
Satan knows where your naked, open place is, and therefore if you be not
harnessed al over, with every Duty, with every Truth, and with every Ordinance,
you cannot withstand him: wherefore says the Apostle, Take unto you, the whole
Armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having
done all, to stand; stand therefore, having your loins girt about with Truth,
having on the Breast Plate of Righteousness, and your feet shod with the
preparation of the Go^pel of Peace: Above all, take the Shield of Faith, and
take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit, and pray always
with all manner of prayer, and supplication, and watch thereunto, etc. Ephesians.
6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

These. 2.17. A man will never hold to that work long, which he finds no comfort
and delight in: when the Devil draws a man from Duty, he does not tell him at
the first, that the Duty is naught, or evil; but he labors to clog the way of
that Duty with many Difficultie^; for says he, if I can make this man draw
heavily, and uncomfortably in his Duty, he will soon cast it off. And indeed,
what is the reason that men are so off and on, to and fro, in the good Ways of
God, but because they do not find delight and contentment in them? Do you
therefore desire to be fixed and established? labor more and more then, to make
your way to Heaven, easy, and comfortable to you.

Now that the way to Heaven, may be made sweet and easy to you. 1. Be sure
that you do not separate between Gods Commandment, and his Promise: there is
no one thing which God has commanded us to do, but he has promised strength,
and Grace to perform it with: If I look upon the Command alone, then the Work
does seem hard to me; but if I take in the Promise, then it is most sweet and
easy. 2. Be sure that you apply your self unto Gods Work, according unto Gods
Method; let that be first, which he has made first; and that last, which he
has made last: A F^gge, or ^^llet, is easily drawn from the Stack, if you
begin alo^^; but if you will take out that first, which does lie below, it will
come ha^dly: So in regard of Duties; there are some Duties which do lie above,
and some that lie beneath; some are to be performed first, and some after:
first you must believe, and then do good; Trust in the Lord (says the
Psalmist) and do good: But if you will do good before you believe, then it will
come off with difficulty. Gods own Method observed, makes his way sweet and
easy. 3. Be sure that you improve, and make use of that variety which God has
given you: Varietas refocillat.
variety refreshes, and Gods variety is most refreshing: But if I will hold my
self only to one Duty, when God has given me many, and so neglect Gods
variety, no wonder that his Work is made hard and tedious: Are you therefore,
weary with praying? Apply your self unto Reading. A^e you weary in Reading?
Away then to Conference. Possibly you^ heart may be backward to Prayer; but by
that time you have been a while Reading and Meditating, you shall be fit for
Prayer; and having been a while at Prayer, you shall be more fit for Conference:
but if you will keep your self only to one Duty, your way to Heaven, will be more
difficult. Observe therefore Gods vari^ty, and neglect not the same. 4. Be sure
that you do not stint your self unto any Work, or Duty, so as to say; Thus far
will I go, and no further. If a man be in a Journey, and has fixed al his
Stages, he rides in continual pain and fear, lest he should not reach his
appointed place, by his time appointed: But if he say, I will go as far as the
Providence of God will carry me, then he rides more at ease in his mind all the
day long. So in our Journey to Heaven; if you say, thus far I will go this day,
and no further; then you will go in continual pain, lest you should not reach
your appointed St^ge: but if you say, I will pray morning, evening, and as much
as I can, hear as much as I can, read, and meditate as much as I can, I will go
as far for H^^ven this day as I can, then the Work or God will come off with
more ease and ^weetness, and with less difficulty: I speak not this against set
ti^^ of P^ayer, and Du^y; but against stinting, and ^^nting God, and your own
hearts. O! let us take heed of ^^a^. 5. If you would so sweeten the Ways of
God, as that you may be more fix^d and established therein, then labor more and
mo^^ to nature ^ze them unto your own souls; violent things nev^^ hold, natu^^^
things do: The Sun is constant in rising every (...), for it is natural: The
Stone, if thrown up into the A^r, does descend con^tantly; for it is natural.
So, i^ the Wo^k of God be Natural to you, you will be constant in it; and though
you be pu^ by it, yet you will return again, and again. Labor therefore to
naturallize the Work of God to your own soul; so shall it be more and more
sweet, and easy; and you will be more fixed, settled, and established therein;
for it is delight that does give fixation.

Pilate was wavering, and not fixed for Christ; so they came upon him with new
volleys of Temptations, and carried him at the last: but when the Disciples
saw, that Paul's heart was fixed on his Journey to Jerusalem, they gave over
their siege, and l^ft him to his own thoughts; and though Naomi did persuade
Ruth to return unto her own Country, and Kindred, ye^ at the last, she left
speaking to her; for says the Text, She saw that she was steadfastly minded, to
go with her, Ruth, 1.18. As an unsettled Spirit does lie open unto new
Temptations, and does invite them; so a settled, fixed, and established heart,
shall be freed from them.

Phil. 1. he that is unsettled, unconstant, and uneven in his course, does bring
no honor unto his Profession, but lays stumbling blocks before the blind, and
does offend the World; do you not see, say they, Qui servat constantiam, servat
dignitatem.
what a giddy, and unsettled People, some of these Professors are? but there, or
there is a man, that does walk closely with God, there is a Christian indeed;
he that keeps his constancy, keeps his dignity.



Multos annos laborant homines et constantes sunt pro rebus mundi
inconstantibus et fugitivis; quia inconstantes sumus pro aeterna et constanti
gloria.
and will ye be constant in seeking unconstant things, and not constant in
seeking those things that are most constant, and durable Riches?



Difficile putabis perseverare at difficilius est iterum incipere, multo
molestius inceptare sepius, equi minorem vim faciunt cum continuant iter,
trahentes currum quam cum repetere volunt postquam steterunt; non fugiunt
difficultatem qui cessant ab opere, nam perseverando facillius ^^et, si
potuisti incipere quod difficilius est, poteris continuare facilius.

Eusebius. Nierem. de adorat. Lib. 3. Cap. 7.


this Work of God is exceeding hard, and very difficult, and therefore you
leave it off; then you come to it again, and then you leave it off again; but
by your leaving it off, you do make it difficult. If an Horse be ^^dden with an
even hand, he will go well all the day; but if sometimes you ride him upon the
Spir, and then he stand a while, and then ride him on the Spir again, and then
he stand and take cold again, he will sooner tire: And what is the reason that
many men are so often jaded, tire, and give in, but because they do not keep an
even pace in good? Now therefore, as you do desire that the way to Heaven may
be (...) easy to you, that you may not be tenacious in what is evil, that you
may not grieve the Ministers of the Gospel, Instruments of your Good and
Conversion, that you may not lie open unto sad, and new Temptations, and that
you may not be a scandal to the good Name of God (for what hurt has the
precious Name of God done to you?) labor to be more settled, fixed, and
established; which that you may be, think, and think much on these Motives,

And lastly: Go to God by Prayer, for this Fixation, and Establishment of Soul;
he is apt, and ready to pardon your former unevenness, and want of
Establishment: Psalm. 78.37. it is said of the Israelites, that they were not
steadfast in the Covenant; Yet God being merciful, forgave their Iniquity, verse
38. and he it is alone, who hangs weights on the wings of the wind; and
therefore though your Spirits have been as light as the wind it self, yet he
will hang weights upon them; therefore go to him, For be is the God of all
Grace: Who having called you to his Eternal Glory, after you have suffered a
while, will restore, strengthen, stablish, and settle you.

FINIS.
TWO SERMONS: I. The great Things Faith can Do. II. The great Things Faith can
Suffer.


Preached by William Bridge, sometimes Fellow of Emmanuel College in Cambridg;
and now Pastor of the Church of Christ in Great Yarmouth, in Norfolk.

blazon or coat of arms 1216.



LONDON: Printed by Peter Cole in Leaden Hall, and are to be sold at his Shop,
at the sign of the Printing-Press in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. 1656.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
ALthough some of the Notions in these two Sermons, may be already published in
some former Works of this Author; yet the Subject being both useful, and
seasonable for these times, which are calling upon the Saints to Do, and Suffer
great Things: and the publishing of them being much desired by many who heard
them, I have perused them, and look upon them as conducing much to thy
spiritual good. And that the blessing of the Lord may go along with, and make
them very advantageous to thy soul, both in doing, and suffering for Christ, is
the prayer of

Thy true Friend, William Greenhil.
June, 13. 1656.
Reader,
THe Contents of these twenty five Sermons, are now collected by the Printer,
for thy ease and Benefit.

THE GREAT THINGS Faith can do.
Hebrews, 11.32. Preached at the Charter House. December. 23. 1655.
And what shall I say more? for the time would fail me, to tell of Gideon, and
of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, of David also, and Samuel, and of the
Prophets; who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped
the edg of the Sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, women received their dead, raised to
life again, etc.


IN this Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews, you have a little Book of Chronicles;
wherein the Believers of the old Testament, do stand upon Record for their
great Work of Faith. In the former part of the Chapter, the Apostle does
instance in several Believers at large: In the latter part, he is more
compendious, and draws up the Instances into a narrower Room; for says he, The
time would fail me to ^^l of Gideon, of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha,
etc. Now these Believers that he does instance in, in the latter part of the
Chapter, are of two sorts: some famous, and of good reports for their actions;
and some for their sufferings: some did great things, and some suffered great
things, and both by their Faith: Those that suffered great things, are
mentioned in the following words: Others were tortured, not accepting of
deliverance. Those that did great things by their Faith in these Verses: their
Persons are mentioned, and the fruits and effects of their Faith, for which
they are mentioned in these Verses. Their Persons are mentioned in Verse 32. ye
have their Names there; their State, Condition, and their Order: their Names,
Gideon, and Barak, and Sampson,, and Jeptha, and David: their State and
Condition, some were Kings, some were Judges, some were Prophets: Faith runs
through al Conditions, and Ranks of Men; Faith, and true Grace, is able to make
a Plantation upon every Condition of men. And as for their order here, Gideon
is before Barak, and Sampson is before Jeptha: yet if you look into the Story
in the Judges, you shall find Barak is before Gideon, and Jeptha before Sampson;
and here Gideon set first, and Sampson first, why? because they excelled in
Faith, and those are most excellent in Gods eyes, who are most eminent in
Faith; those are most excellent in Gods Eyes, who most excel in Faith. But now
as for the Fruits and Effects of their Faith, they are many, here are no less
than ten mentioned in these Verses. First they subdued Kingdoms, verse 33. who
through Faith subdued Kingdoms; so the Judges did, and so David also. And 2.
They wrought Righteousness; so Samuel did, Whose Ox have I taken? and so David
did When he spared Saul. And 3. They obtained Promises; Promises, that is the
thing promised; God is so Faithful, says Beza, in fulfilling his Promises,
that the Promise is put for the thing promised; they obtained the Promises,
that is, the thing promised. Now the Promise they obtained, it was not the
great Promise of the Messiah; for so at verse 39. They received not the
Promise, that is, the great Promise of the Messiah; but the Promises they
obtained, were particular Promises of deliverance, Victories, and Kingdoms; so
they obtained Promises, and so Gideon, and Barak, David, and others did. And
then they stopped the mouths of Lions; so David, and Daniel did. And they
quenched the violence of Fire; so the three Children did. And escaped the edg,
or mouth of the Sword; so Elijah, and Elisha did. And out of weakness were made
strong; so He^ekiah was. And they waxed valiant in Fight, and turned to flight
the Armies of the Aliens; so the Judges, and David did. And Women received
their dead, raised to Life again; so the Woman of Sareptha, and the Shuna^^te
did. So that now here you may see what great things the Believers of the old
Testament did by Faith: And so the Doctrine that I shall pitch upon at this
time, rises from all the words, and not from any particular Clause, or passage,
but from the whole.

That true saving faith, will do very great things.

It is true Faith that the Apostle here speaks of, as appears by the whole
Chapter; and these things that they did, as appears to the Reader at first
view, were great things: So that I shall not need to spend any time for clearing
of the Doctrine from the words that it does arise from; and al these Verses and
words, they are witnesses to it, they cry out this Doctrine with one Voice,
True saving Faith, will do very great things.

For the opening and clearing whereof, I shall labor to show, 1. That true
saving Faith, is a doing, working, stirring Grace. 2. That true saving Faith,
will do great things. And, 3. How Faith comes to do such great things.


These. 1.3. Remembering without ceasing, your work Faith; and in 2 These. 1.11.
The work of Faith with power. Our Lord and Savior Christ says, it is the Work
of God; This is the Work of God, that ye believe; it is in it self a work. And,



Thirdly: It is also the first worker in the Soul. Trust in the Lord, and do
good; not first do good, and then trust in the Lord, trust in the Lord first,
trust in the Lord, and do good: it is the work that sets other works on work,
the wheel that sets al other wheels a going; without which, a man is idle,
though he be at work. As a Child may be very busy at his play, yet but play;
and a Servant may be very busy about his own employment, and yet his Master
counts it an idleness, because he is not about his work appointed him. So now,
a man may be very busy in regard of the world, and yet he may be idle
Godward, Nisi a Deo agendo, nil ages; Faith must be the first Worker, and if
Faith be not the first, al other works are as nothing. Yea,





Dod, when a man that was troubled in his mind lay a dying, he said to him,
Sir, what will you say to Christ? when he was dying, did he not say, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? And was not Christ's highest piece of Obedience
upon the Cross, in the dark, in a dark condition? Faith works best sometimes in
the dark.

Secondly: You will say, What are those great things that Faith will do? for we
have heard that Faith is a doing Grace, that is the Doctrine; Faith will do,
and do great things; but what are those great things that Faith will do still?



Faith, true saving Faith, it will resist great Temptations; it will perform
great Performances; it will suppress al your Fears, it will mortify al your
Cares; it will assuage and subdue al your Griefs; it will make you a stranger in
this World; it will keep your hearts steady and upright, in all the turnings and
changes of your Life; it will make you faithful under al your Betrustments; it
will reallize Eternity to you, and make those things visible to you, that are in
themselves invisible; and it will make you live in continual dependence on
Christ, and fetch al from him: Al these things are great things, and I must not
dwell upon any of them, but only touch upon each of them.

Joseph did so; sorely tempted by his Mistress, but he overcame the Temptation,
How? He believed, How shall I do this evil, and sin against my God?

Daniel did, set open his Windows when he went to pray, prayed and kept to his
Duty to the hazard of his life, why? Because he believed. Again,

What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Again,

Prove. 16.3. Commit thy Work unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be
established: Commit thy work, there is Faith, and thy thoughts shall be
established. And,

Hannah was a Woman of a sad, and a sorrowful Spirit, and the Lord gave her in
a word, a particular word, and she believed, and was no more sad.

Job met with many Changes, but his heart was kept steady and upright in the
midst of al; Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I trust in thee. Again,

Abraham in Heb. 11.9. By Faith he sojourned in the Land of Promise, as in a
strange Country: Mark the Expression, he sojourned in the Land of Promise.
There are some outward Blessings that we have by Prayer, that we have by
Promise; it may be a Child, or such a Relation, that we have by Prayer, and by
Promise, and we think we may be very indulgent to our Affection in regard of
that mercy: but see here, Abraham was a stranger ger in the Land of Promise, as
in a strange Country. And then again,

Caleb and Joshua were so; they were sent to spy out the Land of Canaan, and
when the other Spies brought up an ill report, they were faithful in their
Report, why? Because they believed, The Lord has given them into our hands as
bread (say they) Faith will make a man faithful under al his Betrustments. And,

By Faith Moses saw him that is invisible. And,

I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, why Because I live by the Faith of
the Son of God. Faith will make a man live in continual dependence on Christ,
and fetch al from him. Now Beloved, these are great things, every one of these
is a great matter: but true saving Faith will do al these things.

But then to speak to it yet more Comparatively; there are two or three great
Agents in the World, that are close at work, and Faith will out-work them al,
and do greater things than any of them. 1. There is a Carnal Policy, with
Power, which is a great Agent, and Worker, in reference to the Affairs of the
World. 2. There is Civil Honesty, a great Agent in reference to our dealing
between man and man. And 3. There are Gospel Gifts, Parts, and common Grace,
which are great Agents in reference to our Religion. Now, not to show the
difference between them, but to give you a little taste, that I may make out the
general Doctrine, That Faith does work beyond al. And

Chron. 13. where you shall see this clearly proved to you, verse 3. There is a
great Battle fought; And Abijah set the Battle in Array, with an Army of
valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men: Jeroboam also set
the Battle in Array with eight hundred thousand chosen men, being mighty men of
Valor: Jeroboam had as many again, Abijah but four hundred thousand. Now if you
look into verse 16. it is said the Children of Israel fled before Judah, and
Abijah, and his People, slew them with a great slaughter, verse 17. So there
fell down slain of Israel, five hundred thousand chosen men, such a slaughter as
you shall not hear of: Abijah had but four hundred thousand men, and they slew
five hundred thousand, Why? they had power enough, they were as many again:
What was the matter, did they wane Policy? it is said verse 13. But Jeroboam
caused an Ambushment to come about them; so they were before Judah, and the
Ambushment was behind them: here was Power, and here was Policy, and yet this
great Army is beaten with half the Company, and five hundred thousand slain:
How comes this to pass? Indeed you read of the Children of Judah, That they
cried unto the Lord, They cried unto the Lord, at verse 14. But if you will have
the reason, look to verse 18. Thus the Children of Israel were brought under at
that time; and the Children of Judah prevailed, because they relied on the Lord
God of their Fathers. See Faith can do more than all the Power and Policy in the
World can do; true saving Faith can do more in reference to the Affairs of the
World too: What Power is able to turn the Tide? if the Tide come in, and go
out, you may bring in your Vessels with it, or send out your Vessels; who is
able to turn the Tide? What power on Earth is able to turn the Tide? And what
power of men can turn the power of Providence? or Policy of men, can turn the
Tide of Providence? But Faith can do it, true saving Faith can turn the Tide,
even of Providence; and therefore it can do greater things than al Power, the
greatness of the World joined with Policy.



That appears plainly thus:

and therefore the Civil, Honest, Moral man, he never breaks in his Profession,
Why? Because he trades not in great matters. When do you hear a noise of a poor
man's breaking? when a great, rich Merchant breaks, you have the noise of it
through the City: When do you hear of Ships, or Vessels miscarrying in narrow
Waters? in the Seas, Ships that launch out to Sea, they are Shipwrack'd; but
those that trade in narrow Waters, they seldom, or never Shipwreck. So those
Professors that launch forth into the Ocean of the Gospel, they break sometimes;
but the civil, moral man, he blesses himself when he sees this; These (says
he) are unconstant men, these are uneven men, sometimes for this, and sometimes
for that Opinion; but I am constant: Whereas the Truth is, it is because he
trades in Warrow Water, in small things, and so never breaks, never suffers
Shipwreck. But now, true saving Faith trades in the high things of the Gospel.

Al these things have I done; but says Christ, Go and sell all that thou have,
and give to the poor, and come, and follow me; he could not down with that: So
that Civility, and Morality, will never make a man part with all to follow
Chtist, but true Faith will: If Christ say, Follow me, Says Faith, I will
follow thee wherever thou go.

I was dumb, and opened not my mouth, for thou Lord have done it: Morality can
say the first part. Suppose a Moral, and Civil man be reviled, out of the
goodness of his Nature, he can say the first part, I was dumb, and opened not
my mouth; but Morality connot speak the second part, because thou Lord have
done it. Morality does not deal with God through man, but Faith does, and so it
does greater things than this Agent.



It appears thus:

Magnum non est magna facere, it is no great matter to do great things; but for
a man to do great things, and think himself nothing, this is great. Now Parts
and Gifts, they puff up; but true saving Faith does humble. Mark the opposition
in Hab. 2.4. Behold, his Soul which is lifted up, towred up, says the Hebrew,
his Soul that is towred up, is not upright in him; but the just shall live by
his Faith.

yet not I: If you look into the new Testament, you shall find there is a
threefold, yet not I: one that relates to sin, in Romans 7. I sin, yet not I:
one that relates to Spiritual Life, I live, yet not I: one that relates co
Duties, I have labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I. True saving
faith has this, yet not I; Parts and Gifts know not this, yet not I.

Zacheus, an Oppressor before, now says he, Lord, behold, the half of my Goods
I give to the poor; Why? Because he was a Son of Abraham, a Believer: and so
the Jailer; he whipped and scourged Paul, and Sylas; but when he came to believe,
he takes them into his Hou^e, and set meat before them; why for he believed,
and al his House. True saving Faith will make a perfect change; but Parts and
Gifts will never do it.

We are kept by the Power of God through Faith; Faith will hold. You see how it
is with the Leather that a man wears on his Shoo, it will wear out; there are
some poor people that go without Shoos, and their Skin is thin, not so thick as
the Leather, and yet it wears not off, Why? Because there is a Life in it; the
one grows thicker, and thicker; the other thinner, and thinner; Why? Because
there is no Life in it. So Parts, and Gifts, and common Grace, they wear out
because there is no life in them: but now, true saving Faith, there is life in
it, and it will not wear out. So that thus you see, true saving Faith is above
al others, considered alone: it will resist great Temptations, it will perform
great Performances, it will mortify al your fears, it will subdue al your Cares,
it will assuage al your Griefs, it will make you a stranger in this World, it will
keep your hearts steady, and even, and upright in all all the turns and Changes
of your Life, it will make you faithful under al your betrustmen^^, it will
reallize Eternity to you, it will make those things visible to you, that are in
themselves invisible, it will make you to live in continual dependence on
Christ, and fetch al from him, it will do greater things than Policy joined with
Power, it will do greater things than Morality, and Civility, it will out-shoot
that in its own Bow, and it will do greater things than Gospel Gifts, and Parts,
and common Grace: Surely then, true saving Faith, will do great things. But then

How comes it to pass, that true saving Faith can do such great things?

If thou can believe, al things are possible. And if you look into the
Scripture, you shall find that the great Works of God, of his Almighty Power,
are ascribed to Faith, both in the old Testament, and in the new. In the old
Testament, the great Works of God were much expressed in Victories over Enemies;
and in the new Testament, the great Works of God much in Cures of Diseases; and
both these are given to Faith: the great Victories of the old Testament given
to Faith; and the great miraculous Cures of the New Testament given to Faith;
and will you know the reason? God will ascribe much to that Grace, that ascribes
much to him; and set the Crown upon the Head of that Grace, that sets the Crown
upon the Head of his Son. Now the more that any man can wait upon God in the
use of low, and mean, and poor, and no means, the more he does ascribe unto
God, and to his Power. It is said, By Faith the Walls of Jericho fell down; Did
Faith pull down the walls of Jericho? No, but it was the Almighty power of God
that pulled down the walls of Jericho; but this is said to be done by Faith,
why? Because they did wait upon God in the use of Rams Horns; and when a man
can wait upon God in nhe use of Rams Horns, then a man is said to live by Faith.

John, 14.12. Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, the
works that I do, shall he do also, and greater works than these, shall he do,
because I go unto my Father: So ^ha^ not only the Promise is made to Faith, but
the Promise of doing great things, is made to Faith.

Gideon, in Judges, 6.14. And the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this
thy might, and thou shall save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: what
might was this? Go in this thy Might, have not I sent thee? here is the Might;
Go in this thy Might: what Might? the Might of my Call. Gods Call is a Might,
and when a Man does go forth in the Might of Gods Call, he goes forth in a
mighty strength; Faith goes forth in the Might of Gods Call.



Moses did by Faith. Was it not a great matter for a People to venture into the
Sea, merely upon a Command? thi^ Faith made the People do. By Faith Peter
ventured on the waters of the Sea; by Faith Israel entered into the Sea: true
saving Faith is a venturing Grace, it will venture far for God, and far after
God. Was it not a great matter for Rahab the Harlot; an Innkeeper, a Whore to
become a Saint, a Believer? for a Drunkard, and for an Adulterer, to become a
Believer? is it not a great matter? By Faith, Rahab the Harlot believed.
Certainly, where there is Faith in truth, it will make a man do great things,
there will be something that is great, found in his Life and Conversation: Thus
it was with these men, Gideon and Barak. It will be said that their Faith was a
Faith of Miracles, and they wrought Miracles by it; Indeed some did, al did
not; for by Faith they wrought Righteousness, the Text says, and that is not a
Miracle: this is one of the great things. O! but their Faith was strong, and
ours weak. But Gideons Faith was weak, he was fain to have two or three signs
to underprop his Faith: and Baraks Faith was weak, he would not go forth
against the Enemy without the Woman Deborah. O! but these men were busied about
great Works, and great Employment. Mistake not, you may do great things by
Faith, in small Employment: It was no great matter of employment for the poor
Woman to give two Mites, it was a great matter she did, Why? Because she did it
by Faith. And so the Woman of Sarepta, when the Prophet said, give me a Cake
first; it was no great matter that her Faith was employed about, a Cake, and a
little that she did; but a great matter in giving him first: So that I say,
Faith may do great things, although it be not employed about great matters. O!
but I do great things, and therefore I hope I have this true saving Faith; I do
great things: that is well. But I pray, only consider this, Those things are
great, which are great in their own present Generation; that which was a great
matter heretofore, may be a small matter now; and that which was a small matter
heretofore, may be a great matter now. In the times of the Bishops, it was a
small matter then to keep the Doctrine of Religion, and a great matter to oppose
the Ceremonies: Now it is a small matter to oppose the Ceremonies, and a great
matter, to keep the Truth, and the Doctrine of Religion. I say, that which was
a great matter before, may be a small matter now; and that which was but a small
matter heretofore, may be a great matter now. But if your Faith be true, you
will do great things, there will be some great thing or other found in your Life,
and such as are great indeed.

Tyndal in the Story of his Life, there being a Conjurer in the Low Countries,
where he lived, that would undertake to fetch a Dish of Meat off any Princes
Table, and make a great Dinner for his Friends; and it being reported he had
often done it, they being met together to behold this Skill, Mr. Tyndal would go
in among them, and he sets himself to believe that this Fellow should not be
able to do it; and when al his Company was met together, he could not do it;
says he, There sits the man that hinders me. O! Faith can do more than all the
Conjurers in the World. Have you any great matter to do, Christians? Call in for
Faith: And certainly, there are yet great things to do; Antichrist to fall, the
Jews to be called, great things to be done for this Land; God has done great
things, yet greater things are to be done; God has done great things for your,
and my Family, there are yet greater things to be done; God has done great
things for your Soul, there are yet greater things to be done. When any great
thing is to be done, Christians, Christians, Call in for Faith, set Faith a work
now.

What shall we do, and bow shall we so improve our Faith, as we may do great
things thereby?

Solomon, I will build a House, a great House, Why? For it is to the great God.
Would you do great things? study much the Greatness of God. Thus will your mind
be great, and your Faith strengthened to do great things.

Chron. 13. and you shall see how Abijah's Faith was raised; by Faith he
overcame Jeroboam, and slew five hundred thousand of them together: but I pray
how did he strengthen his Faith? Mark the words; And Jeroboam came out against
him, and Abijah stood upon a Mountain, and said, Hear ye me Jeroboam, and all
Israel, verse 4. Ought ye not to know, that the Lord God of Israel, gave the
Kingdom of Israel to David for ever? And verse 9. Have ye not cast out the
Priests of the Lord, the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and have made you
Priests after the manner of the Nations of other Lands? So that whosoever
comes to consecrate himself with a young Bullock, and seven Rams, the same may
be a Priest of them that are no Gods. But as for us (see how he strengthens his
Faith) the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the Priests which
Minister unto the Lord, are the Sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their
business, and they burn unto the Lord, every morning, and every evening, burnt
Sacrifices, and sweet Incense; the Shewbread also set in order upon the pure
Table, and the Candlestick of God, with the Lamps thereof, to burn every
evening: for we keep the Charge of the Lord our God; but ye have forsaken him,
and behold, God himself is with us for our Captain, etc. He argues God had not
forsaken him, because they had not forsaken the Ordinances. Would you
therefore, so improve your Faith, as you may do great things thereby? keep
close to Ordinances.

I say unto you, Whatsoever things ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye
shall receive them, and ye shall have them: Do but believe it, says our Savior
Christ. I charge you says he, do not doubt, do not chide off your Faith, do
not check your Faith, do not rate off your heart from believing; there are many
do so, they check their Faith by doubting, and rate off their Faith by Unbelief.

Greenham concerning Suffering; says he, If you would suffer hard things from
Papists, be content to suffer small things from Protestants; and if you would be
able to suffer hard things from Enemies, you must be content to suffer small
things from Friends; says he, you will never be able to suffer great things
from Enemies, if you are not able to suffer small things from Friends. So say I
in the point of Doing; You will never be able to do great things by Faith, if
your faith be not used to do small things. And therefore Christians, in all
things you do, the Life you live in the flesh, put your faith to work in your
particular Callings, in small things; and when your faith is used to do small
things, you will be able to do great things; but you will never be able to
improve your faith to do great things, if you use not your faith to do small
things.

Abraham considered not his own Body, so these, and therefore they did great
things by faith. Possibly a man is called to a Place in the Magistracy, and he
looks upon it as a great Work; I am not able (says he) it is beyond me: So a
man is called to the Ministry, I have no Parts, nor Gifts, the Work is beyond
me. So for believing, a man is commanded to believe, but I cannot believe, my
heart is dead, I cannot believe: whereas now, if men did but look upon the Call
of God, they would be able to do great things for God. Either Christian, thou
art commanded to believe, or not: If thou are not commanded to believe, then
Unbelief is no sin; and if you are commanded to believe, then you are called to
it; do not stand poring upon the Difficulty of your Work, but look upon the Call
of God; and thus shall your faith work, and do great things. And thus I have
done with the main Doctrine that grows out of these words. There are some
particular Notes, that as little Twigs, do grow from this great Oak, which I
shall draw out, and so conclude; and that is out of the 32. Verse.

What should I say more? for the time would fail me, etc. The number of
Believers in the times of the old Testament, it seems was not small: The time
would fail me (says he) to t^l of the Believers of the old Tastament: few shall
be saved indeed comparatively; but through Grace, many there are that do
believe. If there were many in the old Testament times, certainly then there
are many now, in the new Testament times, that do believe.

Gideon, and Barak, and Sampson, and Jeptha: Gideon and Barak, he instances in
them, thus much you may note; God will own that Faith that is but weak at
first. Gideons faith was weak at the first, Bara^ks faith was weak at the
first; it is more like to live, this faith that is weak at the first, than that
which is born with Teeth; faith that is weak at the first, God will own. It is
true, not only for Faith that is weak at first, but al weak Faith; God will own
the weak faith, and commend the strong faith; he will bear with the weak faith,
and commend the strong faith. See it in the case of Thomas; Thomas, says he,
Reach hither thy hand, and thrust thy finger into my side: Lord, says he, I
believe, my Lord, and my God: well says Christ, Thomas thou beleevest: here he
owns his faith though it is weak, but commends the strong faith; Blessed is he
that has not seen, and yet has believed. Christ will own the weak faith, and
commend the strong faith; but I say, he will own the faith that is weak at the
first. May be here are some that are Believers, that begin to look after
Christ, some young Christians that begin to look after God, and turn from their
evil ways, and begin weakly at the first; remember this, God will own that
faith as weak as it is.

But God see here, Gideon before Barak, and Sampson before Jeptha. The Second
Note from thence is, Though the Lord will own the weak faith, weak at the first;
yet God does most highly esteem of them that do most excel in faith; Gideon is
before Barak, Sampson before Jeptha: those are in most account with God, that
do most excel in faith. But then,

Sampson for a Believer. It is possible that a great sinner may become a true
Believer; yea, possibly a man may have true faith, yet he may fall foully, so
Sampson: but if he do fall foully, and be a Believer, he is like to pay dearly
for it, so Sampson, both his Eyes went for it: but though a man do pay dearly
for it, yet God will return again, and own his faith, and record his faith: so
Sampsons faith is.

Jeptha: Jeptha, who was a Bastard, under a reproach, yet recorded for a
Believer. Possibly a Bastard may become a Believer, one that lies under great
reproach in regard of Parentage, may become a true Believer. Behold what that
is, that will roll away reproach from a Family, it is faith, true saving faith:
behold, here was a reproach upon Jeptha and his family as a Bastard; now he
believes, and faith rowls away the reproach from his person, and from his
family, and he is recorded for a Believer. Let none be discouraged in regard of
any reproachful Condition that they are in; true faith will roll away the
reproach, and by faith you may become of good report.

Fifthly: In that the Apostle does speak of David: Of David also, and Samuel,
and of the Prophets: Consider I pray, these were extraordinary men. When then,
God has any extraordinary work to do, he will raise up extraordinary men to do
it; and when God does raise up a man ex^raordinarily, he will give extraordinary
Gifts. But mat I would have you consider thence, is this; That we may make use
of extraordinary Examples, to strengthen our ordinary faith: here are
extraordinary cases, and brought in by the Apostle to this end and purpose to
strengthen our faith. Be not discouraged then, when you go into Scripture, and
read of extraordinary Examples; Satan tells you, I, but this is an extraordinary
Example, and it reaches not me: do not say so, God will make use of
extraordinary examples, to strengthen ordinary faith.

But to end al: you see what high esteem God has of faith, these men did great
Matters, Gideon, and Barak, and Sampson, and Jeptha, and David; yet their great
Actions are brought in here upon the account of their faith, Fides nobilitat
omnes; it is faith that raises a man: great things they did, but those things
are upon record only as they were wrought by faith, and their faith was weak,
and labored under many Infirmities. Look into this 11. of the Hebrews, here is
no mention made of Sampsons Infirmities, here is no mention made of Rababs
Infirmities; here is mention of their faith, but their Infirmities past by, and
not once mentioned; their faith is mentioned, and all the great things that they
did, mentioned only upon the account of faith. What a great esteem has God of
faith! What a mighty encouragement then should this be to all that hear the Word
of the Lord this day, to get faith, to strengthen your faith. O! you that have
no faith at al (and some such there may be here) you that have no faith at al,
get faith, get faith; and you that have true saving faith, improve it to do
great things by it; and the Truth is, if you have true saving faith, you will do
it, and there will be some great things found in your Conversation: for you
remember the Doctrine, True saving faith will do very great things. And thus I
have done with the first Rank of Believers: Their Doing is first mentioned,
their Suffering follows.

THE GREAT THINGS Faith can Suffer.
Hebrews, 11.35. Preached at Olaves in Silver-street. December. 27. 1655.
And others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a
better Resurrection: And others had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings:
Yea, moreover of bonds, and imprisonment. They were stoned, they were sawn
asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword; they wandered about in Sheep
skins, and Goat skins, being afflicted, destitute, tormented; of whom the world
was not worthy, they wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and
Caves of the Earth.


THis Eleventh Chapter of the Hebrews, being a a Chronicle of the old
Testament-Beleevers; we find here the report of a doing, and a suffering Faith.
The Doing Faith is described, and commended by several Instances at large in
the former part of the Chapter; and more compendiously, and briefly, at verse
32. What shall I say more? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of
Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jeptha, of David also, and Samuel, and of the
Prophets: who through Faith, subdued Kingdoms, wrought Righteousness, obtained
Promises, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire, escaped
the edg of the Sword; out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens, women received their dead raised to
life again.

In the Words that I have chosen to speak unto at this time, you have another
sort and Rank of Believers, famous in their Generation for their Suffering
Faith. I have spoken unto the former in a Neighboring Congregation, having
showed, that this Faith will do great things. Now in these words, we have a
Suffering Faith; for by faith they should be carried through these Sufferings;
thus are the words to be understood. Others by faith were tortured; and others
by faith had trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings; and others by faith were
stoned, lawn asunder, etc. It seems then, that these the Apostle here speaks
of, were such as lived in the time of the Macchabees; they did not l ve after
Christ, for it is said at verse 39. They received not the Promise, Christ was
not come when they lived. And they did not live in the times of the Prophets,
or before; for the Apostle had brought down his Chronicle unto the days of the
Prophets, as ye read in verse 32. So that these must needs live in the times of
the Macchabees. It seems then that Ecclesiastical Histories, may at some times
be made use of, in the preachi^g of ^ai^h.

Now the things that these Believers suffered, were great, hard, and very many.
Here ar^ nine sorts of Sufferings set down in the Text. 1. It is said that they
were racked, or tortured: some read it, beaten with Clubs, b^t it comes al to a
reckoning; for when they were racked they were beaten with Clubs: And the
Apostle says, that they accepted not deliverance, that they might be partakers
of a better resurrection; upon which words, some do think that there are
degrees of ^lory, and that the Suffering Saints should have a better degree of
Glory at the Resurrection; but the word better, is spoken in comparison with
that deliverance that was offered to them. In Scripture Phrase, Afflictions are
Deaths, and when a man is delivered from an Affliction, he has a Resurrection:
When a man has been sick, and at the Grave, and raised to health again, he
has a Resurrection, in Scripture Language: Now this Resurrection, or
deliverance, is refused, hoping for a better Resurrection, having an eye to the
great, and last, and better Resurrection. That is the first, They were
tortured, or racked. And 2. They had cruel mockings; there is a mocking, and
there is a cruel mocking, when a man shall insult over another, and laugh at him
in his misery, this is a cruel mocking; as the Jews derided our Savior on the
Cross; this is a great aggravation of Affliction, this they endured: that is a
second, They had trial of cruel mockings. And 3. They were scourged, and whipped
up and down like Rogues, as if the World was too good for them, they not worthy
to live. And 4. They were in bonds, and Imprisonment. 5. They were stoned. 6.
They were sawn asunder. And 7. They were tempted; some read it burned, by the
change of a Letter or two, they read it so, and were burned: but it s^ems their
Afflictions were filled with Temptations, and Temptation is a great aggravation
of Affliction: so they were tempted. And 8. They were slain with the Sword. And
9. They wandered up and down in Sheep Skins, and Goat Skins, being destiture,
afflicted, tormented, in Mountains, and Caves, and Dens of the Earth, driven
from their own Habitation; and these are such, of whom it is said here, the
world was not worthy: And these hard things they endured by faith, faith the
Apostle. So that here now you see what hard things faith will suffer, true
saving faith (for of that the Apostle speaks here) is a suffering Grace, a
bearing Grace, it will carry us through al Afflictions, although they be never
so great: and so the Doctrine from all the words is this: True saving Faith ^an,

It is that Grace that will carry us through al afflictions, and sufferings,
though they be never ^o great: True saving Faith can, and will suffer very hard
things.

This Doctrine lies upon the surface of the words, and all the words together
speak it; but for the further opening, and clearing of it. First I shall labor
to show you that it is possible that a true Believer, one very precious in the
Eyes of God, may meet with most unworthy things from the hands of men.
Secondly: That faith will carry through these. And Thirdly: How, and by what
means faith will carry a man through these.

Lo, we turn to the Gentiles, because ye judge your selves unworthy. Go (says
our Savior unto his Disciples) and preach, and if any be worthy stay; the men
of the world are unworthy, an unworthy people: Yea, they are an unreasonable
people, absurd men, impertinent men that have not Faith. They are compared in
Scripture unto beasts for their unreasonableness; Beware of Dogs, says the
Apostle. When our Lord and Savior Christ, did send out his Disciples to preach
the Gospel, Beware of men says he; I do not say, tak^ heed, and beware of
Lions, and Bears, but beware of men, you shall find such unreasonable dealing by
men, therefore beware of men. Now if the men of the world, be an unworthy
People, and unreasonable, will ye wonder that the Saints, and People of God,
meet sometimes with unworthy usage from them? It is possible. To raise it a
little higher; possibly, the more precious a man is, the more unworthy usage he
may meet withal. The Apostle Paul was a most precious man in his day, and
Generation, and yet what unworthy usage had he? It is said in 1 Cor. 4.11. Unto
this present hour, we both hunger and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place, and labor working with our own hands; being
reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we entreat:
we are made as the filth of the world, and the offscouring of all things unto
this day: We are the filth, we are made the filth of the world, and the
offscouring of al things unto this day. Some think that the Apostle here, does
relate unto that of one man dying for the People, the guilt of all the People
being upon him. Others, that it is a similitude taken from a kind of Tumbrel,
and Vessel that goes up and down the City, that ye throw all the filth into. But
I rather take the two Greek words, (...), and (...), to relate unto that in
Lament. 3. verse 45. Thou have made us as the offscouring, and reffuse in the
midst of the People. In the Hebrew, Thou have made us the off scouring, and the
filth, and reffuse in the midst of the People: Thus Paul was made, and yet Paul
a precious man; he labored more abundantly than they al. So that I say, it is
possible that the more precious a man is, the more unworthy usage he may meet
withal from men

Yea, to raise it a little higher: It is possible that a man may meet with most
unworthy dealings therefore, because he is precious in the eyes of God; not
only in regard of men; but in regard of God: For God does sometimes so order
things in his Providence, that he does put men to suffer hard things, because
they are precious in his Eyes. Unto you it is given, not only to believe, but
to suffer. Suffering sometimes is a Gift, it is a great Gift: A suffering Gift,
says Chrysostom, is a greater Gift, than the Gift of Miracles; for says he,
if God do give me a Gift to work Miracles by, I am in Gods debt; but if God do
give me a suffering Gift, he is pleased thereby to become my Debtor; suffering
sometimes becomes as a reward for Doing. Ye read of the Heifers that brought
home the Ark out of the Philistims Country, that when they brought the Ark
home, the Israelites they take the Heifers, and they offer up the Heifers unto
God for a Sacrifice; why so, says one? it is an il requital to the Heifers:
No, the Heifers could not have a higher Honor put upon them; this their
Suffering, is a Reward for their Doing. And so, what greater Honor can a man
have after al his Doing for God, than to be called forth to Suffer, and to bear
witness to the Truth? Indeed we do not think thus, but you will say, O! surely
God does not love me, because he puts such hard suffering work upon me. But I
pray tell me, Suppose that a General should have some great Work or Service to
do, and he should single, and pick some half a dozen Soldiers for to go upon
this work; would these Soldiers say, surely the General does not prize us, he
does not honor us, nor love us, because he puts us upon this hard Service: No,
but they will say the contrary; surely the General prizeth us, loves us, and
honors us, because he puts us upon such a hard Service as this is. So here, it
does rather argue that the Lord does honor, love, and prize you, in that he
puts you upon a hard work, and Service. But now, if these things be true, then
surely this first Branch is sufficiently made out, That a man may be very
precious in the Eyes of God, and yet meet with most unworthy usage from the
hands of men. That is the first thing.

How shall a man be able to go through these hard things, and Sufferings? what
will carry him through them?

I had verily fainted in mine affliction (says David) but that I believed. It
is Faith, and Faith alone, that will keep from fainting under suffering. And to
make this out a little unto y^u.

Amor amoris causa, Love is the cause of Love, and much Water cannot quench
Love, it endures al. Now the Assurance of Gods Love grows upon Faith, it is the
Flower of Faith; Faith is the Stalk, Assurance is the Flower; Assurance is the
Cream of Faith, Let us draw near with full assurance of Faith.

up, and manage Experiences. The Lord (says he) that delivered me from the
Lion, and the Bear: it was Faith that did gather up this Experience, and did
manage it. So in Psalm. 56. When I cry unto thee (at verse 9.) then shall mine
Enemies turn back: how do you know this? says he, this I know, how? for God is
for me; this I know, for God is for me: I have this experience of God, that he
is with me, and for me; and therefore I know it. But



If thou will be my Disciple, thou must deny thy self, and take up thy Cross.
2. The Example of Christ, for thereunto are we called, in 1 Pet. 2.5. Christ
has left us an example of Suffering. And 3. Suffering strength with suffering
opportunity. Now there is nothing but Faith is able to discern these things;
and therefore Faith, and Faith alone, is that Grace under Christ, which can
carry us through our affliction, and Suffering, although they be never so great.

We have heard, and read of many that have suffered hard things, and yet had
none of this Faith, no true saving Faith, and yet have suffered great, and hard
things.

and that upon the account of his Religion too: but as Austin speaks, There is
an unlikeness of suffering in the likeness of Suffering; As says he, Gold is
in the same Fire with the Wood, and with the Straw; with the same Fire, the
Straw is consumed, and the Gold is refined: Things suffered may be alike, and
yet a great unlikeness in the suffering. And to clear up this to you, that you
may see that Faith alone is able to do this.

If ye suffer for evil doing (says the Apostle) what thanks have ye? But
Faith, true saving Faith, it does well, and suffers ill. And

Moses chose rather to suffer Affliction with the People of God. True saving
Faith, it suffers great, and hard things, and that upon choice. And



Paul, and Silas, sung in the Stocks, and the Primitive Christians took with
joyfulness, the spoiling of their Goods. And so the Martyrs in Queen Mary's
days. It is reported that when Mr. Philpot was in the Dungeon, the Bishop sent
to him to know why he was so merry? Seeing a pair of Stocks in the Dungeon,
(says he) there is a pair of Organs that I have not played on yet, making
himself cheerful in the time he was in the Dungeon: And meeting with a Minister
that had recanted, and informing him better, the Minister made a Recantation of
his Recantation, and was as cheerful as any others. Faith suffers cheerfully.

upon doing, as if he had suffered nothing: according to that of our Savior; He
that will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and
follow me; follow me, when? after a suffering; not to sit down, and rest there,
but to follow me after a Suffering. Again

Paris, for blaspheming of Jesus Christ; and as he was going to the Stake,
says he to the Friars and Priests that followed him; Behold! how boldly I go
to the Fire: as for your Lord and Master Christ, he went trembling to his
death, and sweat drops of blood; but I, in the strength of Reason, under which
I sacrifice my Life, go with boldness unto these flames: But when he came
there, and his Tongue was cut out for Blasphemy, the Story says, that then he
cried out, and roared out like a Bull; vidi ego hominem, says the Author, I
saw the man, I saw him when he was at the Stake: In the time of his Liberty, he
was loose; in the time of his Imprisonment, he was sullen; and when he was at
the Stake, he was mad, with horror of Conscience, mad. O! but true saving Faith
will not flinch, and give in at last. The three Children, did not only come to
the Fire, but rid out the storm. But I say no more in this, only thus.



How, and by what means, can Faith do this? What is there in Faith to do it, to
carry a man through hard things, and through all Sufferings, although they be
never so great?



that follow upon his Obedience to the Commandment, it leaves that to God. By
Faith Abraham, when he was called to go out, obeyed, not knowing whether he
should go. Now when a man can do this, what may he not suffer?



Moses had an Eye to the recompense of Reward, and so chose Affliction with the
People of God. Says our Savior to his Disciples, Let not your hearts be
troubled; How so Lord? Says he, I go to prepare a place for you: In my Fathers
House, there are many Mansions. Faith shows one the Glory, and the Joys of
Heaven; and when a man sees those things, what may he not suffer?

The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, says Faith: I was dumb, and opened
not my mouth, for thou Lord have done it, says Faith.

No temptation (says the word of Faith) has befallen you, but what is common;
and with the Temptation, there is an outlet, there is a door, a door in the
Ark, although the door may be under water, and the outlet may be under water.
Faith does not only tell a man that there is an end, but that the end shall be
good, and al shall work together for his good; yea, it tells a man, that his
affliction shall be but for a moment, and that moment shall be recompensed with
abundance of Comfort, Psalm. 30. ver. 5. For his Anger endures but a moment; in
his Favor is Life: Weeping may endure for a night, but Joy comes in the
morning. So also in Isa. 54. verse 7. For a small moment have I forsaken thee;
but with great mercy will I gather thee: In a little Wrath I hid my Face from
thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness, will I have mercy on thee,
says the Lord thy Redeemer: Faith tells us this. Now when a man knows, and
considers this, what may he not suffer?

Latimer, the blessed Martyr, that when he was to go to the Stake, taking leave
of his fellow Prisoners, says he, Be of good Comfort, O my Friends, and
Brethren; for though we go to the Stake to day, and be burnt to Fire, we shall
light such a Candle in England, as shall never be put out; we shall make such a
Fire in England to day, as shall never be quenched: he saw both sides of the
Dispensation, because he believed. Faith will show one both sides of the
Dispensation.

Achor. Faith, it looks upon things with the Prospective of the Promise; and
the Promise speaks on this wise, in Deuteronomy. 32. verse 36. says the Lord there,
The Lord shall judge his People, and repent himself for his Servants, when he
sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, or left. Faith (I
say) sees one contrary in another, or beyond another; and when a man can do so,
what may he not suffer? And

Psalm 37. last; And the Lord shall help them, and deliver them; he shall
deliver them from the wicked, and slave them, because they trust in him. So in
Isai. 26. verse 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee. Mark the words, Thou will keep him in
perfect peace, so you read it; but in the Hebrew, the words run thus; Thou will
keep peace, peace; not peace and doubting, not peace and trouble; but peace,
peace, why? because he trusts in thee. But I cannot trust in God, I have no
assurance of Gods Love: Mark the words, he will keep him in peace, peace, whose
mind is stayed on thee; he does not say, who has assurance of Gods Love, but
if it be but a Faith of Relyance, though it be not a Faith of Assurance; he will
keep him in peace, peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in
thee. Now if the Lord be thus engaged to help, and succor men that do believe,
then certainly Faith can do very much in a suffering day. Now I have given you
an account of the General, how it comes to pass that Faith can do it: Faith will
carry us through al our Sufferings, though they be never so great, and you see
how Faith can do it, and so the Doctrine is clear.

Now for Application.
If true saving Faith be such an accommodation unto al our Suffering, Applic.
then in case that any of you are to suffer any great Suffering, the first
thing you do, call in for Faith: As I said upon the former Doctrine, seeing that
Faith will do great things; and therefore if you have any great thing to do, call
in for Faith: So now I say upon this Doctrine, Seeing that true saving Faith
can, and will suffer very hard things, in case you have any thing to suffer,
first call in for Faith, call in for Faith. If you have a great sickness, you will
send for the best Physician that has the most skill at such a Disease. Faith
has the best skill at your Suffering, and therefore send, and call in for Faith
as soon: as ever you come to the brink of these Waters, call for your Faith, and
look to your Faith.

But these are no suffering times, the Winter is past, and there is no
suffering now.

P^edmont, they have suffered; and the Apostle commands us to be in bonds with
those that are in bonds, and to be afflicted with those that are afflicted;
what do you know what your Faith may do for them?

But to come a little nearer our selves; Is there never a Servant here that
suffers from an evil Master, that would fain go to the Ordinance, frequent the
Ordinance, but checked, scorned, and despised by his Master? Is there never a
Husband here, or Wife here, that suffers hard things from his, or her Relation,
merely upon the account of Religion? Is there never a man or woman here, that
has suffered hard things from the hand of his, or her Kindred, since they
began to look toward Christ? Is there never a Professor here that suffers from
the hand of some Professor? what devouring among us, biting, consuming one
another? Of al reproachings, and sufferings, you will find those most bitter
that come from Professors, when one Professor does reproach another, and
slander another, and persecute another. Now, if there be any here, unto you I
speak, call in for Faith, whatsoever your Sufferings be, call in for Faith.

But suppose there be none of these Sufferings among us, who knows how soon
you, or I may be called forth to Sufferings, if not in the Public, yet in our
Particular? I have heard of a good man, and woman, that were feasting at a
great Dinner upon the account of Gods Goodness, and Mercy to their Family; and
while they were at Dinner, celebrating the goodness of the Lord to their
Family, them and their Children, comes a Messenger in, and says, One of your
Children is dropped into the Well, and drowned Beloved in the Lord, Who knows how
soon a Relation of yours, or mine, may be in the Well? how soon such a Comfort
of yours, or mine, may be in the Well? Wherefore call in for Faith, in all your
Sufferings call in for Faith.

What shall we do that we may so strengthen, or improve our Faith, as that we
may bear up in a way of believing against Sufferings; for I am a man, or a
woman that (I confess) have met with Sufferings, and I am seldom out of
Sufferings, sometimes in my Body, sometimes in my Name, sometimes in my Estate,
sometimes in my Relation, and the Lord knows what I may be called to suffer;
what shall we do, that we may so strengthen, or improve our Faith, that we may
bear up in a way of believing, against al our Sufferings?

I will remember the years of the right hand of the most high; I will remember
all thy wondrous works, says the Psalmist; stirring up his Faith, and getting
strength from Faith. The Consideration of what great things God has done for
you already, will engage your heart, and make you willing to suffer: For
Example, go along wih me a little, and I will instance only in that great matter
of your first Conversion, and turning to God. That day that thou were
converted, and brought home to God, al thy sins were pardoned, past, present,
and to come; I say, vertually those that are to come. That day that thou were
converted, and brought home to God, thou were made the Child of God, and Heir
of the Kingdom which is incorruptible, undefiled; and which fades not away.
That day thou were converted, and brought home to God, thou had the Key of
the Scripture put into thy bosom, I say, thou had the Key of the Scripture
put into thy bosom to wear it, I mean the Spirit of God: That day that thou
were converted, and brought home to God, thy old Nature was taken away, and
thou were made partaker of the Divine Nature. That day that thou were
converted, and brought home to God, thou were received into Union with Christ,
and into Communion, thou were received into Union, and into Communion with the
Father, and with Jesus Christ. That day that thou were converted, and brought
home to God, thy Soul was freed; those that the Son makes free, they are free
indeed; though your will were not libera, yet it was liberata; as soon as a man
is converted, and brought home to God, he is free to Duty, though not free from
Duty; and he is free from his sin, though he be not free to his sin. That day
thou were converted, and brought home to God, thou were received unto the
special Protection of God, though not to free, yet to sanctify, and sweeten
your Affliction. That day you were converted, and brought home to God, you had
a Right, and Title given you unto all the Ordinances, Jus ad rem, though not in
re; they are your Fathers Plate, and as a Child you may drink out of your
Fathers Plate. That day thou were converted, and brought home to God, thou
had a special Right and Title given thee unto all the Creatures: you may look
up to Heaven, and see the Stars, and say, these are my Fathers Candles; and
when you hear the Thunder, you may say, this is my Fathers Voice, and when you
see the Sea, you may say, this is my Fathers Fish Pond; and when you see the
Godly men of the World, you may say, these are my Fathers Children; and when
you see wicked men, you may say, these are my Fathers Dish-clouts to make his
Children clean; and when you consider of the Devils, you may say, these are my
Fathers Hang-men, his Executioners; and when you see the Gold, and Riches, and
Wealth of the World, you may say, this is my Fathers Dung-hil. I say, that day
thou art converted, and brought home to God, God does great things for you in
that moment. Now the more that you consider what great things God has done for
you, the more your heart is engaged to God; and the more your heart is engaged,
the more willing, and able you will be to suffer.

of a suffering Christ will teach one to suffer; nothing like it: the example of
Christ, especially the sight of Christ's Sufferings, will not only teach you to
suffer, but will sanctify your heart by the Suffering, and will provoke you to
suffer. What! shall the Lord Christ suffer such great things for me, and shall I
suffer nothing for him? Study the Sufferings of Christ.



Blessed is the man whom thou chastisest, correctest, and teach out of thy
Law: Schola Crucis, Schola Lucis: The Cross is Gods free School, where we learn
much: Suffering times are teaching times.

Adonibezek had his Thumbs and Toes cut off, he could remember his own sin. You
see how it is in Winter, when the Leaves are off the Hedges, you can see where
the Birds Nests were; when the Leaves were on in Summer time, you could not see
those Nests: And so in prosperous times men do not see the Nests of their
hearts and lives; but when their Leaves are off, then their Nests are seen.
Suffering times, are sin-discovering times.

Manasses in Prison, then he bethought himself: and says Solomon, praying for
the People in Adversity, If then they shall bethink themselves. There is many a
man that (I may say) does owe his Convertion to his Affliction, and can say. If
I had not been afflicted, I had never been converted. Suffering times, are
Self-bethinking times.

Every Branch in me he pruneth, that it may bring forth more Fruit. Suffering
times then, are growing times.

in time of Adversity we find Truth, and bear our Testimony for Truth, then
Truth is advanced. It is a good Observation that Marloret has upon Dan. 8. to
show that Truths were advanced by Suffering; verse 11. it is said of the little
Horn, He has magnified himself even to the Prince of the Host, and by him the
daily sacrifice was taken away, and the place of the Sanctuary was cast down:
And an Host was given him against the daily Sacrifice by reason of
Transgression, and it cast down the Truth to the ground, and it practiced, and
prospered: That is (says he) not the Horn, as it is ordinarily carried; for it
is in the Feminine Gender, which only can relate to the word Truth, not to the
Horn; he cast down the True h, and the Truth practiced and prevailed. So that
Suffering times, are Truth-advancing Times.



In their affliction they will seek me early. Suffering times, are praying
times.

Hos. 2.14. I will allure her, and bring her into the Wilderness, and speak to
her heart. Comfort ye, comfort ye my People, says your God: speak ye
comfortably to Jerusalem, because her Iniquity is pardoned: When? In the day of
her Warfare: for her Warfare is accomplished, her Iniquity is pardoned; for she
has received double from the hand of the Lord. Suffering times, are
Soul-assuring times.



Then shall the Spirit of God, and of Glory rest upon you: When? In Suffering
times, When the People of the Lord does Suffer, the Spirit of Glory shall rest
upon them. Suffering times, are Glorious times. And if al th^se things be true,
then surely you will say with me, Suffering times are gaining times. And if you
would but think of this, and possess your heart with it, you would be more
willing, and able to suffer. Christians, they boggle at Sufferings, and they
startle at Sufferings; what is the reason? they do not know the Gains of
Suffering. But is this true, That Suffering times, are garning times? that
Suffering times, are teaching times? that Suffering times, are Sin-discovering
times? that Suffering times, are Self-bethinking times? that Suffering times,
are growing times? that Suffering times, are Truth-advancing times? that
suffering times are Uniting times? that Suffering times, are praying times?
that Suffering times, are Soul-assuring times? that Suffering times, are
Weaning times? that Suffering times, are Glorious times? then surely, Suffering
times, are Gaining times. And if thou would strengthen thy Faith (Christian)
so as thou may be able to endure hard things, think upon this much, and
press it upon thy own Soul, carry this away with thee, if no more; Suffering
times are gaining times; O my Soul, Suffering times, are gaining times: and
thus you shall be able to hold out, and suffer. And thus I have done with the
main Doctrine. There are two or three Observations that lie about the words; I
will only give you them, and so conclude.

Paul's Ministry should have done any great good, after he had been whipped up
and down like a Rogue? yet Paul's Ministry was blessed, and though you think
your Afflictions make you unserviceable, if God call you to them, he will take
care for your Service. But my Afflictions are such as find me al alone; I am
afflicted, and afflicted, a man or woman of Affliction, and I have none to pity
me. So it was here with some of these; they wandered in the Wilderness, and they
were in the Caves, and Dens of the Earth, and such of whom the World was not
worthy. Possibly then, thy Afflictions, man or woman, may be very great, and
yet thou may be precious in the Eyes of God, and such a one of whom the
world is not worthy. And therefore now, if there be ever a man or woman here in all this Congregation, that labors under any great burden, I say to that Person,
question not thy Condition, doubt not concerning Gods Love, because of the
greatness of thy Affliction; thy Affliction may be very great, and yet thou
may be a Person, of whom the World is not worthy in Gods account. I will give
you this Parable, apply it your self: Suppose you see a company of children
playing together one while, and may be afterward fighting; and then you see a
man come and carry away one of these Children, and he strikes him, but he lets
the other alone, and he strikes them not; which of these Children, will you say,
this man is a Father unto? will ye not say, in all likelihood he is a Father unto
that Child that he carries away, and strikes. I leave you to apply it.



Elias, that when the Lord had given him a power to shut Heaven, that it rained
not for three years, and an half, he went away, and hid himself; they could
find him before: ordinary men might be found; but Elias that did this great
Work, could not be found. So an ordinary Faith may be found out; but this true
saving Faith, that does great things, and suffers hard things, is hardly to be
found. There is a common Faith that grows every where: As it is in your Flowers
and Plants; ye have your Field Time, and your Garden Time; ye have your Field
Rose, and your Garden Rose; your Field Rose grows every where, but your Garden
Rose grows not every where: You have Pibble Stones every where, but Diamonds
are not to be found every where. So there is a Pibble Faith, and a Field Faith,
an ordinary Faith, and this you may have every where: But this Diamond, this
Garden Faith, to suffer hard things, it is hard to be found, few there be that
have it, and therefore few can do great things for God, or suffer hard things
from men. Wherefore beloved in the Lord, give me leave to end with this
Exhortation, to beseech you in Christ Jesus, to get this Faith, above al
getting, get this Faith; you that have not this true saving Faith, get it. Some
there be here, it may be, that have Faith good enough to swear by; but not
Faith good enough to live by: true saving Faith, a Believer can live by, but he
cannot swear by it. A true Believer is very sensible of his Unbelief; says he,
there was never a more unbeleeving heart than mine, I think there is not a man,
or woman in the World, is troubled with such an unbeleeving heart as I. True
saving Faith is sensible of Unbeleef; and therefore you that have not this true
saving Faith, labor to get it; above al get it: Get this true saving Faith, and
you that have this true saving Faith, improve it, use it, do great things for
God, and suffer hard things from man; yea, certainly, if you have this true
saving Faith, you will be able to do great things for God, and to suffer very
hard things from man; for that is the Doctrine at this time, True saving Faith
can, and will suffer very hard things.

FINIS.
SCRIPTURE LIGHT, The most Sure LIGHT. The Contents.
Sermon I.
THe Words opened Page 1 An Exhortation to a great Duty ibid. The Duty
commanded, commended ibid. The Duty is urged, and amplified by diverse
Arguments. 1 It is a word of Prophesi^. ibid. 2 A more sure word Page 4
It is meant comparatively. Arguments taken from the use. Fullness of the ^o d
to us. How long we must take heed to it; which is the second thing whereby this
Duty is amplified ibid. 1 It is not understood of Supernatural Revelation. ib.
2 It is no^ spoken to the believing few, in respect of the old Testament ibid.
3 It is not meant only of those glorious time^ yet to come Page 5 4 It is not
meant of Heavenly Glory ibid. 5 The word Until, not taken exclusively ibid.
DOCT. Scripture Light is our greatest, and most sure Light; whereunto we shall
do well that me take heed, etc. Page 6 Opening of it Page 6
1 A good man may be in the dark, in a dark place, state, and condition ibid. 2
Though he be in the dark, yet God has not left him without Scripture Light to
walk by. 3 The Scripture Light, in the most excellent, safe, and sure Light. 4
It is the duty of all the Saints to take heed thereunto, and to walk thereby,
especially in dark times and places. I. A good man may be in the dark ibid. 1
Proved by Examples of persons and places Page 7 2 From times of Affliction. ib.
3 From great streights ibid. 4 From times of Offenses. ib. 5 A good man may
err, and be mistaken in erroneous times Page 8 6 A good man may be engaged in
some dissension ibid. 7 He may be under some desertion Page 9 8 He may be under
some temptation ibid.
II. Though a good man be in the dark, yet he has Scripture Light to walk by
Page 10 Quest. 1. Have not wicked men Scripture Light to walk by in their
darkness? ibid. Answ. It is n^ ^^ght to them ibid. Quest. 2. M^^ (...) man's
Eyes be (...) the Scripture (...) Page 11 Answ. 1 In some things they may ib 2
He does not shut his eyes from any Scripture Light, if he be in health, and not
under some temptation. ibid. 3 A good man feels more than he can speak ibid. 4
He has his intervals of sight, though some things be hidden from him Page 12 5
Though he be in the dark, yet God does not leave him so ibid.

III. Scripture Light, the most excellent, safe, and sure Light ibid. 1 It is a
true light ibid. 2 It is an admirable wonderful light Page 13 3 It is a safe
and sure light. ib. 4 It is a pleasant satisfying light ibid. 5 It is a full,
and sufficient light ibid. 6 It is a clear light in all Truths necessary to
Salvation Page 14 7 It is the most excellent Light, compared with seven or
eight false Lights, in these days cried up by men for great lights ibid. 1
Revelations or Visions. 2 Dreams. 3 Impressions on the heart, with, or without
the Word 4 Experience. 5 The Law and light within 6 Providence. 7 Reason. 8
Judicial Astrology.

Quest. Wherein does Scripture light exceed Revelations or Visions? Page 14
Answ. 1 It is more full ibid. 2 It is the highest light Page 15 3 It is more
certain and sure, the other are uncertain ibid. 4 There is no danger in taking
heed to Scripture light; to the other there is, for three Reasons Page 16
Quest. May not God speak extraordinarily in our days, by Visions and
Revelations? Page 17 Answ. affirmatively. He may. ibid. The matter set with
bounds. 1 We must not have itching Ears after Visions and Revelations, though
we are bound to receive them when God speaks by them; for we may not tempt God
Page 18 2 If the Revelation be contrary to Scripture, it is from the Devil
ibid. 3 It is not from the Lord, if it be brought to confirm the Gospel; for
the Doctrine of the Gospel is sufficiently confirmed already ibid. 4 By
extraordinary means a man's heart must not be drawn off from the ordinary means
Page 19 5 All Visions and Revelations must be tried by the Touchstone of the
Scripture ibid.
Sermon II.
Page 20 Scripture Light the best, comparatively ibid. 1 Dreams are commonly
vain ibid. 2 Dreams are uncertain to know whether they be Natural, or
Supernatural; from God, or from the Devil Page 21 Quest. May not God speak to
us by a Dream now if he will? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively. He may if he please:
but we have no order to wait for it: nor is it a sign of Gods love to me ibid.
Quest. Is not an immediate voice from God to be compared with Scripture? Page
22 Answ. It may be from Hell, or Heaven, from an Angel, or from God himself? yet
the Scripture is beyond al Dreams, and immediate Voices. ibid. Page 23 1 The
written Word is our daily food, Impressions are not Page 23 2 All Impressions
are from the written word ibid. 3 Impressions are dangerous to walk by, the
written word not Page 24
Quest. Is there no use of Impressions, with, or without a particular Word? Is
there no light that shines through them? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively. 1 They
comfort in temptations ibid. 2 They may guide a doubtful soul ibid. 3 They may
strengthen the heart ibid.
Negatively 1 Impressions are no Judge of true Doctrine, but the written Word is
Page 25 2 Impressions may bring much comfort upon the heart, especially coming
with the Word, yet they may be delusions of the Devil, if it be not according
to the true sense and scope of the Word set upon the heart Page 26 3 Though the
impression be of God, yet if the Application be beyond Impression, I still err
ibid.
Page 27 1 The Light within us here, is imperfect, the Law of God perfect ibid.
2 The light within us, cannot convince others ibid.
Quest. Is there no use of the light within us? does not God direct thereby?
ibid. Answ. Affirmatively 1 It is a Candle of the Lord in the soul Page 28 2 It
inclines us to good, as it discovers evil ibid. 3 It enableth a man to do good,
and is that principle whence all good actions flow ibid.
Negatively Though it be a principle of good, yet it is not the rule of our
lives. ibid. I. If it were the Rule, what need the Scripture? But the Scripture
is the Rule. ibid.
Object. If the Spirit within me, be the same by which the Scripture was
written, what need I wait on the Scripture any longer? ibid. Answ. It is sent
to be your Help, not to be your Rule Page 29 Reasons. 1 You may have the same
spirit, but not the same inspiration of the spirit ibid. 2 If the Law, and
Light, and Spirit within, were the Rule, a man might do any wickedness without
sinning ibid. 3 If the light within, were my Rule, then am I my own Rule, and
consequently, I am God Page 29 II. The Law, Light, and Spirit, is a great Help
in our way to life, yet it must be tried by the Word. ibid.
Page 30 1 All Light of Experience, is borrowed from Scripture. ib. 2 It is
short of Scripture. ibid. 3 Without the Word it cannot heal our Unbelief ibid.
Quest. Is there no use of experience? is there no light therein? ib. Answ. 1
Affirmatively. Yea much; for it brings Hope ibid. 2 Negativelvely. It is not
the ground of our Faith, though it be an help to our Faith. The written Word is
the first ground of faith and hope. ib. 3 All experience is to be reduced to
the Word written. Page 31 ibid. Reasons. 1 God does sometimes try us by his
Providence, to see what we will do; but the Scripture is the Rule of our doing
ib^d. 2 The Providence of God extends to all our actions, be they good or
evil; and therefore no certain Rule from thence, to make up our judgment by; but
you may make up your Judgment, and certain Rule from the Scripture ibid.
Quest. Does not God speak by Providence? guide and direct by Providence
sometimes? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively 1 Yea, he does sometimes guide us with his
eye, as the Psalmist speaks ibid. 2 Though God does this, yet to make the
Providence of God the Rule of Lawfulness and Unlawfulness, is a great error.
The Providence of God makes nothing lawful that is in it self unlawful: but
the Scripture is the Rule only, whereby to make up our Judgment, what is
lawful, what not. Page 32
INSTANCE, VII. Scripture is more excellent than the Light of Human Reason
ibid. Reasons 1 Reason is the poor man's bread, but Gods Word is the bread of
Angels ibid. 2 Though Reason be the Gift of God, yet it cannot sufficiently
discover sin ibid. 3 It cannot strengthen us against sin and temptation, nor
convert the soul, but Gods Word can Page 33 4 It is not saving Light; but
Gospel Light is saving light Page 33
Quest. Is there no use of the light of Reason? ibid Answ. Affirma^ively 1 Yea
much: not only in civil things, but in the things of God ibid. 2 Reason is but
an Handmaid; and R^^sons before faith less^^; ^u^ after says they strengthen
it Page 34 3 In things of God, we must deny ou^ Reason, but we must not d^ny
the Scripture. ibid.
Page 35 1 Bu^ (...) in truth a work of da^^ (...) forbidden by God. ibid. 2 It
desi^^yeth Prophecy. ib. Quest. Is there no light of Knowledge from the Stars?
do not the Heavens declare Gods handy work? will you condemn all Astronomy?
Page 36 Answ. Negatively. 1 Astromy; No. There is much difference between the
Lawful knowledge of the Stars, and Judicial Astrology, to foretell future events.
ibid. 2 The Stars are for signs of Weather, and have a teaching power in them;
but he that would foretell future events by them, makes himself a God, sets up
Fate, and destroies God, makes God the Author of all the sin in the World ibid.
A brief of the whole matter rep^ated Page 38

Sermon III. The Fourth General Proposition
Scripture Light, the most sure Light Page 39

The Reasons. 1 It is the Word of the Son of God. Christ only is not called the
Word of God, but the Word written, is also called the Word of God Page 40 2 The
Scripture is the only Rule of our lives, proved by many Reasons. ibid. 3 It is
the Salt that seasoneth al our enjoyments, the great relief of our Souls in
time of Temptations; it sanctifies all our outward comforts. Page 41 4 It
shall be our Judge at the great day Page 42 5 It shall be established upon us.
ibid. An Objection answered, concerning the word Until, which it not to be
taken exclusively ibid.
Quest. Why are the Saints to take heed unto Scripture, specially in dark
times? Page 43 Answ. Because they are then in most danger of falling. ibid.
Object. All Heretics lay claim to Scripture Light Page 44, 45 Answ. Some do,
some do not. It Is one thing to cite Scripture, and another thing to take heed
thereunto ibid. Application. 1 We must bless God for Human Learning ibid. 2
They that fo^^ake, or deny the Scripture, are ^n a sad Condition ibid. 3 Take
heed to the Scripture. Page 46
Quest. What must we do to take heed to Scripture? ibid. Answ. Three things 1
Take heed to understand it 2 Take heed to keep it 3 Attend to walk by it.
I. For understanding the Scripture ibid. Hold fast the Letter of it; for if
you deny the Letter, how can you understand the true sense? ibid. An Objection
answered ibid. Quest. How can we keep fast the Letter when there are so many
Greek Copies of the new Te^^am^^ Page 47 Answ. 1 There is no material
difference between them ibid. 2 You must diligently enquire out the true
meaning of the Scripture ibid.
Object. One Scripture has many Senses, etc. Page 48 Answ. Negatively, Nay,
one Scripture has but one entire sense, though it has diverse parts and
applications ibid. 2 The Scripture is to be understood sometimes literally,
sometimes figuratively; yet always spiritually ibid. 3 For Direction Page 49 1
Al fundamental Doctrins of our salvation, are laid down literally ibid. 2 When
the literal sense must be lest ibid. 3 Mystery does not destroy the History.
ibid. 4 Nothing in Scripture set down mystically, but is literally expressed in
another place of Scripture. Page 49, 50

Object. When a Scripture lies under con rov^^sie, what must be done? ibid.
Answ. Something by way of Observati^n, something by Practice. ibid. 1
Observation; if you be able, c^nsult the Original; if not able, consult those
that are able ibid. 2 Coherence, and Scope, and Context, good means to open the
true sense Page 51 3 Compare one Scripture with another ibid. 4 S^ve^ve not
from the proportion of Faith ibid.
II. More Practically Page 52 1 Go to God for the spirit ib. 2 Take heed of a
fleshly mind. ibid. 3 Study your Condition by Scripture, and the Scripture by
your Condition ibid. 4 Be not too indulgent to your own Condition, Disposition,
or Opinion ibid. 5 Join nothing in Commission with the Scripture for your Rule
Page 53 2 You must keep the Scripture, if you will attend to understand it
ibid. Directions how to keep the Word Page 54 1 Observe the things whereby men
have been drawn from it, and those are chiefly three ibid. 1 The corruption of
man's Nature ibid. 2 Corrupt Principles ibid. 3 Playing with the Scripture Page
55
2 Rules to keep particular Truths of Scripture in your heart, are ibid. 1 Many
Saints have suffered willingly the loss of all to maintain them ibid. 2
Consider that the Saints have generally ma^ntained these Doctrines in
opposition to the world ib
III. To take heed to the Scripture, is to walk thereby Page 56 1 Therefore
prize it much ib. 2 Love the truth you know ib. 3 Let it be your continual
Companion ibid.
Christ in Travel. ON Isaiah, 53.11.
Sermon I. THe Text Opened Page 61, 62
DOCT. Christ shall see the Travel, of his soul, and be satisfied Page 63 The
opening of this by three Ar^uments ibid. 1 The Travel of Christ, or Christ in
travel 2 His assurance of Issue 3 The Contentment that he does, and shall find
therein His travel was very painful, For ibid. 1 It was a sore Travel 2 A long
Travel 3 A helpless Travel ibid.

I. It was a sore travel, in regard of Soul and Body ib. 1 For his Body ibid. 1
It was universal, in regard of the parts in which he suffered, and persons he
suffered from ibid. 2 It was most extreme Page 65 3 They were long and
lingering Page 65

2 For his Soul. His was a sore Travel Page 66 Proved in four Propositions.
1 Christ did truly suffer in his soul 2 That he suffered in his soul
immediately 3 That he did encounter with the wrath of God 4 That he did suffer
the very torments of Hell in this life. ibid. The first Proposition proved.
ibid. The second Proposition proved. Page 67 The third Proposition proved. Page
68 The fourth Proposition proved. Page 69 Quest. Whether one can endure the
very torments of Hell in this Life? Page 70 Answ. Affirmatively. Christ did not
endure all the misery we should have done. ib. Arg. 1. He suffered all the
threatening produced; but not what proceed from the disposition of our persons
Page 71 Arg. 2. What Christ delivered us from, that he endured for us Page 72
Arg. 3. Christ established the Law by his death ibid. Arg. 4. Christ has
suffered Gods Wrath and Justice for the Elect ibid.
Reasons 1 The Law is not satisfied unless the debt be paid ibid. 2 Christ
satisfied the Law in his sufferings Page 93 3 No evil is equivalent to the
wrath of God ibid. II. Christ's Travel was long and tedious, not only in his
death, but in his life all along ibid. III. It was a helpless Travel: for he
trod the Wine Press of his Fathers wrath alone. Page 94
Quest. Suppose Christ was thus in travel for us, what then? ibid. Answ. Our
duty is to come in, and behold this hard labor he suffered ibid. Observations.
1 All the Attributes and Perfection^ of God, are here in Commission in Christ
crucified ibid. 2 We shall hence value, and love Christ more Page 95 3 We shall
hence prize all our enjoyments more ibid. 4 Men are hereby made more willing to
suffer any thing for Christ his sake ibid. 5 We shall hereby be made more
unwilling to put Christ to a new suffering ibid. 6 Hereby we are more enabled
to overcome all our temptations, and corruptions, and to become more
profitable, and gracious in our lives. ibid. 7 Hereby we are more enagaged to
his Commandments and Ordinances ibid. 8 Hence conclude the willingness of God
to save sinners. Page 96 9 It is an encouragement for poor sinner^ to come to
Christ Page 97 10 Hereby our hearts are confu^ed, and our faith confirmed ibid.

Sermon II. Christ's Assurance of Issue Page 99
The Introduction ibid. O^ening of the words ibid. 1 What this Issue is Page
100 2 What assurance he had ib. I. It is all the effects of his sufferings,
whereof some are immediate, some remote ib. Quest. What are the immediate
effects ibid. Answ. Negatively. 1 Not to make God reconcilable to mankind
ibid. 2 That actual reconciliation, and justification, is not the next effect
of Christ's death, is proved by five Reasons. ibid.
Object. But we were discharged from our sins, when they were charged on Christ
Page 101 Answ. Negatively. 3 Christ died not to reconcile man to God, proved by
seven Re^sons ibid. 4 The next ^ffect of Christ's death, is not the forgiveness
of original sin to all the wo^^d, proved by five Reasons Page 102 5 The
obtainment of this Decree, that who^oever believes shall be saved, not the
n^x^ ^ffect of Christ's death, proved by four Arguments. ibid. 6 It was not to
bring all the world unto the Covenant of Grace, proved by three Reasons Page
104 7 Christ has not by his death ob^ained sufficiency of Grace for all men,
proved by five Reasons Page 105 8 Christ died not to obtain a Dominion over all
things, proved by six Reasons Page 107 Quest. What was the next effect of his
death? Page 108 Answ. affirmatively. 1 He satisfied the Law and Justice of God
for us, learnedly proved by six Arguments ibid. 2 He sanctified us Page 112 3
He merited Heaven for us. Page 113 4 He recovered the lost Image of God in us
ibid. 5 He destroyed the power of Satan Page 114 6 He sanctified all things to
us. Page 115 7 He confirmed the Covenant of Grace Page 116
II. The remote effects of Christ's death are many, whereof seven are set down
Page 118 Quest. What assurance had Christ to see these fruits and effects ibid.
Answ. 1 He had the assurance of salvation of many thousand souls before his
death Page 118 2 He had assurance of his own merit, and his Fathers fai
hfulness Page 119 3 He did not only merit the impetration of our Redemption,
but the application of it also Page 120 4 He merited not only sufficiency of
Grace for us, but the efficacy of Grace Page 121 5 He merited not only some
blessings of the Covenant, but the Condition of the Covenant ibid.
Application. 1 Christ did not die for all men Page 123 2 Consolation for those
he died for ibid.
Object. I fear he died not for me ibid.
Answ. He died for his Sheep ibid.

Sermon III. Christ's Contentment, which he does, and shall find in his
Assurance of Issue Page 127
The Introduction Page 128 Quest. Wherein does Christ express this Con entment
ibid. Answ. The Issue is, what he traveled with, or what be t^av^lled for
ibid. I. For his Seed, the Issue he traveled with: his de ight is proved by
eight A^guments. ibid. Quest. Why does Christ take such contentment in his
Issue? Page 133 Answ. 1 They are his own ibid. 2 They are given him of his
Father ibid. 3 They have all relations to him ibid. 4 They are one with him
ibid. 5 They are suitable to him ib. 6 By them also he lives. Page 134
II. For the Issue he traveled for, his delight must be great. 1 He sees the
good pleasure of God prosper in his hands. ib. 2 Thereby the reproach is ^owled
away from his sufferings. 3 He thereby obtains the end of his sufferings ibid.
Quest. How shall this appear that Christ ^aw this? Page 135 Answ. 1 It has
been cleared already. 2 It is proved further by Scripture ibid. 3 Nothing can
hinder Christ from it ibid. An Objection answered: proving that Christ died for
all. Page 136
Application. Use, 1. Universal Redemption is false Doctrine Page 137
Object. Christ died c nditionally Page 138 1 A^^w. negatively, and cons^med by
three Arguments. 2 P^^of that Christ's m^rits were not conditional Page 139 3
Proof etc. ibid. 4 Proof ibid. 5 Proof ibid. 6 Proof Page 140 7 Proof Page 141
8 Proof Page 142 9 Proof. The Covenant of Grace is free, absolute, and without
Condition ibid. 1 The Lord delivered it without Condition ibid. 2 It is like
the Covenant made with Noah ibid. 3 In the Covenant of Grace, there is a
converting mercy promised ibid. 4 The Spirit is promised in the Covenant ibid.
5 The Covenant of Grace is easier than the Covenant of Works Page 143

Object. All Divines say, Faith, and Repentance, are the Condition of the
Covenant ibid.
Answ. Not all: not Luther, Zanchy, Junius, Dr. Ames. ibid. Use 2 The Saints
cannot be Apostates Page 144 Use 3. This Doctrine looks upon Godly, and Ungodly
men Page 125 1 It calls on the Godly to be satisfied in Christ ibid. 2 The Godly
are called upon to be contented with Christ, and to endeavor all for him Page
146
Quest. What must the Godly do to answer Christ's love? ibid.
Answ. Many things 1 To bear the same mind to Christ, he bear to us ibid. 2 To
use the means of Grace in public and private Ordinances Page 147 3 To use one
Grace so as to make us fit for another ibid. 4 To be thankful for our present
Condition ibid. 5 Use no com^any, but what you may receive some good from ibid.
6 Use your particular Calling, so as to be fit for a general Calling Page 148 7
Be merry, yet so as you may not grieve afterward for your mirth ibid. 8 It is
excellent to know what Gods design is, yet we must admire what we cannot
understand ibid. 9 So mind the Truth of the Times, as not to neglect the power
of Godliness Page 148, 149 10 Desire to die, yet be contented to live ibid.

FINIS.
A LIFTING UP FOR THE DOWN-CAST. The Contents.
Sermon I.
THE Words opened in two Branches. Page 1 1 The sad Discouragements of a
gracious Spirit. Page 2 2 The Remedies ibid. Three Doctrines observe^ in the
first Branch ibid.
1 That the Saints have an inward Peace ibid. 2 This Peace may be interrupted
ibid. 3 The Saints have no reason to be di^couraged. This is the main thing
aimed at ibid. Doct. 1. proved 3 The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, are engaged
for their peace, Page 4 1 The Father is engaged
1 By his Prerogative ib. 2 By his Commandment ibid. 3 By Virtue of his
Promise. Page 5 4 By Purchase ibid. 5 In regard of the Chastisements of the
Saints ibid 2 The Son is engaged Page 6 1 By his qualifications he received
from his Father. ibid 2 By his own disposition Page 7 3 By his Office. ibid.
3 The Holy Ghost is engaged, As Christ's Executor (be it spoken with Reverence
ibid. As our Advoca^e, in some sense, though Christ alone be our Advocate.
ibid. Object. Experience shows the contrary, by the unquiet Condition of the
Saints. Page 8 Answ. ibid 1 There is a Fundamental Peace naturally flowing from
Justification. 2. There is an additional peace flowing from the sense of their
Justification: the former cannot be lost, the latter may. ibid. 2 There is
great difference between peace, comfort and joy Page 9 3 There is a peace in
opposition to what one has been, and a peace that lies in opposition to what
one would be ibid. 4 There is a dormant peace, and there is a wak^ned peace
ibid.
Quest. What is the Issue of this? Page 10 Application. 1 See what a blessed
Condition the Saints of God are in. ib. 2 Thankfulness of the Godly called for
ibid.
Object. May be the Peace I have, is not right, wherefore I cannot praise the
Lord for it. Page 11 Answ. 1 I grant, that there is a false Peace that wicked
men have, but there is a true Peace to the Godly Page ^^ The di^^ere^ce of true
and false Peace ib^^ Common Peace arises from the apprehension of Gods common
Goodness. Special P^ace arises from the apprehension of Gods s^ecial favor.
F^^se Peace is ^ Guard to our Sins. True Peace is a Guard to our Graces. ibid.
2 True Peace is wrought by Faith ibid. 3 Tru^ Peace will live in the sight of
Sin ibid. 4 True Peace loves to be tried ibid. 5 True Peace is spoken by God
ibid. An Appeal to any that doubt of their Peace Page 13 Object. I fear my
inward Peace, because it does not continue ^^id. Answ. The second Doctrine
answers this ibid. Object. I fear my peace, because I came so lightly by it
Page 14
Answ. All peace is the free gift of God for Christ his sake, not for our
sufferings Page 15
Object. I want that Peace within, how shall I come by it? ibid. Answ. The Lord
only can speak this peace to thee, which he does speak in the way of his
Ordinance ibid. Quest.What does the Lord speak in his Ordinances that may quiet
my Soul? ibid. Answ. 1 You are willed to consider much of the fullness of
Christ's satisfaction. ibid. God for Christ's sake works all our works for us
Page 16
2 Christ is our Peacemaker, we must go to him ibid. The manner how we must go.
1 Go in uprightness Page 17 2 Carry the Promise with you ibid. 3 Wait long on
Christ, till Peace do come. ibid.
Quest. Must we not be humbled for sins committed? ibid. Answ. In all your
Humiliation, carry Christ along with you ibid. 4 Labor to mortify your
affections ibid. 5 Walk not with doubting company Page 18 6 When God speaks a
little peace to thee, refuse it not, for it will increase. Page 19 This is
amplified Page 20

Sermon II.
DOCT. 2. The Saints may be under much discouragement. Page 21 Two words in the
Text most Emphatical, Cast down, Disquieted. ibid. The words opened by four
Questions Page 22
1 How far a good man may be discouraged. 2 How it comes that he is discouraged
3 How discouragements can stand with Grace 4 How they may be cured.
Quest. 1. How far may a good man be discouraged? Page 22 Answ. 1 A Saint may
refuse Comfort for the Soul ibid. 2 For the Body also ibid. 3 A good man may
refuse Duty Page 23 4 He may be weary of his life ibid.
Quest. 2. Why does God suffer his Children to be so discouraged? ibid. Answ.
In general It is for their good. Page 24 More particularly 1 It is Gods way to
deal so with men ibid. 2 This way God sets a greater price on our inward peace
Page 25 3 God will have us to love him only ibid. 4 He thus trains up his
Children to more perfection. ib. 5 He does this to keep his Chil-from security
Page 24 6 This is explained by the similitude of a Chyrurgeon dealing with his
Patient. Page 26

Object. Can any man foretell a man's discouragement? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively.
1 It may be foretold when a man places his Spiritual Comfort on outward
Blessings Page 27 2 When a man is unthankful for true peace, and not humbled
for false Peace. ibid 3 When a man does raise his Comfort only from Grace
within, and not from Christ without. Yet Grace within is, 1. A Cause sine qua
non. 2. It removes all impediments of Comfo^t. 3. It is a witnessing Cause. 4.
It is a confirming Cause. ibid. 4 When a man lays his comfort on the
impression or coming in of the Word, rather than upon the Word i^ self. The
words on Psalm. 16.4. critically expounded Page 28 Quest. 3. How can all this
stand with Grace? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively The Saints are never so
discouraged, but there is some Grace left ibid. Quest. Is there no evil in
Discouragements? Page 29 Answ. Affirmatively Very much ibid. Quest. 4. What
must a poor Soul do to recover its peace lost? Page 30 Answered, partly by way
of Question, partly by Direction ibid. 1 Have thou quite forgot thy former
peace? Page 31 2 Do you not use the means for restoring your Comforts? ibid.
Some seek Comfort by way of reasoning with God. Some seek it in Duty,
neglecting their Calling. Both are d^ceived
3 Have you not so far strained for some outward comfort, as to lose your
inward comfort? ibid. Quest. What shall I do that my comforts may be restored
Page 32 Answ. By Direction in three things. 1 Do what you would do to be
justified ibid. 2 Seek whether God has withdrawn his presence for your sin
ibid.
An Objection answered. Page 33 3 Read the Scriptures much ibid. Object. What
if I do, they may not comfort me. ib. Answ. You cannot tell, till you prove it
Page 34 Sometimes the Promise comes to us, sometimes we go to it ib. Object. I
shall meet with threatenings in the Scripture. ibid. Answ. Negatively, for
Threatenings lead you to the Promise Page 34
Object. There are many other things in Scripture that concern no^ my Condition
ibid. Answ. Negatively Christ cures us sometimes by diverting our minds ibid.
Quest. Where Peace returns, what must I do Page 35 Answ. 1 Be sure it be true
Peace ib. 2 Fall upon Satan's Quarters ibid. 3 Put all your Comforts into
Christ's hands ibid. 4 Spend all for Christ, comfort others Page 36

Sermon III.
DOCT. 3. David's condition is put for a pattern Page 42 Habakkuks Condition
ibid A Godly man may rejoice in any Condition ibid. The Saints think they have
reason for their Discouragements Page 43 The Saints may have reason for their
Discouragements. ibid.
Quest. What have the Saints that is a sufficient Bulwark against all
discouragements? ibid. Answ. 1 A godly man has a propriety in God ibid. How
God is my God Page 44
2 God knows him, and his condition ibid. 3 God will not have his People to be
discouraged: proved from God the Son, to God the Father Page 45 4 The Saints
have no discouragement, but there is a greater Encouragement bound up with it
Page 46 God makes our discouragements, causes of encouragements Page 47 5 A
pray^ng man can never be very miserable. Page 48 4 The matter of our
discouragements, is but as a cloud ibid.
Quest.How shall it appear to be but a cloud? ibid. Answ. 1 If this Cloud come
after the Promise Page 49 2 If a man can see to work. Page 50 3 If there be
some openings of light with the darkness, by intermission ibid.
Application Page 51 Object. I have reason to be discouraged, for I have no
feeling of Gods Love ibid. Answ. 1 We do not live by feeling, but by Faith.
ibid. 2 The great difference between a Godly man, and a wicked man in this Page
52 3 An Exhortation to the Saints, not to be dscouraged, for four Reasons ibid.
1 You rejoice Satan when you are discouraged. ibid. 2 You grieve the heart of
God ib. 3 You do thereby make void the end of Christ's coming ibid. 4 You make
your self unfit for Christ's Service. ibid. Quest. What shall a man do to bear
up against all discouragements? Page 54 Answ. 1 Never lay your Comforts upon
any Condition ibid. 2 Think of Christ in a right way Page 55 3 Check your self
for being discouraged ibid 4 Mix the thoughts of your Discouragements, with
thoughts of Comfort ibid. 5 Mortify Self-Love Page 56 6 Question your self for
being discouraged ibid.
So much for the Proof in general Page 57
Sermon IV.
The Point is cleared, and proved, by nine particular Instances Page 58 1
Discouragements from gross sins Page 59 2 From weakness of Grace 3 From their
failing in Duty 4 From want of evidence of Gods Love 5 From Temptations 6 From
Desertions 7 From Afflictions 8 From Vnserviceableness 9 From the Condition it
self. INSTANCE, I. Proved by way of Question, and Answer. Page 60 Quest. How
may this appear? ibid. Answ. 1 They know they shall never be condemned Page 61 2
Their sins shall never part God and them, proved by the Covenant made with
No^h. Page 62 3 Their sins are occasions of more Grace, proved Page 63
Object. Suppose my sin be such that there is no such found to be pardoned in
Scripture, may I not be discouraged? ibid. Answ. Negatively ibid. Object.
Suppose a man sin against his conscience and knowledge. ib. Answ. Negatively
Page 65 Object. Suppose it be an exceeding great sin a godly man has committed
ibid. Answ. Negatively ibid. Object. Suppose it be a sin of revol^ing, and
backsliding Page 66 1 Answ. Negatively 2 You may be mistaken 3 Christ died for
sinners, were they young or old in their sins. Page 67 Object. Suppose a man
cannot repent enough for his sin presently? Page 67 Answ. Negatively Page 68
And proved by three Reasons Quest. Should not a godly man be humbled for his
sin? Page 69 Answ. Affirmatively Reasons to prove it by Page 70 Quest. What is
the difference between humbled, and discouraged? ibid. Answ. 1 When a man is
humbled, the Object of his grief, is his sin; but he is not discouraged: Cain
was discouraged, but not humbled Page 71 2 True humiliation, is a real friend
to spiritual Joy ibid. 3 True humiliation brings on Diety, Discouragement
drives us from it Page 72
Quest. How shall a man be humbled, and not discouraged? ibid. Answ. 1 A man
must be humbled for his sin, be it never so small; but not discouraged for his
sin, be it never so great ib. 2 In your humiliation, do not part that which God
has joined Page 73 3 Mourn not for your sin in order to your condition; but
mourn over your condition in order to your sin ibid. 4 In your humiliation,
meddle not too much with Gods Prerogative Page 74 5 The more you are humbled at
the sight of Gods free Grace, the less you will be discouraged: Sometimes we
present the Lord to our souls, under the notion of his greatness; and sometimes
under the notion of Goodness. Whence he cites a saying of Luthers ibid. 6 If
you would be humbled, and not discouraged, lay the stress of all your sorrow
upon your sin, and drive up your sin to your Unbelief Page 75

Sermon V.
ISTANCE, II. A Complaint of small Grace. Page 76 The Answer, negatively. God
recompenceth weakness with wisdom Page 77 Every godly man is a wise man ibid.
Quest. Is it no disadvantage to be weak in Grace? ibid. Answ. affirmatively 1
He is the more ready to stumble and fall ibid. 2 His Comforts are more easily
quenched Page 78 3 He cannot glorify God, as the strong Christian may: for
three Reasons ibid. 1 He doubts oftener ib. 2 The more a man lives by hope,
the more he glorifies God Page 78 3 A strong Christian will do great things for
God Page 79 4 A strong Christian can tend the public, a weak Christian cannot
ibid. 5 A strong Christian can wait long on God, a weak cannot. ibid. 6 A
strong Christian is helpful to others ibid. Secondly, There is no reason of
being discouraged. ibid. The Reason are two 1 Weakness does not exclude mercy
ibid. 2 The weak Christian has as many Promises from God as the strong ibid.

1 If your weak Grace be true Grace, you have as great a share in Christ's
Righteousness as the strongest Christian has Page 80 2 The Promises of
Scripture, are most to those that are weak in Grace ibid. 3 Weak Christians
have most kisses from God Page 81 3 If I be weak in Grace, if Christ will
condescend to mine infirmities, I need not be discouraged Page 82 4 Christ puts
a Why, and a Wherefore, on the discouragements of weak Christians ib. 5 A
Christian would be discouraged, if he did not sometimes find this smalness of
Grace within him Page 83 Object. It is an uncomfortable thing to be weak ibid.
1 Answ. Negatively Page 83 2 There is difference between uncomfortableness, and
less comfort ibid. Quest. How shall I know that my little grace is an earnest
of more grace? ibid. Answ. 1 Because you have the Spirit of Adoption ibid. 2 If
you mourn for little grace, and wait on God for more. ibid.
Object. I am not discouraged at my weakness for the uncomfortableness of it,
but for the unserviceableness of it. Page 84 Answ. 1 You ought not so to be
discouraged, for the spiritual victory lies not in our selves. ib. 2 Though
your grace be weak, yet you may do much for God ibid.
Object. I am most discouraged in regard of my own guiltiness Page 85 Answ. 1
You may be mistaken ibid. 2 If your sin have weakened your grace, you must be
humbled, but not discouraged; for three Reasons. ibid.
1 If nothing have befallen you, but what may befall a true Believer ibid. 2
Though grace be weakened by sin, yet if it be true, it cannot fail. ibid. 3 If
the Promise belong to you Page 86
Object. I fear my Grace is not true, but common Grace Page 86 Differences
between true, and common Grace ibid.
1 True grace, though small, will not oppose much grace ibid. 2 It loves to be
tried ibid. 3 It is very inquisitive after the ways of God, and further Truths
Page 87 4 It is much in humiliation ib. 5 It works proportionably to its
strength ibid. 6 It is willing to learn of others ibid. 7 It is very sensible
of its own weakness Page 88 Object. I am an old Professor, yet weak in grace
ibid. Answ. You may be weak in respect of others, yet strong in respect of your
former parts. This is cleared by three Reasons ibid. 1 The more extensive a
man's Obedience is, the more he is grown in grace. ibid. 2 The more exact a man
is in Duty, the more he is grown in grace ibid. 3 The more a man understands
his Christian Liberty, and yet walks more strictly, the more he is grown in
grace Page 89
Quest. If I be weak in grace, and temptations press me, what must I do? ibid.
Answ. 1 Consider what a great charge God the Father has given to Christ's ^f
those that are weak. ibid. 2 Consider what charge Christ gave to his Apostles
and Ministers, of those that are weak ibid. 3 Consider what a great mercy it is
to have a little true grace Page 90 4 Think how your grace will grow weaker
under discoucouragements ibid.

Sermon VI.
INSTANCE, III. Object. A dull heart in Duty causes discouragement Page 92
Answ. Negatively, There is reason to be afflicted, but not to be discouraged.
ib. Quest. How may that appear? Page 93 Answ. 1 Every good man is in Covenant
with God ibid 2 Though his Duty be done in weakness, there is somewhat of Christ
in it. ibid. 3 Our acceptance of Duty must not come in by way of performance,
but by way of Christ. Page 94
Object. I have no parts in Duty, therefore I am discouraged ibid.
Answ. 1 God accepts the desire for Christ's sake Page 94 2 Thy parts are
^^swerable to thy grace Page 95 3 Parts and gifts do not commend our Services
unto God ibid. 4 Parts recompensed some other way Page 96
Object. I want the grace and holiness of Duty ibid. Answ. Pearls may grow on
Rocks; so may some graces on thy rockie heart Page 97 1 Are you contented with
the straightness of your condition? Answ. Negatively. ib. 2 If your condition
here, be no other than the condition of the Saints, you have no cause to be
discouraged ibid. 3 You would fain have enlargements represent your condition
to God Page 98 4 It is Gods way to restrain prayer, before he gives
enlargements ibid. 5 Dullness in prayer is an ill sin, yet the sense thereof is
a good sign Page 99 6 Prayer is not pouring out of many words, but the pouring
out of the Soul unto God. ibid. Object. I am not only dull in duty, bu^ full of
distraction. Page 100
Answ. This is a great evil, yet no cause of discouragement; for three Reasons
ibid. 1 All men have some distractions in d^ty. ibid. 2 Distractions shall not
hurt us, because they please us not. Page 101 3 Our distractions move the Lord
to pity us ibid.
Object. I pray, and am never the nearer, should not that discourage me? Page
102 Answ. Negatively. 1 It is a great mercy that God will receive my prayer,
though I never receive the thing I pray for ibid. 2 Gods Children usually think
God hears not their prayers when he does ibid. 3 The Lord not granting your
prayer, is not always matter of discouragement, but sometimes of encouragement
Page 103 4 Whoever waited on God by prayer, but be received more than he prayed
for? Page 104 5 Should God presently answer our prayers always, we should be
discouraged Page 105
Object. 1. I fear God denies my prayer ibid. 1 Answ. Affirmatively. It may be
so to his own children ibid. 2 If the thing you pray for, be good for you, and
you continue praying, it is a sign that God rather delays, than denies you
ibid.
Object. 2. I fear God is angry with me. Page 106 Answ. Was not God angry with
Jonah and the Canaanitish woman? Page 106 Object. 3. But she believed, there is
much unbelief in my prayer ibid. Answ. Was it not so with David? ibid. Object.
4. I am self-ish, and pray only by reason of affliction ibid. Answ. So it was
with Jonah ibid. Object. 5. My prayer is not well prepared ibid. Answ. Hezekiah
prayed for those that came unprepared ibid. Object. 6. I am full of passions.
ibid. Answ. What think you of Elijah? ibid. Object. 7. My condition is such or
such. ibid. Answ. The condition of distressed men paralel'd in Scripture, when
they look toward Christ. ib. Application. 1 What encouragements here are for
all poor souls to come unto Christ. Page 107 2 What a vast difference there is
here, between a godly, and a wicked man ibid.
Quest. What must I do against discouragements, that come from mine own failing
in duty, or Gods not answering me? Page 108 Answ. 1 Lay not the weight of your
comfort upon duty ibid. 2 Consider that difficulty commends duty ibid. 3 Leave
the success of our spiritual things unto God himself Page 109

Sermon VII.
INSTANCE, IV. Object. O! I want assurance of the love of God, must I not be
then discouraged? Page 111 Answ. Negatively Yet it is a sore evil Page 112 He
that wants the assurance of Gods love, is neither fit to receive mercy from
God, nor to praise God ibid. He that wants the assurance of Gods love,
converseth too much with Satan ibid. Quest. How may it appear we must not be
discouraged, when we want this assurance? Page 113 1 Answ. negatively. For want
of Assurance is not that unbelief that condemns us. ib. 2 Want of Assurance
shall turn to the Saints good Page 114 They gain experience by it, to see the
emptiness of their own righteousness ibid. A man learns thus to comfort others
Page 115
3 A good man may have comfort, though he want assurance Page 115 Object. I
have no Promise to bring me comfort Page 116 Answ. Negatively, 1 That must not
discourage a Christian, for have you not the word of the Gospel? ib. 2 The
promise of grace belongs to you: proved by three Reasons. 1 You do, or have
rested on the Promise. 2. If the Command belong unto you, why not the Promise?
3. It is your duty to rest on the Promise Page 117
Object. 2. Gods Promise in Scripture, runs upon some Condition which I cannot
perform ib. Answ. 1 A good man may apply the Promise, though he has not
performed the Condition. ib. 2 The condition of one promise is the thing
promised in another promise Page 118 3 The condition of the promise is
performed for you, better than you can perform it ib.
Object. Instead of a promise, there is a threatening on my Soul. Page 119
Answ. 1 God has two Arms to draw his Children to him; the Arm of Love, and the
Arm of Anger. ibid. 2 Joshua sometimes lost the sight of the promise: and for
the threatening, you know how it was with David Page 120 3 A Threatening from
God, may be repealed, but a promise shall never be repealed. ibid.
The Reason is, God never repeals in the matter of the Gospel Page 121 Object.
I have assurance of Gods displeasure, must I not then be discouraged? Page 122
Answ. Negatively. 1 It may be you look on the back side of Gods dispensation,
wherein appears his Anger. ibid. 2 There is no such testimony of Reprobation in
all the Scripture ibid.
Object. I have been without assurance these many years, yet living under
Gospel means; therefore I look for none Page 123 Answ. Negatively. 1 Our
evidence for Heaven, is in Gods keeping. ibid. 2 Consider four Propositions. 1
A man may have saving Faith, who has no assurance of Gods love ibid. 2 A man
may have strong Faith and assurance, yet many doubts Page 124 3 A man may have
strong faith and assurance, yet for a long time be deprived of the feeling of
it. ib. 4 A godly man may live and die doubting ibid.
3 Though some may die doubting, and yet be saved, a man may from Scripture
fetch Arguments, from whence he may ordinarily conclude he shall be saved. Page
125
Arg. 1. There is a faith of Reliance, from whence we may conclude a faith of
Assurance. Page 125 Arg. 2. God has done great things for thy soul in trouble,
thou may conclude he will do more ibid. Arg. 3. If thy heart be upright in
the matter of assurance, God will give it thee. ibid. Arg. 4. If a man can
praise God for what he has, though his condition be very sad Page 126 Arg. 5.
If the Lord be the health of your countenance, you shall have assurance of your
salvation ibid. A Caution that no man may misapply this Doctrine. Page 127
Quest. Suppose I want assurance, how shall I bear up against all
discouragements? Page 128 Answ. by way of Direction. 1 Seek earnestly after
Gods love, and Christ's satisfaction ibid. 2 Hearken to no comfort out of an
Ordinance, contrary to the comfort the Lord speaks in his Ordinance. ibid. 3 Be
not discontented with your condition Page 129 4 Do not say, I shall never have
assurance. ibid. 5 The less assurance you have, the more precious your
Obedience may be Page 130
Sermon VIII.
INSTANCE, V. I have been under Temptations many years, and yet find no
comfort, must I not be discouraged? Page 132 Answ. Negatively. Temptations are
great afflictions ibid. They are an immediate combating with the Devil Page 133
They commonly seize on soul and body, yet we must not be discouraged for them
Page 134 Quest. How shall that appear? ibid. Answ. By four demonstrations. 1
Satan tempts Gods people to discourage them ibid. 2 God pitieth us under
Temptations Page 135 3 Christ overcame all Temptations for us ibid. 4 All
temptations shall turn to our good Page 136 1 Thereby they are more humbled
ibid. 2 Thereby they are more occasioned to love God ibid. 3 Thereby Gods grace
in Christ is more discovered. Page 137 4 Thereby their graces are more
increased. ibid. 5 Thereby all the Saints triumph over Satan ib.

Object. 1. I have been long tempted, yet find no deliverance Page 137 Answ.
Christ was tempted in all things as we are. ibid. Object. 2. I doubt, being so
tempted, whether I am the child of God. Page 138 Answ. Christ was so tempted in
two of the three temptations, in his forty days temptation. A comparison that
illustrates the matter, and is very sit against discouragement ibid. Object. 3.
I am tempted to make my self away, to blaspheme God, and to believe I have
sinned against the holy Ghost. Page 139 Answ. I confess this is sad indeed: but
I dare not say they are damned, though I read not of any such example in
Scripture, of any godly man that killed himself, yet I dare not say they are
saved. Page 140 Object. 4. But I am weak, and yield to many temptations, must I
not be discouraged? Page 141 Answ. Negatively. For out of weakness, we are made
strong ibid. Three sorts of People are in the world; Old Men; Middle aged;
Children. The time of young men is the overcoming time: Yet the Apostle John
writes unto them all. So though you be weak, yet you may overcome Page 142
Object. 5. I have been overcome in my temptations ibid. Answ. You are never
overcome so long as you keep your weapon in your hand: you may be overcome in
skirmish, yet overcome in battle ibid. Object. 6. My temptations are not such
as Gods children meet withal Page 143 Answ. Negatively. 1 For the godly are
tempted to presume, to despair, unbelief. The differences. ibid. 2 The godly
accuse themselves when they fall to sin by temptation; but the wicked lay it on
others, and on the temptation ibid. 3 When a godly man is tempted to evil, he
rather startles at the sin, than at the burden of it; but the wicked startle at
the punishment more than the sin Page 144 Temptations use to be greater after
Conversion ib. 1 Peter did not deny Christ before he was converted to Jesus
Christ ibid. 2 God never measures his children by what they are in temptations.
Page 145
Quest. What shall I do then that I may not be discouraged? Page 146 Answ. If
temptations arise from natural causes, Physic is to be used ibid. 1 Expect not
too much from any one means of help; but wait on God Page 146 2 Say not of a
Temptation, this is no Temptation Page 147 3 Consider that Christ is engaged to
help you, when you are tempted. ibid. 4 Think not to relieve your self under
temptations, with physical and moral Reasons. Page 148 5 Advise with others
that have been tempted, though weaker than your self ibid. 6 Especially
converse with the Promise ibid. 7 The greatest Consolations do sometimes follow
the worst Temptations Page 149
Sermon IX.
INSTANCE, VI. Spiritual Desertions, are just cause of discouragement Page 150
Answ. Negatively. I know no affliction so great to a gracious heart as this,
yet Gods children must not faint here Page 151
Quest. How may this appear? Page 152 Answ. 1. How God is said to forsake a man
ibid. 1 In regard of union, God never forsakes his own. ibid. 2 In regard of
his Power, Grace, and Strength, he never forsakes them totally ibid. 3 In
regard of Vision, and comfortable feelings, he forsakes them but for a time,
and returns again: None of these can discourage us ibid.
2 God forsakes his People that he may not forsake them. Page 153 3 Though Gods
People are left sometimes in the dark, they have always light enough to work by
Page 154
Object. 1. I fear Christ has withdrawn himself from me in regard of Union.
ibid. Answ. Negatively. You cannot judge of Grace under spiritual Desertions.
ib. Object. 2. I find Gods Displeasure, etc. Page 155 Answ. Negatively, For
this has been the Saints condition before you. ibid. Object. 3. I have drawn
this displeasure on my own head, therefore, etc. Page 156 Answ. Negatively. For
God will hide his face, and smite too, yet not forsake ibid. Object. 4. My
condition is worse every day, therefore etc. Page 157 Answ. Negatively For so
were the Israelites in Egypt. ibid. Object. 5. I find in Scripture a final
rejection, therefore etc. Page 158 Answ. Negatively 1 The Saints usually think
so, that their Desertion is final. Page 159 2 The Promise usually takes off
this Objection. ibid. 3 Scripture will make it clear to you. ibid.
Six Questions to resolve this by Page 159 1 Did you ever read in Scripture
that a man was finally forsaken of the Lord, but that an evil spirit from the
Lord did seize upon him presently? Page 160 2 Did you ever read that God did
forsake any, that were not willing to forsake God? ibid. 3 Did you ever read
that God forsook any man who was sensible of this forsaking, and complained of
it simply for it self? ibid. 4 Did you ever read of any man forsaken by God,
who was tender in the point of sin? ibid. 5 Did you ever read that Christ did
forsake a soul, in which he left his Soul furnished with spiritual
houshold-stuf? Page 161 6 Did you ever read that Christ forsook any man who
longed after him as the greatest good? ibid
Quest. What shall I do when Christ hides his face from me? Page 262 Answ. 1 Do
not measure Gods Eternal affection by some present Dispensation ibid: 2 Let fall
no despairing speeches Page 263 3 Hear indifferently on both sides. ibid. 4
Labor more to live by Faith. Page 264
Your own Experience will convince you. Page 265
Sermon X.
INSTANCE, VII. The case was David's, therefore you need not be discouraged.
Page 267 Obj. But besides National miseries, I have many Personal Afflictions;
therefore etc. Page 268 Answ. Negatively, for 1 It is no new-thing for the
Saints to be personally afflicted. ibid. 2 When they are afflicted, they are in
some respects more sensible of their affliction than the wicked are ibid. 3 As
they will be sensible of affliction, so they are very apt to be much
discouraged by reason of them. ibid.
Four things considerable to clear this Truth Page 269 1 What the Sufferings of
the Saints are. ibid. 2 Whence they proceed. 3 What accompanies them. 4 What
follows them. Page 269
For the first. 1 They are parts of Christ's Purchase for them. ibid. 2 They
proceed from Gods love. Page 270 3 Much supporting Grace accompanies them. Page
271 4 They bring forth quiet fruits of Righteousness Page 272
Object. 1. My afflictions are without end, therefore etc. Page 273 Answ.
Negatively: For God takes away your comforts for a time, that you may not be
drunk with them ibid. Object. 2. My Afflictions are not usual, but new ones,
and strange. Page 274 Answ. You think so, but not truly. ibid. Object. 3. I
want all kinds of Mercies, my Afflictions have no bottom. ibid. Answ. It was
David's case ibid. Object. 4. But my dearest friends hate me, therefore etc.
Page 275 Answ. negatively: For Our greatest Enemies may prove our greatest
Friends. ibid. Object. 5. But my afflictions expose me to all Temptations,
therefore etc. Page 276 Answ. negatively: For 1 May be you are mistaken. ib. 2
God by affliction calls a man to some other work. ibid. 3 No affliction does
expose a man to a new sin, that makes him sensible of his former sin. ibid. 4
When a man thus fears, it is a sign of Grace Page 277
Object. 6. My sin is the cause of my affliction, and I know not what sin it
is, therefore etc. ibid. Answ. negatively: For So it was with Jonah, so with
David, etc. ibid. It is sometimes better for a particular sin to lie
undiscovered Page 278
Object. 7. But I fear my afflictions come from Gods displeasure, therefore etc.
ibid. Answ. negatively: For 1 Afflictions argue Gods love rather than his
hatred. ibid. 2 Is there any thing in God that is not a friend to all the
Saints? ibid. 3 But what are those visible Characters of love engraven. on
affliction? Page 279
1 If affliction be a blessing, then it comes from love. ibid. 2 If affliction
end in our love to God, then it comes from Gods love t^ us. ib. 3 If affliction
teaches the mind of God, then it does come from love ibid. 4 If i^ be but in
measure, and at a seasonable time, then it comes from love. ibid. 5 God is more
especially present in affliction than at other times Page 279 Object. 8. But
our whole Nation is afflicted, therefore etc. Page 280 Answ. negatively, This is
a sad thing. If ever England had cause to be humbled under the hand of the
Lord, it is now: Yet say to the Righteous, in evil times it shall go well with
him. ibid. Quest. What must we do to bear up against all discouragements? Page
282 Answ. 1 If you have assurance of Gods love in Christ, hold to that; if you
have it not, this affl^ction shall bring you to it. ibid. 2 Remember much your
Fellowship with Christ in his Sufferings. ibid. 3 Labor more to be a stranger
to the world, and to live by Faith ibid. 4 Consider what Christ has born, and
left you to bear. Page 283 5 Consider frequently, and seriously, what abundance
of good, you, and others may get by your afflictions ibid. 6 When afflictions
come, look not only on the evil of it, but on the good of it too. ibid.

Sermon XI.
INSTANCE, VIII. Object. Either men think they are not called forth to work for
God, or they want abilities, or they have no success, therefore. Page 285 Answ.
negatively: For 1 Is Family work nothing? There is a threefold sweat says
Luther, Political, Ecclesiastical, Domestical. Page 286 2 Is it nothing to be
trusted with the work of your Christian Station? ibid. 3 Is it nothing to be
employed to comfort others? ibid.
Object. 1. But God does not employ me in the world, I am an useless Creature,
therefore etc. ib. Answ. 1 It is a great blessing to be employed in any Service
of God ibid. 2 The more a man does for God, the more he does honor God Page 287
3 By being employed, we are kept from Temptations. ibid. 4 Great employment is
the mercy promised. ibid. 5 The more serviceable a man is for God, the more
will God be apt to pardon his failings. Page 288 6 If a man be faithful in Gods
work, God will bless him. Page 288 7 The serviceable man for God is the only
man that does live and speak when he is dead. ibid.
I may be Gods Servant, though I am not employed by him in his Service: For
Page 289 1 The Service of God is twofold; either public, or private. The
private Service is the saving Service, though we have no public employment.
ibid. 2 Special, or public employment, is various also; either in a mean, or a
great employment. ibid. 3 Though God do not use me at present, he may use me
afterward. Page 290 4 A man may be so employed, and yet go to Hell; and he may
not be employed, and yet go to Heaven. ibid. 5 You must rejoice when others are
employed. ibid. Object. 2. But I want abilities, therefore etc. Page 291 Answ.
negatively; For 1 Gods greatest works are not always done by the greatest
abilities ibid. 2 Our best abilities are from God ibid. 3 The Spirit of God,
does not always breath alike. Page 292 4 If God call you to a work, he will
give you needful assistance in that time. ibid.
Object. 3. I fear I intrude into Gods work because I want abilities. ibid.
Answ. Negatively. 1 God sometimes first calls a man, and then gives abilities
afterward. ibid. 2 If Gods door-keepers do judge you able, you must rest on
their judgment. Page 293 Though I am to judge of mine own grace, yet others, and
not I, must judge of my abilities. ibid. Object. 4. I fear I am an intruder,
because I meet with so many difficulties. ibid. Answ. 1 What good action does
not? ibid. 2 The greatest Call from God, usually finds the greatest
difficulties. Page 294
Object. 5. God I believe has called me to his Service, but I am
unserviceable. ibid. Answ. That is ill indeed. ibid. But this compla^nt,
shows you are willing to serve God, therefore be not discouraged. Page 295
Object. 6. I work, and have no success in my work, therefore etc. ibid. Answ.
Negatively. 1 You may mistake the success. Page 296 2 Gods dearest Children
here, sometimes labored all night, and caught n^thing. Page 296
Object. 7. I fear God has employed me in the way of judgment, and not of
mercy, therefore Page 297 Answ. negatively: For 1 If you love God the more for
your imp oyment, it came from Gods love to you. ibid. 2 If God does any way
acquaint me with his design therein, he does employ me in love to me. ibid. 3
He that is employed in love, has high thoughts of the employment, b^t low
thoughts of his own actings under it. ibid. 4 He that is employed in love, is
very tender of the Name of God. Page 298 5 He that is employed in love, does
grow in grace ibid. 6 He will not pock^t up much for himself in Gods Service.
ibid. 7 He will do Gods work without any great noise of himself. Page 299 8 He
is willing to be used, and contemed to be laid by. ibid. 9 He will do Gods work
fully, though he do his own work by ha^fs. ibid. 10 When God calls a man in
judgment, he ha^h ordinarily more skill to destroy what is man's, than to set up
what is Gods. ibid.
Quest. Suppose that God shall not use me ^n his Se^v^ce, or if he do, I meet
with such difficulties, what must I do then, not to be discouraged? Page 300
Answ. 1 If you are not called to public Service, then 1 Consider you have the
more time to mind your own soul. ibid. 2 If you be not called to work, and yet
be willing to work, you shall be paid for that service you never did. ibid.
2 In case you be called forth, Page 301 1 Consider, the greater the
difficulties are you meet withal, the more is your obedience in carrying on the
work. ibid. 2 The more assistance may you look for. ibid.
3 In case you have no success in your work, ibid. 1 Consider, that the less
success you have, the more are you free from envy. Page 302 2 Hereby are you
kept from that great temptation of resting on your own labor. Page 302


Sermon XII.
INSTANCE, IX. My afflictions are seated in my condition it self, therefore
etc. Page 304 Answ. negatively: For 1 A good man's outward condition may be very
bad. Page 305 2 It may be worse in regard of the world than the condition of a
wicked man. ibid. 3 It may be worse after his conversion than it was before.
ibid.
Yet a godly man must not be discouraged. For 1 I demonstrate: If a good man's
condition be carved out by the hand of his Teacher, he has no reason to
complain ibid. 2 If a man does not live upon his condition it self, but upon
his call to it, he ha^h no reason to be discouraged Page 306 3 If there can be
no condition of a godly man without mercy Christ has paid for, then he may not
be discouraged Page 307
But I am a poor man, in so mean a condition that I cannot serve God as the
rich may, therefore etc. ibid. Answ. Negatively. For, Do you know the burden of
prosperity? B^rden and Service go together, Numb. 4. Page 308 Luther did a
greate^ wo^k in way of Faith, than Alexander did in conquering the world. The
more riches, the more debts. Page 309 Object. 2. I am in an unsettled condition,
sometimes high, sometimes low, therefore etc. ibid. Answ. Negatively. 1 For what
settlement would you have in this world of vanity? Page 310 2 If God loves you
in your unsettled condition, you need not be discouraged ibid.
Object. 3. I am troubled, not for my outward condition, but for the condition
of my soul, have I not cause now to be discouraged? Page 311 Answ. Negatively
For 1 If you want Ordinances, God will make that want to be an Ordinance to
you. ibid. 2 If you want memory, know that there is a head memory, and a heart
memory: the last is the principal, and will suffice, if the other be wanting
Page 313 3 As for yoar deadness, it is some life to feel ones own d^adness
ibid. 4 A^ for your unprofitableness under means, there is great difference
be^ween less fruitful, and unfruitful, for ib. 1 Though a g od man be
unfrui^ful, he will be sensible of it Page 314 2 Though a good man may be too
unfruitful, yet he does not cumber the ground ibid. 3 He desires to use means
to bring forth fruit ibid. 4 God will prune him, but not cut him down ibid.

Object. 4. I fear I am an Hypocrite; therofore etc. Page 314 Answ. Negatively.
For 1 Though you have lain long dead under the means, Christ may at length roll
away the stone ibid. 2 Gods Children usually think they are Hypocrites Page 315
3 Did ever Hypocrite long for Gods presence in Christ, as the best good? ibid.
Object. 5. But a few are elected, and I fear I am not one, therefore etc.
ibid. Answ. Negatively. For This is no prejudice to the growth of your comfort.
Page 317 1 As for Election. It is true that there is a certain number only that
are elected. ib. 2 This number is unalterable ibid. 3 God knows them all
certainly ibid. 4 A man may know himself to be one of those Elect. ibid. Three
things here to be noted, Page 318 1 That some are elected. ib. 2 That a man may
be assured he is one of them. ibid. 3 The way to know it, is not to begin
aloft, but at your Vocation, as Paul did, putting Election last. ib.

2 Christ died for all men, both Jew and Gentile, but not for every particular
man, with intention to save him ibid. Universal Redemption is an enemy to an
afflicted soul. Page 319 I shall clear this Point thus. 1 This Doctrine makes
void the satisfaction of Christ for actual sins; for they that hold Universal
Redemption, say, That thousands are damned for those sins which Christ has
satisfied for. ib. 2 The intercession of Christ joined with the death of
Christ, is a great comfort to a Christian; but this Doctrine parts Christ's
death and intercession, telling us Christ died for all, but that he does not
intercede for all Page 320 3 This Doctrine is an enemy to free Grace ibid. 4 It
destroys the assurance of Salvation Page 321 5 The mercy of God, is made by it,
to depend on our performance of Conditions Page 322

Object. 6. If Christ did not die for all, how can I know he died for me? ibid.
Answ. They that make this Objection, holding Universal Redemption, do answer it
themselves. Yet to know further Page 323 1 There is a faith of Relyance, and a
faith of Assurance. I have ground to rely on Christ, because he died for
sinners. ibid. 2 The act of Reliance is below the act of Assurance; but he that
relies on Christ, shall be saved ibid.
Object. 7. I am persuaded that never any good man was in my Condition. Page
323, 324 Answ. Negatively. For 1 The Saints usually think so ibid. 2 If it were
so, God works new things ordinarily ibid.
Application. 1 What great necessity we have to consider our condition, whether
we be in Christ or no, for every one will say he believes ibid. 2 If you do
not believe, you are here invited to it by this Doctrine. Page 325 3 If you do
believe, then see that you walk answerable thereunto ibid.

Sermon XIII.
Means against Discouragements. Page 327 DOCT. Faith is the Help against all
Discouragements. Page 328 For your better understanding, consider, 1 What is
Hope. ibid. 2 That Faith quiets the heart in sad times. ibid. 3 It is the day
of all the Saints to trust in God, especially at that time ibid. 4 What there
is in faith, and how faith can do it ibid.
Quest. 1. What is it to trust in God? ib. Answ. 1 To trust in God, is to rely
on God for help, etc. ibid. 2 He that trusts in God, does trust unto him for
some good thing that lies out of sight. Page 329
Quest. 2. How may it appear that Faith will quiet the soul? Page 330 Answ. It
is proved several ways out of Scripture ibid. Faith gives free access to God.
Page 331 There are three Vails in Scripture. 1. Of Obscurity. 2. The Vail of
covering guilt. 3. A Vail of shame Page 332
Quest. 3. How may it appear, that when discouragements arise, Faith must then
be exercised, and then especially? ibid. Answ. It was David's case, and the
Scripture is express for it. ibid. Quest. 4. What power has Faith to allay
discouragements? what is in faith can do it? and how does faith do it? Page 333
Answ. 1 Faith gives a man the true prospect of things past, present, and to
come: And all Discouragements arise, because men do not see things as they are
ibid. 2 True saving Faith sees that in God, and in Christ, which answers all
our fears Page 335 3 Faith puts the Soul under Gods Commandments to answer all
Objections. Page 336
More briefly of saving Faith. 1 It is the proper work of Faith to resign our
wills unto Gods will. Page 337 2 It is the proper work of Faith to apply a
suitable Promise ibid. 3 True faith will not venture without Gods Call. Page
338 4 True faith sees the hand of God in every dispensation ibid. 5 True faith
looks on both sides of Gods Dispensation, and of our own Condition ibid. 6 Fath
sees one contrary in another? ibid. 7 It is the work of true faith to engage
God to suffer. ibid.
Application. Then if discouragements arise, exercise your faith ibid. Quest.
Will every faith quiet a man's heart? ibid. Answ. Negatively. For There is a
feigned, and uneffectual; and there is an unfeigned, and effectual faith: A
counterfeit faith will not quiet a man's soul, etc. ibid. Quest. How then shall a
man exercise his faith, that he may bear up against all Discouragements Page
339 Answ. 1 You must be humbled for your unbelief, etc. ib^d. 2 Go not to God
without Christ. Page 340 3 Trust in the Lord himself, and not in your own
duties. ibid. 4 Trust in the Lord, before you do act in your business ibid. 5
Trust in Jesus Christ before you trust in the Promise. Page 341 6 If God give
you a Promise, never let it go, though you see nothing but the contrary. ibid.
Object. I fear I should presume, and tempt the Lord ibid. Answ. To doubt after
so much experience, were rather to tempt the Lord Page 342 Quest. If God give
me a Promise, and I see no performance, how shall I not be discouraged? Page
343 Answ. Either it is thy Duty to believe on Christ, or not: if not, why do
thou believe at all? If it be thy Duty, why should thou not rely on him?
ibid. Be of good comfort: for
1 If you want assurance in God, look on Christ Page 344 2 If you want
assurance, turn your eyes from those Objections that invade your faith. ibid. 3
Believe that you do believe. Helps for Faith. Page 344 1 God never leads his
People to any great mercy, but he puts the sentence of death on all means that
tend to it. ib. 2 It is a great sin to limit Gods mercy, as to limit his power
ibid. 3 When God gives a Promise, he sometimes tries whether we will believe,
or not. ibid. 4 God often times fulfils one Promise, and denies another. ibid.
5 When we see nothing but what is contrary to help, then is Christ's time to
help. Page 345 6 Be your Affliction ordinary, or extraordinary, you must trust
to God for mercy ibid. 7 Questions to ask a man's own Soul, to encourage us Page
346 8 Consider frequently, and seriously, what a blessed thing it is to trust
in God. Page 347 It is reasonable to wait on God, For 1 He waited on you for
your Repentance ibid. 2 You have waited on men will you not wait on God? ibid. 3
When you give over waiting deliverance may come to your shame Page 348 4 If you
give over waiting, you lose all your former labor. ibid. 5 If you wait on God,
he will not always forget your work of Faith Page 349

The Sin against the Holy Ghost. ON Matthew. 12.31, 32.
THere are two Arguments in the words Page 353 1 The largeness of Gods heart in
forgiving sins to men. ib. 2 The unpardonableness of the sin against the Holy
Ghost, ibid. I had rather speak first to the former; but to prevent Objections
from some distressed soul, I shall first speak to the latter Page 354 For
opening the words Quest. 1. Whether the Jews our Savior spoke then to, did then
sin against the Holy Ghost? ib. Answ. Some think, No; But I rather think, Yes;
for the Reasons in the Text. ibid. Quest. 2. Is there any so giveness of sins
in the world to come? ibid. Answ. It is an unusual Phrase, noting the eternity
of misery. Page 355 DOCT. The Sin against the Holy Ghost, is an unpardonable
sin. Page 355 The Truth opened by the enquiry into two things: 1 What the Sin
against the holy Ghost is ibid. 2 How this sin is unpardonable beyond other
sins ibid.

For to say, what this sin is? ibid. I answer, Nega^ively, and Affirma^^vely.
ibid. 1 Negatively. It is not that sin whereby men do barely deny the Deity of
the Holy Ghost, etc. ibid. 2 Nor is it every opposition to the work of the Holy
Ghost, etc. Page 356 3 It is not necessary that every man who sins against the
holy Ghost, should be an universal Apostate, as i^ is ordinarily thought ibid.
There is a twofold Apostate, Either one that declineth from the profession of
the Truth; Or one that rebels against the Truth revealed, and will go no
further, cleared by an example Page 357
4 Final Unbelief, and Impenitency, is not the sin against the holy Ghost;
neither that a man lives and dies in, nor that he purposes to live in to the
last, for many have so purposed to live, yet have been converted ib^d 1 The
Jews did then commit this sin, yet they had not continued in it to their death.
ibid. 2 Final unbelief, is rather sin against God the Son. ibid. 3 If final
unbelief be this sin, then Christ should threaten that he which dies in his
sin, should not be forgiven w^^lst he lives Page 358 4 He that dies in any
sin against the Father, or the Son, shall never be forgiven 5 This is asserted
from 1 John 5.16. ibid. 6 A man may sin this unpardonable sin whilst he lives
ibid. 7 It is a sin a man may know another man to be guilty of whilst he lives
ibid. 8 A man may speak a word against the holy Ghost whilst he lives ibid. 9
All wicked men dying impenitently, under the Gospel, should sin this sin. ibid.
2 Affirmatively ibid.

1 It is a malicious, wilful opposing the holy Ghost ibid. 2 He that commits
this sin, blasphemeth the peculiar work of the Holy Ghost. ib. 3 It must be
malicious blasphemy Page 359 Quest. How can a man sin maliciously, since he
will is always carried to what is good? ibid. Answ. Affirmatively: For, 1 That
good, is either moral good, natural good, or profitable good; but the will is
not always carried upon that which is honestly good in appearance, etc. Page
359 2 If this were a reason, the Devils do not sin maliciously. ibid. 3 Though
every man sins ignorantly, yet every man does not sin out of ignorance: for
then, Page 360 1 Why is there so vast a difference between a sin of ignorance,
and presumption? ibid 2 If every sin should arise from ignorance in the
understanding, the will would be always carried upon honest good, at least in
appearance. ibid. 3 If it were so, the will could not fall off from the dictate
of the Understanding. Page 361 4 If the will always follow the understanding,
then the created, and defiled will of man, cannot tend unto any object, upon
any reason, upon which the Divine will of God cannot ^end unto its object.
ibid. 5 All men confess a sin of malice, and a sin of ignorance ibid.
4 Suppose that some ignorance in the understanding, be the remote cause of the
sin, yet malice is the next, and chief cause Page 362 5 A Question answered,
how the will should be always carried upon that which is good, and yet a man
may sin maliciously ibid. 6 It is a malicious sin against the Holy Ghost, after
he has been convinced by the Holy Ghost Page 363
Quest. 2. Why is this sin unpardonable above all others? ibid.
Answ. 1 It is not because it is hard to be pardoned Page 364 2 It is not only
unpardonable in regard of event ibid. 3 Nor is it greater than Gods mercy ibid.
4 Nor because it is a sin against the means of pardon ibid. 5 Nor because a man
does not repent thereof. ibid. But it is unpardonable, because God has
appointed no sacrifice for it ibid.

Application. 1 If the sin against the Holy Ghost be unpardonable, then the
Holy Ghost is God. Page 365 2 There is great necessity to know what this sin
against the Holy Ghost is, that if a man have sinned t^is sin, we may not pray
for him. ibid. 3 Think on Gods mercy that has kept us from this great sin
ibid.
Object. 1. I fear I have sinned this great sin, because my sins are so great
Page 366 Answ. How great may that sin of yours be, and not be that sin? Page
366 Object. 2. I fear it, for I have fallen fowly into it gross sin ibid. Answ.
So did David ibid. Object. 3. But I have lost my communion with God ibid. Answ.
So did the Church of Ephesus. Page 367 Object. 4. I have resisted Gods Spirit.
ib. Answ. A man may do so, and yet not sin against the holy Ghost. ibid.
Object. 5. I have denied the Truth ibid. Answ. So did Peter ibid. Object. 6. I
have been a blasphemer ibid. Answ. So was Paul Page 368 Object. 7. I have
sinned maliciously ibid. Answ. Maliciously is taken three ways: Either sinning
from some ill habit, as all wicked men do; Or out of passion, as Paul did; Or
out of liberty of his own will, and self-conviction. Had you sinned this last
way, you would not be troubled about it, but well pleased with it ibid Object.
8. I have forsaken God, and God has forsaken me ibid. Answ. David thought so
ibid. Object. 9. I despair Page 369 Answ. You know what Heman said, All thy
waves are gone over my head. ibid. To clear this, I ask five Questions ibid. 1
Art thou willing to forgive men that have trespassed against thee? ibid. 2 Have
you opposed the ways of God out of malice? ibid. 3 Do you not desire to be
humbled for your sin? ibid. 4 Do you not desire above all things, the
breathings of Gods Spirit upon your heart Page 370 5 Where do you find in all
the Bible, that they that sinned against the Holy Ghost, are afraid that they
have sinned it. The great misery of that man who has sinned against the Holy
Ghost. ibid. What great comfort is here for Believers that cannot commit this
sin? Page 371
Applic. 4. If this be unpardonable, what great cause have we to look to our
selves? ibid. Quest. What must we do to be kept from this unpardonable sin?
Page 372 Answ. 1 Do as David did against presumptuous sins ibid. 2 Be always
humbled for lesser sins Page 372 3 Fear always ibid. 4 Resolve to do good Page
373 5 Do not blaspheme what you understand not ibid. 6 Never blaspheme the way
of God that thou have found to be true ibid. 7 Take heed of all declinings.
ibid. 8 Forsake not the assembling your selves together, as the manner of some
is ibid.

Of SINS of Infirmity. ON Matthew, 26.43.
THe difference between the true, and the false Disciple. Page 377 The Text
divided ibid. Here is the Disciples sin, and the Lords Grace Page 378
1 They slept ibid. 1 The Cause; for their eyes were heavy ibid. 2 The
Repetition; he found them asleep again ibid.
2 Christ comes again ibid. DOCT. Though a man sin again and again, yet if it
be a sin of Infirmity, Christ will come to him again. ibid. Three things
considered in the opening of the words ibid. 1 A good man may fall often into the
same sin. 2 This sin may be but a sin of infirmity. 3 That Christ will not
leave him for it. ibid.
I The first Proposition proved Page 379 II The second Proposition proved. And
to clear it, consider what a sin of Infirmity is. Page 380 1 It is a sin of
weakness in Scripture Phrase ibid. 2 Infirmity is a defect in one that has
life Page 381 3 It arises not from wilfulness, but from want of strength to
resist ibid.

Quest. 1. Is every sin a god^y man commits a sin of Infirmity? ibid. Answ.
Negatively, with the Reasons ibid. Quest. 2. Is any sin a wicked man commits, a
sin of Infirmity? ibid. Answ. Negatively, with the Reasons ibid. Quest. 3. Can
any great, foul sin, be a sin of Infirmity? ibid. Answ. Negatively, with
Reasons ibid. Quest. How may I know a sin of Infirmity? Page 382 Answ. First,
Some mistakes are observed. Secondly, It is answered Negatively. Lastly,
Affirmatively Page 382 1 There are mistakes on both hands: Some think they are
sins of Infirmity, when they are not: And some think they are not, when they
are. ibid. The first kind of mistake is on the left hand: fourfold. 1 Some
think it a sin of Infirmity, because it is a small sin. ibid. 2 Because they are
drawn on by others Page 383 3 Because they strive against it ibid. 4 Because
they are troub^ed after it ibid.
The Second mistake, on the right hand, is threefold: Page 384 1 Because they
sin knowingly ibid. 2 Because they fall into the same sin again ibid. 3 Because
they fall into it after admonition ibid.
Object. 1. My sin can be no sin of infirmity; for I sin against my conscience,
and knowingly ibid. Answ. It is one thing to sin knowingly, and another to sin
against knowledge ibid. Object. 2. I fall into my sin again, and lie in it,
therefore etc. Page 385 Answ. There is much mistake about lying in sin; he that
complains of it, lies not in it ibid. Object. 3. I fall into it after
admonition, therefore etc. ibid. Answ. So did the Disciples in the Text ibid.
Quest. How then shall we know a sin of Infirmity? Page 386 Answ. Negatively 1
That is no sin of infirmity that is gross and scandalous, committed with
deliberation ibid. 2 A ring-leading sin to other sins, is no sin of infirmity.
ibid. 3 A sin of Presumption, is no sin of infirmity ibid. 4 A reigning sin, is
no sin of infirmity Page 387 Sin reigns in a man, 1 When it commands his
Spiritual Duties ibid. 2 When men do yield the Members of their Bodies, as
weapons of Unrighteousness Page 388 3 Sin reigns when it usually rises by
opposition ibid.


Quest: How shall we know a sin of infirmity, affirmatively? ibid. Answ. 1 If
it proceed from want of Age in Christianity ibid. 2 If it be no other sin than
what is incident to all the Saints Page 389 3 If it be such a sin as you cannot
avoid ibid. 4 If your sin be your burden ibid. 5 An infirmity will hardly
acknowledge it self to be a sin of infirmity Page 390 6 If your sin rise chiefly
from some outward cause ibid. 7 Infirmity loves admonition Page 391 8 Infirmity
is an ill sin, but a good sign ibid. 9 Sins of infirmity ^re Servants to Grace
ibid. 10 Infirm^ty keeps a man's heart humble Page 392
Quest Suppose my sin be a sin of infirmity, what then? Page 393 Answ. Then
Christ will never leave you ibid. Quest. Is there no evil in a sin of infirmity?
ibid. Answ.Yes, very much; it is a Gibeonite, though it se^ve Grace ibid. III.
Though there be much evil in it, Christ will not cast us off for it. For Page
394 1 It is an honor to a man to pass by infirmities, much more to Christ ibid.
2 The Cov^nant of God is c^njugal, and passes over infirmities ibid. 3 The
Saints are Members of Christ's Body Page 395 Object. The back-slider shall be
filled with his own ways ibid. Answ. 1 There is great difference between the
relapses of the Saints, and the backslidings of Hypocrites ibid. 2 The meaning
of that is explained, how a man is said to be satisfied with his own ways Page
396
Application. See what great necessity we have to examine our sins, and to know
what they are ibid. Quest. What advantage has this sin of infirmity above
other sins? Page 397 Answ. 1 Very much; for if it be a sin of infirmity, though
it be very g eat, it shall not hinder the acceptance of my Duty ibid. 2 It shall
not hinder the sense of my Justification ibid. 3 There is a pardon lies of
course for it ibid. 4 It shall never bring a scourge on a man's family ibid. 5
It will never spoil a man's Gifts ibid.
Quest. Suppose I find a sin of infirmity, and fall unto it again, what must I
do? Page 398
Answ. These Duties 1 I will observe Gods design in it, and labor all I can to
advance Gods design ibid. 2 By Gods Grace I will never believe Satan's false
reports of Christ, that he is a hard Master Page 399 3 I will not question my
spiritual estate for every sin ib. 4 I will not cast off my self, and others
for sins of infirmity. 5 I will not cast off the things of Christ, because of
any infirmity may hang to them Page 399 6 I will never be discouraged from
doing my duty ibid. 7 I will commit no sin, because it is but a sin of
infirmity. ib.
Quest. What shall we do not to fall into this sin again? Page 400 Answ. 1
Forget not your former sin ibid. 2 Quench your sins in the blood of Christ
ibid. 3 Watch and pray ibid.

The False Apostle, tried and discovered. ON Revel. 2.2.
IT is held that these seven Epistles, written to the seven Churches in Asia,
contain the state of Christ's Church unto his coming again Page 405 The first
Epistle is written to languishing Ephesus ibid. Christ's commendations of this
Church ibid. 1. For her Labor. 2. Patience. 3. Zeal. Page 406 Her Zeal is
described two ways. First, By the Persons they dealt withal, false Teachers.
Secondly, By their exercise of their Zeal, and that in two things, 1. By the
discovery of false Teachers. 2. By the hatred of their deeds. ibid. The
discovery of false Teachers was a work concerned the Apostles then living ibid.
DOCT. It is a work of great Commendation with Jesus Christ, to try, and
discover false Teachers. To clear this Point, consider, ibid. Arg. 1. What
dangerous people false Teachers are Page 407 Arg. 2. It it hard to discover
them Page 408 Arg. 3. It is an excellent thing to discover them Page 409
Object. Is it lawful to go to their meetings to discover them? Page 410 Answ.
Negatively, No more than you must go to Rome to try, and find out Papists ibid.
Quest. How then shall I try all things? ibid. Answ. Mark this Scripture well, 1
These. 5.20, 21. ibid. Application. We should all take pains in this work,
because Christ commends it Page 411 Quest. If we may not go to their Meetings,
how shall we discover false Teachers? Page 412 Answ. All Teachers are to be
discovered three ways. By Their Call Their Doctrine Their Fruits, or Lives.
ibid.
I. For a man's Call to preach: He is called either to a particular work, or to
an Office. The first is called Prophecy: and so some men are called to preach.
If men be so called, then they must preach, 1. According to the Analogy of
Faith. 2. If so called, they must have a Gift to profit others by 3. He must
submit what he says, to the judgment of others, or he is a false Prophet in
this kind ibid. Secondly, If a man be called to Office, then his Office is
either Extraordinary, or Ordinary ibid. 1 If Extraordinary, he is either a
Prophet to foretell what is to come; or an Evangelist, whose Office is to
minister to the Apostles. Page 412, 413 2 If a man be called to an ordinary
Office, 1. He must be apparently Godly. 2. He must be qualified for preaching.
3. He must be chosen, or desired by the Church. 4. He must be separated to the
work of the Ministry. ibid. II. For the Doctrine; Teachers may, and must be
tried by their Doctrine ibid. Particular Doctrines men must be tried by, are
many. I will name some few ib. 1 True Apostles ever exalted the Scriptures Page
414 2 True Apostles never denied the Deity of Christ ibid. 3 True Apostles
never did deny Ordinances ibid. 4 True Apostles preached for Justification by
faith, and imputed righteousness in opposition to works Page 415 5 They never
told us, that there is a light in every man, which followed, will bring him to
Salvation ibid. 6 They never preached that any man might be perfect, and
without sin in this life. ibid. 7 True Apostles never preached against respect
unto Magistrates, Parents, Masters Page 416 8 True Apostles, never preached
against the resurrection and assention of the Body ibid. 9 The Apostles never
preached that there is no place of Heaven or Hell after death ib.
III. A Teacher may, and must be tried by his Life and Fruits Page 417 Quest.
If they go in Sheeps Clothing, how shall I know they are Wolves? ibid. Answ.
Yes, 1 A Wolf is a Wolf in Sheeps clothing, for he is fierce and cruel Page
417 2 He howls at the Sheep, and barks at the Shepherds ib. 3 He rends the
Sheep Page 418
Quest. What fruits does our Savior mean we must know them by? ibid. Answ. 1 If
you find they walk after the flesh. ibid. 2 If they are given to lying. ib. 3
If the height of their Religion be to maintain some Opinion that consists in
voluntary Humility ibid. 4 If their Doctrine tends to draw men away from the
Ordinance of God ibid. 5 If he falls short of him he would seem to be, yet in
show goes beyond him ibid. 6 If you find that his great work is to destroy the
Church of Christ. Page 419 7 If he forsake the Assemblies of the Saints ibid. 1
It is the special work of Church Officers, to try and discover false Teachers
ibid. 2 It is a work incumbent upon all the Saints and Churches. ib. More
practically 1 Go to God for a spirit of discerning Page 420 2 Lie in no sin or
Error, for all sin blinds ibid. 3 Consult with others about it ibid. 4 Keep
close to the Scripture ibid. 5 Have not too great charity toward an Opinion of
such as are accounted false Teachers ibid. 6 Wait long before you close with
any of their Opinions, that you may not be deceived. ibid.


The Good and Means of Establishment. ON 1 Pet. 5.10.
Different Opinions how these words a^e spoken, Page 425 The Authors Opinion
Page 426 The words divided into 1 A Blessing prayed for 2 The Arguments ensuing
it.
1 The Blessing prayed for, is expressed in four words; Perfect, Stablish,
Strengthen, Settle you ibid. DOCT. Settling Grace in respect of all trouble, is
a great Mercy, and Blessing. Page 428 1 It is a great mercy for a Nation to be
settled. 2 It is a great mercy for a Church to be settled. 3 It is a great mercy
for a particular soul to be settled. I. The first part proved by Scriture Page
429 II. The Second part proved, by five Arguments Page 429 1 When the Church
has this settlement, then it is edified. 2 It is the mercy God has promised
to the Church Page 430 3 It is that the Apostles labored for ibid. 4 That they
prayed for ibid. 5 It is sometimes the signal mercy of Christ's Church ibid. III.
The third part proved by five Arguments Page 431 1 It is the ground of all our
fruitfulness ibid. 2 It is the bottom of all our praises Page 432 3 It is the
beginning of our perseverance ibid. 4 It is that good thing which pleases God
exceedingly. ib. 5 It is the Character of a gracious person Page 433 The second
part of the Doctrine It is worthy of all our p^ayers, For Page 434 1 It is that
mercy we all need. 2 God only can settle us Page 435
Application. How great cause have they that ar^ settled, to praise God? ibid.
Object. I find not this settlement, therefore I cannot praise God Page 436
Answ. It may be so: yet there is much difference between variety of Grace, and
instability of Spirit ibid. 2 If Establishment be so great a Blessing, how sad
is their condition that are not established? ibid. Quest. What shall we do that
we may be established? Page 437 Answ. I. For a Nation. ib. 1 It must first
settle Religion. 2 There must be care taken for a succession of Godly
Magistrates ibid. 3 They must do, and govern in Righteousness Page 438 4 They
must trust in the Lord. ibid. II. For a Church. Page 439 1 All Churches must
know that they are laid out for sufferings ibid. 2 A Church that would be
settled, must have all the Officers and Ordinances of Christ. 3 Let all Churches
know, and keep the word of Gods Patience ibid. 4 If difficulty arise in a
Church it must call for help from other Churches Page 440 5 Especially al
Churches must pray for this mercy of Establishment ibid. III. Particular
Persons, what they must do for this mercy. ibid. Quest. 1. What shall I do to
be more settled in my Judgment, and in the Truth Page 442 Answ. 1 Get a clear
understanding in the truth of the Gospel ibid. 2 Take heed of unsetling
Principles Page 443 3 Make no Impression, the Rule and Square of your Judgment
ibid. 4 Get into Gods House Page 444 5 Go not into the company of those where
false Doctrine is taught ibid. 6 Practice what Truth you know Page 444 7 Go to
God for his establishing Grace Page 445
Quest. 2. What shall I do to be more settled in my practice? ibid. Answ. 1 You
must be very sensible, and humbled for your own unsetledness. ibid. 2 Labor for
a serious Spirit. ib. 3 Live not on your Condition alone, but upon the God of
your Condition ibid. 4 Take heed of a divided heart Page 446 5 Put on the whole
Armor of God ibid. 6 The more you delight in Gods ways, the more will your
heart be established. Page 447 Rules to make the way to Heaven, sweet and easy
to a man ibid.
1 Do not separate between Gods Commandment, and his Promise ibid. 2 Apply
your self to Gods work according to Gods Method ibid. 3 Improve that variety
which God has given you ibid. 4 Do not stint your self in any Duty, as to go
no further. Page 448 5 Naturallize Gods Gifts in your soul ibid. 7 Motives to
establish a man in the ways of God ibid.
1 Free yourself from temptations ibid. 2 The fixation of your soul, is a great
honor to your Profession Page 449 3 You shall thereby rejoice the hearts of
those that are set over you in the Lord ibid. 4 You have been constant in
seeking Earthly things, it is shame to be inconstant in seeking heavenly things
ibid. 5 If you be not constant in Good, you will be constant in evil ibid. 6
The more unconstant you are, the more you make the way to Heaven difficult
Lastly, Go to God by Prayer for fixation Page 450

FINIS.
The Contents.
The great Things Faith can do. On Hebrews, 11.32.
Sermon I.
THe Text Opened. Page 1, 2 DOCT. Saving Faith will do very great things. Page
3 Opened by three Propositions: 1 Saving Faith is a working Grace. ibid. 2
Saving Faith will do great things 3 How saving Faith comes to do great things
First Proposition proved. ib. 1 True Faith has the spirit of the Gospel in it
ibid. 2 It Is a friend to work. ibid. 3 It Is the first worker in the soul ibid.
4 It is an universal work Page 4 5 It works best alone ibid. 6 It works best
sometimes in the dark ibid. 7 It works best at last ibid. II. What are those
great things Faith can do? Page 5 Answ. Faith will do as great things now, as
it did under the old Testament ibid. 1 Is it not a great matter to overcome
temptations? ibid. 2 Is it not a great matter to perform duties to the hazard
of life? ibid. 3 Is it not a great matter to mortify fears? ibid. 4 Is it not
a great matter to mortify your cares? ibid. 5 Is it not a great matter to have
your griefs assuaged? ibid. 6 Is it not a great matter to be kept steady in
times of changes? Page 6 7 Is it not a great matter to be a stranger to the
world? ibid. 8 Is it not a great matter for a man to be faithful under all his
betrustments? ibid. 9 Is it not a great matter to see things invisible? ibid.
10 Is it not a great matter for a man to live in dependence only upon Christ?
ibid. More Comparatively.
There are three great Agents in the world; ^ut Faith works beyond them all
Page 6 1 Compared with Power Page 7 2 Compared with moral Honesty. This is
Proved by three Reasons ibid. 3 How it may appear that faith can do more than
Gospel Gifts, and common grace. It is made to appear by four Arguments Page 8,
9 III. How comes it to pass that true faith can do such great things? Page 10
Answered by four Reasons.
1 It goes forth in the might of Gods Promise ibid. 2 It goes forth in the
might of Gods Power. ibid. 3 It goes forth in the strength of Gods Call ibid. 4
It goes forth in the sense of what God and Christ has done for the Soul Page
11 Application. 1 The Reason why men do no great things in their Generation, is
because they want Faith ibid. 2 If you would do great things call in for faith
Page 12
Quest. How shall we improve our faith to do great things? Page 13 Answ. 1 Study
much the greatness of God ibid. 2 Keep close to Gods Ordinances ibid. 3 Do not
chide off your heart from believing Page 14 4 Use your faith to do small things
ibid. 5 Look much upon the Call you have to any work Page 15
Notes from Verse 32. 1 The number of Believers under the old Testament, it
seems was not small ibid. 2 God will own that Faith that is but weak at first
ibid. 3 From Sampson I collect it is possible a great sinner may be a true
Believer ibid. 4 Note from Jeptha, a bastard may be a true believer ibid. 5
From the mentioning of David, Samuel, and the Prophets, etc. consider, when God
has extraordinary work to do, be raises up extraordinary men Page 17 Lastly,
You see what high esteem God has of Faith. ib.

The Great Things Faith can suffer. ON Hebrews, 11.35.
Sermon II.
The Text opened Page 20, 21 DOCT. True saving Faith will suffer great things.
ib. Three Propositions. 1 A true Believer may suffer hard things 2 Faith will
carry him through them. 3 How Faith can carry him through them. ibid. The first
Proposition proved, Page 21, 22, 23
Quest. Secondly. How shall a man be able to go through these hard things?
ibid. Answ. True saving Faith will do it. Proved by four Reasons. Page 23, 24
Object. We have read of many that suffered hard things, yet had not this faith
ibid. Answ. 1 A wicked man may suffer as an evil Doer Page 25 2 A wicked man
does not suffer upon choice ibid. 3 He does not lay the stress of all upon
Faith ibid 4 He suffers not cheerfully, but discontentedly ibid. 5 He will rest
upon his sufferings ibid. 6 He will yield at last Page 26 7 He does not bring
forth the quiet fruits of Righteousness. ibid.
Quest. Thirdly. By what means can Faith do this ibid. Answ. 1 It is the work
of says to submit to Gods will. ibid. 2 It is the work of Faith to cleave to
the Commandment of God ibid. 3 It is the work of faith to close with the
Gospel Page 27 4 It is the work of faith to look upon the recompense of r^ward
ibid. 5 The more one sees the hand of God as a Father in sufferings, the more
able a man will be to suffer. ibid. 6 The more a man can see to the end of his
affliction, the better he will go through it ib. 7 It is the proper work of
faith to look on both sides of the dispensation Page 28 8 It is the proper work
of faith to see one contrary in another ibid. 9 If God engage to help us, faith
can suffer much in afflictions ibid.
Application. If any man be to suffer great things, let him call for faith.
Page 29 Object. These are no suffering times. ibid Answ. Bless God for your
Gospel Liberty. Consider the sufferings of your Brethren. ibid. Particular
applications to several conditions ibid. Who knows how soon suffering times may
come? Page 30 Quest. How shall we strengthen our Faith that we may be able to
suffer? ibid. Answ. 1 Consider frequently what great things the Lord has done
for you already ibid 2 Study much the Book of the Revelations, which is a
standing Cordial for suffering times Page 31 3 Consider frequently, the great
gain of suffering Page 32 That suffering times, are gaining times, proved by
ten Arguments Page 32 1 Suffering times are teaching times ibid. 2 Suffering
times are sin-discovering times ibid. 3 They are self-bethinking times ibid. 4
They are growing times. ib. 5 They are truth-adorning times ibid. 6 They are
uniting times. Page 33 7 They are praying times ib. 8 They are soul-assuring
times ibid. 9 They are weaning times. ib. 10 They are Heavenly, and glorious
times ibid.
Three Observations from the Words Page 34 1 Consider the Persons that
suffered, mentioned in the text, whence I collect, That greatness of
sufferings, are no argument to make you doubt of your Salvation. ibid. 2 They
suffered in hopes of a better Resurrection; whence consider, what those men are
that would steal from you the hopes of a better Resurrection Page 35 3 They
suffered all by faith, whence observe, That it is no easy thing to believe
Page 36

FINIS.

