A BREVIATE OF THE STATE OF SCOTLAND IN ITS GOVERNMENT, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices, and Inferior Courts,
Districts, Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and free Corporations,

LICENSED

April 1. 1689. James Fraser.



LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCLXXXIX.

A ABREVIATE Of the STATE of SCOTLAND In its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferour Officers, Offices, and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and free Corporations,
THE Ancient Kingdom of Scotland being governed for many Ages by Kings: Upon
the Death, Removal, or Incapacity of their Kings, or in extraordinary Cases,
there was always an extraordinary meeting of the Three States, who appointed
Governors during the inter Regnum, or the same States (being as the
representative of the whole Body called the great Assembly of the Nation)
Proclaim d a King, who being King, by Virtue of the whole Bodies proclaiming of
him King, called a Parliament, or more ordinarily a Convention of States, who
had not power (though they were the same Members that Constitute a Parliament) to
make Laws, but only to lay impositions upon the Subjects for some exigences. A
King being once thus proclaimed vertute officii and Coronae inherent to the
Office, though it wants the Ceremony, or Solemnity of Coronation, Names the
Officers of State; Greater and Lesser, grants Commissions to the Judges fit for
every Sovereign Court, Inferior Courts, and Jurisdictions, and grants
Commissions to the Officers of the Crown, of the Army, the Lion Herald,
Governors of Forts, and all other Inferior Officers in Civil and Military
Assairs, etc. Sometimes the King calls a Parliament, which is the great Council
of the Nation, to Crown him and to make Laws, to corroborate or ratify the old
wholesome Laws, something in desuetude, which makes them New Laws, because when
in desuetude, and not put recently in Execution, the penalty incurred is become
so Universal to the Nation, that the Execution in that case of them would prove
dangerous. Thus a Parliament lawfully called has the Chancellor to preside, if
no Chancellor, they choose their Preses, the Register, and the Clerks of
Session (his Deputies) are Clerks of Parliament, and the same are as to a
Convention. But a general Meeting of the Three States choose their Preses,
Clerks and other Officers and Servants, except such as are heretably so. In
time of Popery, when not only our Kings, but all in Europe had enslaved
themselves to the Court of Rome, there was no Oath which tied King and People
to the True Apostolic Doctrine and Worship. Yet when Scotland was Reformed and
the Protestant Religion established by Law, there was an Oath enjoined, and
always taken by the King, (except of late) for professing and maintaining the
same Religion, and our Kings were never used to come to any part of the Regal
power till they took this Oath.

The Officers of State in that Kingdom are Eight in Number.
The Great Officers are,
The Lord High Chancellor, who is President in all Courts he sits in, except
the Thesaury and Exchecquer: he has a Pension and a Sallery.

The Lord High Thesaurer (or Commissioners) who presides only in the Thesaury
and Court of Exchecquer: A Pension and a Sallery.

The Lord Privy Seal, Keeper thereof, the Emoluments thereof.

The Lords Secretary one or more, who most ordinarily attends at Court: A
Pension and the Emoluments of the Office.

The Lesser Officers of State, are
The Lord Register; who is keeper of the Register and Rolls of Parliament, etc.
being a place of the greatest trust and Emoluments in that Kngdom, and is
ordinarily a Lord of Session, and has a Sallery likewise.

The Lord Advocate, who advises and pleads all the Kings Causes, etc. a Pension
and Emoluments.

The Lord Justice Clerk, which though a very Old Office, has no Emoluments, but
a Pension.

The Lord Thesaurer Deputy, who has the same Emoluments in his degree with the
Thesaurer, and presides in the Thesaury and Exchecquer in the Thesaurers
absence, both have pensions,

The Officers of the Crown, besides the Officers of State, are
The President of the Council, and so takes his place next the Chancellor, a
Pension.

Collectors General.

Master of Requests.

Directors of the Chancery, which is an Old and Honorable Office, the
Emoluments of the Office.

The Director of the Rolls.

The First Supreme Court of the Nation is the PARLIAMENT.
IN this Court (which is so called by the Kings Proclamation in needful places)
The King himself sits immediately upon a Throne under a Canopy of State, or in
his absence (since King of England) by his Commissioner, and this Court
consists of three States: In time of Popery the Bishops and Miter'd Abbots made
the first State, but since, of Archbishops and Bishops; sometimes the Nobility
and Gentry the Second; the Buroughs the Third; though there be Persons that
urge good Arguments to maintain that the Nobility, the Gentry who are
represented by certain Commissioners from each Shire, and the Commssioners from
Burghs etc. with the assistance of a General Assembly sitting makes the three
States, of Parliament. The King or his Commissioner, with the three States the
day of their meeting, ride in their Robes and foot Mantles with their
Attendants from the Kings Palace in a Parliamentary way; the meanest State by
way of precedence by two and two riding formest, so by degrees, and the King or
his Commissioner last to the Parliament House, then the King or his
Commissioner is conducted to the Throne, Prayer being said after all placed,
the Rolls are called, the Court fenced, the King, if present, tells them the
reasons of calling them, or the Commissioner by the Kings Letter presenting of
his Commission, and by a Speech to the Parliament tells the reasons of their
meeting, next they choose the Lords of the Articles; but the old Form is
altered; for one State used to choose eight out of another State, which being
thirty two, with the eight Officers of State, makes forty; but now by Act of
Parliament its settled that the King or Commissioner choose the eight
Clergymen, the Nobility choose their own eight, and those sixteen choose eight
of the Barons and eight of the Burgesses, which way of choosing of the Members
of the Articles would insinuate a fourth State, besides Officers of State, or
else one of these called the States would seem to be superfluous, or at least
not essentially necessary to constitute a Parliament, which would make the
foresaid Argument good. This is all that is done the first day, and so they
ride in the same order to the Kings Palace. The next day, or sometime that
afternoon, the Commissioners meets with the Lords of the Articles to prepare
matters brought into the Parliament. When any thing is past in the Articles and
Parliament by the Major Vote, the King or Commissioner touches it with the
Scepter, which imports the Kings consent, without which it is of no force, and
their Votes they approve or not approve, or say non liquet, for there is no
dissents, or protests allowed in public Acts being accounted treasonable, sed
licet protestare in privatis pro interesse, and takes Instruments in the
Registers hands. This Court ordains the Acts to be printed, and proclaimed,
without which they seemed of old to have no import till they were legis
promulgatae, notwithstanding of any late customs introduced. This Court do
revise or produce Acts and Decreits of any other Courts, and canvass the Rights
and Properties of private parties, if not prescribed by Law, and even in that
case they have found prescriptions short in some circumstances. This Court
Names Commissioners in every Shire, for Cess, Excise, Supply, etc. Names
Justices of peace for high ways, Bridges, Briefs, and other things, tending to
the public peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom in their divisions, and
whatever might have been done in this great Court, which might furnish grounds
of grievances: Its not the fault of its Constitution, or of the Members
thereof, since all is carried by the Major Vote; but some corrupt Nobility,
that either expected, or did live by the Kings bounty, or the Representatives
of Shires, or Burghs, that were a packt, party, who purposely contrived the
late yokes to debar many good honest Protestants from being capable to be
Electors of Members, or Elected Members of Parliament themselves, though
otherwise qualified by the Ancient wholesome Laws, to be both Electors of
honest Men, and Elected themselves.

The Second Supreme Court is the Privy Council.
THis Court consists of the Chancellor, who presides the other Officers of
State, the President of the Session, Justice General and such others of the
Nobility and Gentry as the King pleases to Name, this Court was Originally
appointed for the public affairs, and are Judges of Riots, and disturbances
given to the peace of the Nation, but it arose to its highth only when King
James came to England, who placed much of the power anent the public safety
and peace of that Kingdom in the Privy Council: Yet till of late this Court did
never decide in Civil or Criminal causes occasioning any debates, but remitted
the same unto the Judge Ordinary, either, via ordinaria, by raising of formal
processes, or summarily by remitts, and the parties application to the Judge,
or Judicator competent: Many think this extraordinary power given to this Court
was a ready way, not only to introduce the dispensing power, but also an
Arbitrary Government into that Kingdom, the Council having no bounds further
than to obey whatever the King by Evil Ministers suggested to them by Letters,
or other ways, and if there could be an Union happily concluded betwixt the Two
Nations, the deciding of Riots, etc. might be done by the Sheriffs of the
several Shires, and if difficult, the Lords of Session by a distinct sederunt
from that of the Session, once or twice a Week might decide all these affairs,
competent to a Privy Council themselves, being made up of ordinar and
extraordinar Lords, and this would be a great ease to the Lieges, not to be
obliged to attend Two Courts where one might serve. This being only Honorable
they have neither Pensions nor Casualities.

The Third Supreme Court is the Session called the College of Justice a
Capite, or Nobiliore part.
THis Court being one of the most Noble, Decent, and most orderly Courts in
Europe, both from its first Foundation and later Constitution by King James the
Fifth, who (by its newer foundation, created it a College of Justice after the
form of the Supreme Sovereign Court or Parliament of Paris) gave it great
Privileges, Emoluments, and Immunities, before it was so Erected, it was
called in Scotland the Kings Council, or the Lords called the Lords of Council
and Session, which Title, they still carry, being first a Committee of
Parliament, and was an Ambulatory Court by Circuits, when its thought they had
a cumulative and distributive Jurisdiction centered in one, which made it both
Civil and Criminal: This most Honorable Court now consists of one constant
President and fourteen Senators, who have but mean Salleries not suteing the
Grandeur of their Character, or their fatigue or attendants, being but two
hundred pound English yearly to each Senator: The Lord High Chancellor presides
here when present, but speaks little, except he be a bred Lawyer; the King
Names several other extraordinar Lords, who sit but are not obliged to
attendance, because they have no Salleries but Votes with the rest: This Court
now sits the first of June, and rises the last of July, and vacates till the
first of November, at which time they sit again, till the twentieth of
December, and then it vacates till the Tenth of January, when they sit again,
and rises the last of February: Many thinks the Christmas vacance too long
which occasions their Session from the first of November, till the twentieth of
December by reason of the ensuing vacance to have but little effect. In time of
Session they sit from Nine of the Clock, till Twelve in the forenoon, all the
days of the Week, except Sunday and Monday; they sit sometimes in the
afternoon, to end concluded causes, or to hear long debates, the forenoon being
short to hear them. The Lord Stain when President in the year 1676 procured a
Warrant from the King, giving power to the President to call the Lords in the
Afternoon together to hear and dispatch business, which was a great occasion of
dispatching the Lieges affairs, and the Lords follows much of the same Methods
as yet: The Senators in the Inner House, with the other extraordinar Lords, sit
in a semicircle Bench, in their Robes in the forenoon, but wanting them in the
afternoon, to hear Petitions, Processes resumed by the Clerks, and Advocates
debates their Clients cause: They have three or six principal Clerks, who per
vices as they are employed minutes the Heads of great and weighty causes and
debates, and writes the deliverance of Bills, Interloquitors, and desinitive
Sentences by the Lords in the Inner-house, which makes Decreits, and which
determines all business in that Court, there being no appeals from it to any
other Court, but by application to themselves before extract, or Reduction, or
Suspension in common Form: Which in the second instance comes always before
themselves, and must be upon other new grounds than was formerly represented:
Nine of the Lords makes a Quorum in the Inner-House, otherwise they cannot Vote
in any Case, except in particular Cases referred to one or more by the Hall
Lords, and one of the Senators (the President always being excepted) is Weekly
appointed Judge in the outerhouse for discussing of ordinary Actions, who sits
upon a Bench with the six under Clerks sitting before him, who minutes likewise
in their course as they do in the Inner-House all Debates or Writs, Signatures
or Sentences of ordinary Causes decided by the Ordinar, who meddles with no
extraordinary case, except where it is remitted to him by all the Lords to be
discust, in the outerhouse for dispatch. There is a Roll of ordinary Actions,
such as summons, simple reduction, improbation, recognition, etc. Advocations
and Suspensions in another Roll, for the outer-House, when these are called:
Terms granted, Acts extracted, which when called here are either Sentences
pronounced by the Ordinar in the Outer-house, and so Decreeted, or else the
parties craves a Representation of one point or more to the Hall Lords, and the
Ordinar to make a report of their interloquitor, which he reports in the
Outer-House the next day ordinarily, or at the side Bar, the next Week, but the
most of causes in the outer House, especially of consequence comes to the
Inner, House, by making an avisandum to all the Lords, and is Enrolled in
course by Warrant in the Inner-House Roll of ordinary Actions, which in its
course again comes to be called in the Inner-House before the Hall Lords, and
after debate, either there is a decision, or the cause is concluded. Where
there is any probation led and enrolled de novo in the Roll of concluded causes
in the Inner House, then it is advised by the Hall Lords with close doors, and
where there is any difficulty after the President resumes the Hall cause and
debate, and the Lords calls the parties, and their proctors to see if they have
any further thing to say, and ordinarily they have nothing material to add:
Then the Lords orders them to remove, and upon serious deliberation they Debate
and Vote, and calls in the party and their Advocates, and by the mouth of their
President declares their Sentence definitive, which is a Decreit to be
extracted, as all other Decreits are by the Clerks, conform to the Minutes and
Warrants of the Process, if there be more sheets in the Decreit than one: The
principle Clerk sidesigns the joining of every two sheets, and the Lord
Register subscribes the last Sheet of the Decreit, which contains the Hall
Libel, as it is in the Summons, the Executions, Debates, and Interloquitors of
the Outer and Inner-House and the Lords Sentence: This is a Vidimus of the
Lords of Sessions procedure, but of all the Courts in that Kingdom their
Decreits and precedure are most formal. So that the Lords by their constitution
are obliged to do nothing, but by the greatest deliberation in the World, upon
these Decreits the parties raise horning, and other diligence under the Kings
Signet for payment of the debt or securing of the debtors Estate for payment
thereof. This Court is said to have a distributive Jurisdiction only, but no
competent Judicator for life or Limb, etc. But for faults competent to
themselves too tedious to insert here, being intended but an abreviate. This
Court makes acts of sederunt, equivolent to Laws and Acts of Parliament, and
are in force till they be approved of, as ordinarily they are, or recalled by
Parliament, which is seldom, or never, because the Lords of Session are the
proper interpreters of Acts of Parliament, who have a Bench in Parliament, not
as Judges, but sit there in time of Parliament, to give their opinion to the
Parliament, when required in matters of intricacy. The Lords of Session make
their own Collectors and other Servants of the house, except the four ordinary
Macers who serve them in time of Session, and have their Commissions from the
King, with yearly pensions besides their ordinary dues from parties. The Lords
appoints certain of their number weekly to sit upon all Bills of Suspension,
etc. And for examining of Witness by turns. This Court having formerly been
called the Kings Council for the reasons foresaid, had not only a distributive,
but a cumulative Jurisdiction. The reasons for dividing and giving part of
their Power to the Privy Council, and partly to the Justice Court is not sit
now to be urged. The restricting the power of this Court, and imparting it to
others, and displacing Judges that were honest men, Notwithstanding their
Commission (ad vitam and culpam) who could not comply with any designs against
their Conscience, and placing men not fit for that weighty employment, or that
would comply, was a ready tool to serve that prerogative (which some
Parliaments gave the King, by the help of evil Ministers, that were either too
forward, or others that connived at any thing was enjoined them) to a Stretch
of fundamentals, tending always by degrees to a despotick power and arbitrary
Government. This Court likewise, has an Ordinar at the side Bar, which (though
not in their Constitution) dispatch much ordinary business, and is pretty well
regulate within these two years, allowing none at the Bar but one at once, some
think (as was hinted before) that this Court might supply the Privy Council for
the ease of the Lieges.

The fourth Sovereign Court, is the Justice or Criminal Court having a
Cumulative Jurisdiction.
THis Court came in place of the Justice Eir, or Justice General, which was
last of all in the Person of the Earl of Argile, who transacted for it with
King Charles first; and was made then Justice General of all the Islands, which
raised great debates betwixt him and some pretended heritable Sheriffs there,
and that Jurisdiction was taken away by the Parliament, 1672. Which was erected
in a Justice, or Criminal Court, this Court consists of the Justice General
alterable at the Kings pleasure, Justice Clerk, and five other Judges, who are
Lords of the Session; and this Court ordinarily sits upon Monday, and goes
sometimes to the Country by Circuits, which the Country found to be very
uneasy to them: The ordinary Clerk of this Court has his Commission from the
Justice Clerk, They have four ordinary Macers and a Doomster appointed by the
Lords. The Clerk raises a libel or inditment upon a Bill past by any of the
Lords thereof, at the instance of the Persuer against the Defender a criminal,
who is readily incarcerated after citation. When the Party, Witnesses, and
great Assize or Jury of forty-five are cited, the day of compearance being come
fifteen of the greatest Assize is chosen to be the Assize upon the pannal or
prisoner at the Bar; if he be a Peer, most part of his Assize are Peers, and
the Assize sits with the Judges to hear the Libel read, witnesses examined, and
the debates hinc inde, which is verbatim, written in the adjournal Books. The
Kings Advocate pleads for the Persuer, being the Kings Cause, and other
Advocates for the pannal, the debates being closed, they either find the Libel
or Indictment not relevant, in which case they desert the Diet, and assoiles or
absolves the party, or if relevant then in that case the Assize or Jury of
fifteen is removed to a closer Room, none being present with them, where they
choose their own Chancellor and Clerk, and considers the Libel, Deposition, and
Debates, and brings in their Verdict of the pannal Sealed, guilty or not
guilty, if not guilty the Lords absolves, if guilty they condemn and declares
their Sentence of condemnation, and the punishment to be put in Execution
against the pannal by a Macer, and the mouth of the Doomster. So the Pannal is
carried to prison till the Sentence be put in Execution. Of Late the Kings
Advocate have brought in an use of raising a Summons of an Assize of error
against the Assizers, if they find not guilty, and they are tried as the other
Pannal, which occasioned a great deal of grumble and murmur, Men choosing,
(being upon Soul and Conscience) rather to be fined, than to be Assizers. All
these Lords have pensions.

The fifth Supreme Court is the Exchequer or properly the Kings Baron Court.
THis Court consists of the Lord High Thesaurer, who presides, though the Lord
Chancellor were present, or Commissioners in place of Thesaurer and Thesaurer
Deputy, who presides even among the Commissioners being one himself, or in
absence of the said Lord Thesaurer. There are several Assistants to them who
are called the Lords of Exchequer, who have little power, because the Thesaurer
or Commissioners, and Thesaurer Deputy, who carry all as they please, because
they but Sign in Exchequer whatever the Thesaurer, or Commissioners and
Thesaurer Deputy, revise and pass in the Thesaury Chamber: Before this Court
was formerly overruled by the Comptrouler of the Kings Accounts, and the
Master of Requests. All the Kings grants whether Commission, new Charters, or
Charters of confirmation, with de novo damus, Confirmations of Subvassals,
Charters from their Superiors to prevent forfeiture, and other things which
pass of course for small composition, gifts of ward, single or taxed, Letters,
Pensions, etc. are revised and componed by the Thesaurer or Commissioners and
Thesaurer Deputy, pass in this Court; and there are few debates before it, for
where there is any matter of Law, it is remitted to the Judge Ordinar, if there
be any new Signatures. Parties Leased or injured compear, and give in Petitions
to be heard, and so they are either past Simpliciter, or with protestation are
stopped, till the cause be further represented. The Kings will was a Law in this
Court, and so whatever the prevailing Ministers Suggested to be the Kings
pleasure, was readily complied with there, by some, and connived at by others,
The Lords have no Pensions nor Emoluments.

There is a Sixth Court called a Sovereign Judicator, which is the Admiral Court.
THIS Court came first to an hight by King James VI. Act, Parl. 18. cap. 10,
etc, And this Act Ratified and further extended by King Charles II. Parl. 2.
cap. 16. And further amplified by the Act 1681. Declaring it a Sovereign Court
in it self. His Royal Highness the Duke of York being then Lord High Admiral,
and was the Kings Lieutenant, and Justice General on the Seas, and all Ports,
Harbors, and Creeks thereof, and upon fresh Waters or Navigable Rivers below
the first Bridges, or within the highest Flood marks; where there was no
Bridges, he had the sole Jurisdiction in all maritine Causes, Foreign or
Domestic, Civil or Criminal, Exclusive of all other Judicators, with many
other Privileges; He reduces Decreits of Inferior Admiral Courts, and revives
his own. No advocation from, or suspention of these Decreits, but by the whole
Lords of Session in time of Session, and by three in time of vacancy, and must
be discust Summarly without the order of a Roll, and that the Admiral and his
Deputy have the sole Right of granting Passes or safe Conduct to all Ships,
etc. In that Parliament there was strong debates to oppose this Act; Showing,
That it would be a retrenching of the Power and Privileges of the Lords of
Counsel and Session, and incroachment thereupon, etc. This Court which is kept
by the Judge Admiral only and his Deputies, meddles with Bills of Exchange of
Merchants, which is thought to be extrinsick to that Court, and no doubt, is
very proper and convenient for encouraging of Trade and Commerce, and for the
credit of the Nation abroad, with Foreign Merchants, that there should be a
particular Court erected of honest knowing Merchants, who are the only proper
known Persons to judge in such Cases, and requiring Summar Execution, for many
reasons that might be given. This Court also since its Soveraignity was
extended, the Judges thereof were active enough to ply their time, the benefit
of their Sentences accrewing to themselves, he making himself a Judge
competent, in actions not competent for him, as was said already, or in case
the Customs were put in a Commission, the Judges whereof no doubt should be
knowing Merchants, who did not traffic themselves, and would be sit Judges in
Debates anent Bills of Exchange. These have the Emoluments of the Court.

The Second Great Heritable Offices in the Kingdom; are
The Lord High Constable.

The Lord Marshal, and these Exercise their Jurisdictions, and keep their
Guards in Edinburgh and the Parliament House, the time of the Meeting of the
General States of Parliament, or Convention.

The Heritable Usher.

The Crown Bearer.

The Scepter Bearer.

The Purse Bearer.

The Sword Bearer.

Before the King or His Commissioner in time of Parliament.

These have been altered in the time of some Parliaments.

The Chancery.
The Director of the Chancery an Ancient and Honorable Office, having been
formerly the King's Chaplain, Ergo Clericus.

The Director Deputy, his own two Clerks, and a Register with two Copraters.

The Military Offices within the Kingdom whose Commissions are granted by the
KING; are
The General, and all other Officers under him in Military employment, they
have their ordinary dues which are known.

The Leiutenant General: Of old there were Leiutenants of Shires and Counties,
but in desuetude.

The Master of the Ordinance, who is ordinarily termed Lieutenant General of the
Artillery; This Office will be the better distinguished by riding Marches,
betwixt it and the Governor of the Castle of Edinburgh, to whom it was
incommodious of late; the Army lying there.

The Major General.

The Captains of the Kings Guards of Horse, who take place, and has the pay
always of a Colonel, and is the first Colonel in the Kings Forces, and his
two Lieutenants, Cornet, etc. Take their places in the Army accordingly.

The Colonels first of the Kings Guards of Foot, then the Colonels of other
Regiments, either Horse or Foot as they are in, with all the Captains,
Leiutenants of Companies and Ensigns with other subaltern Officers.

Captains and Governors, Lieutenant Governors or Constables often so called,
and other subaltern Officers of the Castles and Forts, whereof there are five
only in repair, and Garrisoned in Scotland, viz. The Castle of Edinburgh, where
the Crown and Honors, and the most material Registers of the Kingdom are kept,
and is a good Post commanding the City of Edinburgh; here is kept the Kings
Cash when there is any store or quantity of it, of which sometimes there was an
ill account made; the Castles of Striviling, Dumbarton, Blackness, and the
Bass, but the Earl of Mar is heritable Keeper of Striviling Castle, the rest at
the Kings grant.

The Muster Master General has his Commission from the King with a yearly
Pension, and ought to be a bred Soldier, being a place of great Trust in that
Sphere.

The Lyon-Office.
The Lion King at Arms has his Commission ample from the KING with great
Privileges, Immunities and Emoluments; and as it is most Ancient, so it is a
most Honorable Place.

The Lion Clerk.

The Lion Heralds.

The Pursuvants.

The Lord Lion with those makes a Court, and issue Precepts relating to their
own Court and Jurisdiction, and have the Fees and Emoluments of their Offices.

The Messengers have their Commissions from the Lord Lion, and are convened for
Faults, Convict, Sentenced and Punished, or Deprived by this Court, but the
creating of too many ignorant Messengers contrary to the old Law, is a great
Inconveniency and Oppression to the Nation: So that this Crew and the number of
them should be regulaer and conform to the old Law, for the fourth part of
Messengers now in Scotland might serve.

Mint-House Officers.
The General of the Mint.

The Master of the Mint-House.

The Warden thereof.

The Sey Master thereof.

The Clerk, and many other Inferior Officers: They have their Fees and
Emoluments.

This Office has been much abused of late by the evil management of the Bullion
and Coin.

The Kings Ordinary Servants anent his Health.
Two Physicians in Ordinary, with Pensions, they serve the King's Commissioner.

One Apothecary.

One Chyrurgion.

One Almoner.

More of Honor than of Profit since our King lived in England, only they have
small Pensions and are free of all public burdens, as all the Kings other
Servants are.

The Bishops (when in being) have their Commission or Congydelier from the
King, which is only but the Kings consent to the Dean and Chapters election of
fit and qualified Persons for the Offices, in their several Sees, which is the
granting of the consent before the Election real: For this Election being of a
long time but a Sham, because the King Orders the choosing such a Man, the
person named being recommended by a Court Minion, whether good or bad, the King
hardly knowing him; So that the Clergy themselves having been imposed upon of a
long time, as well as other people, proves a check in that Kingdom, since the
power of the General Assemblies was taken away, and the power thereof centered
in one man in every Diocese; They constitute their Commissaries who keep their
Courts with their own Clerks, except where the King has the making of Clerks.
The Sea of St. Andrews being divided, and the Bishopwrick of Edinburgh taken
out of it by King James VI. they have the naming of the four Commissaries of
Edinburgh equally between the two Bishops, but all those Commissary Courts,
which formerly were constituted for patronage, and provision to the Widow and
Fatherless, are proven a burden to both those and the Leiges, by their
exactions and quot, and confirmation Money for Testaments, though there were
never so little lest by the defunct to his Wife and Children; and generally the
People in Scotland seldom agree with Bishops for their Commissary-Courts, and
many, even sober, neutral, unbiased, and unprepossessed of the difference of
Church Government, think that a well constitute moderate Presbyterian
Government, that had not power to meddle with matters of State or
Superintendency, either by Speech or in a Pulpit (which was the first
Government after the Reformation) and was established in other well governed
Countries, would agree and suit better with that peoples constitution: and
these Governments and their Constitutions may be writ of a part if judged
convenient.

The King appoints a chief Ranger of his Forests, and Keepers of his Parks,
but some have monopolized the Kings benefit, by the pretension of having those
things heritable by a long Tract of their possession.

A List of the Inferior Officers in Scotland, who have their Commissions from
the King, or of late from the several Officers of State, other persons, or
Corporations.
Places derived by Commissions from the King, still.
One or Two Solicitors or Agents for the King: A Pension.

Two Clerks to the Privy Council. Emoluments of that Court.

Two or Three Receivers, or Cash-keepers: A Pension.

Conservator in the Low Countries: Pension and Emoluments.

One or Two Post-Masters General, and Letter Offices, chiefly in Edinburgh and
other places: Emoluments and a Pension.

This Office would be extended through all the Kingdom.

Clerks to the Treasury; Emol.

Two Clerks to the Exchecquer; Emol.

Register to the Thesaury: Emol. Presenter to the Signatures: Emol.

Clerk to the Admiral Court: Emol. Several Sheriffs Clerks: Emol.

Some Commissary Clerks: Emoluments.

Collectors to the Customs, but that Office would be better regulated in a
Commission to the benefit of the Nation, and the public Revenue, which can be
made appear to a demonstration, and it has several depending Officers:
Emoluments.

Chamberlain to the Crown Rents of the Earldome of Ross and Lordship of
Ardmeanach: This Office in some Hands has been a vast Burden to the Fewers, and
less benefit to the King: A Pension.

The Chamberlain of the Crown Rents of Orkney and Schetland: A Pension.

Collector to the Annuity of Teynds, none for present.

Surveyer General: A Pension.

Clerks to the Cocquets in some places: Casualities.

Collectors of the Church Teynds, if brought in to the Exchecquer, by which
great benefits might be made, and the Clergy sufficiently provided, not in
being as yet.

Clerk to the High Commission if it continue: Casualities.

Writer to the Privy Seal: Casualities.

Usher to the Exchecquer: Casualities.

Counter of the Thesaury: Pension,

The Kings Printer: Emoluments. Master of the Revels: Emoluments.

The Kings Barber, Tailor, Sadler, Shoemaker, etc. Pensions.

Sadler to the Artillery: Emoluments, and small Pension.

Kings Smith. Kings Mason: Pensions.

Kings Wright or Joyner, and many others of this Nature; all have Pensions.

Dependers on the Lord Chancellor in his Office.
Appender of the Great Seal: Emoluments.

The Cashiate: Emoluments.

The Purse Bearer. The Mace Bearer: Both Pensions.

The Keeper of the Inner-House Roll, and concluded Causes: Emol.

Dependers on the Thesaurer, or Commissioners, and Thesaurer Deputy.
All the Inferior Officers in and about the Thesaury and Exchecquer.

The Farmers of Kings Customs, if in being.

The Collectors of Excise, and all other Inferior Collectors of the Kings
Rents and Revenues, all have Pensions and Casualities.

Dependers on the Lord Privy Seal.
The Keeper of the Privy Seal only, Farmed.

Dependers on the Secretaries of State.
The Keepers of the Signet one or more, and their Deputies: Allowance of
Pension.

All Writers to the Signet: Fees of their Employment.

All Signatures that pass under the Kings Hand before they come to the
Exchecquer, are Signed and Docked by the Secretary, and he is to be answerable
for what he Docks and Signs, notwithstanding that the King superscribes. The
dues for Docking only, which is five Pound.

Their own Deputies and Servants in their Office.

Several others have their Commissions that way.

Places depending upon the Lord Register bringing Vast Casualities by their
Enteries.
The Six Clerks of Session, who are Clerks to the Parliament, and their Six
under Clerks, and all Extracters in the Three Offices: All buy their places of
the Lord Register: Emoluments.

The Clerks of the Bill Chamber, and several other Clerks there, which is a
great Office, and of Great Emoluments.

The Sheriffs Rolls and Stewards Rolls, Clerks (who are not many) but these are
called Clerks of Exchecquer, and the Lord Register gets entry Money for them and
their Deputies: Fees.

The Clerks of the Baily Rolls: Ibidem Fees.

The Clerks of the Borough Rolls and their Deputies: Ibidem Fees.

The General Register of Saisings, etc. Fees.

The General Register of Hornings and Inhibitions: Fees.

All the particular Registers of Saisins, Inhibitions, etc. in every Shire and
Borough of the Kingdom: Fees.

The Clerk for admission of public Notaries in the whole Kingdom: Fees.

Of late the Keeper of the Rolls of the Outer Session House, and the Keeper of
the Minute Book of all things done in the Inner and Outer-House, though it
properly belonged to the Lord President, with advice of the Lords.

All Clerks to the Justices of Peace in the Kingdom: Emoluments.

The Keepers of all the Registers and Rolls of Parliament, and Session, laid up
in the lower Parliament house within the time prescribed to be there kept, with
all his Substitutes, and Sub Clerkswithin the Kingdom. This is a great
Emolument likewise, and is one of his casualities, what Fees they please.

There is another Office added to him, Parliament 1685. in the Clerks Office,
called Keeper of the Register, which is beneficial and seems to be a grievance
to the Nation, by the addition of half a Mark Scots money to him for every
Subscription.

The Kings Advocate.
He grants only deputations to persons in his own Office in any part of the
Kingdom, where his presence cannot be in Criminal or Circuit Courts.

His own Principal Servant, who in his name passes all extraordinary Bills
competent to him for his dues, and Summons that are not privileged without his
marking, and Commissions for Trial.

The Justice Clerk.
He grants only Commission to the Clerk of Justice Court, some servile Macers,
and the Doomster of that Court.

Town of Edinburgh.
The Two Town Clerks, and the several Deputies and Dependers in City and
Suburbs, the Emoluments of which are great, and a place of great Trust, who
ought to be known Lawyers, and Men of great skill as well as Integrity.

Agents for the Buroughs, chiefly disposed of by the Provost: A Pension.

Keepers of the Tolbooths or Prisons of Edinburgh, Leith, and Cannongate:
Emoluments

Clerk to the Meetings of the whole Buroughs: Emoluments.

Clerks to the Kings Customs there: Pensions.

The disposal of many other beneficial places within the City and Suburbs,
which with their other Privileges, Rents casual and real, and Stems, makes a
great public good; but how employed, being seldom called to an account, though
the Lord Thesaurer, or Collector General, or Commissioners of the Thesaury are
obliged yearly to call them, by virtue of an Act of Parliament, to an account
in the Exchequer; neglecting of which, proves a great Detriment to the public
Good of the place

Sheriffs and their Deputies, only the Fees and Emoluments.
Most of the Sheriffs were anciently heritable, and being a matter more of
Profit than of Charge, our Kings bought many of their Rights, so that there are
now some of them heritable, some by the Kings Gift.

The Sheriff may sit by himself, or his Deputy, who judges in ordinary Causes,
as also in Thefts, Murder, and lesser Crimes; but in Murder when the Criminal
is taken in hot Blood, though there be no Appeal in this Kingdom, yet any Cause
may be taken from it by Advocation before Sentence, or Suspension of the
Decreit after Sentence by the Lords of Session in Equity, etc. and are the
ordinary Reasons given in their Petitions or Bills: these Courts are much
encroached upon by some later Regalities by Repledgiations.

A List of the Sheriffdoms of the Shires of Scotland, and their Sheriffs.
1 The Shire of Edinburgh comprehending Midlotham. By the Kings Gift. 2 The
Shire of Berwick containing Merce. Earl of Hume. 3 The Shire of Peebles,
containing Tweddall, Earl of Tweddall. 4 The Shire of Selkirk, containing the
Forest. Murray of Philiphaugh. 5 The Shire of Roxburgh, containing Tevidale,
etc. Duke of Buccleugh. 6 The Shire of Drumfreis containing Nidisdale, etc.
Formerly Earl of Drumfreis, now Duke of Queensberry. 7 The Shire of Wigtoun,
containing the West part of Galloway to Carruck. Sir Andrew Agnew, but for
present the Viscount of Dundee by the late incroachment. 8 The Shire of Air,
containing Kyle, Carret, and Cunningham. By the Kings Gift. 9 The Shire of
Ranfrew, containing that Barony. Earl of Eglintoun. 10 The Shire of Lanerk,
containing Clidisdale. Duke of Hamilton. 11 The Shire of Dunbarton, containing
Lenox. Duke of Lenox. 12 The Shire of Boot, containing the Isles of Boot and
Arran. Stuart of Boot. 13 The Shire of Interara, containing Argile, and some of
the Western Islands. Earl of Argile. 14 The Shire of Perth containing Atholl
and much Highlands, with the Earldom of Monteith and Trathern. Marquess of
Atholl. 15 The Shire of Striveling lies on both sides of the River of Forth.
Earl of Mar. 16 The Shire of Linlithgow containing Westlothian. Hopetoun. 17
The Shire of East Lothian. Earl of Wintoun. 18 The Shire of Clackmannan
containing a part of Fiffe. Bruce of Clockmannan. 19 The Shire of Kinross
containing another part of Fiffe. Earl of Mortoun. 20 The Shire of Coupar
contain, the third Division of Fiffe. Earl of Rothes. 21 The Shire of Forfar
containing Angus with its pertinents. Earl of Southesk. 22 The Shire of
Kinkardin containing Merms. Earl of Marshal. 23 The Shire of Aberdeen with its
several pertinent of great extent. By Gift. 24 The Shire of Bamfey containing
part of Buchan, etc. Baird of Auchmedan. 25 The Shire of Elgin containing the
Eastern part of Morray. Dumbar of Westfield. 26 The Shire of Naim containing
the West part thereof. Sir Hugh Cambell of Calder. 27 The Shire of Innerness
containing Badzenoch, Lochqualer, and the South part of Ross; but formerly
contained all beneath it. Earl of Morray, 28 The Shire of Cromartie containing
that part of Ross within its Frith. Viscount of Tarbat. 29 The Shire of Ross
containing the Sky Lewis and Harrick. By Gift. 30 The Shire of Sutherland
containing Strathwater. Earl of Sutherland. 31 The Shire of Cathnes containing
that Country. Earl of Cathnes. 32 The Shire of Orkney. By Gift.
The Burghs of Regality and Barony being no State, sending no Commissioners to
Parliament, or Convention; and having less Privileges and belonging to
particular persons, as the Kings Grants; and where these Lords or Barons hold
their own particular Courts (but have power of Pit and Gallows) they are not to
be treated of here, not concerning the Government much, except it be where late
Grants encroaches upon old Jurisdiction.

Constabularies, Stuarties and Bailaries.
Constabulary of Haddingtoun containing East Lothian and Lautherdale. Earl of
Lautherdale if he represent.

Constabulary of Dundee, and other pendicles. Now the Viscount of Dundee by the
late alteration.

Stewartry of Strathern with its pendicles. Earl of Perth.

Stewartry of Monteith. Earl of Monteith.

Stewartry of Annandale with its pertinents. Earl of Annandale, Johnston.

Stewartry of Kirkudbright, containing all the East part of Galloway. Earl of
Nithisdale.

Bailary of Kyle, in desuetude.

Bailary of Carrich. Earl of Cassils.

Bailary of Cunninghame. Earl of Eglintoun.

The Royal Boroughs, and the free In-corporations of Scotland.
These are a State a part, and have their yearly Conventions from which a
Commissioner comes from every one of them to the Parliament, Convention, or
General Meeting of the States of the Kingdom: They make Laws also for
themselves about Trade and other things relating to the In-corporations, their
Conventions are circular, going round about the head Burghs, and at one Meeting
names the other. In these Buroughs there is a Provost, called the Lord Provost
in the Metropolitan City of Edinburgh, equivalent to the Lord Major in England,
he is Prefectus Vrbis. In Edinburgh there are four Bailiffs or Aldermen that
are next to the Provost in the Government: In most of all the rest of the
Burrows, there are only their Provost, and two Bailiffs or Aldermen. They have
also their Dean of Gild or Edilis, their Thesaurer and Common Council, all (if
Legally chosen) are chosen by their own Community, conform to their Charters:
Their Council of which the one half is chosen by Merchants, the other half by
Tradesmen every Year. The Trades have their Courts, for which there is one from
every Trade called the Deacon, and choose their Deacon Convener to meet about
their own Affairs; these Free Corporations are called Freemen of Trade. The
Town Council meets once or twice a Week, to consider the Affairs of their
In-corporation, they have their several distinct Courts for administrating in
indifferent Affairs, but their Magistrates by their Fundamental Rights continue
but one Year; notwithstanding of any late Court proceedure with which some
Citizens complied for private interest.

A List of the Boroughs; and because many of them strive for precedence they
are set down in their several and respective Shires.
Middle, East, and West Lothians. Edinburgh the Metropolis. Linlithgow.
Haddingtoun. North Cervick. Dunhar. Perth in Perth-shire.

The County of Fiffe. St. Andrews. Coupar. Kirkaldie. Crail. Anstruther.
Pittinweeme. Dysert. Earlsferry. Kinghorn. Innerkerthing. Burnt-Island.
Queensferry. Dumfermling. Cullross. Clackmannan in Clackmannan-shire.

Angus. Dundee. Montross. Forfarr. Breiehen. Arbroath.

Galloway. Kirkudbright. Wigtoun. Withorn. Stranraver.

Clidisdale. Glasgow. Lanerick.

Murray. Elgin. Nairn. Forress.

Ranfrow-shire. Ranfrow. Pasley. Ruglen.

Mar. Aberdeen. Kintore. Inner-rurie.

Boyn. Bamfe. Cullen.

Ross. Innerness. Tayne. Dingwall. Air in Kyle. Irvine in Cuninghame. Rothesay
in Boot. Dumbarton in Lennox. Inerrara in Argile. Jedburgh in Tevidale. Peebles
in Tweddall. Selkirk in Forest shire. Striviling upon Forth. Dumblain in
Monteith. Dornoch in Sutherland.

Annandale. Annan. Lochmaban.

Nithisdale. Drumfreis. Sanquhar. Bervy in Mernis.

All these inferior Judges and Magistrates, though they have their own Law and
Customs to rule by, yet all their decisions and determinations, centers in the
Common, Civil, and Municipal Law, by which the Sovereign Judicatures proceed,
and that gives a check to any irregularities that these commit in their
respective Jurisdictions for redressing the grieved. Many things might be added
to this were it not intended only as an Abreviate, to give a vidimus to those
who are not obliged to know so much of the present State of Scotland, and the
Encroachments of late.

FINIS.

