A BRIEF ABSTRACT OF THE Great Oppressions and Injuries which the late MANAGERS
of the East-India-Company Have Acted on the LIVES, LIBERTIES and ESTATES of
their Fellow Subjects. WITH A SHORT ACCOUNT OF THEIR Unjust Dealings with the
Natives in sundry Parts of INDIA; which has so much exposed the Honor and
Interest of the Nation, and hazarded the Loss of that Advantageous Trade;
Humbly Presented to the Consideration of the Honorable, the Knights, Citizens
and Burgesses, in Parliament Assembled.
THEY have been great Promoters of Arbitrary Government, endeavoring by all
Ways and Means to destroy the Rights and Liberties of the People, and enslave
us both at home and abroad to the Absolute Will and Pleasure of the late King
and Themselves; as appears by the following Intimations of their most Illegal
Practices.

In the First and Second Years of the Reign of the late King, they did procure
his said Majesty's Proclamations, prohibiting their Fellow Subjects from
Trading to India, and commanding all Persons from their Employments and
Settlements in those Parts, to repair to the Company's Garrisons in India, or
return home on Pain of Death, and Forfeiture of Estate.

They procured Judgment to be given in the King's Bench by the late Chief
Justice Jefferies, whereby the King's Proclamation was declared to be Law, and
Juries directed to find Damages accordingly. And thereupon, most vexatious and
chargeable Suits were brought against sundry Persons, for such immense Sums as
150 and 200000 Pound-Actions, and diverse People were illegally Fined on
Informations of pretended Misdemeanors, for Trading to India: Some Ships
designed on Voyages thither, have been Arbitrarily obstructed, and others, at
their Return, forced to Ransom their Cargoes at the Cost of the Fifth Part of
their Values; whereby great Sums of Money have been extorted from the Subject
contrary to all Justice and the known-Laws of the Land; and for the carrying on
these their unlawful and exorbitant Oppressions, they procured a Letter from
the Late King to the Judge of the Admiralty, which was delivered by one of
their Agents in open Court; whereby he was over-awed in the Execution of his
Office, and the due course of Law and Justice obstructed: By which illegal
Proceedings several of their Fellow Subjects have been damnify'd to the amount
of 40000 l.

They did procure a Ship of the Late King's to be sent to India, with
Commission to seize, or destroy all the Ships and Goods of their
Fellow Subjects that were found in the Limits of their Charter; and
accordingly, said Man of War did seize and occasion the destruction of Three
Ships and Cargoes, to the value of about 60000 l.

They did also procure a Power from the Late King, to Erect Courts of
Judicature, and exercise Marshal-Law within the Limits of their Charter; and to
pass final Sentence in Cases Civil and Criminal without Appeal to England,
which is humbly conceived to be a most Arbitrary Invasion of the Fundamental
Rights and Liberties of their Fellow Subjects.

They did by their Influences at Court, procure the late King's Commission to
the Commanders of their own freighted Ships, with leave to wear the Royal
Ensigns; under which they have seized several of their Fellow Subjects Ships
and Cargo's in India, carrying them to those Places where they have set up
Unlawful Courts, which they call Courts of Admiralty; and there made Prize of
them, to the Ruin of their Proprietors, from whom they have in this manner
taken the Value of above 50000 l.

As to their most unaccountable Actions at St. Hellena, in destroying, as well
the Lives as Estates of their Fellow-Subiects at that Place, This Honorable
House has been already Presented with a particular Account thereof by the
Humble Petitions of some of the Persons agriev'd, showing, that besides four
Men which were killed, and fourteen wounded, they executed Two by a Court
Illegally erected by the Governor there, and five more were put to Death by a
Court-Marshal, set up in that Place by the Company's Procurement.

For the obtaining, and support of this Unlimited, Arbitrary Power over their
Fellow Subjects, Those that managed the Affair, have presumed to Issue out
Great Sums of the Company's Money under the Title of Secret Services; And they
had brought themselves under the Annual Tribute of Ten Thousand Guinneas to the
Crown as was several years paid to the Two Late Kings.

Nothing can be more notorious than the exorbitant Power they use to assume
over those that are concerned with them, as well Merchants and Mariners in
their Service, as Owners of Ships they take to Freight: Whereof Numerous
Instances might be given; But it may suffice for all to observe, That upon any
Difference which happens between them and any of the foresaid Persons, They
compel them to stand to such Determination, as shall be made by Arbitrators
chosen out of their Own Committee, And so their Will is their Law; And they are
both Parties and Judges in the Case, which is a most Arbitrary insulting over
their fellow Subjects.

They did some time since take upon them to deny Payment of Moneys when due,
and required by their Creditors, and presumed to affix a Writing over their
Door, declaring that they would not discharge any of their said Debts till a
certain time as they were therein pleased to appoint.

Some of the prevailing Members in the Committee, have of late presumed to
introduce a new way of vending the Company's Goods by Private Contract; which
is directly contrary to their Established Rules; and is very prejudicial to the
Trading Merchants in general, as well as to the Company's Interest, being a
Monopoly in it self, and designed only for the private Advantage of some few
Persons that are admitted to a Concern therein.

They have taken upon them to impose Illegal Oaths on their Fellow Subjects
both at home and abroad; As for one Instance, Their General Sir JOHN CHILD,
forced this following Oath to be Subscribed and Sworn to by sundry Seamen
belonging to the Ship Adventure in the River of Surrat, before he would pay
them their Wages, viz.

I The Subscriber, will be Obedient to His Majesty, and observant of His
Authority established here abroad, and hereby declare, I will, in Obedience to
His Proclamation, Royal and Righteous Command, withdraw my self from, and
wholly relinquish with Abhorrence, all Rebels and Interlopers. Witness my Hand.

They have of late years sent out Ships to India at most unseasonable times,
and detained them there much longer than usual, or than any real Interest of
the Company's in a Regular Management of the Trade would require; and since, by
their great Neglects, the Dutch took the Advantage to make themselves Masters
of Bantam, whereby they were expuls'd from their most Commodious Settlement
there. They have employed Ships for the procurement of Pepper to such Places,
which for the known Unhealthiness of the Air, were formerly excepted in
Charter-Parties; by all whieh most imprudent and irregular Actions, they have
occasioned the Loss of several Thousands of our best Seamen, and destroyed
several considerable Ships, to the great Damage of the Nation in general, as
well as to the particular Owners; And out of this Ruin to others, the Company
hope to reap the Benefit of employing said Ships some Years, without paying any
thing at last for Freight or Demorage due to them.

Besides these evil Practices on their Fellow Subjects, whose Lives and Estates
they have thus disposed of at their Pleasure, their late Dealings also with the
Natives of India, have been most unjust and unaccountable: For, first their
General Sir John Child, did by their Order borrow of the Merchants of Surrat
for their Accounts, about 400000 l. Sterling; And then withdrew from the Place
without rendering any satisfaction for that vast Debt; And at his Arrival at
their Island of Bombay, he employed the English Ships under his Command to make
further spoil on the Mogull's Subjects, by seizing all their Ships and Goods
they could meet with; which violence they committed under the Royal Ensigns of
our Nation. And by the last advice from those Parts they had taken about
fifteen Sail, computed to amount in the whole to a much bigger Sum than their
aforesaid Debt which they left unpaid at Surrat: And these their strange
Proceedings are in all respects most unjustifiable; for they have not, in
reality received any Injuries that require such Reparations. Nor did they make
due Applications to the Great Mogull, for Redress of their pretended Grievances
before they acted the foresaid Depredations upon his Subjects.

In several Ports in the Bay of Bengall, which are also in the Dominions of the
Great Mogull, they have not only used the like force in taki^ their Ships, but
also made Assaults on the Land; destroying the Houses, G^ and Ships in Harbor
by Fire; and killing many of the Inhabitant(...) all these cruel Outrages have
been committed without any provocations that may help to extenuate, much less
justify them: Nor has the success of their Attempts been better than the
Merits of their Cause; for by the preposterous Actings of those to whom they
committed the management of these Martial Exploits, there seems to have been a
fatal Infatuation amongst them; and all they have hitherto done in near Three
Years, is only to deprive themselves of that most Beneficial Trade, and dig
Graves for many hundreds of our Countrymen that were employed in that unhappy
and unjustifiable Expedition.

They seem to design to set up this new Trade of Warfare, and make it their
main Business in all Places; for upon most unjust, groundless and frivolous
pretenses they have likewise made War on the King of Siam, wherein their
Ingratitude does highly aggravate their Crime; for that Prince has not only
always treated them in a very friendly manner, but been even lavish of his
Favors to those of Our Nation, who have Traded to, or resided in his Kingdom;
And he had taken into his Service several of our Countrymen, amongst whom,
some were preferred to places of great Command, which was for the Honor, and
might have been (as in some Instances it proved) for the considerable Interest
and Advantage of the Nation and Company. But in June 87. Two Vessels of War
belonging to the Company, besieged and assaulted the Port of Mergen, where the
English had the Government, which proved a fatal Occasion of the Massacre of
about sixty of Our Countrymen, One of the Company's Vessels being taken, and
the other forced to secure himself by flight; Upon which, the King of Siam has
proclaimed War against the Company, But with a kind Invitation of all
Englishmen unconcerned with them; to whom he promises the same Friendship as
formerly.

These are brief Intimations of the late Illegal and Arbitrary Proceedings,
which though they pass under the Name of the Company, yet are really and justly
chargeable on a few ruling Members in the Committee, and particularly on Sir
JOSIA CHILD, by whom they have been chiefly, if not solely, projected and
perpetrated, He having for some years past usurped such a Despotic Power, and
Sovereign Authority over all their Affairs here, as he has taught his
Emissaries to assume and practice abroad: The Means whereby he has arrived to
this arbitrary Dominion, being by that pernicious Custom they have amongst them
of making every 500 l. a Vote, and so his 50000 l. Stock, with some other
considerable Sums that are under his management, has subjected the whole to his
Dispose: And though there is still the Formality of a Committee, according to the
number the Charter directs; Yet they are all, in effect, made choice of by
himself, and Deposable at his Pleasure, as appears by the strange Alterations
have been lately made in turning out so many Gentlemen of known Integrity and
long Experience in those Affairs, because they would not comply with his Unjust
and Unwarrantable Proceedings; and supplying their Rooms with those who have
made up what they wanted in other Qualifications, by their entire Submission to
him in all things.

In Consideration of the Premises, it is Humbly Prayed

That the Present Charter be Called in, and that because the Trade may be best
managed to a National Advantage by a Company:

That a New Company be legally confirmed with a Joynt-Stock, under such a
Constitution, as upon due Consideration shall be most Advisable, And that some
speedy and Effectual Course be taken for the retrieving our lost Credit, and
re-establishing our Commerce on such a Bottom, as by a Prudent and regular
Management afterward, may conduce as well to the Public Honor and Advantage,
as the particular Interest of the Adventurers.

FINIS.

