A BREVIATE FOR THE BISHOPS, IN VINDICATION OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE House of
Commons*
FOR THE Settlement of the THRONE.
To which is Annexed, A PROTESTANT President, (exact Parellel with the Case of
England) in the Reasons that moved the Convention of Sweden, to declare the
Forfeiture and Exclusion of Sigismond the Third.
By a Person of Honor.
IF Necessity, which is a great Branch of the Law of Nature, did not press us
at this time, to come to some speedy and pertinent Determinations, as to the
business, especially, of Settling the Government, that nicety, which seems to
be promoted and set afoot in all our Counsels, might, considering the
weightiness of the business in hand, rather claim the Just Commendation and
Applauses of every good Man, than, as it seems now, fall under their Censure;
and I may say, Indignation. If the matter Debated were extraneous, and the
Kingdom within it self peaceably, and firmly settled; if the circumstances of
our Affairs were ordinary and usual, and could admit of an unlimited time for
their Decision; if we were secure from Injurious Resolutions of our Enemies
abroad, or from the private Machinations of Disaffected Persons at home: If
these things were so, it were worthy the Wisdom of those, who by their
unseasonable Scruples (so generally resolved against, and now again by them
started) may seem either ignorant of the desperate languishing condition of
these Kingdoms at present, or prejudiced and disaffected to the peace and
settlement of them for the future; I say, it were then worthy the Wisdom of
these men, to dissect every particular of so Important an Affair, before they
made any Determination of the General. As we all acknowledge the extraordinary
circumstances of this juncture, so they themselves have not been a little
contributing to this Happy Revolution: The Princes first Declaration tells us,
he had the Invitation of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal. Was it Justice and
agreeable to Conscience then, to call for Foreign Arms to assist us, against
our own King, in the recovery of those Rights, Liberties and Properties, which
contrary to Law, he had Invaded, and taken from us? And is it now become a
Scruple in those same Consciences, to be confirmed in those Rights, etc. by the
same Arms and Power? Is that pretended, absolute, unlimited Power, which in
their Prayers and Sermons they have so often nibbled at, and endeavored to
retrench, now, in its just debasement become so Inviolable and Sacred, that it
must become a Point of Faith entirely to submit to it? Has this small fit of
fear and discouragement in our implacable Enemies, so well secured us from any
future encroachments, that we need not be careful of any further Assurance? Has
these men's Re-embellish'd Honors so obliterated the memory of the Dangers
some of them so lately have escaped, and the rest justly feared, as to free
them from all apprehensions for the future? What is it these Gentlemen would be
at? What do they fear? Is it without Reason, without Justice, without
President, that we defire to be everlastingly secured from POPERY and SLAVERY?
Not without Reason; for when we have seen many of our fairest Branches Lopped
off, many of our Liberties Invaded, many of our Laws Perverted, and the Axe at
last laid to the Root of our Government, it is high time then, I say, to provide
for our Safety, and to put a stop to that current which would have quickly
overrun and drowned us; not without Justice, for where my Life and Property is
hunted after, and Assaulted, I may, by the Law of God and Man, repel the
Injury, and stand in my own Vindication; not without President, even in
Protestant Kingdoms (not to mention the Romanists who both teach and practice
the Deposing of Evil and Wicked Magistrates;) and though in England we may
perhaps think the changes we have very lately seen among our selves admit of no
President, it may easily be proved that what has been done of late in this
Nation, has been in great part formerly presented and allowed of upon Foreign
Stages; yea, and not many years out of the memory of some yet living, if we
would but look into the Actions of other Regions, and those too wherein the
Reformed Religion is professed, we shall find that they, by their public
Records, acknowledged that in case of Tyranny and Oppression, it was lawful not
only to defend their Lives and Liberties against all Assaults, but reduce and
declare the persons so offending, incapable of holding the Government. A lively
example of this, and almost exactly parellel with ours, was the Case of
Sigismond the III. Hereditary King of Sweden, who by a Convention of the States
of that Kingdom, was Excluded even with his Heirs, (a severity which both the
Honorable Houses of Parliament here have with great Justice and Wisdom
declined,) from that Crown for ever: Some of the Articles drawn up against him
were these; first, For swerving from their received Christian Religion; as
also, from his Oath and Promise, and Solemn Engagement made to his People at
his Coronation, to Preserve their Rights and Privileges; as also, their Holy
Reformed Religion Inviolated; for departing the Country without the consent,
and unwilling to the States and Orders of the Realm; for exporting several Acts
of great concernment out of the Cancellarie; for prosecuting such as would not
embrace or favor the Romish Superstition; for contemning and endeavoring to
Undermine and Annul those laudable Institutions and Laws made for the security
of the Realm, and the Establishment of the Protestant Reformed Religion; for
raising up what Enemies he could against his Native Country, thereby to involve
his Subjects in a deluge of Blood, which he intended, and had almost effected;
for inhumanely designing and suborning Russians and Villains, to Murder and
Assassinate one of the chief Nobles, for no other reason, but that out of
Conscience and Duty he would have persuaded him from those Irregularities and
Notorious Breaches, of the known Laws of the Land. For these and many more
Causes, as the sending his Son out of the Land, without the consent of the
States, and causing him to be brought up and Educated in the Romish
Superstition, did the Swedes (submitting the same to the judgment of all
sincere and candid Arbitratours) justify their abdication for ever, of King
Sigismond III. and his Heirs, from the Crown of Sweden, etc. and proceeded
strait to the Constituting and Electing of Charles Duke of Sudermannia; vid.
Spanheim 's hist. of Sweden, etc. And in conclusion, they pray for and doubt
not of a sincere and candid Construction, a benign and favorable Acceptance,
from all Christian Emperors, Kings, Princes, States, etc. of this their
Legitimate Defense, and to Vindicate them and their most equal Cause from all
Calumny, or Evil Interpretation whatsoever. The Circumstances relating to this
present juncture in England, bear so near a resemblance almost in all those
Grievances objected against the said Sigismond, that our late King by a sort of
(...) seems to have breathed his Soul rather than to have Copied after him,
though indeed in some cases, he has plainly outdone the Original, especially
in relation to his supposed Son. And as our King thought sit to Copy a King of
Sweden, I cannot apprehend how it can lessen our Judgments or Integrity, our
Piety, or our Loyalty, to follow the example of the Swedes, excepting in the
case of the Lawful Heirs (whom every good Englishman and Protestant, to their
utmost Danger and Peril, are ready to defend and maintain) to take such
measures for our future Security, and lawful Establishment, as shall not by any
Humane Art or Endeavor, be liable to Interruption.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Bowers, at the Crown in Long-Acre. 1688/9.


