THE CHRISTIAN Sacrament and Sacrifice By way of Discourse, MEDITATION, and
PRAYER Upon THE NATURE, PARTS, and Blessings OF THE Holy Communion.

By DAN. BREVINT. D. D

At the THEATER in OXFORD, Anno Dom. 1673.

The CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT and Sacrifice.
At the THEATER in OXFORD



To The RIGHT HONORABLE The Lady ELIZABETH CARTERET.
THis is one of the many Tracts which I made at Paris on several Subjects, at
the instance of those two Incomparable Princesses, who there for many years
continually employed me in their service. What use they were pleased to make of
them, your Ladyship knows best, being often admitted with some other Persons of
Quality, to their private Devotions: Therefore when I present you with these
Papers, I but repeat and ratify their gift, and by this public Address pay that
respect which I owe (besides what is due upon other accounts) to that singular
Esteem and Kindness which they ever had for your Ladyship.

Those great and holy Souls had no desire, more earnest then to contemplate and
embrace Christian religion in its original beauty, and see it freed from the
Encombrance which ordinary Controversies most commonly throw upon it. And
really tho they did understand all these Scholastic points as well or better
then their Teachers, (especially the Princess of Turenne, whose clear and quick
Apprehension, and neat and unartificial eloquence were wonderful) yet they
cared so little for them, that they deplored very often the unhappy necessity
that had filled the Church with such weapons; and had so flanck't about (to use
here their expression) Jerusalem with Bastions, that one could hardly see the
Temple.

I can assure you Madam, that upon this account the holy Communion which is as
the tree of life in the Paradise of God, the most generous plant in his
Vineyard of the Church, has bin the worst dealt with. For as it was most
despitefully treated by Popery; the Protestants did spend most of their care
this way to secure it, whereby it could not be well expected that men thus
taken up in raising fences, in planting thorns and quicksets against wild
Bores, could have much time to dress and improve better plants. Then came from
Germany Anabaptists, and from other parts Socinians, who pretend that the best
way of pruning luxuriant excrescencies, is to cut up by the roots.

Here then Madam, while the Romanists having made havoc of the Vineyard, and
laid it wast; the fatness of the ground brought forth that poisonous wild vine
of the Roman-Mass: and others left nothing but dead sapless branches and dry
leaves, the emty figures of fanatic Heretics; I make it my endeavor to rescue
it out of the hands of such Husbandmen, and to restore all back again both to
the full meaning and institution of Christ, who is the Planter as well as the
Master of the Vineyard, and to the Practice of the Holy Fathers, who for
several hundreds of years, dressed it, and made it bear excellent fruit. So
here I take no more notice of either Papists or Sectaries, no nor Protestants
neither, then as if the former had never appeared in the world to trouble and
spoil the Church of God, nor the latter to assert and redress it.

The holy Sacrament being thus set at liberty, and enlarged to its full extent,
will appear presently attended with all its Duties and Blessings, as the Ladder
of Jacob did, with ascending and descending Angels. This may be soon perceived,
by any one who will but take the trouble to read this Book, so he do it with
some attention, and distinctly in parcels; a caution which I desire may be
adverted to. Chronicles, or eloquent Discourses, may best please, when they are
cursorily run over. But Mysteries must be studied, or they cannot be well
understood; and God knows how much more is here required at our hands besides
bare understanding. Therefore I have added to the Discourse that refers to the
advancing the mind in knowledge, Meditation and Prayer, the two usual attendants
on devotion; which being joined together, are the only probable means of
dealing succesfully with holy things, and of attaining by the use, to the true
end of this Sacrament, which aims at nothing less then a mutual Communion
between us and Christ, even here on earth while we seem to be absent from him:
and withal at such a reciprocal correspondency between God and his Church, as
may both open our hearts toward him in holy Duties and Performances, and open
his hand and bowels toward us in all necessary Mercies.

I know Madam that for the confirming of all this, I need but appeal to your
own experience. And it is partly on this account, that without so much as asking
leave, I have made bold to put your Name before this Book: because it having
bin first written for the peculiar use of two Persons, whom God had sanctified
in all respects much above the rate of these Times; it seems to claim a special
Title to their acceptance and reading, who intimately knew the worth of those
Princesses, and walk after their steps, at so near a distance as your Ladyship
does, to whom I am

MADAM A most Humble and Faithful Servant, DAN. BREVINT.
Durham Jan. 24. 1673.
THE CHRISTIAN SACRAMENT and Sacrifice. By way of Discourse, MEDITATION, and
PRAYER, upon THE NATURE, PARTS, and Blessings Of the Holy Communion.
SECTION I.
The Importance of well understanding the Nature of this Sacrament.

1. THe Sacrament instituted by Christ at the eve of his Passion, which S. Paul
calls the Lords Supper, is without controversy one of the greatest Mysteries
of Godliness, and the most solemn Festival of the Christian Religion. The holy
Table, or Altar, which presents this sacred Banquet, may, as well as the old
Tabernacle, take to it self the title of * Meeting: since there the People must
appear to Worship God, and there certainly God is present to (...) Tabernacle
for appointed time and meeting. meet and to bless his People. At the Place, and
during the whole Act of this Meeting with God, the Christian Communicants are
in a special manner invited to offer up to God their Souls, their Bodies, their
Goods, their Vows, their Praises, and whatsoever they can give: and God on the
other side offers to us the Body and Blood of his Son, and all those other
Blessings withal, that will assuredly follow this sacred Gift. For this must be
granted, then the holy Communion is not only a Sacrament that the Worshipper is
to come to for no other purpose, then to receive; nor a Sacrifice only, where
he should have nothing else to do, but to give: but it is as the great Solemnity
of the ancient Passover was, whereof it has taken the place; a great Mystery
consisting both of Sacrament and Sacrifice, that is, of the Religious Service,
which the People owe to God, and of the full Salvation, which God is pleased to
promise his People.

2. It may by this appear, how far it concerns every Christian not to err in a
Point, that makes the Center both of his Happiness and his Duty: and that ties
the very knot, which in a manner joins Man with God. It was upon this account
that the Devil, who bore ever an equal hatred both to what is Holy to God, and
to all what is conducible to the Salvation of Man, has from the very beginning
bin busy with this Sacrament: and has ever since given the Church more
trouble about the Body of Jesus Christ, then ever the Angel suffered about the
Body of Moses. Jude 9. For the Body of Christ, as the Holy Fathers distinguish
it, being of two sorts, to wit the Natural, which is in Heaven, and the
Sacramental, which is blessed and given at the holy Table; the primitive
Heretics, whom the Spirit of Antichrist set up and animated against the Church,
spent all their strength and their venim, at the very time, and in the face of
the Apostles, in order to destroy the first, which is the Human Nature of
Christ, and to reduce it to a Phantosm: and God knows whether the second, that
is the Sacramental, receives at this day any better entertainment from two
contrary Parties, who make it either a false God, or an emty Ceremony. Of all
these opposite Enemies, the first, who assaulted his Flesh, could in this
impiety be but poor vain undertakers, this glorious Body being highly exalted
above their reach: but the second are on this account more dangerous, because
the blessed Communion, which makes up this other Body, may daily fall into the
hands of either an Idolatrous, or a profane Abuser. Therefore it very much
concerns them, whosoever have either any Piety toward God, or any care of
their own Souls, to menage their Devotions with such precaution and judgment,
that this venerable Sacrament may be kept safe from the attemts of superstition
and profaneness.

SECTION II.
Concerning the Sacrament, as it is a Memorial of the Sufferings and Death of
Christ.

1. THe blessed Communion was chiefly instituted by the Son of God, for a
Sacrament in the Church: But when it is received by the Christian People, if
this receiving of theirs be right, it must needs be attended with the addition
of such other Performances, as will make it also a Sacrifice. As it is a
Sacrament, this great Mystery shows three Faces, looking directly toward three
Times, and offering to all worthy Receivers three sorts of incomparable
Blessings; that of Representing the true Efficacy of Christ's Sufferings, which
are past, whereof it is a Memorial: that of exhibiting the first Fruits of
these Sufferings in real and present Graces, whereof it is a moral Conveyance
and Communication: and that of assuring Men of all other Graces, and Glories to
come, whereof it is an infallible Pledge.

2. As this Sacrament looks back; it is an authentic Memorial, which our Savior
has left in his Church, of what He was pleased to suffer for Her. For tho
these Sufferings of His were both so dreadful and Holy, as to make the Heavens
mourn, the Earth quake, and all men tremble: yet because great Objects, how
terrible and magnificent soever they be, whilst they last, are not less, then
the smallest things, apt to be forgotten when they are gone: and so, there was
small likelihood; that the Passion of Jesus Christ, which was not seen upon the
Cross above the space of some few hours, could be well preserved in the memory
of men throughout all ages; therefore our Savior was pleased at his last
Supper to ordain this Sacrament, as a holy Memorial, Representation, and Image,
of what He was about to suffer for that short time, to save his dear Church for
ever. So that when Christian Posterity, which had not seen the Crucifixion of
their Savior, like the young Israelites, that had not seen the killing of the
first Passover, should come to ask after the signification of those things,
this Bread, this Wine, the Breaking of the one, the pouring out of the other,
and the Participation of both; this sacred Mystery might expose to faithful
Beholders as a present and constant Object, both the Martyrdom and the
Sacrifice of this crucified Savior, giving up his Flesh, shedding his Blood,
and pouring out his very Soul for the expiation of their Sins.

3. Therefore, as in the Feasts of the Passover, the late Jews could say, This
is the Lamb, these are the Herbs, and this is the Bread of affliction, which
our Fathers did eat in Egypt; because their latter Feasts did so effectually
represent the former; that the People, who did partake of those, had ground
enough both to act and to speak as if they had bin present at this: So at our
holy Communion which succeeds the Passover, and is undoubtedly no less a
blessed, and powerful Sacrament to set before our eyes Christ our Passover who
is sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. Our Savior, says St. Augustine, doubted not
to say, This is my Body, when he gave to his Disciples the Figure of his Body.
Because especially, besides the Commemoration, this Sacrament duly given, and
faithfully received, makes the Thing which it represents as really present for
our use, and as really powerful in order to our Salvation, as if the Thing it
self were newly done or in doing. Eating this Bread and drinking of this Cup
you set forth the death of the Lord. 1 Cor. 11.26.

4. For certainly, not to mistake the meaning of Christ, nor to injure his
Mystery; whenever with the primitive Church we call it a Memorial, or a
Figure; great care must be taken lest we confound these Venerable
Representations, which God himself has set up in his Church, and for his
Church, with those emty Figures and Marks which either some old Tradition, or
some private fancy may by chance have put in our way. Men of ordinary
Understanding do not regard with the same eye the Arms and Images of Princes,
which public Authority has set up in a public eminent Place: and which a
Painter, to please his fancy, has fixed in a private Room. Without all doubt
a wise Traveller would be much more moved at the sight of the Salt Pillar, (if
it did stand yet where it did) which God had set up purposely, where Lots wife
looked toward Sodom, then at some Prints of her Feet (if they were to be seen
yet) when she turned some other way. And if we credit the History, that Cross,
which the first Christian Emperor is reported once to have seen in the Air
(which undoubtedly the hand of God, or an Angel had made appear with some
Design) could not but cause a greater respect, then that ordinary Sign of the
Cross, which Christians have used on common occasions. Add what no body can
deny, that all Sorts of Signs and Monuments become more or less Venerable
according to the greater, or lesser worth of the Objects, which they are made
to represent. It had bin hard for Abraham, or for any devout Patriarck, not to
feel some motions of Reverence and holy Fear, when they did chance to pass
again by Mamre, or by Morijah, or such other remarkable Places where God had
appeared to them: and who doubts but the very sight of Bethlehem, of the Mount
of Olives, of Calvary, etc. which Christ honored with his Presence when he was
born, when he suffered, and when he went up to Heaven, did heat the primitive
Christians with considerable Flames of Zeal, besides that usual Faith and
Knowledge, which they had got by their reading? But when these Signs and
Monuments, besides their ordinary use, bear withal as it were on their Face the
glorious Character of their Institution from above, and with this Institution
the most express Design that God has thereby to revive in a manner, and to
expose as full to all our senses, his Passion and sufferings, as if they had
still there true Being (as they have still the same virtue;) a discreet and
pious Beholder must needs look on these Ordinances with these three degrees of
Devotion.

5. The first is, when he considers those great and dreadful Passages which
this Sacrament sets before him. I do observe on this Altar some what very like
the Sacrifice and Passion of my Savior. For thus the Bread of life was broken:
thus the Lamb of God was slain: thus his most precious Blood was shed. And when
I look upon the Minister, who by special order from God his Master distributes
this Bread and this wine, I conceive that thus verily God himself has both
given once his Son to dye, and gives still the virtue of his Death to bless and
to save every Soul that comes unfaignedly to him.

6. The second is an Act of Adoration and Reverence, when he looks upon that
good Hand, that has consecrated for the use of the Church the Memorial of
these great Things. I cannot without some degree of devotion look on any
Object, that in any wise puts me in mind of the Sufferings of my Savior: and if
I did perceive but any Cloud, somewhat like them, although it were but casual, I
would not neglect the Accident that had caused that Resemblance. But since the
good hand of my God has purposely contrived it thus, to set before me what I
see; and since by his special Appointment these Representatives are brought in
hither for this Church, and among all the rest for me: I must mind what Israel
did, when the Cloud filled the Tabernacle. I will not fail to worship God,
as soon as I perceive these Sacraments and Gospel-Clouds appearing in the
Sanctuary. Here I worship neither Sacrament, nor Tabernacle, but I will observe
the manner, that Moses, David, and all Israel have taught me to receive poor
Elements with, after the Institution of God has once raised them to the estate
of great Mysteries. Neither the Ark nor any Clouds were ever adored in Israel,
tho some brutish Heathen sometimes thought so: but sure it is, the Ark was
considered quite otherwise then a Chest, and the Cloud then a Vapor, as soon as
God had hallowed them both, to be the Signs of his presence. Therefore as the
former People did never see the Temple or the Cloud, but that presently at that
sight they used to throw themselves on their faces; I will never behold these
better and surer Sacraments of the glorious Mercies of God, but as soon as I
see them used in the Church to that holy purpose that Christ has consecrated
them to, I will not fail both to remember my Savior who consecrated these
Sacraments, and to worship also my Savior whom these Sacraments do represent.
And God forbid, that, when I am able, I should not receive them, as my Savior
himself was pleased to receive his own Baptism, with Devotion and Prayer. Luke
3.21.

7. The third, which is the Crown and the completing of the two other, is such
a vigorous and intense Act of Faith, as may correspond to the great End, which
our Savior aimed at, when He instituted this Sacrament. The main Intention of
Christ was not here to propose a bare Image of his Passion once suffered in
order to a bare Remembrance: but over and above to enrich this Memorial with
such an effectual and real Presence of continuing Atonement, and strength, as
may both evidently set forth Christ himself crucified before our eyes, Gal.
3.1. and invite us to his Sacrifice, not as done and gone many years since,
but, as to expiating grace and mercy, still lasting, still new, still the same
that it was, when it was first offered for us.

8. All those Sacrifices under the Law, which had both their use and their
strength limited, some to a year, some to a Month, some to a day, were not less
powerful at the last, then they were at the first moment of their proper
Duration: and they who lived or dyed within the twelfth month of the year,
after the Feast of Propitiations, had as much benefit from that anniversary
Sacrifice, as they, who were upon the place and at the very day, when the high
Priest did offer it. Upon the like, but infinitely better reason, the Sacrifice
of Jesus Christ being appointed by God the Father for a Propitiation that
should continue throughout all Ages, to the Worlds end: and withal being
everlasting by the Privilege of its own Order, which is an unchangeable
Priesthood, Heb. 7.24. and by his worth, who offered it, that is the Blessed
Son of God, and by the Power of the Spirit, by whom it was offered, which is
the eternal Spirit, Hebr. 9.14. all kinds of Eternity thus concurring together
to the Sacrifice upon the Cross, it must in all respects stand everlasting and
Eternal, and the same yesterday, to day, and for ever. Hebr. 13.8.

9. Therefore this Sacrifice being such, the holy Communion is ordained of
Christ, to set it out to us as such, that is, as effectual now at this holy
Table, as it was then at the very Cross: and by the same proportion the Act of
worthy Receivers, (besides Remembrance and Worship) must needs be this; first
to elevate their Faith, and stretch their very Souls up to the Mount, with the
blessed Virgin, who stood nearest the Sacrifice, or at the least with the
Disciples, who looked on it at some distance: and then look up to the Victim, to
Jesus the Everlasting Mediator of the Everlasting Covenant, and to the Blood of
sprinkling that speaks yet, and craves for better things (Pardon and Blessing)
then Abels did. Hebr. 12.24. Here Faith must be as true a subsistence of those
things past, which we believe, as it is of those other things yet to come, which
we hope for. Heb. 11.1.

10. At the approach therefore of this great Mystery, and by the help of this
strong Faith, the worthy Communicant being prostrated at the Lords Table, as at
the very foot of his Cross, shall with earnest sorrow confess and lament all
his Sins, which were the nails and spears that pierced our Savior. We our
selves most chiefly, not Pilate, nor the Jews (for he would not have dyed for
such alone) we have crucified that Just one. Men and Brethren what shall we do!
Act. 2.37. He shall fall amazed at that Stroke of Divine Justice, that being
offended but by Men, could not be sanctified, nor appeased but by the
sufferings and death of God. How dreadful is this Place! how deep and holy is
this Mystery! Then he will fall again to worshipping, not less amazed at, then
thankful for, those inconceavable Mercies of God the Father, who so gave up his
only Son, and for the Mercies of God the Son, who thus gave himself up for us.

11. My Lord! and my God! I behold here in this Bread made of a Substance that
was cut down, beaten, ground and bruised by men, all the heavy Blows and
Plagues and Pains, which my Savior did suffer from the hands of his Murderers:
I behold in this Bread dried up, and baked and burnt at the Fire, the fiery
wrath also, which he suffered for me from above, and from the hand of his own
Father. My God, my God, why have thou thus forsaken him! the violence of wicked
men first has made him a Martyr, then the Fire of Heaven has made him a Burnt
sacrifice: and under both these Sufferings, lo he is become to me the Bread of
Life!

Let us then go, to take and eat it. For tho the Instruments that bruised him
be broken to pieces, and the direful Flames that burned him be quite put out,
yet this Bread, which is the Body of the Lord, continues new. The Spears and
Swords that slew, and the Burnings that completed the Sacrifices, are many
years since scattered and spent; but the strength and sweet smell of the
Oblation is still fragrant, the Blood still warm, the words still fresh, and
the Lamb still standing as slain. Rev. 5.6.
Any other Bread by duration will alter, and any other Sacrifice will lose its
strength; but Thou most Eternal victime, offered up to God through the Eternal
Spirit, by an everlasting Priest, and by an Order which can never be changed,
Thou remainest always the same: and as thy years shall never fail, they shall
never lose nor abate any thing of thy saving strength and mercy: help O help me
also, that they abate nothing of my Faith. Help me to grieve for the sense of
my sins, and for that of thy pains, as those good Souls did, who saw thee
suffer. Luke 23.27.
Let not my heart burn with less Zeal to follow and serve thee now, when this
Bread is broken at this Table, then did the hearts of thy Disciples, when thou
did break it in Emaus. Luke 24.32.
O Rock of Israel. Rock of Salvation, Rock struck and cleft for me, let those
two streams of Blood, and Water, which once gushed out of thy side, Joh. 19.34.
when the Curse of the Law, and the Rod of Moses had opened it, bring down with
them Salvation and Holiness into my Soul, tho far distant from the Mountain,
where thou did receive that deadly Blow. And let not my Soul less thirst
after them at this distance, then if I stood upon Horeb, whence sprung this
water, and near the very Cleft of that Rock, the very Wounds of my Savior
whence gushed out this Sacred Blood. All the distance of Times and Countries,
how great soever, which is between Adam and me, does not keep his Sin or his
Punishment any more from pursuing and reaching me, then if I had bin born in
his house: and notwithstanding this distance we sin and dye after his Image, as
if we were immediately sprung from his Loins. Second Adam, Adam descended
powerful from above, let thy Blood reach as far, and come as freely both to
save and to sanctify, as the Blood of my first Father did both to destroy and
defile me. Blessed Jesu, who revivest by this Sacrament the Memory of thy
Sacrifice, quicken and strengthen my faith also, dispose my mind, prepare my
heart, and then bless this thine Ordinance. If I but touch (in that manner I
ought to do) the Hem of his Garment, the Garment of his Passion, virtue will
proceed out of Him, it shall be done according to my Faith: and my poor Soul
shall be made whole. Amen.

SECTION. III.
Of the blessed Sacrament, as it stands for a Sign of present Graces.

1. THe second Face of the blessed Communion looks toward the present Graces
that attend the right use of it, first as a Figure, whereby God represents,
secondly as a moral Instrument whereby he is pleased to convey, them unto the
Church. First I say it marks and signifies these present Graces. For being of
its own nature a Sacrament, that is, a sign of an Invisible Grace, it must
principally stand to signify, and lead us to greater Blessings.

2. It is the ordinary way of God, when He either promises or bestows on men
any considerable Blessing, to confirm his word and his Gift with the addition
of some Signs. For this I need not to alledg other Evidences then the Rainbow,
the Burning Bush, Abraham's Furnace, Gideons Fleece, the Cloud, the Ark, etc.
which for those times were Sacraments of great Things. God commonly sent no
Prophets, without giving them as it were a Sacramental Equippage, which could
represent in some degree the Message they had to deliver; witness the Hairy
Mantels, the rent Garments, the Iron Yoakes, the Horns, some times some kinds
of life or Gesture, wherein men might see before hand, the Charges and sad
Predictions which they were to hear soon after. Our Savior did observe this
same method, when he laid his hands on Children, when he breathed upon his
Disciples, when he bad them to anoint the Sick, and when he cursed the
Fig Tree. All men by a natural instinct do somewhat like this when they second
their Expressions with some signs and motions of their Body, tho they think of
no Mysteries. So that you hardly can hear any man being somewhat earnest and
serious upon any matter, whether of Request, or complaint, Submission, or
Excuses, but you may see him at the same time either bowing the knee, or
joining his hands, or uncovering his head, which Acts are, in a manner, civil
and natural Sacraments, to confirm his Expression.

3. The truth is, such is the disposition of most men, that how strongly soever
they be persuaded of the Truth, which they hear, yet will they be far better
wrought upon toward their own persuasion when they see some signs of this
Truth: And tho a true Israelire doubts not at all of the presence of his God,
nor a faithful Disciple of the promise given him that he shall receive the
Holy Ghost, when Moses and Christ have once passed their Word for these two
Things: yet will their Faith be much strengthened, when one sees the Ark and the
Cloud, which were the Sacrament of that, and when the other receives the
Breath, which was the Sacrament of this. Now the Mystery of the Cross, and of
the Salvation that follows it, is of that high and important nature, as might
justly oblige the Son of God to propose them to his Church in the most suitable
manner to work in men a deep impression. Therefore as God himself in order to
satisfy Moses more fully that his People should not perish, nor so much as
diminish under the Thraldom of Egypt; showed him a Bush continuing still whole
and entire in the midst of a great Fire: and in order they might be more firmly
persuaded, that tho they were in a wilderness, they were under Gods protection,
he made them go all the way under a Cloud; that when soever there should happen
any staggering in their Belief, both Moses and the People might strengthen it,
Moses by remembering the Bush, and the People by minding the Cloud; to the same
purpose has Christ ordained some Visible Signs in his Church, to complete her
common Faith, and to assure this truth to every one who comes to him, that he
shall be cleansed of his sins, as certainly as it is certain he sees some water
which is the ordinary means for washing* and that he shall be kept up, and fed
with a supply of all necessary Blessings, as certainly and really, as it is
real and certain he tastes and takes in this Bread and Wine, which are the
ordinary means for preserving our life and strength.

4. Besides, because the Sacraments are designed not only to persuade us more
strongly of the truth and Being of the Things, but also to acquaint us more
familiarly and sensibly with their Condition and nature; these Sacraments must
have in their natural constitution, some known Qualities that make them fit for
this Sacramental office. Such has the Water for example, which was so
deservedly chosen for the use of holy Baptism, because of the proper virtue it
has of washing the things that are fowl, of reviving and refreshing them that
are dry, and of making fruitful the Barren. Hereupon S. Austin says plainly,
that unless the holy Sacraments had some such agreement with the Holy Things,
which they are set up to represent, they could not be Sacraments at all. Epist.
23. ad Bonif.

5. So the blessed Communion is made of two such Elements, as can forthwith
expose to the sight and sense of all men, the true ground of its Sacramental
and significative Function. This function is twofold; the first to represent
Christ's Sufferings: and the second to represent the Blessing and the Benefit
which we receive from these Sufferings. The first I say to represent Christ's
Sufferings. This Bread and Wine could neither sustain nor refresh me, had not
their intrinsecal Substance lost its first condition and estate: that is if the
one had never fallen under the Sickle, the threshing, the Millstone, the Fire:
and the other under the Hook, the Trampling, and the Press of bandmen: Nor does
the Son of God save me, but by (...), Philip. 2.7.
emtying himself in a manner, for a while of his first glory in Heaven: and by
losing that second life which he had taken in Bethlehem. This Blessed Savior is
not a Savior by the strength of all the Miracles which He did about Judea, nor
by any thing that He could suffer, as long as He would keep himself alive, when
he was made fast to his Cross. As the best Harvest is not yet Bread, as long as
it stands in the Field: nor is the best Corn Bread likewise as long as it is
kept whole in the Floor; both Corn and Harvest being no more then antecedent
Matter for man's Food. Jesus living in Galilee, Jesus teaching about the Temple,
Jesus commanding Storms and Waves, when he did walk upon the Sea, if he had
proceeded no further, could not have bin the Bread of life: it must be Jesus
suffering, Jesus crucified, Jesus dying: the grinding Mill, and the burning
Fire have of this Corn made me this Bread: and nothing less then Cross, Wounds,
Death, my Lord! my God! could of thy dearest Son make my Savior?

6. I say secondly, this Eucharistical Bread is instituted to represent the
Fruit and Benefit which we receive both at the Holy Table, and upon all other
occasions, from Christ's Sufferings, to wit Maintenance and Improvement of life.
As without Bread and Wine, or something answerable to it, the strongest Bodies
soon decay: so without the virtue of the Body and Blood of Christ, the best and
holiest Souls must infallibly starve and perish. The Body of the Lord as it was
offered up to God in Sacrifice, is the Truth represented by the Passover: and
as represented to us at the Holy Communion, is the Truth and Accomplishment
typified by the Manna. The one is, as it were the Seed and the Original
Principle whence we are born: and the other as the Bread wherewith we live.
That is to say, as Bread and Wine do not produce, but keep up that animal Life,
which another Cause has produced: so does our Lord Jesus by a necessary and
continual supply of strength and Grace, represented by Bread and Wine, sustain,
improve, and set sorward that Spiritual Life and new Being, which He has
procured us by his Cross.

7. For Jesus the second Adams, being seized, as He hung on the Cross, with
that deep sleep which God daused to fall upon him, gave this new Being to his
Church out of that side which at his Passion was opened: and the Blood and
Water, which then gushed out of his Wounds, are the true Principles of life, by
reason of which his spouse the Church may be called Eve, that is true and
everlasting Liver. Before she had this new original out of her Saviors Passion,
her Husbands sleep, she by her old Extraction was a very Daughter of Death, and
a Mother of such Children, as could pretend to no better Inheritance, then
Curse and Wrath. Ephesians. 2.2. By the course of Nature our Life is but a sad
Progress from Birth to Death: and by the course of Gods Justice a sadder
Motion, such as is that of condemned Persons from Prison to the Place of their
Execution. But whilst we were daily passing on to that most dreadful
Punishment, the Son of God looked on us, and took our Condemnation upon himself,
and under it dyed in our steed. Thus by the Death and satisfaction of this
Victim Justice gave way to my Release: God the Father forgave my Sin, and God
the Son procured my Life. This Grace is the first Purchase of Christ's Blood,
the first Irradiation of Gods mercy, and the first Breath of spiritual Life in
our Nostrils.

8. But alas! how soon would this first life vanish away, were it not presently
followed and supported by a second? How soon would the removal of the former,
be frustrated by the commission of other Sins! And since I am no sooner born in
sin then dead in it, how hard would it be without more help in this corrupted
condition to keep dead Lazarus from Rottenness! Therefore the Body and Blood of
Christ once Sacrificed on the Cross, (to help this first) procures a second
Life, that preserves, whomsoever it saves out of this stupid death in sin: it
helps them out of the Puddle, where they did ly like Beasts without sense of
danger, or shame: and it quickens these rotten Trees for the producing of
better Fruit. The first Life being opposite to Condemnation and Eternal
Punishment, belongs properly to the Blood that has satisfied divine Justice,
and so removed Punishment: and the second which is opposite to stupid and
senseless both falling into sin and lying in it, relates properly to the Water,
that after Propitiation and Pardon washes and sanctifies the sinner. These two
Lives are the two first Effluxes, which proceeded out of Jesus Christ, when his
Body was pierced: and both are inseparable; as the Blood and the water were,
which flowed together out of his side. Let none, who finds himself clean from
the filth and spots of his sin, be afraid of Punishment for them, I have found
a Ransom for him. Job. 33.24. for the water came not without the Blood. But let
every one that has a mind to be safe from Punishment which is taken off by the
Blood, seek for farther security in the purifying of himself from all the
uncleanness of sin which the Water is to wash away: for the Blood came not
without water. Christ came not by Blood alone, but by water and Blood. 1 John
5.6.

9. Over and above these two Lives, whereof one consists in Pardon and removal
of Punishment; the other in Sanctification, and enlivens us from dead works, so
as not thenceforward to deserve it as before; there remains besides a third
Life, which consists in an absolute Redemtion from Death and other miseries.
This life, as to the sure Title and Right, is together with the two other
purchased by the same Sacrifice: but as to the real use and possession, it is
reserved for us in Heaven, and there hid with Christ in God. Coloss. 3.3. Until
it be revealed, we appear as if we were dead, these two Jewels lying in, and
being wrapped about, with the dark Veils of human Mortality, till that Christ
becoming unto us actual Redemtion, as well as actual Justice, and actual
Sanctification, this third life succeeds to break the Cloud.

10. Now the blessed Savior being by his Sacrifice the Author and giver of
these three Lives, shows himself by this Sacrament to be the preserver of them
also: and to this purpose sets up a Table by his Altar, where he engages most
solemnly to feed and nourish our Souls with the constant supply of his Mercies
to the very day of eternal Salvation, as really as he gives and we receive
these Elements of Bread and Wine, which are the usual means of sustaining
mortal Bodies until the end of this short Life. My Father works hitherto and
I work with him. Ioh. 95.17. God the father rested indeed upon the seventh day
from the work of Creating, and God the Son at the same day from the work of
Suffering: but neither of them will rest till the day of Redemtion from the
work of preserving, both what the Creation has produced, and what the Passion
has saved. In the first Creation here is a Man and a Woman made of the Flesh,
and as it were of the very wounds of her Husband: and there you find a Tree
planted to maintain both their life and strength. In the Deliverance of Egypt,
here is a People saved by the Sacrifice of the Passover: and lest so many
rescued out of Egypt, should faint and starve in the Desert, there you see an
Angel leading them the way with his Light, keeping them cool under the Shadow
of his Cloud, and feeding them through all their journny with a miraculous sort
of Meat. Jesus is both in the Original and progress of Salvation the Truth
foreshewed by these Figures. When he dyed upon the Cross, there he fullfilled
that which had bin shadowed forth both by the Sleep and wound of Adam, and by
the killing of paschal Lambs: And when he feeds from Heaven with a continual
Effusion of Blessing those souls and lives which he has bin pleased to redeem
by the effusion of his own Blood, He is the Truth both of the Tree and of the
Angel, which were appointed the one to maintain Man, and the other to keep
Israel.

11. Christ relates to these four Figures as the Body which fulfils them: and
the Holy Communion relates to them on the other side, as an Antitype, that is,
as one Image may relate to another, all to express the same object. Upon the
breaking the one and pouring out the other of these consecrated Elements, you
see what Christ has suffered, as upon the wound of Adam, and the death of the
Passover, Abel, Enoc, and Israel might partly see, what he should suffer: And
upon the nourishing nature of this Bread, you see that which others have seen
in the Tree of life; and in the Angel raining down Manna, what He would give.
But this is the advantage of the Holy Communion above all the ancient Figures.
Adam with his open Side, and all Sacrifices with their Blood did foretell only
Christ's Passion: and the Tree of life with all its fruit, and the Angel with
all his Food did foretell only, his preserving Grace: whereas this Sacrament
alone represents both his Passion, and Preserving, and besides these, another
great Mystery, by their mutual dependency. What we take and eat, is made of a
Substance cut, bruised, and put to the fire; that shows my Saviors Passion; and
it was used in that manner that it may afford me wholesome food; that shows the
Benefit which both he gives and I receive out of this dreadful Passion. The
Angels enjoy such an immortality, and wear such Crowns as cost God nothing, but
the pain he took to give them: ours are more precious and costly then so: Our
inheritance in Heaven is not less then Akeldamah, a Possession bought with
Christ's Blood. In this Sacrament here is Death represented, there Life; the
Life is mine, the Death my Saviors: and o blessed Jesus, this my Life comes out
of thy Death, and the Salvation which I hope for, is purchased with all the
pain and Agonies which Thou did suffer.

12. Here Melchisedek and Aaron wait upon Jesus Christ at this Table, as Moses
and Elias did on the Mount: These two great Priests stand to soreshew, what
Christ alone is to perform. For there is Aaron the Priest with Blood, and here
Melchisedek with Bread. There Aaron breaks, sheds and destroies: here
Melchisedek feeds and blesses. Nay, both are one in Jesus Christ. First Christ
appears to Sacrifice (upon the Cross) as Aaron did at his Altar, with Flesh and
Blood: and as in Melchisedeks case and figure, with his own Flesh, and his own
Blood. Then as Aaron did use to enter once every year into the Sanctuary,
Christ once for all is ascended into Heaven thence to bless us. Act. 3.26. And
this blessing, is the strength, the Food and Refreshment, which Melchisedek
brought in a figure; that with the help of these good Things both Abraham and
his Followers, that is all sincere Christians, may cheerfully go on their way
notwithstanding their own weakness, and all the dangers of their life. Thus
here is a double Blessing which I wait for; both what Aaron showed by his
Blood, and what Melchisedek showed by his Bread.

13. Author of my Salvation, and of these Mysteries which express it, bestow on
me these two Blessings, which this Sacrament shows together; Grace for Grace;
Mercy, and strength to keep Mercy. Hosanna O Son of David, save and preserve.
Save me that I may not fall under the hand of the Destroyer, and preserve me
that after this Salvation I never fall by my own hand. But keep and set forward
in me notwithstanding all mine Infirmities the work of thy faithful Mercies.
Grant that I may not increase my Guilt, by my abusing of what thou gave. My
Savior, my Preserver, give me always what thou give once. Create a new heart
within me; but bless and keep what Thou createst: and increase more and more
what Thou plantest. O Son of God and Tree of Life, feed with thy sap this
tender Branch, which without thee cannot but wither: and strengthen in thee a
bruised Reed, which without thee cannot but fall. Father of everlasting
Compassions, forsake not in the Wilderness a feeble Israelite, whom thou have
brought a little way out of Egypt: And let not this poor Soul of mine, which
thou have blessed with some desires, and helped a while with some tendency
toward an Eternal Salvation, ever faint and fall from the right way. The Angel
in the Wilderness could undoubtedly rain as much Manna, as the Paschal Lambs
could shed Blood; Jesu, the Truth both of those Lambs and of that Angel, Thou
art as able to perfect me with thy Blessings out of thy Throne, as thou were to
redeem me by thy Sacrifice on thy Cross. Jesu Author, Object and Truth of this
which by thine appointment I am bidden now to take, perform in me by thy
sufferings what Thou do exhibit: Eternal Life, by this thy Body broken; give
also Nourishment and maintenance thereby to this same Life, for this is the
Bread of Heaven. Amen.

SECTION IV.
Concerning the Communion, as it is not a Representation only, but a Means of
Grace.

1. HItherto we have considered this holy Sacrament, first as a standing
Memorial of that Passion, wherein Christ Jesus once offered himself up to God
as Sacrifice: and secondly as a sign of that nutritive and corroborative Grace
(the true Efflux of that Sacrifice) by which sign he daily offers himself to us
under the notion of Meat. For his Flesh is meat indeed, and his Blood is drink
indeed. Joh. 6.55. And I ingeniously confess that the most general use of the
blessed Communion runs upon these two Notions: and that these two main
Resemblances between the Bread, and Christ's Body, which qualify the consecrated
Bread (and the consecrated Wine in the same manner) to bear the Character of a
Sacrament, do likewise sufficiently qualify it, to bear another honor, which it
enjoys, of being called the Lords Body. However it is most certain, that when
the Fathers call it so, (which Christ himself taught them to do) they justify
both His and their speech upon the account of resemblance, and of this
commerce, (most usual between Representations, and objects represented) of
enterchanging their own names. Read the 23. Epist. of St. Austin ad Bonif.

2. So for example, in the Prophetic Visions and Dreams, which most commonly
were nothing else then extemporary Sacraments of Things then revealed by God,
those are most constantly said to be these. The 7 Ears of Corn are 7 years, by
the interpretation of Joseph. Genesis 41.26. The seven Stars are seven Angels, in
the Revelation of St. John 1.20. The Sower is the Son of Man, The Tares are the
wicked, The Harvest is the end of the World, in the Parables of Jesus Christ.
Matthew. 13.37.38.39. If by chance we meet with Pictures, that represent the
Tabernacle, or the Ornaments of Aaron; we usually say, pointing at some of
these Figures, This is the outward Court, this is the Sanctuary, here is the
brazen Altar, and there you see the Plate of pure Gold, that none was allowed
to wear, except the High Priest of Israel: just as walking in the Palaces and
Galleries of great Persons, we say without thinking to speak improperly, that
we have seen the 12. Sibyls, the 12. Cesars, the Temple of Ephesus, etc. that
is, the Representations of all these. Now it is certain that no Visions nor
Images have ever bin more intended for this end of Representing, then the true
Sacraments have bin: therefore it were most unreasonable to think, that these
sacred Images should want that Privilege which all other (although casual and
profane) are allowed to have, viz. to take the name of their Objects. Nay,
since the Paschal Lamb, the Circumcision and the Baptism have it (for one is
called the Passover, the other the Covenant, and the other the Burial of
Christ) why should the Holy Communion be without it? Besides it is not
conceivable that Christ, who had yet in his hands that Paschal Bread which was
called by the Jews the Bread of Affliction which their Fathers did eat in
Egypt, because it was the Memorial of it, may not be understood after the same
manner, when a moment after He calls it his Body.

3. Nevertheless, although the literal and immediate sense of these Words This is
my Body, comes to no more; as Tertullian, and S. Augustine with many more have
in express terms declared it: and as all ancient liturgies must needs
understand it, whenever they call the Eucharist, Type, Image, or figure; for
the proper and immediate use of Images is to represent Things. If they chance
also to have them in themselves, or to convey them over to others, it is upon
another account, as being vessels or utensiles, etc. which office is
extrinsecal to Sacraments; Nevertheless I say the end of the blessed Communion,
the exigency and pious desire of Communicants, and the strength of other Places
of Scripture require a great deal more in the Eucharist then a mere Memorial or
Representation.

4. 1. The proper end of the holy Communion; which is, to make us partakers of
Christ in another manner and degree, when with faith and repentance we take
and taste those holy Mysteries, then when with the like dispositions we do hear
the Holy Gospel. 2. The Exigency, and honest desire of Communicants; who seek
no more for a bare Representation or Remembrance of Christ crucified, at this
Holy Table, then Mary and other devout women did for winding Sheets or Napkins
about his Grave. I want and seek my Savior himself: and I watch for all the
opportunities of coming to his Sacrament, for the same purpose, that once made
S. Peter and S. John run so fast to his Sepulcher; because I hope to find Him
there. 3. Lastly, the full sense and importance of other Places in Scripture,
which allow the Holy Communion, a much greater Virtue then is that of
representing only. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion
of the Blood of Christ? 1. Cor. 10.16. For whether the word, which we render
Communion be taken in an active sense, as it is often for Communication; the
holy Eucharist is a Means of communicating the Blood of Christ: or tho we take
it but in a neuter and intransitive sense; yet the holy Eucharist will be still
a Mystery, wherein one way or other true Christians shall find, not a
Commemoration or Representation only, but a Communion also with the Blood so
represented and remembered.

5. The real Efficacy which the Holy Communion has to convey Grace and
Blessing on the true Christian Receiver, is evidently demonstrated by the
opposite Efficacy it has to convey a Curse and Destruction on the Profane.
Whosoever says S. Paul, eats of this Bread unworthily, eats damnation to
himself. Now certainly this would be as much to think unworthily as to eat
unworthily of this holy Bread, to think it might be really pernicious when it
is abused, but not really blissful and saving in its right use; and that this
Bread, which we eat of, should be an effectual Communion to procure death, but
merely Sacramental only to show, and not to procure Salvation. S. Paul sets out
the Character of the unworthy Communicant, by not discerning the Lords Body:
and thereby declares him guilty of the very Body and Blood of Christ. That is
to say, that whosoever offers to abuse this Sacrament, plunges himself into
their Crime, who have abused Christ himself: and that that Villain goes hand in
hand with Judas, with Pilate, with both Jews and Romans who murdered Him. What
therefore can be thought of those good Souls, who approach to this Sacrament
with faith, humility, and a trembling Reverence, but that they will return home
as much Justified and full of grace after their Devout, as the other shall full
loaded with Damnation, after their impious usage: and that God will be as
merciful in reckoning those among the Righteous Mary, Joseph, Nicodemus, as He
is Just against these, when upon this account he shuts up their Souls with the
Sinners, that in very deed crucified him. And God forbid that the Body of
Christ, who came to save, not destroy, should not diffuse as much of its Savor
of life for the life and Salvation of Devout Souls, as it does, of its Savor of
Death for the Death of the Impious. 2 Cor. 2.16.

6. The manner of this real Communication and Conveyance, is the great
unfathomable Mystery, which the Holy Fathers have ever admired: and which
therefore we neither need, nor do take upon us to explain. The Shepherds think
themselves happy with the Message brought to them by an Angel, This day is born
to you a Savior, Luke 2.11. tho they know nothing of the way of his most
miraculous Birth: and the honest Israelites ought not to receive Manna less
thankfully (as they do not less effectually) tho they know neither of what
matter, nor by what means the Heavens, the Air, or the Clouds can thus every
morning shed about their Tents this strange Meat. I must not wonder if the
ways of the Lord be unknown to me in his Miracles, since they are so very
often in his most ordinary works. And if David, tho a Prophet, cannot think
upon that natural virtue, which makes Bones and Veins every day out of that
feed, that is apparently nothing like to all these parts of Man's body, but he
cries out I have bin strangely and wonderfully made! Ps. 139.13. Who am I to
pretend to a clear understanding of that hidden and incomprehensible wisdom,
wherewith God is pleased to make out of Water, or Wine, or Bread (in themselves
weak Elements) strong and supernatural Organs for Men's Souls and salvation?

7. It is true indeed, that Bread, Wine, and Water can without much ado come up
so high as to become a Sacrament to signify: since the Act of signifying
depends merely on Institution. Yet this Institution, such as may make a
Sacrament, must needs proceed both from a Divine and an almighty Origin.
Divine I say; to give a Sacred Character: and Almighty withal; to justify and
maintain it. For example, after the Flood no man or Angel had authority to make
of the Rainbow a Mystery, that should signify the worlds preservation from
Drowning: and if either Men or Angels had taken on them that Liberty; none of
them had the power to make it true; that is, to make it a standing infallible
Evidence that the world shall never perish by water. So in the Church neither
Apostles nor Bishops have any more Right to confer either upon the water of
Baptism, or upon the Bread and Wine of the Holy Communion, a Sacramental or
representative Office, then they have power to make good their Representation
by conferring the Blessings promised by it. And it is specially to this
purpose, that most of the Expressions and Epiphonemas of the holy Doctors are
to be understood, when they stand sometimes amazed at the infinite Power of God,
either in the Institution, or the use of these Mysteries: God alone being able
to raise, water or Blood or any Thing else to the Order of Sacraments. But to
raise them a step higher, that is to the Dignity of standing for true Means and
Instruments, which may convey on us those Graces, which by their proper
institution they represent; there is the Finger of God indeed, and there is a
fitter matter for Men's admiration, then Men's knowledge.

8. Here then I come to Gods Altar with a full persuasion that these words This
is my Body, promise me more then a figure: that this holy Banquet is not a
Representation made of outward shows without substance: and that it is not so
dangerous a Mystery but that the Religious use of it may convey to me (at the
least) as many, and as great Blessings, as the profane abuse of it may throw on
the Abuser Plagues and Curses. But how these Mysteries become in my behalf the
supernatural Instruments of such Blessings; it is enough for me to admire. One
thing I know (as said the blind man after he had received his sight. S. Joh.
9.25.) he laid Clay upon mine Eyes, and behold I see. He has blessed and given
me this Bread, and my Soul received Comfort. I verily believe that Clay has
nothing in it self, that could have wrought such a Miracle, as Israel never saw
the like: And I know as much of this Bread, that it is not such a Jewel as may
contain in its substance, or impart from it self to others, Grace, Holiness,
and Salvation, which is the juice and the substance of Christ's Body. Only I am
perfectly satisfied, that it is the constant way of God, to produce his greatest
Works, at the presence (tho not by the virtue) of the most useless Instruments.
At the very stroke of a Rod, He parted once in two the red Sea. At the blowing
some Trumpets, He tumbled down massy strong walls. At some few washings in
Jordan, he cured Naaman of a Plague, which naturally was incurable: and as soon
as but a shadow did pass by, or some Oil was dropped down, or some Clothes were
touched, presently virtue went out, not of Rods, or Trumpets, or shade, or
Clothes, but of Himself. Virtue, says he, is gone out of me: and thus he cured
the sick, etc. Since then he has instituted and adopted unto himself the
Sacraments of the Gospel, as the Representative of his Sacred Body and Blood:
why may he not take the same course for the dispensing of his Mercies, at the
use of his Ordinances? and why should not his very body pour out Effusions of
life as well when we take in his Sacraments, as when others did touch his
Clothes, which surely had less Privilege?

9. Under the Law, the Right hand of the Lord had the preeminence, the Right
hand of the Lord brought these mighty Things to pass, either when the red Sea
opened a way for Israel, or when the Rock of Horeb powered Rivers to refresh
them. Now under the Gospel, It is Christ himself with his Body and Blood once
offered to God upon the Cross, and ever since standing before him in Heaven as
the Lamb slain. Rev. 5.6. who fills his Church continually with the
Propitiations and Perfumes of his Sacrifice, when after the receiving of the
holy Sacrament, faithful Communicants return home richer then they came, with
the first fruits of Salvation. For Baptismal Water, and Consecrated Bread and
Wine, can contribute no more to it, then the Rod of Moses, or the Oil of the
Apostles did, which was no more then their Motion and their Presence. But yet
since these simple Motions and inconsiderable Presences are so closely attended
by Christ's institution and working, that he is pleased to attribute to them the
Blessing wrought out by himself, 1 Pet. 3.21. O my God whenever thou will bid
me, go and wash in Jordan, or be baptized and wash away my sins, I will doubt
no more to be made clean either of my Leprosy, or of my Sins, then if I had bin
bathed in thy Blood: And whenever thou will be pleased to say unto me, go,
take and eat this Bread, which I have blessed, and which now I have given thee,
I will doubt no more of being fed with the true Bread of Life, then if I were
eating thy very Flesh.

10. In this manner faithful Communicants eat as effectually of the Body of
Jesus Christ by receiving its strength and virtue, as the Saints eat of the
Tree of life. Rev. 22.2. because they eat the Fruit of that Tree: or Israel did
drink of the Rock, 1 Cor. 10.4. because they did drink of the Stream that
flowed from it. Once my Savior could say, that some Body had touched him, tho
they had touched but his Clothes, because a Woman had reached both her Faith
and her Hand so near as to be healed by the Divine warmth and virtue that
proceeded then out of him, as if she had touched his very Flesh. The truth is,
we really touch, have or enjoy the Thing it self, when we are within that
distance, where we may enjoy its virtue. So the Church was clothed with the
sun. Rev. 12.1. because she had all about Her its Brightness: and by the Holy
Baptism we are said to put on Christ. Galat. 3.27. because we then receive the
Robes of his Righteousness, and that which was typified by that Garment which
God made of skins (which implies the death of Victims) to cover Adams Nakedness.

11. This Victim having bin offered up both in the fullness of times, and in the
midst of the habitable World, which properly is Christ's great Temple, and
thence being carried up to Heaven, which is his proper Sanctuary, thence he
spreads all about us Salvation, as the Burnt offering did its smoke: as the
Golden Altar did its Perfumes: and as the burning Candlestic its Lights. And
thus Christ's Body and Blood have every where, but especially at the Holy
Communion a most true and real Presence. When he offered himself upon Earth,
the Vapor of his Atonement went up, and darkened the very Sun: and by renting
the great Vail, it clearly showed he had made a way into Heaven. Now since He
is gone up to Heaven, thence he sends down on Earth the Graces that spring
continually both from his everlasting Sacrifice, and from the continual.
Intercessions which attend it. So that it is in vain to say, who will go up
into Heaven? since without either ascending or descending, this Sacred Body of
Jesus fills with Atonement and Blessing the remotest Parts of this Temple.

12. Of these Blessings, Christ from above is pleased to dispense sometimes
more, sometimes less, into these Inferior Courts of the People, either according
to the several degrees of their Faith, or according to the several ways and
times, which He has appointed to them, for presenting themselves nearer to
Him. All worshippers do not come to him with the same Faith: nor have all
seasons and ways, (tho approved and appointed by Him) the same or equal
Privilege: And his Ordinances in the Church, as well as his Stars in Heaven,
differ in Glory one from another. Fasting, Prayer, Hearing of the Word, public
and private Services, and all like holy Duties, are all very good Vessels to
draw water from this Well of Salvation: but yet they are not all equal. The
blessed Communion must exceed as much in Blessings, when well used, as it
exceeds in danger of a Curse, when it is not. In all places, says God, where I
record my Name, there I will come to thee, and bless thee. Exodus 20.24. But in
those Places and Ordinances, which He has in an especial manner set out to
record his Passion, and to renew the Sacrifice of his Body; he will certainly
come with such a fullness of Blessings, as attend this Sacred Body, which is the
proper Seat of Blessings: the Bread which we do break, being the Communion of
his Body: just as the eating of the Unleavened Loaves were (out of Jerusalem)
the communion to the Passover, which was the type of Christ Crucified. Christ
our Passover, says the Apostle, is Sacrificed for us: therefore let us keep
the Feast, etc. 1 Cor. 5.7.8.

12. Our life in general is the time of this Festival: and the Blessed
Communion, is the Bread and Wine of the Banquet. Therefore as they of Israel,
who for some lawful impediment could not eat the Lamb in Jerusalem, nor durst,
because of the Law, sacrifice and eat it at home, had nevertheless the Benefit
both of the Passover and other Holy Things of the Temple, by virtue of privar
Feastings, which they were allowed to keep with unleavened Bread and bitter
Herbs in the Country. Our Eucharistical eating supplies now this very Office:
and derives on worthy Communicants, as far as their Salvation is concerned, the
virtue of Christ's Sacrifice, in as large and saving a manner, as if they were
present at His Altar, and at the hour of His Passion. The Lord bless thee out
of his holy Seat. For then it was the kindness of the Lord toward his first
People (as certainly He has no less mercy for the second) virtually to diffuse
the Propitiation and strength of Holy Things from his Palace, into their Tents;
and to bless them both inherently with all the Graces, and imputatively with
all the Right, which could be conferred on them whose fault it is not, if they
cannot either eat the Passover nearer the Temple, or wait upon Christ at his
Cross.

13. Thus this great and Holy Mystery extends and communicates the Death of the
Lord, both as offering himself to God, and as giving himself to Men. As he
offered himself to God; it enters me both into that mysterial Body, which is
reputed as dead with Christ, and into their Society, privilege and Communion,
for whom He was pleased to dye: it sets me among the precious stones of Aarons
Ephod, Exodus 28. close to the Breast, and on the very shoulders of that Eternal
Priest, whilst he offers up himself and intercedes for his spiritual Isiael:
and by this means it conveyes to me the Communion of his Sufferings. Philip.
3.10. whence will infallibly proceed another Communion in all his Graces and
Glories. Under the second notion, as He offers himself to Men; the holy
Eucharist is, after the Sacrifice for sin, the true Festival and Sacrifice of
Peace offerings, and the Table purposely set up to receive those Mercies, that
are sent down from the Altar. Take, and eat, this is my Body which was broken
for you. And this is the Blood that was shed for you.

14. Here then I wait at the Lords Table, that both shows me what an Apostle,
who had Heaven for his School, had the greatest mind to see and learn, and
offers me the richest Gift, that a Saint can receive on Earth, the Lord Jesus
crucified.

Amen Jesu, my Lord and my God, give me all this which Thou showest; and grant
withal that I may both devoutly take, and faithfully keep, what Thou art
pleased to give. Bless this thine own Ordinance, and make it of a true Sign, an
effectual Means of thy Grace: then bless and sanctify my Heart also, and make
it a fit Temple for thy Mercies. Certainly Thou will deal with me in these thy
Mysteries, O God of Truth, according to thy faithfulness; but dispose also my
heart so toward the right using of them, that I may safely wish it may be don
according to my Faith. O Father which art in Heaven, here. I offer up to thee
my Soul, and thou offerest to me thy Son. The Oblation which I make is alas an
unclean habitation to receive the Holy One of Israel: and a Tent infected with
Leprosy, therein to Lodge the Saint of the Lord. Come in nevertheless, come in
high and Eternal Priest, but wash thy house at thy coming. Let no ill savor of
the grave, no more then that of Lazarus, keep thee so far from the Sepulcher,
and from the vile condition wherein I ly, but that thy power with thy Voice,
and thy Blood with thy Sacrament, may reach to me to raise me up: And let none
of those uncleanness, that after the Law of Moses, did defile them who came
too near, keep off the great Saint of the Lord from touching, and healing me.
Evil Spirits enter sometimes into swept houses, to make them foul. Matthew. 12.
But O Holy and hallowing Spirit of God draw nigh unto my Soul, which of it
self is foul already, to make it clean. I am a poor sinful, and unless thou
help, a lost person, but yet such as I am sinful and lost, I wait for thy
Salvation. Come in, O Lord, with thy Salvation to a dying Man, to make him
whole; to a sinner tied hand and foot with the bonds of iniquity, to release
him: to one who confesses his sins, to absolve him. Finally come in my Savior,
as thou did to the Publican, both to make me better and to save me. O let
this day Salvation come to this House. Amen.

SECTION V.
Of the Blessed Communion as being a Pledge of the Happiness and Glory to come.

1. THe blessed Communion opens such a treasure of Blessings on the two sides
which look toward the past or present Time, (as I have considered it) as it
may very well take up both all the eyes of Cherubins in beholding the
Mysteries, and all the hands of the numerous Israelites in gathering up all the
Manna, that it contains: yet it has one other side or prospect more, which
goes beyond the two former, as much as the future Blessings exceed the present,
and as the Glory, which we hope for, exceeds the small degree of grace, which
we possess. The blessed Communion which is a special Instrument ordained of
Christ both to present a new (as to our use) his Passion, and to convey on us
the present Graces, which flow out of this Passion, does there withal assure
us likewise of all the Happiness to come; whereof the received Graces are a
hopeful Earnest, and this Sacrament under this third notion, is a certain Pledge.

2. Now, tho what is given before hand for Earnest, and what is engaged by way
of Pledge, come all to one, in point of Validity and obligingness: yet they
quite differ many times both in their use and in their intrinsecal value.
Whence it comes to pass, that Earnests may be allowed upon account for part of
the Payment which is promised; whereas Pledges are recalled, and taken back; as
the Seal and Staff of Juda once were. Genesis 38. Thus for example, zeal, Charity,
and these degrees of Holiness, which God bestows at the use of holy
Sacraments, will remain still ours in Heaven, and there make part of our
Happiness; whereas the Sacraments themselves shall be kept back, and shall not
appear more in Heaven then did the Cloudy Pillar in Canaan, or do now the
shadows of the Law under the time of the Gospel. Certainly we shall have no
need, either of these sacred Images of Christ; when we shall see him face to
face, or of these Pledges to assure us of that Glory, which is to be revealed,
when we shall actually possess it. But till that day, the holy Communion has
this third use, namely of being a Pledge and an assurance from the Lord, that in
his good time he will crown us with Everlasting Happiness.

3. Our blessed Savior pointed at it, when He said to his Disciple, the Holy
Cup being in his hand, that he would drink no more of that Fruit, till he
should drink it new in the Kingdom of his Father. Luke 22.18. In the real
purpose of God, his Church and Heaven go both together: That being the way that
leads to this, as the Holy Place, to the Holiest: and both Holy Place, and
Holiest come to this one Thing, which Christ calls the Kingdom of God. Let them
not, whom He has invited to eat and drink at Abraham's Table, trouble
themselves about the Room where our blessed Savior will feed them; for tho it
were but in this inferior part of the kingdom, where this Patriarck was
faithful, it it a sufficient assurance, that in time He will also make them
sit in that other Palace, where this holy Man is now happy: and whosoever are
admitted to the Dinner of the Lamb slain, Matthew. 22.4. unless they be wanting
to themselves, must not doubt of being admitted to that wedding Supper of the
same Lamb, who once was dead, but now is Living for ever. Luke 14.16. Revel.
19.9.

4. The consequence and connection that these two Festivals have one with the
other, was most sweetly alluded to by our Savior, when he asked the Disciples,
who talked of sitting at his Right hand in his Glory, whether they could pass
to it throught the same Baptism and the same Cup. Mark. 10.37.38. And S. Paul
meant as much, when he said that by the holy Eucharist we set forth the Lords
death til he come. 1. Cor. 11.26. Both referring and continuing this holy
Mystery to the second Coming of Christ, not only as to the End, where it must
cease: but chiefly as to the Scope, that it looks to; and to that happiness at
his coming, where it must be fullfilled. And truly, since our Savior scarce
ever speaks of his own death, but as a forerunner and Preparative to his
Resurrection: and often joines in one Clause, and delivers as it were with one
breath, both his Crucifiction and his Glory, Mark. 10.34. it it very fit,
unless we put asunder these two Things, which Christ commonly did put together,
that the Sacrament which he instituted purposely to represent the one, which is
already accomplished, should at the least cast an Eye toward the other, which
we look for.

5. Nay, it must look and lead that way upon another and much stronger
necessity. Our Savior has given us three kinds of life by his Passion, and He
promises to nourish and maintain us in every one of them, by these tokens of
Bread and Wine, which he has made his Sacrament. This Sacrament affords help
and improvement for two as it is said before, but there is a third more, that we
are not yet come to: This is that eternal Life, for which this present world is
too vile an Element, and we our selves as yet too vile vessels. Till we
acquire by Grace and pious Endeavors a greater Perfection; and till we grow to
that stature as may fit us to bear up that weight of Eternal Glory: we are
neither of age to enjoy our Inheritance, nor of ability to manage well that
great Estate, and wear those noble Ornaments that attend it: and therefore it
lies hidden from us with Christ in God, and as it were under his Custody. I
Know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded he is able to keep that which I
have committed unto him against that Day. 2. Tim. 1.12. that is; by Faith we
deposit this great Treasure in the hands of God to keep: and God by this
Sacrament assures us and engages himself, that he will both keep it safe for
us, and restore it to us whenever we are fit for it.

6. This third use is the Crown and the Accomplishment of the two other: And
tho the Sacrament has three Faces, and looks three several ways, the Past,
the present, and the future; yet as to the main end, these three aim at one and
the same Glory. The first use of this Sacrament is to set out as new and fresh
the great and holy Sufferings, which have purchased our Title to Everlasting
Happiness: the second is both to represent the quality, and to afford us the
help of all necessary Graces (true Effluxes of these Sufferings) to capacitate
us toward it: and the third is to assure us that when we are capacitated by
these Graces; God, and his Christ will faithfully surrender to us the Purchase
it self, that is, eternal Happiness. And these three Parts put together make up
the proper and true sense of these words, Take and eat this is my Body: for the
consecrated Bread is not said to be the Lords Body only, because it represents
the Lords Body, but because also as to our present use on Earth, it does as
good as exhibit it: and as to our Happiness in Heaven bought with the price of
this Body, it is the most solemn Instrument to assure our Title to it.

7. Thus the consecrated Elements are no more the Body and Blood of Christ, in
that sense that Pictures and Maps set about Rooms, are commonly called Kings
and Countries only because they represent them: but as Patents also granted by
Kings, or other Deeds and Evidences left in our houses by our Ancestors, are
called Lands, Estates, and Manors, because they convey over to us most really
both the Title and Possession of all the goods which they mention. Represent to
your mind Jacob dividing among his Children every Parcel of his Estate, and
withal surrendering the Titles that belong to each Division; take thou this,
Joseph, this is the Field, which my Grand Father Abraham bought of Hephron, and
you Manasehs, come you hither, this is the Land, which I got from the Amorite.
It is most certain that the surrendering such Instruments, (although in themselves
but Papers, or Parchments) is in very deed nothing less then giving away the
very Lands: And Deeds and lands may very well go together under one Name, since
by giving whether Deeds or Lands, whether Patents, or Privileges, Fathers and
other Benefactors do both intend and effect the same Thing. If it happen
sometimes among men that Right and Possession take not one way: that our best
Titles are laid aside: and that we cannot enjoy those Estates, whereof either
our Kings, or Fathers have left us most clear Evidences; this falls out so by
unhappy Rencounters of either weakness, or injustice, or ignorance, which are
not to be found in Christ. Here then Christ our blessed Savior being desirous
before his death, as by a Deed of his last will, to settle upon his true
Disciples both such a measure of his Grace in this life, as might in part make
them Holy, and after this life such a fullness of all Blessings, as might make
them eternally happy; He delivers into their hands, by way of Instrument and
Conveyance, the blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood (the true Root and stem
of all Blessings) in the same manner, as to his Intention, but in a surer way,
as to the Event and effect, as Kings use to bestow Dignities by the bestowing
of a staff, or sword, and Fathers pass as much as they please of their Estates
on their Children, by giving them some few writings.

8. The true reason of all this, is because the Giver is not able to transfer
into his Friends hands Houses and Lands, because they are of an immovable
Nature: and therefore this must be supplied by substituting in stead of Lands,
some Ceremonies, forms, or tokens, which may visibly pass from hand to hand:
and show to all ends and purposes both the Intention, that the one has to pass
away, and the power, which the other has to take and enjoy what is given him.
Now Christ and his Estate, his Happiness and his Glory, his Eternity and his
Heaven, are not Things that may be moved more easily, then the Mountains or the
Earth: and therefore not to be disposed of in any other real manner, then great
immovable Estates are. Therefore the Kingdom of Israel was once conferred upon
David, with some drops of that Sacred Oil, which Samuel poured on his head. 1 Samuel 16.13. The Body and Blood of Jesus Christ is in full value, and Heaven
with all its fullness is in sure Title instated on true Christians by those
small portions which they receive at the Blessed Communion: the Minister of
Christ having, as to this effect, as much power from his Master, for what he
acts, as any Prophet or any Angel ever had, for what they did.

9. Hence it appears, what crime it is not to discern the Lords Body. It is to
do worse then Esau did, who sold his Birthright for a trifle: it is to value at
the same rate the Anointing of a Prophet, and the composition of a Perfumer: it
is to take the Lords Body for a despicable Morsel of Bread. In a word, it is to
perform the action of a Beast, that devours but the gross and earthy Matter of
this Sacrament: and have nothing of a Christian or rational creature, who
elevates his Soul to that Body, which by Christ's institution it represents, and
to the Price of that Body, which it promises. For since the proper essence of
Sacred signs or Sacraments consists not in what they are in their nature, but
in what they signify by divine institution; hence it happens infallibly, that
when the Sacraments are abused, the injury must needs light, not upon them in
their own natural Being, Bread, Wine, and Water, which upon this account are
not at all considerable; but upon the Holy mysteries, the Body and Blood of
Christ himself, who is the main object of their formal Being, that is, their
Signification. And therefore the Apostle speaks most exactly, when he says,
that whosoever eats of this Bread unworthily, does not discern, or does not
sanctify, but uses as a common and profane thing, the very Body of Jesus Christ.

11. In this profane want of Discerning, it is hard to say whether the Sin, or
the Punishment be the greater. For the sin is abominable, since not the Bread,
but Christ himself suffers the wrong: the Bread being not here concerned at
all, nor more abused by the Villain that abuses the Sacrament, then is the
Earth, the water or any other common matter of human Bodies, by the Murderer,
that kills a Man: or then are Brass and Marble by the Rebels, who pull down
their Princes Statues: or then Parchment, Paper, and Ink, by that unnatural
Son, who tears and tramples upon the Deeds, and the last will of his Father.
Only there is this difference, that in these last Instances, the Outrage
proceeds but from the Earth, the Brass, the Marble, the Paper, and other such
common Matter, to the Man, King, or Fathers persons, who should have bin
considered, and who alone suffer the wrong: whereas in abusing the blessed
Sacraments the sin flys a great deal higher, namely to the very Face of Jesus
Christ, for whose Body and Blood they stand. So that as the Holy Communion is
not exposed in the Church under the notion of Bread and Wine: the faithful
Communicants do appear there to receive Christ, and the faithless to abuse Him.

11. But if this Attemt is impious, the Punishment that attends it, is most
dreadful. It is a very sad mischance when Dogs or Apes tear like lose paper all
to fitters the Titles and assurances of a good Estate: and who would not pity
that wretch, who in his mad Passion had thrown into the sea, the very Keys,
which were given him, to Justify the Propriety of vast Treasures, in such
Houses, as these keys might open. Blind Villains, you cannot discern, either
among these Papers, the Original Deeds of your Estate: or among all these
Instruments the keys, that might both assure and give you admittance to
immense Riches. Whenever you eat of this Bread, and drink of this Cup thus
unworthily; unhappy men, you do not discern the Pledges of your Salvation: nay
most Impious as you are, you neither discern nor will honor the Body and Blood
of your Savior, which would bring salvation to you. At once both impious and
unhappy men, you despise and cast away from you, both the Salvation and the
Savior!

12. Lord Jesu! who have ordained this Mystery for a Communion of thy Body: for
a Means of advancement and proficiency in Holiness: and for an infallible Pledge
of Eternal Salvation, which thou have purchased by thy Body, and which thou
preparest thy People to receive by this Proficiency in Holiness; now Lord in
mercy look on me, help my unbelief, increase my Faith, and order the Soul of
thy Servant, who is to take these Holy Things. Then since thou thy self
originally give them, (tho not immediately, but by the ministry of thy
Disciples, Joh. 4.1, 2.
) In giving them bless them also: and bless them whilst I receive them: that
they may be efficacious to settle me in the Communion of thy Sufferings which
they exhibit and show forth: to feed me with that living Bread, which they
present: and to sanctify me for that eternal Happiness, which they promise. O
Lord thou know my simpleness, my Growning is not hid from thee look on a
poor Sinner at thy Table, as thou did on him who hung by thy Cross. O Lord my
God, remember me now, when thou art come into thy Kingdom. Luke 23.42.
Amen.

13. Eternal Priest, who art gone up on high, there to receive Gifts for men;
fill my Heart I beseech thee with blessings out of thy holy Seat, as now thou
fillest my Mouth with the Holy Things of thy Church: and so dispose me by thy
Grace to eat both spiritually and really the Flesh of that Sacrifice, which
thou did offer without the Gate, and which this Sacrament sets before me here
in thy Courts, that thence I may be admitted into that Holiest Sanctuary, which
thy Sacrifice has opened, and which this Sacrament invites me to. This is the
Bread which the Lord has prepared for his Children, and which he sends me now
by the hand of one of his Angels. O that in the strength of this Meat, I may
walk as Elijah did, my forty days, or as Israel, my forty years, and come at
last to that Holy Mountain, where without the help of any Bread, or the
Ministry of any Angels, I shall see my God face to face. Eternal, and blessed,
and blessing Spirit of God, bless me now, and help me to drink so worthily of
this fruit of the Vine, that I may drink it new in the Kingdom of my Father.
Amen.

SECTION VI.
Of the Holy Eucharist, as it implies a Sacrifice. And first of the
Commememorative Sacrifice.

1. IT is a certain truth that there never was on Earth a true Religion without
some kind of Sacrifices: and it is a very great lie to say that now the
Christian should want them. The Jews and the Pagans, who first aspersed the
Church of Christ with this slander, did it upon such a reason, as became them,
because they saw neither Altars set up, nor Beasts slain and burnt among them.
Thus the Pagans accused the Jews of adoring nothing but Clouds, because they
had no Gods of Stone, or Silver in their Synagogues: and thus silly men may
think now, that the world is destitute of Angels, because they do not appear so
often as they did in ancient times, in the shape and forms of Men. The truth,
is as what appeared like a Body, was not an Angel: nor what was Stone, or
Silver could be a God: Neither the slaughter of poor beasts could ever be true
Sacrifices. Thou delightest not in Oblations, the Sacrifice of God is a broken
Spirit. Many among the Jews much less quick sighted then the Prophets were,
confessed as much: nor certainly could any reason permit them to imagine, that
Flesh and Blood, which in all their Scriptures passes both for the weakest and
the vilest of Things, could be the best and the soundest part of Sacrifices.

2. Of all the Carnal Sacrifices, which the Jews do reduce to six kinds
(besides many more Oblations) none ever had any saving reality, as to the
washing away of sins but in dependence on Jesus Christ our Lord: and as to our
service and duty toward God, which they were also to represent, none had this
second end so fully performed under the Law, as it must be under the Gospel.
The blessed Communion alone, when whole, and not mutilated, concenters and
brings together these two great Ends (full Expiation of sins, and acceptable
Duty to God) toward which all the old Sacrifices never looked, but as either
simple Engagements, or weak shadows. As for the first, which is Expiation of
sins; it is most certain that the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ alone has bin
sufficient for it: and that if all both men and Angels were joined to it, it
were not to add too, but to receive from its fullness. It is most certain also,
that this great Sacrifice being both of an infinite virtue to satisfy the most
severe Justice, and of an infinite virtue to produce at once all the Effects,
that can be expected of it; it were impiety to think, it should need to be don
again, as weak and infirm Causes must, in order to make up by degrees and at
several times their full Effect. This was perhaps the want of Faith, which the
holy Scripture taxes in Moses. Number. 20.12. (which it is hard to find in any
thing else) to strike a second time, and without order, that mysterious Rock,
which to strike once had bin enough: for this second blow could proceed but of
a faithless mistrust that the first, which alone was commanded, could not
suffice. But it were a much greater offense both against the Blood of Christ,
to question its infinite worth, and against the infinitness and Immensity of
this worth, to charge it with some Emtiness, which any reiteration should fill
up. Therefore as the Expiatory Sacrifice, which Christ offered upon the Cross,
was infinitely able to do at once whatever an infinite number of other Sacrifices
had bin able to do, either all together at one time, or each of them severally
during the succession of all Ages; the Offering of it must needs be one only:
and the Reiteration of it were not only superfluous as to its real effect, but
also most injurious to Christ in the very thought and Attemt.

3. Nevertheless this Sacrifice which by a real Oblation was not to be offered
more then once, is by an Eucharistical and devout Commemoration to be offered
up every day. This is what the Apostle calls, to set forth the death of the
Lord; to set it forth I say as well before the Eyes of God his Father, as
before the Eyes of all Men: and what S. Augustine did explain, when he said that
the holy Flesh of Jesus Christ was offered up in three manners; by prefiguring
Sacrifices under the Law, before his coming into the World: in real deed upon
the Cross: and by a Commemorative Sacrament, after he is ascended into Heaven.
All comes to this first, that the Sacrifice, as it is it self and in it self, it
can never be reiterated; yet by way of devout Celebration and Remembrance it
may nevertheless be reiterated every day. Secondly, that whereas the Holy
Eucharist is by it self a Sacrament, wherein God offers unto all men the
Blessings merited by the Oblation of his Son; it likewise becomes by our
Remembrance, a kind of Sacrifice also; whereby, to obtain at his hands the same
Blessings, we present and expose before his Eyes that same holy and precious
Oblation once offered. Thus the ancient Israelites did continually represent in
their Solemn Prayers to God, that Covenant which he had made once with Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob their Forefathers. Thus did the Jews in their Captivity turn
their Faces toward either the Country or the Temple where the Mercy Seat and
the Ark were, which were the Memorial of his Promises, and the Sacramental
Engagement of his Blessings. And thus the Christians in their Prayers do every
day insist upon, and represent to God the Father the meritorious Passion of
their Savior, as the only sure ground, whereon both God may give, and they
obtain the Blessings, which they do pray for. Now, neither the Israelites had
ever Temple or Ark or Mercy seat, nor the Christians have any Ordinance,
Devotion or Mystery, that may prove to be such a blessed and effectual
Instrument to reach to this Everlasting Sacrifice, and to set it out so
solemnly before the Eyes of God Almighty, as the Holy Eucharist is. To men it
is a sacred Table, where Gods Minister is ordered to represent from God his
Master the Passion of his dear Son, as still fresh and still powerful for their
Eternal Salvation: and to God it is an Altar whereon Men mystically present to
him the same Sacrifice as still bleeding and still sueing for Expiation and
Mercy. And because it is the high Priest himself, the true Anointed of the
Lord, who has set up most expressly both this Table and this Altar for these
two ends, namely for the Communication of his Body and Blood to Men, and for
the Representation and Memorial of both to God; it cannot be doubted, but that
the one must be most advantageous to the penitent Sinner, and the other most
acceptable to that good and gracious Father, who is always pleased in his Son,
and who loves of himself the repenting and the sincere return of his Children.
Luke 15.22.

4. Hence one may see both the great use and advantage of more frequent
Communion: and how much it concerns us, whenever we go to receive it, to lay
out all our wants, and pour out all our Grief, our Prayers, and our Praises
before the Lord in so happy a conjuncture. The primitive Christians did it so,
who did as seldom meet to preach or pray, without a Communion, as did the old
Israelites, to worship without a Sacrifice. On solemn days especially, or upon
great Exigencies they ever used this help of Sacramental Oblation as the most
powerful Means the Church had to strengthen their Supplications, to open the
Gates of Heaven, and to force in a manner God and his Christ to have compassion
on them. The People of Israel for the better performance of Prayer and Devotion
went up to the Tabernacle and the Temple, because (besides other Motives) both
these were Figures of that Body which was to be sacrificed. Wherefore. Christ
calls his Body this Temple. Joh. 2.19. and the first Christians went up to
their Churches, there to meet with these Mysteries, which do represent him both
as already sacrificed, and yet as in some sort offering and giving up himself.
Those in worshipping ever turned their Eyes, their Hearts, their hopes toward
that Altar and Sacrifice, whence the High Priest was to carry the Blood into
the Sanctuary: and these looking toward the Cross and their crucified Savior
there, through his Sufferings hope for a way toward Heaven; being encouraged
to this hope by the very Memorial, which they both take to themselves and show
to God of these Sufferings. Lastly, Jesus our Eternal Priest, being from the
Cross, where he suffered without the Gate, gone up into the true Sanctuary which
is Heaven, there above does continually present both his Body in true reality,
and us as Aaron did the twelve Tribes of Israel in a Memorial, Exodus 28.29. and
on the other side we beneath in the Church present to God his Body and Blood in
a Memorial, that under this shadow of his Cross, and image of his Sacrifice, we
may present our selves before him in very deed and reality.

5. O Lord who see nothing in me, that is truly mine, but Dust and Ashes,
and which is worse, sinful flesh, and Blood; look upon what I have of thee,
some small Remnant of thine Image, some small beginnings of thy Grace, and some
light sparks of thy Spirit. But because all these are defective, supply them, O
Lord, with thy mercy, and with the Sacrifice of thy Son. Not unto us, O Lord,
not unto us, but to thy Name, and thine Anointed give the praise. Turn thine
Eyes, O Merciful Father, to the satisfaction and Intercession of thy Son, who
now sits at thy Right Hand: to the Seals of thy Covenant, which lie before thee
upon this Table: and to all the wants and distresses, which also thou see in
my heart. O Father, glorify thy Son whom thou have sent into this World: O Son
bless thou this Sacrament which thou have ordained for thy Church, and send
with it some influence of that Spirit whom thou have promised to all Flesh:
that by the help of these Mercies, the World, the Church, our Flesh and Souls
may glorify thee now and ever Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Amen.

SECTION VII.
Concerning the Sacrifice of our own Persons.

1. IT is either the Error, or the incogitancy of too many Christians, which
makes them sometimes believe and oftener live, as if under the Gospel there were
no other Sacrifice but that of Christ upon the Cross. It is very true indeed
there is no other, nor can there be any other sufficient, and proper for this
end, of satisfiing Gods Justice, and expiating our sins. I have trodden the
Winepress alone, and of the People there was none with me; I looked and there
was none to help. Esaias. 63.3.5. In this respect, tho the whole Church should in
a Body, offer up her self as a burnt Sacrifice to God, yet could she not
contribute more, toward the bearing up or bearing away the wrath to come, then
all those Innocent souls, who stood near Jesus Christ when he gave up the
Ghost, did toward the darkning of the Sun, or the shaking of the whole Earth.
But that which is not so much as useful, much less necessary to this Eternal
Sacrifice, which alone could redeem Mankind, is indispensably both necessary
and useful, that we may have a share in this Redemtion. So that if the
Sacrifice of our selves, which we ought to offer up to God, cannot procure
Salvation; it is absolutely necessary to receive it.

2. As the old Law never introduced Aaron officiating before the Lord, without
the whole People of Israel, represented both by the twelve stones on his Ephod
and the two other on his shoulders Exodus 28.12.30. The Gospel most commonly
describes Jesus Christ and his Church, not only as two Parties, that do nothing
the one without the other, but sometimes also as one Person alone: as
particularly, 1. Cor. 12.12. Christ acts, officiates and suffers for his Body,
in that manner that does become the Head: and the Church imitates and follows
all the motions and sufferings of this heavenly and holy Head, in such a manner
as is possible to its weak Members.

3. The main if not the whole Divinity of S. Paul as well in point of faith, as
of Christian life, runs upon this Conformity both of actions and sufferings:
And that of S. John likewise upon this same Communion. The truth is, Our Savior
had neither Birth nor Death nor Resurrection here on Earth, but such as we
ought to conform us to: as he has neither Ascension, nor Throne, nor
Everlasting life, nor Glory, but such as we may also have in Heaven common with
him.

4. This Conformity or likeness to Christ, which (as the Hebrews use to
spoke,) is the foundation and Pillar, that is, the grand Principle of the whole
Christian institution, relates more directly to our duty about his Sufferings;
and then to our happiness about his Exaltation. And the Communion, which is the
other great fundamental, that S. John has still in his Mouth, points more at
this, and presupposes that: And both make up a full Comment upon the words
which our Savior so often commanded his Disciples, to follow him; thereby
signifiing both the Labor, and the success of this most Important Journey, for
without doubt we shall follow him into Heaven, if we will follow him here on
Earth: and we shall have Communion with him in his Glory, if we will keep
Conformity with him here in his Sufferings.

5. These three expressions to Follow, to be like or have Conformity, and to
have Communion, which are the most essential Clauses in the charter and charge
of christianity, are not to be limited to the imitation of Christ's Moralls
only, as when he bids us be Holy as he is Holy, etc. but they oblige all his
Disciples to follow and imitate him likewise, as much as in them lies,
throughout all the other parts of his life, and the very functions of his
Offices. For we must be regenerated in his Birth, dye on his Cross, be buried
in his Grave, bear his shame in his Tribulations; in a word, Christ and
Christians are and must be continually together, Where I am there my servant
shall be also. Ioh. 12.26. But of all these Duties the most fundamental and
most indispensable, is that of bearing part of his Cross and dying with him in
Sacrifice.

6. Never did the Son of God intend any more to offer himself for his people,
without his people, Then did the High Priests of the Law to offer themselves
for Israel without his Ephod, the memorial of them. Christ presented himself
to God, in this great Temple, which is the world, at the head of whole Mankind,
as did the first born of Egypt, who also did prefigurate him every one in his
house, at the head of his family. He came as a voluntary victim to the Altar,
being attended on by his Israel, who as it were with their hands laid all their
sins upon his head. Therefore as it was necessary, that they, who sought for
Atonement, should wait upon the Sacrifice: and that whosoever would escape the
destroyer, or other Plagues, should keep themselves within that house, where
either the first born, or the Paschal Lamb was destroyed: by the same
necessity, whosoever do pretend to Eternal Salvation, must needs appear within
that house, about that Altar, and that Cross, whereon this first born of every
Creature, and this Eternal both Priest and Sacrifice was pleased to Offer up
himself.

7. By this standing and appearing at the Altar under the Law the sinners
indeed did not dye; the victim alone being burned and destroyed: but because
they laid their hands on it, when it was dying, and fell (for prayer and
worship) on their faces down to the ground, when it did fall bleeding to death,
They were as well as the very victim, reputed to Offer up themselves. So the
truest Christians likewise are neither crucified, nor destroyed in that manner,
that their Master and Savior was: yet, 1. because they look toward, and cast
themselves upon his Cross and Sufferings, as the only means both of expiating
for their Sins, and of Salvation for their Souls, 2. because of the great and
sharp grief, which they do suffer who sincerely think on the Son of God thus
dying, and which is more, thus dying only for their sakes; which to them is as
it was to the Blessed Virgin a sword to pierce their hearts, and likewise to
pierce and crucify to death their Sins: 3. because their whole Body of Sin,
being by this Crucifixion, really overmastered and wounded, there remains no
life in them, but what they may, and will offer up and dedicate to Gods
Service; The Savior thus offering himself, and the saved so united to him by
faith, so plunged both into the Communion of, and grief for his Sufferings, and
so resigned up and consecrated to his Will for the remnant of their life, are
both accounted before God for one and the same Sacrifice.

8. It is the same, first by Imputation, such as were the first fruits and the
Lump: Romans 11.16. The Ears of Corn and the Harvest, which were both together
involved in, and made holy by one Offering. Levit. 23.10.11. In this sense
Jesus Christ dying upon the Cross, was made the first fruits of them that offer
themselves to God, that they may be sanctified by his death and Sacrifice. If
one be dead then all are dead; as he was made the first fruits of them that
sleep, that they should be quickened by his Resurrection. But secondly as the
Lurnp or mass may in some case either lose or not get at all the privilege and
holiness of the first fruits, (for example, a few sheaves of Corn, which the
Worshippers had offered unto the Lord, could by no means sanctify that Harvest
which afterward should be eaten in the Service or in the Temple of an Idol)
Two real Actions are required to make good this Imputation, and to join the
Christians to the Sacrifice of Christ their Head.

9. The first is, that they endeavor to crucify their sinful members as really
as Christ himself had his sinless Body crucified. So that the feet, that before
did run to Evil, the violent hands that did injure, the greedy eyes that did
covet, and all those members of the Flesh, that were weapons of wickedness, may
by this Cross and Sacrifice be most really bound, and in a good measure
destroyed as to their Corruption. I do glory in the Cross of Jesus Christ, by
which the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world. Galat. 6.14. So
Jesus Christ, and his whole Church, and in this Church every true penitent
Sinner being joined all together, do make up that complete Sacrifice, which
seems to have bin prefigurated by the Sacrifice at the consecration of Aaron,
Exodus 29.13.14. whereof the kidneyes and the fat about the Inwards, were burnt
as a sweet smeling Oblation on the Altar: but all the Flesh, the Skin, the
Feet, the Dung (Instruments and Emblems of Sin) were thrown and burnt without
the Camp. For Jesus Christ and his Church so concur together in one Oblation,
that the blessed Savior contributes all that can go up into Heaven to please
and appease God: and we on our Part do contribute, but what deserves to be
removed out of the way, the Corruption and smell of sin. The Second necessary
Condition to the aforesaid Imputation (for no imputation either to life or
death can be just without some real grounds to support it) and to incorporate
us into the Sacrifice of Christ's Body, is a serious resolution of piety, and
universal consecrating both of our Persons and of all our Actions to God. I am
crucified with Christ, that I may live to God. Now it is not I that live, but
Christ lives in me, and the life which I now lead in the Flesh I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. Gal. 2.19. This
Place must be so rendered according to the distinction of both the Greek Copies,
and all the Oriental versions. And this Act of the Church consecrating her self
to God, and joining her self so to Christ as to make but one Oblation with him,
is the Mystery represented by the daily Sacrifice. Exodus 29.38. Numb. 28.3.

10. This Sacrifice did consist of two parts. The first and chiefest was the
Lamb, that did foreshew the Lamb of God: and the second was the Meat and
Drink Offering made of flower mingled with Oil and Wine: all which being but an
Additional thrown on the Lamb, morning and evening, was counted but for one and
the same Sacrifice. Those Secondary Oblations so thrown and burnt upon the main
Sacrifice, signified properly these Offerings, which Christians must present to
God, of themselves, of their Goods, and of their Praises. From this Meat and
Drink Offering which was added to more substantial Sacrifices, came the Bread
and Wine to be used at the celebration of Christ's Death. Which Bread in the
Communion considered as Sacrament, signifies the natural, but considered as
Sacrifice, it represents the mystical Body of Christ, that is his Church. For
we that are many says the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.17. are one Bread. To this purpose
the holy Martyr Ignatius Epist. Romans being ready to be offered up by Martyrdom,
said he was the wheat of God, which was to be ground by Beasts teeth. Soon
after the Church added Oil and Frankincense to Bread and Wine, to make up the
whole Meat Offering which consisted of these four Things. The truth is, all
what we can offer upon our own account, is but such an Oblation as this Meat
and Drink offering of Moses was, that cannot be presented but by the virtue and
merits of Jesus Christ, who supports it: and that can never ascend up to Heaven
but along with the sacred smoke of that great Burnt Sacrifice, which is to
carry it up thither. For on the one side our own persons, our works, or any
thing else that may be ours, are by themselves but weak, unsubstantial kinds of
Offerings, which cannot be presented unto God, otherwise but as these
Additional Oblations, which from themselves fall to the ground; unless a more
solid Sacrifice do sustain them: And on the other side, this solid and
fundamental Sacrifice upholds, saves and sanctifies, but those persons and
things, that according to the Law of Moses his Meat Offerings, are thrown into
this his fire, are hallowed upon his Altar, and are together with him
consecrated to God by him.

11. For this cause it is, that as soon as the Prophet had preached the coming
of this Everlasting Sacrifice, and the propitiation and happiness, which it
would spread over all the world; he foretells at the same time, that the
Apostles and their successors: (whom he designs by expressions proper to that
Economy, under which he did live) should bring the Nations from all parts of
the Earth, as an Offering unto the Lord. Esaias. 66. And to the same purpose St.
Paul himself speaks of his Evangelical Office as of a Sacrificing Priesthood;
and of the Gentiles, whom he did convert to Christ, as of so many Sacrifices
which he presented to the Lord. I exercise, says he, in the Gospel a holy
Sacerdotal Priesthood (for the word (...) signifies both) that the Oblation of
the Gentiles may be acceptable, being sanctified by the holy spirit. Romans
15.16. Hence proceeds that Method, which he observes most constantly, never to
preach the Faith in Jesus Christ, without inviting presently the Beleivers to
Offer up unto God, either their Bodies and Souls: as Romans 12. or their works of
holiness, of Praise, of Charity, etc. as every where else. And these are the
Spiritual Offerings which every true Christian must join to cast upon the
fundamental Sacrifice of Christ Jesus.

12. We know indeed that the universal Assembly of Christians could never meet
at the same time, or place, either to follow Christ in a Body, when he went to
offer himself for them; or to fall upon their faces and prostrate themselves to
the ground, when he bowed his head under their Sins: Providence that scatters
men up and down throughout all places and times of the world, permitting no
possibility of such a general meeting. But the Sacrifice of Christ, tho it was
confined to few hours and to a small parcel of Ground as to the Suffering; yet
being everlasting, infinite, and still the same, as as to the sufficiency and
virtue of it, coextends it self most perfectly to all both times and places,
when and where those scattered members, will ever come to Offer up themselves
to God with their head. And besides this, the second part of his Sacerdotal
Office, which consists in interceding, continuing still in the very Act, till
the worlds end; They that could not embrace his Cross, and join with him at
that same time that he Offered himself, may do it every day, and humble
themselves like poor victims laden with sins and miseries, at the same time,
that now he continues still actually interceding. So in all Places, at all
times, and upon any emergencies, whenever the Beleivers will present
themselves unto God, both with and by his Son Jesus, they may still receive the
favor of acceptance, and that real efflux of saving Odor from Christ, which
was represented by that typical holiness, which the additional Oblation did
receive from the principal Sacrifice, when it was adjoined to it. Whereas it is
most certain, that all the Merit and blood of Christ shall no more save Men
that will not draw near and join themselves to conformity and Communion of his
Death; then the continual and other burning Sacrifices, were ever able to
consecrate, that meat, that Wine, that Oil, and that Frankincense, which were
not brought, nor burned upon the the same Altar with them.

13. Now tho all men be called to this conformity and Communion in the
Sufferings of Christ, from the time of those sufferings, until there be no
times at all: and although the days of our present life, have all the privilege
which these seven feast days once had, when every one might gird his loins,
eat his unleavened bread, and kill his own Bullock, as the Priest did Sacrifice
the Paschal Lamb; (which Bullock was superadded to the Paschal Lamb, that both
might better suffice for the 7 Festival days, besides its other ritual and
figurative importance as a Sacrifice:) it is certain, nevertheless that there
are two more special and extraordinary days, wherein Christians are invited by
more urgent and proper Circumstances, to present their Souls and Bodies by way
of Second Offering upon the Sacrifice of their Savior. The first is past, and
that was when the Savior offered himself to death: when Heaven and Earth,
Temple and Graves shook at the blow that killed him; when pious Souls either
stood immovable as the blessed Virgin hard by his Cross, or in a manner
crucified themselves, beating their breasts as the Daughters of Jerusalem: and
when every Disciple might by the very conjuncture of all the things he saw, be
moved to say as Thomas, let us go and let us die with him. Joh. 11.16. The other
time most favorable and proper, next to that of his real Passion, is that of
the holy Communion; which, as it has bin Gelas. Cyzic. part. 2. cap. 31.
explained, is a Sacramental Passion, where tho the Body be broken, and the
blood shed but by way of representative Mystery, yet both are as effectually,
and as truly offered for our own use, if we go to it worthily, as when that
holy and divine Lamb did offer himself the first time.

14. Therefore whenever Christians approach to this dreadful Mystery, and to
the Lamb of God lying and sacrificed (as some say that the holy Nicene Council
speaks) upon the holy Table; it concerns their main interest in point of
Salvation, as well as in other duties, to take a special care, not to lame, and
deprive the grand Sacrifice of its own due Attendance. But to behave themselves
in that manner, that, as both the principal and additional Sacrifices, were
consumed by the same fire, and went up toward Heaven in the same flame; So
Jesus Christ and all his Members, may jointly appear before God: this in a
Sacramental Mystery, these with their real Bodies and Souls, offering
themselves at the same time, in the same place, and by the same Oblation. So
that whosoever are attending on this sacrifice, since they do it in remembrance
of their Savior, once really dead, and every day Sacramentally dying for them
(do this in remembrance of me) they do it in such a manner, 1. as may become
faithful Disciples, who are resolved to die both for and with their Master: 2.
as true and sincere Members that cannot outlive their own head; and 3. as truly
penitent sinners who dare not look for any share in the Glory, and Redemtion,
and session at the right or left hand of their Savior, unless after their way
they undergo the same Baptism, unless they will drink the same Cup: and unless
they enter really into the Communion of that Sacrifice and those Sufferings,
which their Master, their head, and their Savior has passed through, and which
this very Sacrament engages them to.

15. Now, this Communion does require, first a Conformity of Actions, that may
in some sort correspond to all what Christ has done as Priest: Secondly
another Conformity of mortifications, and passions, that may likewise answer to
whatsoever he has Suffered as a voluntary Victim. As Priest; (for in this
occasion all Christians after the example of their Savior, become Priests,
since they offer themselves to God) to follow all the steps, and take upon them
all the preparations, the Course of life and the like dispositions of mind,
which were seen in this Blessed Melchisedeck, when he presented himself to God.
To this effect the faithful Worshipper, presenting that Soul and Body, which
God fitted him with at his coming into this world, will lay them down at the
Altar.

Lo I come, if this Soul and Body may be useful to any thing, here they are
both to do thy will O God. Heb. 10.5.7.
And hereafter if it please thee, to use that power which thou have, as Creator
over Dust and Ashes, over weak flesh and Blood, over a brittle vessel of Clay,
over the work of thine own hands; Lo here they are to suffer also thy good
pleasure. I do now protest to my God, that if he please to afflict me either
with pain or dishonor, I will humble my self under it, and be obedient unto
death, even unto the death of the Cross. Phil. 2.8.
Whatsoever may happen to me either from the Jews, or Gentiles, from my
Neighbors, or from strangers, since it is my God that emploies them, tho they
neither know, nor think it so; unless at the same time God help me to some
lawful means of securing my self against their wrongs. I will not hereafter
open my mouth before the Lord, who does strike me, except only to sing the
Psalm, after I have eaten some bitter Herbs that belong to this Passover; and
to bless the Lord who gave them me; and entreat him for the wicked, who perhaps
has maliciously gathered them. Hereafter no man can take away any thing from
me, no life, no honor, no Estate, since I am ready of my self to lay them down,
as soon as I can perceive that God requires them at my hands. Nevertheless, O
Father, if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me; yet if I must drink it,
thy will be don. What kind soever of Suffering hereafter may trouble my Flesh,
or what kind soever of Agonies may perhaps worse trouble my Spirit, following
the example of this high Priest, in the midst of his bitterest pains, O Father,
into thy hand Luke 23.46.
I will ever remit my life, and the dearest concernments that attend it. And if
thou be pleased, that either I live yet a while, or not; I will with my Savior
bow down my head, Joh. 19.30. Joh. 19.46.
I will adore thee under my burden, and humble my self under thy hand; I will
give up all what thou will be pleased to ask, Goods, Joys, etc. until at last I
surrender and give up the Ghost.

Luke 22.42. Matthew. 26.42.
16. To this first part of our Conformity with Christ as Priest, must be
referred, whatsoever we read he did from his last Passover to his Passion, as
far as we can imitate it: as when he washed the feet of his Disciples: when he
prayed for his Murderers: when he received with a mild reply the rashness of
him that struck him, commiting all the rest to God: when he took that
charitable care of gently restoring the Ear to an insolent fellow named
Malchus: when his dismallest Agonies never kept him from comforting a Penitent,
this day shall thou be with me in Paradise; Luke 23.43. nor from instructing
Good pious Souls, ye Daughters of Jerusalem weep not, etc. nor from interceding
for his cruellest Enemies, Father forgive them for they know not what they do.
nor from taking care for his Relations, woman behold thy son etc. Ioh. 19.26.
Hereupon the success of these both Active and Passive dispositions must needs
be this, that God looking first to Abel, and finding him endued with that
spirit of humility, of Charity, of meekness, and of patience, which was also in
Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5, he certainly will be pleased to look also upon his
Sacrifice, Genes. 4.4.

17. Besides this first Conformity of holy Dispositions, and as it were
Sacerdotal Ornaments, between Jesus and his Disciples, considered as they are
Priests: there must needs be also a conformity of Death and Passion between
them, being considered as Sacrifices. The first Conformity, which regards
Personal and Priestly Endowments, is never so exact, nor so full, as to adorn
inferior Priests with all the proper Attire of Aaron; his Golden Plate, his
embroidered Ephod, or his Miter, or his Breast Plate: yet it is never so
defective, but that he and they may without indecency, notwithstanding the
inequality of their Garments, officiate at one Altar. The second Conformity
which regards the Sacrifice, is yet much shorter then the first, being between
things, not only unequal in degrees of perfection, but different in their
nature. For really the Sacrifice of a living Creature, as the Lamb was, could
not differ so much in nature from dead and inanimate Offerings, such as the
Meal, the Oil, and the Wine were, which as secondary Sacrifices were added to
the first; as the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ differs from what poor Christians,
either are in their nature, or can offer up to God in Sacrifice. For of these
two Sacrifices as to their proper conditions, The one is Divine, allmighty, and
all Holy; and the other is human, infirm, and sinful. And as to their several
ends, The one is made to procure and work Expiation, and the other only to get
some capacity to receive it. The first and prime Sacrifice imparts to the
second its Righteousness; and the second is thrown upon the first as a burden,
only to charge it with all its sins. Nevertheless as under the Law, the Lamb,
and the Oblation added to it, did join in one Sacrifice, because both were
offered upon one Altar, and consumed by one fire: so under the Gospel Christ
and his People are accounted for one Oblation, when both in their own proper
way are consecrated by the same Cross, and are in some manner alike obedient to
death. For we have bin planted together in the likeness of his death, knowing
this that our Old Man is dead, etc. Romans 6.5, 6.

18. By this likeness or conformity of Sufferings Christ is dead once to
satisfy the rigor of the Law, and so must Christians destroy their sins and
mortify themselves, that they may observe hereafter the Righteousness of the
Gospel. Christ during that terrible storm that made him weep and cry aloud.
Matt. 27.46.50. Luke 23.46. Heb. 5.7. did suffer such a heavy punishment as
might satisfy Gods Justice: And his Mystical Body must every day both undertake
and suffer such fatherly Corrections as may overmaster their own sins. In a
word, the Holy Savior was willing to be crucified, because this dismal
execution was indispensably necessary to turn away the wrath to come: and his
true members must be willing to crucify themselves with him, because this
Discipline is as indispensably necessary to destroy in them by degrees that
inward corruption which would bring back again this wrath.

19. O Father of Mercies I beseech thee, both by the merits of thy Son, who now
intercedes in Heaven, awd by that bloody Sacrifice which he has offered on the
Cross, (whereof thou see the Sacrament upon This Table) this Day be pleased
to receive me into the Communion of his Sufferings, and hereafter into the
Communion of his Glory. Cast not away from thee in displeasure the Elevation of
these hands, which I will fasten to his Cross, so far as they may not offend,
and which I do now stretch before thee with a true desire that hereafter they
may serve thee; neither despise the Sacrifice of a poor Soul, which also his
Cross has wounded with the sense of her misery, and by this wound lays it
open, both to pour out her own prayers, and to gasp after thy mercies. O God
and Father, bestow on me such a measure of that Spirit, through which thy Son
offered himself, Heb. 9.14.
as may sanctify for ever, the Body and Soul which now I offer; and may
likewise help me to perform the service which I do promise. A Spirit of
Contrition, that I may sufficiently detest those sins, which did deliver my God
to death: then a spirit of Holiness, that I may never be temted to them any
more then a crucified man can be temted. O let this crucified Body, which I
present to thee for such, never be untied from his Cross, either to fall to
those viclences, that have peirced my Saviors hands, or to fly up to those
vanities, that have crowned his head with Thorns; or to follow unjust
pleasures, that have filled his dear Soul with grief, that have filled his
Entrails with Gall. Arm and Rod of the Lord, who in thine Anger did revenge
all these sins upon my Savior, in thy mercy correct and destroy them also in
me. So my God accept of a heart, that sheds now before thee its Tears, as a
poor Victim does its blood: and that raises up unto thee all its desires, its
thoughts, its zeal, as a Burnt offering does its flames. Finally since my
Sacrifice can be neither, holy, nor accepted, being alone: Accept of it, O
Father, as it is an Oblation supported by that Sacrifice, which alone is able
to please thee. Receive it clothed with the Righteousness of thy Son, and made
acceptable with that holy Perfume that rises from of his Altar: And grant that
He who sanctifies, and they who are by him sanctified, may be joined in one
Passion, and may enjoy hereafter with thee the same Glory. Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc.

SECTION VIII.
Concerning the Oblation of our Goods and Alms, or the Sacrifice of Justice.

1. IT is an express and often repeated Law of God by Moses, and no where
repeated by Christ, that no worshipper shall presume to appear before him with
emty hands. Sincere Christians must have them full at the receiving of the holy
Communion, with four distinct sorts of Sacrifices. 1. The Sacramental and
commemorative Sacrifice of Christ. 2. The real and Actual Sacrifice of
themselves. 3. The free will Offering of their Goods. 4. The Peace Offering of
their Praises.

2. The first as representing the Sacrifice offered on the Cross, is the ground
of the three others, especially of the second: which must no more be separated
from it, then Parts are from the Whole, or the Body from its Head. These two
are so close coupled together, that St. Austin Aug. apud Fulg. de Bapt.
Aethiop. c. ult.
more then once, by the Body of Christ in the holy Communion, understands
Christ's mystical Body, which is the Church. And St. Cyprian St. Cypr. l. 2. Ep.
3.
says expressly, that Christ and his People are contained and united together
in the Holy Cup (that being represented by the Wine, this represented by the
Water;) so that Christ is not there without his People, nor the People without
their Savior.

3. The Third and fourth, which are the Sacrifices of our Goods and of our
Praises, are appendages following after the second, that is the, Sacrifice of
our own selves, by as natural a consequence, as the fruits and leaves follow
the Tree, and as what we have or what we can, must needs come after what we
are. All the world know how that blemished and lame Sacrifices were abominable
under the Law: and certainly Bodies without heads, souls without their
faculties, and Persons without their proper Duties, are not better under the
Gospel. Such mutilated Sacrifices cannot suit with that of Christ, which was
perfectly whole and entire. Therefore as when we once offer our selves to God,
our Souls and Bodies, become attending Sacrifices on the Sacrifice of Jesus
Christ: so must by the same equity, all our Goods and Services, by way of
seconddary Oblations attend the Sacrifice of our Persons. And as the Lamb, in
the daily Sacrifice was never offered without its Meat Oblation, nor this meat
Oblation without its incense, its Wine, its Oil: So the Eternal Son and Lamb of
God, who was pleased to offer himself for me, must neither be offered without
me; nor whenever I offer up my self, both by him and with him, must I appear
as a dry and unsavory Meat offering without juice, without sweet smell, without
all the holy dispositions of readiness and joy to obey and please my God in all
good works, whereof the Incense, the Wine, and the Oil, were under the Law
sacred Emblemes. In a word, whenever we offer our selves, we offer by the
self same Act, all that we have, all that we can: and so consequently we do
engage for all, that it shall be dedicated to the Glory of God, and that it
shall be surrendered into his hands, employed to such uses, upon such occasions
and times, as he will be pleased to appoint.

4. Hear then, my son (as says the wise man) look to they feet, when thou
entrest into the house of God, lest thou offer the Sacrifice of fools. Eccles.
5.6. It is the Sacrifice as well as the part of a fool to offer the Person
without the Goods that attend it, as it were the bones without the sinews and
the flesh that cover them. It is the same Act of an Impious wretch to mangle,
and to mutilate, either the holy Sacrifice which Jesus has made to his father,
or the holy Sacrament which he has ordained to his Church, or that holy
Oblation, which after his Sacrifice and at his Sacrament he is pleased to
require of us. And after we have presented it, it is an Act, not only of great
Impiety, but of as great a Sacriledg, as was that of Ananias, to withdraw
without leave, any part of that Whole which we have devoted to Gods Service.

5. It behooves not Israel alone to go forth out of Egypt with all their
Children and Cattle, and Goods, to offer them unto the Lord, that he may take
either all, or such a part, as he will be pleased to choose; Exodus 10.25, 26.
All the Gentiles were likewise to go and give themselves up to Gods service
with their Gold, their Silver, their Dromedaries, and their Chariots laden with
their chiefest substance: The Egyptians with all their wealth: Tire and Sidon
with their Merchandise: Esaias. 23.18. and 60.6, 7, 9. The wise men with their
Frankincense, their Myrrh and their Gold: and so every sinner at his Conversion
to God, was to consecrate all to Jesus Christ, and to the service of his
Church. From that very moment, that by any real Act of conversion, of faith,
of repentance, or of vow, we have given up our selves to Christ, who has
likewise given himself for us; as by virtue of this mutual Communion, all what
he possesses becomes ours, namely his Grace, his Immortality, his Glory; and so
he bestows it upon us, according to the times, and degrees which he sees best
for our Salvation: by the same consequence, all whatsoever we have does become
his, so that he may take it after in what proportion and season soever he shall
see best for his Glory. The two Asses which he sent for by his disciples, that
he might ride on them to Jerusalem, and the Chamber which he commanded to be
ready, that he might eat the Passover in it, were not so absolutely his, as are
our lives, our Goods, etc. whenever the Lord has need of them: Matt. 21.2,
3. Luke 22.11. Those things were his only by the Right of propriety, which, as
to a Sovereign Lord and God, is naturally reserved upon any thing which he
creates or saves; but these are his besides, because we with our selves have
given them. When he calls for the former, to deny them were injustice, but to
deny these latter, were a visible Sacriledg: all what we are, what we can do,
and what we can give, even to the least vessel in our houses, being involved
and made holy, in this one Consecration. In that day shall there be upon the
very Bridles of the Horses holiness unto the Lord: and every pot in Jerusalem
and Juda shall be holy unto the Lord. Zechar. 14.20, 21.

6. This Consecration whereby the worshipper offers and resigns up all himself,
and all his Concernments to God, if it be well don, and duly performed, is,
first as for our Souls and Bodies a Christian Apotheosis, if I may use this
word, which both makes them capable of the Sacrifice and grace of Christ, and
raises and prefers them to the very nature, that is the Condition of holiness
and Immortality of God. Secondly as to the Consecrated things; it is a
miraculous privilege, which in the end infinitely multiplies every thing, which
is thus parted with; it blesses the use of it although it be but presented, as
long as we can enjoy it, and finally exchanges it, when we can enjoy it no
more, for such advantageous returns, as may be conceived to be, not such as
when water was turned into Wine, or dirt into Gold, but such, as if we conceive
a glass of water, turned into streams of Everlasting Comsorts, the dust of
Israel into so many stars of Heaven, small Cottages of Clay into Royal Palaces;
and vain declining shadows into real and Eternal possessions: Thou have bin
faithful in a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many things, etc. Matthew.
25.21. But if the Law of these Consecrations be not well performed; if Levi
come to serve Ashtaroth, after he has dedicated himself to God; and if the
Offerings of the People, be employed to profane uses after they have touched
Gods Altar; then there are as many and as heavy Curses to be looked for, as on
the other side upon a better use, there are many and great Blessings to be
expected. So that upon all considerations, both of prudence, and of Duty; first
we must give up all to God: next after we have given we must fly all, not only
as two most odious sins, but also as two most terrible mischeifs, the Sacriledg
in withdrawing at any time when God demands it, what has bin thus consecrated
to him: and the Profaneness in mispending upon superfluous, or worse uses, what
of it he is pleased to allow to our proper necessities, and other lawful
Conveniences.

7. Now tho Christ our blessed Savior, by that everlasting and ever same
Sacrifice of himself, offer himself virtually upon all occasions: and we on our
side, also offer our selves, and what is ours, with him several other ways,
besides that of the holy Communion: as at our Conversion, and first Act of
faith in him, Christ (says St. Austin,) Aug. Evang. Quest. l. 2. q. 33.
is sacrificed for the salvation of every sinner, at the very moment he repents
and beleives him to have bin Sacrificed; and at our Baptism, For every one
offers the Sacrifice of the Passion of the Lord, at that time, that he is
consecrated by the faith of this Passion, and baptized a Christian, says the
same father; August. Expos. incheat. ad Romans
and the Baptism of Christ is the blood of Christ, says another. Chr^s. Hom.
10. Heir.
Nevertheless because Christ offers himself for us at the holy Communion in a
more solemn and public sacramental way; (thence it comes, that the Memorial of
the sacrifice of Christ thereby celebrated, takes commonly the Name of the
Sacrifice it self, as St. Austin Aug. de Civ. c. 5. id. ^p. 23. ad Bonis. ^e
Consert, Disp. 2, hoc ^st.
explains it often) we are then obliged in a more special manner, to renew all
our Sacrifices, all the vows of our Baptism, all the first fruits of our
Conversion, and all the particular promises, which it may be we have made,
either at our repenting of some sin, or at our deliverance from some eminent
danger, or at the recovery out of some grievous sickness, or at the receiving
some other signal mercy, whether for our selves, or for our friends. I will go
into thy house with burnt offerings, I will pay thee my vows, which my lips
have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble. Psalm. 67.13.14.
Then and there at the Altar of God must we, both discharge all the vows, which
for some hindrance or other, we had not yet the Convenience to fulfill; and set
afresh from Communion to communion, as they did the Shew-loaves from Sabbath to
Sabbath, all those other Performances, which by their nature, and our duty, can
never be fulfilled, but with the very end of our days.

8. So shall the new Israel tread on the pious steps of the Old, who ever from
time to time reiterated, either in Mispah, or in Gilgal, etc. that Covenant
which the Lord had made with him in Sinai. It is true, the Lord did not then
again repeat the Thunder, that once made the Mountains tremble; as in our
Churches he does not reiterate that very Passion, that made the powers of
Heaven mourn and shake: Nevertheless as Josuah, Asa, Josias, Jehojadah, and
other such holy men, could from their Master assure the People, that the
Covenant which they did renew, for example, in Shechem, Jos. 24.25. 2 Chr.
15.12. and 23.16. was not less powerful, either to bless the observers, or to
destroy the offenders thereof, then it was when Moses, and the Holy Angels
published it at the first upon Sinai: So now the Ministers of our Lord Jesus
Christ, having in their hands the sacraments of the Gospel, (true Seals and
Tables of the new Law) may both produce and give them out as Evidences; that
the sacrifice of their Master is not less able to save men's Souls, when it is
offered to men, and Sacramentally offered again to God, at the holy Communion,
then when it was newly offered upon the Cross. And this is the reason,
wherefore all faithful Christians ought then as effectually to reinforce all
their Oblations, their vows, their Contritions, and their protestations, Men
and Brethren what shall we do? And God forbid that I should ever glory but in
the Cross of my Savior; as the Israelites did by protesting upon the like
occasions, We will obey the Lord our God and the Lord is the God, the Lord is
the God. 1 King. 18.39. both Israelites and Christians seconding their
Protestation of obedience, and their prostrations of Body and resignations of
their minds, with secondary sacrifices: those of Bulls and Rams; these of Alms
and Pious works.

9. By this it is easy to see, that our holy Eucharistical Communions are much
correspondent to those Feasts, that did call the People of Israel together,
first to appear and prostrate themselves before the Lord with sacrifices for
their sin: and then to lay upon the Altar that other kind of Sacrifices which
they used to call (...) Peace offerings, (...).
Peace Offerings, and which were ordained to express both their thankfulness to
God, and their Charity to men. And in this friendly concurrence both of
Mysteries, and of holy duties that attend them, all respects duly observed,
Moses may still with the same power command both new and old Israel, thou shall
keep the feast unto the Lord thy God, with a Tribute of a free will offering of
thine hand which thou shall give unto the Lord thy God, according as the Lord
thy God has blessed thee: And thou shall rejoice before the Lord thy God, thou
and thy Son and thy Daughter, the Levite, the stranger the Fatherless and the
Widow. And you shall not appear before the Lord emty. Every man shall give
according to the blessing of the Lord thy God which he has given thee. Deuteronomy.
16.10, 11.

19. The first Christians ever took it, and constantly practiced it so. For
whenever they met at their devotions, whereof the Holy Communion was the most
ordinary and the most essential part, they did make the use of all their Goods
to be common among themselves: and the distribution of this blessed Sacrament
was so constantly attended by the distribution of their Offerings, that it is
somewhat hard to discern which of the two the Apostolical History intends to
signify by the Breaking of bread, so often mentioned in the Acts. Some pious
and learned men have thought that this largeness and frequency of Offerings,
which in the primitive times was all the stock they had for pious uses, made
that Article which immediately follows that of the Church, that is, the
Communion, or Communication of the Saints. But however tho this were not the
Article of faith there meant, yet it was an Act of Piety so frequent, and so
essential in those days, that St. Luke would place it amongst those other
sacred functions, that comprehend the whole duty and service of the Church.
They continued steadfastly in the Doctrine of the Apostles and in the Communion,
and in breaking of bread, and in prayer. Act. 2.24. Thus were the primitive
Christians literally and punctually such as holy David had prophesied they
should be, a People that would come and offer themselves, with their free will
offerings to Christ, in the Day of his Power; and of that glorious effusion of
Graces, that like to a Celestial dew, would appear wonderful by a thick and
sudden producing of subjects and soldiers ready armed for his service: Psalm.
110.

11. For this purpose it was that the Bishops had in their Churches, two
Tables. One of them was (...), i. e. within that space where the Ministers did
officiate at the Altar, and where were Curtins purposely shut to keep
non-Communicants from the sight of and access to the Holy Mysteries. The other
was where the People could freely come to offer their Gifts, part whereof
afterward was brought by the Deacons to the Communion Table. Hither were
brought the Free will Offerings of the People, Bread, Wine, Oil, Wool,
sometimes Cloth, Silver, and any thing else, that might be useful to the Church,
(till by express Canons of the Church, Can. 37. Afric.
those Oblations in kind were limited to such things only, as could be employed
about the sacraments and service of the Church) and all this was offered up to
God by all Christians, by way of a daily Sacrifice. And when the Christians had
offered up to God their Goods, the Priest who did receive them, did solemnly
pray to God, that he would be pleased to look on their Oblations, as he did
once on them of Abel, of Noah, and of Abraham. Out of these Oblations, the
Elements of the holy Communion were taken forth and presented at the other
Table, where they were blessed by the Bishop or Priest, and distributed by him to
the People as from God, to assure them he had accepted, of both their persons,
and offerings, and that instead of the Bread and Wine, which they had offered
upon his Altar, as either the first fruits, or the Representatives of all their
Goods, he was pleased to return to them not simple Bread, and simple Wine, but
such Blessed Bread and Wine, as were both the sacred Mysteries of the Body and
Blood of his Son, and an infallible surety of all Things depending thereon.
This is the reason; why, because primitive Christians never received those holy
Mysteries, but after they had made their Offerings; and because those very
Mysteries, which they received, were commonly taken, as to the matter, from
that Bread and Wine, which they had before Offered; The Holy fathers, (for
instance S. Ireneus) Iren. l. 4. c. 30, 34. Et alibi passim.
who then had no occasion to be so exact, or cautious as to distinguish
precisely the Nature of two sacred Offices, which went constantly together, do
not scruple to speak of the blessed Communion, promiscuously as Sacrament, or
Sacrifice.

12. Now to bring all this more home; The Law of Ancient Israel, the practice
of the Primitive Church, and the very equity of the thing it self, do
sufficiently testify, that we ought not in these, more then in the former Ages,
to appear before the Lord with emty hands: that it is not more fit for
worshippers now then it was then, to present their persons, without their
Goods, as it were trees, without their sap and fruit: and that these same
Nations, which in the prediction of Esaias, were at their first coming, to bring
and consecrate both themselves and their Gold unto the Lord, must not be now
less liberal, when by their Sacrifice, they appear to renew the vows of their
former Consecration; as surely God is not, upon the same occasions less
merciful, when by his holy Sacrament he renews unto them the Covenant of his
saving Grace. Therefore he that comes rich, is bound to appear before his
Savior, with his hands full of such free Will offerings, as he may take out of
his abundance, as did in Israel the husbandman out of a plentiful harvest, when
the Lord had blessed his field. He that is less able, must offer out of what he
can either get by his labor, or spare by his Parcimony: as the poor widow did,
when she offered her Mite. In a word every one, whether he be rich or poor, is
to lay down at the Offerings of God, according as the same God has either
blessed or spared him. 1. Cor. 16.2.

13. The quantity of these Oblations, whether extraordinary, as upon a
Communion Day, or more ordinary, as upon other daily occasions, is wholly left
to the discretion of the Christian worshipper. And whereas God by his Law, did
deal with the Israelites, as fathers do with Children in an ago unfit to guide
itself, prescribing to them the measure, the time, and the manner of every
thing, which they were either to do, or to give; our Savior has by the Gospel
freed all Christians from this punctual Pedagogy, leaving them, as men able to
give an account of themselves, both to their own Judgment, and to the direction
of his spirit; But if this different way of the Gospel discharges Christians
now adays from the subjection of doing punctually, and literally every thing,
which the ancient Israel were to observe; it certainly obliges them to do more
as to the matter, and to do it in a better manner. And God forbid that this
honor and liberty, which he vouchsafes us above what he did to the Jews, should
be taken by us, either as a permission, or as an occasion of being worse.
Therefore God in former times did give special Laws to his People for every
thing they were to do, in point either of Piety, or Charity; for example, they
were to give the Tenth part of whatsoever they could gather out of their
feilds, their Trees and their flocks, besides another Tenth part every third
year, that is a Thirtieth part every year: and what ever could grow of it self,
during the vacancy of every seventh year: They were bound moreover to many
other charitable ways of helping the poor, as to lend them money without taking
either use or pawn: and to leave in their fields and Vineyards so much of their
Corn, and fruits behind, as could recompense, the labor and diligence of many
honest Neighbors, who, at the end of the year, had no other Harvest then this
Gleaning. And although all this was Charity, yet it was among the People of Israel
called Justice, because it was commanded by Law, and that they were obliged to
pay these Alms, as strictly as any other Debt. Here then a downright Christian
will do well to take notice, of what all these charges may come to, and what
proportion they will bear with the Estate and revenue that God blesses him
with, that so he may contribute toward works of Piety and Charity, not only so
much but more; and if not in the very same, yet in as good a kind as the Jews
did. So that he may go beyond them in Charity, whom the Gospel commands us to
exceed in all other virtues, as we exceed them in Blessings.

14. The time of these oblations is not more limited then their measure. At
first S. Paul had appointed the first day of the week, that is the Lords day,
for the gathering of those Charitable assistances, and, as he calls them,
Acceptable Sacrifices, 1. Cor. 16.2. Phil. 4.18. which were to be sent to the
poor Brethren of Jerusalem; because even from that time, that day was in a more
special manner consecrated to the solemn Ministry of Prayers, of Preaching, and
of Communion. Now, tho the danger of Profaneness, which then was less to be
feared, has in our days made the use of this Sacrament much less Common then
that of Preaching and Prayer. Nevertheless since by these two holy exercises,
both God speaks to us, and we to him; this should be warning enough, not to
presume to appear before him without a Gift. And that we may both bear up the
more easily the expenses of this weekly Sacrifice, and diffuse more universally
the sweet savor thereof into all the parts of our life; it would be a piece of
holy prudence, to take care that every day should both bear some part of the
burden, and have some share of the holiness. And that by a daily attending to
this service, the Rich be still industrious to defalk some larger portions of
his abundance; the poor to steal some thing out of his necessaries: and the
middle conditioned man to spare what he can out of all his competence. But
specially when the good Providence lets fall into our hand some considerable
advantages, then let him that will grow rich in God, look upon those temporal
occasions, as a propitious time of Harvest, whereof he must be sure to reserve
the first fruits to God: and let him have a place in his house, like the
Treasury in the Temple, where he may daily cast in his Talent, or his Didrachm,
or his Mite, according as God daily blosses him* and whence he must be sure to
take nothing, but for a special holy use, as if he did take it from Gods Altar.

15. It is true indeed that not only this, but also any thing else that we have
at home, is already consecrated, since God having given it to us, we have given
it back again unto God. For whenever we gave him up our own persons, all our
Goods were involved in this general Consecration, and thereby became ipso facto
holy Offerings unto the Lord. But as these holy Offerings under the Law were of
two sorts, some which the Worshipper, and his wife, and Children might eat;
some of which it was not lawful for any to eat, except the Priests only; my
meaning is that the truly pious Christian should gather day by day, and by
little and little (both to make his Devotion less burthensom, and by a
continual application to this work, to sanctify the whole course of his life
the better) a Magazine of holy things of this last kind, which may be only
employed to God and his Churches service.

16. But at the same instant that the Christian Worshipper shall take the
materials of his good works, out of this store, he must have a great care to
draw withal out of the good Treasure of his heart the fire, and the
Frankincense, that is, the zeal and the holy thoughts that may improve, and
raise good moral works, to the being of Religious Sacrifices. And as without
doubt, at first, he had a care not to lay aside these first fruits, in a Corner
of his house, either negligently or rudely, as some do throw their Alms into
Beggars hands, or as Judas did his thirty Pieces into the Temple; so he must
not forget himself so much, as to take them thence, and bestow them on the Body
or members of Christ, that is, the Church and his Neighbor, but with such pious
Elevations and applications of his mind, as may become both that Majesty which
he adores, and the pious and holy Act, that he intends. Let him do it, whether
at his door, or in the way, or in the Temple, it matters not, for the hour is
long since come, that Religious Acts, or Worshippings, are confined neither to
this Mountain, nor to Jerusalem; Joh. 4.21. wheresoever God gives thee the
occasion and power to perform any holy work, there he makes holy Ground for
thee: only this work, to be holy, and becoming a Worshipper, must by all means
be don in Spirit and in Truth. This Spirit will teach us, what Flesh and Blood
cannot do, both to perceive, and consider, not an Angel only, as the Patriarcks
often did, but Christ himself, in the condition of an afflicted Church, for
example, or of an honest distressed friend; and then at such occasions to lay
our liberalities, with that same mind and thought that a true Worshipper would
lay his Oblations, upon the Altar, where he knows that Christ will most
effectually both find it, and accept of it. Once He received the Gold the Myrrh
and the Frankincense, which the wise men gave Joseph; He did also receive the
Goods which Susanna, and other Religious Women did put in the hands of his
Disciples; since that time the Church and all her distressed Members have bin
instated by Christ himself most expressly into the Place of these happy
Persons; and as if they had bin for this purpose created Christ's solemn
Officers and Angels, about the time that he was to suffer and to leave his
beloved Disciples, he promised them both to accept, and account as bestowed on
himself, these small Offerings, which for his sake we should deposite in their
hands. Mat. 25.40, 45.

17. This same spirit, and this Actual application, is the only means that we
can have to raise up good moral works, and to make them true Heave-Offerings.
Without this Elevation, what we give; may in it self be a good deed, to us a
considerable-expense, and to other men some benefit; but to God, it is no
sacrifice: or it is such a sacrifice, as sends up no savor above: but either
like the Oblation of Cain, falls all down to Ashes and Dust, or like the Alms
of Pharisees to such a paltry toward, as we get perhaps from men. Genesis 10. Mat.
6.

18. All these considerations and pious intentions of the Soul, which to the
Worshipper must be instead of the Sacerdotal Utensils, and to the Oblation,
instead of the fire and Frankincense, are much revived and stirred up by the
Circumstantial solemnity and Holiness of the blessed Communion. Look to the
Adoration of the Ancient Israelites. I was, etc. Deuteronomy. 26.

I Dare appear before the Lord with all my sins and my sorrows; It is very just
also, that I should appear with these few blessings, which are mine; they are
mine by thy favor, and having received them of thy hand, now do I offer them to
thee. 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
Forgive I beseech thee my sins, deliver me from my sorrows, and accept of this
small Blessing. Accept of this my sacrifice, as thou did of that of Abel, of
Abraham, and of Noah; or rather look in my behalf on that only true Sacrifice,
whereof here is the Sacrament; the Sacrifice of the only unspotted Lamb: the
Sacrifice of thine own Son: of thine only begotten Son, of thy Son proceeding
from thee, to die for me. O let him again come from thee to me; let him come now
as the only begotten of the Father full of grace and of truth to bless me,
Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
INDEX.
SECTION. I. The Importance of well understanding the Nature of this Sacrament.
Page 1. SECTION. II. Concerning the Sacrament, as it is a Memorial of the
Sufferings and Death of Christ. p. 4. SECTION. III. Of the blessed Sacrament,
as it stands for a Sign of present Graces. p. 19 SECTION. IV. Concerning the
Communion, as it is not a Representation only, but a means of Grace. p. 36.
SECTION. V. Of the Blessed Communion as being a Pledge of the Happiness and
Glory to come. p. 56. SECTION. VI. Of the Holy Eucharist, as it implies a
Sacrifice. And first of the Commemorative Sacrifice. p. 71. SECTION. VII.
Concerning the Sacrifices of our own Persons. p. 80. SECTION. VIII. Concerning
the Oblation of our Goods and Alms, or the Sacrifice of Justice. p. p. 106.

