A BREVIATE of the Establishment of the Friendly Society for Securing Houses
from Loss by Fire, by Mutual Contribution agreed by the Trustees Enrolled in
Chancery, and to be seen at Large at the Office.
I. IMprimis, That there shall be an Office kept, where any Person concerned,
may Search and take Notes gratis.

II. That Policies shall be delivered, wherein one House only to be contained,
in which Policy the Trustees are empowered to Pay the Sums due, in case they be
not otherwise Paid, within Sixty days after the Houses are Burnt; every Person
receiving a Policy, does thereby become a Member of the Society.

III. That every Member of the Society shall Pay yearly beforehand at the
Office, the Sum of 1 s. 4 d. for every 100l. Secured on Brick-houses, and 2 s.
8 d. for every 100l. Secured on Timber-houses, by way of Praemium. Houses
having Party-walls entire of Brick or Stone, to be esteemed Brick-houses, and
Houses not having Party-walls of Brick or Stone, to be esteemed Timber-houses.

IV. That every Member of the Society shall Contribute toward the making good
such Losses as shall happen to any of the Houses of the Members of the said
Society; Provided, That no Person be Charged for any one Loss above Thirty
Shillings for each 100l. by him Secured on Brick-houses, and double so much on
Timber-houses.

V. That any Member of the Society may within 8 days after any Rate is
declared, Examine the Registers, and except against the said Rate; which upon
just Cause or Error in Casting, shall be altered.

VI. That every Member upon the receiving of his Policy, shall deposit as a
Pledge or Caution for the Performance of his Covenants, the Sum of 6 s. 8 d.
for every 100l. Secured on Brick-houses, and 13s. 4d. for every 100l. Secured
on Timber-houses; for which Receipts shall be given, and Covenants, to repay
the same (or so much thereof as shall not be Forfeited) at the end of the term
in his Policy expressed.

VII, and VIII. If any Member Omit or Neglect to Pay his Annual Payment at the
Office within 40 days after it is Due, he shall forfeit 8 d. over and above the
said 1 s. 4 d. for every 100l. Secured on Brickhouses, and 1 s. 4 d. for every
100l. Secured on Timber-houses to be deducted out of the deposited Money.

IX. If any Member neglect to Pay his Share toward any Loss for 25 days after
Publication of the Rate, he shall forfeit one 4th part of the Money so Due,
over and above his said Share to be Deducted out of the deposited Money; and if
he shall again make Default, for the space of Three Months after Demand made in
Writing (to be left at his Dwelling, or last Secured House) he shall from
thenceforth forfeit the Benefit of his Policy; his Covenant nevertheless to
stand good against him for so much as shall be then Due.

X. The Acts and Covenants of the Deputies shall Charge and Bind the
Undertakers.

XI. That every Member upon any Loss, shall forthwith certify his said Loss to
the Office, and some of the Office shall certify the same to the Trustees; who
shall forthwith appoint some Skilful and Able Builder or Workman to View and
Estimate the said Loss, and make Report, and shall set the Rate of Contribution
accordingly; But if the Trustees shall omit to do so, the Undertakers with the
consent of Three or more of the Principal Members, to do it.

XII. That such Workman as shall be employed to Estimate the Damage of any
House only Damnified by Fire, shall be obliged to Repair the said Damages at
the Rate he shall value the same; in case the Party Damnified shall not be
willing to take the Money at which the said Damage is valued, or the
Undertakers shall not be willing to do it themselves.

XIII. The Form of the Workman's Certificate of his View and Estimate of the
Damages, and Examination of the Registers, and of the declaring of the Rate,
and Publishing it by affixing it to the Gates of the City, and other public
Places, whereby it will appear that the Rate is certain, and not Arbitrary.

XIV. That the Trustees have Power to raise Money by the Rents, Sale, or
Mortgage of the Estates settled upon them by the Undertakers for the Payment of
all Sums Due to any Member by reason of any Loss by Fire within Fifty days
after any Rate of Contribution shall be declared, if the same shall not be
otherwise Paid, according to the true intent and meaning of the Establishment.

XV. No Question to be admitted about the Description, Quality, or Value of any
House that shall be Burnt; but the Money in the Policy expressed to be Paid,
after the Rate declared as aforesaid.

XVI. Whenever the Roof and Floors of a House from the first Floor upwards,
shall be Burnt or fall in, that House to be deemed a Demolished House, and the
whole Sum Secured thereon to be Paid.

XVII. To prevent any Fraud in getting any Policies by indirect means after a
House is Burnt, no House is to be Esteemed a Secured House till the Mark has
been actually affixed thereon.

XVIII. Watermen, and other Laborers to be Employed at the Charge of the
Undertakers to assist at the quenching of Fires.

XIX. If there shall be so much Money Insured upon Houses as the Trustees shall
not think the Security already given to be sufficient, the Undertakers to give
such further Security as the Trustees shall reasonably require.

XX. If any one Fire shall be so great as to require 30s. for each 100l.
Secured on Brick-houses, and double for Timber-houses, to make good the said
Loss; it shall be Lawful for any Member after the Payment of his said Share, to
Surrender his Policy, and receive back his deposited Money; and from
thenceforth be Discharged from the Society, if he so please.


